THE TRIAL OF Mr. JOHN GIBBONS, In Westminster Hall, before the High-Court of
Justice, beginning July 18. 1651.

HAB. 1. VER. 13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold Evil, and can not
look on Iniquity; wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and
hold thy tongue, when the wicked deavoureth the man that is more righteous
then he.

ECCLES. 7. VER. 15. There is a just man that perishes in his righteousness,
and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1652.

To the Reader.
HE, who while he reads, takes notice that these Notes being taken from the
Prisoner, in taking them from his Notary, and that the Copy of his Charge, and
of the Deposition of the Witnesses, and the help of a Council at Law, which
had been granted to others, (which was frequently, and with all earnestness
pleaded for, and pressed by him) were flatly, and peremptorily denied, shall
rather wonder, that so much of their unjust and illegal proceedings has come
to light, then be offended that this Narration (collected out of his own
seattered Papers) comes abroad imperfect; read therein the meekness,
cheerfulness, and constancy of the Innocent, condemned; the malice, iniquity,
and obstinacy of the cruel Persecutors: bear with the defects in the relation,
at least; let them run upon that reckoning, who are accountable for his Blood:
Be ye followers of the Faith, and patience of him who having endured the
trial, has received the crown of Life, which the righteous Lord has promised
to them that love him: Beware of the wolves of the evening, that walk in sheeps
clothing, not sparing the Flock, and the Lord of all grace, who has called us
unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after ye have suffered, make ye
perfect, establish, strengthen, settle you to him, be Glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
THE TRIAL OF Mr. JOHN GIBBONS, etc.
Friday the first day.
Potter and he were both brought to the Bar together.

POTTERS Charge was first read, unto which he pleaded Guilty, and made a large
Narrative of all his Crimes against the State; very much was he examined
against Master Gibbons, but no hurt at all he did him: after they had done with
him, the Charge of Master Gibbons was read, which, when he heard, he spoke in
this manner.

Gibbons. My Lord, this Charge is very new to me, I have been a Prisoner under
close Imprisonment for many weeks together, and never knew before this time
what it was in particular that was laid to my Charge: And now I do hear my
particular Accusation, it is so strange to me, that I do not know what to say
to it at the first hearing; therefore I humbly beseech your Lordship that I may
hear it read again.


Attorney General. My Lord, Master Gibbons heard Potters Charge read, which
was very like to his own, so he has heard it twice already; however my Lord,
he may hear it read again, for he may hear it thrice.


Keeble. Come let him read it again, he is a young man, let him have what
favor he may have; mark it well, now you hear it again.


After reading, Master Gibbons spoke in this manner:

Gibbons. My Lord, I am brought hither by an Order of this Court, which Order
mentions a Charge of Treason exhibited against me; I should betray the Liberty
I am born unto, If I should not desire a Trial, according to the fundamental
Laws of this Nation, which is by a Jury of my Neighborhood; the benefits and
advantages are exceeding great, therefore I do earnestly crave to have them.


Keeble. The State have thought of another way of Trial, which you you must
have, and submit to; this is best for your advantage, and more honorable then
any other you can have, therefore you must plead Guilty or not Guilty.


Gibbons. My Lord, I shall never be so prodigal of my Blood, as to throw away
my Life, by refusing a Trial before you, though I am not satisfied in this new
way of Trial; yet I shall not refuse to plead in confidence of my own
Innocence, and in hope of your tenderness in matters of Blood: But before I
Plead, and Answer to my Charge, I have this humble motion to make.


Here he spoke very much on the first day of his Trial, moving very much for
Council; but after he had used many Arguments to persuade the Court to incline
to it, and could not have it, he desired the Court to be the Council for him,
and take care of his Life, and not suffer him by his own ignorance, to weave a
web for his own ruin and destruction. After much said of this nature, he
pleaded not Guilty; the which being entered in the Book, they proceeded to the
Trial.

Attorney General. The Attorney General began with a long speech, how Master
Gibbons had plotted and contrived these Treasons, named the Meetings, and the
places, where he said it began presently after the late Kings death, under the
pretense of getting the King to Scotland; but the truth was, they intended to
settle him upon this Commonwealth. And further, that he the said John Gibbon
as a false Traitor, and out of a malicious and wicked purpose and design to
raise insurrections in this Nation, did several days and times in the years
1648, 49, 50, and 51. and at diverse other times and places within this
Commonwealth, together with Chistopher Love, Piercy, Jermin, Massey, etc. and
other their Accomplices, being false Traitors to this Commonwealth,
traitorously and maliciously Complot, Contrive, and endeavor to raise Forces
against this Commonwealth, settled in way of a free State, without King, or
House of Lords, and for the subversion of the same did raise, and collect
diverse great sums of Money, and did hold intelligence by Letters, Messages,
and Instructions with CHARLES STUART, son of the late King, and with the
Queen his Mother, and diverse other persons, being false Traitors to this
Commonwealth.

And further, he the said John Gibbons, together with Christopher Love, William
Drake, Peircy, Jermin, etc. and other their Accomplices, since the death of the
late King, several days and times in the years aforesaid within this
Commonwealth of England, and elsewhere did traitorously and maliciously
declare, publish, and promote CHARLES STUART, son of the late King, commonly
called the Prince of Wales, to be King of England, meaning of this
Commonwealth.

And further, to carry on the said Design, he the said John Gibbons several
days and times in the respective years aforesaid, together with Christopher
Love, William Drake, Peircy, etc. did endeavor to procure the Scots to invade
this Commonwealth of England.

And further, that he the said John Gibbon, on the 6th of April, 1650. and on
diverse other days and times between the 29th day of March, 1650. and the first
day of June 1651. at London, and elsewhere, did give, use, and hold
correspondence with the said CHARLES STUART, son of the late King, and the Queen
his Mother, Jermin, Peircy, etc.

And further, to accomplish the said Designs, he the said John Gibbon, on the
6th day of April 1651. at the places aforementioned, did hold, and give
correspondence and intelligence, with diverse persons of the Scottish Nation, as
Argyle, Lowden, Lo hian, etc. Enemies to this Commonwealth, and adhearing to
the King in the War against them.

And further, the said John Gibbons did traitorously, and maliciously abbet,
assist, countenance and encourage the Scottish Nation, and diverse other persons
adhearing to them, and did convey great sums of Money, Arms and Ammunition
into Scotland, and elsewhere: All which wicked practices and designs of him
the said John Gibbons were against this Commonwealth, Parliament, and People;
and in manifest contempt of the Laws of this Nation, and Acts of Parliament:
and in such cases made, and provided.

After he had ended, the Witnesses were called in; the first was Major Adames,
the second Colonel Barton, the third was Captain Hatsell, the fourth Colonel
Baines, the fifth Major Alford, the sixth Captain Far, the seventh was Master
Jekell, the eighth was Major Huntington, the ninth Master Harvey, the tenth was
Major Corbet: Adames being first examined, his testimony was to this effect.

Adames Testimony.

That the Correspondency of John Gibbons, with the rest abovesaid, was to
endeavor an Agreement between the King, and the Scots; the first Meeting was
at the Swan in Fish-street, where Master Gibbons was; at that place there was
only a consideration how to carry on the Correspond ncy. There was also a
Petition to be sent to the King, (as I was informed) and the meeting in this
place, was in reference to that also. There was Letters written to Scotland,
and some received thence, which Mr. Gibbons was privy to.

After Master Drake went away, we met at Master Loves house, where Master
Gibbons met also; there were Letters read, and I think Master Gibbon did hear
them, and did confer about them: the Letters sent to Jermin, Peircy* etc. at
one time or other Master Gibbons was present, and heard them read. This was
before Titus his going away.

Then after there were Letters sent from the King, which were read at Master
Loves house, where M ster Gibbons was present, and heard them read; Master
Gibbons brought likewise a rough draught of the instructions that were to go to
Holland

A so* there was a Letter read at Master Loves from Alderman Bunce, where
Master Gibbons was present* Also a Letter after Dunbar F^ght from Scotland,
relating how Affairs stood there, and that Letter (as I remembe^, was for Arms
and Money) was read at Master Loves house, where Master Gibbons was present at
the reading of it.

Master Gibbons was a constant man at all Meetings.

A Letter sent from Massey read at M^ster Loves for Arm^s and Money, M. Gibbons
was present, and three or four hundred pounds agreed to be sent.

A Letter was written to the Estates of Scotland, to procure Massey, and the
English to be in est^eme.

Master Gibbons sometimes acquainted me where we were to meet.

Lieutenant Col. Baines Test^mony.

A little while after the death of the late King, there was a Meeting at the
Swan at Dowgate, where several persons were; but whether M. Gibbons was there,
I know not; but Captain Titus was there, and gave a large commendation of the
young Prince, and moved that a Petition might be drawn up, and sent to the
Prince from the Presbyterian party here; there was a debate upon it, and this
design was looked upon as the only visible way to preserve the Presbyterian
party, and to bring the Prince to the Crown.

Colonel Bartons Testimony.

A while after the death of the late King I was going into Cannon-street, and
at Dowgate I met with Will. Drake, who desired me to meet him at the Swan at
Dowgate; when I came there, I found Capt. Titus, Leiut. Col. Bains, and diverse
other persons, I believe M. Gibbons was not there; I came in while they were in
discourse, and I could not well hear them; but at their rising, I asked M.
Drake what was the occasion of their Meeting, and he told me that Capt. Titus
had given a good report of the Prince, and did desire that some addresses might
be made to him, that thereby he might be taken off from his Cavaliering
Counselors.

After a while William Drake came to me for 10l* which he said was to furnish a
friend of his which did want an 100l. he desired I would not deny him, and
because he was a good Customer to my house, I did len^ it him; and after I
heard it was for Capt. Titus. As for the Prisoner, I think he was not at the
Swan at Dowgate, for I did not know him till afterward.

Major Alfords Testimony.

At the Meeting at the Swan at Dowgate, where diverse were; Captain Titus made a
large Narration of the Princes deportment, declaring how inelineable he was to
cast off his Cavaliering adherents, if he were but assured there was a People
in England that stuck to their Covenant, he was weary of his other Councels,
and was ready to apply himself to the ends of the Covenant.

A Petition was brought to the Bear in Bread-street, where it was read, and
d^bated among us and agreed to be drawn up, and Capt. Titus and Drake were sent
away with it.

I do not remember that Master Gibbons was at either of these Meetings.

There was Money raised for Titus; Drake had 10l. of me, he had it in private;
Capt. Titus had 30l. for his Journey: He went over twice (I think) and if so,
the second time Master Gibbons was there; the second time I saw Master Gibbons,
he brought me to his Chamber; and the third time he and I went with some Papers
to Gravesend, agreed on at Master Lov^s: These Papers were either a Commission,
or Instructions, or both together in one; but this was the substance, That the
Lord Willoughby, and others* should go to the Treaty at Breda, and to press
the King concerning this Agreement with Scotland.

Master Gibbons was at Master Loves house when the Commission and Instructions
were agreed upon; he and I went to Gravesend, and (I think) he carried the
Papers: but of this I am sure, that he knew the end of our going; we tarried
there all night, and delivered the Papers to M. Mason.

I did go to Callice, when I came back, but I do not know whether the Papers
that I brought over (being read at Master Loves house) were read all at one
time or not, if they were, then Master Gibbons was there.

I was present when the Letters came after Dunbar Fight at M. Loves, the
Letters came from Col. Massey; they gave an account of the Fight there, and of
the estate of Affairs; and withal, writ for Money and Arms to be sent by way
of Holland. I cannot say M. Gibbons was present: There was Money agreed upon
there to be raised for Massey and Titus; M. Gibbons was many times at the Swan
at Dowgate, he was constant at the Club. But after M. Drake fled, we did take
in other men into the Club; M. Gibbons was as little absent as any man.

M. Gibbons did put me upon it to show friendship to M. Mason, and he gave me
this reason, That so M. Mason might represent our good affections to the King;
and M. Gibbons did desire me to defray the Charges of that nights Expenses at
Gravesend, where M. Mason was telling me, that if I were not allowed it by our
Friends, he would do it.

Master Harvey his Testimony.

I came to the knowledge of this Design at several meetings and places; M.
Gibbons told me of 2000l. which was to be sent into Scotland, and that Massey was
to land Forces in the West; and concerning my Lord Generals Soldiers, that
many of them were run away; and concerning the Trained Bands of the North, he
said they waited but for one blow to be given in Scotland; he told me also of a
Town that was to be delivered.

Major Huntingtons Testimony.

The first that made me acquainted with this Design was M. Gibbons who told
me, that if I would come to M. Loves house, I should hear the News; I went to
M. Loves, and when I came there, that which I heard, was a Paper sent from
Massey, Graves, and Titus, brought by Drake, and read by him; M. Gibbons was
there then, there was many more there in M. Loves Closet, but I cannot say well
who they were.

The Testimonies of the rest of the Witnesses could not be well heard, neither
can they be had, the Books being so close kept.

After all was ended, M. Keeble desired Master Gibbons to speak for himself.

Gib. My Lord, I have now stood here near 5 hours, and am both spent in my body
and spirit, and that I am as unable in body to speak for my self, as I am
disabled to make my defense without the Court grant me time; a Copy of my
Charge, the depositions of the Witnesses, and assign me Council. And
therefore, before I plead, or answer to my Charge, I have this humble motion to
make (I being a man altogether ignorant and unacquainted with the Laws) that
this Court would be pleased, as I said before, to assign me Council to advise
me in my Chamber, and to plead for me in the Court: and that your Lordship, and
this Court would be pleased to give me a Copy of my Charge, and to assign me a
Solicitor to solicit my business for me.


Keeble. M. Gibbons, you must proceed to make some general defense for the
present.


Gib. My Lord, I hope you will do as God use to do, allow some grains of
allowance, that a man that has nothing but weakness, and ignorance, may help
himself.


Upon this motion the Court adjourned, and M. Gibbons was taken away by the
Keeper of Newgate, and thereafter came a Warrant to bring him to the Bar the
Wednesday following. The reply that M. At. made to Gibbons appeal we cannot
have.

In the mean time there were several friends that went to mediate, and speak
for him to the Judge, who did lay out his simplicity and innocence, laboring
what they could for the saving of his Life. The Judge answered, that he was not
so simple as he was set out by them, and that he doubted not but that he was a
Servant to greater Persons, who had employed him: but if he would be ingenious,
and discover the parties that were in that design, he would labor to save his
Life, and do him good; but if he would not confess, he could not help him. Yet
still they interceded for him, until at last the Judge told one of them, that
verily he was persuaded that he was Innocent; but nevertheless, if he did not
reveal all those whom he knew to have any knowledge of the business besides
himself, nothing could be expected but death: he was extreme desirous to have a
discovery of some persons of Quality, but M. Gibbons constantly affirmed he
knew none, neither would he accuse any, for he had rather die, then be a means
to scandal, or hazard any good man, this he constantly affirmed with an
undaunted resolution to the last.

Wednesday the 2d days Trial, July 23.
Master Gibbons being brought before the Court, my Lord Keeble spoke as
follows.

Keeble MAster Gibbons, the Court out of abundance of favor to you, nave given
you time from Friday till now, whereby you may be able to make your Defense;
therefore it is now expected you should proceed, and plead what you have to say.


Gib. My Lord, the last time I was before this honorable Court, after I had
desired a Jury, and was denied it, I did in confidence of my own Innocence, and
your tenderness in matters of Blood, submit to a Trial, though I was no way
satisfied in this new way of Trial; but before I could plead, I made this
humble motion, perceiving the Charge against me for High Treason, was against
several Statutes, Laws, and Acts of Parliament, which I never saw, heard, or
read them in my life.

My life and estate thus being drawn into Question (my Lord) it did very much
concern me to be well advised, there being many things in the Statutes which
made for my advantage, both in my Plea and Defense; therefore I did humbly
beseech your Lordship, and this High Court, that I might have Council in Law
assigned me* both to advise me in my Chamber, and plead for me in this Court,
that so I might be able to take all those lawful advantages which the Statutes
and Acts of Parliament afford me, which I was not able to do my self, being
ignorant of the Laws; this being denied, and I seeing I could no way obtain
Council to preserve my life, as I did see the State had got great Council
against me to prosecute me for my life. I did humbly beseech your Lordship, and
this High Court, that you would be so far of Council against me a poor
Prisoner standing at the Bar, drawn in question before the Justice for my life,
that you would not let the Learned Council of this Commonwealth take any
advantage against me through my Ignorance, or want of skill in the Laws: but
that if the Statutes and Acts of Parliament, and Laws of the Land did afford me
any advantage, which I might over-slip through my Ignorance, that your Lordship
and the Court, out of your bowels of compassion to a poor Prisoner, would stand
for me, that I might not have any wrong done, nor Law denied, which by right
was due unto me; upon these considerations my Lord, I did plead not Guilty: I
do humbly thank your Lordship, and the Court for the time you have given me,
but as unable to answer, or speak for my self now, as I was the last time, I
took my leave of this Court, being wholly unfurnished, and altogether
dis-inabled to make my defense; for when I came back to my prison at Newgate,
with an expectation of meeting both the Copy of my Charge, and the deposition
of the Witnesses, I found all was taken away from my Notary, whom I brought a
purpose to this place to help me therein; seeing my self thus totally deprived,
and cut off from all helps, and hopes of making my defense, I could not tell
whither to go or send but to your Lordship, whom I thought, upon my humble
Petition, might have granted both a copy of my Charge, and the depositions of
the Witnesses: but seeing that could not be granted, I am left without all
possibilities of pleading, or making any defense: Therefore I do now again with
all humility address my self to your Lordship, and this honorable Court, and
do most earnestly desire a Copy of the Charge, also the depositions of
Witnesses and Conncell assigned me to come to my Chamber to advise me there:
also Council to plead for me before this Court, and a Solicitor assigned me to
follow my business; and if God shall not incline your hearts to show this
mercy, I do not look upon my self as able to make my defense, as to stand
before a company of armed men.


Keeble. The Court will be very tender of your blood, and they must, and will
be as tender to preserve the blood of the Common*wealth, in execution of
Justice upon Traitors that seek to destroy them; you have had a great deal of
favor and time given you, therefore now you must make your defense.


Gib. My Lord, if ever Prisoner that came before this Court had reason to cry,
and call for possible helps and advantages that may be allowed them, much more
have I cause to do the same, verily believing never until now there was ever
any brought before Justice so unable to help, or answer for himself as I am;
therefore I humbly beseech your Lordship, and this High Court; and I do
withal, earnestly desire Council, a copy of my Charge, the depositions of the
Witnesses, without which I am neverable to Plead, or make any defense for my
life: and the rather am I invited to crave, and desire the same, for that I
have both heard, and seen Presidents before mine eyes of this nature. Major
Rolf, that was accused for High Treason, had Council assigned him, by whose
assistance he saved his life. Sir John Gell, before this Court of Justice, had
his Brother, Master Gell, to speak for him; and since, M. Love had Council to
plead for him in this very place.


Keeb. M. Gibbons, you will not be denied Council, or any thingelse that may
help you, if there be found matter of Law: Go on, and make your defense, and
make it appear to the Court that there is matter of Law, and you shall not be
denied Council, and what ever else may do you good.


Gib. My Lord, had I the several advantages that others have had to offer such
matters of Law, I should be as ready as any else to do it; but being deprived
of all these helps by the Officers of the Court, who took away the book from
my Notary, after he had written the Charge; therefore my Lord, without a Copy
of the Charge, and the depositions of the Witnesses, it will be in vain for me
to trouble this honorable Court, when I never had fight of the Charge, nor
depositions of the Witnesses; the want of which have so dis-inabled me, (seeing
I could not have help of Council to advise me) that I cannot tell what in the
world to say my self.


Keeb. M. Gibbons, you must proceed to plead, or else you will incense the
Court more then you are aware of, for you to stand out thus, and plead for that
which cannot be granted, will do you no good; therefore I advise you no longer
to stand out, but make your defense.


Gib. My Lord, if I should begin to proceed, and make my defense, being (as I
said already) totally ignorant in all the Laws, and utterly unable both in
memory and parts to take all just and clear objections against the advantages
of the Charge, and Evidences; if I should make my defense when all means are
thus taken away, I should certainly throw away my own life, and become guilty
of shedding my own blood; therefore I had rather a 100 times leave my self to
the mercy and Justice of the Court, who, I hope, are very sensible how much the
life of a man is worth, and withal, consider the hard measure I had, in taking
away the books of those that wrote for me, that so I could never have sight of
the Charge, nor Depositions of the Witnesses, which all others have had, nor no
Councels to advise me. Thus being left naked, and destitute of all helps, I had
rather submit to the mercy of the Court, then ever plead to save my life: my
Lord, I am persuaded, I stand to be Judged by a Court where I see the faces of
those that truly fear God, and that they will seriously weigh and consider that
the blood of any, for whom Christ has died, is exceeding precious in the sight
of God, who will not take any advantage against any for their ignorance, and
that you also do remember that all your Judgments will be judged over again
at the Tribunal of Christ, who will both be a Council and Advocate for me a
Prisoner now standing at the Bar: thus hoping that you will reckon the life and
blood of the meanest person, for whom Christ has died, as much worth as the
life of the greatest. I will rather submit to your mercy, then Plead, if I
cannot have, what I do desire: But being very unwilling to have any hand to
destroy my self, and so become guilty of my own death; therefore, though for
want of help I be not able to make my defense, yet I shall make an Appeal to
the Court, which is all I can do; and therefore desire you seriously to weigh
and consider how far short the Evidences come, and how full of contrarieties
and contradictions; by the Law there ought to be two lawful and sufficient
Witnesses to make a man Guilty of Treason; these Witnesses must agree
punctually in their testimony, and the Treason they prove must be against the
express words of the Act: Also the Law will not suffer those that are Guilty
and Convict of the same Crime, by their own confessions, whereof they accuse
me, to give Evidence against me; these Witnesses therefore cannot be lawful and
sufficient against me, they having confessed thus much against themselves, and
so do either witness against me out of fear of Death, or promise of Reward:
this I am certainly informed will be proved against Major Adams, and was
declared in the face of the Court at M. Loves Trial concerning the Testimony
of Major Adams, which is the most material Witness against me: I hope your
Lordship and the Court will look upon it, as not only he has been offered,
received, and taken Money to discover the Design, and witness against me; but
also in regard to whatsoever he swears as that I should bring in the rough
draught of Instructions to M. Loves: And as to my presence at the Swan at
several Meetings, was both contradicted, and positively sworn against by
several other of the Witnesses: none but he does say that I was present at the
reading of any Letters of the Fight at Dunbar; nor none but Adams says I was
present at M. Loves house when any moneys was debated; nor none but Adams says
I was a constant man at Meetings, thatever I invited any to a Meeting. I hope
your Lordship and the Court will consider, that though there are ten Witnesses
produced against me, besides several questions asked Capt. Potter at the Bar
concerning me; yet many of them neither said, nor swore any thing that touched
me at all: and of those that do reach me in their T^stimony, not any two did
agree in proving the same Fact. As concerning the particular T^stimony of M.
Harvey, unto which no one Witness but himself either say or swore the least
tittle of it to be true; being struck with wonder, and amazed to hear these
things given in against me, which m^ heart never thouvht, no^ my tongue never
spoke: I do both before your Lordship, and this High Court, and the presence
of all the people, lay it before the righteous* God to plead my Cause, and
judge between me a Prisoner at Bar, and M. Harvey, that falsely accused me. I
did further desire, that this Appeal might be set upon Record, and meet me
before the Tribunal seat of Christ, and that both your Lordship, and them that
sit in this Honorable Court, might follow this my Appeal to the Judgment
Seat, and there witness it before the presence of the Lord against me when I
am p^eading for mercy, if ever I spoke, or heard these things which he has
accused me of. My Lord, I shall go further, and did offer unto the Court, that
if in all England they could find a man that would say any of these things M.
Harvey accused me of; then I said more particularly, if any whom I had most
frequently conversed withal, or any of those that kept my company would say
they ever heard me say any of these words, the next time I came before this
honorable Court, I would come and plead Guilty. And I do now say, if it
please your Lordship, and the Court to give me time, I shall be able to produce
Witnesses, I shall make it appear M. Harvey is as unfit to be a Witness in any
Court of Record, as he was unfit to be a Justice of Peace in Essex, where he
was Indicted for many and notorious offenses. If I might have time, I should
produce witnesses that M. Harvey was the Original reporter of some of those
things he accused me of. And concerning Major Corbets Testimony, I know little
in it, but that I shall call God to witness I knew not Mason; I did then in
the face of the Court declare how much he had wronged me, for that I had
acquainted the Committee who examined me, that I both knew Mason, and told them
the place, and how I came to know him; besides, there is a Copy of my
Examination abroad that does confirm the same; that Corbet came to me more like
a Murderer, then like a Christian: and because I did call God to witness
against these untruths he charged me withal, he did in effect, judge my Soul
to the Devil, and my Body to the Gallows, and so he left. For which
unchristian carriage of his, I both complained to M. Price, Clarke to the
Warden in the Fleet, my Keeper, and some others. My Lord, I am charged with
being a Solicitor, and represented as a man that had nothing else to do but
follow such businesses as here I am accused of; which is a life so unlike an
English man, and so ill-becoming a Christian, that I have all the days of my
life walked a contrary course: if it were necessary, multitudes of Witnesses
will testify the same for me. I was entertained by my Master to wait upon him
in his Chamber, after he was gone to the House, I had constant occasions to go
into the City, either to lay out, pay* or receive Money: so much experience had
I gained, as I entered upon a Merchants Trade, dealt with many and several
merchantable Commodities, having a wife children then living, that was the
Trade I resolved to follow. My Wife dying, I went over to France some little
time after with my Master* and carried many Merchantable Commodities with me,
where I found library to increase my experience my Master returning to England,
where he stayed not a year* but we (...) back again into France, I was left
behind to wait upon my Lady: my employment in my Ladies service is sufficiently
known to be such as daily lead me to go into the City; the 19th of July 1650.
my Lady went from the City, there was a necessity one man she must leave behind
in London, which fell to my portion, and my businesses called me daily into the
City, sometimes to go to Council, sometimes to show Bills of Exchange,
sometimes to pay Moneys, sometimes to lay out Money, and buy several things
which both my Master and Lady did daily send for to me; there was some Letters
that came constantly every week from my Lady; some out of France to one M.
Charboners, whose house was in Tower-street: I missing these Letters often on
the Monday, went on the Tuesday for them, which was the day that we met at the
Club, which was the main reason of my being so constantly there; where I met
for no other end then to see the faces* of my Friends, and to discourse of the
News of the Town: most of what ever I heard there discoursed on, I found in
the printed Books; nothing do I know was ever said or done there prejudicial
to the State; but since it is looked upon as a Crime, I would I had never come
there. Concerning my Master, were it necessary, I would here make a
Declaration, that he never left me to do any business, but to wait upon his
Lady, and to provide, buy, and send those things into France that were
necessary for him: For Letters, I never received any from him, but such as
might have looked all the world in the face; neither think I, I need say much to
clear this, for that the State have seen most of those Letters that my Master
sent before they ever came to my hands. My Lord, this is all I can say, being
unwilling to trouble the Court any longer, but must declare how much I am
amazed to be Indicted by so high a Charge, of Treason, as I dare say never
looked any such man as I am in my condition in the face till now, and do fully
persuade my self that your Lordship will rather pity my ignorance, and sad
condition; then look upon me as a man either fit for Plots, or any such matter
I am Charged with. I do protest, that if I would make a Declaration of every
Act I have done, of every Word I have said, of every line I have Written; I
never knew it came up to the border of Treason, what ever is laid to my Charge:
And whereas Major Adams charges me of being at several meetings presently
after the late Kings death; I did not see them not nine months after the death
of the King: And after I came acquainted with Alford, and all that ever he
lays to my Charge, is going down to Gravesend, but he did not say whether he
or I carried the Commissions or Letters he speaks of; it is hard for me to
remember what the discourse was a year and half since, but I dare say he does
most falsely charge me that I should bid him show kindness to Mason, that so he
might represent the Presbyterian Party considerable to the King, and that I
should bid him disburse some Money, and pay all the Charges, and if it was not
paid him by the Company again, I would; this to the best of my remembrance is
all false; Capt. Far (who is another of the Witnesses, who went along with me,
and Alford) did declare it in the face of the Court, that he knew no such
thing, and that Major Alford was the man that invited him to Gravesend; and so
I do protest, he did me, or else I had never gone. For Letters, I do not
remember that ever I touched any; nor did Major Alford in the least swear
positively I did; only he says either he or I did deliver them; Alford does
not swear that ever I wrote, that ever I saw them open, or ever heard them
read. All this my Lord was done above a year and half ago, and I hope if there
shall be any thing found done amiss in that Journey, the Acts will clear me,
for that it is said, if a man be not Indicted within a year, he is not to be
Arraigned, or questioned. All that Maj. Huntington says, is, He saw me at
Master Loves when the Instructions were read, but whether I heard them he could
not swear, but he saw me go out of one room into another; and since he says I
met him in the street, and asked him if he would not go to M. Loves to hear
News: and when we came there, after Prayer half an hour, Will. Drake pulled a
Letter out of his Pocket, neither swore he what it was, nor that I heard it
read. My Lord, upon the whole, I do say, among all the ten Witnesses, there is
not one that does say or swear that ever I wrote Letter, sent Letter, or
received Letter; that ever I collected Money, paid Money, or received Money; or
that ever I discoursed any thing prejudicial to the State; not any one
Witness does say any one thing to my Charge done for more then this year and
half besides Major Adams; and all that ever he swears, is, being present at
Letters read; he neither says I heard them, or ever discoursed any thing
concerning them. So my Lord, except it be one single Witness, there is nothing
laid to my Charge done this year and half; so my Lord, the utmost that the
whole proof against me does amount unto is, but hearing of Letters read at the
second hand, and all this but in the utmost were but misprision of Treason if
fully proved; but being but one single Witness to swear this, I cannot imagine
it will ever hurt me. For Potter, Jekell, Far, or Alford, (who knew as much by
me as Adams) did not say any such thing; and all that Adams did say, is but
hearing of Letters; he does not say that ever I sent means to the King: though
I never did this, yet I have weakened my self, and opened my purse to help the
State. About the time the Kings and Scots were agreed, I furnished my Brother
with a considerable sum of money, and sent him into Ireland to do the States
service, where he gained a Command under my Lord, and did very good service for
the State. My Lord, had I ever such a mind to the War in Scotland, I could have
sent my Brother thither, and not into Ireland. Thus my Lord, I have gone as far
as I can in making my appeal to the Court, being utterly unable to make any
defense, I do hope there will be no advantange taken by my Ignorance, but you
will be pleased to take my condition into your consideration, and yet grant me
both time and Council, and give me a Copy of my Charge, and the depositions of
the Witnesses, which is no more favor then was allowed to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Deputy of Ireland: I crave leave of your Lordship, and the
Court, that I may not suffer for want of experience, nor that my ignorance may
be made use of to work my ruin and destruction: From my youth I have studied
the Scripture, but never have studied the Laws in my life, and therefore all
that I have to help my self with is, from the Scripture; where I find that
ignorance has constantly the Plea at the Bar of Heaven, and so I am certain
should have at the Bars of all the Courts of Justice. Abimelech that committed
a very great sin in taking another man's wife from him, he pleaded his
integrity, and God did spare him, because he knew it not* God has always been
wonderful tender of the life of a man, and that in the time of the most
strictest Laws, so much care did he take to preserve the life of man, that he
provided Cities of refuge to fly unto, if any killed a man by accident, or
unawares: Murder is a great crying sin, yet were it done unawares God made a
City of refuge to fly unto, that the man might be safe, and out of danger of
the revenger. My Lord, whatsoever I have done amiss, I do profess it is out of
ignorance, I never knew I broke any of the Acts of Parl. nor that I offended
the Laws of England; and therefore I hope my ignorance shall have the plea at
your Bar, as I am sure it shall have at the Bar of God; I have often heard that
the Law of England is the Law of Mercy, and that there is no Law in the world
looks with more tenderness and compassion upon a man's life: therefore I say as
David concerning the sword of Goliath, There is none like that, give it me; the
same I do say this day, no Law is like to our English Laws, therefore let me
enjoy the^, I know the benefits and advantages* hereby is wonderful great; I do
verily believe I am before a Court that are fully persuaded that the
strict-beholding eye of God looks upon them, and beholds all your intentions,
and the thoughts of your heart toward me, and sees whether you do deny me any
help or advantage that may save my life. Therefore I earnestly beseech your
Lordship, and this Honorable Court to look upon the Laws of England, and see
whether there be not some helps, some City of refuge to fly unto, where I may
be out of danger of all that I am here charged with. My Lord, this is the first
time that ever I was brought upon a Stage, the first time that ever my name was
heard of, or I known to be an Offender against the State: And whatsoever shall
now be found in me amiss, I desire there may be a favorable construction made
of it, and not to be strained beyond what my intention was, who have always
abhorred from my very soul all designs that have tended to blood; I have
always stood firm to the Cause of Liberty and Religion, and all the interests
thereof: these are the Principles I first took up, these are the Principles I
have always held; from which Principles I never yet departed, I have always
had a bleeding heart when the Church has been in a suffering condition; I have
never been of a bitter spirit, but have always carried a most tender and
Christian respect toward those that were of an unblameable life and
conversation: And where I thought there was truth of Grace, however contrary to
me in judgment, yet I have loved them, and embraced them as Christians; I have
always lived peaceably, never no disturber of the Church or State, either by
writing, or printing Books, or any thing else. May it please your Lordship, it
is my desire you should do as God did, when the cry of Sodom came up before
him, I will go down says he, and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry which is come up to me, if not, I will know: the Lord that
knows all things, knew before what Sodom had done, but after the manner of men,
he came down, to teach all Courts of what they should do before they proceed to
Judgment. My Lord, here has been a great Charge against me, a great cry come
up unto your ears, I desire you to to do God did, that is, to know whether it
be according to the cry, that you would seriously weigh all that the Witnesses
have said; gather all the Circumstances together, and see the utmost that it
does amount unto, and then I am sure you will see the Evidences to come so
infinite short of what the Charge and cry has been against me, that you will
find arguments to incline to mercy; and if I might not be quitted, yet at least
you will let me have those helps and advantages that the Laws afford me, and
God has commanded you to give me; that you will not keep any thing from me,
that I, according to Justice, have demanded, and for the want of which see me
destroyed before your faces; therefore I do once more with all earnestness
desire you will not deny me a Copy of my Charge, also the depositions of the
Witnesses, and assign me Council to come to my Chamber, and plead for me at
the Bar, without which you take from me all these helps that should enable me
to make my defense; without which it is impossible for me to go any further, and
must declare that I want all the material things that should help me to save
my life, when I see before my eyes all possible advantages to undo me* MyLord,
I am able to say no more, if thus my just request shall be denied, I have gone
as far as I can without them both to clear my innocence, and vindicate my self
from that which is laid to my Charge; and am most confident, if you would let
me have what you cannot justly deny me, a Copy of my Charge, and the
depositions of the Witnesses, I should stand as clear in the eyes of the Law,
in the eyes of your Lordship, and all thi^ Court, as I am clear in the eyes of
God, and my own Conscience, from what is unjustly Charged upon me. And thus
much I have done, and am able to do no more; therefore if you do deny me, I
shall be abundantly satisfied; howsoever, it shall please God to suffer you to
deal with me. Concerning the Witnesses, I have little further to say, but
desire that the Lord would forgive them, as I do freely, would not change
conditions with them, though I were sure to die in fire flaming, or in the
mouth of Lions, even in the worst condition that could be imagined* I both
pity, and desire to mourn for them, who have so desperately wounded their own
Souls and Consciences to destroy my life. And the Lord grant, that not one drop
of my blood which they have endeavored to shed, may not stand betwixt them and
Mercy, when they are upon their dying beds a crying for it. And this is the
worst hurt I wish them for all the wrong they have done to me. Now the Lord of
Heaven direct your Lordship, and this honorable Court, that you may not suffer
the Witnesses Testimonies to be strained for me to lose my life upon
circumstances, or what is supposed to be, or in Conscience thought, but
according to clear proof and evidence; do that which may give you comfort upon
a dying bed, and no more then you dare look God in the face withal, and answer
to me his poor servant, who am innocent at the Bar of the Lord Jesus Christ,
where I shall have free liberty to speak, and you must, and shall hear me; the
Lord of Heaven direct you, that you do no more then what the Law will allow,
and that what you do, may be according to the mind of God, and most for his
Glory, and the good of me a helpless prisoner at the Bar; and so let it go
which way it will, I shall submit with abundance of content and satisfaction,
and with a quiet spirit, say the will of the Lord be done.


Thus having ended his speech, the Court adjourned until Friday next, and so
M. Gibbons was carried back by his keeper, and ordered to be brought before
them again on Friday after.

Friday, about twelve a clock M. Gibbons was brought to the Bar.
Keeble COme M. Gibbons what have you to say?


Gibbons. My Lord, I have not much to say, being totally dis-inabl^d* and cut
off from those means that might help me to save my life, which the last time I
was here, I fully declared, and as earnestly desired both a Copy of my Charge,
and the depositions of the Witnesses, and Council assigned me this I pleaded
for, until your Lordship told me the Court would be increased if I didnot
proceed to my defense, which made me dare to go no further, but rather choose to
submit to the mercy of the Court, and make an appeal to their justice, where I
desired that you would seriously weigh and consider how wonderful short the
whole evidences come; there was not any two agreeing Adams, the material
Witness, most what he said, was disproved by the other several Witnesses that
came after: I hope the Court is very sensible how little is laid to my Charge
by Major Adams after so great an inquisition, as he daily set upon me, inviting
of me to his house in the City, to his house in the Country, going from one
shop to another, where he hought I did come; to Aldermanbury Church, and all
other places where he did hope to find me; after all this sifting, and trying,
what was it he got out? nothing but the hearing of Letters read, which none but
himself Swears. My Lord, all that I have to say is, to desire both your
Lordship, and this Court, to consider with what great aggravation the Attorney
Genesis did multiply, and aggravate against me beyond all that ever the Witnesses
said, leaving out all what might serve for my advantage. My Lord, how the
Attor. General could bring Major Alford, and Major Adams together, and so make
them double witnesses against me, that is not possible for me, or any man else
to understand. First, what Adams says, is concerning of my bringing in of the
rough draught of Instructions, which I wholly deny, and so do all the Witnesses
that came after him, to the best of my remembrance* and some of them swear
positively that Drake brought it in; none but himself says that I brought it
in: to testify unto this, Major Alford says nothing: but all that he says
is, That I went down to Gravesend with him, and did not say or swear that I
either carried the Instructions, or delivered them, or that ever I heard them
read; all that he can say is, that I went with them, but whether he or I
delivered them, that he cannot tell: He speaks of some discourse concerning
showing of kindness to Mason, it being a year and half ago, I am not able to
charge my self with what I said then, but dare say he has falsely accused me:
what Major Alford says more is, only that I should bring them to Masons
Chamber in the Strand, delivered not, nor says that we had any discourse at
all, but took our leaves, and came away presently; another time, said Alford* I
brought Mason to Titus to M. W^itarrs a Booksellers, and that Mason and Titus
went up to the Chamber, where they had private discourse together; he did not
say that I went up to the Chamber, or heard, or knew any thing what their
discourse was. Now my Lord, I hope by this time both your Lordship, and the
Court, are satisfied what slender testimony there is against me. First* my
Lord, I was never heard of, til^ I cam^ to Gravesend with (...) Alford, only
something that Major Adams says of m^, me^ting at the Swan, which all the other
Witness^s does acquit and clear me from. Now my Lord, to what Major Alford
says, is nothing but giving a vi^it to Titus and Mason, which, I hope, will
never be thought any crime; for that neither of them both were declared Enemies
to the State, and therefore certainly it could be no hurt for me to see them.
And besid^s, what ever Major Alford charges me withal, is a year and half
since, therefore am acquitted by your own Acts. So that it cannot enter into my
th^ughts by what Act of Parli^m^nt or Law you can pass any Sentence against
me: For all that ever is laid to my Charge done within this year, is nothing
but hearing of Letters read; which not any one but Major Adams say s, and he
neither says what these Letters were, and that ever I discoursed, or said any
thing* concerning them. Thus my Lord, you see there is but one single Witness
throughout. My Lord, I waited upon a Gentleman that led me to 2 or 3 Meetings,
by which means I gained a nearer acquaintance, which now proves part of my
unhappiness, seeing it is become a crime to meet Friends at the Club, and
other places, and hear Letters, and other News read, which is all that I am
Charged with. My Lord, I hope I am before a Court that does consider, that all
those days works will be judged over again; therefore I cannot imagine that any
Court of Justice in the world will proceed to Sentence upon so slender a
Testimony that lies before you, but that you will rather allow me those helps
that may enable me to end the difference that is betwixt the State and me, that
is, to let me have a Copy of my Charge, the deposition of the Witnesses, and
Council assigned me; without which, it is as impossible to defend my self, as
for a little child to encounter an Armed man with a drawn Sword in his hand. My
Lord, I have no more to say, but shall submit to God whatsoever comes; and, as
I said before, so I say again, I do freely forgive the Witnesses, but do desire
that the Court will not proceed upon so slight and slender Testimonies, which
never can, nor will hold water in the sight of God, or Law.


Keeble. M. Gibbons, most of what you have said now, you said before, only you
made some little addition, the Court has debated your business and Life, with
as much care as if you were the greatest Noble man in England, and upon the
debate, they are persuaded in their Consciences that you deserve to be
Sentenced.


Attor. Genesis My Lord, M. Gibbons pleads for his Life, and I for Justice in the
befalf of the Commonwealth, therefore I desire you will proceed to Sentence
according to the Judgment of the Court. Whereupon Sentence was read: After
that all the whole Charge was read, and M. Gibbons Sentenced as a False
Traitor, to return to that place from whence he came, so to suffer death, by
having his Head severed from his Body.


After Sentence Keeble spoke in this manner.

M. Gibbons, you having nothing to do, but to prepare your self for God; you
have a great acquaintance among the Ministers, you should do very well to send
for them, and reveal what you know, and so do the State what good you can
before you die.


Keeble. Have you any thing more to say?


But M. Gibbons said not one word more, but took his leave of the Court, humbly
bowing to them; and after that, he bowed to the Attorney General, and took his
leave of him, and so came down the Stairs with abundance of cheerfulness,
speaking to his friends, and shaking them by the hands. And in this manner he
went along the Hall until he took Coach to go to prison.

Were we but able to give the world account of these three days Trial that M.
Gibbons had, with what scorn and provocations the Attorney General did all
along carry himself; and how much he was dis-inabled by taking away his Papers,
and all other things, whereby he should make his defense; and now at last
receive the Sentence of Death upon such a Testimony as very few, or none, are
satisfied with that heard the Trial; were it all published to the world, I
dare say such hard measure and dealing, and so severe a Trial was never known
upon English ground.

A relation how Master Gibbons was cheated of two hundred pounds by Smith,
Under-keeper at Newgate, and Dyke his Master, who invited him to make his
escape, and agreed with him for the aforesaid sum to conduct him safe away,
and thereafter basely betrayed him; take the words as they were less in writing
by M. Gibbons himself, with his own hand.

A true relation how I was invited to escape out of Prison by Smith, who with
his Master Dyke agreed most cruelly to betray, and cozen me of two hundred
pounds.
UPon Wednesday night I called up Smith to pay him two shillings, I had a 20s
piece in my hand, let me see it said Smith; when he had it, I told him I did
not care if I gave 200 of these for my Liberty; said Smith, I was offered 300.
I told him it was the first time I heard it. Smith came up again to my Chamber
about one of the clock upon Thursday morning, and when he had awakned me out of
my sleep, was very earnest to persuade me to be gone, if I would give a 100 in
hand, and promise another, he would let me go? I told him I would rather die
my self, then either wrong him, or his Master, he said it could be no wrong to
neither. Here he told me a long story of one Wharton, over the Gallery by the
great yard; I told him there were some friends of mine were looking over, and
said I might get away by that Gallery; I told them I never meant to try, for
indeed I did abhor to make such an escape, or to break prison to hurt any
person. But M. Smith still following me with persuasions, and fully awakning me
out of my sleep, told me he would let me out of the Gate, and did give me
assurance it would neither hurt him, nor his Master. At last I did advise, and
concluded, that if I did not accept of such a fair call, and free offer, I
might become guilty of my own death. So at last I concluded to give him a 100l.
and writ him a Note for another 100. Smith having got my 100l. seemed very
careful to have me alter my habit, and told me, that with some difficulty, he
had sent his wife away, and therefore bad me prepare to be gone; he went down
before me to see that the yard was clear, and when he had made some search, he
let me out of the Gate, where, by his appointment, stood Dyke, and another man,
with Smiths wife ready to receive me, who presently called me by my name,
brought me in again, and kept my 100l. from me; and that same night Dyke went
down to acquaint the Council of State. Now I appeal to all, whether such
cruelty was ever practiced, as Dyke and Smith have done upon me a dying man. It
was resolved to go quickly to the Scaffold, but Dyke and his man, as if they
intended to gratify the Devil, uses all possible means to take off my
thoughts of dying, by prescribing a way to be gone; which Smith entreated me to
accept of, and offered to go along with me himself; when I did not accept of,
then Smith told me a long narration how he would answer the Council of State
how impossible it was to prove any thing against him, and that he knew his
Master could receive no hurt, nor he neither: And that he did verily believe
the Council of State, and his Master both, would be glad if I were gone. I do
forgive both Dyke and his man, but I fear the Lord will make a sad reckoning
with them both: remember the words of a dying man, and mark their end, and
bless God when I am dead for his goodness toward me; for all this is so far
from unfitting me, that it makes me the more willing to leave the world,
blessed be God, I am going from such a Generation.

FINIS.

