By Virtue of an Order to me granted by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament Assembled, I do appoint Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, London,
to Print this Trial of Henry Carr. Gent. and Elizabeth Cellier, and that no
other Person Print the same.

Feb. 18th. 1680. John Comb.

THE TRIAL OF Henry Carr, Gent, AT THE GUILD HALL of the City of London, the
2d. Day of July, 1680.

Upon an INFORMATION brought against him in the Crown-Office, charging him to
be Author (as in the said INFORMATION it is called) of a certain false,
scandalous, and malicious Book Entitled,

The Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome, or the History of Popery.

Particularly for that of the 1st. of August, 1680, which was the next Friday
after the Trial of Sir George Wakeman at the Old Bailey, before the Lord Chief
Justice SCROGGS. Also the Trial of Elizabeth Cellier, AT The Kings-Bench-Bar,
July the 1th. 1680. where she was cleared, and Mr. Thomas Dangerfield, the
chief Witness against her, for some defect in his Pardon, committed to the
King's Bench Prison.

LONDON, Printed by I. G. for R. Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1681

THE TRIAL OF Henry Carr: In Hillary Term, 1679.
AN Information was brought in the Crown-Office, against Henry Carr, which sets
forth, That a certain Plot of a traitorous Conspiracy, was late had within this
Kingdom of England, amongst diverse false Traitors of this Kingdom of England,
to put to Death, and murder our Lord King Charles the Second, and the
Government of this Kingdom of England, and the sincere Religion of God within
this Kingdom of England, well and piously Established; to destroy and subvert,
and the Romish Religion, within this Kingdom of England to introduce; and that
also diverse Traitors for high Treason aforesaid, were lawfully convicted and
attainted, and other Persons, for High Treason aforesaid, were by due Course of
Law tried and acquitted. Nevertheless, one Henry Carr of the Parish of St.
Pulchres* London Gent. knowing well the Premises, but minding, and maliciously
intending the Government of the Kingdom of England, and the Administration of
Justice in the same Kingdom to scandalize, and to bring the same in Contempt.

The 1st. day of August, in the 1th Year of our now Lord the King, at the
Parish of St. Pulchres, London, a certain false, scandalous and malicious Book,
Entitled, The ^^ekly Packet of Advice from Rome, or The History of Popery;
maliciously and unlawfully has Printed, and caused to be Published: in which
Book is contained among other things, as follows. There is lately found out
by an experienced Physician, an incomparable Medicament, called the
Wonder-Working Plaster, truly Catholic in Operation, somewhat of kin to the
Jesuits Powder, but more effectual. The Virtues of it are strange and various.
It will make Justice Deaf as well as Blind, takes out Spots out of deepest
Treasons, more cleaverly than Castle-Soap does common Stains. It alters a man's
Constitution in two or three days, more than the Virtuoso's Transfusion of
Blood in seven Years. Is a great Alexipharmick, and helps Poisons, and those
that use them. It miraculously exalts and purifies the Eyesight, and makes
People behold nothing but Innocence in the blackest Malefactors. It is a mighty
Cordial for a declining Cause, stifles a Plot as certainly as the Itch is
destroyed by Butter and Brimstone. In a word, it makes Fools Wisemen, and
Wisemen Fools, and both of them Knaves. The Color of this precious Balm is
bright and dazzling, and being applied privately to the Fist in decent manner,
and a Competent Dose, infallibly performs all the said Cures, and many others
not fit here to be mentioned.

To the great Contempt of our Lord the King, and his Laws, to the great Scandal
of the Government of our now Lord the King, and the Laws of this Kingdom of
England, and the Administration of Justice in the same Kingdom, to the evil
Example of all others in such a Case offending, and against the Peace of our
Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity.

To which Information appeared in the Court of King's Bench, Henry Carr, by his
Attorney, Benedict Brown, the 1th. of February, and having heard the
Information aforesaid, said that he was not guilty.

Issue being joined, it was tried by Writ of Nisi prius, at the Guild Hall,
before the Lord Chief Justice Seroggs, upon the 2d. of July 1680, where a Jury
being Summoned, whose Names are as follows.

Benjamin Thorogood. Richard Blackbourn. Godfrey Richards. Leonard Bates.
Phillip Harman. Francis Breerwood. Thomas Kemble. William Longman. John Debman.
Lewis Wilson. Henry Lashoe. Thomas Salter. Jeremiah Gregory. Nicholas Bondy.
George Day. Nicholas Dawes. Richard Blaney. Henry Averie. Joseph Hall. William
Bridges. Thomas Lee. Richard White. Randal Dod. Richard Bowater.
Of all which only four appeared and were Sworn, viz.

Nicholas Bondy. Leonard Bates. Henry Avarie. Randal Dod.
Whereupon a Talis was prayed and granted, and then were Sworn and Added to the
principal Panel, according to the Form of the Statute.

Nicholas Caplin Richard Cawtham. Arthur Young. William Yap. James Wood. Thomas
Gilby. John Odense^. Emanuel Coniers.
After which the Court proceeded, and the Recorder began to open the Offense,
as follows.

Recorder, THIS Person among others, intending to Scandalize the Government,
has caused a Book to be published, which I have here in my Hand, called, The
Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome, there are some Papers besides what are bound
up together, that are continued on, which, my Lord, would not be amiss for us
that are of the Kings Counsel to take notice of, not only for the Juries
Satisfaction, but likewise for the Satisfaction of this great Auditory, some
whereof I know come to pick Advantage, and to know whether or no Rascals may
not have Liberty to print what they please. Now all the Judges of England
having been met together, to know whether any Person whatsoever may expose to
the public Knowledge any manner of Intelligence, or any matter whatsoever that
concerns the Public? They gave it in as their Resolution, that no Person
whatsoever could expose to the public Knowledge any thing that concerned the
Affairs of the Public without License from the King, or from such Persons as
he thought fit to entrust with that Affair. But such is the Age that we live
in, that a man that has Wit enough for to libell any Man in the Government,
thinks he has License enough to expose that Man to public Knowledge also. And
they do it under specious Pretenses, because they think that any man may be
exposed to the public Censure, that they can either call a Papist, or but
popishly affected, and that man is either the one or the other, that is not
agreeable to every Rascally Humor that some People affect. I acknowledge, my
Lord, that any man that will in a Legal Manner endeavor to suppress Popery,
ought to be encouraged in his Endeavor, to the utmost, but if in Case any man
will be transported with Zeal, because he is of a Party, and under pretense of
endeavoring to Suppress Popery, should support a Party, that man ought to be
detected. The Author of this Packet of Advice from Rome, or the Publisher of
it, Mr. Carr, that is now the Defendant, he thinks he can scratch the Itch of
the Age, and that he may Libel any man concerned in the Government, if he can
but call him a Papist or popishly affected; let a man be never so honest, let a
man be never so much for the Support of that Religion that every honest Man
ought to Support, that is, the Protestant Religion as it is Established by Law,
without going to Rome or Amsterdam for Assistance. I will not mention the
Persons that are concerned in it, but I will apply my self wholly to this
matter, that it is the Opinion of all the Judges of England, that it is the Law
of the Land, that no Person should offer to expose to public Knowledge any
thing that concerns the Government without the Kings immediate License. Now we
are to try whether this Person exposed this thing to public Knowledge, and
that is matter, Gentlemen, that you are to try. The other is the Business of
the Court, we are to say whether, if we prove the Fact, this man is guilty
of Punishment, and no doubt the Justice of the Nation will punish him. But
when I see so many svvarm about me, I am vvilling to hear what Proof there is.


Sir Francis Winnington, I am of Counsel for the Defendent, I only offer it to
your Lordship, that the Information may be proved.


Lord Chief Justice. Here are two things we are to keep to the Matter of Proof
according to the Information, and accordingly are we to proceed as in Common
Justice we find the Case to be. I must say that for the Prisoner, he has
behaved himself with as much Modesty as in Duty and Honesty he ought, But I
find that Sir Francis Winnington puts you upon proving.


Sir Francis Withins. My Lord, we will prove it.


L. C. J. Let them that are not of the Jury go forth, the Jury is no more to be
corrupted than the Judge.


Sir F. W. We must be allowed the first part, that there was a Plot.


L. C. J. The Jury may take that upon their Oaths, they know there was a Plot,
the certainest of any thing of Fact, that ever came before me.


Mr. Stevens, Printer.

L. C. J. Did Mr. Car own he writ this Packet, had you any from him.


Printer I had several from him.


L. C. J. Of whom else had you any?


Recorder. Besides Car.


L. C. J. You are upon your Oath, from whom ever had you any besides?


P. I do not remember that I had any from any body else.


L. C. J. You printed them, did you?


P. Yes my Lord, I did.


L. C. J. And you know of none from any else, but by him or his Orders.


P. No my Lord.


Sir. F. W. Show him the Paper. Can you Swear upon your Oath, that Mr. Car did
send or deliver to you that very Paper?


P. I cannot tell that any body else did send it.


L. C. J. We must do here, as we do in all Cases, He says, I had diverse of
these Papers from him, I printed them, and I know of none that ever was but by
him or his Order.


Sir F. W. He says so, but, my Lord, the Information is to such a particular
Book, Entitled a Packet of Advice from Rome.


L. C. J. He says this in Answer to it, I cannot charge my self with this
particular, to say positively, I had it from him: But this I can say, we had
several from him, and I know of none else, but all were by him or his Order.


Sir F. W. Will your Lordship give me leave to ask him one Question, can you
Swear that any that came from him, contained the very matter in that Book? Was
it the Matter or Words?


R. Do you Believe it?


Sir F. W. Good Mr. Recorder let me alone. Can you say it is the very Matter
contain^^ in that Paper?


P. I cannot say that.


L. C. J. It is not an easy matter for a Man to remember the Matter of a Paper
that is writ on all Sides. He Swears that they had several, and that they had
none, tho he printed them, from any but him or his Order. This Question Sir
Francis Winnington asks, had you this particular Paper from him, he cannot
Swear it was the same he had from him, but he does Swear all the weekly
Intelligences were from him or his Order; he does not Swear for the Matter of
this Book, which no man will do. But he does Swear that these Papers were
always by him or his Orders, and that several were received from him.


Mr. W. I ask you upon your Oath, he brought it you in Writing did he not?


P. They came in Writing.


Mr. W. Have you any of these Papers to show?


P. We did not regard them when they were Printed.


L. C. J. His Cause shall be tried very justly, and very indifferently.


Mr. W. Had you ever a Paper from Car's hand or no?


P. We had few from his own hand.


Mr. W. Had you any?


P. I cannot remember.


L. C. J. Had you any? you are upon your Oath.


P. My Lord, I cannot remember.


L. C. J. Had you one, or two?


P. Indeed, my Lord, I cannot remember. I cannot say upon my Oath he ever brought
one.


L. C. J. How then came you to say, you had several from him?


P. Ay, my Lord, from him, that is, by him or his Order.


L. C. J. Are you sure it was by his Order?


P. I did conceive so, my Lord.


L. C. J. Had he any Money?


P. From me?


L. C. J. Had he any Money from any Body for Printing any of these Papers, as
you can remember?


P. I do suppose so, I have heard he had.


L. C. J. Did you give him any?


P. No, my Lord, I was not concerned. The Publisher, my Lord, was between him
and me.


L. C. J. Who is that?


P. That is one Curtis.


L. C. J. Did Curtis pay him any Money?


P. I never saw him pay him any, my Lord.


L. C. J. Has he owned at any time he had any Money.


P. My Lord, I never had any Occasion for that Question.


L. C. J. Have you talked with Carr.


P. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Now I shall have you: for I do believe you are an honest Man. Did
Carr ever own himself to you to be the Author of this Book, or any of these
Papers?


P. My Lord, as I said in the other Case, so I say in this, I had no Occasion
to dispute it, I took it for granted.


L. C. J. Have you ever heard him own it?


P. I have heard him deny it.


L. C. J. How did you come to take it for granted that he was the Author, when
he did once deny, but never owned it? answer me that Question, and thou shall
be a brave Man.


P. My Lord, there was never Occasion for that Discourse.


L. C. J. Look you Sir, you must answer me in a Way agreeable to common Reason
and Understanding. Why did you say just now you took it for granted that he was
the Author, and yet you say he has denied it, and never owned it? Why should
you then Believe he was the Author.


P. I don't say, my Lord, he never owned it.


L. C. J. What tricks we have in this World.


R. I would ask the Gentleman, I will not Quarrel with him at all, if he thinks
not in his own Conscience he has reason to Quarrel with himself. Did he ever
own it to you.


P. I don't remember he ever owned it to me in so many words.


L. C. J. Did he treat with you in these Circumstances as if he were the Author?


P. Yes, my Lord, I grant that.


R. But do you Swear it is so. We don't care for your granting: I ask you upon
your Oath, did you ever discourse him as the Author of these Papers.


P. I supposed him to be the Author.


L. C. J. Did he deny it or baulk when you discourst him of this Matter.


P. My Lord, I must needs say as I said before, it was taken for granted.


Mr. W. You had it in Writing, where are those Writings?


P. We seldom regard those Writings.


L. C. J. It is hard to find the Author, it is not hard to find the Printer:
but one Author found, is better than twenty Printers found,


Mr. W. My Lord, I will ask this Man a Question. Upon your Oath, who brought
you that Writing?


P. What Writing?


Mr. W. That by which it was Printed: who brought you that Paper?


P. I don't remember particularly, I had any of Mr. Carr himself.


Mr. W. Can you name the Person that brought this Paper, or any one Person that
brought any one Paper?


P. There was a little Boy.


Mr. W. Whose Boy?


P. Mr. Car's Boy.


R. Now it is out.


Mr. W. Name the Boy.


P. I do not know his Name.


Mr. W. Can you name another, can you name any Body else.


P. Truly, Sir, I don't remember any Body else.


Mr. W. now I will ask you one thing: Had you any Directions for the Printing
this Paper?


L. C. J. To what purpose was this written Paper brought to you?


P. To be Printed, my Lord.


Mr. W. Who gave Directions?


P. It was the Publisher that chiefly directed me.


Mr. W. Who was that?


P. I have named him.


Mr. W. Name him again.


P. Curtis.


Mr. W. Did Car never direct you to Print this Paper?


P. He did not deal immediately with me.


R. When the little Boy came, who did you take him to come from? from Mr.
Carr, or Mr. Curtis?


P. From Mr. Carr.


L. C. J. He says he was Carr's Boy, and that he came from him. This I speak to
the Jury, and I promise you this, if my Life and Fortune were at Stake, I would
be tried by this Jury at the Bar; and would do in this, as in all Cases. Mr.
Car, is looked upon as the Author of this Book, that it either came from him or
by his Order, his Boy (he can remember no Body else) did bring it. This is now
remaining only, are you sure Mr. Carr sent him, says he, we talked with Mr.
Carr several times.


Sir F. W. Thus it is, my Lord in the Information, Maliciose and illicite
imprimi causavit and publicavit. Now I would only ask him a Question, my Lord,
Whether or no did Mr. Carr own to you, that he sent the Boy to have it Printed?


P. No, Sir, I think not.


L. C. J. That is the same Question asked before. Did Mr. Car ever own it as
his or no? Upon your Oath, did Carr own this Packet to be his when you
discourst with him about ith


P. My Lord, I humbly crave your leave to explain my self. I mean by the
Discourse I had, common Conversation, as the drinking a glass of Wine: but I
know not that ever we discourst upon this thing.


L. C. J. I mean so, When you talked about this Matter, Did you take it by his
Discourse for granted, that he was the man that published it?


P. I took it for granted, because I had it from him.


L. C. J. What say you to this? Have you blamed Carr for writing too sharply in
this Book against the Government?


P. My Lord, I do confess I have.


L. C. J. What Answer has he made, when you blamed him for writing too
sharply as you thought? did he deny that he did it?


P. I do not remember that.


L. C. J. What sort of Answer did he make to excuse it, that he thought it not
too sharp, or did he say, I care not.


P. My Lord, I cannot particularly say what Answer he made.


L. C. J. When you blamed him, by the Oath you have taken, upon that Blame of
yours, did he deny he wrote it.


P. No my Lord, I do not remember he did.


Mr. W. Did Carr at any time deny he was the Author or Publisher of it?


P. He has at sometimes.


Mr. W. What did he deny?


P. That he was the Author.


Mr. W. Of what Book?


P. Of the Packet.


L. C. J. Did he deny he was the Author of this particular Book for this week,
or deny it in general? Did he deny in general that he was the Author of that
Book that is called the Packet of Advice?


P. I have heard him say sometimes, that he was not the Author.


R. And sometimes what?


P. I have heard him say sometime or other that he was not the Author.


R. And what else?


The Printers Servant.

Mr. W. Are you acquainted with Carr?


Man, I never had any Converse with him.


Mr. W. Do you know any thing of the Packet of Advice?


M. I know we have had Pacquets from him: I fetched some from him.


Mr. W. What, from his Hands?


M. Yes.


M. W. What from his own hands?


M. Yes, in pieces, no whole Sheets.


P. This is my Servant, I am not always there.


Sir F. W. My Lord, I would ask this Man a Question. This Printed, Paper that
is put in the Information, did he ever deliver that to you?


M. I cannot speak particularly to any one.


R. But generally to all?


L. C. J. Have you done?


Mr. W. I ask you a Question?


L. C. J. If you could, Mr. Williams, show me any Author besides Mr. Carr, I
would say something.


Mr. W. Who brought you this Paper?


M. Which Paper.


Mr. W. I don't speak of this Paper particularly. Did any bring any besides
Carr?


M. Yes, his Boy.


Mr. W. Did any body else bring any from any Place?


M. No body else that I know of.


Mr. W. The Packet he brought you, had it been Printed before? I ask you upon
your Oath, was it printed before he brought it?


L. C. J. Did he bring Papers to Print that were never Printed?


M. They were never Printed that I know of.


Mr. W. Did he bring any to Print?


M. I cannot say he brought any.


Mr. W. Did Mr. Carr bring any*


M. No, the Boy.


Mr. W. Who directed you to Print them? did Carr direct you?


M. I cannot tell, I am a Servant in the House.


L. C. J. I will assure you a Non est Factum cannot pass at this rate.


Mr. Jones Who did you take to be the Man that sent you all the Pacquets.


M. I very seldom took any, because I was not always in sight.


L. C. J. Who did you understand?


M. I understood they came from Mr. Carr.


L. C. J. Have you any more? Read the Words in the Information.


Clerk. Friday the 1st* of August 1679. The^e is lately found out by an
experienced Physician, an incomparable Medicament, called The Wonder-working
(...) Truly Catholic in Operation, somewhat of Kin to the Jesuits

Powder, but more effectual. The Virtues of it, are strange and various. It
makes Justice deaf, as well as blind, and takes out Spots of the deepest
Treason, more cleaverly than Castle-Soap does common Stains. It alters a Man's
Constitution in two or three days, more than the Virtuosi's Transfusion of
Blood in seven Years. It Is a great Alexipharmick, and helps Poisons, and those
that use them. It miraculously exalts and purifies the Eyesight, and makes
People behold nothing but Innocence in the blackest Malefactors. It Is a mighty
Cordial for a declining Cause, it stifles a Plot as certainly as the Itch is
destroyed by Butter and Brimstone. In a word, it makes Fools Wisemen, and
Wisemen Fools, and both of them Knaves. The Color of this precious Balm is
bright and dazzling, and being applied privately to the Fist, in decent manner,
and a competent Dose, infallably performs all the said Cures, and many others,
not fit here to be mentioned. Probatum est.


Sir. F. W. I am Council for the Defendant. May it please your Lordship, and
you Gentlemen of the Jury. I am Council in this Cause. And the Question is,
Whether or no we must take the Information as it lies? And truly, for the
first part of it, whether there was a Plot or no, I do not intend to make
exceptions: for I believe there was one, and do intend to take it as in the
Information. Gentlemen, we are to proceed now to this other Question; which is,
my Lord, Whether or no this Defendant, that is Carr, did falsely and
maliciously, and with design to scandalize the Government, cause to be printed
and published this false Libel, that is in the Information. Now truly, my
Lord, We that are for the Defendent, say we are not guilty. My Lord, we very
well know how penal a thing it is, for a Man to be the Author of a Libel that
relates to the Scandal of the Government. And, my Lord, whether this Defendent
be guilty of this or no, we must submit that to your Lordships, and the Juries
consideration. They have produced two Witnesses, that is to say, the Printer
and his Man. Now, my Lord, there has been going out for some time, a Weekly
Packet of Advice from Rome; and I did ask the Witnesses (for the Information
Points at one Paragraph, and puts the Paragraph In haec verba) I did ask him,
whether or no he did send, or, whether the Matter that he sent, is that
contained in this Information. That he could not Swear; but must be left in
point of Evidence; it being, we allow, a very penal Matter. The second Witness,
and the first Witness likewise say, there was a Boy, but whether that Boy came
by his Masters direction, he does not know. I ask't him if ever his Master sent
the Boy, he does not know; he says that he sent him. But the last Witness says,
diverse were had from the hands of Carr; but whether it was the thing that is
now complained of; there is the Question, and that is in the dark. For, by your
Lordships leave, I do not understand that ever this man was complained of to
any public Magistrate for writing this Book: for it was thought he was a
Satyrist against Popery; and thought to be very well liked on, til this Fault
was found with it; and 't may be very justly, whether or no we be guilty of
this, is uncertain: for we know, in the Age we live in, there are two many
shams put upon men, and who knows, but that the Papists, that might have an ill
will to this Mr. Carr, that has been no Friend to them, might shuffle in this
Paragraph, by that means to have Justice come upon him. I would not contrive
against common Evidence, where a Man is guilty to the Public; but we know
there are abundance of Artifices in this Age to abuse Men. For this purpose I
hope your Lordship and the Jury will expect that you should have positive
Evidence against him. Now, granting your Lordship should have Conjectural
Evidence, that he did cause it to be Printed and published, that this Man did
write it, is, I say, very uncertain, for there is no positive Evidence. What a
man may have in his private thoughts of it, is not enough: but whether Secundum
allegata and probata, it shall be alleged and proved that this man was the
Author of it. Now, my Lord, I say, I must submit it to your Lordship, I say,
that as to the causing it to be Printed, or the causing it to be Published, or
that this individual Paragraph was writ by him in Order to its being Printed or
published, my Lord, I say, there is but remote and conjectural Evidence, and an
angry Papist might contrive this way to have an Innocent Protestant found
guilty.


People. Hem --


L. C. J. You see what a Case we are in, Gentlemen, You see what a sort of
People we are got among. Go on Sir Francis.


Sir F. W. With your Lordships leave, I have one thing to put to your Lordship.
The Information says, false, illicite, and malitiose. I know there are some
things that do imply Malice in themselves. Truly, my Lord, I am upon a tender
Point, and know not how to express my self. I say, supposing it should fall
out, that this Man writ this Book, and he might have some little extravagancies
in his Head in writing, whether this Man did it maliciously to scandalize the
Government, as the Information says, is a Question. Truly, my Lord, there is
many an indiscreet Act a man may be guilty of, that cannot be called a
malicious Act; and that is the second thing, there must be Evidence that this
Man did it maliciously, or that he did it with a design to scandalize the
Government. If you be of Opinion, that it is otherwise, that is, in your
Lordships Breast, we are of the Negative, and we say, we cannot prove a
Negative. But if you find him Innocent, I suppose there will be no Cause to
complain of him afterward, for he had no Malice in his Heart.


Mr. W. My Lord, it can never be supposed, that a good Man, and a good Subject
should do an ill Action. If he be a very good Subject, if he be upon a Square
in every respect, a Person that loves his King, and loves the Government, in
Church and in State if he be such a Person, he cannot be thought guilty; my
Lord, we will prove him to be such a Man, and I hope the Gentlemen will believe
us.


Call Mr. Sutton, Mr. Ayliffe, and Mr. Ambler.

Mr. W. Mr. Sutton, do you know Mr. Carr?


Mr. Sutton. I know him very well.


Mr. W. How long since have you known him?


Mr. S. Two or three Years.


Mr. W. Does he go to Church or Meetings?


Mr. S. He has been with me at Church often.


R. Does he receive the Sacrament according to the manner of the Church of
England?


Mr. S. I was never with him at the Sacrament.


Mr. W. Is he one of them you call Dissenters?


L. C. J. Did he ever discourse with you concerning this Book?


Mr. S. My Lord, I have often spoken to him.


L. C. J. Has he disowned he was the Author?


Mr. S. He has so sometimes.


L. C. J. How do you believe it was upon that Discourse?


M. S. I do think he is able to write such a Book.


L. C. J. That is not the Question, answer me what I ask.


Mr. S. It did seem something like his Writing methought.


L. C. J. Did it seem by his Answer to your Discourse with him?


R. Pray tell us, did you look upon him to be the Author?


L. C. J. By the discourse you had with him. How did it appear upon that
discourse? Pray tell us plainly and clearly, How do you think by the discourse
you had with him concerning this Pamphlet, whether he was the Author or no?


Mr. S. My Lord, about a Year, or a Year and an half since, I did ask him
whether this Book were Licensed, he told me it was Licensed by Mr. L'Estrange:
but he did not tell me he was the Author.


L. C. J. How did it seem by his discourse?


Mr. S. I did apprehend he might write it.


Sir F. W. My Lord, but the Question is, whether he writ this Paragraph.


Mr. Ambler.

Mr. W. Mr. Ambler, pray do you acquaint my Lord, Do you know Mr. Carr?


Mr. Ambler. Yes Sir.


L. C. J. How long have you knowd him?


Mr. A. Three Years.


Sir F. W. Of what Conversation is he, and how affected to the Government?


Mr. A. He went to Church with me.


Sir. F. W. Do you look upon him, as a man well affected to the Government? Do
you think he would maliciously write any thing to scandelize the Government.


Mr. J. How do we know how Mr. A. understands the Government.


R. Mr. A. Had you any discourse with him about the Packet of Advice?


Mr. A. Never in my Life.


R. Did you ever hear of the Book?


Mr. A. Yes, Sir.


R. Upon your Oath, Did you look upon him to be the Author?


Mr. A. The common report was, that Mr. Carr was.


Mr. Ayliffe.

Mr. W. Mr. Aliffe, Do you know Mr. Carr?


Mr. Aliffe. Yes, Sir.


Mr. W. Is he a conformable Man to the Government, in Church* and in State?
Does he go to hear Common Prayer?


Mr. Ay. I have seen him at Church, and at Divine Service.


R. Did he behave himself reverently there?


Mr. A. Yes, Sir.


L. C. J. Do you think he writ this?


Mr. A. My Lord, I never asked him.


Sir. F. W. My Lord, it seems he was accounted the Author of Books, but whether
of this particular one in the Information, we conceive not proved.


R. If we should not do right, we disclaim that Service we owe to the Crown,
and that respect we owe to the Government, as honest Men, and as true
Protestants, and as much against Papists, as any men whatsoever. I shall
endeavor to give the World satisfaction, that this man is guilty of this
Offense. My Lord, for any man to come and pretend that we must prove, that a
man is malicious, or because that a Man writes against the Papists, he must
never therefore be convicted of Malice, surely, is a strange Argument; And I
wonder to hear any Man that pretends to reason, Men of Sense, and Conscience,
and Understanding, so out of their common Sense and Understanding, as to make
that go as an Argument. Gentlemen, the things themselves bespeak their Malice.
For so we in our common discourse, when we bring our common Actions, (of which
you have heard a number) if in Case, any man call a man Thief, we say he does
falsely, and maliciously, and scandalously call a man Thief. If we prove he
called him Thief, the very thing does intimate, he does it falsely,
scandalously, and maliciously. Therefore, the thing it self is a sufficient
Indication of the Malice and Depravity of it. There Is no man, but may know in
plain English, what the meaning of these words; It is as plain as can be in the
World. We must debauch our Understandings, and be as great Doltheads, as they
would make all men that will be of their Party, if we don't plainly see into
the meaning of these words, That Justice is to be bribed with Money. In the next
Place, Gentlemen, we do not come and say, that the Information lies against
these very particular words, that is a Mistake of the Information, but the
Information is, that he did cause to be Printed and Published a Book, in which
among others, there were such words as these; though, if they had been the very
words themselves, the very words have been proved. Now, there is no better
Proof under the Heavens, than the Proof we have offered. The Printer himself,
he comes here and says, that Carr did acknowledge himself the Author, and he
did generally publish the Book. I appeal, if you do not Believe it. This they
would now come and excuse; for they are glad to make a Rascal of any of their
Party, if they can but save a man that is Guilty. But, things come out with
much difficulty, and much straitness; and I must say, if ever any thing were an
Instance of Popery, then that man is one of the Jesuited'st Fellows that ever
was; for he does, cant so like them, that a man cannot tell how to govern Who
was it that should write these things? Truly, he had discourst with him about
the matter. Who sent the Boy? Do you know? Truly I cannot tell, and wonderful
great Snuffling and Canting before he comes to the business. Besides, what can
there be more plain than the Proof Pieces before the Publishing. To'ther Man
says, that he was the Man that fetched pieces from Carr's own hand, and that
he always looked upon it that all did come from Carr.

Now every man that knows any thing of Printing, knows this, that after it
has first taken the Press, it is always carried back again to the Author, to
see whether it be done according to his mind; and after that, it comes to the
Public view. And that this man, Carr, is the Author. Mr. Sutton and the rest
of his Witnesses, if they speak according to Conscience, they themselves looked
upon this very Man to be the Author. Their own Witness looked upon it so. It
was not only the Private Opinion of these Men, but the General report of all.
So that, my Lord, had it not been necessary to the support of the Government, I
should have scarce troubled my self to give your Lordship and the Jury this
Trouble. But I must say, and I do believe, that there is no man whatsoever,
that stands to have vices of this nature convicted and punished; but desires
the Protestant Religion may be supported to the utmost, and that Popery may be
suppressed. But I say, who ever it is, that after this evidence, who is bound by
his Oath to go according to evidence, shall acquit this man, he must be a man
of a Humming Conscience indeed.


Sir. F. W. I shall hint one thing to your Lordship in this case. That it is an
unlikely thing that a Papist should set out this Packet at this time. For then
my Lord, how came it to Pass, that Mr. Carr* had none came out that Week; for
his is a weekly intelligence. If Mr. Carr's had come out and this likewise
there had been some pretense for this: but since there came out but one, that
the Papists set out this is unlikely. They have not pretended to bring in any
body else as the Author: but there own Witnesses say, and they themselves say,
he was looked upon as the Author. Those things that are done against the
Government, are never done in the face of the Government.


L. C. J. Really, Gentlemen, I thought not that this had been a Cause of that
Moment, that now I find it. For their very Disturbance has altered it from Mr.
Carr's, to a public concern. The noise which they make, this way that these
People use, that with their shouts and noise attend the cause, has quite
spoiled it. As in the Case of Harris. But those People that did then attend
him, leave following him in a Goal, for Five Hundred Pounds, which may be five
shillings a piece had discharged him of, if they had been as free of their
purses as they are of their noises and acclamations: So that in Truth, they are
only violent against the Government whilst they can make shouts and noises,
but if it come once to deliver a man from a penal sum they will let him rott in
Goal. For so Harris sent to me, that his Party had all forsaken him, and no man
would give him any thing. And this is for those Hummers, those brave fellows
that seem to espouse a Cause, and yet leave their Party in distress: but let
them go away with this, that they prove themselves hereby* Enemies to the
Government, and false to that Interest, and Men that they seem to espouse; that
come only here to affront a Court of Justice with their Shouts and Noises, and
will not relieve their Party: for this is the Complaint of Harris, and the
Disparagement of all men that come to espouse it. This Cause, the truth on it
is, I did not look upon to be of this nature and moment, when it was opened.
For though, there are in this very Paper, upon which the Information is
grounded, words malicious and reflective enough; yet, they were not so
apparently appropriated, that a man might observe an extraordinary Design in
them. This I thought, but really, the case is altered, even by those Men. For,
I Will tell you, Harris is poor, and his keeping in Prison, is principaly
occasioned, from the manner of the reception of his Punishment, which he calls,
His Pardon. And therefore, these Fellows, these Hummers, let them all know,
when ever they come to espouse a Cause of public Concern against the
Government, they spoil it; and when they are taken, then they ruin one
another. And this is like to be so; for none will help them with a Groat. And
this is the misfortune of that unfortunate Man Harris, that he has no place of
Mercy left him from the King, because, he was attended with such a rabble, as
these People are, that have made a noise here, and ye^ will give him no help
nor assistance when he wants it. And, let them know, it has turned this man's
Cause, into a public Cause, because, here are People that do espouse it, and
the Government is hereby concerned much more, than by any one Action that this
Carr could have done. I have said so much the more of this, that I might show
you to what a sad Cause this is brought, from what at first it was. For, if it
had past without such a noise, as you see how they express themselves, I should
not have thought much matter in it* and though, you had convicted him, I should
have thought a better Sentence might have served the turn: but, they have
undone Carr, if you find him guilty, and so, it is like to prove, when ever
there is a popular attendence upon public Causes that concern the Government.

The present case, it stands thus. Mr. Carr, here is an Information brought
against him, for publishing a printed Pamphlet, called, The Packet of Advice
from Rome, and in it there are recited some Particulars, which were observed to
you before, which was not well done; but yet, not so insolently done, as some
perhaps do conceit. The Question is, whether he was the Author, or Publisher of
this. You hear, he is thought the Author, but say his Council, it is not plain,
and that is true. But, it seems by their own Witnesses, to any man's
Understanding, that they looked upon him as the Author. But then, is he the
Author, and Publisher of this particular Book? I had rather, Mr. Carr, with all
his Faults about him, and his Hummers, should go away with applause, and have
him found not guilty, than do him wrong in one Circumstance: for, I come to try
Causes according to the truth of Fact, I come not to plead on one side nor
another. Not to Condemn Men that are Innocent; nor, to acquit them, if they be
guilty. Now, it remains for you to consider, what Proofs you have, as to this
particular Book, against which, the Information lies. And that is the Printer
himself, who is one of the best sorts of Evidence that can be had: for, you
very well know, that Evidences of Fact, are to be expected according to the
nature of the thing. That is, Forgery, is not to be proved so plainly, as to
expect Witnesses, as you do at the sealing of a Bond: for, Men do not call
Witnesses, when they forge a thing. Therefore, in things of that nature, we are
fain to retreat to such probable and conjectural Evidence as the matter will
bear. I believe, some of you have been of Juries at the Old-Bayly, and that
even for Men's Lives, you have very often, not a direct Proof of the Fact, of
the Act, or of the actual Killing; but yet, you have such Evidence by
Presumption, as seems reasonable to Conscience. If, there be a known Case in
Men's Lives, certainly, that should govern in Offenses, and especially, when
Offenses are of a nature that reflects upon the Government. As for those Words,
Illicite, malitiose, unlawful; for that I must recite what Mr. Recorder told
you of at first, what all the Judges of England have declared under their
hands. The words, I remember, are these, when by the Kings Command, we were to
give in our Opinion, what was to be done in point of the regulation of the
Press. We did all subscribe, that to Print, or Publish any News-Books or
Pamphlets of News whatsoever, is illegal; that, it is a manifest intent to the
Breach of the Peace, and they may be proceeded against by Law for an illegal
thing. Suppose now, that this thing is not scandalous, what then. If there had
been no reflection in this Book at all, yet, it is illicite, and the Author
ought to be convicted for it. And that is for a public notice to all People,
and especially, Printers, and Booksellers, that they ought to Print no Book, or
Pamphlet of News whatsoever, without Authority. So as he is to be convicted for
it as a thing illicite done, not having Authority. And I will assure you, if
you find any of those Papers, I shall be more merciful in the Consideration of
their Punishment, if it be inoffencive. But, if so be they will undertake to
Print News foolishly, they ought to be punished, and shall be punished, if they
do it without Authority, though, there is nothing reflecting on the Government,
as an unlawful thing. The reason is plain. So ^ond are Men in these Days, that
when they will deny their Children a penny for Bread, they will lay it out for
a Pamphlet. And it did so swarm, and the Temptations were so great, that no man
could keep two pence in his Pocket because of the News. But still, they never
repented of laying out their Money, till they found, there was nothing against
the Government. This is not worth a Farthing, there is nothing of Treason in
it, we will not give a Farthing for it. Therefore this Book, if it be made by
him to be published, it is unlawful, whether it be malicious or not. Now for
the Matter, the subject Matter. What, does Carr think he has too much Wit to
fool us that are to try the Malice. It was sillily writ, if he did not believe
we understood it, and that were very intolerable in us; I hope, I speak plain:
that is, the sort of Books that he writ, it must be with an intent, People
should know what reflections he made, and shall all Mankind know, and shall
they that try the Cause not know it. If you find him guilty, and say what he is
guilty of, we will Judge whether the thing imports Malice or no. Sir Francis
Winnington has told you, there are some things, that do necessarily imply
Malice in them. If this thing does not imply it, then the Judges will go
according to Sentence, if it does, so that it concerns not you one farthing,
whether malicious, or not malicious, that is plain. Now, there remains only one
thing, that is, whether or no he was the Publisher of this Book? for that we
have this Evidence. The Printer tells you, he was the Person that they looked
upon to be the Author of this Book, that he sent this Book to be Printed by his
Boy. The Printer says, that he often discourst with him, and he took it for
granted. His Boy brought it. To what purpose? to be Printed. The Printers
Servant says, they looked upon him as the Author, and I have fetched Sheet by
Sheet, several Sheets from his own hand. I will do right in the Case, be it
what it will, let him escape or not. Say his Council, had you this particular
Paper from him. I urge this as clearly, as their own Council have objected it.
For that you must consider, whether he is the Author of the Book. You must take
Evidence in this case, as you do all the Year long; that is, in other Cases,
where you know there is an absolute certainty, that the thing is so: for humane
frailty must be allowed; that is, you may be mistaken. For, you do not Swear,
nor, are you bound to Swear here, that he was the Publisher of this Book; but,
if you find him guilty, you only Swear, you believe it so. God help Juries, if
so be, in matter of Fact, they should promise otherwise. They cannot Swear it.
Now, the Question is, whether you have Evidence enough here to Swear he was the
Publisher: for this is the main thing, to prove that he is so. Now, the Printer
tells you that he knew the man; that he had frequent converse with him about
it, and that he took it for granted. Now consider, when a man talks at this
rate, he does not say he was, but that he took it for granted, he does not as
much as say he is. They will own he writ several Sheets of this Book; then, why
not all this Book. Now, we come to the more principle matter of Fact, according
to reason, and the probable Evidence of things. That this Person is taken to be
the Author, and that it was his Boy that brought these Papers to be Printed. If
you cannot say he sent him, you can give no Verdict while you live, if you
expect that. The Printer says, he has been often discoursing with him, that
his Boy brought them, and that he knew no other Persons in the World, that had
any pretensions to be the Author, and if he were the Author, no doubt, but he
is the Publisher. Whether or no any body else had an hand in this, we don't
know. If you are satisfied in your Consciences, that you believe he is not the
Author, you must acquit him. If you are satisfied it is not he, you must find
him not guilty. So that as you are honest Men and wise, as I believe you are;
if you believe he was not the Publisher of this Pamphlet, that he did not send
his Boy to have it Printed, but that he came of his own head, you must find him
not guilty.


The Jury went from the Bar, and nigh an hour after returned, and brought him
in guilty.

L. C. J. You have done like honest Men.


R. They have done like honest Men.


FINIS.

