THE TRIAL OF THE LORD AUDLEY, EARL OF CASTLEHAVEN, For inhumanely Causing his
Own WIFE to be RAVISHED, AND FOR BUGGERY.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1679.

THE TRIAL OF THE Lord Audley, Earl of Castlehaven.
Judges,
SIR Tho. Coventry, Lord Keeper, Lord High Steward for that day.
Judges Assistant.
Hide, Lord Chief Justice. Richardson, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.
Davenport, Lord Chief Baron. Judge Jones. Judge Harvey. Judge Whitlock. Judge
Crook. Baron Denham.
Kings Council.
1. Finch Recorder. 2. Sr. Randal Crew. 3. Mr. Attorney. 4. Mr. Solicitor.
Queens Attorney.
The Names of the Jury follow.

THE Lords being all met and called, the Jury appeared full, and the Lord High
Stewards Patent was read, which was dated the 17th. of April. Anno Dom. 1631.

The Lord High Steward made a short Speech, praising and extolling the Kings
Justice, and Care of the State, that his Majesty hearing of these abominable
Crimes by report, could hardly believe them not only reported, but now by his
Majesty's Special Command, and Direction, Tried and found by a Jury of able
Men, and sufficient Men at Salisbury then, who opened the full business, and
explained the meaning of the Law for such heinous Crimes; First, for the --
Secondly, for the Sodomy; when, and in what Kings Reign these Offenses were
made Death by the Common Law.

The Prisoner being brought to the Bar by the Lieutenant of the Tower, the Lord
Steward spoke to him, bewailing of his Case for falling so far from God, and
expressed his sorrow for him, not only as for a Subject, but as a Peer; and
withal gave him this Caveat; that in, and out of all the Confession, and
Deposition concerning this business, the Earl never fell into these foul
Crimes, until he first fell from God, and changed his Religion, and that by
Fountayle, and by persuasion of his Neighbor Roman Catholics, and that he
leaving God, God left him, and that the Dignity, of the Person did aggravate
the Crime.

The Prisoner desires to speak.
The Lord Steward told him he should have time and leisure enough to speak for
himself. In the mean time if he had any thing to deliver shortly; he should be
heard, desiring him to speak boldly without fear; that he should have an
honorable Trial by those Peers he saw present, who were without exception. But
withal he desired him for his own weal, and the sooner to obtain mercy from
the King, to confess freely without circumstances, that his own Conscience was
more than a thousand Witnesses.

Then was the Indictment Read.
First, For Sodomitry, with Florence Fitzh-Patrich, alias Fumy, at Sarum, the
First of June 1630.

Secondly, For a Rape committed against his own Wife, in compelling her, and
forcing her to yield against her will, to the lust of one Giles Bradway at
Sarum, the 20th of June 1630. He the said Earl holding his Wife by one Arm and
one Leg, until the Fellow had satisfied himself, the Earl holding a Knife in
one hand; which done, the Lady endeavored to kill her self with a Knife, but
they took the Knife from her, and brake it.

Thirdly, That the same Night he committed Buggery with Florence Fitzh-Patrich,
alias Fume, being the 20th of June at Sarum.

To all three Indictments, he pleads not guilty, and desires leave to speak,
which was granted so he were short.

The Earl alleges he is no Scholar, that he has been kept these Six Weeks
close Prisoner in the Tower, where he could have no occasion to seek out any
thing that might clear him, and entreats the Lord Steward that he might have
liberty to have Counsel.

The Lord Steward replied, that in all that time, he had more notice of the
Proceedings against him, than any Prisoner before had, to his Knowledge, being
often before the Council Table, and face to face before his Accusers; yet to
satisfy the Earl, the Lord Steward asked the Opinion of the Judges, who all in
one voice answered, that it could not be granted but in points of Law; if any
such occurred, he should have present Determination: Then the Lord Steward
said, that his Trial must be secundum veritatem facti, little de jure: If his
Lordship or the Lords doubted any thing, let them show it to the Lord Steward,
and he would show it to the Judges, and so have present Answer: That now he was
to be judged by the Peers, who were without any exception, and because of their
absolute Integrity, no Oath was to be taken from them: So the Earl pleads, not
guilty, and submits himself to God, his Peers, and the right of his Cause.

Then begun the Kings Attorney to speak, and open the whole business with the
Circumstances and Depositions, pressing them all against the Prisoner, but so
fairly and so judiciously, that none could do better, nor contrive so foul a
business in fairer Terms.

First, Mr. Attorney clears himself of any former spleen against the Person,
but against the Crimes; that he should say nothing but what he could prove
clearly; (which indeed he did perform) that these ten years past, during the
time of his service to our late Majesty, and our now present Sovereign, he had
never opened his mouth against any Peer in this Land; wherein he commended
greatly the King in his Government, and the Peers in their Duty to their
Sovereign; then he showed that these Detestable Crimes were now prosecuted by a
Legal Course of Law; that his Majesty and People might be clear of them: that
the Lord Audley (for so they still called him) was Legally indicted in his own
Country: Mr. Attorney goes on, causes the Depositious to be read.

First, he insists upon the Rape: If a man, says he, does force a married
woman, and that she yield thereafter, yet he dies by the Law, except she
concieve; yea though she cried not, nor complained in time, for this is no
exception against the King, If a Man force a Whore, yet he dies by the Law.
but against the woman; Mr. Attorney persists, and shows there was no necessity
of revealing it, because the woman was in their Power.

The Earl tried his Wifes Chastity the first night of her Marriage with him, and
takes pleasure to make all men as bad as himself; he tempts her first night
after her marriage, to lie with his Favorite Anthil, whom the Earl said he loved
above all men; he says also to her, that her Body was his Body, she must
therefore use it at his pleasure, and used Scripture for it.

To Anthil the Son of an Inkeeper, being his Favorite, he gave his Eldest
Daughter in Marriage with 8000l. of Portion; this argues strong affection, and
that which all mankind abhors, No Man being never so ill, but would have his
Wife better.
(that is to have their Wifes prostitute to others) the Earl took great delight
in.

Next to Anthil scceeds Skipwith in the Earls affections, whom from a Footboy
and a Page he advanced to be his Favorite, and so styled him usually, and made
him sit at his Table, and makes him his Bedfellow: sed quorsum hoc? I leave
that to your Lordships to judge: to him he was not so favorable as to Anthil,
in bestowing his Wife upon him, and was the Pander and the Baud; when as most
men strive to leave their succession to legitimate Children, and not to
Spurious Births.

So I will leave this point of Rape with this truth, that to force a woman is a
great sin; but for an Husband to consent that his Wife shall be forced, is very
much: but for an Husband to behold it, to be a spectator, yea to force her, it
goes beyond the Bounds of humanity.

Now as to that sin which should not be named amongst Christians, and a strange
sin in this Land, brought hither by strangers, I will scarce name it, the Law
of England says, that Knowledge is a Burden, and I think it is in this
particular, Crimen est bestiale contra naturam, It is Crimen Sodomiticum sine
penetratione cum faemina; It is Masculus cum Masculo, and therefore Penetration
is not lawful to make it Sodomy; Cubitus immunditus supplies the Penetration;
Voluntas solum requiretur, non Copulatio; so that the Law of England makes
distinction of degrees of this filthy sin, non est species Luxuriae, sed
Bestialitatis, quia non sequitur Conceptio. Many more passages were cited by
Mr. Attorney both out of Scripture and Law, etc. So he concluded that every
Breach of this filthy sin was within the compass of Felony.

Then he fell upon Henry Skipwith, born in Ireland, who being come from a
Footman, to be the Earls Bedfellow and Favorite, got from the Earl 500l. per
Annum, whereas he gave not his Son one hundred: he gave him also his House at
Salisbury; and gave him many Leases; and all his goods by Gift and Deed;
besides all these, he did prostitute unto him his Lady, and his Eldest Sons
Wife.

Then did Mr. Attorney largely declare all my Lord Audlyes Business, how
Skipwith and She did love one another in Ireland before her Marriage, but never
enjoyed her, till after her Marriage; and by reason of her young years what Oils
and grease the Earl used, to make her fit for Skipwith, which his heart
abhorred to relate. He did aggravate the more against the Earl, because
Skipwith being in such exorbitant and excessive favor with the Earl;
whatsoever his Wife had, must come by Skipwith, whatsoever the young Lady had,
must come by Skipwith; yet all these favors bestowed upon Skipwith were
nothing, in regard of that which is beyond all expression, that the Earl should
be to him the impulsive instrument, to betray the Chastity of an Innocent Lady
of 12 years, his own Daughter-in-Law, whose Children (if any had been) should
have been Peers of this Realm; and which is worse, if worse can be, the Earl to
be the Spectator and Enconrager of all these filthy Crimes.

This was confessed by Skipwith, and the young Lady; and as for the Earl's
Filthiness with his Maid Blandina, that was also touched, how the Earl's House
was a common Brothel-house, the Earl himself delighting to be not only an
Actor, but a continual Spectator of Filthiness; and also Blandina was abused by
himself and his Servants for the space of seven hours together, until she had
the French Pox; and so Mr. Attorney ended his Speech, recommending the Business
to the Peers.

Then were all the Witnesses examined, The Ladies were in a Room behind the
Chancerie; the Lords that went to them were four, Bedford, Essex, Warwick, and
Leicester
Fumy, alias Florence, Fitz-Patrick, Giles Bradway, Skipwith, Scot, Flore,
Walter Tite, his Steward, their former Depositions were read to them all, which
now again upon Oath they did acknowledge to be true; Both the Ladies
Depositions were also read, and some of the Lords were sent to them to take
their Oaths whether they were true or not, which they constantly stood to upon
Oath.

Thus did Mr. Attorney clearly prove what he had alleged against the Earl; not
one Circumstance at all which he alleged against the Earl, which was not
proved by two of the Witnesses at the least.

Then spoke the Kings Solicitor, resuming all that was said, and proved by Mr.
Attorney, alleging more Law to prove the same; but in substance said no more
than what was said before.

Then did the Prisoner speak for himself.
First he excepts against the Witnesses, as base and unworthy persons, suborned
by his Wife and his Son, to take away his Life; whereas, by Law, Witnesses
ought to be honest persons and undefamed, which they are not; and alleges Law
for it: for Fitch-Patrick, he said he was a Recusant, and therefore could be no
Witness; which was repelled, because he was never convicted for the same; and
therefore the Judges could take no notice of his Recusancy.

The Earl said further, That for his Knavery he had oftentimes beaten him, and
turned him away; and that he was now hired by his Son to bear witness against
him: It was repelled again by the Lord Steward, because it could not be.

It was answered again by the Judges, that in Law for the King, all Witnesses
are held to be sufficient, and that no honest and undefamed men could be
witnesses of such bad and monstruus Actions; and besides, it concerned the
Deponents Lives as well as the Prisoners.

The Lord Steward further adds, that the Earl had fair dealing, beyond the
practice, in that the Witnesses were brought face to face to him, which were
all brought there, except the two Ladies.

Secondly, That supposing it were true which they deposed (which he hoped would
not so prove) he urged to be cleared, whether the Statute did intend that all
kind of pollution (man with man) were Buggery or not, seeing by their
Confession, there was no Penetration. To this (the Judges Advice being asked)
they answered it was Buggery by the Law, and that the Law of this Land made no
distinction of Buggery, if there be Emissio Seminis.

Thirdly, He excepted against the Deposition of the Witnesses for the Rape,
alleging that the Actor being the Witness, deposed, that he had spent after he
had strugled with the Countess, that he did not penetrate at all.

To this it was answered by the Judges (after asking) that the Countess her own
Deposition* did clear that Matter, who declared upon Oath that the Fellow had
carnal dealing with her, being held by the Arm and Leg by her Husband, and
never thereafter knew him.

Fourthly, He said that the Wife could not be a Witness against her Husband:
the Judges being asked their Opinions therein by the Lord Steward, answered,
that in Civil Matters between Party and Party, a Wife could not be a Witness;
but for Criminal matters, and for the King, the Wife may be a Witness,

Fifthly, He urged that his Wife was incontinent, yea before he married her,
and therefore a Whore can be no Witness: the Judges Opinions being asked in
this Case, they answered, that a common Whore may be ravished, and so repelled
his Answer.

Sixthly, He alleged that his Wife, his Son, and one Mr. William Wroghton had
plotted together against his Life, and so all was but their Suggestions; this
he could not prove, and was rejected and repelled again by the Lord Steward.

Lastly, He beseeched the Lords to consider what a dangerous preparative it was
to this Kingdom, that a man's Wife and his Son, gaping after his Succession, the
Devil and wicked servants complotting together, might bereave the greatest Peer
of his Life.

Wherefore he desires them to see into what a Misery the Nobles, Gentry, and
Commons did involve themselves by this example, if he were condemned; and so
humbly submitted himself to God, and the censure of his Peers, and was removed
to a place appointed, till the Peers considered of it.

The Peers Names who were of the Grand Jury.
1. Weston, Lord Treasurer. 2. Montague, Lord Privy Seal. 3. Earl Marshal. 4.
Lord Chamberlain. 5. Earl of Kent. 6. Earl of Worcester. 7. Earl of Bedford. 8.
Earl of Essex. 9. Earl of Dorset. 10. Earl of Salisbury. 11. Earl of Leicester.
12. Earl of Warwick. 13. Earl of Holland. 14. Earl of Carlisle. 15. Earl of
Berkshire. 16. Earl of Danby. 17. Viscount Wimbleton. 18. Viscount Conway. 19.
Viscount Dorchester. 20. Viscount Wentworth. 21. Lord Clifford. 22. Lord
Piercy. 23. Lord Strange. 24. Lord North. 25. Lord Peter's. 26. Lord Edw.
Howard. 27. Lord Goring.
The Peers being upon their Honors, removed themselves to another Room, and
debated the Matter near three hours; all the Lords except one, found him
guilty; and that was my Lord North, who conceived him guilty of neither. But
there was a great Contestation for the Buggery; fifteen found him guilty,
twelve not; but the Major part carried it.

The Kings Sergeant at Law desired Judgment.
Thereupon Sentence was pronounced against him by the Lord Steward, who
adjudged him to be carried back to the Tower, and from thence to go to the
place of his Execution, to be hanged till he died.

The Earl hearing his Judgment, sat down upon his Knees, and protested upon
his Salvation and Damnation, that he was Innocent, and then desired the Lords
to intercede for him to his Majesty; that his Majesty would be pleased to give
him some respite, to settle and reconcile himself to his God (though he desired
no Pardon of his Majesty of his Life) which the Lords promised him, and so the
Court dissolved.

The Lord Steward gave him a Grave and Godly Admonition, desiring him to
reconcile himself to God, and to be penitent for his Offenses.

That he was beholding to his God, that he was not stricken suddenly in the
very Acts of Sin, but he had this leisure to repent; with many other
comfortable Speeches.

Notwithstanding this Judgment, there was a Warrant from his Majesty, upon the
Lords Intercession, for his beheading.

The Manner of the Earl of Castlehaven, his coming to the Scaffold, Carriage
and Speech there.
Mervin Lord Audley, Earl of Castlehaven, being at his Arraignment, the 25 of
April 1631. recieved the Sentence of Death. It was not long after before the
Warrant for his Execution was signed, and that to be upon Saturday the 14 of
May following; notice whereof was given him, and his Coffin carried into the
Tower about a week before, that he might the better prepare himself for Death:
The Dean of Paul's, Doctor Winerfe, failed not daily to visit him; and to see
how he stood, and to settle him in his Religion, upon the 1st. of May he
published in writing under his Hand the Articles of his Faith; and the Day for
him to suffer in being come, there repaired unto him of Noblemen, Gentry, and
others, a world of people to behold the same.

He came attired in a plain black Grogram Suit, a falling Band, a Hat without a
Band, coming along (notwithstanding the mighty Guard which attended him) such
was the Concourse and Press of people, both men and women, to see him, that his
person was scarce free, but even both along in the throng, insomuch that his
man was fain to settle anew, and amend his Gown on his Back, when he came to
mount the Scaffold; which being ascended, the Dean of Paul's and Doctor Wickham,
together with his servants, he saluted the Noble Personages, and whole
Assembly, showing to them all a very Noble, Manly and Cheerful Countenance,
such as seemed no ways daunted with the fear of Death. After a short while
showing himself to the people, he addressed himself to Prayer, the Deans
accompanying him in that Exercise, but somewhat apart; which being not long, he
stood upon his Legs, and leaned upon the two Deans, conferring with them; then
after he turned to the Lords, and spoke to this effect;

I acknowledge with thankfulness the great Goodness of Almihgty God, that it
has pleased his Divine Majesty to bestow on me many Endowments, as Honor,
Riches, and the like, which I have misspent, having been a vicious Liver, and
justly deserved Death, forasmuch and in that the least sin at Gods hands justly
deserves Death, and no less; but for the two heinous Crimes with which I am
branded, condemned, and here to suffer for, I do here deny them upon my death
freely forgiving those that have accused me, and have been the occasion of my
Death, even as freely as I my self do desire forgiveness at Gods hands, which I
hope to obtain through his infinite Goodness and Mercy; and somewhat the
rather, by your Christian Prayers, which I expect and humbly beg of your
Lordships and this whole Assembly. Now forasmuch as there has been speech and
rumor of my unsetledness in my Religion, I have for explanation thereof, not
only made Confession of my Faith, to those two Worthy Doctors; but for better
satisfaction to the World in that Point, expressed the same in writing under my
Hand signed; which as it is here set down, I desire may be publicly read.

The Confession of his Faith was read by a young Gentleman with a loud Voice,
as follows;
In the Name of God, Amen. I Mervin Earl of Castlehaven being in my full
strength and perfect Memory, Thanks be given to my Maker, having been branded
and openly accused for Change, Alteration and Doubtfulness of my Faith and
Religion, I thought it fit, like a Christian man, to give satisfaction upon
what Grounds I stand for my Belief, and I express it under my Hand for the
satisfaction of all charitable people and Christian men.

First, I do believe in the Blessed and Glorious Trinity, three Persons, one
Eternal and ever-living God, God the Father, God my Redeemer, God my
Sanctifier. I do believe upon the Merit, Death and Passion of our Blessed
Savior Christ Jesus, and upon his Mediation for the Remission of my Sins.

I do believe and use with most humble Reverence, the Lords Prayer, the Creed
of the Apostles, and the Ten Commandments, as they are set down and allowed by
the Church of England.

I do believe the Canonical Scriptures, that they are written by the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit.

I do believe the Book of Common Prayer allowed of in the Holy Scripture, and
in the Church of England, to be an excellent Form for the Service of God, and
to the use of the same; and for the rest of my Belief, I do refer it to the
true orthodox Faith of the Church of England.

And for the Articles received at this present time in the Church of England,
and confirmed by the Authority of Parliament, I do not differ in any Points,
renouncing all the superstitious Errors taught or believed in the Church of
Rome, or any other Church. In which Faith I will continue, God willing, to my
Lives end; in testimony whereof, I have here subscribed my Hand the first Day
of May 1631.

Then he proceeded.
I acknowledge the great Justice and Mercy of the Kings Majesty; His Justice,
in bringing me to the Bar; and His Mercy in affording me such a Noble and
Gracious Trial here; and I give His Majesty humble and hearty Thanks for
signing my Death to be in this manner, contrary to the Sentence pronounced
against me at my Arraignment: But there is a greater Favor than this, for
which I am to render Thanks unto His Sacred Majesty, and that is, the long time
I have had to repent in; whereof (praised by Almighty God) I can speak with
comfort, I have made good use, and am now fully prepared for Death, and much
the better, by the good help and instruction of these two worthy men, to whom I
acknowledge my self bounden, and do here before you all give them hearty Thanks
for their great pains taken in coming to me, praying for me, and preaching and
reading to me.

And I desire your Lordships to present my humble acknowledgment to His
Majesty, and for His Goodness in sending them to me, and my Thanks for the same.

I do also from my heart desire and beseech Almighty God to bless the Kings
Majesty, the Queen, and the Young Prince, together with all such other Issue as
he shall hereafter in Mercy bestow on them, and the whole State: and my Trust
and Desire is there may be ever one of there Line to sway the Scepter of these
Kingdoms to the Worlds end.

And I beseech, and do heartily pray for the Welfare and happy Prosperity of
the King and Queen of Bohemia, with all their Princely Issue. I do again desire
your Lordships to make Tender of my humble acknowledgement of his Mercy and
Goodness.

And now lastly, That you will not bend your Eyes so much upon me, as your
Hands and Hearts to Heaven in Prayers for me; and so I take my last Farewell of
your Lordships and the World.

Then he went again to his private Prayers, which being done, he prepared
himself for Death, striving to show the like Courage and Magnanimity which he
had formerly done, unto the last; but sight of the Headsman (whom yet he freely
forgave, and took him by the hand, bidding him do his Office manfully) together
with the apprehension of his near approaching End, made him somewhat to change
color, and show some signs of trembling Passion; for his Hands shook a little
in undoing his Band-strings; which his man perceiving, stepped to him and helped
him, as also off with his Doublet. Then taking leave again of the Lords, the
Doctors, and his man, saying a very short Prayer by himself, he pulled down his
Handkercher over his Face, and laid his Head upon the Block; which was watched
for by the Executioner, who instantly at one Blow smote it off.

And thus died that Great Lord of Castle-Haven.

FINIS.

