THE TRIAL BETWEEN Henry Duke of Norfolk, PLAINTIFF, AND JOHN JERMAINE
DEFENDANT, IN AN Action of Trespass on the Case AT THE ^^urt of KING'S BENCH at
Westminster, on the 24th of November, 1692.

By the Direction of his Grace the Duke of NORFOLK.

LONDON: Printed by H. Hills, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London
and Westminster, 1692.

The TRIAL between Henry Duke of Norfolk, Plaintiff, and John Jermaine,
Defendant, in an Action of Trespass on the Case, at the Court of King's Bench
at Westminster, November. 24. 1692.
THE Declaration was in Trinity-Term, the Fourth of William and Mary, King and
Queen. To which the Defendant pleaded, Not Guilty within six Years. And it is
replied, That it is within six Years; whereupon Issue was joined, and a Jury of
24 Knights and Esquires being returned, 12 did appear at the Bar, and were
sworn, Viz.

Sir Michael Heneage of St. Andrew's-Holborn. Sir Thomas Grantham of Sunbury.
Sir Charles Humfrevill of Westminster. Sir William Hill of Teddington. Ralph
Hawtry of Buxship, Esquire. Robert Sheffield of Kensington, Esquire. John
Pagett of Drayton, Esquire. Hugh Squire of Westminster, Esquire. John Coggs of
St. Clement Danes, Goldsmith. Charles Pryor of High-gate, Esquire. Richard
Craddock of Hornsey, Esquire; And William Withers of Cripplegate, Esquire.
After the Jury were sworn, the Council for his Grace the Duke opened the
Cause, which were as follows, Viz. Mr. Attorney General, Mr.
Solicitor-General, Sergeant Thompson, Sergeant Levings, Sergeant Birch; And
Councellor Banister.


The Defendant's Council were, Sergeant Pemberton, Sir William Williams, Sir
Thomas Powis, Sergeant Tremaine, Sir Bartholomew Shore, Mr. Jones; And Mr.
Dolbin.


Mr. Banister, May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, this
is an Action brought by Henry, Duke of Norfolk, against one John Jermaine: The
Plaintiff sets forth, That the First of April, in the Second Year of the Reign
of the late King James, the Defendant did, by unlawful Ways and Means, Entice
away his Duchess, by which means he had not the benefit of her Society; and,
by lascivious Conversation, committed Adultery with her, and caused her to
commit Adultry: And this he lays to his Damage 100000 l.

If we prove, that he did do so, we hope you will give us good Damages and
Costs.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, this
is a very melancholy thing to be told; yet it is fit the Age we live in may
know it; so as the Offender may be punished. The Duke of Norfolk is the first
Duke in England; Enstalled Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter; Lord
High Marshal of England, and one of the Lords of Their Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council: And he to be abused, perhaps none found any such
Cause to come before any Court. It is a hard thing, as this Case is, for us to
produce strong and pregnant Evidence: But our Proofs are such, as I am ashamed
to repeat them; but desire the Witnesses may tell your Lordships, and the
Gentlemen of the Jury, what they know: It was not kept secret, but it was known
so, as all the Kingdom did ring of it; and how the Defendant had the Duchess
frequently to his House; and how they lived in Adultery: My Lord, we will take
that Method that is most plain.


At. Genesis My Lord, it will be necessary to give your Lordship an Account of
something of the beginning of this Matter.


L. C. J. As to the Time.


Serj Tremaine, They would make this a sort of a running Account.


Sir W. Williams, It must be within six Years; before the 26th of May last, if
they will prove any Adultery; before it is nothing.


L. C. J. If the Witness be not heard, it is impossible to tell whether it be
within the Statute of Limitation.


Mr. Just. Eyres, If we hear it, and find it out of time; then when we have
heard it, we can tell the Jury how it is, whether it be within the time; and
they are to take notice, if they open Evidence that goes beyond six Years, I
hope your Lordship will not suffer them to do that.


Mr. Serj. Thompson, Here are Anticipations, Directions, and what not.


At. Genesis We will call our Witnesses, if your Lordship please.

Come, Rowland Owen, Do you know the Duchess of Norfolk?


Rowland Owen, Yes.


At. Genesis Do you know John Jermaine?


Roll. Owen, Yes, very well.


At. Genesis Pray tell my Lord and the Gentlemen of the Jury what you know of him.


R. Owen, I have seen him several times Dine and Sup at my Lord Duke's house.


At. Genesis Tell what Familiarities you have seen pass between the Duchess and
Jermaine.


Roll. Owen, I was ordered by one Henry Keymer, to go down to Whitehall with
Plates and Tablecloth, and he would go to the Blew Posts for some things, and
there was a Supper to be that Night; then to go down to Whitehall: Then I came
there at my Lord Duke's Apartment; I opened the Door and afterward going into
a Room, I saw Mr. Jermaine and the Duchess in Bed together; and the Duchess
pushed me out, and asked me how I durst be so impudent as to come in, and chid
me.


L. C. J. Who chid you?


At. Genesis He says, my Lord, the Duchess of Norfolk.


Mr. Serj. Tremaine, Pray when was this?


Roll. Owen, About 7 Years since.


Mr. Serj. Tremaine, Owen, you speak of something of a Supper, and that you
went down to White Hall; Who gave you the Key?


Roll. Owen, One Henry Keymer.


Sir Tho. Powis, What are you a Street-Porter?


Roll. Owen, I was Usher of the Hall.


At. Genesis You were Servant to the Duke, were you not?


R. Owen, Yes.


Sir Tho. Powis, Were they at Supper that Night?


Roll. Owen, I cannot tell.


Sir Tho. Powis, You carried down Plates?


Roll. Owen, Yes.


Sir Tho. Powis, This you say was 7 Years ago; Who did you tell it to?


Roll. Owen, To the Housekeeper.


Sir Tho. Powis, Who was she?


Roll. Owen, One Mrs. Webb.


Sir Tho. Powis, Did you tell no body else?


Roll. Owen, No indeed, I will not lie.


At. Genesis We will call another Witness.

Margaret Elwood, Do you know the Duchess of Norfolk?


Marg. Elwood, Yes, my Lord.


At. Genesis Do you know John German?


Marg. Elwood, Yes, my Lord, about 7 Years since; but I do not know whether I
know him now.


At. Genesis Pray tell my Lord and the Jury what you know.


Marg. Elwood, It was my business, being Housekeeper, to look after my proper
Affairs, and I being called down, I saw my Lady and Jermain; and I saw my Lady
in an ill posture upon the Stools, and my Lady said to Jermaine, Kick her.


Mr. Serj. Thompson, Tell how you saw her.


Marg. Elwood, Why, when I saw her, I saw her bare Knee, and Jermaine was near
to her; and then I came away, she being angry, and so he came from her.


Court, Was his Breeches down?


Marg. Elwood, His Breeches was down, and his Hat and Sword lay upon the Table.


At. Genesis What Posture was the Duchess in?


Marg. Elwood, I saw her bare Knee, and he -- --


At. Genesis Was she lying down?


Marg. Elwood. Yes; and the Saturday after I did see Mr. Jermaine come in, and
he laid his Hat on the Table, and unbottoned himself and went to Bed to her.


L. C. J. How do you know that?


Marg. Elwood, I opened the Drawing Room Door, and looked through the Keyhole
of the other Door where they was, and saw them go to Bed.


L. C. J. How do you know he was in Bed with her?


Marg. Elwood, Why I saw them, for there was a Wax-Candle in the Chamber, and I
could see them easily.


L. C. J. What time was this you say you saw them in bed; had they no Curtains?


Marg. Elwood, Yes, my Lord, they had; though they were drawn on both sides the
Bed, they left them open at the foot.

-- -- Did you ever pretend this before?


Marg. Elwood, Yes, I did.

-- -- Did you ever swear this before?


Marg. Elwood, Yes, my Lord, in the Parliament I did.


Sir Tho. Powis, You have lived in several places since; did you never tell any
bodies Servant?


M. Elwood, To no body but Mrs. Web: And my Lady gave Orders next Morning, that
I should be put away; but she heard no more of it: but I staid.


At. Genesis Do you know any thing else?


Marg. Elwood, I was making my Lady's Bed, with one Ann Burton, and I found Mr.
Jermain's Handkerchief and Ruffles in the Bed, at one time.


At. Genesis Do you remember any Shirt and Wastcoat that was found.


Marg. Elwood, Yes.


L. C. J. Did you find his Handkerchief and Ruffles in my Lady's Bed?


Marg. Elwood, Yes.


L. C. J. Did you never see him come down Stairs?


Marg. Elwood, No, my Lord.


L. C. J. It is very much you never saw him come down Stairs.


M. Elw. We set Traps for him to fall over, but he never came down to fall over
them.


Serj. Tremaine, Do you know of any thing, but in the first Year of King James?


Marg. Elwood, No, my Lord, not I.


At. Genesis We will call another Witness, Mrs. Benskin. I think, Mrs. Benskin,
you are married.


Mrs. Benskin, Yes.


At. Genesis What is your Christian Name?


Mrs. Bens. Ann.


At. Genesis Pray tell my Lord and the Jury what you know.


Mrs. Bens. My Lord, I was House-maid and Servant to the Duchess in the first
Year of King James's Reign; about Bartholomew-tide my Lady Duchess went to
London with Jermaine, Nell Gwynn, and some others, and we did not expect them
to come home that Night, but she did, and after they went to Supper; after that
they went to Cards; and then my Lady Duchess had a great mind to go to Bed,
and desired us to make her a Fire, and so we did, and my Lady went to Bed, and
said, Though the King and Queen should send for me, I would not rise till Eleven
a Clock to Morrow-morning. So the Candles were put out, and two Footmen stood
to wait, because Mr. Jermaine used to be generous to the Servants; and they
waited till Two a Clock in the Morning: I asked them whether Mr. Jermain had
come down? and they said, No, for they had been there all the while; and if he
came, he could not go, for, they said, we have laid Chairs and Stools in the
way, that if he come, he might fall over them; and the next Morning I saw a Man
with a Paper-Box in his hand, and he asked me for Mr. Jermain's Chamber or
Lodgings; I told him, I knew none he had there. My Lord, the next day my Lady
Duchess ordered me to make her a Fire, and Mrs. Kniveton was Combing her Head,
and Nell Guynn came in, and said, Good Morrow, to your Grace; how did you rest
last Night? She said, Well. Then Col. Cornwall came in, and said to my Lady
Duchess, How does Mr. Jermain do? And she said, Why do you ask me? And Col.
Cornwall said, He did not lie at Home last Night. Then Nell Gwynn said, We shall
see him come out by and by like a drowned Mouse. And so I went to make my Lady
Dutchess's Bed, and found a Handkerchief and Ruffles. And Mrs. Kniveton came
and said, Come hither, and I will show you a sight; and when I came, there lay
a Shirt and Wastcoat, and I took them away, because it was a place where any
body, as they came, might see them. And my Lord Duke was not in Town.


At. Genesis How came you to take notice of the Ruffles and Handkerchief?


Ann Bens. Why Mrs. Kniveton said it was a Man's Ruffles.


Sir Tho. Powis, How long was this since, in 85? had there not been an Appeal?


Ann Bens. Yes, there was.


Serj. Birch, Was there any thing remarkable in the Bed.


Ann Bens. The Bed was stained?


Sir Tho. Powis, What is your Name now, Benskin?


Ann Bens. Yes.


Sir Tho. Powis. What was your other Name?


Ann. Bens. Burton.


Sir Tho. Powis, Was you ever married?


Ann Bens. Sir, you know I could have no other Name, if I were not married.


Sir Tho. Powis, You have lived in several places.


Ann Bens. I have lived with my Lord of Clare, and my Lord Ferres.


Serj. Birch, Did Jermain go by any other Name than he goes by now?


Ann Bens. Not as I know of.


At. Genesis We will call another Witness. Thomas Hudson, Do you know the
Duchess of Norfolk, and Mr. Jermain?


Tho. Hudson, Yes.


At. Genesis Pray what did you observe betwixt the Duchess of Norfolk and
Germain?


Tho. Hudson, Sir, I was a Servant to Mr. Scroggs, that was the Dutchess's
Steward, and so he going away upon other business, I was left Butler at
Windsor; so there came two Captains to play at Cards, and one Captain asked if
Mr. Jermain was there? I told him, No. Now his Man, as I heard after, had
brought Jermain a Shirt and Wastcoat; for, as soon as his Man was gone, we
found the Wastcoat and foul Shirt: And the same day the Duchess treated the
Queen at Windsor.

-- -- When was this?


Tho. Hudson, It was in the Year 1685.


Sir Tho. Powis, Was this in the Year 1685.


Tho. Hudson, Yes, it was so, for I took it down in my Book.


Mr. Jones, Did you swear all this before the House of Lords.


Tho. Hudson, Yes, but only the Day of the Month I could not well remember
then; but I refreshed my memory since.


Serj. Thomp. We will call Mrs. Hastings and Elizabeth Knave. Mrs. Frances
Hastings do you know the Duchess of Norfolk or Mr. Jermain?


Mrs. Hastings, I knew nothing of them, but that they lay at my House.


At. Genesis Did you know Mr. Jermain?


Mrs. Hastings, I saw him but once.


At. Genesis Did you ever see Mr. Jermain lie at your House?


Mrs. Hastings, Yes.


At. Genesis When?


Mrs. Hastings, The first Year of King James's Reign.


At. Genesis How long?


Mrs. Hastings, A whole Summer.


At. Genesis We will call another Witness. Elizabeth Knave, Did you ever live
with Mrs. Hastings?


Eliz. Knave, Yes.


At. Genesis How long?


Eliz. Knave, A whole Summer.


At. Genesis Did you ever see the Duchess of Norfolk?


Eliz. Knave, Never.


At. Genesis Did you ever see the Duchess of Norfolk and Mr. Jermain together?


Eliz. Knave, No, but Mr. Jermain's Servant said it was the Duchess of Norfolk
that was with Mr. Jermain; and as he and I was making the Bed, I found a
Handchief, marked with an M and a Coronet.


At. Genesis In whose Bed was this?


Eliz. Knave, Why it was in Mr. Jermain's Bed.

-- -- How long since?


Eliz. Knave, In the first Year of King James's Reign.


L. C. J. Woman, did you find the Handkerchief?


Eliz. Kave, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. What Mark had it.


Eliz. Knave, An M and Coronet.


Serj. Thompson, You see how far we are gone.


L. C. J. All without the Statute.


Serj. Thompson, We shall show you, that my Lady Duchess went by the Name of
my Lady Bateman, and Mr. Jermain went by the Name of her Brother; and he did
take a House at Fox-hall, beyond the Water; the Man's Name was Scriber; and she
lived in that place for three quarters of a Year and more; and then Mr. Jermain
came constantly to her; and it was known to be the Duchess of Norfolk though she
went by another Name, and her Servant, Henry Keymer, also; this Keymer was he,
that the first Witness swore gave him a Key to her Chamber at White Hall.


[ Henry Keymer did not appear.] At. Genesis Peter Scriber, Pray do you know one
Mr. Jermain?


Peter Scriber, Yes, Sir.


At. Genesis Pray did he come to take any House of you?


Peter Scriber, Yes, Sir.


At. Genesis How long since?


Peter Scriber, About two Years since.


At. Genesis Who did he take it for?


Peter Scriber, He told me for a couple of Ladies that came from Holland, as he
told me.


At. Genesis By what Name went they?


Peter Scriber, One Mrs. Bryan, another's Name was Madam Bateman.


At. Genesis Did you know any Gentleman, called Mr. Jermain, that lived near the
Cockpit?


Peter Scriber, Indeed, Sir, I know not where he lived, I have seen one walk in
the Garden, that went by the Name of the Lady Bateman's Brother.


L. C. J. Where is your House?


Peter Scriber, At Fox-hall.


L. C. J. Who paid you the Rent?


Peter Scriber, One Half-year, my Lord, was paid by my Lady Bateman.


L. C. J. What Servants had she?


Peter Scriber, She had one that went by the Name of Goodman.


At. Genesis We will call another Witness. Thomas Lloyd, Do you know the Lady
Bateman and Mr. Jermain?


Tho. Lloyd, Yes, Sir.


At. Genesis How often have you seen Mr. John Jermain at Fox-hall?


Tho. Lloyd, Often.


At. Genesis Who was this Lady Bateman?


Tho. Lloyd, The Duchess of Norfolk.


At. Genesis How do you know that?


Tho. Lloyd, Because I have seen her coming out of the House of Lords, and they
said it was the Duchess of Norfolk.


At. Genesis Are you sure of that?


Tho. Lloyd, Yes, Sir.


At. Genesis Did you know one Goodman?


Tho. Lloyd, Yes, Sir.


At. Genesis What is he?


Tho. Lloyd, I know not, but I heard after his Name was Keymer; but when he
waited on the Lady Bateman, he went by the Name of Goodman; about Michaelmas
last was Twelvemonth I saw Mr. Jermain that Summer was walking with the Lady
Bateman.


Sir W. Williams, You say you saw Mr. Jermain walking that Summer with the Lady
Bateman; what Summer was that?


Tho. Lloyd, Yes, that Summer was Twelvemonth.


Sir W. Williams, Are you sure it was within two or three Years.


Tho. Lloyd, Yes that I am, sure it was.


Sir W. Williams, Was it the beginning or ending of Summer?


Tho. Lloyd, It was about the height of Summer.


At. Genesis We will call other Witnesses, one Robert Hemingway; where do you
live?


Rob. Hemingway, At Fox-hall.


At. Genesis Do you know one that went by the Name of the Lady Bateman?


Rob. Hemingway, Yes.


At. Genesis And you are sure that she went by the Name of the Lady Bateman; is
she Duchess of Norfolk?


Rob. Hemingway, Yes.


At. Genesis Do you know one Goodman, that waited upon the Lady Bateman?


Rob. Hemingway, Yes.


At. Genesis Was that his right Name?


To. Hem. No his name was Keymer


L. C. J. Where did you see her?


To. Hem. Near her Fathers House my Lord of Peterboroughs.


L. C. J. Why, How did you know this was the Duchess of Norfolk?


To. Hem. Why, all that ever I knew said she was so.


At. Genesis Where did you see the Duchess of Norfolk?


To. Hem. I have seen her in the House, and out of the House of the L.
Peterboroughs.


L. C. J. What occasion had you to observe her?


To. Hem. I have seen her at her Fathers House by the Mill-bank.


At. Genesis He was a Gardner employed there. We will call another Witness:
Andrew Anderson, Do you know the Duchess of Norfolk?


And. Anderson. Never otherwise but by the Name of the Lady Bateman.


At. Genesis Do you know a Lady that went by the Name of the Lady Bateman.


And. Anderson. Yes.


At. Genesis Do you know one Mr. Jermaine.


And. Anderson. I never knew his Name, but he went by the name of my Ladies
Brother. I have carried him oft-times by water to Fox-hall.


At. Genesis Have you carried that Gentleman that lived next door to the Cockpit
by Water to Fox-hall?


And. Anderson. Yes.


At. Genesis By what name did he go by?


And. Anderson. By the Name of my Ladies Brother.


At. Genesis What is his Name? or what Name does he go by now?


And. Anderson. You know very well.


At. Genesis Have you carried any Wood from Fox-hall to the Cockpit?


And Anderson, Yes.


At. Genesis From whence?


And. Anderson. From my Lady Bateman.


L. C. J. When you did carry him by Water where did you take him up?


And. Anderson. Sometimes, my Lord, at Channel-Row, sometimes at one place and
sometimes at another.


At. Genesis My Lord, he says he carried from Fox-hall some Wood, and it came
over, and it was carried to the Cockpit.


L. C. J. When you saw him then, by what name did he go by?


And. Anderson. I never knew him then but by the Name of my Ladies Brother?


L. C. J. What Name goes he now by?


And. Anderson. Jermaine: All that know his Name, know it to be Jermaine.


At. Genesis Did you know one that went by the Name of Goodman that lived at
Fox-hall with this Lady Bateman


And. Anderson. I knew not but that was his Right Name then, but now I hear his
Right Name is Keymer.


L. C. J. When you did carry him by Water, where did you carry him?


And. Anderson. My Lord sometimes to one place and sometimes to another as I am
Commanded. I must observe.


At. Genesis We will prove that the Duchess has been several times with
Jermaine at the Cockpit, and that Jermaine has gotten a private Door into the
Cockpit Yard, and so into the Park for which he pays 40 s. per Annum.


At. Genesis Mr. Bradbury, Where do you live?


Hen. Bradbury. I live next Door to Mr. Jermaines.


At. Genesis Where is that?


H. Bradbury. By the Park Wall next Door to the Cockpit.


At. Genesis Tell my Lord, and the Gent. of the Jury, how it was.


Hen. Brad. Why, Mr. Jermaine had no way where he must go into the Park, so he
spoke to my Man, That he might have a privilege to go through my Door into the
Park, so I ordered my Man to give him or his Servants passage. and about a year
after he sent a Workman to me that he might make a Door out into the Park, and
I did agree with him for a Buck or 40 s. in Money, which he pleased; and so a
Door was made, but since he has gotten a Door himself into the Park.


At. Genesis John Dagley, Pray give an Account of what you know of the Duchess
of Norfolk, and Mr. Jermain.


John Dagley. I was at work there, and I saw a Gentlewoman going to and fro, up
and down Stairs, and I asked, who that was, and I was told it was the Duchess
of Norfolk. -- here was a brave curious Bed, and I was saying to some of the
House, that it was a very fine Bed, and asking what it might be worth, they
said it cost 700 l. And I was then just Married, said I, (I have a mind to
bring my Wife hither, and give her a Flurt upon it;) and we laid all our Heads
together as if we were settling the Nation, and then they said, that Bed was for
the Duchess of Norfolk, and I saw a Person there, who they said was the
Duchess of Norfolk.


Serj. Birch. Richard Owen Do you know Mr. Jermain at the Cockpit?


Ri. Owen. Yes.


At. Genesis What Company have you seen with him?


Ri. Owen. Why, I saw a Lady in a Mask I may say 100 times.


At. Genesis How often?


Ri. Owen. I may say 100 times in a Mask looking about, another time I saw my
Lord Duke of Norfolk walking among the rees in the Park, and this Lady looking
out of the Window toward him in Mr. Jermain's House: this I have seen, I speak
what I know.


At. Genesis Jane Wadsworth, Come tell my Lord and the Jury what you know, speak
out, Do you know Mr. Jermaine?


Jane Wadsworth. Yes.


At. Genesis Where lives he?


Wadsworth. In Park-street, near the Royal Cockpit.


At. Genesis Have you ever seen the Duchess of Norfolk at Jermain's House?


Wadsworth. Yes.


At. Genesis Upon what occasion?


Wadsworth, I living next Door going in for a Pint-Pot with the Dutch-Woman
that belonged to the House, and asked her for it, she said, there is never a
Pint-Pot there, it was above Stairs, and bade me go up and fetch it, and so I
did; and I met the Duchess of Norfolk there, she had a Nightgown on, and
Flanders-Lace, but in Night-Linning.


At. Genesis Was she undressed?


Wadsworth. Undressed as one may think, She might have a Petticote on.


L. C. J. What occasion had you to go there?


Wadsworth. For a Pint-Pot (My Lord) and going up, I saw the Duchess of
Norfolk going from one Room to another, (and My Lord:) Another time I saw the
Duchess of Norfolk and Mr. Jermain in a Coach together.


At. Genesis When was that?


Wadsworth. It was in March last, and I saw the Coachman, I asked him, Who it
was that he sat down out of the Coach, and he said an Honest Gentleman that
gave him woe Shillings for the Carrying him from the Horseferry.


At. Genesis Have you ever seen Mr. Jermain at the Duchess House?


Wadsworth. I did disguise my self, and followed him to see where he would go,
and I did see him go into the Dutchesses House at the Millbank.


At. Genesis When was this?


Wadsworth. In May last.


L. C. J. What time a day?


Wadsworth. My Lord, At 9 a Clock at Night.


Sir Thomas Powis. When you say you went for the Pint-Pot, did you ever say any
thing to any Body of it, that you had seen the Duchess of Norfolk.


Wadsworth. Yes to one Harman, that I had seen the Duchess of Norfolk -- How
said he, If my Master had seen you to go up Stairs, he would have killed the
Dutchwoman.


L. C. J. Do you know my Lady Duchess well?


Wadsworth. Yes My Lord, I know her well, she had Flaunders Horses stood in my
Stable, when I kept the Bear-Inn, and she came often to see them, I know her
very well.


Serj. Birch. Ann Read, Do you know Mr. Jermain's House?


Ann Read, Yes.


Serj. Birch. Where is it?


Ann Read, By the Cockpit.


Serj. Birch. Do you know him?


Ann Read, Yes.


Serj. Birch. What Company have you seen go there?


Ann Read. In April last I saw a Chair go by, and some Persons said, That was
the Duchess of Norfolk, and so I went and saw her in the Chair twice.


Serj. Birch. Did you see her with her Mask off?


Ann Read. I saw her with her Mask off, and saw her set down at Jermain's
House, and go in a Doors, the Door being immediately opened for her.


L. C; J. Did you know the Duchess before


Ann Read. Yes (My Lord.)


L. C. J. Did you see her before this time?


Ann Read, Yes (my Lord.)


L. C. J. What time a day was this?


Ann Read, betwixt 2 and 3 a Clock.


At. Genesis You say you saw her with her Mask off, and set down at Jermain's
House, and the Door was immediately opened?


Ann Read, Yes (my Lord?)


At. Genesis Now we will call another Witness, One Thomas Foster, Do you know the
Duchess of Norfolk?


Tho. Foster. Yes.


At. Genesis How did you come to know her?


Tho. Foster. I drove her often in a Coach with Mr. Jermain.


At. Genesis How long since?


Tho. Foster, About this time 4 years.


At. Genesis Where did you use to carry them?


Tho. Foster. Sometimes into Lombard Street, sometimes to one place, and
sometimes to another, and I looked back, and saw them with their Heads laid
together.


At. Genesis Are you sure it was the Duchess of Norfolk?


Tho. Foster. Yes Sir, I knew her before she was Married, and I knew her after.


Sir Tho. Powis. Did you see them with their Heads together?


Tho. Foster. Yes.


Sir Tho. Powis. When you was in the Coach-Box, you say you saw them?


Tho. Foster. Yes.


L. C. J. Did you look back to see them?


Tho. Foster. Yes, my Lord, and their Heads were laid together.


Serj. Tremain. Where do you live now?


Tho. Foster. With the Duke of Norfolk.


At. Genesis We will call another Witness. Mr. Bowtel, Pray do you know Mr.
Jermain.


Mr. Bowtel. Yes.


At. Genesis Do you know the Duchess of Norfolk?


Mr. Bow. Yes Sir.


At. Genesis Have you seen her?


Mr. Bow. Yes, I saw her come out of Mr. Jermain's House in a Chair in St.
James's Park.


At. Genesis Was it the Duchess of Norfolk?


Mr. Bow. Yes.


At. Genesis Did you know her before?


Mr. Bow. Yes Sir.


At. Genesis Had you full sight of her?


Mr. Bow. Yes Sir.


At. Genesis What Apparel was she in?


Mr. Bow. In Man's Apparel, a Blew Coat and Perruke.


L. C. J. How long have you known the Duchess of Norfolk?


Mr. Bow. This 8 or 10 Years.


Serj. Tremaine. Do you believe it was the Duchess of Norfolk?


Mr. Bow. I do verily believe it.


Serj. Tremaine. Do you take it upon your Oath?


Mr. Bow. I do verily believe it: The Duchess being in a Chair, the Maid came
running out of Jermaines House after her with a Handbasket.


At. Genesis When was this?


Mr. Bow. In April last.


L. C. J. Are you sure it was the Dutchesses Maid?


Mr. Bow. She gave in Evidence as so in the House of Lords.


At. Genesis What is her Name?


Mr. Bow. Frances Knight, and she had a Handbasket in her hand.


At. Genesis What did you observe in the Handbasket in her hand?


Mr. Bow. I suppose there was Clothes, for I saw the Tip of a Coat or Gow^ hang
out.


At. Genesis We have brought this down so far.


L. C. J. Why, All is not within the Statute -- I must direct the Jury.


At. Genesis We have told you when it began. First we will call another Witness.


Serj. Thompson. Mary Hall, Do you know Mr. Jermaine?


Mary Hall. Yes Sir.


Serj. Thompson. Do you know where he lives?


Mary. Yes, At the Royal Cockpit in Park-street.


Serj. Thompson. Did you ever see the Duchess of Norfolk in your Lifetime.


Mary. I cannot tell whether I did or not, for I do not know her so, I cannot
tell when I do see her.


Sir Will. Williams. They have called about 19 Witnesses, for the first 5 we
pass them, for they did not speak one word of any thing since 86: And for the
other they have not proved any one Act in the time of the Declaration betwixt
Mr. Jermaine and the Duchess of Norfolk. They have not proved any thing that
has any tendency to it. They have not given any manner of Evidence; -- (...)
there be any thing that has any Tendency, it is that which Jane Wodsworth
says: And what is that which she says? why, she being a Woman that Sold Ale,
she had let a Pint Pot go to Mr. Jermaines House, so she went for it; and the
Dutch Woman that lived there, directed her to go up the Stairs for the Pint
Pot. She Swears that she saw the Duchess of Norfolk, and she had a Petticoat
on; and this is the Evidence that she has given. She does not pretend that Mr.
Jermaine was in the House or in Company with the Duchess, and she appears to
be a Stranger in the House, and yet she must Run up Stairs. As for her
Reputation, she is one of the vilest of Women. She would say something in March
or May last, there is no Act proved by her. And she is a vile and Incredible
Witness, we shall Call Witnesses to show it.


Sir Thomas Powis. My Lord we will prove.

And for this Woman Wodsworth, we will not only Call the Person she speak to
of this, that will Contradict her, and tell what she did say; but go to her
Credit and Reputation. So that now, my Lord, I believe upon the whole Matter,
we cannot do the Duke of Norfolk more Honor, than to acquit the Defendant, for
it will be more Honor to the Duke of Norfolk to have the Defendant Acquitted,
than Satisfaction to him by giving him any Damages whatso*


Sir W. Williams. We will call a Witness, one Grace Cook. Do you know Jane
Wadsworth?


Grace Cook. Yes Sir.


Sir. W. Williams. Tell my Lord and the Jury what Discourse you and Jane
Wadsworth have had together.


Grace. I will; she and I had some talk together: And she then said, I could do
them no good, for I was mistaken.


Sir W. Williams. When did she tell you this? Sitting the Parliament?


Grace. Yes: She came in and said, I can do them no good: For said she, I did
go into Mr. Jermaine's House, and thought I had seen the Duchess of Norfolk;
but now I see I am mistaken.


Sir W. Williams. You are a near Neighbor to her?


Grace. Yes, Sir.


Sir W. Williams. What is her Reputation?


Grace. I cannot say any thing to her Reputation.


Sir W. W. Who was by?


Grace. There was another Woman.


Jane Wadsworth. I had a Sub-poena, and as I was going to Jermaine's House,
there was one of his Servants; and I had like to have been knocked down. And
there was one Hall; What, said he, you are to go to be a Witness? What, you
will swear that the Duchess lay with Jermaine? And another said, I deserved to
be at Bridewell.


L. C. J. Who was it that told you that you deserved to be at Bridewell?


Jane Wadsworth. Hosea his Footman. My Lord, it was not a Fortnight since I
was robbed: And it is not a Fortnight since there came in Persons and
threatened, and said what they would do to me. It is not two Months since, that
a Person or two did beat me, and had like to have knocked me down. And they ran
into this Woman's House ( Grace Cook's.)


Serj. Thompson. You are asked if those Persons that had like to have knocked
Mrs. Wadsworth down, did not run into Mrs. Cook's House?


Witness. Yes.


Serj. Tremaine. The Question is, Whether what she swore was true?


Witness. She said she was chanceing to go for a Pint-pot to Mr. Jermaine's
House, and going up the stairs for it, I thought I had seen the Duchess of
Norfolk then there, but I see it was not she: And one Hosea Grimsley asked if
she was sure of what she said was true; she said she would not say it for the
World.


Attor. Genesis What Trade are you?


Hall. A Joyner.


At. Genesis Are not you employed by Mr. Jermaine?


Hall. Yes.


At. Genesis How long since?


Hall. Why, ever since King William was Crowned.


At. Genesis Have you been ever since employed by him?


Hall. No; by times I have been.


At. Genesis Upon your Oath; Who did you hear this Lady was, that used to come to
Jermaine's House?


Serj. Levings. By the Oath you have taken; Did not you hear it was reported,
it was the Duchess of Norfolk?


Hall. Yes, Sir.


Serj. Birch. Did you not whisper daily in the Ear, and say, That you believed
her to be the Duchess of Norfolk?


Hall. I cannot remember.


Serj. Pemberton. Was that Woman in such a Condition as she says she was?


Hall. No; I think that ^he was in as good Condition as she is now.


Serj. Thompson. That could not be, she was fain to be carried in a Chair to
the House of Lords.


Serj. Tremain. We will call one Hall. Tell my Lord and the Jury what you heard
Foster the Duke of Norfolk's Coachman say of Mr. Jermaine.


Hall. Why, he said Mr. Jermaine had done very ill in turning him off in
Ireland, and he would be revenged of him.


Tho. Foster. My Lord, Mr. Hall and I were speaking something of the Duke and
Duchess of Norfolk: Then I said to him, that Mr. Jermaine had done very ill by
me, in turning me off in Ireland, but I did not say I would be revenged of him.
I chanceing to go to Spring Garden, I saw Thomas Foster carrying Water to the
Horses that were in the Stable, and after he and I had spoke to one another:
What, said he, will not you make me drink this Morning? I told him I did not
care if I did; and so we went to drink. Now said I to him, Thomas are not you a
fine Fellow to abuse in good a Master, that would give you Money when you wanted
it, are not you sorry for it? Yes, but it is too late: But the Devil I think
had possessed me, And he said he was gotten Drunk, and when a Man is Drunk he
will say any thing. And, said he, I remember not a word I said: And, said he, I
hope my Master will pardon me: And he said that some were promised good
Employments in the Duke's Service, but none had gotten any but one, and that is
the Housekeeper: And he said, Better be a Housekeeper in Hell.


L. C. J. Did he say he had wronged Mr. Jermaine?


Witness. Yes he did, and said he was Drunk.


L. C. J. He was not Drunk when he was in the House of Lords. He said he was
sorry that he had wronged his Master, and he hoped that he would pardon him.


Serj. Tremaine. We will call Alexander Harman. Did you ever see that Woman
Jane Wadsworth in Mr. Jermaine's House?


A. Harman. No Sir.


Jane Wadsworth. Pray, my Lord, give me leave, and I will tell you how it was:
Alexander Harman came into my House, and I told him I had seen the Duchess of
Norfolk at Jermaine's House: I told him I wanted a Pint Pot that I had lent to
Jermaine's House: And going thither, asking the Dutchwoman for it, she bad me
go up the stairs for it; and so I did, and then I saw the Duchess of Norfolk.
Said he to me, you should not have gone up the stairs for it, for if my Master
should know it, he would have killed the Dutch-woman.


Sir W. Williams. We will call another Witness. Margaret Condy, What did you
hear this Woman Jane Wadsworth say?


Margaret Condy. She came to M. Cook's with a Paper in her hand; (and said she)
I thought I had seen the Duchess of Norfolk at Mr. Jermaine's House; but now
she said she is better satisfied, that she never did see her there.


Sir W. Williams. Did she complain she was beaten and bruised?


Margaret Condy. Not as I know of.


Serj. Tremaine. She and others were examined in the Lords House, and the Lords
would not believe them.


L. C. J. We do not know what the Lords did believe or disbelieve, they were
examined so far forth, as to enable them to make a Law; we must now hear what
the Witnesses say.


Sir W. Williams. We will call another Witness. Francis Knight, Pray was you
ever at Mr. Jermaine's House?


Fr. Knight. No, my Lord.


L. C. J. The Woman said she talked with you there.


F. Knight. She will not say so to my Face.

Did you ever carry a Letter from the Duchess to Mr. Jermaines, or to any
person in his House?


F. Knight. No, my Lord.


L. C. J. Mr. Bowtell says, that he saw the Duchess and this Maid.

Was not you there in the Summer?


F. Knight. Never.


L. C. J. Never carried a Basket?


F. Knight. Never.


L. C. J. Did you ever go with a Chair?


F. Knight. No.


L. C. J. Call Mr. Bowtell again. Is this the Maid that had the Basket of
Clothes?


Mr. Bow. Yes, I supposed them to be Clothes.


At. Genesis Did she come out of the House when the Chair came?


Mr. Bow. The Chair came first out, and she followed it presently, and then I
was near her, and knew her Face.


At. Genesis Is this the Dutchesses Servant?


Mr. Bow. Yes Sir, it is the same that followed the Chair. She was the
Dutchesses Servant, I saw her then.


At. Genesis When was this?


Mr. Bow. In April last.


At. Genesis F. Knight was you not (upon your Oath) in Jermaines House in April
last?


F. Knight. I broke my Leg then.


At. Genesis How long ago was it you broke your Leg*


F. Knight, It was two years.


Sir W. W. Was you in April last in Jermaines House?


F. Knight. No Sir.


Sir T. Powis. Was this in open day?


Mr. Bow. Sun was about half an hour high.


Sir T. Powis. We will call another Witness, one Mary Penington. Do you know
one Jane Wadsworth; was she your Servant?


M. Penington. She was, and pretended to be sick; and as I was informed
afterward, she was not: For there was a Man that gave Physic, and I bad him
go and look upon my Maid, and he did so, and came to me and said: Your Maid may
be sullen, but she is not sick; and coming to her, I found her sullen: And
afterward I met her out of my House (said I) Jane what do you do here? She
made some excuse and said, she was not well: I told her I would take Care of
her: And how that they did not deserve Servants that would not take Care of
them when they were Ill: I saw her muffled, and her Coats trussed up; I walked
after her, and (said I) Jane whither art thou a going? and bad her let me see
what she had in her Coats, and I thought it was good to have Witness: I spoke
to one, and (said I) Gaffer Hall come hither, do you take notice that this
Linen is all mine. A good while after, I saw this Jane Wadsworth standing at
Mr. Birds (said I) she was my Servant several years ago; and my Lord, this
happened when the difference was betwixt the Duke and the Duchess, for they said
she was a grievous Witness against the Duchess. Upon this Mr. Tobson, my Lord
Peterborough's Servant sent for me. Then I came to be a Witness.


Serj. Thomson. How came she to you first of all?


Mary Pen. She was recommended to me first; and she being minded to go away
soon after she came (I said) Jane if you will go, go: And then I observing when
she went away, her Clothes to be trussed up, I walked after her into
Deans-yard; I said to her, Jane what have you in your Coats? and there I found
my Linen.


Counsel for the Def. We will call another Witness, Mrs. Peningtons Maid.


Maid. I saw the Linen that my Mrs. took from her, as she said.


At. Genesis Did you see any?


Maid. Yes.


Counsel for the Def. We will call the Defendants Man William. How long was
your Master in Flanders?


Will. A Month.


Counsel for Def. Was you and your Master with the King in Ireland?


Will. Yes, we went with him, and came back again with him.


Sir W. W. Its said, he was at Fox-Hall about three years since.


Will. We were out of the Kingdom four Months.


Sir T. Powis. There is no material Evidence but what this Woman is. Now we
will call another Witness. Mr. Welburne, Pray tell my Lord and the Jury what
Discourse you have had with the Duke of Norfolk concerning his Duchess.


Mr. Welburne. My Lord, about the middle of December last, my Lord Duke was
pleased to send for me to come to him; and so I came to Mr. Negus, and he
carried me into the Duke of Norfolk's own Room. Said he, there are some
Treaties betwixt me and my Wife, Sir Robert Clayton and Sir Robert Howard are
concerned in them.

There is one thing that I find, my Wife is setting up to have a great
Equipage; this I do not like. I hear (said he) she is about to have a Coach,
Horses, and two or three Footmen: And this is not all, there is Castle Rising
that my Wife has a pretension to, and Billing: Now if she will part with her
pretensions in them, I shall take it well, and it may be for our good, and we
may be reconciled. I know Drayton is a Seat that she has a kindness for: Pray
tell my Wife of it, and let her consider of it; if she be willing to comply
with me in this, I shall. And (said he) I am told, if I bring a Bill of Divorce
into the House of Lords, it would take effect. And so I went from the Duke of
Norfolk to the Duchess, and told her what the Duke said: And my Lord of
Peterborough hearing of it, he was angry that I went to the Duke.


Sir W. W. Did you acquaint the Duchess, that if she would part with her
pretensions in Castle Rising and Billing, all things might be reconciled.


Mr. Welburne. I did.

The Bill of Divorce was lodged in the House of Lords in January following.
There is one thing my Lord, that the Duke said that I had forgotten; he did
speak of 2500 l. or some such thing, he could make of Castle Rising and Billing.


At. Genesis My Lord, we will call some Witnesses as to Mrs. Wadsworth's
Reputation, because they speak against it. Mr. Dagley Senior, Do you know Mrs.
Wadsworth?


Mr. Dag. Yes.


At. Genesis Pray what Reputation is she of?


Mr. Dag. Very good Reputation.


At. Genesis Was she ever upon the Parish?


Mr. Dagley. Never in her days.


At. Genesis Mr. Prince, Pray do you know Mrs. Wadsworth?


Mr. Prince, Yes Sir.


At. Genesis What is her Occupation?


Mr. Prince. A pains-taking Woman.


At. Genesis What Reputation is she of?


Mr. Prince. Of good Reputation.


Wadsworth. My Lord, I would not live with Penington any longer, for she kept a
disorderly House.


One of the Jury. Pray what is that she says?


L. C. J. She says, Mrs. Penington with whom she lived kept a disorderly House.


Jane Wadsworth. My Lord, I kept House, and paid 60 l. a year for the Bear-Inn,
and (my Lord) my Husband lay sick a great while; and he having a mind to go
into the Country for his Health, I had 15 s. of the Churchwardens or
Overseers; and that was all that ever I had.


At. Genesis We will call another Witness, one Emry Argus. Pray how long have you
known Mrs. Wadsworth?


Mr. Argus. Many years.


At. Genesis What Reputation was she of?


Em. Argus. She was always accounted an honest laborious pains-taking Woman.


At. Genesis Whether did she keep the Bear-Inn?


Argus. She did.


At. Genesis Was she ever kept at the Parish Charge?


Argus. No.


At. Genesis Was she ever in the Poors-Book?


Argus. No.


At. Genesis We have proved by three substantial People, who all say, that she
was always accounted an honest laborious Woman.


L. C. J. Do you observe what you have proved? You have proved no Lascivious
Conversation; because you speak of that in the opening of the Evidence. You
have not proved any Lascivious Conversation within this 6 years.


At. Genesis The Court says, that we have not proved the Duchess to go beyond
Sea. We will call a Witness, Mr. Negus. Pray did the Duchess go over with the
Duke? The Duke came back, did the Duchess come with him?


Mr. Negus. The Duchess came over again in 86. after that she stayed in
England some time: And about the time of the Revolution, then it was given out
that she was gone over again.


At. Genesis What time was it that you heard she came back?


Mr. Negus. In 89. I can inform the Court if they please, the time when my Lord
was sued for Alimony.


A Letter was then read in Court from the Duke to the Duchess. Serj. Thompson.
This Cause has been in the House of Lords. The Question whether they believed,
or not believed, was not the Question; but they would have some time to make
some proofs at Law.


At. Genesis For, as all unlawful Conversations must have a beginning, it is
necessary we should show something of that, and the Time, and that does
fortify the Evidence that is given within the time.


Sol. Genesis Pray my Lord, if your Lordship pleases, this is the use we make in
giving in Evidence some things before, to show the Fact within the six years,
their frequent meeting in a lascivious manner; and we make use of that before
the 6th year, to explain what use we make of it in matters done within the six
years.


Serj. Tremain. I do Appeal to your Lordship, and all that hear me, whether
within this 6 years they have proved any Lascivious Action, or any indecent
Action, so that this will not Charge the Defendant: For if the Duchess will
come to his House when he is not at home, he cannot help it. All the Proof is
without the 6 years, and no Proof within the 6 years to Charge him to inflict
such a Crime; if they had carried it down, as to have proved Acts within this 6
years, I should have said they had done something


L. C. J. Have you done?


Gentlemen of the Jury, You understand very well the Nature of this Action, and
the Record has been opened to you, which was to this effect:

That the Defendant the Is It day of April, in the 2d year of King James, did
entice away the Plaintiffs Duchess, whereby he had not the benefir of her
Society; and that he had Lascivious Conversation with her, lived in Adultery
with her, and caused her to Commit Adultery.

The Defendant pleaded, That he did not Commit any thing within this six years;
what has been before, is not now to be taken notice of. But the Plaintiffs
Council has given in Evidence of some Acts before, which is not for any Damage
as they expect before, but to Explain some Actions that have been between them.

For my part, I must declare, that these matters may be given in Evidence to
Explain, but they are not to be given in Evidence to any other purpose.

The first Witness is one Owen, and he tells you, that he was sent to
Whitehall, and he says, That he went into the Lodgings there, and then he did
see the Duchess and Jermaine in Bed together.

Then there is another Witness proves it at another time and place, that is
Margaret Elwood, and she tells you in what manner she found the Duchess and
Jermaine, and Jermaine was very Angry at her; and that his Hat and Sword lay
upon the Table: And you are told by her, that looking through the Keyhole, she
perceived them in Bed; she said the Curtain at the Beds-Feet was actually open,
and she saw them in Bed together, and found Jermains Hankerchief and Ruffles in
my Ladies Bed.

The next Witness is one Ann Benskin, and she says, They were in expectation
of him one Night at Windsor: They stayed up till Two a Clock, and laid Chairs
and Stools in his way, that if he came he might fall; but he did not come down
that time: All this is about seven years ago, and out of the time mentioned in
the Declaration. And then after, they come and begin about the year 89. and
they tell you of a Lodging at Fox-hall, at one Scribers House, for a Couple of
Ladies, one went by the Name of Bateman, and the other Bryan; during that time,
the Man of the House knew nothing of one that went by the Name of Mr. Jermaine,
but of my Ladies Brother, he had been seen walking in the Garden: They tell
you, they have seen the Lady that went by the name of the Lady Bateman, and
that very Lady was the Duchess of Norfolk: And the Waterman says, that he
has carried him often by Water, and he went by the Name of my Lady Batemans
Brother; he has carried him from the Stairs in Channel-Row to Fox-Hall, when
the Lady Bateman lodged there: And has carried Wood from Fox-Hall by the Lady
Batemans order to the Cockpit: And there is no manner of question but Mr.
Jermaine's House is at the Cockpit: But then they come to Mrs. Wadsworth, and
she is a Woman that lived next door; and she had occasion to go to Jermaine's
House for a Pint Pot; and there coming, she met with a Dutch-woman, and asked
her for the Pint Pot; she says she bad her go up stairs for it; which she did,
and then she saw the Duchess of Norfolk undressed in a Morning-Gown; she said
she very well knew her, she had seen her very many times, and she was sure this
was the Duchess of Norfolk; she tells you, that at another time, I think it
was in May last, she did see Mr. Jermaine go to the Millbank, she was sure it
was him, and she did think he would go there, and thereupon she dodged him from
that very place.

She said she told one Harman that she had seen the Duchess of Norfolk.

How, said he, if my Master had seen you, he would have killed the Dutch-woman.

Then comes one Foster the Coachman, and says, That about four Years since
he had carried the Duchess of Norfolk and Mr. Jermaine often times, and one
time he driving them, looking back, he saw Mr. Jermaine and the Duchess of
Norfolk lying with their Heads together. Then comes Bowtell, and he tells
you, that in April last he saw the Duchess of Norfolk come out of Jermaine's
House in a Chair, and she was the Duchess, and in Man's Apparel: And he said
there was an old Maid had a Handbasket with some Clothes, as he believed, she
followed the Chair: And this was the Servant of the Duchess of Norfolk.

Now, Gentlemen, these are the Witnesses that prove to you, the Issue in the
time mentioned.

Now, Gentlemen, they have called some to discredit these, they began with Jane
Wadsworth; they bring one Condy that should say, that she heard Jane Wadsworth
say, That she thought at the first it was the Duchess of Norfolk, but she was
mistaken: Then they call some more Witnesses, that is Mrs. Penington that was
her Mistress twelve Years ago, and she said that she pretended to be sick a
while after she had been with her, and so going away, she seeing her Clothes
tucked up, she seeing what was the matter, she had some of her Linen; she said
she lived with her not above a Fortnight and so she parted; she says she was
Indigent and Poor, and her Maid says the same.

And then they bring another Witness against one Foster the Coachman, telling
him of what he had said against Mr. Jermaine, he said he was gotten Drunk, and
when a Man is Drunk he will say any thing.

Then as to Bowtell, whereas he says he saw the Duchess in Man's Apparel come
out of Mr. Jermaine's House, and the Maid was there, and the Maid comes and
says, that she was not there, she was ill and her Leg was broke, and denies
that ever the Duchess was there, or that she saw her in a Chair, or in Man's
Appa^^^

Now for Anne ^^^d, no Evidence at all is against her Testimony, and she is
very positive of what was done in May last.

They have called one Wellborne, who says that the Duke sent for him, and
after some other Discourse, spoke to him about Billing and Castle-Rising, and
he says the Duke sent to him, to have the Duchess to know, if she would not
Comply with him, he did not question but to prosecute a Bill of Divorce in the
House of Lords with Effect. They tell indeed of Foster that Jermaine had turned
him out of his Service, that he should say he would be revenged on him, but he
denied that.

And then the Dutchesses Letter in 87. was read: I cannot see what Inference
you can make of it, but that the Duke had no design of showing an Unkindness;
you have heard the Letter read, and you may make your Inference as you will.

Then as to Mrs. Wadsworth, they have brought some Persons to speak to her
Reputation, and they tell you she is an Industrious Woman and of fair
Conversation, and Rented a House of 60 l. per Annum; as to what they alleged
she was kept by the Parish, no such thing, but her Husband being Sick, and
about going into the Country, the Churchwardens helped him with about 16 s.
That she was never in the Poors Rates, or in the Poors Books. And then as to
Mrs. Penington, what she says against her, she answers this, that why she
did live no longer with her, she says, her Mistress kept a disorderly House.

The question will be, what was betwixt the Duchess and the Defendant within
six Years; if you are satisfied that there has been any such Lascivious
Conversation. For if so be that it was only before the six Years, to what
purpose was their meeting at Fox-Hall, and taking a House at Fox-Hall, and to
what purpose the Duchess came to Jermaine's House? So that it is left to you
Gentlemen to consider, if there has been unlawful Conversation, and Lascivious
Intercourse between the Duchess and the Defendant within this six Years; if
so, you are to find for the Plaintiff; but if not, you are to find for the
Defendant.

The next Morning the Jury brought in their Verdict into Court, and being asked
whether they found for the Plaintiff or Defendant, said, for the Plaintiff.

Being asked what Damages, they said One Hundred Marks Damages with Costs of
Court.

Upon which they had a severe Reprimand from the Court, for giving so small and
Scandalous a Fine.


FINIS

