A Treatise of New ENGLAND Published in Anno Dom. 1637.
And now reprinted.
NEw England is a Country in America, Situated within the Degrees of forty,
and forty nine of Northerly Latitude, bordering Southwestward upon Maryland
and Virginia, Northward upon Nova Francia, Northeastward upon Nova Scotia, and
Southward upon the great Ocean, first called by the Spaniards, Mare del Nort
(or the North Sea) not for its height so far Northerly, but in opposition of
the Sea which is on the other side of that Continent, called the South sea. The
Sea coast thereof, from its Southernmost to Cape Codd, bearing West southwest,
and East Northeast; and from Cape Codd to Cape Croix, being infortie five
Degrees odd minutes, and the utmost bounds of New England Northward, lying
Southwest and Northeast. This Country, together with Nova Scotia, was formerly
called Norombega, which has bin this many years discovered and possessed by
the English, in right of the Crown of England. This Land in the Superficies
(the store of Wood excepted) may be compared to this Kingdom. As for
De-la-ware Bay to Cape Codd, being an indifferent low Land, is like to the
shires of Essex Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, Huntingdon, Lincoln; and from
Cape Codd Eastward, more hilly, resembling Hampshire, Dorcester, Devon and
Cornwall. As these two parts of the Country differ in form, so they do in
fertility; for that to the Westward of Cape Codd, exceeds the other to the
Eastward, as much in rich Soil as in level; and withal, has more large
Marshes upon the Sea coast, now subject to the inundation of high-tides
howbeit, diverse of them might be gained from the water (if ever the Planters
should undertake it) with far less charge, than to make Tillable the like
quantity of wood land, by reason the in-lets are but narrow, and bounded with
ascending grounds.

2. The inner part of the Country consists most of Vpland, full of Woods,
yet is so well furnished with fertile low Plains and Valleys, that in crossing
the Woods, one shall hardly miss in three or four miles of such places,
whereof some are very spacious and delightful, with clear fresh Rivers or
Brooks gliding through them; without Fenne or Bogge, and scarce a shrub or bush
to hinder a Ploughs going; and commonly flanked or surrounded with woody Hills,
whence a man may behold as pleasant prospects (building, Tillage and Cartell
excepted) as any in all England; wherein Planters may have choice enough of
rich Earable land for many Generations. Those Valleys and Marshes upon the Sea
Coast, bear Grass of a great length and thicknes, in some places so rank,
that it is above an Ell in height; which, though it be not at the first cutting
so fine as our English Grass, yet is such good Winter Fodder as that Cattle
thrive well therewith, and the oftener it is mowed, the finer it grows. The
Vpland also in most places is sufficient good land, producing Grass very
thick, sweet and timely, especially where the Indians have cleared any quantity
of ground to plant their Corn in, and afterward quitted it for new choice.
The soil in general is of diverse sorts. The Valleys and Marshes are for the
most part a fat black Mould, saving in some places a kind of a loamie Clay,
whereof the Planters make Brickes, Tiles, and earthen Vessels. The Vpland is
either a Gravel Sandy, or somewhat stronger inclining to a Clay ground, each
being very beneficial to the labors of a painful Husbandman.

3. That Country is stored with as great and good choice of all forts of timber
as any one land in the known world; there being three kinds of Oak, each
excelling the other for particular uses, with plenty of all kinds of trees
that England affords; besides many other kinds of Wood very useful for this
Kingdom, which it self yields not; as Spruce, Fur, and Deal of
extraordinary growth, for Masts, Yards and Plankes; out of which Wood may be
extracted, Pitch, Tar, Rozin and Turpintine. Likewise, Pine trees, Cedar,
Cipres, Sassaphras, with the Sumack, which is very good for Dyers and Tanners;
out of this Sumack and Shee-Cedar issues sweet Gums, much used for perfumes.
All those that work in Wood, do find those trees for goodness very answerable
to their desires. There be several kinds of trees that be are fruit, as
Wallnut Chestnut, Haselnut trees and diverse sorts of Plumbe trees; with
infinite store of Vines that bear Grapes in great clusters, and as big many of
them, as Musket bullets; which some of the Inhabitants, both English and Dutch,
have transplanted, who are of opinion, by what they have already tried, that
with dressing and pruning of them, they will be able to make as good Wines as
any part of France. All the Woods over, there be Chestnuts, Wallnuts Haselnuts,
Currance, Mulberries, Rasberries, Gooseberries, Hurtleberries, Hawes, with many
other kinds of fruit and roots which are excellent food for Hogs, and
causes them to increase wonderful in growth and profit.

4. That Earth fructifieth exceedingly all kinds of English and Indian Corn,
and the Planters do find by experience, that it bears as great crops, and
more increase than in any part of this Kingdom: Yet therebe diverse experienced
Farmers which do neglect our English Beans and Pease, and sow those of the
Indians, preferring them before the other, for goodness of taste and profit. But
the product of Indian Wheat, which is a good food, surpasses all other grain;
for 100. and 50. and 200. is ordinarily the increase thereof: And there be some
of good credit now in this Kingdom who have affirmed, that they had above 300.
fold. The worth of that Land is manifestly confirmed, in that it is an usual
course with those Farmers (upon the first cutting up of their ground) to sow
either Hemp or Indian Wheat to correct the rancknesse of it, as being too
strong for any other grain: there be also Hemp and Flax that grows
naturally somewhat shorter and slenderer then ours in England, but much finer
and stronger, whereof the Indians make Cords and Nets, which may prove in time
a great staple commodity for Cordadge Canvas, and other sorts of finer linen.
Likewise that Country affordethh naturally diversity of medecinable Roots,
Herbs, and Flowers, some of them being very beautiful and fragrant, with other
kinds wholesome and good for sauce and sallads, and abundance of Strawberries
throughout the fields, larger and as good as any Garden Strawberries in
England: For all kinds of Garden Roots and Herbs that are planted or sowed they
prosper mavelous well, and are very useful for the Plantors. Moreover the
ground is so rich, and the climate so seasonable, that it would afford as good
Woad, Madder, Rape and Safron, as in any land where they are now growing.

5. There may be had all Materials for Buildings, whether Forts, Castles,
Churches, Houses, or any other Structures, as Freestone, Smooth stone, and
Marble slats for covering, Limestone for mortar and plaistering, with choice
Timber, and all other appurtenances fit for finishing.

Some affirm, that there be diverse sorts of Mines, but little that I know of,
has bin as yet found, excepting Black-lead and Iron-stone of several kinds,
which may in time move the industrious Planters to set up Iron works, having
Wood and all other necessaries fit to maintain them for many succeeding ages;
and may prove a special means to preserve the Woods here in England. Good
salt has bin there found, candied by the Sun upon the sides of the Rocks,
where high spring Tides has left any quantity of salt water, insomuch, that it
is assuredly known, there might be made as good salt in many places to the
Southward of Cape Codd, as in any part of France. Likewise for Potashes, there
is no Land where more may be made, nor at less charge, for the Planters might
therewith supply this Kingdom yearly with more then can be used, out of the
superfluous Woods they have about their Plantations.

6. There are also many fair Lakes (which are the heads of all or most of the
principal Rivers of the Country) stored with good choice of dainty fresh Fish,
where the Salvages take their Beavers Otters, and other Furs; but the
Planters have not yet discovered in all that continent near Virginia and New
England, any worthy of particular mention but three. The one is the Lake St.
Lewis, in the West end of New England, which is 60. leagues in length, and 30.
Leagues broad, but extends it self so far westerly, that I could not
insert it in this Mapp. Another Lake there is sixteen leagues to the westward
of this quite out of the bounds of New England, not expressed here at all, named
by the French La Merdulce, in English the fresh Sea. This Lake is 160. leagues
long, and 60. in breadth, two great fluxes of water are found to go out of this
large Cisterne; the greater falls off at the West part of it, and runs
Westerly within the space of fifteen leagues into a Bay of salt water, which
must needs be an Arm of the South Sea. The other Eastward and loses it
self into Lake St. Lewis. The third is the Lake of Hierocoyis, lying in the
body of New England, the length thereof being 40 Leagues and the breadth 80.
miles. As the Lakes of that Country are vast and numerous, so they produce many
goodly Rivers, some of them far bigger then any in this our Britain, of which
Canada is the greatest, issuing out of that great Lake St. Lewis: And taking
its course all along the North part of New England, divides it from Nova
Francia, and disburtheneth it self in the great Bay Northeastward of Nova
Scotia. The second is Mauritius River, so called by the Dutch, but by the
English, Hudsons River, who first discovered it: This River has diverse
branches, the chief of which, comes out of the Lake Hieroquoyis, as the
Indians and Dutch among themselves report, but describe it not so [as it is
supposed] lest the English should find out by that means a way to the Lake,
and so participate of their great Beaver trade; it flows forty leagues into
the land, and is Navigable diverse leagues higher, running all within New
England, and is received into Sandt or Manahatas Bay, a league and a half from
the prime Plantation of the Dutch, in the latitude of forty degrees, and thirty
six minutes. The third is Den Suidt River, or south River, which parts New
England from Virginia and Mary Land, being Navigable five and thirty leagues at
least. Many are of oppinion upon good probabilities, that this and Patowmack a
River, which runs thorough part of Virginia and Maryland into the Sea at
Chesapeacke Bay] descend both out of the Lake St. Lewis. The fourth is St.
Croix River, which distinguishes New England, from Nova Scotia. There be many
other Navigable Rivers, as Merimack Sagadahock, Conectecute, Champloiones
River, and others which would be too tedious to discovrse of particularly: For
Brooks and springs of sweet water, there be so many, that Planters wheresoever
they seat them selves, need not fear scarcity of water in the greatest drought
for any use. Seamen that frequent that Country commend it for diversity of
good Harbors so that whencesoever the wind blows, they have one or other to
put into for safeguard: For the Coast being full of Islands and broken land,
have many openings, which make the Channels deep and narrow, between which
Islands and the maine land, lie the most and best Harbors which are sheltred on
the shore side with high Cliffs, Woods, or both; and toward the Sea with
Islands or Head-lands, which break the ways of that swelling Sea, so that the
tides come in where the Ships ride so calm that they are hardly sensible of
any storm. Another great commodity of these Harbors is, that Ships may ride
there without danger of Worm-eating, which they cannot do unless they be
sheathed, in Virginia, Florida, and further to the Southward. The raggednes of
the Coast, and straight entrance into the Harbors are partly fortified by
Nature, in that there be few of them so broad, but an ordinary cast piece will
execute from one Bank to another, where with a little Art may be raised (as
they have done in several places) such strong works as will be able to repel
the power of an invading Enemy.

7. All English and Spanish Cattle which were transported thither, grow larger,
and yield more profit than those of the same kind whence they came; and which
is more, Dutch beasts which were carried out of a fatter Soil then ours, do
with breeding there, become larger in size then otherwise, and none of them
have bin hitherto subject to those diseases incident to Cattle in this Land:
But for their Poultry, comparing the number of those Planters in Families and
Estates with the Inhabitants of this Country, they will be found better
provided. The benefit that is made by the Planters of their Cattle, Corn and
other commodities which the Land affords them is great, considering what good
estates diverse industrious men have attained unto in a short time, out of small
beginnings.

8. There are of the Native Beasts both ravenous and commodious; The Ravenous
are Bears, Wolves, Luserans or Ownces, Foxes, Squunks, Ferrets, and wild Dogs,
very like the ordinary Curs of England, which the Salguages do take and tame
when they are young to follow them who never bark; but against rain or foul
weather, will then set themselves to howl, making a most hideous yelling
noise: The beasts that are commodious be profitable two ways, either for food
or furs. For Furs, such are Beavers, Otters, Minks, Rackoons, Musquash, Sables,
and others. There have bin Bears, black Wolves and Foxes taken, whose cases are
of great esteem here in England: the beasts for food are Elks, Deer of two
kinds, Hares and Rabbets: the bear and Squunk also are esteemed by the
Planters little inferior to Veale and Lamb: For those Dear, the lesser of
them are a kind of Red Dear, but not altogether so bigg and large as ours,
who never beat themselves so low at rut, but that they will be fat all the
winter, and are as good Venison as any in Christendom: these have their brow
and beam antlers, broaches, torches, and as many starts upon their heads, as
our English Deer, but grow more compast and forward: the other is as large as
an Ox, called a Moose, headed somewhat like a Buck with broad palms, but much
wider then our Red or fallow Deer; these Mooses are heavy slow beasts, which
frequent the low rank grounds to feed upon long grass, by reason their fore
feet are longer then their hinder feet, whose flesh is of a course big grain,
and eats like unto Beef. Both these kind of Deer bring ordinarily 3. Calves at
a fall and timelier then our english Deer by 2. months: there be many kinds of
sea and land Foul, whereof some may be made fit for recreation, others for
sustenance, with a third kind good for neither; as Eagles, Gripes, Ravens,
Cormorants, and Crows: For sports you have Faulcons, Lanners, Goshawks, and
others for food, Turkies, Grouces, Patridges, Cranes, wild Swans, wild Geese of
3. kinds, Ducks, Widgins, Teales, Herons, fea and Land Larks, with many others
in greater plenty by far then in these Countries, with several singing Birds
strange to us, that are very glorious to the eye for diversity of colors. But
there is a Foul, which some that write of them call Pigeons, whose color is
like to the Turtle, and tayled like to a Magpy, otherwise for their shape and
flying, I should rather think them to be a kind of Stock-Doves, which Foul
in October, fly in such flocks, that I have seen the sky darkened with them; as
if it had bin over-cast with a cloud, all flying from the North Southward to
some hotter Region, where they continue until the spring, and then do return
to build and breed toward Nova Scotia, in a more temperate clymate for the
summer.

9. As that Sea which flanketh the Coast of New England, is the most spacious
in the world, so it affords the greatest store and most variety of fish, for
near to De-la-ware Bay there are more Whales and Grampasses then in Groinland;
and all the Coast along there are great abundance of Salmon, Sturgion, Turbut,
Mullet, Basse, Mackerill, Thornbacke, Hake, Herrings, Shads, Scules, Eales,
Lampries, Smelts, and all other kinds taken in our English seas, with many
others, not known by any names to our Nation: As for Codd, the fishing voyages
made yearly out of England for that purpose, will sufficiently prove their
plenty, and withal there is neither Bay nor Creek, but is as full of Lobsters,
Oysters, Scallops, Crabs, Cockles, Praunes, Clammes, Mussels, Perewinkles, etc.
So that a Boy may go into diverse places on the water side, and take more in one
hour than will dine eight or ten Men.

10. Touching the Climate; That Country is placed in the principal part of the
temperate Zone, where being ten Degrees nearer the Equinoctial than this Land;
the Air is better digested, which makes a very serene and fresh Sky: So that
New England is generally preferred before this land for healthfulnes,
sympathizing better then our English Nation; more particularly, such as are
troubled with any Cold, Rhumaticke or Melancholcke distemperatures; for the
temper of that Climate is somewhat hotter then is ordinary here in Summer, and
somewhat colder in the Winter, yet the Summer is not so hot, but men endure the
heat to labor in; nor the Winter so cold, but with moderate stirring they may
brook the sharpest air a whole day; but for the spring and Autumn, they are
very temperate and pleasant. I need not writ much concerning the length of
days and nights, for there is no Intelligent Traveller but knows the nearer
a Country is to the Equinoctial, there the more equal both nights and days
are in Winter and summer; so that in the south part of New England, the days
are two hours and a half shorter in Summer than in this Kingdom, and as much
longer in the Winter.

11. There be three Nations besides the Indians who inhabit that Country,
namely, French, English, and Dutch: the French are the most Northerly
Plantation, being in number about two hundred, and the last of the three that
possessed any part of the Land, they are set down in a place called Penobscot,
where they have erected a Fort and necessary buildings, but apply themselves
hitherto, more to the trad of Beaver, than to Fishing or preparing of Land to
establish a Plantation.

12. The next are the English who are thought to be no less than 30000.
persons, whose plantations are all (excepting one) to the Northward of Cape
Codd; but because there be of them two distinct Collonies, the one at New
Plymouth, the other at the Masachusets Bay, who went not over together, nor
hold their estates by the same grant; I thought good [for the Readers better
information] to speak somewhat of them severally. The first that came into the
Land, are those of New Plymouth, who went over from Amsterdam and Leiden in
Holland, and were set out at the charge of diverse Merchants for the south part
of Virginia: but being crossed in their voyage by contrary winds and storms
were forced to land in New England, much weather beaten and prejudiced in their
Provision; where, through want of means to follow their purpose, did continue
until they sent their Masters word of this cross fortune, which was soon
dispatched, desiring a second supply of Necessaries, and a Direction what they
should further do. In the mean time, they sought out the best helps that
that Country could afford for livelihood, having no Provision but what they
got with labor and danger, nor then sufficient to content Nature; yet all of
them with much hardness and patience, sustained the want of this rude Desert,
expecting some relief to come to them, but this bad and unexpected news took
off the edge of the Adventurers hopes, so that they concluded, rather then to
hazard any more money for their second transportation, to lose what was already
expended. Nevertheless, they inployed their wits and hands some to build
houses, others to go abroad into the Country to seek what they could find for
profit; and after much search, happily happened upon some trade for Beaver and
other Furs, which they did so diligently follow, that within a short time
they had not only quitted themselves from the miserable condition they were
lately in, but began to raise some benefit, and to conceive a good hope of a
growing and continuing gain, which in a short time suited their expectation.
For, whereas they were at that time but covenant Servants to the Merchants did
within the round of eighteen months or two years; but out their Freedom (as I
take it for eighteen hundred pounds) paying them by two hundred pounds a year;
but within a year or two after, they came to another composition, which was,
That if the Merchants would abate part of the sum agreed upon, they would
discharge all in one payment, which was effected to the contentment of both
parties. This prosperous success of theirs being known here in England,
persuaded in many such a good oppinion of that Country that they resolved to
adventure themselves and estates into those parts, in hopes of the like
fortune, for not long after, there went over many who joined with them and more
do still so that they are now grown to a great number of Planters, and of good
estates. But they follow the Trade of Bever, with that greediness by reason of
present profit] that they do not apply themselves so much to clear and fence
grounds for tillage as other Planters, whereby the Inhabitants might be
maintained with the fruit of Husbandry, and the brood of Cattle increased,
which indeed is the best and surest foundation of a settled Colonie.

13. The other Plantation is that of the Masachusetts Bay, who went over well
provided with all necessaries, intending to raise themselves new estates in
that Country. The better sort of them being Gentlemen of good estates and
reputation here in England: the rest were very industrious and painful, who
brought over either competent means to put themselves into a thriving course,
or had good Occupations and Trades, whereby they might live upon the
accommodations of the Country: And withal, are now very desirous to have such
a Government settled by the Kings Authority, that will subject all of them to
the Laws of this Land, whereby the abuses of such as are refrectory may be
convicted and corrected and the obedience of the rest cherished and defended.
This Plantation has bin very successful and ate already grown so numerous,
that they are dispersed throughout the Seacoast of this Bay, above fifty miles
in compass: In several places whereof, they have built Forts of good
strength, with diverse Towns and villages which are able to intertain such as
come over, with house-room and other refreshings, while they build and make
Provision upon their own lots; and whereas some Scituations would not afford
them arrable grounds enough near the towns, they have found out convenient
places further in the Country for tillage and Meadowing, where they have good
Farms. Their chief employments hitherto have bin Husbandry, trading for
Beaver, and fishing: For their husbandry, they brought that to so good a
perfection, that all of them who have lived there any reasonable time, have
sufficient to maintain their Families out of their stocks in Corn and Cattle:
For their Beaver trade, it has continued very beneficial unto them a good
while after their first coming over but it soon decayed sithence there went
so many Planters with trucking commodities, that all of them traded
promiscuously, respectlesse of the manner and rates the ancient Planters used,
which was not to exceed a certain proportion; and this corruption still gaining
upon their covetousness, have brought it now to this pass, that so soon as
they can discrie any Salvages coming toward their Plantations with Fur, they
will all flock about them, one out-bidding another while there is any material
gain, so that they can hardly get two Beavers for that commodity they
exchanged for ten or twelve.

14. And for their fishing, they made Weres in many places where the tides
leave so much fish, that they do not only serve all the Plantations therewith
throughout the Year, but are forced (and that for a good purpose) to carry the
overplus to fatten their Land with, lest those great Shoales should break, or
choke up the VVeres. But the wealth that the Planters might get by setting up
the trade of fishing (did they effectually go in hand therewith) may be
conceived, by comparing that Coast with other fishing places; for it is well
known that it equalizeth Groin-land for Whales and Grampasses. The Irish and
North Sea for Herring and salt fish. The Baltic sea for Sturgion and Muller.
And withal does exce^l New Foundland, fishing for Poore-John, in that the
fish is larger and the season sooner by above two months, whereby they may be
at their Markets in their Islands. Italy, Spain or France, before he others
have their Fish a shipboard in Newfound-land, and will sell their fish at a
greater price. Furthermore, they have in diverse respects, the advantage of our
New-foundland Fishermen (who are at a great charge in buying of salt spending
of time and Victuals before they arrive at their fishing place) by reason they
are at hand, and may in a short time fit themselves with all provision for that
work. But those Planters (excepting some particular men who built a few ships
for that purpose) have bin hitherto hindered by their Land employments, neither
will there be much good done before they make a general stock, and
incorporate themselves into one body; which being wisely managed may in a few
years raise them to great estats, and make them masters of such a Navall power
as will be able to do the King service and defend their own Country.

15. What I have hitherto written of New England, is upon the matter general
now I purpose to write somewhat in particular; concerning a part of the Country
which lies between Delaware Bay, and Cape Codd, that is more than half the
land in extent, though not in Degrees, by reason it bears more Westerly then
the other and that has not bin formerly mentioned by any man's Relati^n, but
from Cape Codd Northeastward, Captain Smith, and Mr. Woods have discoursed
copiously of the several scituations and plantations as also of the manner,
and profit of that Fishing, whose Books are now extant.

16. The only Planters who possessed that Western part of the Country
excepting one small Plantation of English upon the River Conectecute] are the
Dutch, who first came into the land about the year 1622. and putting into
Hudsons river (which they call Mauritius River) spent some time with the
Indians in trading for Beaver, and took possession of that place in their
West India Companies name, who then employed them, and afterward returned into
Holland, moving their Masters with some experimental reasons, to be at the
charge of transporting a Colony thither, which the Company undertook, For in
the year following they set out a ship for the same River, with some 60
Planters furnished with trucking Commodities, and all necessaries for a
twelve-moneth, who upon their first landing searched all the places near the
Sea side for a commodious Situation, at last chose Manahatas Island for two
reasons, one respecting a good Harbor, the other for convenience of commerce
with the Indians. This Island is ten leagues in compass, and a league and a
half broad or thereabouts, at the South part whereof, they raised a strong
Fort, with 4. complete Bulwarks, upon which they have 20 cast Pieces mounted:
near about this Fort live all the Planters that are Artifficers, but their
Boores disperse themselves farther Northward into the Island where it is more
fertile than about the Plantation, with in 4 or 5. miles Eastward of this
place, is a large plain of ten or twelve miles wide, which is very fit for
Farmers to inhabit, but on the West side it is more ruste and hilly. There is
another Island a league and a half from this Plantation that is more fertile
than Manahatas (which they called The States Island) fronting Southward upon the
Bay, at the East point thereof, we enter first into Mauritius River, being not
above a Falcon shoot over where there might be a Fort made of such consequence,
that would secure the whole Plantation from any danger of an invasion: This
Island is some 9. leagues about, and the fittest place to be planted of any
other nearer the Sea side, by reason of the great quantity of arrable land
there is in it; as also, of having Men at hand to resist the entrance of an
Enemy into that River.

17. Not long after their first coming into the land, they sailed in a small
Vessel 46 leagues up this River, and [finding there a far greater Trade than
by the Sea coast planted another Colonie, and erected a little work in form of
a Redoubt, which they call Fort Aurania; but for their better securing, they
have cast up since a high Trench about it, where there is 7 or 8 pieces of
Ordnance mounted. The Banks of this River for diverse leagues together
thereabouts, is an exceeding fat Soil, surpassing all that on the Sea coast,
insomuch that the Planters of Manahatas, when they have wrought their Cattle so
weak that they are not able long to labor, do use to send them to Fort
Aurania, wherewith that rich feeding they recover their flesh and strength in a
short time, within a day and a half or two days journey at the furthest from
this place, is the Lake Hieroquoyis so famous for Beavers and Otters, which
maintains the greatest part of the Bever trade in the French Plantation at
Quibec, and also affords this Colonie more then they have in all their
Factoris besides. The Dutch men's aim is, to get up and plant a Collony upon
the Bank of this Lake, where they might with ease ingrosse to themselves most
of that great and rich Trade, having a very advantageous help withal by their
River to transport to, and from the Sea side a great way, though not up to it
all provisions necessary for their use and trade which if they could but
compass, would enable them in a short time, but that only gain, to plant and
fortify that part of the Land which they now hold so strong, that they might
make a powerful resistance against any foreign invasion. Part of the Dutch
went from Manahatas four years sithence, and fettled another Plantation upon
the River Conectecute, which is held to be one of the best situations for
Tillage in all the Country; but some English who came from the Masachussets
Bay, planted above them upon the same River, and do cut off their Trade for
Beaver, so that they have little else to make profit of but their Husbandry.

18. In the year 1630. they set up a Plantation on the South side of
De-la-ware Bay, and finding that soil very fertile, intended to plant Tobacco,
which if it had taken effect, would have much prejudiced the Virginians for the
sale of that commodity in the Netherlands and many other places; but the
indiscretion of that Dutch Governor gave a woeful period to the Collony, the
manner I will relate to forewarne others from the like folly. The custom of
the Dutch, when they take possession of any strange Land, is to fasten upon a
tree the Arms of their Country, as they did in this place; but a simple Indian
passing by espied it, and ignorant of what it meant took it off and carried it
away: which, when the Governor understood, was much incensed therewith,
holding it for a great affront, insomuch, that when the Princes and chief of
them came first into the Quarter, were laid hands on and examined upon his
misdemeanour; who pleaded, they knew not of it: nevertheles he threatened their
lives, in case they would not bring in the Malefactor to answer it and in the
mean time detained them for Prisoners: when the poor people saw themselves in
that exigent got the Offender to come in, thinking the contempt not to deserve
death; but when the simple people understood his danger, they offered a great
ransom for his life, but nothing would, nor did satisfy this austere Judge,
but the poor Indians blood: when this was done, the Salvages were discharged,
who masked their discontent under a fair show of friendship, frequented the
Plantation as they had done with some trade or other; but within a while after,
there came so many of them together, that they cut all the Planters throats in
an instant, demolished their Fort, and destroyed what else they had there, so
this Plantation continued not much above a year.

19. This Nation have a trade in the South-River, and the Naroganses Bay,
whence they get from the English in New Engl. and Virginia, 6000. Beavers in a
year; and withal, have lesser Boats that go into all the Creeks and Rivers
between those two places, where they glean all the trade of the Country;
Insomuch, that I believe, these people who are not above 700. in their several
plantations, do make a greater benefit of the Beaver trade than all our English
in New England being 30000. They have made an experiment in Delaware Bay, of
Whale fishing, but by reason of their slow preparation, came not so soon as the
season required; nevertheless, they killed 2. or 3. and were confident of a
great voyage had they come in time: for they report, that there is greater
store of such fish than in Groinland. But upon that massacre the Indians
spoiled all their fishing craft, that they never followed that employment
afterward. The Planters have built in Manahatas Island many little Boats and
Shallops, with diverse Ships from 70. to 200. Tuns and upwards, and one of 700.
Tuns, which was fitted with as good Masts and Yards as any come from the East
Country; and they have Sails, Cables, Cordage, and all other requisites fit
for their setting out, for all other provision that belongs to a Collony;
they are generally better stockt than any other Plantation in that Country, and
have thriven beyond them therewith. I can say little of the Indians, but that
they are very subtle and ingenious, seldom or never seen upon any occasion, to
express much joy or sorrow; the more Eastward you go into New Engl. the fewer
and more effeminat they are; as on the other side, the more Westward, the more
populous, masculine and marshall: yet it was never known, that any of them
assaulted a Planter upon equal terms, but wait for a treacherous opportunity,
and then make use of their advantage.

20. I should advise those that would undertake to plant new Collonies remote
from others, to build their houses so near, that upon all occasions they may
be able to second one another; and for their better securing, to keep in each
house a good Mastiffe Dog, which may give notice of an approaching danger,
which otherwise would not be discovered, and with all are far more terrible to
the Indians then either Gun or Sword; also I would wish all such Planters to
entreat the Salvages fairly, and by no means to wrong them for if they be once
justly exasperated, they will be found implacable, and will never leave
travailing of a reveng until they bring it to execution. Therefore if any one
be guilty in that kind, let all the Plantation stand upon their guard, and
expect no better favor then the Dutch received upon De-la-war Bay. For the use
of Fowling pieces, I hold them very necessary to shoot at Dear and
Land-fowle, for the Dear will be less affrighted with the fall of one that
way, then with hunting or coursing at the Herd, and for Land-fowle, the ground
is so rough, that there is no other means to come by them. But for Sea foul
though much shooting cannot beat them off the Coast, yet they will grow so
cunning and fearful, that a man may walk two or 3. hours before he can come
to a shoot, so the best course is to get into each Plantation a good Fowler
that knows how to lay Nets, and other devices to catch them, who by that means
will be better able to furnish the Planters by his own labor, then they will
with forty Gunnes. There must be a good circumspection used in civilizing of
the Salvages, otherwise what will prove their best good, may happen the
Planters greatest prejudice; for the meaner sort of them, they may be trained
up any where without any danger, and there bringing up to arts and labor, will
prove an assisting help to the Planters. But for the Princes and chief of the
Country, the surest course to prevent trouble and danger, is to send them so
far from the places where they were borne, that they may not know what they
were, or whence they came, otherwise by better understanding what right Princes
have above private men to a Country; and having some of the Natives skilled in
the Arts and Occupations of the Planters, will peradventure think themselves
fit and able to reduce the Land people to what we intended, and seek either
by their treacheries strength, or the aid of other neighboring Princes, to
extirpate the Plantations, and reinvest themselves in the possession of their
ancient Inheritance, which though happily they cannot effect, would distract
and disturb the Peace of that COUNTRY. [*]

FINIS.

