THE TRIAL OF Sr. Miles Stapleton Bar. FOR HIGH TREASON, IN Conspiring the
DEATH of THE KING, etc. AT YORK ASSIZES ON The 18 th. day of July, 1681. Before
the Right Honorable Sir William Dolben Knight, One of the Justices of the
Court of Kings Bench, and William Gregory, Esquire one of the Barons of the Court
of Exchequer, then Judges of Assize for the Northern Circuit.

To which is added the TRIAL and CONDEMNATION of Mr. THOMAS THWING for High
Treason, At the Summer Assizes before.

LONDON Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Bailey 1681.

THE WHOLE PROCEEDINGS, AGAINST Sr. Miles Stapleton BARONET, etc.
SIR Miles Stapleton Baronet, was Indicted at a Sessions of Oyer and Terminer
at the West Riding of the County of York, and the Indictment was removed by a
Writ of Certiora^i to the Kings Bench, where Sir Miles Stapleton having been
Arraigned and pleaded to the same not guilty, was sent down to be tried in the
County of York. The Indictment was as follows.

Sir Miles Stapleton late of Carleton in the County of York Baronet stands
Indicted, for that he as a false Traitor against our Illustrious and Excellent
Prince, King Charles the second, his natural Lord, not having God before his
eyes, nor weighing the Duty of his Allegiance, but by the Instigation of the
Devil being moved and seduced, the Cordial Love, and true, due, and natural
Obedience, which true and faithful Subjects of our Lord the King should bear to
him, and of right are bound to bear, wholly withdrawing, devising, and with all
his power intending, to disturb the peace and Common Tranquillity of this Realm,
and to bring and put our said Lord the King to death and final destruction, and
the true worship of God in this Kingdom by Law established and used, to alter
to the Superstition of the Church of Rome, and to move and stir up War against
our said Lord the King in this Realm, and to subvert the Government of this
Kingdom, the 30 th. day of May, in the thirty first year of our said Lord the
King's Reign, at the Parish of Barwick in Elmett in the said County of York, in
the West Riding of the same County, with diverse other false Traitors unknown,
did traitorously compass, imagine and intend, the death and final destruction of
our said Lord the King, and to change and alter, and wholly to subvert the
Ancient Government of this Realm, and to depose and wholly to deprive the King
of the Crown and Government of the said Kingdom, and to root out the true
Protestant Religion; and to fulfill and accomplish the same most wicked
treasons, and traiterous imaginations and purposes, the said Sir Miles
Stapleton, and other false Traitors unknown, on the said 30 th. of May in the
thirty first year aforesaid, with force and Arms, at the Parish of Barwick
aforesaid, advisedly, devillishly, maliciously and traitorously, did assemble,
unite and gather themselves together, and then did devillishly, advisedly,
maliciously, craftily and traitorously, consult and agree, to bring our said
Lord the King to death, and final destruction, and to depose and deprive him of
his Crown and Government, and Introduce and Establish the Religion of the Roman
Church in this Realm; and the sooner to fulfill and accomplish the said most
wicked Treasons and Traitorous Imaginations and purposes; the said Sir Miles
Stapleton, and other unknown Traitors, then and there advisedly, maliciosly and
traitorously, did further consult and agree to contribute, pay and expend
diverse large sums of money, to diverse of the King*s Subjects, and other persons
unknown; to procure those persons traitorously to kill our said Lord the King,
and to introduce the Roman Religion into this Realm, against the Duty of his
Allegiance, against the Peace of our said Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity,
and against the form of the Statute in such Case made and provided.

Clerk of Assize, Hold up thy hand, Sir Miles, thou have heard the Treasons and
other misdemeanors whereof thou stand'st Indicted, art thou guilty thereof or
not guilty?

Sir Miles. Not guilty.


Clerk of Assize. How will thou be tried?


Sir Miles. By God and my Country.


Clerk. of Assize. Culprit, God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk of Ass. Sir Miles, this understand you, that these Gentlemen that are
now to be sworn, are returned by the Sheriff of this Counry, to pass between
our Sovereign Lord the King and you for your Life; therefore if you will
Challenge any of them, you are to challenge them as they come to be sworn and
before they be sworn.


The Jury being called, Mr. Just. Dolben took notice to Sir Miles that there
were but few appeared, and therefore told him he would do well not to Challenge
too many of them, Sir Miles thereupon said he should not Challenge many; and
enquired whether those that served on the Lady Tempests, Mr. Thwings and Mr.
Ingleby's Juries did now appear? and the Judge answered him, that if they did,
care should be taken that they should not be sworn.

Then the Jury being called to the Book, Sir Miles challenged these, viz. Sir
David Fowls, Bar. Rob. Bell, Gent. John Eastoft, Esquire John Dixon, Gent. William
Bethel, Esquire The. Wood, Gent. William Caley, Esquire Rob. Turner Gent. Towers
Driffeild, Esquire John Beckwith, Gent. Marm. Trueman, Esquire Simon Warrener, Gent.
John Wright, Esquire Gervaise Hatfeild, Gent. John Green Esquire John Coats, Gent.


And only two of the Jury returned, viz. Tho. Fletcher, Rob. Gudgeon,
were sworn.

Mr. Just. Dolb. Sir Miles, I see you must stay till the next Assizes, for you
challenge so many, here will not be a Jury gotten.


Sir Miles. If your Lordship please, I shall be content, and do desire the Jury
may be called that served the first day; nay all the three Juries if you please.


Mr. Just Dolb. That is, you would choose all of one way, and leave the others;
where is the Indifferency of the Trial then? but come call them, I cannot deny
it.


The three Juries called, and five Challenged, viz. Tho. Worsely, Esquire Roger
Strettwel, Gent. Samuel Tennant, Gent. Roger Lee, Esquire Rob. Bushel, Gent.


And these sworn, viz. Sir Tho. Pennyman, Bar. Tho. Rokely, Esquire William Stone.
Thomas Conyers. Christopher Tankerd Esquire who was Excepted against by Sir Thomas
Stringer, as one that disparaged the Evidence of the Plot, and called his Dogs
by the names of Oats and Bedloe; which the Judge allowed to be a good
Exception; but there being no witness in the Court to prove it, he was sworn.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Sir Miles, you must stay till the next Assizes, we have not a
full Jury.


Sir Miles. Here are Gentlemen in the Court, your Lordship may take whom you
please.


Mr. Just. Dolb. I can not do it without the Kings Council move for a Tales,
which as this Case stands they will not do. And so he was remanded to Prison,
and Remanet pro defectu Juratorum until the 18 th. day of July 1681. And at the
Assizes then holden for the County of York before Mr. Just. Dolben, and Mr.
Baron Gregory, was proceeded against as follows.


Clerk of Assize. Sir Miles Stapleton hold up thy hand, thou standst Indicted
by the name of Miles Stapleton late of Carleton in the County of York Bar. etc.
Pro ut in the Indictment.


After not Guilty pleadeded to the Indictment and other formalites of Court as
before, these Gentlemen following were called. Sir Thomas Malliverer; Knight.
Challenged by the Kings Counsel. Sir Roger Bekwith Knight. Challenged by the Kings
Counsel.


Sir Miles. Are any Challenged?


Mr. Just. Dolb. Yes, there are two Challenged for the King.


Sir Miles. I hope they must show cause why they Challenge them.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Yes, they shall, but they are not bound to show cause before
the Panel be gone through, and then, if you desire it they will show cause:
but I suppose Sir Thomas Malliverer Married a Kinswoman of yours, and if so it is
a good Exception.


Sir Miles. I desire it may be proved.


Richard Audbrough Esquire Challenged by the King. John Dodsworth Esquire Challenged by
the King.
Jsaac Fairfax Esquire Christopher Bradshaw Esquire
Challenged by Sir Miles.

These twelve following were called and Sworn, viz. Sir Barrington Boucher, Knight.
Anthony Franckland, Esquire Sir John Jennings, Knight. John Addams, Esquire Richard Hutton,
Esquire Francis Battery, Esquire Welbrough Norton, Esquire Francis Fuldgam, Esquire Tobias
Hodgson, Esquire Humphry Brook, Esquire John Beverly, Esquire Thomas Lee, Esquire


Crier. Twelve good men and true, stand together and hear your Evidence.


Clerk of Assize. Sir Miles Stapleton, Hold up thy hand (which he did)
Gentlemen, you of the Jury that are Sworn, look upon the Prisoner and hearken
to his Charge; you shall understand that he stands Indicted by the name of Sir
Miles Stapleton, etc. pro ut in the Indictment; upon this Indictment he has
been arraigned, and thereunto pleaded, not Guilty, and for his Trial has put
himself upon his Country, which Country you are, etc.


Then Proclamation was made for Evidence, and Sir Thomas Stringer, one of the
Kings Counsel aggravated the Indictment as follows.

Sir Miles Stapleton. I desire my Lord the Kings Evidence may be put a part,
not to hear what each other Swears.


Mr. Just. Dolb. No, no Sir Miles, that must not be, would you have the same
for your Witnesses?


Sir Tho. Stringer, May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury;
Sir Miles, the Prisoner at the Bar stands here Indicted of the greatest and
blackest Treasons that can be invented by the worst of men; He stands here
Indicted for endeavoring to despose the King from his Crown and Dignity; and
by imagining and Compassing the Death of the King to alter the Established
Government, and rout out the true Protestant Religion, and to Establish the
Romish Religion among us. Gentlemen, to Compass these wicked designs we shall
prove there has been several Consults where the Prisoner at the Bar has been,
and where he has Contributed money to Carry on these wicked designs: And
Gentlemen I must acquaint you there has been a horrid Plot against the King
and Government, and I need not do it, for it has been made Notoriously known;
not only Parliaments have declared it so, but there have been Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and Priests, Nay, some men have been found guilty for carrying on
the Horrid design and have received their deserts. This Plot, Gentlemen, is no
new Plot, not a Plot of a day, nor of an Age; But a Plot that has been carried
on for a hundred years. My Lords since we were delivered by God's mercy from
the Popish Religion by the Reformation; ever since that time, the Pope, the
Jesuits, the Priests and those of the Popish persuasion, have, my Lords, been
from time to time and ever since, endeavoring to carry on this wicked design,
and had desiroyed us long since, if we had not been by God Almighty from time
to time delivered from their power. And you Gentlemen of the Jury I must tell
you, this Plot was carried on in Queen Elizabeth's time; And as they did in this
Plot carry on their designs, with the King of France, so then they carried it
on with the King of Spain, at Validolid in Spain, The King of Spain, he Joined
with the Popish party here; but it pleased the Lord to take the Queen to his
mercy, before that Plot was effected. And I must tell you, the same men of the
same quality that carried it on then, have now endeavored to carry it on in
these days. My Lords, the King of Spain, though he was a Papist, yet it was so
horrid a thing that he left them to carry on their wicked design, and God
Almighty did preserve the Queen. My Lords, they rested not here, but in King
James his time they designed to have destroyed both King and Parliament at one
blow, and thereby the whole Nation in its representatives, and this they
managed by Guy Vaux and others. And all King Charles his time the same Plot was
on foot, and pray how far did they bring it? they brought it to the Death of
that Gracious King, and the sad effects of a Civil War; and they have brought
it in these days, to raise Officers, Generals, Major Generals, and other
Officers, and proceeded so far that Actual Commission was delivered for
destroying our King, and if this had not been by God's mercy prevented, what
would have been the evil effects thereof 'ere this day? And Gentlemen, I must
tell you that which is now before you is the greatest, and most wicked design
that ever was before men; and though you be of Relations and kindred, yet I
know if you have but Conscience and Right in you, you will give a Verdict
according to the justness of the thing and the Evidence you shall have.


Sir John Ottwith. We will call Mr. Smith first who will give you an Account of
the Plot in General.


Mr. John Smith called, and Sworn.

Mr. Just. Dolb. Mr. Smith pray tell the Court what you know of the Plot.


Mr Smith. I must speak of it then what I have done Beyond Sea my Lord.

My Lords, I remember when I had been first Beyond Sea, I became acquainted
with one Abbot Montague and Mr. Thomas Car, at Paris, and they told me then, if
I came to the Romish Religion, what preferment I should have here in England;
they told me what Friends they made in England, they named several persons
about the Court, and several Gentry in England which I did not then know to be
Papists. I stayed sometime among them in Paris, and all this while I did not
pervert to the Romish Religion; though they told me how many Jesuits they had
sent over into England. After I left France, I was going for Rome, where I met
with Father Anderton Rector of the English College, and Father Southwel and
Father Campian, who introduced me into the acquaintance of Cardinal Grimaldi,
which is an Italian name, but he is Archbishop of that place, I happening
there, they carried me to speak to the Cardinal, and he told me what
likelihood there was for introducing the Romish Religion into England, and he
told me he would prefer me very well there, if I would turn to their Religion;
and gave me Letters to several Friends in Italy: At last I was perverted to the
Romish Religion by virtue of this Cardinal, and this Gentleman at last asked me
if I had a mind to study, I told him yes* so I came into an Italian College,
and became acquainted with all the Secular Priests, both English, Scotch, and
French: who told me what interest they had made in England during the coming in
of Cardinal Norfolk, and said there was but one man in the way, meaning the
King* and said they should soon remove him.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Did they mean the King?


Mr. Smith. Yes my Lord, they said there was but one man in the way, and that
they would soon make an end of him, and that they had men ready in England for
it. After this, my Lord, I left this Italian College, and came to the English
College (for I had a mind to come there) and I made friends with the Jesuits:
After I came to the English College, my Lord, I was enform'd of one Father
Anderton Rector of that College, and Father Mondford, who told me that by
means of this Cardinal Norfolk they did not doubt but to take the King out of
the way; and that they would give me all privileges that could be for a young
man in that time. When I was coming away, my Lord, from Rome, and had my
Letters Emissaries, by Cardinal Perori^ (He sent for me when I was coming away,
as is usually done to all Scholars, and they Kiss the Popes toe, and he gives
them his blessing and particular Indulgence: which I had when I came into
England) said he to me there is one man in the way who has made us fair
promises but will perform nothing, therefore we must take him out of the way,
and that I might be Instrumental in the design; with this my Lord I took my
leave of the College, and we came five into England as Priests, and I made my
application to the Archpriest which was in London, one Purrat, and I was
employed a long time by him in England; but Proclamations coming forth for the
apprehending Popish Priests, I was constantly after at the Portugal Ambassadors
Chapel, where this Purrat had a Chamber, wherein I discourst with several of
the Clergy in England, who said they doubted not but Popery would soon be
settled in England. I came after that to live at one Mr. Jennisons House where
the Clergy had several meetings, and we were all of opinion that course would
be taken with the King unless he brought in Popery. And this my Lords is all I
can say in General.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Do you know of any Conspiracy in Yorkshire?


Mr. Smith. My Lord I am coming to that. When I came to Mr. Jennisons House,
there was one Mr. Thwing a Priest, who has suffered as a Conspirator, he was
very well acquainted in the House before I came there, and did very much to
persuade me that I would entreat Mr. Jennison to send his Daughters to a place
called Dolbanck, where a Nunnery was to be erected, and I knew several that
were there. This Mr. Thwing came to me oftentimes and several other Priests in
this City, and they all pressed me to it, but I was against it, knowing what
their design was.


Mr. Just. Dolb. But do you know any thing against the Prisoner?


Mr. Smith. All that I can say to the Gentleman at the Bar is this. I never
saw him before to my knowledge; But Mr. Thwing when we were at Mr. Jennisons
and discoursing of the Plot, asked me how they gave Money in Bishopprick, I told
him some gave more some less.


Mr. Just. Dolb. What were those Collections for?


Mr. Smith. My Lord it went among our selves under the notion of Killing the
King, and rooting out the Protestant Religion* but we gave it out that it was
for repairing a College at Doway, which if granted, had been penal by Law.
Then I asked him, how does the Collections go among you in Yorkshire, some,
says he, give freely, but says he, my Uncle and his friends are engaged
another way; for says he, they are going to make a Founder for Dolbank:
Several persons he named, among which he named this Gentleman.


Mr. Just. Dolb. What said he of Sir Miles?


Mr. Smith. He said Sir Miles was very zealous for promoting the Roman
Catholic Religion, and had Contributed Largly for the introduceing of it into
England.


Bar. Gregory. You say that amongst your selves you gave it out out that the
money that was raised was for the Killing of the King and rooting out the
Protestant Religion; pray by what way and means was it to be done, was that
ever discoursed among any of you, was it for raising of an Army or what was it
for?


Mr. Smith. Where ever I was my Lord, it was resolved that that was the most
efectual means for the introduceing of Popery.


Mr. Robert Bolron called, and Sworn.

Sir Tho. Stringer. Mr. Bolron acquaint my Lords and the Jury, what you know of
Sir Miles Stapleton.


Mr. Bolr. May it please your Lordships, I came to live with Sir Thomas
Gascoyne in 1674. as Steward of his Cole-works; and was then a Protestant, but
was persuaded by Mr. Rushton, Sir Thomas and others to turn Roman Catholic;
when I had turned Roman Catholic, about 1676, they came and asked me what I
would do for the Romish Religion, if it should come to it; I told them I would
adventure my life in that cause, and then I went to Barmbow-Hall where I took
the Oath of Secrecy, after that I went to Barmbow-Hall, where Sir Miles
Stapleton was at a consult in 1677.


Mr. Just. Dolb. At what time in 77?


Mr. Bolr. It was about Whitsontide, my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolb. That was the Whitsontide after you had taken the Oath of
Secrecy?


Mr. Bol. Yes my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Who was there?


Mr. Bol. Sir Miles Stapleton, Sir Tho. Gascoyn, Mr. Gascoyn his Son, my Lady
Tempest, Lawyer Ingoldby, Mr. Thwing, Father Rushton and several others.


Baron Gregory. What was there done at that Consult?


Mr. Bol. My Lord, the Consult was about killing the King, and Establishing a
Nunnery at Dolbank near Ripley; Sir Tho. Gascoyn gave 90. l. per Annum, and
300. l. for killing the King; and I remember very well Pickering was mentioned
about killing the King: and they asked Sir Miles Stapleton what he would give?
and he said 200. l. for killing the King.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Are you sure that in the presence of Sir Miles Stapleton it
was resolved the King should be killed?


Mr. Bol. Yes my Lord, it was resolved both by him and all others, that the
King should be killed; and my Lord I heard them further say if the Duke of York
did not please, that they would serve him, as they would serve his Brother.


Baron Greg. Who said these latter words?


Mr. Bol. Sherby of Stone-house said these latter words, and Mr. Shereburn said
--


Mr. Just. Dolb. No matter what Mr. Shereburn said, what said Sir Miles?


Mr. Bol. The Gentlemen said that Sir Miles should be a Privy Counselor, and
that they would procure the Duk's consent to it.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Is that all?


Mr. Bol. My Lord I was further at a Consult in Seventy-eight, about the
thirteenth or fourteenth of June.


Baron Greg. What time was that?


Mr. Bol. The thirteenth day of June 78. and there it was agreed upon the
taking of Hull, the letting in of the French there, as the fittest place for
the French to land at.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Where was this?


Mr. Bol. At Barmbow, and likewise they did discourse that my Lord Bellas had
caused the Block-houses to be almost ruined, that the French might more easily
come in; and we had all Pardons for our Sins.


Mr. Lawrence Mowbray called and sworn.

Sir Tho. Stringer. Mr. Mowbraey, tell my Lords and the Jury what you know
against Sir Miles Stapleton the Prisoner at the Bar.


Mr. Mowbray. My Lords, you have heard what Mr. Smith, and Mr. Bolron say to
the Plot in general, what I say shall be very brief in relation to Sir Miles
Stapleton and no further. Sir Miles Stapleton being present with Sir Tho.
Gascoyn, my Lady Tempest, Esquire Gascoyn and several others, they held several
discourses concerning a design of killing the King, Subverting the Government,
and bringing in Popery, and accordingly they would fire London.


Bar. Greg. When was this?


Mr. Mowb. This was in 76. where Father Rushton gave him an Oath of Secrecy,
and he promised to be true to the Design, and would venture his Life and Estate
for the promoting so good a Cause.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Did you hear Sir Miles Stapleton say he would Adventure his
Life and Estate for the killing of the King?


Mr. Mowb. Yes my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolb. And was it resolved at that Consult?


Mr. Mowb. Yes my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolb. And he consented to it?


Mr. Mowb. Yes my Lord, and took the Oath of Secrecy from Father Rushton.


Mr. Just. Dolb. This is not the time that Mr. Bolron speaks of.


Mr. Mowb. No my Lord he speaks of 76. and 78. this was in 78.


Mr. Bolron. I have in 75. a Collusive conveyance of Sir Miles Stapleton's
Estate to Sir John Daney.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Where did you see it?


Mr. Bol. I did see it at Sir Thomas Yarbroughs, and he asking me when Sir
Miles Stapleton was at Sir Tho. Gascoyns; may it please you said I, I can tell
you something where you are concerned with Sir Miles Stapleton; as soon as he
heard that he blushed, and away he went and would hear no further.


Sir Tho. Stringer What say you Mr. Mowbray, of an Indulgence you had?


Mr. Mowb. Yes my Lord I had an Indulgence.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Was it for the time to come, or the time past?


Mr. Mowb. It was for the time past; for I was to enter into the Rosary.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Did you ever attend Rushton at the Altar?


Mr. Mowb. Yes I did.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Mr. Bol. you say you saw a Collusive Conveyance made by Sir.
Miles Stapleton to Sir John Daney; pray what was the forfeiture of it?


Mr. Bol. It was --


Mr. Just. Dolb. Was it Sir Tho. Yarbrough, or Sir John Daney you told of it?


Mr. Bol. I told it to Sir John Daney.


Mr. Mowb. I drew a Copy of that very Conveyance.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Truly my Lord we want Mrs Bolron, one of the most material
Evidences against Sir Miles, being sick at London.


Mr. Bayns called and sworn.

Sir Tho. Stringer. Come Mr. Bayns declare to the Court what you know against
Sir Miles.


Mr. Bayns. I know nothing against Sir Miles, only I have seen him at
Barmbow-Hall in 77.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Pray tell us this, whether you have observed in the year
76. Sir Miles Stapleton come to several meetings with Sir Tho. Gascoyn, and my
Lady Tempest, and others?


Mr. Bayns. Yes my Lord I have.


Mr. Just. Dolb. But you do not know what discourse they had?


Mr. Bayns. No my Lord, but I remember we were once discoursing about some Nuns
beyond Sea, and they were called galloping Nuns.


Mr. Just. Dolb. They were gallopers indeed.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Sir Miles, you have heard what has been proved against you --


Sir Miles. My Lord there is nothing of truth in it at all; I hope to make it
appear to your Lordship. I call God to wittness I am as Innocent of what they
say, as any Child unborn.


Mr. Just. Dolb. That is an easy thing to say.


Sir Miles. I hope to make it appear to your Lordship. Will your Lorship please
to give me leave to ask the witnesses some questions?


Mr. Just. Dolb. That you may have allowancc in.


Sir Miles. Then I desire to ask Bolron this question; Did you accuse me in
your Information to Justice Louder?


Mr. Bol. No my Lord I did not.


Sir Miles. Did I or any other desire you to keep any secret for me?


Mr. Bol. Yes my Lord* I have been desired.


Mr. Just. Dolb. But did Sir Miles ever desire you?


Mr. Bol. No my Lord he did not, but Rushton did, when I was Introduced by the
Priests to the Consult.


Sir Miles. Did you and Mowb. know that each other was concerned in the Plot?


Mr. Bol. Yes we did.


Sir Miles. Name the persons that were private at the Consult.


Mr. Bol. There was Sir Tho. Gascoyn, my Lady Tempest, Esquire Gascoyn, Mr.
Ingleby, Mr. Thwing, Mr. Rushton, Mr. Addison, Mr. Metcalf and several others.


Sir Miles. How long did the Consult last?


Mr. Bol. Some six or seven hours.


Sir Miles. What Servants were there?


Mr. Bol. I took no notice of the Servants.


Sir Miles. What Room was it in?


Mr. Bol. In the old Dining Room.


Sir Miles. How long did it last?


Mr. Just. Dolb. Six or seven hours he tells you.


Sir Miles. Was there any other at Sir Tho. Gascoyns?


Mr. Bol. None else that I can remember.


Sir Miles. Upon what occasion did he mention Mowbray in his Information to the
Counsel?


Mr. Just. Dolb. There has no Information to the Counsel been men tion'd here.


Sir Miles. Pray what was the occasion you were turned out of Sir Thomas
Gascoyns Service?


Mr. Bolr. My Lord I know not; they say it was about a Trunk; Sir Thomas
Gaseoyne sent him to York and he was to come again: I know there was a design
to take away Mowbrays life, but I never told him so much, and my Lady accused
him for a Ring, I never durst tell him this, but this was the thing contrived
against him to take away his life, I can make it appear where he bought the
Ring.


Mr. Just. Dolb. What telst thou us of a Ring? can not thou as well tell us
it was for that he left Sir Thomas Gascoynes service?


Sir Miles. When did you first become a Protestant?


Mr. Mowbray. When I made my first Information.


Bar. Gregory. When was that?


Mr. Mowb. That was in 79, and a little before that I kept correspondency with
Father Addison?


Sir Miles. I desire to know whether he saw a list of names.


Mr. Mowb. Yes I did.


Sir. Miles. Whose names were there?


Mr. Mowb. There was your name for one, and Sir Thomas Gascoyns.


Sir. Miles. What was it for?


Mr. Mowb. It was a List of those that were Actors and Contributors for Killing
the King.


Mr. Just. Dolb. You are sure Sir Miles Stapletons name was in the List?


Mr. Mowb. Yes my Lord, I am.


Mr. Just. Dolb Was it Parchment, or Paper?


Mr. Mowb. No, my Lord, it was Paper.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Were you to assist in Killing the King?


Mr. Mowb. My Lord, I was not to be an Actor in killing the King.


Sir Miles. Whether did I, or any other desire you to keep any secret for me?


Mr. Mowb. Yes, Father Rushton did.


Sir Miles. Did I ever do it?


Mr. Mowb. No Sir Miles, you never did.


Sir Miles. Did any body else desire you?


Mr. Just. Dolb. Father Rushton he tells you did.


Sir Miles. Was the discourse so loud that Sir Thomas Gascoyne could hear it?


Mr. Mowb. Sir Thomas could hear well enough when he would.


Sir Miles. Was it in 79 that you discovered the Plot?


Mr. Bolr. Yes I went to London and there discovered the Plot in -- 79 I think
it was.


Sir Miles. You said I was not concerned, you only accused Sir Thomas Gascoyne
and some other in your Information but did not name me.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Did he so, you may prove that upon him.


Sir Miles. It was so in his Information, my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Well then let it be so. Call your Witnesses.


Mr. Louder called and Examined.

Sir Miles. I desire Mr. Louder to acquaint your Lordships and the Jury, what
was in the Information Mr. Bolron gave in, whether he accused me or no.


Mr. Louder. All I know of it is, that in January 79 on Sunday Evening, as I
think, about the 24 th. day of the month Robert Bolron came to me and told me
he had something of Secrecy to impart to me, and I asked him if he would go into
the House with me, he told me it was matter of High Treason; I asked who was
concerned, he answered Sir Thomas Gascoyne and several others; then I ordered
my Clerk to bring a Bible and Pen and Ink to take his Information. I desired
him to be very Caurious, telling him that several lives were at stake; at that
he began to be fearful and changed Coulor; I asked him for what cause that fear
was, he said if that were upon my Conscience that was upon his, for concealing
it so long, I should be as fearful as he. I bid him seriously consider what he
had to say; he said then he had delivered his Information to Mr. Tindal; well
then said I why is it you come to me? said I Mr. Tindal is to be at my House
the 25 th. day and I shall discourse it with him, and we shall take it
together, Mr. Tindal did come, and Bolron came and delivered in his Information.


Mr. Just. Dolb. You did not give him his Oath at that time?


Mr. Louder. No my Lord, for it seems he had not then delivered in his
Information, but only a writing of his to Mr. Tindal.


Bar. Gregory. You took no Examination then?


Mr. Louder. No my Lord, not at that time, but afterward he came and he gave
in his Information to us, and I think we were about two hours about it; and
then he did not charge any person but Rushton and Sir Thomas Gascoyne; but said
he had more to recollect, well said I, if you recollect any more you may come
again.


Bar. Gregory. Pray who did he name?


Mr. Louder. He named Father Rushton and Sir Thomas Gascoyne; he named my Lady
Tempest, but spoke that as from another. And when he came again he said he
would trouble us with no more, but would go to the King and Counsel to deliver
in the rest.


Mr. Just. Dolb. He said then he should recollect more?


Mr. Louder. Yes my Lord he did, and when he came again, he said he would not
trouble us with it, but would inform the Counsel of it: when we saw him so
positive, he had a Letter of recommendation from Mr. Tindal to the Counsel; and
he lost that Letter at Ware, but he went on, and delivered his Information to
the Counsel.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Do you know it?


Mr. Louder. Yes my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolb. You cannot know it, were you there then?


Mr. Louder. No, my Lord, but I do know it.


Mr. Just. Dolb. How do you know it?


Mr. Louder. I have a Copy of the order under several of the Counsels hands.


Mr. Just. Dolb. That is not Evidence, you are not to speak what another man
knows. But that is not the matter, it seems he went to give in his Information
to the Counsel, for indeed he could not otherwise have been safe.


Mr. Louder. After this, he goes up to London again, and comes down and brings
me another order of Counsel to examine Mr. Mowbray and one Hickeringil, and I
asked him if he knew any thing about Sir Miles Stapletons being concerned in the
Plot, and he said no, he believed he was very clear.


Mr. Just. Dolb. You say, that Bolron brought you another order of Counsel to
examine Mowbray.


Mr. Louder. Yes my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Did Bolron bring you in writing what Mowbray could say?


Mr. Louder. My Lord, I know not whether it was in writing or by word of mouth.


Mr. Just. Dolb. What was it he told you Mowbray could say?


Mr. Louder. He told me he could say he saw Sir Miles Stapleton at Barmbow when
the consult was, but said he, there will others come against Sir Miles.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Pray Let us ask Bolron that, did you say to Mr. Louder you
knew nothing against Sir Miles Stapleton but there was others would do it?


Mr. B lr. No my Lord not that I remember.


Mr. Louder. Bolron himself had never said any thing against Sir Miles.


Bar. Gregory. Did you ask Bolron if he knew whether Sir Miles was concerned in
the Plot or no?


Mr. Louder. Yes my Lord I did, and he answered he knew nothing against him.


Mr. Just. Dolb. He was not then upon his Oath?


Mr. Louder. No not then, but after this he delivered his Information, and did
Swear to the same effect, that Mowbray did Swear, that Sir Miles was at Barmbow
and that they all did Conspire the killing of the King, and introduceing the
Romish Religion; and he said my Lady Tempest came to him, when he was in the
passage, and said to him, Mr. Mowbray it is fitter for you to be treating of
Sir Miles Stapletons Servants in the Larder: And he asked me whether he had
better go and apprehend Sir Miles or Mr. Ingleby first.


Mr. Just. Dolb. This was your discourse with Bolron.


Mr. Louder. Yes my Lord.


Mr. Bolr. May it please your Lordship, I did not know then that Mr. Mowbray
was at all concerned in the Plot.


Mr. Just. Dolb. He tells you, how you told him what Mowbray would say before
he came to him, and what he would say against Sir Miles Stapleton.


Mr. Bolr. No my Lord, I never said any such thing.


Mr. Just. Dolb. You say you did not know what Mowbray would say, Mr. Louder
says otherwise.


Mr. Bolr. My Lord, I did not know what it was before he brought it himself,
and he brought it in writing.


Bar. Gregory. Mr. Louder did he tell you the perticulars, or he only said he
was to depose things against Sir Miles Stapleton?


Mr. Louder. My Lord he told me he could Swear Sir Miles was at the Consult at
at Barmbow, and did there Conspire the death of the King and introduceing the
Romish Religion.


Mr. Just. Dolb. How long was this Mr. Louder, you had that discourse with
Bolron before Mowbray came to give in his Information?


Mr. Louder. It was my Lord two or three days before, and I ordered him to
come again, when Mr. Tindal was to be at my House.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Were you ever with Mr. Louder, and knew when he and Mr. Tindal
ordered him to come to him?


Mr. Bolr. I went to Mr. Mowbray, and we came to Esquire Lowders, and there Mr.
Tindal was; but I knew nothing of what he had to say; my Lord Mr. Mowbray was
there at that time he does affirm.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Mowbray, before you came to Mr. Lowders had you acquainted
Bolron with what you had to say?


Mr. Mowb. I might acquaint him I had something to say, but did not tell him
the particulars.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Did you tell him you had any thing against Sir Miles Stapleton?


Mr. Mowb. It Is possible my Lord I might, but I am not positive in that.


Bar. Gregory. Did he tell you Mr. Louder what Mr. Mowbray could Swear against
Sir Miles, and was it not the day which he tells you hereof?


Mr. Louder. No my Lord it was not.


Bar. Gregory. It was not the same day?


Mr. Louder. No, my Lord, I shall be positive in it, if I be brought to my Oath.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Come another Witness, Sir Miles.


Sir Thomas Yarbrough Called and Examined

Sir Miles. I desire Sir Thomas, to speak, what he heard Bolron declare what he
knew of the Plot after Sir Thomas Gascoyne was taken.


Sir Tho. Yarbrougb. The 10 th. of August 79 Mr. Bolron came to my House about
10 or 11 a Clock at night and knocked at my Door, I thought him very
unseasonable, but my Servants looking out at the Window asked who was there, he
said a Friend that would speak with Sir Thomas, my Servant came and told me,
and I ordered my Servant to go down and bring him into my Chamber, in the
Interim I put on a Morning Gown: as soon as he came in he told me he had an
order of Counsel to search all suspicious places for Popish Priests, and I have
great cause to believe that there is one Rushton a Priest now at Sir Miles
Stapletons; what would you have me to do, said I, would you have me to go with
you my self? he said no, but a Servant: said I Mr. Bolron will you show me the
order, and finding his name in the Warrant I asked him was that the Person that
informed against Sir Thomas Gascoyne? his answer was this, that if I pleased he
would show me the Article against Sir Thomas Gascoyne, when I observed the
Article I asked him if he knew any thing of Sir Miles Stapletons being concerned
in the Plot: No I protest, says he, I know nothing of Sir Miles Stapleton's
being concerned in it, for he is a very honest Gentleman; only this I must say,
that I know he has made a Collufive Conveyance of his Estate, and I believe
most of the Roman Catholics in England have done it for the securing of their
Estates.


Mr. Just. Dolb. What do you say to this, Bolron?


Mr. Bol. My Lord when I delivered in my Information to the Counsel I did
accuse Sir Miles Stapleton.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Did you say this to Sir Thomas?


Mr. Bol. No I did not, if it was not in the Information I gave to the Counsel,
believe not one word that I have said.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Its possible it might be in the second Information to the
Counsel that you accused Sir Miles: Was Sir Miles Stapleton's name in the Paper
you gave to him?


Mr. Bol. Yes my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolb. This was the tenth day of August 79. Had you then Informed the
Counsel of any thing before that time against Sir Miles Stapleton's being at
Barnbow Hall at the Consult?


Mr. Bol. May it please your Lordship, I was called out when I was before the
King and Counsel, and there was something I did not deliver in.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Then you did not do it at that time?


Mr. Bol. No my Lord I did not.


Mr. Just. Dolb. I ask you again, before the tenth day of August 79. Had you
Informed the Counsel of any thing against Sir Miles?


Mr. Bol. No my Lord I had not.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Then it could not be in the Information that you showed him.


Mr. Bol. No my Lord, it was at the second time.


Bar. Greg. Was it before you had this discourse with Sir Tho. Yarbrough?


Mr. Bol. No, my Lord it was not before that: I shall not speak one word of a
Lie.


Sir Miles. Every word you speak is a Lie.


Mr. Bol. It is no lie before this Honorable Court.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Were these Informations enclosed in the Letter from the
Counsel?


Mr. Loud. Yes my Lord, your Lordship may see the Letter mentions it, (holding
the Letter forth in his hand with the Informations) which Mr. Just. Dolb. took
and silently read them over, after which he made his report thereof to the
Court.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Mr. Loud. I have read all these things over, and there is
nothing of any Consult in them: How should then the Accusation of Sir Miles be
mentioned in them?


Bar. Greg. Ido believe Sir Tho. you mistake times.


Sir Tho. Yarb. No my Lord, I do not.


Mr. Just. Dolb. In the bringing of this Order of Council to you, did you ask
Mr. Bolron if he knew any thing against Sir Miles Stapleton?


Sir Tho. Yarb. Yes my Lord I did, and he said he believed he was Innocent.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Pray Sir Tho. why did you ask him that about Sir Miles?


Sir Tho. Yarbr. Because I knew Sir Miles was related to Sir Tho. Gascoyn, and
was often there.


Sir Tho. Stringer. It seemed Sir Tho. you feared it.


The Lady Yarbrough Called and Examined.

Sir Miles. Madam pray accquaint the Court what you heard Bolron say when he
discoursed your husband.


Lady Yarbrough. All I can say is, that I was in bed then and heard him say all
these things, and I heard the Order read, and there was mention of several at
the Consult, among whom there was no mention of Sir Miles Stapleton.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Does your Ladyship very well remember that Sir Tho. Yarbrough
asked him if Sir Miles was concerned, and he said not that he knew of?


Lady Yarb. Yes my Lord, and he said more than that, for when he returned from
taking Priests in the afternoon, there was a great deal of Company in the
house, and when he came he brought one of the Sons along with him, and they
came into the Hall, there Mr. Bol. was with them, and among the rest there was
one Mr. Anby, who being a little merry, he takes him by the Arm, and comes and
bring him to us as we were sitting in the Porch and said, hark you Mr. Bolron,
I hear you are a Discoverer of the Plot? Yes I am said he: Then I pray you, who
are they that are concerned? But he would not tell him; so said he, is Sir
Miles Stapleton in it? he answered he had nothing to say against Sir Miles, but
he was an honest Gentleman for ought he knew, Excepting that he had made a
Collusive Conveyance of his Estate.


Mr. Normanton Called and Examined.

Mr. Norm. In June 79. came Rob. Bolron to me, and said, that Sir Tho. Gascoyn
would give 1000 l. for killing the King, and the Lady Tempest would have hanged
him for breaking a Trunck, but now he would be even with her: and that Sir
Miles Stapleton kept Priests in his house, but he would apprehend them
presently, for he might have twenty pound a piece for taking of them.


Bar. Greg. You say Bolron told you this?


Mr. Norm. Yes my Lord he told me this in my own house, and I told him he might
go to Esquire Tindal, and I lent him eighteen pence, and borrowed him a horse in
the Town.


Richard Pears, Sir Mile's man, Called and Examined.

Richard Pears. My Lord, Bolron came to Carleton.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Carleton, what is that?


Richard Pears. To my Master's house.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Who is thy Master?


Pears. Sir Miles Stapleton.


Mr. Just. Dolb. What then?


Pears. I goeing to an Alehouse where Bolron was, he asked me how I did, I
thanked him.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Did you know him then?


Pears. Yes my Lord, and he had called for a Pot of Ale, and wished me to drink
with him, and he asked me if they did not blame him for accusing my Master Sir
Miles? and I said I did not hear him named, he said it was not him, but he
might not tell who it was.


Mr. Just. Dolb. When was this?


Pears. Three or four days after my Master was taken into Custody: and he said
he would have gone to have seen Sir Miles; but I think, (says he) he does not
know me: and he asked me if Mr. Legget would be at our house, and he desired me
to give him a Letter; and I said I should not see him; then he said I might
burn it, and I did burn it my Lord.


Sir Tho. Stringer, How came you acquainted with Bolron?


Pears. At the Cole-pits, my Lord.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Did you never see him at Sir Tho. Gascoyn's?


Pears. No, my Lord.


Stephen Thompson, Called and Examined.

Mr. Just. Dolb. Have a care you speak nothing but truth, though you are not
sworn, yet we can punish you, and God Almighty will punish you if you speak
false.


Steph. Thompson. An't like your Honor, Rob. Bolron was Servant to Sir Tho.
Gascoyn, as Steward of his Cole-pits; Sir Tho. put him out of his Colepits, and
there was a great deal of money due, and he knew not how to get it, and
therefore he would take threescore Pounds for it, because he knew not how to
get it, and he would take thirty two Pounds at one time, and twenty eigth at
another, and he came to me to be bound with him, which I was unwilling to;
says he here is thirty eight Pound good Debt, and I shall take care to get the
other, and if Sir Tho. be not kind, I shall do him an ill turn.


Mr. Just. Dolb. What is this to Sir Miles Stapleton?


Thompson. He did swear, this Plot being discovered, they thought he knew
something of Sir Tho. Gascoyn, and he said before the Plot broke out, there was
never a Catholic in Yorkshire was concerned in it, if there were any it was
above.


Bar. Greg. This was before his Information I Will lay a Wager.


Mr. Just. Dolb. How could he do him an ill turn?


Thompson. My Lord this is the ill turn, Mr. Legget said he did it not for
need; Oh Rob. Bolron said I, do you thus requite Sir Tho Gascoyn's kindnesses?


Bar. Greg. Did he speak any thing to you concerning Sir Miles?


Sir Miles. I conceive when they reflect upon Sir Tho. they reflect upon me.


Mr. Just. Dolb. No not so, you might be guilty, and Sir Tho. Innocent; or you
might be innocent and Sir Tho. guilty.


Sir Miles. My Lord I think that as there was a Consult at Sir Tho. Gascoyn's;
certainly if any one was guilty, we were all guilty.


Baron Gregory. There are some that conceive, and I think, not without grounds,
that there are no considerable Catholics in England but they are concerned in
the Plot.


Mr. Just. Dolb. There was one Dixon came at Sir Tho. Gascoyn's Trial, and said
he heard Bol. and Mowb. down a pair of Stairs, speaking of Revenge against Sir
Tho. Gascoyn and my Lady Tempest, and thinking these Witnesses might now be
produced, we called at Leeds to veiw the Stairs, and I am sure neither my
Brother nor I could see any probability in it.


Bar. Gregary. For satisfaction we made two go up into the Chamber and stand
where the Witnesses were, and they spoke as loud as People do usually when they
discourse, and I am sure I could neither perceive what they said, nor see them,
unless I went three or four steps up.


Mr. Just. Dolb. This is but occasioned by your jesting upon the matter.


Nathaniel Wilson Called.

Mr. Just. Dolb. Sir Miles I would put you in mind of one thing, Produce those
two Witnesses that were produced at Sir Tho. Gascoyn's Trial.


Sir Miles. I have none of these Witnesses.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Certainly these Witnesses would be as material as any you can
have to do it


Sir Miles. I have them not here my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Nay, that is because you dare not; the Kings Counsel will
prove what they spoke they were hired to, and had money from Sir Tho. Gascoyn,
which they confessed.


Sir Miles. My Lord they made Affidavit of it.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Though they did, yet they confessed they were hired to it.


My Lady Vavasour Called and Examined.

Sir Miles. My Lord, I call my Lady Vavasour to tell whether Sir Walter was
there at the Consult they tell us of at Barmbow.


Mr. Just. Dolb. That will be heard for her to do, but call her then: Who was
calcalled, but speaking so low she could not be heard by the Court, and
standing besides Mr. Just. Dolben he repeated her words to the Court. My Lady
says this, Gentlemen, she believes her Husband was not there in any part of
the year, because he was infirm at York. Now Gentlmen, I would only know
whether that be Conclusive Evidence when it is only possible.


Mr. Legget Called and Examined.

Sir Miles. Mr. Leggett, pray what money would Mr. Bolron have given you when I
was taken?


Leggett. Mr. Bolron desired me to lend his Wife some money to go to Market
with, and I did: The same day between Tadcaster and York, Mr. Bolron asked me
what Allowance Dr. Oats had, I told him I heard he had five hundred Pounds a
year; and he answered I deserve as much, for I have done as much good as he; as
I was going for York, I met with Mr. Mowb. and it Raining I put in at
Tadcaster; when the Rain was over we set forward for York, said Mr. Mowb. Mr.
Bolron has sent for me, so I went to Mr. Bol. to the George, and he sent for
Mr. Mowbray, and he pulls out his Information, and after he had read it he asked
him if he knew any thing of that, and he said he did not know of it.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Well what is that to the purpose, did you hear him say any
thing against Sir Miles?


Leggett. I have heard Mr. Bolron say that he had nothing to say against Sir
Miles Stapleton, but only he had made over his Estate to Sir John Daney.


Mr. Just. Dolb. How came he to name Sir Miles to you?


Mr. Leg. He Voluntarily told me of it, when we went to Allerton to apprehend
some Priests, and when I returned, I told him I took but one of these Persons,
old Mr. Metcalf, and he said he cared not if I had but taken one Addy.


Mr. Just. Dolb. You must not talk of this fashion.


Sir Miles. It shows but what a kind of a man he is.


Mr. Just. Dolb. So may we Examine to the end of the Chapter. Do you say Bolron
read over his Information to Mowbray and he said he knew nothing of it as to
Sir Miles Stapleton?


Leg. No my Lord, but of Sir Tho. Gascoyn; he asked him nothing my Lord but
against Sir Tho. Gascoyn, after they went out and had been together, Mr. Bol.
told me Sir Miles Stapleton was to be taken into Custody, and he said you may
as well have it as another, but I Will go half Snipps with you; at last he told
me if I have an Hundred Pounds of Sir Miles, you shall have Twenty of it.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Had you any Warrant at that time to take Sir Miles?


Legget. No my Lord.


Bolron. I know nothing of any such thing.


Mrs. Eliz. Holmes Called and Examined

Mrs. Holmes. And't please you my Lord, at Sir Tho. Gascoyn's Trial, Mr. Bol.
and his Wife they were at our house at Dinner, after dinner they asked me if I
would go to Sir Tho. Trial, I answered Yes, So Mrs. Mowbray came and called her
Husband out of door, and I asked her about Sir Tho. Gas. and she said --


Mr. Just. Dolb. Tell us not what she said.


Holmes. She said they were hard People, but she thought they were Innocent to
the Plot, and she had nothing to say against them, as God should judge her
Soul. Then another time my Lord, after Bolron came from York, he met me, How
now Sister, I understand you are to be a Witness against me at York, but if
you will be kind to me I Will be kind to you and speak as favorably as I can; and
he said if he had known he should have been no better rewarded, he would never
have been a Witness; the Devil should have been a Witness as soon as he.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Against whom?


Holmes. Against Sir Tho. Gas. and Sir Miles my Lord, and he bid me be careful
what I swore; for if we did swear false he would have us at the Pillory, and
unless I would unsay what I had said in my Lady's Trial, he would punish me
sufficiently.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Who said this, know you?


Holmes. Mr. Bol. my Lord.


Bar. Greg. Where do you live?


Holmes. I live my Lord, in Baldwin's Garden.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Did you ever tell any that if they would come and swear
against the Evidence against Sir Miles Stapleton, they should be sufficiently
Rewarded?


Holms. No, never in my life.


Sir Miles. When did you see me last, Bolron?


Bol. I have seen you in 78. several times.


Mr. Just. Dolb. He has seen you in Prison.


Bol. My Lord I have seen him at Barnbow Hall in 78.


Sir Tho. Stringer. You know Sir Miles Stapleton?


Mr. Bol. Yes very well; and I have several times talked with him.


Sir Miles. I desire to know whether he has seen Sir Tho. Gas. and me
discourse about any thing?


Mr. Bol. No not since the Plot broke out.


Sir Miles. He swore in Sir Tho. Gascoyn's Trial he heard me and Sir Tho.
discourse about Oats and Bedloe.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Well how material will that be?


Sir Miles. I shall prove that he swore false, for Sir Tho. and I was never
together since the Plot broke forth.


Mr. Just. Dolb. That is hard to do.


Bar. Greg. You have an Excellent Witness that can swear that.


Sir Miles. In all probability I can do it.


Mr. Just. Dolb. But that must not go before a positive. Well, have you done?


Sir Miles. There is another Witness or two if it be not too tedious.


Mr. Just. Dolb. No we will stay here all day if you please.


Edward Cooper Called and Examined.

Cooper. My Lord all that I can say is we having been at Autherton Fair, we met
with Mr. Mowbray, knowing him and being acquainted with him, pray said I,
whether is there any thing of a truth in this that Bolron swears against Sir
Tho. Gas. or no? No says he, he might as well have sworn it against you or
another Person; for I have been in the house as he, and I never knew any such
thing.


Mr. Just. Dolb. This was before Mowbray had discovered any thing, for Mowb.
was then a Papist and had taken the Oath of Secrecy; besides it is not much what
Mowb. said he was going on a highway: If it had been before a Justice of
Peace, or if he had been upon his Oath, then it had been more material.


Madam Shereburn Called and Examined.

Sir. Miles. Madam Shereburn, pray declare what Bol. said at your house.


Madam Shereburn. Mr. Bol. and Mowb. came to our house under the pretense of
searching for Priests, and Bol. took several parcels of Silver away with him.


Judge Dolb. Away, away, if you have any thing against him on the behalf of
this Gentleman, Madam speak it; but you would prove him a Theif, and say he
went to seek for Priests and he stole money from them


Mowb. We went to seek for Priests, and we took some Chalices and other Popish
trinkets away.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Do not spend your and our time in saying that Bol. and Mowb.
were knavish boys; we it may be are all guilty of Extravigances in that
particular.


Bar. Greg. They themselves confess they have been very bad; They took the Oath
of Secrecy, and it is as ill as ever was spoken or writ in so few words.


Mr. Just. Dolb. I know they have been very bad men. Well have you any more
Witnesses?


Sir Miles. I can produce my Neighbors and those of the Church of England,
that can say no otherwise than that I have been of good behavior.


Sir Tho. Stringer. It is generally concluded by all that Sir Miles has been a
very good man until he fell into this great Action.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Brother have you any thing more to say? if not i will proceed.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Only I desire that Dixon and Wilson may be called in to
swear that they were hired at Sir Thomas Gascoyns Trial.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Call them then.


Dixon Called and Sworn.

Sir Tho. Stringer. Pray tell my Lord and the Jury what Witnesses were hired,
and whether you were hired to testify for Sir Thomas Gascoyn or no?


Dixon. My Lord, in November 79 John Bailey sent John Wilkinson for me, and when
I came there, Batley was there, and they desired me to go and there called me
into the Garden, and asked me if I would be a Witness for Sir Thomas Gascoyn,
and would give me forty shillings.


Wilson Called and Sworn.

Sir Tho. Stringer. Were you offered any thing by Mr. Babbington to be a
Witness for Sir Miles?


Wilson. I was, my Lord.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Pray tell my Lord what you were offered, and what he would
have you to say?


Dixon. Batley would have him to be a Witness.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Well, but what was he to say?


Dixon. He was to say he never see Bol. nor Mowbray at his house. Says Batley,
I saw them at the door. Thou never did see them in my house? Yes says he I
see them once, and my Lord, the third time before they departed he might say
that in 79. he came in and found them there.

This he pressed on me, celling me it was but as telling a Lie, for no Oath was
required in this Case.


Bar. Greg. Did Mr. Babington offer you money, what would he have you to
testify for it?


Mr. Just. Dolb. What money would he have given you?


Wilson. He would have given me 10 l. and Hickeringil proffered me 10 l.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Is Babington a Solicitor for Sir Miles?


Bolron. Yes my Lord here he is.


Dixon. Batley did press me to say again that he did never see Mr. Bol. and
Mowb. in his house, and he had made a Contrivance of that.


Christopher Langley and Richard Cocker called and sworn.

Sir Tho. Stringer. Pray tell my Lords and the Jury what you have been
profer'd, and by whom to give Evidence for Sir Miles.


Chr. Langley. My Lord and't please you, I kept a public house, So William
Batley and John Ross came and called for a quart of Ale, and this Richard
Cocker was with us, and he said if you will go and be a Witness for Sir Miles in
those things we shall direct you, you shall have a couple of Oxen and half a
score of Sheep.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Who profer'd you this?


Langley. Will. Batley and John Ross.


Cocker. Well it is the same my Lord, I went with him into his house and he
profer'd him a couple of Oxen and half a score of Sheep, if he would be a
Witness for Sir Miles.


Mr. Bayns called and sworn.

Sir Tho. Stringer. Speak whether Mrs. Holmes would have had you to have
recanted any thing against Sir Miles.


Mr. Bayns. He profer'd me since I came into the Kingdom of England threescore
pound a year to have holden my tongue, if I had any thing to say against Sir
Miles: I told her not whether I had any thing or no, and she profer'd me 60. l.
per Annum, Mrs. Hewit said she would give me more if I would say nothing
against Sir Miles.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Did they make any assurance?


Bayns. I asked them, do you know another Gentleman's Purse: they said they knew
it very well that he would give it.


Sir Miles. Pray let Mrs. Holms be called again.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Well, she denies it. What is that Hewit?


Bains. He married another of my Daughters: my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolb. She only appeared zealous for Sir Thomas Gascoyne, and she
would be the same for Sir Miles Stapleton. Have you any thing more Sir Miles?


Sir Miles. No, my Lord: only Mrs. Holmes denies it.


Mr. Just. Dolb. She does so.


Sir Miles. I have not much to say against Mr. Bayns.


Mr. Just. Dolb. I do not hear he says much against you.


Bar. Greg. He had got his money pretty easily if he said nothing more against
you: he had scarce earned his money.


Sir Miles. I desire the Jury may Consider what Credit was given to their
Evidence formerly in the former Trials: for I speak seriously, I never spoke
any such thing, nor was ever at any Consult about any such thing; I believe
there is none that knows me will believe it.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Is that all?


Sir Miles. The Evidence is very improper: I never thought ill against the King
in my life: what reason was there for it?


Mr. Just. Dolb. No reason at all that either you or any Papist should do it,
but only through the mad fiery zeal of the Jesuits, for ever since the
Reformation you have enjoyed your Estates and Religion without any molestation,
but you could not endure we should quietly enjoy ours. But if you have any
matter on Record against them we will hear it; It may be you will say he is an
idle fellow and the like; there will be no end of such reflections.


Bar. Greg. You see what is produced on your behalf Sir Miles though not by
your direction, yet on your behalf, and they said it was but telling a lie.


Sir Miles. No, my Lord, not I; I never gave any such directions.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Gentlemen of the Jury, Sir Miles Stapleton, stands indicted
for a very foul Treason, for endeavoring to subvert the Government, change the
Religion, and to bring in Popish Superstition and Idolatry: which he could
never do, without compassing the Death of the King, he being the only obstacle
in the way. This is his Charge. The proof of this depends upon Bolron and
Mowbray; Mr. Smith, the first Witness, he only relates he has been in Rome and
France, and among all the Priests he conversed with there was such a design on
foot; But against Sir Miles he knows nothing, but things told him by Mr.
Thwing, which I must tell you is no Evidence against Sir Miles Stapleton.
Bolron and Mowbray, do positively swear the thing as plain as any thing can be;
they both swear they were present at several Consults, where it was resolved
the King should be killed, and that Sir Miles did agree to it, and did agree to
contribute 200 l. to carry on this Design. Captain Bayns, being Examined, he
says he did really see Sir Miles at Barmbow-Hall at that time, but he does not
know whether it was about that or no.

Against this, Sir Miles says it cannot be but this is an Invention of Bolron
and Mowb* and to prove this he produces several witnesses, that Bolron should
deny, and that he should sometimes say that Sir Tho Gascoyn knew nothing of it:
sometimes that Sir Miles knew nothing of it: I must tell you at this time, that
they were then discourst withal, they at that time were Papists themselves, and
lay under the Oath of Secrecy. But now here are three Witnesses, Sir Tho.
Tarbrough, my Lady Tarbrough, and Mr. Louder; and they do speak as much as any
of the other does concerning Bolron and Mowbray, and they speak it when it was
a time Pertinent* for what they spoke to a Justice of Peace at that time seems
somewhat probable: You heard what Mr. Louder says, they came to him to accuse
them the 25 th. day of January 79, and he put them off for that time, and he
gives you Reasons why he did it; and then he brings an Order of Counsel to
Examine Mowbray, and he rells him what Mowbray would Swear, and he tells him he
would Swear against Sir Miles Stapleton, that he was at the consult at
Barmbow-Hall; you have heard him often deliver this, and because it was
somewhat material we desired him to speak it again and again: Bolron denies it,
he never told him what Mowbray could Swear; so that depends upon the Credit of
the Witnesses.

Sir Thomas Yarbrough tells us that Bolron came to him, and knocked him up out
of bed for his Warrant to search for Rushton a Priest, who he said was at Sir
Miles's, and thereupon he asked him if he could tell any thing of Sir Miles
Stapleton, and he said no, with many Asseverations; now if that Information
were the same that was sent to Mr. Louder, then it is of no such weight, and it
has been presupposed by the Kings Counsel that Sir Thomas might forget
himself, neither was there any thing in these Papers relating to Sir Miles.

And my Lady Yarbrough being in bed in the same Chamber, she says she heard
the Papers Read and her Husband asked him of Sir Miles Stapleton, but he denied
that he was concerned in the Plot: And she says further, in the Afternoon, a
Gentleman brought him into the Porch where they were sitting, and the Gentleman
asked him who was Plotters, but he would not tell him; then he asked him if Sir
Miles Stapleton was concerned, and he positively denied it. These things hang
not well together, I know not how to make any observations upon it; he denies
that he said so, they say he did. The rest of the witnesses are not very much
material, only as I told you before, what talk they would have talked before
they changed their Religion: There is nothing proved against them, but they are
good witnesses in the Law; there is no Records, nor perjuries; nor any thing
else that takes off their Evidence* they have Sworn it several times, and stand
to it. Now you have heard and taken notice what objections have been made
against it


Baron Gregory. My Brother has opened it so fully, I shall trouble you with
very little, only to let you see that my observations were the same, and that I
concur in the Evidence with my Brother, for there is very full Evidence
against the Prisoner at the Bar. The matter they swear is Treason of the
Highest nature imaginable: There are but two that Swear positively, but they
Swear of several Consults, and of the particulars that were agreed on by Sir
Miles Stapleton for the carrying it on; and there is no material witnesses
against them. For the latter witnesses, of their denying of it, it must be
before they were of the Protestant Religion; when they were concerned as much
to conceal it, as any Persons that were guilty of it: besides in a discourse a
man is not bound to tell a Neighbor all things that he does know, he cannot be
safe to tell it to a private person at that time. It is very true, as my
Brother has told you, they were resolved when they discovered it they would
have security for themselves: I suppose they needed not have feared Sir Miles
flying from being apprehended, but if Sir Miles was at large they might have
feared it. But when they came to be examined upon their Oaths before Mr. Louder
and Mr. Tindal there could not be any thing to excuse them; It is true, to my
apprehension, there was no probable reasons why these two Gentlemen should ask
them if Sir Miles were concerned in the Plot; for in the information that they
saw, his name was not mentioned; thus they were as much afraid as Sir Miles
was, it may be, it was their care of him knowing what Religion he was of, and
knowing him to be related to Sir Thomas Gascoyn. No it does depend upon the
Credit of what they have Sworn, they deny what is charged upon them by these
Gentlemen; by Sir Thomas Yarbrough and by my Lady; and it is true Mr. Louder was
as a Magistrate too, and Sir Thomas was as a Magastrate too, it is true he was
not upon the Examination of them upon Oath at that time, therefore that was not
as before a Magistrate; but Mr. Louder they came to him as a Magistrate,
therefore it must be for you to consider whether or no there might be a
forgetfulness of them in their speaking or a misunderstanding of them; there is
nothing else that I know can tend to the reconciling of it: For if there were a
mistake by the one, or a forgetfulness in the other, then it might alter the
understanding; but if they heard well and remembered true, then it will be, as
I said before, more difficult to be reconciled. But Gentlemen, upon the whole
matter, it will depend upon the Construction and Reputation of what they Swear
and these Gentlemen speak, which you are to Consider.


Having Sworn a Bailiff, the Jury withdrew for about half an hours consultation
together, and then Returned into Court and gave in their Verdict, NOT GUILTY.

FINIS.

