AN ESSAY To the Restoring of our Decayed TRADE.

Wherein is Described, the SMUGLERS, LAWYERS, AND OFFICERS Frauds, etc.

By JOSEPH TREVERS.

LONDON Printed for Giles Widows, at the Green Dragon in St. Paul's
Churchyard, John Sims at the King's Head at Sweetings Alley end in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange, and Will. Milward Stationer a^ Westminster Hall door
in New-Pallace-Yard, 1677.

The Contents.
1. THat no Nation has such advantages whereby to enrich themselves, as
England has. 2. That the private Exportation of our wool and Fullers Earth,
does exceedingly binder the Trade of this Kingdom, as also does the private
Importation of Foreign Prohibited Goods. 3. The ignorance of our common People
of the Law in such cases, and want of encouragement to the discoverers. 4. The
great loss our Silk and Ribbon-Weavers. 5. That the Trade of Clothing is the
chiefest thing in the Nation. 6. The profit gained by working up our Wool by
our own poor people, is almost unspeakable, and influential to all degrees of
persons in the Kingdom. 7. That there is lost Millions per annum to the King
and Kingdom, in Customs, etc. by losing our Trade of Clothing. 8. That no
other Country affords Wool to make good cloth without our English Wool and
Fullers Earth. 9. A recital of several Statutes concerning Wool, and the
Transportation thereof, settling the Aulangers Office, and for the well making
of Cloth, and the abuses of our good Laws. 10. Setting forth the industry of
the Dutch, and other Countries, whereby in a great measure they undermine our
Trade. 11, How the decay of Trade occasions the Poor to be so numerous, brings
Rents low, and consequently Poverty to the Kingdom. 12. Several Quaeries
Propounded, by way of Remedy.
By, A true friend to his Country, JO. TREVERS.
To the Right Honorable EDWARD SEYMOUR, SPEAKER of the Right Honorable House
of COMMONS; Treasurer of His Majesty's Royal Navy, and one of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy COUNCEL.
FOr me to speak of the Nobility and Worth of your Ancestors, and the Noble
Family (most Honored Sir) would be but as an Eclipse of the Sun by the Moon,
which is the Planet that moves in the lowest Orb, but laying a side all such
thoughts, the Occasion of the Dedication of this ensuing Treatise to your
Honor, is,

First, for that you are signally Elected to be the Speaker of the Honorable
the House of Commons, the Representative of the Kingdom, wherein such Laws
are framed and settled, as are conducible to the Weal, Honor, and Safety
thereof.

2. Because your Honors Abilities are so publicly manifest, as that you are
likewise singled out to be one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

3. And that which does very much move me hereto is, because your converse has
been much in, and about the Counties of Devon. Summerset, and Wilts. where the
Trade of Clothing is very much used, and therefore it may in all reason be
deemed, that your Honors knowledge of (and acquaintance with) Clothiers and
their Employments is more than ordinary.

Sir the great Ambition I have to manifest my Loyalty to the King, and my zeal
to serve the Country, puts me upon these endeavors, to discover not only the
advantages by our Manufactures, and the disadvantages to the Kingdom by the
cessation thereof, but also the great Frauds and Abuses in the Out-Ports by the
Custome-Officers, which when reduced and brought into a better Method, by those
chief Officers that are concerned therein, I hope it may prove a good Balsome
to heal our wounds, and a Cordial to our drooping spirits.

It is well known that the improvement of our Manufactures in this Nation has
a communicative influence upon thousands of young and old people; yea ma^^^
that are now idle and loose people, have been more numerously employed
formerly, than now they are, by reason of the decay of Trade, which if it
should thus continue, or grow worse, might be a great means to depopulate the
Nation, and to draw great burdens upon many Parishes for the maintenance of
their Poor, but if not timely prevented, will cause the Trade to be driven by
Forreigner, and so exceedingly cause an abatement of Rents among us.

Sir, your public Employment, your generous and Courteous Deportment, give me
confidence to Dedicate these Rude and Unpolisht lines to your view, because I
know, you have Ability to judge, and Charity to pardon the Errata's that you
may find therein.

When I did first set Pen to Paper about this matter, I found my self in a
Labyrinth, and there might have suffered, had not my Education as a Clothier
given me a glimmering light to extricate my self. And yet when I had purchased
my Enlargement, by my strict enquiery into those Mysteries, I had a great
dispute with my self, whether I should put my Abortive thoughts into Print or
no, but more respecting the common good, than my private Reputation, I resolved
rather to make my wishes public, than to bury them in Oblivion.

Now Sir, it is not only a pleasant study for Statesmen to promote the Public
good, but the only way to true and lasting Honor, and Happiness; and that
these poor Endeavors of mine may attain that good effect to the King and
Country, as I really design; (aiming at no other, I earnestly beg of God to
direct you for the Improvement of them, in your public employments, which may
(like the (...) Heaven) break open the Springs of Trade ^^^ary and thirsty
Land, to revive and refresh the same, and by so doing, Sir, you will not only
do eminent service to the King, great kindness to your Country, but also
oblige all people to pray for your happiness both in this world, and that which
is to come, for the which also most earnestly prates,

Your Honors most humble, and most devoted Servant, JOSEPH TREVERS.

To his Honored Friend, Cap. Joseph Travers, on his Book Entitled
An Essay to the Restoring of our decayed Trade.
IF I a Poet were, I Would undertake,
To write some Verses for the Authors sake.
And give him commendation for his pains
For I believe, no more will be his gains.
For such men as do mind the public good
Their merits are but slightly understood
Yet unto lasting age their fame shall bud.
The Author of this Book who took the care
Exactly to observe the great affair
Of this our Kingdom, which consists in Trade,
Of Clothes and Stuffes which of our Wool are made,
Has here the profit clearly shown to us,
And what advantage yearly comes thus
If we were wise to be industrious.
Together with the mischiess that do come
On the whole Kingdom by neglect of some,
And treachery of others which is worse,
(A heavier and more Prodigious curse
Cannot well lighten on the English Nation)
To send away our Wool by Transportation,
This if not cured will bring to desolation.
As much as in them lies for selfish ends
Such bring destruction to their best friends,
First to the Sovereign Majesty of the King,
Then to the Commonwealth, for this does bring
The Nation to be exceeding poor
And many Clothiers forced to give ore
Their Trading, and follow it no more.
But now I hope for better things to come
By the removal and displaceing some
Of those that were in trust, and put in such
As are upright, and will not comply with Dutch,
Nor any Foreign Nation to invade
The Ancient Privileges of our Trade
The want hereof makes England greatly fade.
R. B.

Go little Book into the world and see
Who thou can find therein to welcome thee,
I Am sure thou mean as well to every man
Of all degrees and sorts as any can:
From King to meanest, thou do wish them well
And therefore this thy Book does truly tell
Of wrongs and of Abuses done to all.
Then let them in whose compass it may fall
Soon rectify the same, and bring on Trade
A fresh, this is the end this Book was made.
Incerti Authoris*
AN ESSAY To the Restoring of our decayed TRADE.
THat I may proceed in as good an Order as I can, (although I cannot pretend to
Learning, or Ability to Compose a Book in a Methodical way,) but do wish that
such a task as this, had been undertaken by some other, that might have been
able abundantly better to have managed it, to satisfaction of the Reader; Yet
by reason of my former employment, in the Trade of a Cloathier, and afterward
in the Office of Surveyor of one of the Ports of this Kingdom, at the
Custom-House, I am experimentally enabled to speak to those things, which shall
follow.

And if there fall not out such an Harmonious Order, in the ensuing Discourse,
by the necessary connection, or orderly introduction of one thing to another,
as might be expected, (as before in my Epistle so again,) I do humbly beg the
best and most favorable construction, and censure of the matter; for having in
my breast, the true heart, and Spirit of an Englishman, for his King and
Country; I cannot bear with those daily abuses, and evil practices, so
frequently and notoriously put upon the King and Kingdom, but that I do reckon
my self Obliged, in all duty and good conscience to my King and Country, to
make them as publicly known and manifest as I can, and then leave the
Remedies, to be provided and answerably applied, by the Ministers of State,
which I hope in a short time will be effected.

And here I shall endeavor, First, to make it to appear, that there is no
Nation nor Kingdom in the World, that has those advantages, whereby to enrich
themselves, as this our Kingdom of England, by the Manufacture of our Wool,
and consequently to maintain our strength, and The Advantage by the Manufacture
of Wool.
Honor; omitting to speak of many other staple Commodities, of this our
Kingdom, though many Rich and Profitable, because I am intended to Treat
principally about the Subject of Wool, and the Manufactures thereof, with the
dependancies thereupon.

Now that such advantages as might accrue to the Kingdom are not laid hold on,
and the Commodities improoved to what it might be, is too too evident to all
men, that have Wool not improoved
any feeling of the case, or that do make any inspection into it; which may
also be sufficiently confirmed to all others, by the sad complaints, and
frequent moanes, that are daily made concerning the miserable decay of Trade,
to the great loss of many particular men, and to the King, and Nation in
General, and principally in the Trade of Clothing.

But if the Wool of England, and Ireland were improoved to the best
advantages, and secured from exportation to Foreigners, doubtless England
would be the General Market for the whole Universe, for matter of Clothing,
and what would soon be the Riches, greatness, and Splendour thereof, ( by the
Almighties blessing) is not a thing very difficult to be imagined, by any sober
judicious Person, Merchant, or Traveller.

And that no Nation has such good Wool, for the general No Wool so good as
English.
Trade of Clothing is evident, elce what makes so many Foreigners of other
Nations, so greedy of our English Wool, if they had as good, or near as good
of their own, and how highly was it formerly esteemed, by the Dukes of
Burgundy, and what benefit and advantage did that People under his government
make of it; when they paid but sixpence the pound for our English Wool, they
returned it to us in Cloth at Ten shillings the Yard; by which may very easily
be computed, what profit did redound to that people, in the working up the
Wool, which thing occasioned many English Families, to transport themselves
into those parts, for their profitable livelihood and subsistence.

But after the Victorious Conquest, made by Edward the Clothing set up in
England.
third, of Famous Memory, he caused to be ordered and set up the Manufactures
of Wool in this Kingdom, to the great increase of the Riches of his own
People; the memory of whom, for his provident care for the welfare of his
People; is worthy to be perpetuated to all succeeding Generations.

And what now a days makes Holland, and France, so covetous of our Wool and
what large quantities by sinister Foreigners do covet our Wool.
means, do they procure to serve themselves, and their Countries; and what
Riches do they acquire to themselves thereby, may in some measure be guessed
at, for by having our good English Wool, they can mix their own course Wool
with it, and so make good Cloth, or Stuffes, which otherwise they could not do.

To instance perticulerly in the French, it is taken for granted, and
sufficiently known, that their Wool is very course, and of it self fit for
little, but to make a sort of Cloth which is worn by Seamen, and Fishermen,
etc. But by the help of our good Wool; they make very good work, and send to
other parts of the World their druggets, etc.

And by having our good English Wool, they can spend two or three Packs of
their own Wool, mixing it with ours, Much French Wool wrought up by mixing
with ours.
by which means they make their Cloth and Stuffes pass very acceptably, both
among themselves, and other Nations: Yea we our selves in England not being so
wise, as we should be, for our own advantage, do buy the French druggets, etc.
Made of our Wool, mixed with theirs, and give great Prices for them too; when
we do, or at least may make better of our own.

The care then being taken for granted, that English Wool is the best, and
most fit for Clothing, Stuffes, Stockins, etc.

How necessary may it be rationally supposed then, for our own People to be
imployd in the working up our own Wool, and how many thousands would be
employed of the Poorer sort of people, about such work, who might thereby, Poor
to be Employed.
gain to themselves a very comfortable living, and free the Kingdom from those
great burdens in maintenance of the Poor; they being able by their Labor, ( if
Employed) comfortably to provide for themselves; for it is not the numerous
multitude of people in a Kingdom, or Common Wealth, that makes it to be Poor,
that they cannot live one by another, but the contrary, if all were employed,
and set at work, as there is employment enough to be had, they would prove the
especial means, to make a Kingdom Rich; as may be clearly instanced by the
Dutch, how many scores of thousands of their Poor people are employed about the
Herring Fishing, which makes them very Rich, and brings in yearly, near two
Millions of Money, or other commodities necessary for the Land, which are
equivalent to Money, besides what they spend in the Land; this may seem to some
to be a thing incredible, but I am able to make it clear to any intelligent
Person.

Thus then by the neglect of our own Manufactures of our Wool, flows in like
an inundation, the poverty of the Land; and hence arise those sad complaints,
that fill every Poverty for want of Employ.
man's Ears, throughout the Kingdom, Alas! What shall we do to live, we have no
Employment; for if the Trade of the world abroad, for Cloth and Stuffes, etc.
Be supplied from other Lands, which make their Cloth and Stuffes of our
English Wool, being Clandestinely Transported into Foreign parts; our English
Trade for that commodity, must answerably decay; and if the English Merchant
has not vent for that commodity abroad, to other Nations, the Country
Cloathier must strike off in a great measure, and consequently many of the Poor
work folks, are answerably taken off from their employments, which formerly
for many years, they had been exercised in, and so having no work, they get no
Money, and so are reduced to a begging condition, or worse: these things are to
be discerned clearly, without the help of a Perspective-Glass, by those that
are in any measure intelligent in Politic affairs.

Thus the profit of the Poor, that they should get to themselves for a
maintenance is lost, and the profit gotten by their labor to the Kingdom is
also lost, in the General, Profit lost.
and this is brought to pass by the quicksightedness, and diligence of our
Neighbor Nations; who finding daily the sweetness of the Trade, and so
exceedingly enriching themselves, by our commodity, Viz. Wool; do endeavor
more and more, to carry it on to their own advantage, whiles we in England, in
the mean time neglect our own opportunities, and advantages, which do so
clearly lie before us.

From what has been before hinted, does necessarily Loss to the Kingdom.
follow the vast damage, and prejudice done to this our own Nation, and
Kingdom, by the exportation of our Wool; for the damage does evidently
appear, thus.

Had not the French our English Wool to work withal, they could not work up
their own Wool, into any Manufactures that should be acceptable, or saleable
in other Countries, no nor in their own Land, but they would be ready as
formerly to buy our English commodities; but now having our English Wool so
frequently among them, privately gotten from England, or Ireland; they mix
their own Wool with it, and work up two or three Packs of their course Wool,
with one pack of ours, so that every Pack of English Wool exported from us,
and carried to France is treble loss, if not more to England, and on the
contrary so much profit to France.

Thus then any man may perceive, how Rich other Countries grow by our means, by
obtaining our commodity Other Countries grow Rich.
to work upon, and there People also do generally live at a lower rate, and
work cheaper by the day or otherwise, than our People in England do, by which
means they may afford to under-sel us, as usually they do at a Foreign
Undersel us.
Market, so that hereby they do acquire to themselves, both good credit, as
well as great profit: and this Originally as aforesaid is by our commodity;
which if it was carefully looked after, by the Officers of the Customs, in the
outports chiefly; there might be speedily, a good stop put to this their Trade,
for if they got not our wool from England, Custom Officers unfaithful.
or Ireland; they could not go on with this their Trade of Cloth and Stuffes,
but the great negligence, or unfaithfullness of some Officers, belonging to the
Customs, is the Principal occasion, of the exportation of our wool into
Foreign parts, and consequently of the loss of the Trade of the Nation, in so
great a measure, in this particular; from whence follows clearly, and
undeniably, the poverty of the Kingdom in general.

For one Trade depends upon another, as it is in the body natural, so it is in
the body politic, in the body natural, one member depends upon another, and
is serviceable to the other, by a natural Harmony and Correspondence, even so
does one Trade, or occupation closely, and necessrily depend upon another, here
in England, and such a connection there is in this point, that if one chief
Trade fail, very many also do fall with it, more or less, according to their
proximity, or remotenes from it, in their dependence, and this may be applied
chiefly, and principally to the Trade Clothing Trade Failing.
of Clothing, and the Manufacture of wool in other respects; how many several
Trades are there, that must of necessity depend on the Clothing Trade, as
Card-makers, Many other Trades fail also.
Spinners, Weavers, Fullers, Dyers, Cloath-workers, Packers, and those Trades
which make Tools, and instruments for these; are not also the Farmers at work,
in the mean time, to provide bread for all these People, and their Families,
and breeding up his Oxen, Sheep, Hogs, etc. That they may have Meat to eat,
are not the Merchants and Seamen, employed in a great measure by this Trade,
and these last mentioned ( the Seamen) are the men, who principally, and
chiefly bring in the wealth of the Nation: the Gentry of the Land, and all
sorts of Shopkeepers, are the receivers of this profit, which the Seamen by
their adventures, and industry do bring into the Nation; all sorts of Lawyers,
Physicians, and Clergymen, are receivers, and get their Money by their
Tongues, while the Adventurous Merchant, and undaunted Mariner, carries on the
Trade of the Nation, exporting our native staple commodities* ( of the which
through Gods abundant goodness,) this Land of ours is so well stored, in
several perticulers, as might be instanced in Tin, Lead, Cloth, Stuffes,
Stockins, Herrings, of which might be an hundred times as many if looked after,
and Sale enough for them too, at Foreign Markets: but the Dutch run away with
the profit of these goods, making two Barrels for our one; Pilchards are a very
good commodity, of which we do get good store in the West Country, and they do
bring in good profit to the Nation, either in Gold or Silver, or such
commodities, as the Kingdom stands in need off.

By what has been said, it plainly appears how from the highest to the lowest,
there is a necessary dependence of one employment upon another, and the falling
off from one general Trade, occasions the ruin of many inferior Tradesmen, who
had subsistence for themselves, and Families thereby; and this in our Kingdom
of England, is seated principally, and chiefly, in the Trade of Clothing, and
the Manufacture of Wool.

So that upon the failing of this Trade, of which there is too great a
cessation and decay, in many parts of this Kingdom, there comes in inevitably
such a general loss, to the whole Nation, for first and most principally the
King loses hereby, and that extremely, not only because his The King Loses.
Subjects are not set at work, and so are unabled to live comfortably, and to
pay such Taxes, and impositions, as are requisite for his Majesty's support,
and defense against his powerful Enemies.

Nor in that the Honor, and splendour of the Kingdom, is hereby so much advanced
and promoted, as it might be, but also because his Majesty loses so great a
revenue, which would accrue to him in his Customs, if the Clothing Trade was
carried on with Vigor, so that the effectual carrying on, or desisting from the
Clothing Trade, is of very high Concernment, and Importance to the King; in
profit or loss, and so it runs through the meaner sort of People also, as has
already in part been spoken to.

For what Customs come in Yearly to his Majesty concerning The Kings Custom^s.
the Manufactures of Wool, in its several, and particular sorts, of the Old
and New Drapery, in all the Varieties of Stuffes, made now a days, and
Stockins, by being Transported to Foreign parts, and what store of Money, and
other goods, ( equivalent to Money) being necessary commodities for the
Kingdom, do they bring in again, for our Cloth, Stuffs, etc. so sold or
bartered; and what Customs again do all those imported goods bring into His
Majesty's Coffers, may not be difficult to be computed, besides the employment
of so many Ships and Seamen, and training up young Seamen, than which nothing
in this age of ours, is more necessary to be taken care about; for there is ( I
believe) the greatest want of this sort of men in the Kingdom, for although
there may be enough found in the Kingdom, to Man His Majesty's Royal Navy, and
it may be some to spare, yet it is believed there are not near enough for His
Majesty's Service, and for Merchants service too, which may many times be
carried on both together, as occasion may require;

And if we do but look back a little, to a few Generations past, we may soon
find what high Advantages have accrued to His Majesty in His Customs; and to
the Kingdom in general, by the Clothing trade, being lively managed by the The
Companies of Merchants.
Merchants, and what worthy and noble Companies of Merchants, have been
Associated and Incorporated; whose Trading has for the most part, consisted in
Woollen clothes, as in the Merchant Adventurers Trading to the East-lands, and
in what esteem their Agents and Factors were in Foreign parts, and how Rich
and great their Stock and Treasure has been, in so much that they have been
able to lend a very considerable supply and assistance to the King or Queen
upon any Occasion; and Particularly and Eminently ( may it be spoken to their
Honor) their Assistance of Queen Elizabeth of most happy Memory, in the year
Eighty Eight; and since upon any Occasion of the like nature.

Neither is here to be omitted that company which is called the East-land
Company, whose principal Trading also consists East land Company.
in the same commodity of Woollen-Cloaths, by which they do furnish all those
Eastern Countries about the Baltick-Sea, and to Russia, by which means also our
discoveries of those Northern parts of the World, have bin made very Evident,
and well known to Us, to the great Advancement of our Navigation to the
Northward, as far as Green Land; and of late years has given occasion of that
Discovery about Hudson's Bay, commonly now called the Northwest Passage, made
by that stout and adventurous Seaman, Captain Zachariah Gillam.

But the main and chief Trades of all, are the Turkey and Turkey Company.
East India Trades, and the Riches by those Companies procured, chiefly by
Woollen-cloaths, So highly Advantageous to the King in His Customs, to the
Companies in particular, and to the whole Kingdom in the general, as is not a
thing easily to be known or computed.

How the Turkey Company in particular by their discreet management of the Trade
in those parts, with that commodity of Woollen-cloaths chiefly, do bring into
England, all the rich Goods from all parts of the Streights, and how the
East India Company, by their Trade in the same commodity, East India Company.
( in a great measure) do purchase the Rich commodities of India, Persia,
China, and the South-seas, with the Odoriferous Drugs of Arabia, and all such
Goods as those countries afford for necessary Use and Delight, although of late
years the Dutch have wrought us out of a great part of the South Sea Trade, of
which more might be largely The Dutch have spoiled our trade in the South seas.
spoken concerning their usage of our Englishmen in those parts; but that it
has bin already sufficiently laid out in Print, to the view of the English
Nation.

And to add a little to what was before intimated, what excellent Good ships
built yearly.
Ships are annually built and prepared for the services of these two Honorable
Companies, whose employment as aforesaid, is principally for the Exportation of
our Woollencloaths, and if we do look back but to thirty years past, four or
five Ships of the Turk's men of War durst not adventure upon one of our Smirna
Ships, and also how worthy is it of Consideration, to take notice how many of
our best Seamen, Seamen bred up.
and Artists are bred up in those employments by the two last worthy Companies
Employment; So that besides what Revenue is brought to the King in his Customs,
by these great Sea-Trades of these worthy Companies mentioned, both for the
Exportation of their clothes, etc. and the Importation of all manner of Goods,
by this Stock so purchased abroad in Foreign parts, our Merchants are grown
mavelous Merchants grow rich.
Rich, in so much that they are able upon any necessary Occasion that His
Majesty has for Money, to furnish him at Can lend the King money.
a weeks warning; and that which is worthy the noting also, our Seamen are
grown of late years to be the most famous in the world, to the great glory,
honor, and safety of His Majesty and the Kingdom, and all this is evident by
what has bin said, to arise chiefly ( next to the blessing of Heaven) from the
Manufacture of our Wool in England, by our own people, which how much it ought
to be encouraged, and of what high concernment it is to the Honor, Wealth, and
Security of the Kingdom, let the Sober and Judicious consider,

And if I should adventure to give my opinion freely, touching the matter in
hand, I am very much induced to believe, that were it not for the
Cloathing-trade ( which imploys so many Ships and Men into several other
Countries, and for the value of our Clothes bring their Goods, by which means
the poor also are set on work) that a great part of the Traffic and Commerce
of the world would fail; and this Trade as formerly intimated, is, and may be
most readily, roundly, and advantagiously driven in England; were we but so
pollitique and carefully, as to keep our Wool to our selves and within the
King's Dominions of England and Ireland, and to set the people closly to their
work again.

And before I do leave the Argument I have engaged in, let there be considered
the good quantities of Cloth and Stuffs English Cloth and Stuffs serve all
the world.
that did go over continually to Holland and Flanders, and by them there
dispersed otherways; the large quantities of Stuffs and Bays that are sent over
to Portugal, and thence Transported to Brazilia, etc, with a very considerable
number of Clothes and Stuffs that go to Spain, and by the Spaniards Transported
to the West Indies all over, the good quantities of Perpetuanies, and such like
Stuffs that are carried out for Guinea, together of late days, with the large
stores of Broad-cloaths, Kersies, Sarges Cottons, Pennistons, Duffels ( or
Hogs) Transported to our own Plantations of New England and Virginia, with what
also must supply Barbados, Jamaica, and our other Islands in the West Indies,
and foreign Plantations; all which are the manufacture of Wool.

Clothing more worth to England.
The Premises considered, I hope I may make bold to say, that setting aside all
the rest of the Rich and Staple commodities of England, which nevertheless are
as good as any Country can parrallel in the world, as Tinn, Lead, Iron, etc.
this very commodity produced from our Wool, is of than the commodity of any
Country whatsoever.
more worth and value to England, (that is to say) will bring in more profit to
the Kingdom of England, than all the Silks or rich commodities of any Country
whatsoever; Yea doubtless more than all the Spices of the South-Seas, yea, I do
believe, and I have reason enough to lead me so to do, than all the Spaniards
Gold and Silver Mines in America; for none of these I am thoroughly persuaded,
can any way equallize that yearly Revenue, that does, or may come into the
Kingdom of England by this one commodity diversely made up of our Wool.

Neither does any Nation in the world get so much by any of their Goods, as
England does by this, to the great enriching and advancement of the Merchant,
and the Companies Stocks, trading and adventuring in these goods to Sea,
Increase of Seamen
the enriching of His Majesty, the increase of our strength in Shipping, and
consequently the breeding and training up of Seamen, and increase of them,
wherein as before intimated, a great part of the welfare and safety of the
Kingdom does consist in these our days: and the encouragement of whom is of
great concernment to the Kingdom, as the case now stands with England and her
neighboring Nations; or as the case may hereafter fall out to be; for our Land
is an Island, as is known well enough, not only to its Inhabitants, but to all
Europe, and we have not, nor cannot have Castles and Garrisons round about the
whole kingdom by the Seaside to beat off a foreign Enemy, and to keep him
from landing and invading our Nation; for in fair weather in Summer The King's
care. for the Security of the Nation.
time, there may be landing in hundreds of places about the Kingdom, where
there is neither Town nor Castle near; but such is His Majesty's great prudence
and care for the safety of his Land and People, that he does highly esteem and
promote the affairs of Shipping, more than ever any of his Royal Predecessors
have done, well knowing that his Ships and Seamen are the strength and security
( next to the protection of the Almighty) of his whole kingdom.

I shall now endeavor to give some particular account, but very briefly, of the
Profits arising to England, by working up our Wool into Cloth: every two
pounds of Wool which is worth about twenty pence, will make a yard of Karsey,
worth five or six shillings; and every four pounds of Wool, worth about three
shillings four pence, will make a yard of broad-cloth, worth eleven or twelve
shillings: so Profit by working up wool.
that two thirds, is the least profit, that does arise by putting our Wool into
Manufactures; which does amount to above 230 pounds sterling profit, in every
Tun of Wool so wrought up, accounting twenty hundred English wait to the Tun;
so that if we should suppose, but an hundred Tuns of Wool transported, out of
the Kingdom, in a year to France unwrought, it will amount to 22400ll.
sterling, which is so much clear loss to the Kingdom, and trebble so much
profit to France, by their working up three times so much of their own, with
ours, as has been formerly intimated: besides, it is worthy of consideration,
that so many of our poor lie Poor idle.
idle, and lose their employment, being ready to perish for want of necessary
food, notwithstanding the great plenty in the Land; and no Kingdom has the
like advantages, for the employment of the poor, in any Trade or occupation
(within doors) whatsoever, as we have for the poor in his Majesty's dominion of
England, about the old and new Drapery: and yet those poor, that had their
hands full of work, in one kind or another, according to what they were most
accustomed, either by sorting of wool, mixing, breaking, carding, spinning,
spoling, quilling, weaving, making of cards, picking of ^esels, and many other
employments, concerning the working up wool into cloth, which have kept many
thousands of men women and children at work, who knew not how to get a penny
another way; but by this way Poor get Money if Employed.
of working, could in some comfortable manner live. When the trade of clothing
was driven roundly, one family, that does not get twelve pence a week now, have
then received twelve, fifteen or eighteen shillings a week, which money went
round to the Farmer for provision, or to the Shopkeeper for necessaries for
their Families, and this again to the Merchant, or to the Landlords, according
to each man's Trade, and correspondence.

So that the profit arising, by the working up of our Wool into cloth or
Stuffs here in England, by our own people is almost unspeakable, and is the
great and chief wheel in the Kingdom, to set all others at work, as has been
already in several Trades mentioned, and more do attend upon it, when it is
made into cloth, as the Clothworkers, Drawers, Dyers, Fullers, Packers,
Merchants and Seamen.

But then to enter into the consideration of the contrary, what an unspeakable
loss is it to the Kingdom, to have such Exporting Wool.
a Trade fall to decay, and so many thousands of poor must of necessity be
multiplied in the Land, which must beg, steal or starve, for want of
employment. But what think you if three or four hundred Tuns of Wool in a year
be exported out of the Kingdom (for so I have been informed) what a stroke
does that give to the beating down of our Trade in England, and what a vast
loss comes thereby to the Kingdom; and Fall of Rents.
may we not justly be induced to believe, that the decay of our Trade in this
respect, does occasion the fall of the rents of Lands in the Country, and
houses in the City of London and else where; fo that the Nobility, and Gentry
of the Kingdom, have a sensible feeling of the decay of this Trade of
clothing, for all that the poor do get for their labor about The poors labor
profit to the Nation.
this Employment, goes from them again to others, as has been already
intimated, and so the money goes round according to its figure, and passes
from one to another, according as one trade has dependence upon another.

It may not be here unseasonable, to insert a word or two, concerning our
Fullers Earth, for cloth cannot be perfectly finished without our Fullers
Earth, to scour and cleanse the fine Fullers Earth carried out of the Land.
clothes, that are milled with Castle soap, and all other midling cloths that
are fulled with Soap; so that none but course clothes that are milled with
Medicine can be well done, without the assistance of our Fullers earth, except
at a greater charge, neither is there any other Country, besides our King's
Dominions, that have any Fullers Earth like ours in England; and it is so
reported, that the Dutch have gotten enough of it into Into Holland.
Holland to serve them for many years to come, which was certainly transported
out of the River of Medway, (alias Chatham) for we have none in England, but
what is about Maidstone, on the said River of Medway, that ever I could hear
of, except at Wooburn in Bedfordshire, which is an Inlandtown, and many Miles
from the Sea; yet I have been a diligent inquirer into this matter: so that if
the Transportation of this commodity, into Foreign Countries, was carefully
looked after, it could not possibly be carried out of the Land, without a
discovery of it, especially from the River of Medway aforesaid, so that
foreigners must of necessity be at the greater charge, in finishing their
clothes, which could not be done, without the help of our Fullers Earth. Now
that there is a prohibition of Exportation of our Fullers Earth, to Foreign
parts, is well enough known to the Officers of the Custom house, but it is not
looked after as it should be, for either some of them are negligent, not
regarding their duties, and behaving themselves with that vigilance and
circumspection, as such places of Trust do necessarily call for at their hands;
or else they wink at such miscarriages, and suffer our Fullers Earth to be
carried away, as the like is commonly done concerning our Wool.

And although most part of our Laws are binding enough with severe Penalties
annexed to them, if they were but duly observed and well put into Execution,
yet not one of ten thousand does know the Laws of Prohibition throughout the
Kingdom, and how to put them into Execution; and although Wool carry^d to
France. etc.
many people do certainly know that Fullers Earth is certainly carried out of
the River of Medway, (alias Chathan,) and our Wool commonly shipped off from
Dover-Cliffs by night, from Rumney-Marsh, the Isle of Wight, Purbeck, and about
Waymouth, and in several other parts of England; and too much from Southhamton:
under the pretense of an Allowance by the Law, for the supply of Jarsey; Yet no
body does, or dares to prosecute the Offenders for the breach of our good and
wholesome Laws, because the very principles of Nature in every man, teach
himself Preservation, and he that minds but that, is afraid to meddle with
these offenders who are commonly Rich men, and strengthened both with Money and
Friends in the Counties where they dwell; so that every man that is willing to
preserve himself, his Estate and Family, is afraid of appearing against these
Transgressors in the behalf of the King, though it be never so much conducible
to the good and welfare of the whole Kingdom; for fear they should be dealt
withal as I have been.

And while I am speaking about the negligence and unfaithfulness of the
Officers of the Customs; give me leave in two or three words for a Digression
concerning the importation of Foreign prohibited Commodities, to the utter
ruin of many poor Tradesmen, with their Families in this our Kingdom; as
Ribbon Weavers, and Silk weavers, and other such Tradesmen undone.
like Artificers in and about London, and several other parts of the Kingdom,
that they are so miserably Impoverished that they are ready to perish for want
of necessary food, to keep life and soul together; (as our English Proverb is)
notwithstanding the great plenty of all sorts of Provision in the Nation,
(through the goodness and bounty of God to us.)

But all these errors, and miscarriages, might and may easily be prevented by
the care and vigilance of the Custom Officers, especially in the out-Ports:
But some Officers finding a particular, and present profit, by being invested
with a Golden Livery, do rather choose that, than to do their King and Country
faithful service, although it be also running the hazard of losing their
present Employment, and future Preferment; for things of this Nature, are now
grown to that height of perfidiousness, and confidence, (I might say Smugglers
prosecute honest men.
Impudence) that two or three golden Decoys are sufficient to entrap an
inclining Surveyor, and if there should chance to be a discovery, or a
surprisal, there shall be all present help at hand, if need require, for the
carrying off the matter smoothly, and Witnesses in any case shall not be
wanting, to That discover them.
counterfeit Truth and Justice, when it is directly contrary; by which
malicious, and unnatural courses, those that would be just and honest in their
places and Offices, are disheartened, through the lewd and deceitful practices,
of these Catterpillars; who by such indirect Courses are disobedient to the
Laws, and the Smugglers that employ them, do multiply great troubles, upon
such as at any time discover these Offenders, yea and do violently prosecute
them at the Law, to make them Examples and terrors to others, that so they
might drive on their cheating trade without control; and yet such honest
well-minded men do nothing but their duty, but for that they have this odium
cast upon them, they are called Informing Knaves, etc. notwithstanding the
welfare of the whole Kingdom, does in a great measure depend upon the
discovery of such abuses.

How much necessary may it then be supposed that there should be very good
encouragement given to such honest public spirited men, as should diligently
enquire after such sinister practices: and as it was before touched, those
Smuglers are not only well acquainted with some Attorneys and Smugglers are
befriended
Clerks, who will either use undue practices, or make dela^es; but they make
good interest with the Under-Sheriffs, in the Countyes where they drive their
Trade; and then these Undersheriffs also have strange tricks and delays in
their returns, in which some of them will take part with the Offenders, instead
of executing the Law against them, so that such Offenders are encouraged; and
by this means it is, that our Wool and Fullers Earth, and other prohibited
Goods, are exported so frequently out of the Kingdom, and Foreign prohibited
Goods, and Merchandise imported; so that our Manufacture is in a great measure
gone to decay: other Countries are greatly enriched, who also live at a lower
rate, and work cheaper than our People in England, whereby our Trade is much
taken off in Foreign parts, and our poor live idle, with the other
inconveniences consequent thereto, as has been already spoken to.

By this means it is, ( in good part) that so much of the Treasure is exhausted.
Treasure of the Kingdom is exhausted and drawn away to other Lands; the
general complaint now, being what shall we do, there is no Money stirring; and
Lands are reduced to a lower value than formerly they were.

Now, though all these Mischeifes do not flow in at one time and place, yet it
is like a Pond that is soon filled with many Springs, when as one Spring would
do it in length of time: that which may seem to be at first but a small Evil,
will in process of time with constant Practice, destroy the happiness of the
whole Kingdom; as a little Leak if not taken notice of and amended, will in
time sink the greatest Unfaithful Officers.
Ship or empty the greatest Cistern: even so will Offenders and unfaithful
Officers, being the only persons in trust with those affairs, fill the Kingdom
with Foreign prohibited goods and commodities, and empty it of our Wool and
Fullers Earth, with other prohibited goods; which evil Practices are now so
frequent, that if not timely prevented by our Ministers of State, our Kingdom
will be soon filled with Poverty, and emptied of Wealth and Happiness, by this
loss of our Trade and Manufacture, which now is in so great danger of sinking,
( and that without all hope) unless those that guide the Helm, do steer the
great Concernments thereof into some secure Harbor, and there amend what may by
searching be found amiss, by displacing such Officers as have proved in the
least unjust either by conniving at the Offenders or abetting and assisting
them, to the great discouragement of those that are faithful in their
Employments; and that care also be taken that all due encouragement and
countenance be showed to such as are found to be just, faithful, and exact
observers of the Laws that are extant against such Smugglers and abusive
persons.

And without doubt, there is much Wool Shipped off from Ireland annually, unto
foreign parts; which might be Wool out of Ireland
as well wrought up in the country among themselves, there being no want of
people, and such as for the most part live a lazy kind of life, (as I have
credibly been informed) or elce their Wool (if they work it not up) might soon
be transported over into England in twenty four hours time, or thereabout with
a fair wind, and be wrought up in England, which would turn to a treble account
of profit, as has been already demonstrated; but this I shall refer to others,
that are more knowing in the Irish trade; but I am very apt to believe the
reports that I have heard, concerning great quantities of Wool carried from
thence, both to France and Holland; but to lay aside the informations of
others, although very well worthy of belief in all points, I shall according to
my promise, in my Epistle, speak to those things of which I have had some large
experience.

I was a Clothier my self, and Apprentice to the Trade, many years, and
afterward set up for my self, and followed my Trade many years, thriving very
well thereby, till about nineteen years ago, that I was burnt out of all, and
put upon the adventures of fortune; and taking notice of the occurrances of
affairs, I did find large testimonies of the decay of Trade, with the occasions
thereof, but while I did keep the Trade going, I have rode far and near, to get
Spinsters, and other work folks, and gave great Wages, as also did all other
Clothiers, and yet could not procure half so many as we would have employed:
but suddenly after our disorders, and disregard to our Laws as aforesaid, the
Market fell, and many Clothiers were forced to leave off their Trades, because
Clothiers leave off.
they could not vend their commodity.

All those poor people formerly so employed, were ready to starve for want of
bread, in and about those places, where the Clothiers left off and failed; and
every day it grew worse and worse, and those confusions among us increased more
and more, that very few men were of one mind, and hardly any at all, that
minded the public good: but now some thoughts are busied of restoring things
to their Luster, and trade to what it was before the decay.

Some wise men have been of the opinion, that the abating the interest of
money, would greatly increase and advance trade, and very probable it might be
a good lift to it.

Others again, being out of hopes of the recovery of the former trade, think
men must employ their wits, and knowledge, in the invention of some new sorts
of Manufacture; and some covetous wretches, have been very ready to declare
their opinion, that the increase of the interest of money, and the abatement of
Servants and Workmens wages; to which, adding great frugality, and good
husbandry, would make the Kingdom to be happy, and flourishing again; and many
there are, that make it their business and study, to outwit and destroy other
men, and under pretense of honesty, and many by clandestine means, swallow up
the good and pious gifts, of our Ancestors, belonging to the Church and to the
Poor; for in this our Iron age, men have left off to do good, and loft their
obedience to the Laws of the Land, and have ceased from the exercise of those
two unspeakable graces, Faith and Charity.

And therefore truly I fear we have little hopes of happiness, or being
restored to our Pristine flourishing condition, Kingdom flourished under King
Charles the first.
till we do return to our old obedience, and exercise our selves in love and
good works, fearing God and honoring the King, and not giving our minds to
change, but let every one endeavor to amend one, and strike off from the error
of his own ways, and endeavor his utmost to discharge a good conscience,
first to God, and then to mind the pulique good, calling to mind the happy
condition of Trade in the Reign of King Charles the first of blessed memory,
when all men dreaded his Laws, and lived in love one with another, which made
the Kingdom flourish, in our trading with great success, and increase of
Riches; and indeed we enjoyed so much happiness as made us proud, and forgetful
of God's mercies, and so murdered the best King in the world, by which we
stripped our selves of all but Gods just judgments upon the Nation, and left our
selves certain of nothing but of uncertainties.

I find by our good Laws, that great care was* taken about Wool, and all
other prohibited commodities; as first in the Reign of King Edward the Third,
Cap. 1. then wool was wholly prohibited to be exported, which was the first
beginning of the promotion of making Cloth in England, but it seems the Nation
at first could not work up all the Wool, that was of our own growth, till the
Trade was dispersed throughout the whole Kingdom, and people instructed in the
Art. So that an Act of Parliament was made for the transportation of Wool into
other Countries, to a Staple appointed, at first at Callis, paying their due
Custom first in England; so that those which had our Wool in those days
Staples appointed.
paid well for it: another Statute was made to this purpose, that if any
Forreigner would have any of our Wool out of England, and found none at the
Staple, he was to bring to the King's Mint, an Ounce of Gold, as a d^ty for
every sack of Wool; and many other good Laws I find forth prevention of
Abuses concerning Wool and Cloth; and for the prevention of the
Transportation of Wool, but what did first pay the King's duty in England; and
was to the intent that our People might afford their Clothes so, as to undersel
Strangers; And several Staples were appointed in England where Wool was to be
sold and bought, and not elsewhere; and none to be carried or lodged near to
the Waterside, nor bought nor bargained, but by Cloatheirs and such as wrought
it up, or by Merchants and their Factors under several Penalties: Many good
Laws made.
Many other good Laws have been made since the time of King Edward, for the
keeping our Wool and Fullers-earth in England, to employ our own poor People,
and advance the Manufacture of the old and new Drapery, so happily set on foot
by the prudence and diligence of that King, and then there was Obedience from
all persons rendered to the good Laws of the Land; which good Laws have been
Successively ever since continued, by almost every Parliament, with such
Additions or Exemplifications as were found to be necessary, for the
prohibition of the Exportation of Wool and Fullers-earth; by which means we
both got, and kept the whole Manufacture of our own Wool, and a good part of
other Countries among our selves in this Kingdom, till the time of our late
unhappy Confusions.

And if the Book called the Golden Fleece, with some of Sir Walter Rawleigh's
Works, which do fully demonstrate the great blessings of God on this Kingdom of
England above any other, for the employment of the poor people were well
inspected, and answerably improved, it would be a means to make the Kingdom
happy and flourishing.

I shall here give a brief Recital of several Statutes more concerning Wool
and Cloth.
FIrst, that no Cloth made beyond Seas, shall be brought Stat. 15. of Ed. 3.
ca. 8.
into the King's Dominions, on pain to forfeit the same, Stat. 15. of Ed. 3.
ca. 5.
and to be further punished at the King's will.

That all Cloath-workers, and Artificers in the trade of Clothing that came
out of other Countries into the Kingdom, had the King's Protection to dwell
where they pleased, and convenient Franchizes and great privilidges were at
first allowed them for their encouragement; maintained at a public charge out
of the King's Exchequer.

I find there that Strangers as well as Natives, might have Stat. 18. of Ed. 3.
cap. 3.
bought Wool as they could agree, and that great care was taken to avoid
Deceits, to abate and lessen the prices of wool, and to avoid false Packing,
false Winding, and false Balances, and to have one just Weight throughout
England, proved and tried by the respective Sheriffs of every County, according
to the Standard of the Exchequer: and that no buyer of Wool, (Stat. 13. of
Edw. 3. cap. 2.) should make any refuse or wast, but an equal hand should be
carried between buyer and seller; and this upon grievous Forfeitures, Stat. 8.
Hen. 6. ca. 22.
as Stat. 12. Rich. 2. cap. 9. Also that all Wooll-felles and Leather bought in
the Countries, should be brought to the Staples which were appointed on
purpose, where Wool and such commodities were to besold, and should remain
there Stat. 23. H. 8. cap. 17.
fifteen days at least, for the supply of our own people who were to have the
first choice, or as much as they would work up, and then the remainer which
could not be wrought up in England, were to be sent to public places in the
day time, Stat. 31. Ed. 3. ca. 8.
and from thence to the Ports appointed on purpose for the staples to be
Transported, after the Buyers had paid their due Customs and Subsidies, ( Viz.)
for every sack of Wool, which contained 94 Pounds, 2 pounds 10 shillings: and
for every 300 of Wooll-felles two pounds ten shillings, and for every last of
Leather, five pounds; and that no wool vendible Stat. 13. E 3. cap. 9.
should be lodged, showed or sold, within three miles of the Staple, by any
Merchant, Buyer, or Transporter, or any others, but such as had of their own
growth, and no other: And the Chancellor, Treasurer, with the advice of others
of the Kings Council, had power to defer the Transportation of Wool, when, and
as often as they saw it convenient.

It was then ordered, that no Merchant of the Staple, should Stat. 2. of H^n. 5.
Transport Wool, Woollfells, Lead, or Tin, without the King's License, until
they were brought to the Staple, on pain to for feit the same.

It was then made Felony to Transport Wool, by the Statute 27. Ed. Ed 3. ca 3.
of the Staples, as you may find it concerning the Transportation of Wool, by
English Merchants, but this Stature 28. Ed. 3.
for Felony was repealed, the 38 of Edw. 3. Stat. 1. and 6. and the forfeiture
for Lands and Goods, was still continued, 8 Hen. 5. cap. 2.
and in March the 37. of Edw. 3. the Staple for thesale of Wool was fixed at
Callis.

Then the Staple aforesaid was removed from Callis, and clearly put down, 43.
Edw. 3. Cap. 1. and the Staples appointed and fixed in England, at the places
following: Viz. Stat. 47. E. 3. cap. 1.
at Neweastle, Kingston upon Hull, St. Buttolphs Boston, Yarmouth, Quinborough,
Westminster, Chester, Winchester, Exeter, and Bristol, and the Staples of
Ireland and Wales, were to be kept where first they were ordained, and several
other good clauses were added concerning the Regulation of the Staples, as may
be seen at large, in the Statute of the Staple, 27. Edw. 3.

It was there appointed, that all Merchants, Strangers, Sta. 8 Hen. 5. cap. 2.
that bought wool in England, to conveigh to the West parts, or elsewhere,
that did not bring them to some of the Staples to be sold, were to bring to the
Master of the Kings Mint, for every sack of Wool which contained ninety four
pounds, an ounce of Gold Bulloin, or the value in silver Bulloin, on pain to
forfeit such Wool, or the value thereof to the King absolutely. Stat. 8. He.
5. cap. 2.
I also find that great care was taken that no persons in Norfolk should buy
wool there, and in diverse other Countries thereabout, for fear they should
Transport it, but only those Merchants which carried it to the Staples, or
those which did convert it into Yarn, Hats, Girdles or Cloth: Stat. 1. Ed. 6.
cap. 6.
And that such woolls as were bought in Norfolk, and Norwich, and those
Countries, were to be sold and retailed in the open Market, if not carried to
the Staples: And that those in Hallifax, were to sell what Wool they bought to
Stat. 2.
those poor people in the town, or parts adjacent; who to their knowledge did
work up the same into Cloth, or Yarn: and if the Wool driver did sell his
wool out of Hallifax, or if any of the town bought to sell again, unwrought,
into yarn, or cloth, every such Offender did forfeit their double value of the
wool, so sold, or uttered, the one half to the King, and the other half to the
Prosecutor, and the Justices Stat. 3. Ed. 4. Cap. 5.
of the Peace, in their Sessions, were to determine the same. Many sorts of
wares and Merchandises were prohibited to be brought into the Realm, ready
wrought, which were wrought and made by Hand-crafts-men.

That all foreign Bone lace, cuttings, Embroydery, French Stat. 14. cap. 121.
13.
Bandstrings, buttons, needle work, etc. were prohibited to be brought into
this Realm.

Noneshall export any sheep, or wool, wool felles, Martlings, Stat. 12. cap.
2 32.
Yarn, Fullers earth, Fulling clay, nor carry, load, nor convey the same to be
transported, upon several penalties. as well upon the owners of the sheep, as
the persons that shall convey the same. This Statute at large is worth the
perusing, and might do much good to the Kingdom, if it was duly* observed, by
all the Kings Subjects; but the behaviors of our people in England, are not as
they were in former times, for then a Law was no sooner made, but all men took
immediate notice of it, and did willingly yield their obedience thereto; but
the people have been so accustomed to the breach of Law, and Rebellion, that in
reason, it cannot suddenly be forgotten, and desisted from, by many people, for
men now adays are grown so Critically wise to do evil, that let the King, with
the advice of the Lords and Commons, make use of their best discretion, and
judgments, in framing Laws for the public good, and wording them according
to the most proper sense, by them intended, yet some ordinary fellow, that has
store of confidence, and a little money, (and that it may be gained by Cheating
too,) one way or another will find a hole in them, to transgress those Laws,
and if they are called in question, then they have tricks and evil devices,
enough to torment those that do faithfully discharge their Oaths, and
Consciences for the public good, as I my self can speak sufficiently,
concerning this and such like cases, by my sad experience.

It was made Felony for any English, Welsh or Irish, to Stat. 23 E. 3.
transport Wool, wool felles, Leather, Lead, etc. and a second clause in the
last Act was, that no English, Welsh, or Irishman shall transport any of the
said commodities, in any strangers name, or keep a servant beyond the Seas, to
survey the sale thereof, or to receive money therefore; a third clause in the
said Act was, that there should be no exchange of wares for Merchandise of the
Staple, but Gold or Silver, or English, Welsh or Irish Merchandise, neither
shall any Merchant make any confederacy, in fraud or deceit to this Ordinance,
upon the pains aforesaid. A fourth Clause in the said Act was, that it should
be lawful for every man to carry his own Wool, Wool felles, Leather or Lead,
to the Staple, warranting the packing of this Wool.

Merchants were prohibited the exporting the money, Stat. 4. H. 4. ca. 15.
which they received in England, for their Merchandise, and goods imported, but
they were to lay out their money again, upon some of the Merchandise of this
Realm, except their reasonable Expenses.

All Merchants strangers, were enjoined to lay out their Money, they received
for their Merchandise imported into Stat. 17 E. 4. cap.
this Realm again, in some Merchandise of this Realm, and to prove the laying
of their money so out, and by whom it was so laid out, before the Officers of
the Port, where it was so disposed of, or laid out, upon the penalty of
forfeiting all his goods found within the Realm, and to suffer a years
Imprisonment.

All Merchants strangers were bound to give security, to Stat. 15. Hen. 4. ca.
the King's Customer and Controller, to employ their money upon the commodities
of this Realm, their reasonable costs excepted, and Italian Merchants were to
sell their Goods where they did land them in gross, and not by retail, and
their Stat. 1. Ric. 3. cap. 16. 9.
money so received, to be laid out again in the Realm, within the space of
eight months.

These and such like Statutes and Laws might do very much good, to increase
the Tradeing of the kingdom, if they were enquired into, and revived with such
addition as might be necessary, for now we send all our money out of the
Kingdom, and vend but small quantities of our Manufactures, but only our
native commodities, which are prohibited, which quite ruins our Trade.

It shall be Felony for any that shall transport any Sheep, 14. cap. 2* Stat.
14.
Wool, wool fells, martlings, shorlings, yarn made of wool, wool flocks,
fullers earth, fulling clay, Tobacco-pipe clay, etc. this Act I do believe if
not repealed, will do much injury now adays, although it was intended for
public good, for I fear it will hinder many people from discovering the
Offenders, and breakers of the Law, though they were sure to have never so
great a reward for it, for many men will be very cautelous, how they touch the
life of a man, though they do deserve death, more a thousand times than the
Theif that robs on the Highway, for a Theif does but take away part of a
particular man's Estate, but these wretches that transgress the Kings Laws in
transporting Wool, etc. to foreigners, destroy as much as in them lies, the
happiness of a whole Kingdom, and are the procuring causes and Instruments, to
bring many thousands to great miseries and languishing deaths.

There were many good Laws made, for the settling the Aulingers Office, and
preventing frauds and deceipts in work, in all sorts of Drapery, both old and
new, which are too redious to recite, though many of them be very necessary to
be observed, for the credit and reputation of our Manufacture, but I shall only
set forth, where they are to be found, and refer the ingenious, and judicial,
to the perusal of the Statutes themselves, which are the Statutes concerning
Wool and clothing. 25. of Edw. 3. Cap. 4. 27. Ed. 3. Stat. 4. 50. Ed. 3. Stat.
7. and 8. 3, Ric. 2. cap. 2. Stat. 7. Ric. 29. 13. Ri. 2. Stat. 10. 13. Ric. 2.
Stat. 11. 17. Ric. 2. Stat. 2. and 13. 13 Hen. 4. Stat. 24. 9 Hen. 4. Stat. 2.
11 Hen. 4. Stat. 6. 11 Hen. 6. Stat. 9. 4 Ed. 4. Stat. 1. 7 Edw. 4. Stat. 2. 17
Edw. 4. Stat. 3. 7 Edw. 4. Stat. 5. 1 Rich. 3. Stat. 3. and 4. 3 Hen. 7. Stat.
7. and 71. 3 Hen. 8. Stat. 7. and 8. 5 Hen. 2. Stat. 8. 1 Hen. 8. Stat. 11. 6
Hen. 8. Stat. 9. 25 Hen. 8. Stat. 18. 27 Hen. 8. Stat. 11. 6 Hen. 8. Stat. 9.
25 Hen. 8. Stat. 18. 27 Hen. 8. and Stat. 13. 33 He. 8. Stat. 3. 33 Hen. 8.
Stat. 19. 4 Eliz. 6. Stat. and 2. and 5. 3 Phil. and Mary 11. 4 and 5 Stat. 3
Phil. and M. Stat. 4 and 5. 5 Phil. and Mary Stat. 5. and 8. 7 Eliz. Stat. 12.
33 Eliz. Stat. 9. 27 Eliz. Stat. 18. 39 Eliz. Stat. 11. 29 Eliz. Stat, 20.

Cards for Wool, were prohibited to be brought out of other Countries into
England or Wales; none were to transport sheep beyond Sea, without the King's
License, there was a limitation upon keeping Sheep, and an appointment how many
sheep each man should keep, upon the penalty of 3 Shill. 4 pence, for every
sheep more than his number.

And if it be as the Company of Silk-Weavers, and Ribbonweavers say, (as
doubtless it is,) there are an hundred thousand people small and great, that
depends upon that trade in and about the City of London; then how many may be
supposed rationally to be in the whole Kingdom, that have their dependence on
the trade of clothing, in the old and new Drapery, and other Trades, which have
a dependence upon, or relation unto the Trade of Clothing, and which know not
how to earn a penny any other way, since that trade is in a great measure lost,
and lest off; but these poor people live idly, and go a begging for their
bread, among which also are many children from 8 years of age to 15. which can
very well get a living about the trade of clothing, for that they can sort
Wool, mixit, Spole, Quil, Pick Teasels, prick Cardwiers, etc. and which in the
time of good trading, could constantly earn eighteen pence, twenty pence or two
shillings a week, but now very few of them, have any employment as aforesaid;
and if I should suppose but a Million of such poor people, throughout the
Kingdom, which should every one Loss by the Poor not set at w^^k.
get his eighteen pence a week, it would amount to, Three Millions nine hundred
thousand pounds in a year, which is so much clear loss to the Kingdom; besides
I know that there are many hundred thousands more of such people, which live
idly, and get nothing. Since we have left off so much of the Clothing trade in
England, as has been already intimated, the evil effects and consequents
thereof, I humbly desire to leave and commit to the consideration of those that
are more judicious in the Political affairs of the Commonwealth, to have
suitable Remedies, as to their grave wisdeme and Prudence might seem to be meet
and necessary, I endeavoring only to be a layer open of the sore, and refer to
the skilful Chyrurgeon for a healing Plaster.

And if our Parliament men, and Ministers of State should take into their
serious consideration, the great troubles, that are multiplied upon those that
endeavor faithfully to prosecute the execution of the King's Laws, against the
Offenders, ^aw^s to be Prosecuted.
chiefly intending thereby, a future prevention of their fraudulent dealings
and threatening practices,) and would give encouragement to such public
spirited men, by some especial care taken, for the preservation of their
Credits and Reputations, and their persons from troublesome Arrests, and
vexatious Suits and molestations, which the Delinquents do multiply against
them, by false and feigned Actions, and those colored over with very specious
pretenses, but the truth and reality of their intentions and designs is, to
ruin and destroy the Reputations, Estates and Families of such as shall
discover them, or appear against them. This I say ( viz. the countenancing and
encouraging of all faithful Officers and others,) would strike a kind of
terror to these transgressors, (Smugglers and others,) that do deceive his
Majesty of his due Customs, and be a great means to keep them in awe, and good
order, and encourage all men to be ready to discover such Offenders, as they
night any way find them out by their opportunities, being abroad early and
late; and to add to this, that there should be very severe Prosecutions
P^nishm^nt of Offenders.
against such Offenders, and let them be abated nothing of the Justice of the
Law, which is in such cases provided, and established throughout the Nation:
for now it is a sufficient crime, (as the case of late has stood) to be by
such branded with the ignomy of an Informer, or an Informing Knave, though he
discover nothing, but what does immediately concern the King's Interest and
public good. And by these Smugglers and their Companions, he shall be reputed
and said to be, a troublesome fellow, an evil nei hbour, a disturber of the
Peace among friends, etc. because he does faithful service, according to his
Duty, Conscience, and Office, in laboring to prevent their Frauds, and abuses,
as frequently by them practiced as they can. And if such Officers in the
Customs, Atturneys and Clerks, which do connive or comply with such Offenders,
were removed from their Places, and Offices, and severely punished, the
public good would be much preserved, Trading greatly advanced, and thereby
Gentlemen's Estates largely augmented, in their yearly value of Rents.

I shall now give a brief description of several Springs, that fill our
Kingdom with Prohibited goods, and of several Leaks, that empty the Kingdom
of other sorts of our goods, which are prohibited to be Exported out of the
Nation: As our Wool, and Fullers Earth, formerly spoke to, which are by
stealth carried out of the Kingdom, to the great damage and prejudice of the
Nation, and many Foreign Prohibited Injury to the Silkweavers.
goods, are brought in among us, to the great injury, and undoing of many
Tradesmen; as Silk and Ribbon Weavers, and other Artificers in and about
London, and several parts of the Kingdom, which occasions the great decay and
loss of our own Manufacture, with the loss of the employment of the Poor, to
the ruin of many thousands, of men women and children, that have had their
dependence, chiefly, if not only, on those Merchandises, which are daily
Imported from France, Flanders, and other Seaports, secretly into this our
Kingdom.

There are many of our Seaport Towns, and several Creeks, and holes along the
South-shore of England, besides Dover, Rumney Fairlee, Hastings, Foleston, Rye,
Bredhempston, etc. where these things are practiced; and indeed in the Summer
time, when it is fair weather, goods may be Landed on the Shore, and Shipped
off from the Shore, on Vessels all along the Coast, almost from Dover to the
Lands end, in Cornwall; and many times there are both brought ashore, and Wool
Shipp^d off.
carried off such Goods as are Prohibited both ways, both for coming into the
Land, and carrying out of the Land, and this done in a fair night, and the
goods brought in, lie sheltred in Countreymens houses, which can hide and
secure them till there be a convenient opportunity to dispose otherwise of them
with safety, and these Countrymen help them to Horses, to carry them to London
or other Markets.

Neither do I here mention any thing of the North-Coast, because I have
hitherto been altogether unacquainted with those parts, although I have reason
to believe, that the same Smuggling Trade is also practiced in those quarters,
for their Coast lying over against Holland, doubtless the people there are as
ready to comply privately, in forbidden tradeing with the Dutch, as along the
South-Coast, they are with he French, notwithstanding there is sufficient
Provision made, in our Laws against such sinister and evil Practices: But
about Kent and Sussex, are most frequently imported Prohibited goods from
France and Flanders, and they are goods of such value, that a single Horseman
may arry five, or six hundred pounds worth about him, and yet it shall hardly*
be known that he has any thing with him.

Now if these things were well considered, what quantities of goods are
privately imported, and so as that they are seldom discovered, with what also
comes into the River of Chatham River.
Medway (alias Chatham) which lies about twenty seven miles from London, by
Land; and the most convenient River in England, (I believe) to Land goods
privately: it would easily appear, what loss it is to his Majesty in
particular, in his Customs, which by these and such like Practies are stolen,
and in general to the Trade of the whole Kingdom.

It is also well known, that those which steal the Duties of the King's
Customs, and do Import and Export Prohibited Goods and Commodities, are none
of the meanest persons in the places where they dwell, but such who oftentimes
have great interest with the Magistrates about those places, and seeing they
get their money so easily, by not paying the Kings due Custom for their goods,
as honest Merchants do, and being Purse-proud, do not value what they spend, to
ingratiate themselves into the favor of such Gentlemen, as Smuggl^rs m^ke ma^y
friends.
have authority as aforesaid; and then make it their business by the assistance
of such Magistrates, and their countenance, to destroy all such as shall
discover their fraudulent dealings, or elce by some small Bribes to stop their
mouths, that so these Cheats may avoid the penalty of the Law, and prevent
others from the future from discovering their doings.

The King's Custom houses, ought to be so many locks and Keys to the Kingdom,
to let what is warrantable and lawful to come in, and to keep out what is
forbidden its entrance, and to prevent the great abuses that are so frequently
complained of, both in the Exportation of our Prohibited goods, and the
Importation of Foreign goods forbidden by Law; and if the Officers were but as
vigilant and faithful as they ought to be, they might easily and readily
prevent these enormities with their care and diligence, which are so daily
practiced.

But it is too well known, how remiss and careless the Blank Certificates a
Cheat.
Officers are, and neglectful of their duties in many of the out-Ports
especially, that it is a thing very usual with Smugglers to get blank
Certificates, with the Seal of the Customehouse, to take up their Bonds that
are given for the true delivery Exchanging the Master of the Vissel.
of their goods at some other Port in England; and moreover there is a great
cheat in the shifting Masters of such Vessels, as take in such goods, they will
oftentimes exchange the Master, before he goes out of the Liberty of the Port,
where the goods were Shipped; and yet if all these things fail, and their coast
Bonds come to be forfeited and put into Suit, it is not to be expressed, the
delays, shifts and deceitful tricks that are practiced by some undersheriffs
and their Deputies, in their returns, and in the Execution of the Law, which
ought to be done both with speed and justice, but both these are by such
persons omitted, and these kind of doings do highly encourage these offenders,
in their sinful practices.

I have also observed that the Farming the King's Customs Farming the King's
Customs.
has been an occasion of great prejudice to the trade of the Kingdom, and the
public good; for when the weal and good of the whole Nation, comes in
competition with the Injury to the Kingdom.
present profit of the Farmers, they are apt to resolve the question for their
own advantage, permitting Prohibited goods to be Landed, so long as the due
Customs, for them come into their Coffers, and the Underofficers, knowing
what the Farmers their Masters do, are very apt to learn the trade, to let pass
our goods out of the Land that are also prohibited: and those Smuggling
Merchants that deal in such kind of wares, can easily find out the blind side
of such Officers, and that will be bribed, to wink at such their deceitful
practices, such an unfaithful Officer shall be highly commended among these
theevish Merchants for a brave fellow, one that knows his business, and for a
very civil person, that will do a Merchant a kindness upon occasion. Thus evil
is called good, and good is styled evil, as I said before; those Officers that
Springs to fill us with Foreign goods.
are faithful to King and Country, are called Knaves, Troublesome fellows,
evil Neighbors, etc. these the honest good men 'etc. Good Lord! what a pass
are we come to in this Nation? people account it no sin to steal from the King,
and now a days those that practice such things have changed the term, it is
not (by them) called stealing Custom, but saving custom; for my part I am of
the opinion, that he that steals Custom from the King to the value of twenty
shillings, deserves to be punished as well as he that steals so much from any
other man. For as I heard a Scholar once a reasoning, either it is this or
that, etc. so I say here, either Custom is the Kings due, or it is not, but no
man dares be so impudent as in words to deny it, but they must needs
acknowledge it a truth, that it is his due, and if so, why then do they not
give to Caesar the things that are his, according to the Commandment of our
Savior, and the Commandment of the King, and Parliament, it being established
by Law, and constituted for the public good, and the general advancement of
the Trade of the Nation, and such Officers as will not comply with these sort
of people to cheat the King, are called Fools, men that do not know their
business, but if another had that Office, he would make something of it, etc.
but such men minding the faithful and conscionable discharge of their duty to
God, to the King and Kingdom; with the blessing of God live better, and do a
thousand times more good than others, and may be principal Instruments to make
the Kingdom happy and flourishing.

I have had discourse with some persons who have had the thoughts of getting a
Pattent, to put the Laws into Execution, that are against the Transportation of
Wool, and other Pattent against Transporting Wool
prohibited commodities; but I can hardly think they would be careful and
diligent in that employment, except they should reap a considerable profit for
their labor, how should they expect to balance their expense. I refer to the
censure of the judicious, except it be by conniving at, (or do more harm than
good.
compounding with) the Offenders; so that by such a design as this, the
transgressors may be encouraged to sin more, and more; for if such Patentees
should too much discourage that sort of people, that carry off the Wool, etc.
to other Nations, (who are the only men that must bring grifts to their Mill)
it would be as ridiculous a thing, as for Lawyers to persuade people to peace,
and by that means lose their Practice; and it is generally believed, that there
would be more Prohibited goods transported then, than what have been before, if
the care for the putting the Laws into Execution, were once committed to
Pattentees, for as in other cases of the same nature, the love of Money is so
natural, and money so much hunted after, that it may be acquired, that the
minding of putting the Laws into Execution, and men doing faithfully and
uprightly their duty, is not a thing now a days at all regarded, or taken into
consideration as it ought to be.

But I hope that his Majesty with all the Peers of the Realm, and all others,
are made in some good measure sensible of the great concernement of Trade, and
the sad effects and consequents of exporting our Wool, Fullers earth, etc. as
also of the idleness of our poor people, occasioned by the loss of foreign
Markets, for our woollen Manufactures; that I think it is high time for all
Loyal Subjects, to give their utmost assistance to discover all Offenders, and
make them manifest in their kind, and for all Superiors to give their just
assistance that the Laws may be put into a speedy and severe execution against
all Delinquents as soon as made visible.

In the days of King Edward the third (formerly spoken of) and since, to the
times of our late unhappy confesions, the Trade of Clothing made the Kingdom
flourish for many years together, and doubtless would do so again, if our Laws
were but put into Execution, and every one were obliged to discover, and make
manifest the Transgressors, for this is not a business for two or three men to
do, let them employ themselves with all endeavors imaginable, but the eyes of
all men must be about this matter, tending to such a Reformation; and the
Courts of Judicature must be expeditious and severe in the administration of
Justice against such Offenders, when once convicted, and let not one of them be
spared, who deserve to be punished without mercy: because for a little private
advantage, they do their utmost to bring ruin on the whole kingdom: I could
also declare other things that might be very assistant to the increase of
Trade, and the prosperity of the Kingdom, which is not so convenient to be
made public, before it be debated among the Clothiers and Tradesmen.

It has pleased his Majesty to plant such Commissioners now, for the
management of his Customs, that it is hoped they will do much good, especially
in the regulation of the Out-Ports, concerning those notorious evil practices,
which have been continually done among them, and for the encouraging of those
Officers that are honest and faithful, if they should be troubled at any time,
or be any ways damnified about lawful seizures, by reason of Actions brought
against them, that they shall be releived by the Commissioners, and the charges
that may arise in such cases at the Law, to be born by the common stock.

I could say something for the Staplers, though not much, Concerning Staplers.
Quaere 1.
because I cannot find by our Laws, that any such people were in those days,
when the Trade and Manufacture of Wool was first brought into England; and yet
Wool was sent to the Staples, and all the Manufacturers thereof, had those
sorts that suited best for their trade, and we got and kept the whole trade of
our English wool, and of other Countries to our selves, in this Kingdom, and
had the command of the foreign Markets, which was the occasion of the first
settling all those Companies, as has been formerly and briefly set forth; and I
doubt not, but that those Staplers will set a gloss upon their business, and
without question their money does speak much for them, lying for the most part
in and about London, so near to the Fountain of the Laws; yet I do verily
believe those people have much to answer for, as to the ruin of many poor
people, occasioned by their Exportation of Wool beyond Sea, by which evil
practice, the Trade of the kingdom is in a great measure lost, as has been
set forth already something largely; by reason whereof many of our poor people
in the kingdom are ready to perish for want of Bread, notwithstanding the
great plenty in the Land, and this is because they want work.

I should lose time further to complain, seeing all people are experimentally
sensible of the loss and decay of Trade, to the great disadvantage of the
Nobility, and Gentry in the Land, as also to the great detriment of the Farmer,
and Merchant; although indeed the Poor are most pinchingly sensible hereof,
throughout the King's Dominions, and hence arises the want of Money, (the
thing by all men complained of) and the fall of Rents occasioned thereby.

I shall now proceed by way of Quaery, to propound and insinuate something,
that may tend toward a remedy, for these Maladies, formerly complained of, and
to be a restorative to our decaying Trade, and to help it to life again; for as
Physicians having found out the cause of the Distemper, know the readier how to
apply what is suitable, in order to the Cure. So here I having I hope discovered
the causes, and occasions of our lose of Trade, shall take the boldness to give
in tacitly my advice, most humbly begging pardon for such a presumption, and in
all submission, presenting my conceptions to better judgments.

Whether it would not be convenient to have a Committee of Clothiers, some of
the principal of all Counties, with Merchants of the several Cities, and some
other Tradesmen, and Artificers, to be appointed; whose other weighty affairs
might not obstruct this great design of reviving and advancing our Trade, to
its former height, and luster, and that some of those Gentlemen sit at a
certain known place, as their occasions may permit, so that some of them may be
ready at all times, to receive Petitions, or Projections from workmen, which
may any way tend to the increase and encouragement of Trade; and for such
Committees, to prepare and digest the same, into such a Method and form, as
might occasion the Production of such further Laws (if so thought necessary)
for the future, as might restore and advance the Clothing Trade, and the well
making of Cloth, and all sorts of goods, both in the old and new Drapery; and
the rectifying such abuses among all other Tradesmen, that are any way employed
about the said Draperies.

Whether all those Laws against Exportation, and Importation Quaere 2.
of Prohibited goods, and for the punishment of unfaithful Officers of the
Customs, and others entrusted that do connive at such abuses (to the King and
Kingdom) and neglect the faithful performance of their duty, ought not to be
put into effectual Execution, and whether all other Laws, tending to the same
matter, or have any relation to these things, ought not once in a month, upon
the market day to be publicly read and declared, especially in the Seaport
towns, round about the Land, that by this means all the common people, who
have the best and greatest opportunities for discovering Offenders, might know
the Law, and so consequently know how, and wherein to do the King and Country
service, such as might be very acceptable to them, and should not be
unprofitable to themselves, if they would be careful and diligent to watch and
look out.

Whether all people ought not to be encouraged, that shall Quaere 3.
discover such as Transport Prohibited goods, either into the Kingdom or out
of it; and that care should be taken for them in a very special manner, that
they might be protected from vexatious Suits, and Troubles, which are usually
brought upon them that do discover such transgressors, that so others may be
terrified from such like discoveries, allthough therein, by making known such
Smugglers, that they may receive the justice of the Law, they do the King and
Kingdom the highest service that may be; and that care may be taken how their
Credits, Families and Fortunes may be preserved against the malice of such
Miscreants, whose common practice is to multiply troubles on all such as do any
way molest them in their unjust designs.

Whether the evil presidents, on some faithful Officers (being Quaere 4.
vexed and molested by these Smugglers and their Adhaerents) for doing their
duty and being just in their places, for the public good both of King and
Kingdom, may not give occasion to many other Officers, to take Bribes, and
comply with those Smugglers to cheat his Majesty of his due Customs, rather
than to run the hazard of such molestations, to the utter ruin of themselves
and Families.

Whether it may not be necessary to put those Laws into Quaere 5.
Execution, that appointed Staples on purpose to sell Wool at, and that none
should be bought, sold, or bargained for but in the public Market, by the
Clothiers, or the Manufacturers thereof, or should be carried too or from, any
place or lodged near the waterside, under any pretense whatsoever, without the
Licenses of some Officers, appointed on purpose, except only in the daytime,
by public and open carriages from the place of its growth, to the public
Market, so that all those which shall carry Wool concealed, and others who
with force of armed men in the night, transport it to the water side, in order
to their private Shipping it off, with as much obscurity as they can, might be
discovered by some honest Shepherds, Husbandmen, Porters, or Watermen, whose
occasions call them to be abroad both early and late, and so they have more
convenient opportunities to find out such evil doers, than other people have;
and that such as do give in Information of such transgressors, shall be
Protected and well rewarded.

Whether the wilful transgression of the Laws of the Land, Quaere 6.
made and settled by the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament, and continued
in, and obstinately practiced; be not the ready if not the only Introduction to
Rebellion, when such evil doers, as have been formerly spoke of, do make it
their utmost endeavor, to destroy the public for a little private advantage,
as has been already so much complained of, having no respect to the Laws of
the Land, that Prohibit such evil practices as theirs, and whether this be not
a high contempt of the Authority aforesaid, that Enacted those good Laws.

Whether it would not forward the great work of reviving Quaere 7
our Trade, and prevent those abuses complained of, if an Office was appointed
in every County, to be kept by some honest upright men, who have a clear
respect to the public good, and advancing the National Trade, that might
receive all Informations of such abuses, and transgressions of the Laws of the
Land, in the case before mentioned, from any people that should be the
discoverers of the same, and that such Officers may have power to examine
Witness upon Oath, and if there be found a real guilt, in the Accused person or
persons, that such Officer shall give to such discoverer, of his or their good
service, and the matter to be Prosecuted at Law by a public charge; and the
persons, though never so mean, that have given the Informations, should be
assured to receive his reward, by virtue of his Certificate, without any manner
of trouble or charge to himself, as soon as the Suit shall be determined; all
which would be carried on with much ease, and be accomplished in a short time
if such an Officer as did Prosecute for the King had the countenance of the
Courts of Judicature as they ought to have, and the Cities and Countries made
thoroughly sensible, that this matter is of so great concernment to the public
good, so that all Smugglers might be so much discountenanced, by all people
both high and low, that none should dare to presume to transgress the King's
Laws, or for the future, endeavor a public destruction to the Kingdom, for
their private and particular advantage.

Whether it may not be judged to be more convenient, upon Quaere 8.
the discovery of such Offenders, to Prosecute them in the King's Court of
Exchequer, rather than in any Country Court adjacent, where such Fact was
committed; or where the Offender dwells, least there should be some special
correspondence held thereabouts, or interest more readily made in such Courts.

In case any public Officer should be surprised, by the Quaere 9.
subtle contrivance of such Smugglers, with their Atturnies and Clerks, (who
frequently use foul practices also,) and that such Officer shall be put to
great Charges, possibly beyond his Ability, before he can obtain releif
according to the rules of the Law: whether it would not be convenient that such
Rules should be made and practiced in all Courts of Judicature, that such
public Officers for the King, should not be exposed to so great charges, by
Actions brought against them, merely out of malice, which are done purely out
of design to terrify such Officers, (and to prevent if possible, for the
future, the due and faithful Execution of their said Office in such cases,
wherein the Kingdoms good is so much concerned, and that a place was appointed
where they might be speedily-heard without tedious attendance.

Whether any Officer that formerly did, or now does belong Quaere. 10.
to the Customs, or was any ways entrusted in his Majesty's Service, who has
proved unjust, and unfaithful in his Office, either by conniving at such
Smugglers, or complying with them, or negliectng (upon complaint made to him)
to bring them to condign punishment, according to the Justice of the Law,
ought ever to be entrusted in any public Employment for the future.

Whether by our Laws, any Under Sheriff ought to continue Quaere 11.
in his Office, more than one year, or to act as Undersheriff upon any
pretense whatsoever; considering they have such opportunities, to be
prejudicial to any person, according to their Interests, and inclinations; and
they may delay and vex one party, and in the mean time unjustly encourage, and
heighten the other; and this is such a thing as often proves very prejudicial
to His Majesty's Affairs in the Prosecution of such Informations, as may be
brought, touching the abuses here mentioned.

Whether these Officers, that are in Commission or Employment, Quaere 12.
that do join with, or countenance such as do transgress the King's Laws, and
make it their business to defraud the King of his Dues, or are not ready and
forward to do that justice against the Delinquents that so do, ought not to be
Displaced, and some way severely Punished?

Whether those Jurors that will give up their Verdict contrary Quaere 13.
to Law, and Evidence, ought not to be forced to give satisfaction to the party
so greived, and injured; or to be made to suffer one way or another, as
examples in such cases; without any tedious trouble to the party greived, as
may be judged requisite, and reasonable; for as our Laws stand in that case, it
is almost impossible to punish a Jury that does offend, and act contrary to
Law; for it is too much become the custom of many Juries, to act to the
damage of one person, out of favor and respect to the other, so that all
people are sensible of the great abuses that are put upon one party, where the
Adversary can carry a great interest, either in Cities or Country.

Whether it would not be as great a renown to His Majesty, Quaere 14.
if the Trade of Clothing was recovered to its height, as it was to King Edward
the Third, of Famous Memory, by whose Providence, and Industry it was first
brought into England, which has been so exceedingly advantageous to this
Kingdom, for many years, and doubtless might be revived, to as great a
strength as ever; if such things were consulted and practiced, which might be
the proper and effectual means, conducible thereunto; and the people of the
Kingdom brought to a ready observation, of the Laws of the Land, which would
turn to his Majesty's great advantage in his Customs, etc. and put all his
Subjects in general into a capacity of paying their Taxes willingly, according
as his Majesty should have occasion, the Springs of Trade then being open and
running, would bring in supplies to all people. Quaere 15.


Whether it would not be necessary that all these Laws not yet Repealed,
relating to the furtherance of Trade and promiscuously scattered in the Law
Books, ought not to be revived, and Reprinted in one Volume, that so all
people might readily know those Laws, and be by Authority strictly commanded
the observance of the same, with encouragements Quaere 17.
to the obedient, and punishments to the disobedient.

In case any Laws be wanting, or are not full enough, against the
Transportation of our Prohibited goods, or the Importation of Foreign
Prohibited goods, as new sorts of Stuffs, that may be made beyond Sea, or any
thing elce, that is not perticularly provided against, whether it may not be
very necessary to have such a defect supplied.

Whether there ought not to be a Statute for the regulation Quaere 16.
or well making of such Stuffs, etc. which were not used in former times, that
so all deceits in work may be avoided, which if done, would doubtless very much
advance the credit of the English goods, and greatly further the sale of them
at a Foreign Market.

Whether it is convenient that our Manufactures of Cloth Quaere 18.
and Stuffs, should be allowed to be transported out of the Land white (or
undied) because it is a very common practice of the Dutch and English too, so
to do, and then they Dye them and Dress them in Holland, by the which they set
many people on work, and all that employment is lost to England: but this is
not all, for the Dutch do so handle the matter, as that they make our own goods
more acceptable and saleable in Foreign Countries, than we usually do, with
the same sort of goods which we Die in England, to the great profi^ and credit
of the Dutch abroad among strangers, and to the great loss and damage of
England, besides the disreputation by that means to England, yea many times the
same goods that were carried over to Holland white, are returned to us again,
when the Dutch have Dyed them and dressed them, and then they are esteemed the
best Colors, and therefore most vendible among us.

Whether it would not be very conducible to the public Quaere 19.
good, that those particular Statutes should be put into effectual Execution,
which do positively appoint, that all Merchants Foreigners, Tradeing into
England with Commodities of their own Country growth, and vending them here,
should lay out their money again in our English Manufactures, and not be
permitted to carry money out of the Land, directly nor indirectly; but lay it
out in the goods, and wares of England (their necessary expenses excepted)
according to the true intent and meaning of the said Statute.

Whether it be not worthy to be taken into consideration, concerning the
fineness and weight of our English Coin; above Quere 20.
and beyond the Coin of our neighboring Nations, and whether that be not the
cause of its Exportation out of the Land; a broad twenty shillings piece of
Gold, being worth in France, Flanders, and Holland, twenty seven shillings, and
a Crown piece of silver worth six shillings; so that I suppose we may cease
wondering, what is become of the money of the Kingdom, considering it is such
profit to the Merchant to transport it beyond Sea.

Whether it would not very much increase Trading, and be highly advantageous to
the King's Majesty, to have money Quaere 21.
plentiful in the Land, and greatly benefit the Commonweal, if money in
England was in some measure made suitable or equal, to the weight and fineness
of money in other Lands, and whether this would not be a great means of
bringing in money from other Lands, and then keep it in the Kingdom being
brought in; by such means the King would be sure to have a speedy supply on all
demands, for his occasions; and it is granted on all hands, that good Treasures
of Money are the principal Sinews of War.

Whether we in England, ought not in reason, to take the Quere 22.
same care, for the preservation and advancement of our Native Commodities, as
every other Kingdom and Country does for theirs, as in Spain, the labor of
the people is in their Vineyards, for the Production of Wine and Fruit,
concerning which they take great care, that they make the ulmost, and spend
little of these things themselves, that they may make money of them to furnish
their needs, with what is suitable, and many times they will not part with these
their goods, for Barter, or Exchange for other goods, but will have ready
money, and at dear rates too, as I have heard by those that have traded into
those parts; some have given to the Spaniards, at the Canaries 100 pieces of
Eight, for an ordinary Pipe of Wine, in ready money; which 100 Pieces of Eight
are well worth twenty two pounds Sterling, with us, and likewise in France
concerning their Wines, Salt, Brandy, etc. what care is by them taken to make
the best of them, that may be, and what vast quantities of French-Wines,
Brandy, Vinegar, etc. do come over into England in a year; to pay for which I
doubt, there goes a great deal of ready money: and if so in other Countries,
why should not the same care be taken in England, for the advancement of our
Manufactures, endeavoring thereby to employ our Poor, and so to enrich the
Kingdom, especially considering the far greater advantages of so doing, that
we have in England, than any other Nation has, as has been already at large
set forth.

Why should the humor of our people in England so far Quere 23.
engage them to an old custom of burying the dead in Linen, as to contradict
and disobey so good a Law as was lately made by Act of Parliament, for the
burial of our dead in Woollen, doubtless there was reason enoug then produced
in Parliament, to sway with the King and those two Honorable Houses for the
Enacting the same, and whether it be not as decent to cover the dead Corpse in
Flannel, as it is with Linen; beside the burial of the dead in Flannel will
greatly advance the Manufacture of the Nation, and in reason advance the prizes
of all other Woollen wares, and this Woollen Cloth is of our own production,
and when we bury our people in Linne, that causes so much expense (for the
generality) of the goods of other Countries; and whether it ought not to be
considered, that the Law provided in this case, ought to be reinforced.

Now to draw toward an end, I have met with an Objection to this Treatise,
that it may be judged Superflous, because several Books are errant concerning
this Subject; to which I Answer.

Though I have reason to believe them that told me so, yet I do believe that
the Reader will find a great difference between this and any other, if they be
compared together, and that in many respects.

And again I Answer, that the more Complaints are made, of the Abuses and great
Losses to the Kingdom, so much the more ought all good men to enquire into the
truth of those Complaints, and endeavor for suitable Remedies; in Tendency
whereto, I have presented something here by way of Quaere, etc.

And now methinks I hear some wise men say, that it is Reason that such abuses
should be punished, and that severely, if any should presume to act such
things, as are here complained of, or any ways vindicate those that do them;
to the which I answer, that I wish that I were called to prove my knowledge of
those things, without too much charge or Attendance, before any that should be
appointed, to enquire into and to regulate the same, for I do not make it my
business to set forth in this discourse the particular abuses of those Country
Atturneys, Under-Clerks, Under-Sheriffs in their returns, and the abuses of
their Officers, and the Assistance that some great Smugglers have, from some
Magistrates and Justices of the Peace in the Country, together with the
affronts that have been offered to our good Laws, of which I have had a large
and sad experience: And although our Laws are good, and our Judges are just,
yet the corruption in the practice of the Law, by Underofficers, is so
exceeding bad and destructive to the Trade and public good of the Kingdom,
that in case I should perticularly recite those abuses that I my self have met
with among the Practicers of the Law, I should fill a Book many times bigger
than this.

And now I shall conclude, with the true and hearty wishes of an Englishman,
that all our Ministers of State may so agree, especially in this juncture of
time, that they may unanimously join together, as one entire body, against all
Intruders upon our Trade and Priveledges both at Sea and Land; that the Walls
of this Kingdom may be built up and preserved, and our Tradeing may increase
and flourish, so that no cunning Usurpers may rob us of our old Prerogatives of
the Seas, or the Manufacture of our native Trade upon the Land.

FINIS.
In Laudem Authoris and Subjecti.
HAd I but lived in Ben. Johnsons days
I would have learned of him, to speak the Praise
Of Native English Wool, and to set forth
It Is real Excellency and it is worth
The Poets tell us of the Golden Fleece
That Jason undertook to fetch to Greece.
But that is a Fiction, ours a real thing
Which to the Kingdom does great Riches bring
So that no Nation to us might compare
If diligent in working it, we were,
The French with all their Salt, Brandy and Wine,
Could not afford to Cloth themselves so fine.
The Spanish-India Mines do not yield forth
Such Riches as our English Cloth is worth,
The Spaniards scanty Cloaks and Bagpipe Hose
Do go from England, as each Trav'ler knows.
The Dutch men's Suits of Clothes and Bushel knees
From England are Transported ore the Seas.
The Portugal delights to wear our Bays
The Negro does as much affect our Says
The Turk does highly prize our broader Wear
The Grecian herein with him do compare,
To Hamborough our Broad Clothes go a main
By which those Merchants do receive their gain.
To Rushia and Muscovy likewise goes
Good store of broad, and narrow Woollen Clothes.
And all the East Lands ore such is the Trade
For Woollen Clothes, in England which are made.
Into East India store of Cloth we send
As fast as the East India Company can vend.
Who find great profit to accrue thereby
Unto that Honorable Company;
The Indians in America do wear
The Duffels which with us prepared are,
And in Exchange do give us Bever Skins
Which to the Nation good Riches brings.
Unto Peru and unto Mexico
Much of our Woollen Manufactures go,
The Portugal (Brazeel inhabiting)
For Clothing does delight in no such thing
As English Bays and Stuffes which they do wear
Which unto them by Sea Transported are.
The Persian Silks, and from the Armenians
So highly prized by the Italians,
Are but for Summer wear, for there is not
Such thickness in that dress to keep them hot
In Winter, as there is in English Clothes
When as the blustering Boreas stif^y blows.
And of such goods in England we don't lack
To Cloth and to adorn our Gentries back,
Which for Exchange of Cloth our Merchants bring
(Together also with each pleasant thing.
Which is Imported to us by the Seas
While we in the house can make our Cloth with ease.
Thus now you see the World was furnished well
With Cloth and Stuff which English men did sell,
But Dutch and French, intruded have of late
And with us in the Trade participate.
The fault's our own, because they get our Wool,
And then they do improve it to the full.
This makes me that I am exceeding loath
To lose the work, and profit of our Cloth,
Which comes unto the Poor as well as Rich
And therefore now I humbly do beseech House of Lords.

Those that on Wooll-Packs sit, to punish those
That Ship away our Wool, not made in Clothes.
R. S*

Poscript.
THat these things are considerable to be looked into, and that a stock may be
raised to employ the poor out of misimployed Charity, I have given a brief
account of the abuses of Charity, in the place where I now inhabit, with a
short Description of the River of Medway, alias Chatham, and the frauds
practiced there and of some notorious abuses put upon me for doing my duty, and
endeavoring to prevent those frauds complained of in this Book, with the foul
Practice of some under-Clerks, and cunning devices of some other Lawyers, which
I shall Present to his most Sacred Majesty, and to the great Councils of the
Kingdom; to the end it may be known what need there is of better encouragement
to honest Officers, and those who put the Laws in Execution against such
Offenders, being also ready to prove what is alleged in every particular
clause before his Majesty in Council.

England is exceeding happy in a good and gracious King, but extremely unhappy
in some unfaithful Officers, and divided people, we are also happy in good
Laws, but unhappy in that they are so much corrupted, it is nothing with some
Council to make good, bad, and bad, good; and in case they abuse a man never so
much, this is sufficient, They ought to do what they can for their Client: by
this course, our most gracious King, and the Honorable Courts are often
misinformed, honest men discouraged, and unjust Stewards preferred, let
Attorneys and Clerks use never so unjust practice, honest and just Lawyers will
seldom complain, or move against those of the same profession. This Nation is
puffed up with Pride, and grown idle with plenty, the meanest vie with the
greatest, and will do any unjust thing to maintain it, Plays are more regarded
then Prayers, Drunkenness than Study, the Clerks pens, than Trades-mens hands,
so that our Trade is lost, our people live idle, Charity Robbed, our Poor
starved, our Laws not regarded, our Consciences fast a sleep.

The Scene is so much altered in 25. or 30 years, that then a man thought his
Son well provided for, if placed with a Clothier, and now nothing will do but
Law, so that they multiply like Catterpillers in a dry Summer, insomuch that
the increase of the Land cannot feed them, but they swallow up the earth also,
what I write is no Romance, I have had sad experience of the truth of it, and
according to the good old Proverbs, The Loser may have leave to speak, And
truth may be blamed, though not shamed, that does make a man as bold as a Lion,
and I bless God in all my sad Afflictions, that very thing, and God's promises
has kept up my spirits, and without reason I still hoped to be delivered from
those wolves, as Daniel was delivered out of the Lions Den, which has been
done, some of my Enemies falling before me, and others have confessed their
faults, and I have as freely forgiven them, as I hope God will forgive me,
others whose actions are so foul, they blush and hang down their heads when
they see me, though they will endeavor behind my back, and where it is not
known, to excuse themselves, I declare I desire to be in peace with all men,
though I do endeavor to get my right, vindicate my self, and for public good
punish Offenders.

Vale.

