Christian Chymistrie, EXTRACTING The Honey of instruction from variety of
OBJECTS.

BEING An handful of Observations Historical, Occasional, and out of
Scripture.

With Applications Theological and Moral.

By CALEB TRENCHFIELD, sometime Minister of the Church at Chipsted in Surrey.

Go to the Ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise,

Pro. 6.6. I went by the field of the slothful, and by the Vineyard of the man
void of understanding.

Then I saw, and considered it well; I looked upon it, and received instruction,

Pro. 24.30, 32. London; Printed by M. S. for H. Crips, at his shop in
Pope's Head Alley next Lombard Street. 1662.

To my ever Honored Uncle Daniel Shetterden Esquire;
SIR.
Why I should dedicate this small piece to you, will not be asked by those to
whom we are both known; why I should not, would. Your great respect to a godly
faithful Ministry, has merited to be in this kind confessed by much abler pens:
but your particular favor to me, challenged the first fruits of mine. You gave
out your hand when I first began to go; and your encouragement and assistancy
then (besides what since) requires to be first acknowledged now. My capacity
extends not to a fatted Calfe, out of the stall; I here present you with a
Bunch of Grapes, like those of our Country, comparatively sower; nay
positively so, for it is out of mine own Vine yard, and I dwell in a cold air,
and churlish soil, that would abase even a generous Vine, being fitter for
perry and sider. If you can pick out hence any Grape meet for your palate,
that may be for food or physic; if not like Wine to cheer the heart, yet as
vinegar to whet your stomach to what is better, I shall be glad if I may be but
in this kind serviceable to your better thoughts, and intend your heat though
per antiperistasin. I know you have candor enough favorably to interpret what
admits it, and charity enough to cover what is faulty, and goodness enough to
accept of, and patronize what is (if any such here be) worthy of it; in
confidence whereof I lay these before you, in testimony of my desires to serve
you, and on purpose to show that I would do some thing to approve my self
somewhat worthy to be

Your so much obliged Nephew, Caleb Trenchfield.

CHRISTIAN Chymistrie
(1)
SCypio Africanus being showed a very rich shield, answered, that it was the
manner of the Romans to trust more in their right hands, then their left: But
most of those Champions set down in the Lords book of Worthies, are memorized
rather for the defensive then offensive; and there is usually more honor got
in that field by suffering, then doing.

(2)
Agesilaus playing with his young son, and riding upon a reed to make him
sport, was dirided by one of his familiars, as being too vain; to whom he
answered, hold thy peace till thou thy self art a father, and then we will
hear thy advice. When we meet with infirmities which have befallen some of the
servants of God in their exigencies, we are ready to deride their weakness, or
suspect their sincerity; but let us suspend our Judgments, till our souls be
in their souls stead.

(3)
The Miuturnians changing their purpose of slaying Caius Marius, into purposes
of conveighing him to the Sea side, were in their passage thither, either to go
a great way about, which his danger would not allow, or to go through a wood
which they accounted sacred, and the highest sacrilege to carry any thing out
of it, that had been once brought into it: In this exigency, an old man among
them steps out, and resolves the doubt, saying, no way was to be scrupled
whereby Marius might be saved. Our days have shown us many of that opinion,
that nothing should be accounted holy which stood in the way of their ambition;
but Lord, make me always willing rather to go about for the obtaining of my
purposes, then to tread over where thou have set bounds.

(4)
Cardinal Poole being chosen Pope by a free and fair Election; yet either out
of an high conceit of his own worth, or too much desiring to show his
moderation and integrity, would not then be confirmed; but willed the Conclave
to consider of it till the next morning; in which time another of the
Cardinals had so prevailed with the rest, that they rejected Poole, and chose
him Pope. Those things which we apprehend our selves to be excellent in, we
commonly desire so much to make a show of, that (like Physicians who willing to
appear richly clad, swelter in Plush in hot summer) by our ostentation we
render that ridiculous and offensive, which might otherwise prove greatly to
our reputation and advantage.

(5)
Philip King of Macedon being importuned by a poor widow to do her justice,
answered, that he was not at leisure; to whom she replied, then cease to be a
King; for to do justice is that you are a King for: which he hearing,
apprehended himself so homely spoken to, that he took care of her cause
incontinently. Lord, thou requirest of us that we should do thee service, but
we are ready to say we cannot intend it: but it may well be replied to us, then
cease to live, for therefore gave thou us our lives, that we might lay them
out in thy service.

(6)
Hipponicus intending to dedicate a costly statue, was advised by a friend to
employ Policletus a famous workman in the making of it; but he said, That he
would not make use of such an one in that business, whose Art should be rather
regarded then his cost. When in preaching the great truths of Gospel
Salvation, the enticing words which man's wit teaches art sought out, the art
is so much looked upon by the auditors, that the matter is for the most part
lost.

(7)
A Limner being desired by a certain person to draw for him an Horse tumbling,
which he mistaking, drew one running; which when he had brought home, the
person employing him grew angry, that, according as he had appointed, he had
not represented him tumbling; to whom he answered, Turn the piece, and your
running Horse is a tumbling one. Many differences have been among us, wherein
we have been very angry that others have not concurred with our apprehensions,
when the difference has been only the different way of representing.

(8)
Diogenes seeing some Rhodians gorgeously apparelled, while others admired
them, said, Tush, That Is nothing but pride; and seeing some Spartans by, in
their threadbare Caps, said, That Is but another sort of pride. When the vain
men of the world apply to a fantastic gallantry, it is manifest that it is
nothing but pride: Oh would that when religious persons appear to deny the
world, they did not give cause to say, that theirs is pride too.

(9)
Scypio the Conqueror of Hanniball and scourge of Carthage, though by many
triumphs he had replenished the common treasury, yet in all his life never
bought one acre of ground for himself, nor left money enough in his Coffers to
bury him. How many men have damned their souls that they might dye rich, and to
that end, like overflowing Rivers, have grown great by the ruins of their
Country, upon this account chiefly, that they may go out of the world wealthy;
when Scypio's moderation and abstinence, have reared him up a more glorious
Monument then his Conquests.

(10)
Philostratus being employed by Ptolomy in building that famous Pharos near
Alexandria, engraved in the solid and durable Marble his own name, and in
plaster over it, the Kings; that his in time being worn off, his own might be
seen to perpetuity. Sin imprinteth in my fancy favorable and specious conceits
of it, but there are characters in my conscience of another tenor, which will
abide there, when the other are vanished, and no more to be remembered.

(11)
William Wickham being appointed by King Edward in building a stately Church,
wrote in in the windows, This work made William Wickham; for which being
charged by the King, as assuming the honor of that work to himself, as the
author being only overseet, he answered, that, He meant not he made the work,
but that the work made him, being before but beggarly, and then in great
credit. Lord, when we read in thy Word that we must work out our own Salvation,
thy meaning is not, that our Salvation should be the effect of our work, but
our work the evidence of thy Salvation.

(12)
The Empress Maud being closely beset by her enemies near Winchester, caused
her self to be put into a Coffin, and as one dead, was safely conveyed
through their Troops. Evil concupiscences beset my soul with an almost
impossibility of escaping, but the way to avoid them, is, by becoming dead to
sin, not to live any longer therein.

(13)
They tell of a Tree in Japan, that flourishes, and is fruitful, if kept in a
dry earth; but with moisture (which causes other trees to flourish) withers.
Such is the sincere Christian, to whom the cross is a crutch, affliction
raises up his affection, and the heat of persecution makes his graces
flourish, and fruitful; but the gentle showers of prosperity decays his
greenness, and usually makes his graces torpid, if not livelesse.

(14)
Among the Turks, every one is of some Trade, the Grand Seignior himself
(though Lord of so many Countries, yet) daily imployes himself in some chosen
Occupation: because even Adam in Paradise was by divine appointment not left
idle: An huge condemnation to those of our times; who think it a disgrace to be
engaged in any profitable employment, whereby they may promote the common good,
and their own; being almost all only of the trade of that Assirian, whose
Motto was, Ede, bibe, lude.

(15)
Herbert in his travells tells of Foul, which if you shoot some, the rest fly
not away, but render themselves an easy prey to him that will kill them. How
many such foolish men are there, whom others harms make not wary, but are
entangled in the same fetters of lust and misery, wherein they have seen
others, and themselves have been formerly ensnared?

(16)
The River Tigris passing through the Lake Arethusa, mingleth not his waters
with it, but retains its taste and color different from that of the Lake. Such
should the Christian be, though conversing in the world, yet reserving the
savor of Godliness, and color of religious profession unallayed.

(17)
The Virgins of Miletus through an unkind Melancholy being their own
executioners, and that mischief much increasing, there was a Law made, that
those so dying should be carried naked, and exposed to view through the City,
upon which that evil ceased; modesty and the shame of being so laid open,
though after death, prevailing more, then all other considerations could. How
sad is it, that among us professing Christianity, there should be of the
shamefacer sex straining healths through their Smocks, etc. and prostituting
that virtue, which by the heathen was estimated at so high a rate?

(18)
The Hircanians do use to banquet under the falls of their Rivers, as in the
shade, which are so steep, that they shoot over their heads. It often is, that
wretched sinners riot it under the guilt of those sins, that a tender
conscienced person would tremble to think of.

(19)
They have Trunks in India called Sampatans, through which they shoot arrows so
invenomed, that if they prick the skin, it is very dangerous, but if they draw
blood, it is irrecoverably deadly. The first motions to sin, arising from that
root of bitterness, appear never without sad effects; but Lord, let them
never draw blood by consent from my will, that their deadly venom should seize
my vitalls.

(20)
Demetrius King of Syria, being taken prisoner by the King of Parthia, and by
him married to his own sister, and with all desirable things entertained, often
attempted, and at laft effected an escape into his own Country. Lord, with
what enjoyments soever I am derained from thee, yet let the desire of my soul
be to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee, and at last let me obtain an
happy escape to thee.

(21)
Maud the Empress being besieged by the forces of King Stephen in Oxford, when
the snow covered the ground, made her escape thence, by arraying her self and
followers in white sheets. Lord, I am besieged by thy justice, and the guilt of
sin compasses me about on every side; but Oh cloth me with the white Robe of
thy Sons Righteousness, that I may escape the execution of thy vengeance.

(22)
Sixtus Quintus being a great abettor of the Spanish Faction when a Cardinal,
was the greatest enemy of it when chosen Pope, the Papal dignity not being
compatible with the Spanish greatness in Italy. Lord, how far soever I abetted
the reign of sin in my heart, before I received thy Spirit of adoption; yet
now let me ever be a zealous opposer of it, the Kingdom of sin being so
inconsistent with the dignity of a son.

(23)
The Papists say, that their pictures of the Virgin Mary are exactly like her,
being begun by Angels, and finished by Saint Luke; though it is to be seen, that
in them the Painters have used their wonted liberty, not two of them being in
all things alike, and one of them of no small fame, representing a blackmore:
Nay there was a fellow of them, that (like Apelles with his Hellen) from the
beauties of several courtisans before him, drew the picture of this Virgin.
How safe, and to our credit is it, to continue in the truth, for the children
of the father of lies at one time or other, will show their cloven feet, and to
our shame discover their breed.

(24)
Though the Northern people have made many irresistible irruptions into the
South, like a torrent bearing all before them; yet it is observed, that they
never obtained any durable Empire, the Southern wit being an overmatch for the
Northern strength. If concupiscence break forth, and hurry into sin, exercising
some sudden acts of tyranny, yet let it not get any stable dominion: let the
efficacy of thy grace every day wear out the strength of sin.

(25)
William Wickham begging of King Edward the Bishopric of Winchester, was told
by him, It was not fit for him, he being no learned man; to which he answered,
That in recompense thereof, if his Majesty pleased to bestow it, he would make
many learned men; which he effected by erecting Winchester College. How many
of those goods dedicated to the encouragement of the learned, have since the
days of Henry the Eighth, fallen into illiterate men's hands? 'twere well if
they had so much of Wickhams conscience, as to reimburse some of them at least,
to those primitive pious ends.

(26)
A certain person of that Parliament, wherein the Statute for the releife of
the poor passed, and a great indeavourer for the procuring of that Act, coming
down into the Country, asked his Steward what the people said of that Statute?
who answered, that he heard a laboring man say, that whereas formerly he was
wont to work six days in the week, now he would work but four; which abuse
of that good provision, so affected that pious Patriot, that it drew tears
from his eyes in abundance. Lord, thou have made many provisions in thy Word
for my supportation and comfort, and have promised in my necessities thy supply
and protection; but let not my presumption of help from thee, cause my neglect
of any of those means, for my Spiritual or temporal preservation, which thou
have enjoined.

(27)
The Sea called Sargasso, though four hundred miles from any land, and so deep
as no ground is to be found by sounding, yet abounds with an herb called
Sargasso like Samper, so thick that a Ship without a strong Gale can hardly
make her way. Lord, if temptation from without be never so far removed, yet the
corruption of my heart does continually send forth the bitter fruits of evil
thoughts, so that good purposes find very difficult passage; but blow thou with
the fresh gales of thy Spirit, that my resolutions to serve thee may have a
free course notwithstanding.

(28)
A certain person pretending himself borne blind, and cured of that defect by
visiting the shrine of Saint Albon, with great concourse of people admiring the
Saint, and praising his faith, was brought before Humphrey called the good Duke
of Gloucester, being at that place the very day of the cure; who seeming to
desire satisfaction on the perfectness of the cure, asked the man What color
his gown was of? he answered, Purple, and in that rightly, and so of the color
of any other thing of which he was asked; where by he discovered his own
hypocrisy: for said the Duke, If the Saint has given you your sight, he has
not withal given you the knowledge of colors, which is not attained but by
experience. Lord, thou have wrought a cure upon the eyes of my mind, by
enlightening them with thy truth; but let me not render thy cure suspected, by
undertaking to discern those Mysteries, which are only to be known by
experience in heaven.

(29)
Sir Edwin Sandys reports upon his own knowledge of devout Papists, who have
dared to perjure themselves in judgment, presuming upon the present and easy
remedy of confession. Lord, thou have in thy Word discovered repentance and
faith in the Blood of thy Son, as the means of blotting out of the sins of my
soul: and how apt is my heart to take liberty to sin, with purpose of applying
this remedy against the evil consequences of it? but let me not so trample
under my feet the Blood of thy Covenant as an unholy thing, but keep me that
such presumption may not prevail over me.

(30)
Upon the Coast of Norway the air is so subtly peircing, that it insensibly
benums the members, chills the blood, and brings certain death, if not with
speed prevented; as our King James had experience, when there he was a Royal
Suitor to Queen Anne. The air of ill company with a pestilent contagion does
seize the heart, if not with a diligent and constant resistancy repelled. Lord,
I would not willingly be where such a breath rages, lest like Joseph I learn
to swear by the Life of Pharaoh; but if by thy providence I am cast into such
company, let me be like Salt to season them, and not be leavened by them.

(31)
In the King of Persia's Court, there was an allowance of several Countries
for the maintenance of his wives apparel, one Country for the tire of their
heads, another for their necks, and other for other parts of their bodies. The
English nation wants little now of being at that pass; for if a Gentleman have
twenty Farms, how many of them must be parcelled out for his wife? one of
them, unless of good revenue, not sufficing to furnish her with laced shoes,
and other tingling ornaments belonging to them: And truly this vanity has so
far prevailed on both sexes, that it starved the poor, and driven all good
hospitallity out of doors.

(32)
Malhamut the King of Cambaia, accustomed himself so to the eating of poison,
that his breath was venomous to those that spoke with him; and those women
which he used for his lust, were never the subjects of a second dalliance, but
dyed in the congression. Those that accustom themselves to sin, their very
company is contagious, but a strict familiarity with them cannot be had,
without the greatest danger.

(33)
Bajazet the great Turk, being in his March against Tamerlane overheard a
Shepherd sweetly tuning his Oaten pipe; to whom he said, Happy thou that art
not distracted with these solicitous, and weighty cares. We often admire the
peace and contentedness of the mean estate, but are more in love with the
pomps and vanities of the wealthier; like Alexander, who said, Vellem Diogenes
esse, si Alexander non essem.

(34)
Apelles coming to the house of Protogenes, and not finding him at home, was by
the servant required his name, that he might tell his Master who was there to
speak with him; in answer to whom, he asked for a pencill, and therewith drew a
line on a tablet there standing, and bid him show that to his Master when he
came home, at sight whereof by the Art expressed therein, Protogenes knew none
but Apelles hand did it. Lord, the impulses of thy Spirit, of Satan, and my own
corruption, make their accesses to my heart, but without a name, by which they
may be known whose they be; but if the lines drawn on the tablet of my heart,
be holy, regular, and conformable to the rules of thy Word, I know then it is
thy hand that did it: but if they impresse other Characters, let them be
disdained as none of thine, and the door shut against them, as those that are
minded to destroy.

(35)
The Roman State never met with such disasterous fortune, as when assailed at
their own doors; The Gauls and Hanniball afterward Warring upon them in
Italy, bringing their Commonwealth almost to an utter expiration; because in
foreign Wars they fought much with Auxilliary strength, beside their own: In
the Italian they were left to rest upon their own legs. Lord, I find my self
indifferently able to resist temptation from without, thy grace being assisted
with shame, fear, and other helps which reason brings; But the difficulty
is, then to stand when assailed by unruly passions, of which no eye is witness
but thine own: therefore assist thou that insused principle, with such fresh
supplies from thy self, that though the combat be more arduous, yet the
victory may be certain.

(36)
There being a great mutiny among the Soldiers of Alexander the Great, he
bespake them with the most pacifying language that he might; but observing that
rather to exasperate then allay their fury, he leaped from his Throne, and with
his own hands ran his sword through some of the most mutinous; upon which the
rest relented, and begging his pardon, complied with his commands. When my
affections prove mutinous, and rebel against grace, there is no arguing of the
case with them, for they gather strength by treaty: but the way is, to fly in
the face of them by an immediate detestation, there being no expedient in this
case, like a speedy resolution.

(37)
A Grecian Ambassador being at the Persian Court, where it is expected that
reverence be done to the King, by prostrating the body upon the ground, (a
thing so abhorred by the Grecians that they executed some of their Ambassadors
at their return for so doing) he purposely let fall his Ring at his entrance,
that by stooping down to take it up, he might seem to do that reverence which
they expected, and yet preserve his own thoughts, by directing his intention to
another purpose. Lord, how many have found out bolder and balder inventions,
wherewith to cheat their consciences, for the accomplishing of their ends,
acting, though more plausibly, yet no less certainly contrary to their
principles? but do thou assist me, that I may exercise my self always to have
a conscience void of offense, first toward thy self, and then toward men.

(38)
The Lacedaemonians had two staves exactly like, one of which the General had
to the Wars, the other remained with the Ephori: messages of importance and
secrecy, were written upon slips of Parchment, rouled upon one of these staves;
which being taken off, could not be read, (the lines answering unequally) till
rouled upon the other staff of the same size. Lord, the book of thy eternal
decrees is the staff kept by thee, that of thy Word, the staff delivered to
me; if the characters of thy Election written upon my heart are legible applied
to thy Word, I am certain they are such as will be acknowledged by thee, when
at that day, they shall be applied to thy eternal decrees.

(39)
Under the Papacy, any sins find easy absolution, if the person be not
suspected of Protestanisme; and any opinions have tolerable favor, if not
derogatory from Papal authority. How often (besides by Jehu) has that
question been put, who is on my side, who? and if the party have been right for
that cause, if his religion be that of Mahomet, or his life like that of
Apicius, he need not doubt but he shall find fair entertainment.

(40)
The Persian being invaded by the Great Turk, burns up all which may be of
any use to sustain man or beast; that those who could not be overcome by
force, might be weakened with famine. Sine cerere and Bacchofriget Venus, and
not to make provision for the flesh, is not the least help to abate the
strength of lust.

(41)
Philonides Alexanders Currier passing from Scicion to Elis, accomplished his
journey thither in much more daylight, then he could return back again;
because in his passage Westward, he accompanied the Sun, in his return
Eastward, contrarily: Lord, in seeking after the things that are spiritual I
find the comfort long abiding after those pursuits, because in such actions thy
Spirit the Comforter bears me company; but the pleasure of the things of this
life is quickly benighted, because thy Spirit leads another course.

(42)
At that memorable battle between the Carthaginians and Romans at the
Thrasimene Lake, a very great earthquake (at the same time happening) was not
apprehended by either Army. The most important and shaking considerations,
never so earnestly pressed, seldom obtain audience from hearts taken up with
the immoderate cares after things of this life.

(43)
It Is a tradition that the elder Church used the recitation of two Creeds, that
called the Apostles, and the Nicene, the one with a low, the other with a loud
voice; because the first was composed in the times of persecution, when the
Church durst but as it were whisper its Confession; the other in the time of
peace, when it might make a bolder profession. Lord, if it be thy will, give us
peace, that thy Truth may be spoken loud, and professed publicly; if
otherwise, give us that (...) not to whisper it, but profess it boldly.

(44)
There was a Beugalan not long since, who is said to live three hundred and
thirty years, but in that time had his hoary head changed to its original
blackness, and his decayed teeth supplied with new ones. There Is none shall
live that life which never ends, but are first newborn, and restored, as to
those decays which Adams fall brought, putting off the old man which is
corrupt, with his deeds, and putting on the new, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.

(45)
I have hugely wondered, that Bishop should be censured by the Pope as an
Heretic, for affirming Antipodes; the assertion being so rational, and Pliny
long before having with so much evidence of reason, discourst of it. But, Lord,
this is thy just Judgment, that if we shut our eyes against supernatural
light, we should be fools in that which is humane.

(46)
The Great Mogull for his recreation, is said, to cause his Huntsmen to ride
forth on a tame Elephant, till they find a wild one; with whom the tame
committing fight, and both engaged fast by their trunks, men (to that purpose
attending) bind the hinder feet of the wild one, and so secure him. In like
manner Hearts are taken, by fastening a net to the horns of a tame one, who
fighting with the wild, so surely entangleth his craggy horns, that he easily
becomes a prey to them that wait that opportunity. How often is it, that the
dissentions of Christian Brethren, have not only made them serviceable to the
lusts and passions of wicked men, but a prey also to their cruelty?

(47)
In a skirmish between the Protestants and Papists in those civil Wars in
France, a soldier of the Protestants party gained an horse, much esteemed of
by the enemy; for the redemption of which, they offered three prisoners (that
day taken) in exchange; but that offer being rejected, they enraged slew the
men immediately before his eyes: a few days after, the same soldier being
engaged on that very horse, was by his fiery headstrongness carried so far
into the enemies Troops, that he could not be brought off, but was there
slain, and the horse recovered. Lord, in that valuation which my heart sets
upon the things here, let me observe that due subordination, least while I too
much prize the things I love much, those very things procure the loss of those
things I love more.

(48)
At Boghar a City of the Zagaethaian Tartars, there is a River which causes
to them that drink thereof a worm in the leg, which if not pulled out, or
partially, proves certainly deadly. Such is sin if entertained in the soul,
begetting a guilt, and fearful expectation of Gods vengeance, and surely
damnable, if not cleansed out by faith in the Blood of Jesus.

(49)
The Germans knowing themselves no matches for the Italian, in respect of their
craft and subtilty, make amends for that want, by a peremptory sticking to
those resolutions which they had before considerately taken up. I find my self
no ways able to deal with that old Serpent, who has so many methods of
deceit; but let him say what he will, or can, Lord, do thou fix me irremovably
on this resolution, I have said I will keep thy Commandments always, even to
the end.

(50)
The Inns of Poland give no entertainment to the traveller, but bare walls,
without bed, or board, or other accommodation whatsoever: Alas how often is my
heart such a guestchamber to good thoughts and pious designs, where they find
such welcome, as decayed persons have from their wealthier friends.

(51)
In Peru a man may pass from Summer to Winter in a few hours, there being in
the plains a louring sky, continually storms, and everdropping clouds; when
at the same time, the mountains have a serene heaven, and a verdure in all
respects suitable to a Summer season. Such variety does my heart afford, where
the old man rages with unruly passions, and disorderly affections, and
irregular concupiscences; But blessed be God, within a little space a better
face of things is to be seen, the regenerate part bringing in that calmnesse,
meekness, and regularity agreeable to a Gospel Sunshine: yea, even then the
spirit is willing, when the flesh is weak.

(52)
When Cyrus besieged the City of Babylon, the River Euphrates was the greatest
obstruction to his design, till he cut out many channels, and diverted the
stream into them; which before, when united, was deeply Navigable, but now
divided, became in every place fordable. The diffusion of the mind into variety
of thoughts and subjects, renders it incapable of any deep search; but he is
like to be profound, that sums his thoughts to one purpose till obtained: Unite
my heart to the fear of thy Name.

(53)
There is a Plant in Sumbrero (an Island of India) which is locomotive, the
root being a worm, like an house snaile; if this Plant be taken up, it dries
into a solid stone: by how much it had exceeded other Plants in sense, and
motion, by so much more (degenerating into a stone) it exceeded in hardness.
Thus it is with those who being once enlightened, and by a taste of the powers of
the world to come, transported beyond the common sort of inconsiderate souls;
if they apostatize, they become the worst, and most stony hearted of men,
bitter scoffers, or cruel persecutors.

(54)
The City Weinspurg of the Guelphian Faction, being besieged by the Emperor,
and cruelly threatened, the women of the City besought him they might have leave
to depart, taking with them only what they could carry on their backs; to which
he consenting, they each past forth, bearing on their backs their husbands. If
love could procure a compliance between married couples, in those things not so
easily, nor (in some respects) possibly so seemly, yet for general advantage,
it would be found an expedient oftentimes conducing, not to the comfort only,
but safety of both.

(55)
Peter Walde a rich Merchant in Lions, walking the streets with some of his
friends, one of them fell suddenly down dead: with which spectacle he was so
affected, that he immediately reformed his life, and became the beginner of the
Waldenses, which for so many ages have stood forth courageous Confessors of the
Truth. Lord, how suddenly and unexpectedly may thou call for this breath
that is in these nostrils, and time to me shall be no more: let me therefore
improve the present time to do thee service, and secure my soul, being the time
to come depends upon so much uncertainty.

(56)
There is a tree in Mindanao, the half of which Easterly sited, is a great
Antipoison; but that part respecting the West, the greatest poison in the
world. So is it in the regenerate, where the fleshly part perpetually brings
forth the venomous offspring of vile lusts, but the spiritual part is in a
constant resistancy against those poysonfull effects.

(57)
There are a sort of fishes in the Southern Ocean, which when pursued by other
fishes in the Sea, fly into the air, but are then made a prey to a Sea foul,
which continually watches that opportunity. Lord, if I am in private, my own
unruly passions disquiet me; if in public, temptations from without assault
me: but Oh, let thy grace be sufficient for me; that though I be Concussus, I
may not be Excussus, though on every side and ever assailed, yet never overcome.

(58)
There is an Idol in Madure (a part of the East Indies) called Chocanada,
which (they say) in a vision willed a Priest to signify to the King of Madure,
that one of they two must abide in his house: upon which he (unwilling there
should be any competition between him and his Idol) resigned his Palace to
him. How is it that we are less complying with our God, not expelling that
worst part of our selves, our lusts, that he may be intempled in our hearts.

(59)
A certain Noble man of France was wont, when his Armor was buckled on, and
approaches made to battle, to be taken with such a trembling, that it loosed
the retentive faculty of his body; yet valourous in the face of his enemy, and
with much courage lost his life at the battle of Pavye. Lord, the very thought
of what persecutions may befall because of thy truth, makes my heart tremble;
but if thou engage me in that combat, supply me with thy assisting grace, that
like that Saunders, my present weakness, may be succeeded with a most stout
contestation against thy most inveterate, and bitterest enemies.

(60)
The Egyptians were wont with great cost and enquiry to search out a Bull to
be their Apis; whom having worshipped for a time, after their superstition they
drowned in a fountain, and then with great lamentation for his loss, they
employed the like cost, and quest for the finding of another. Oh the hazards,
and hardships, wherewith the things of this world are sought by us, which being
had, we as foolishly spend, as if indeed Satius esset quaerere, quam quaesisse,
when like the Hawke we leave the killed Quarry, and pursue that which flies
away.

(61)
The people of Numidia are said, not to wash their hands in some years, an
excusable fault, for they have not water in those Deserts wherewith to do it.
If the poor Indian be an irreligious, profane, unmortified sinner, he will be
in some respect, or comparatively excusable, the Fountain opened for sin and
for uncleanness, being set far off from him; but what Apology will be found
for such in our Western world, where that fountain is Prae manibus.

(62)
There is a Poole in Comogena, that sends forth a mud that burns, and is not
to be quenched, but with earth. Lord, my heart emits burning desires after
worldly things, which will be quenched in the grave at last; Oh that the
consideration of my latter end might do it now.

(63)
The same year that Saguntum was destroyed by Hanniball, a child was borne
there, which forthwith returned back again into his mothers womb. Lord, the
miseries undergone by us in this vale of tears, might make us of his mind, who
faid, that they were happiest who were never borne, and they next which dyed
soonest; but if it be thy will that they shall be suffered by us, yet let them
by thy grace be sanctified to us, that what is necessary may yet be profitable,
and what cannot be avoided, may yet be the better by patience endured.

(64)
They tell of an huge golden Idol among the East-Indians borne in a massy
chariot, drawn by four Elephants in procession, under the wheels of which many
persons (sometimes to the number of five hundred at once) put themselves, and
are so squeezed to death: at which times also, many cut off gobbets of their
flesh, and offer them to the Idol, slaying themselves at length in like
devotion. Hey me, that such should be the effects of a blind zeal to a blinder
Deity, and that we should shrink from the service of the living God for fear
of the loss of profit, or credit; yea, that those our lusts so peremptorily
required, should not be cut off in devotion to him.

(65)
You may behold the Egyptian temples on the outside glorious with all possible
magnificence, but within no other Deity then some vile Cat, or other such
contemptible creature. So is it with the outward pomp of Papisticall devotion,
yea, and with the hypocritical formalities of an only ourside Religion,
wherein nothing is more solemn, then the furniture of ceremonies, nothing
less then the devotion of hearts.

(66)
At Segelmesse a City in Numidia they have no Fleas, (a privilege they much
boast of) but are miserably infested with scorpions. Wicked men think they are
greatly happy in being free from the preciseness, and troublesome limitations
which the godly comply with, a poor privilege, if compared with those
scorpions, assured guilt, and terror of conscience which every act of sin
brings along with it.

(67)
Captain Saris sailing to Japan, diverse of the Japanenses by a Religion the
Jesuits had taught them, fell down on their knees to the pictures of Venus and
Cupid, in the Captains Cabin, supposing them to be the Images of Jesus and
his Mother: this the Jesuits will excuse and say, though the object be
erroneous, yet the worship was good, the intention being aright directed. Lord,
if my charity have been mistaken, thinking I have relieved the truly
necessitous, when I have given to a sturdy vag bond; yet accept I pray thee the
sincerity of my intentions to do good to thy distressed members, and for the
time to come, let my mistakes be on the right hand, like those who instead of
being Hosts to strangers, entertained Angels unawares.

(68)
There is a Well formerly dedicated to Jupiter Ammon, which is very warm in
the dawning of the day, but cools as the Sun gets to his height, and after
recovers its warmth as the Sun beams decline from it. So is it with the heat of
spiritual zeal of pious souls, which the Sunshine of prosperity usually makes
languid, and well were it, if it could be again recovered as that declineth.

(69)
A certain Merchant traveling through the Lybian Deserts, being oppressed with
thirst, gave ten thousand Ducats for a Cup of water. How sensible are men of
their bodily wants? and how expensive in supplying them? but how many would dye
eternally, through the spiritual thirst of water of life, before they would be
at the thousandth part of that cost for supply?

(70)
The Indian King of Mexico, in his Coronation was clothed with a garment
painted with Skulls, and dead men's bones; those rude people intending to
admonish him in his new Sovereignty, of his own mortality. And how well were
it, if with us of more knowledge, there would be more remembrance of those
chambers of death, where the pomps and vanities of this world shall pass, but
a long reckoning shall remain to be accounted for.

(71)
The Isle of Saint Thomas upon the coast of Africa, is so excessively hot, that
European bodies are not able to walk there, and the earth perpetually dry,
there being neither Rivers nor raines; but in the midst of the Isle, there is
a mountain, stored with Wood, over which a cloud continually hangs, that
distilleth so large a dew upon these trees, as runs down thence so
plenrifully as supplyeth the thirst of men, and beasts, and plants. Lord, this
heart of mine is as a barren and thirsty land, where no water is, and the heat
of inordinate desires so rages, that resolutions of well doing are languid,
and the exercises of thy grace faint: But Oh, let the cloud of thy presence be
upon the mount of my retirement, that from thence may flow plentiful
distillations of thy grace, for the remedying this barrenness, and relieving
this faintness: I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall
enlarge my heart.

(72)
A certain person falling into the hands of the Indian Caniballs, being sick
and faint, was by them dismissed without farther harm, as being judged by them
unwholesome food. How often is it that those very things which we lament, and
trouble us, by God wise and gracious dispensation become preservations to us.

(73)
The Commons of England being very importunate with Edward the Fourth, to make
War in France, he consented to satisfy their importunity; though willing
rather to enjoy the fruit of his Wars, and toiles, and spend the rest of his
days in peace: Therefore he rakes with him a dozen of far Capon-earing
Burgesses, who had been the most zealous for that expedition, these he imployes
in all Military services, to lie in the open fields, stand whole nights upon
the Guards, and causes their Quarters to be beaten up with frequent Alarmes;
which was so intolerable to those fat paunches, accustomed to lie on their
soft Downs, and that could hardly sit on a Sessions Bench without their nods,
that a treaty being motioned by King Lewis, none were so forward to press the
acceptance of his offers, and hasten their return into England, as they; and
when there, to excuse so little done by the King, with so great preparations.
Lord, how shall I be able to keep way with the Horsemen, if I cannot hold out
with the Foot? how shall I be able to stand in the day of battle, when in the
cause of thy truth there must be a resisting to blood, if I am nothing active
in resisting of sin now? am I like to abide in the Watchtower whole nights,
that like the Disciples cannot watch one hour to prevent temptation? Oh let me
be therefore much in spiritual exercises now, and in cutting off the right
hands and plucking out of the right eyes of corrupt desires, that I may be
ready to deny the conveniences and preciousnesses of life, when the emergences
of thy interest shall call me to it.

(74)
In the Province of Dariene in South America, the men's heads are so hard, that
they will break a sword smitten on them. Alas, how many are there of such
darkened understandings and seared consciences, that those piercing discourses
which have deeply penetrated others, make on them no impressions, but are
returned back with scorns and scoffs, or dashed in pieces without effect.

(75)
Cardinal Campeius being sent by the Pope Legate into England, about the
divorce of Henry the eighth from the Lady Katherine; Landing at Dover not in
such equipage as was by Cardinal Woolsey thought meet for his dignity, he
sent him diverse Mules and Muleters richly habited, to furnish his train more
pompously; these passing with the said Cardinal through the City of London,
where all the Citizens arranged to express their devotion and his wel-come;
being disturbed by some accident, fell a kicking and flinging so, as down fell
their Coffers broken upon the stones, which were thought to contain precious
treasures, and rich apparel; but instead thereof, out flew old Boots and
Shoes, broken Bridles, and Girts, to the solemn derision of the red Hats.
Lord, to what purpose will it be to make a show, and but a show of a long train
of graces, when my emptiness shall be manifested at that general assembly of
men and Angels, and my hypocrisy will make me but the more abundantly ashamed.

(77)
There is a ground in some part of Italy, into which what is driven is so fast
detained, as not to be pulled out. Lord, make my heart of such soil, that the
impressions of thy Word, which alas have so often been like untimely fruit,
shaken off with every wind, may be fixed past possibility of removal.

(78)
The Ocean continually flows into the Mediterranean Sea, by the Straits of
Gibraltar; and the Euxine always flows into the same Sea by the Proponticke;
yet is there no appearance that the Mediterranean is more filled, though no
passage whereby it sends forth its waters is discovered; nor seems the Euxine
Sea any thing lessened, though there appear no supply of waters to it, but by
some small Rivers. Many there be of large revenues but bare purses, who yet are
strait handed to acts of charity, while others free to good works, and of much
meaner incomes, are yet well stored with that, which to those good ends they
daily spend; vain expenses by a private consumption wastes the one, while
Gods blessing by a secret retribution, returns with interest what was laid out
upon his account.

(79)
Near Assos there are stones which in few days, not only consume the flesh
of dead bodies, but the very bones too; and there is an earth in Palestine of
the same operation. Lord, let the mortification of this body of death in me, be
of the like speedy execution; that those lusts which are more confirmed and
seem more durable, may through the power of thy grace have a quick consumption.

(80)
Julius Caesar having taken at Pharsalia and Thapsus the Cabinets of Pompey and
Scypio his utter enemies, wherein were many Letters from their partakers,
whereby the men and their designs against Caesar would have been discovered;
by a rarer example then our days have yielded, without once reading the
enclosed Epistles, caused them all to be immediately burned. Lord, that book
wherein all, even my most secret iniquities are written, will by the accuser at
that day be brought before thee; but let thy mercy blot out that handwriting
with the blood of thy Son, that no charge may be framed there, either to
confound or shame me.

(80)
It Is said of Agesilaus King of Sparto, that He ruled his Country by obeying
it, gaining so far upon the Sphori and Senate by complying with what they
desired, that he might do what himself would. Lord, what freedom is it to be
thy servant? for I may then do what I will, if I will do but what thou
command; in doing thy will, I cannot do amiss, but in serving thee, serve
my self.

(81)
King Pirrhus being asked, Whither Python or Cephesias were the best
Fluteplayers, answered, that in his Judgment Polyperchan was the best
Captain; intimating that it was not worth the enquiry, who were best skilled in
those Arts, which were so little pertinent. Lord, let me be offertedly ignorant
of those things that are wicked and vain; well may the children of this world
be wiser in those things of their generation, then the children of Light. The
posterity of Cain are storied to be the first inventers of Arts; they might be
witty in that upon which they were wholly intent: the pious seed had their
aims above; they might well overlook what others saw, whose eyes were fixed
below; but when God comes to reckon up the wits of the world, those only will
be accounted witty, that are so for heaven.

(82)
Summers, Henry the Eights Jester, kept a Catologue of the indiscretions of the
Court, which the King desiring to see, found his own name there, for intrusting
an Italian with some thousands of Crowns to buy Barbary Horses; but says the
King, How if he do return, and bring the Horses I gave him money for? it is
then (says Summers) only the blotting out of your name, and putting his in.
How often are we guilty of such improvidences, wherein our success is to be
ascribed, not to our wisdoms, but others folly? such successes are like
wellfavoured children of an uncomely venture, when though we dandle the babe,
yet we are ashamed of the mother: whereas what is done uprightly, and done
prudently, may like nature produce a monstrous birth, but has ever its excuse
made for it; though it may be blamed, it can never be shamed.

(83)
Polienclus (a very fat man, in an hot day) persuading the Athenians in an
Oration, to make War with King Philip, Phocian told the people, they should do
well to undertake it upon such a man's motion, who was likely to do much with
his Armor on his back, that was in such a sweat with delivering an Oration. We
are ready to think we shall appear much for God, if we are concerned to resist
unto blood; but how unlikely, when we come so poorly off in our contention
against any poor lust?

(84)
Agesilaus being lame of one of his feet, was wont to prevent the mocks of
others, by merrily jesting himself at his own infirmity. Lord, we are
Mephibosheths lame in both our feet, when we are to run the ways of thy
Commandments; but our lamenesse is least subject to thy censure, when it is
most under our own.

(85)
The Elephant though of the greatest bulk, and vastest strength, yet above any
other creature is plagued with flies, and least able to remedy that
inconvenience, not having so much as an hair on his tail wherewith to drive
them away. Lord, with how many incommodities have thou allayed the great things
of this world, so, that it is questionable (even to carnal reason) whether
great matters with their many evils, are more eligible then less with fewer
troubles. Oh therefore, let me not be discontented with my mean estate, being
a greater cannot be had without discontent.

(86)
L. Domitius having drunk poison with intention to rid himself out of this
world, for fear of being Caesar's Captive, afterward would by all means have
hindered the operation of it. Lord, in our exigences and straits we are free to
make large promises of what we will do for thee, and give unto thee, but when
the storm is over, and the present passion down, we wish that the obligation
had never been made, and devise shifts how the penalty may be avoided: But let
us be a shamed of this inconstancy, and be established in the first resolution,
not only because thou will not cancel the bond, but because the debt is most
just without it.

(87)
That famous Cato was forty four times called into Judgment, yet every time
acquitted. Oh how happy is it if we have envious and malicious accusers, yet to
have impartial and upright Judges? Lord, how often does Satan accuse me
before the Throne of thy justice? yet while thy Son is my Advocate with thee, I
shall be acquitted; not because I am not guilty, but because he is Righteous.

(88)
Alexander the Great being presented from the spoils of Darius, with a most
rich Cabiner, beset with Gold and what else might make it more precious; and
his friends each of them giving his thoughts, what use it should be for; said,
that the Books of Homer should be kept in it, as judging them fittest to be
reserved in so precious a receptacle. Lord, thou have given us thy Scriptures,
better Books then those of Homer, and my heart is my most precious Cabinet: Let
other things be rejected as less valuable, but let these be not only laid up,
but written in my heart, yea let them like Aarons Almond Rod blossom and bear
fruit also.

(89)
Agesilaus in his travels was wont to lodge in the holiest places of the
Temples of the Gods, that they themselves might be witnesses of his private
doings. Lord, there is no place but has thee for a spectator, and we have
called thee (...) from our apprehensions of thy allseeing presence; let me
therefore be sahamed to do that when thou only art conscious, which I would
not should be laid open to the veiw of men and Angels.

(90)
Alexander the Great sending to the Athenians, that they should deliver up the
Thebans which had fled to them, unless they would have him War upon them:
Phocian being desired to speak his opinion, said, That truly he lamented much
the case of those Thebans: but it were better for one City to mourn, then two.
Lord, thou requirest of us the delivery up of the concernments of flesh and
blood, if we would have thee our friend; though we are loath report from them,
yet it is better that the body lament the loss of those dear conveniences,
then that soul and body both lament eternally in Hell.

(91)
At the battle of Crefcy where Edward the black Prince led the Van, (being
then but eighteen years of Age) the King his Father drawing up a strong party
to a rising ground, there beheld the conflict, in a readiness to send relief
where it should be wanted: The young Prince being sharply charged and in some
danger, sends to his Father for succor, who delays to send any; so that
another messenger comes to crave it, to whom he answers, Go tell my son, that I
am not so unexperienced a Commander, as not to know when succor is wanted, nor
so careless a Father as not then to send it: but he intended the honor of the
day should be his sons, and therefore let him with courage stand to it, and be
assured that help should then be had, when it might conduce most to his
renown. God draws forth his servants to fight in the spiritual warfare, where
they are engaged not only against the strong holds of carnal reason, and the
exalted imaginations of their own hearts, but also in the pitched field against
Satan, and his wicked instruments; but they (poor hearts) when the charge is
sharp are ready to despond, and cry with Peter, Save Lord, we perish, but God
is too knowing to oversee their exigences, and too much a father to neglect
their succor, but if help be delayed, it is that the victory may be more
glorious, by the difficulty of overcoming.

(92)
It Is said of Crassus, that though he were the most avaritious man then living,
yet above all men he hated those that were so. Strange it is, that though
likeness be the true cause of love, yet proud and coverous men admit no
fellow: a manifest conviction of the disorder of sin, that agrees not with its
self; whereas grace never is, but is loved where grace is.

(93)
A Getulian shepherd being assaulted by a Lion, and otherwise unprovided of
resistance, cast his loose coat upon the Lions head, whereby the beast not only
lost his fierceness, but, as if his strength had layen all in his eyes, was by
the man easily taken and bound. When I have confidered what the Lions of
England have suffered from the Roman Bishops, I have even admired how so great
strength and courage could be so amated: but I observed the veil of ignorance
was thrown over their eyes, which made them so rame and submissive to that
See: a policy so often proved of great advantage, that to this day they are in
doubt whether that, or Divide and impera be the surer Trump. Thus have we seen
whole herds of stronger cattle subject to the discipline of a little Boy,
because they poor creatures know not their own strength; and it is easy to
take him at all advantage, that to prevent his own calamities is without eyes.

(94)
A certain person, at a game among the Athenians called Casting of the Dart,
slew accidentally with his Dart one of his companions: Piricles spent an whole
day with some Sophisters his familiars, in dispute, Whether the Dart, or he
that threw the Dart, or he that instituted the sport, were guilty of the man's
death. It Is a Proverb, The greatest Clarks are not always the wisest men; and
certainly this is not the least part of their folly, that they delight to
canvasse frivolous questions, which engender strife, rather then edifying; and
are wittily vain, more then profitably learned, either to others or
themselves: how many are there accurately seen in the difference between esse
and existere, that yet are to seek in that great question, what they shall do
to be saved?

(95)
Marcus Livius Governor of Tarentum, for the Romans, when Hanniball took it,
kept the Castle till the City was recovered again by Fabius; who then envying
the honor done to Fabius for that exploit, said in open Senate, that It was
not Fabius, but himself that was the cause Tarentum was taken again: Truth,
says Fabius, for if thou had not lost it, I had not won it. When man was at
first created, Liberum arbitrium was made Governor of that estate of
innocence, but Freewill quickly lost it, only some inconsiderable remnants of
natural light reserved: now, when glory is given to Christ for man's
restoration, Freewill steps up, and boasts its self the cause of man's
recovery; but no otherwise certainly, then that man had not needed to be
restored, if Freewill had not undone him first.

(96)
Arostotle being sick, and his Physicians intending applications to him, said,
That he desired to be cured, not as a Farrier does an Horse, but as a man
capable of an account of the way of the cure: that apprehending the reason of
those receipts, he might the better comply with the distastfullness of those
potions which should be received. Well were it, if in those cures which State
Physicians have applied in Religious causes, they would not have dealt
altogether by Club Law, as if only bruites had been their Patients; but have
done us the favor, to let us see the reason of the cure, that what we could
not take as toothsome we might yet as wholesome.

(97)
A certain wealthy Matron having promised a young man to make him her Heir,
dyed, leaving him inscribed in her Testament; who providing a sumptuous
funeral for her interment, she in the very time of the solemnity (being the
seventh day) revived, and lived diverse years after, to the tedious
prorogation of his hopes: whence arose that Proverb, Mulieri ne credas, ne
mortuae quidem. Lord, how often have I been persuaded that this old man had
been mortified, but yet, to the sadding of my heart, I find it contrary to
expectation revived. Lord, let not my hopes be disappointed, though they be
thus delayed, and if this body of death do not die suddenly, yet let it at last
dye utterly.

(98)
Vraba in Peru is of so rich a soil, that the seed of Cucumbers and Melons
sown, will bear ripe fruits in twenty eight days after. How happy were it,
if such were the soil of my heart, wherein the immorrall feed of the Word
might produce its fruits with the like earliness, fertility, and plenty. But
alas, how hinderly do all good purposes appear? how short of expectation, of
the time? how long shall I be with you, how long suffer you?

(99)
Those Countries which are seated under the Line, have then their Winter when
the Suu is nearest them, being then continually vexed with raines and storms.
When the Sun of prosperity shines on men most, it is usually Winter in their
hearts, and the tempests of temptation rage most there then.

(100)
The women in Brazill after their travel soon apply themselves to household
affairs, the husbands in their stead, keeping their beds, visited, and
comforted up with restorative broths. So fares it with those vagabond beggars
who are well supplied from door to door, till they have full cheeks, and
toating Noses: while the poor houskeeper who is ashamed to beg, looks thin,
and faint; the sweat of his brows being the bread of his family, yet without
our provision, or pity.

(101)
The Emperor Sigismunds Army in his expedition against the Turk, were so
elevated with confidence of their own number, that they said, if Heaven should
fall, they should be able to keep it off with their Halberts; who yet were most
of them miserably slain by the Turks: and it is observed that very few Armies
have come off with victory, that entered battle fledge upon the wings of
selfe-confidence. The Frech at Poictiers and Agincourt, sold the prisoners
before the day, but found to their cost, the Beare-skine was not to be divided
before 'twas taken. Those that fight in that spiritual combat against sin,
Satan, and his instruments, are then strongest against their enemies, when
they are weakest in themselves. A faint hearted Saunders stands to his tackling
in the fire, when a confident Pendleton quits the field before any encounter.
In this warfare we are more then Conquerors, but through him that has loved us.

(102)
William Gardener who struck the Host out of the Cardinals hand in Portugal;
when he had his right hand cut off, took it up with his left, and kissed it:
having his left cut off, stooped down and kissed that also: and being burnt
afterward by degrees, rather roasted to death then burnt, showed such
magnanimity as was exceedingly admirable. Thomas Benbridge suffering for the
Gospel in Queen Mary's days, when the fire seized on him, (not being able to
endure the smart thereof) cried, I recant, and so was taken out of the fire;
but afterward repenting his fact, was the seventh day after burned with much
Christian constancy, enduring the torment, which through the ill making of the
fire was very great. God glorifies himself, not only in the courage, but in
the infirmity of his servants. Gardiners resolution gave not more evidence to
the truth, then Benbridg's weakness, questionably whether so much: for
Benbridg's soft nature showed that it abhorred torment, and would feign have
escaped the violence of fire; but the evidence of truth was so much upon his
spirit, that seeing the dear things of the flesh, and the concernments of the
soul could not be joined, the flesh was necessitated (though unwillingly) to
the terriblenesse of torment, rather then the soul should deny the clearness
of that light which shined into it.

(103)
Galba lived in the Reign of five Emperors in credit, and fortunate under all
of them; but when Emperor himself quickly ruined, and slain, happier under
others Government then his own. There is nothing to which the heart of man
(even in infancy) shows more disgust, then subjection to another Government:
That natural jurisdiction that one man has over another to advise and
reprove, is not without much reluctance submitted to by any; even then, when
the conscience witnesses the debt of obedience to God, the heart secretly
wishes the cancelling of that Bond, and that there were no such superiority in
God. Yet what creature needs so much Government as man? other creatures
conform to those rules nature has enjoined: Man is (above all other)
exorbitant, and never more happy then when most confined.

(104)
The Chariot Horses of Claudius Caesar, which he sent to the Circensan Games,
at the first starting threw their driver, yet performed their course, and won
the Prize. Those that are of mean parts, and much exercise; are able to do
more when engaged, then they of greater abilities, and lest use.

(105)
The Earl of Wiltshire sent Ambassador with some others by Henry the Eighth to
the Pope, being admitted to have Audience, the Pope held out his Toe to him to
kiss, which a Spaniell of the Eaths seeing, caught in his mouth, but the Earl
(not liking to take his dogs leavings) left the kiss which he had first
hanselled. Satan offers filthy and stinking lusts under the pretense of
pleasure or honor to us, which vile and unclean sinners greedily catch at,
and well were it, if we were too curious to taste of that Cup, wherein those
swine have dabled.

(106)
The War between the Duke of Burgudy and the Swissers, began but for a load of
Sheepskins, wherein the Drake (refusing all offers of accord) lost in three
battles his honor, wealth, and life. Of how great advantage to us while we
are in this world, is moderation; whereby, even easily, those differences are
accommodated, and mischiefs avoided, which our frowardness and obstinacy
widen unmeasurably, and many times involve us in utter ruin, past recovery.

(107)
Doctor Harvy reports of a Wench living in the Country, which went to
London, there in that Forest of people to conceal her shame, and lay down her
great belly; of which being delivered in the Month of September, and a few
days after recovering strength went home, where in December following she was
brought to bed of another child, to the manifest evidence of her dishonesty.
Lord, this is not the least of my infelicities, that this heart does
superfoetare: a suggestion of Satan is no sooner brought forth, but eftsoons
my heart is delivered of another; nay as Pliny reports of Ponticke Mice, even
the young ones yet unborne, are with young. Therefore, Lord, as to these
conceptions, give my heart: what will thou give it? even a barren womb, and dry
breasts.

(108)
A Citizen of Megalopolis being on his deathbed, and his friends lamenting by
him, said to them, To dye is not grievous to me, hoping in the other world to
meet with such good company, as Pythagoras, Homer, and Hecatoeus. If there be
such an association of affections between those where Learning only has knit
the knot, as to make death it self to be desired for company; let the Apostles
Cupio dissolvi be no more wondered at, when the company to be enjoyed, are God
the Judge of all, and Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament, and the Spirits
of just men made Perfect, and the bond of Union even the same Spirit.

(109)
Henry the Eighth being an hunting, an expected rain fell, whereupon one of
his Noblemen came to him, saying, It raines hard my Leig, and has spoiled your
sport; to whom he said, And so let it rain. When those things befall us, which
are above our power, by our patient sufferance we bring them under our Command.

(110)
At the battle of Montlhrey, a Nobleman of the King of France his side, fled
without stay to Luzignan, and an other of the Earl of Charolois side to
Quesnay le Court, which are above three hundred miles asunder: 'twere well if
in all Wars the contest were who should flee farthest. Certainly in the battle
against sin, he is surest of the victory, that least comes near it.

(111)
Policletus being to make two Statues, contrived one of them according to the
exact rules of his Art, the other according to the fancy of every one that came
by; which when he had exposed to public view, the first was applauded by all,
the other laughed at by those that had themselves given direction for its
fashion. What itching fingers has every mean person to be meddling with those
in public employments; and they who cannot ken their A. B. C. will yet take
upon them to censure their Teachers, and direct for the management of their
function. Yea, Lord, we are ready to say, Why is it thus? and to think if we
had the disposing of worldly affairs, those things should never have been which
have happened; but we would more compendiously effect those ends which we think
God proposes to himself: But were it so, how would unruly passions and
unbridled affections distort us, and lead us into factions and fooleries, to
the vexation of others, and disquieting of our selves, and perverting those
ends, which culminantly should have been in our eyes?

(112)
On an Island on the North of Scotland, there is a Foul which lays but one
egg, and that fastened by the slime which accompanies its production at the
small end on some stone, which she hatcheth by holding it in her foot; but if
it be removed from the place where it was fastened no Art can fix it there
again. Lord, thy Spirit suggesteth an holy motion, and fastneth on the stone
of my heart, with that evidence of the holiness, justness, and goodness of
it which accompanies it; which if attended to by a careful hand, may be
brought forth to an happy perfection; but if it be let fall from my heart, by
suffering that evidence to cool by negligence, or be disturbed by
worldliness, it is almost impossible in the like manner to resettle it.

(113)
There is an Hill upon the Coast of America, where such plenty of Sea Foul
roost, that they cover it thick with their dung, so as no Plant grows there,
which the husbandmen carry thence for the manuring of their grounds, which
makes them bear with incredible fertility. Lord, to that end does Satan
bespread my heart with the abominable filth of unclean suggestions, that a
good thought might have no abiding there: But let that wicked one be
disappointed of his end, that what he intended should kill, may become useful
to me, that thy grace may be actuated, and exercised by what he designed should
decay it; and the abhorrency of his pest, may make me delight in, and be more
laborious in thy service.

(114)
Alexander the Tyrant of Pheren seeing a Tragedy acted, and being moved to
tears by a lamentable passage in it, rose up, and said to one of his
familiars, that He was ashamed to show himself commiserating the fained
sufferings of others, and not to take pity of the miseries by himself brought
upon his own Citizens. Lord, thou have disposed the heart of man to compassion;
no heart so stony but admits of some degrees: distressed orphans and diseased
Lazers we cannot but relent to, though not releeve: our greatest cruelty is to
our selves, to that best part of our selves, our souls, which may so justly
lament, and cry, these are the wounds which I received in the house of my
friends.

(115)
Rought having been at the Martyrdom of Austoo, returning home was met by a
friend, and asked, Where he had been? who answered, To learn the way; which he
went afterward in a fiery Chariot. It Is better to go to the house of mourning,
then the house of feasting: Sadness contracting the soul, Mirth dilating it.
But it is excellent to be present at the departure of the servants of God, many
rare experiences are to be learned there: Those so traveling in the very
Thorniest part of the way to heaven, give both choice direction and
confirmation: The Devil then exercising them most, and with greatest variety
of temptations, and those dying Swans never singing so sweetly, as at their
expiration.

(116)
Charles the Seventh King of France having a jealousy that those about him
(by the instigation of his son) did intend to poison him, abstained from meat
so long, that when he would have eaten he could not, his passages being shrunk
up with too much abstinence, and so dyed miserably of famine. There is a time
when Gods Spirit strives with man, motions to good are frequent and vehement
upon the soul, when with a certain violence we are drawn to good; the fear
of God is before our faces, as with Balaam, that we dare not rush into sin; but
if these strivings be still resisted, these motions slighted, and this fear
repel'd, the time will be, when God will say my Spirit shall not always strive.

(117)
In the conspiracy of Otho against Galba; when Otho had invaded the Army, and
was acknowledged by it, there was a strong report that Otho was slain; which
very many of the Senators and Knights of Rome hearing, presented themselves to
Galba, professing their sorrow, that the occasion to show how much they would
have done for his security was taken away, of which yet (when the truth proved
otherwise) not a man did once appear in his defense. Lord, when thy justice
seems to be suspended, and because thou punishest not speedily, therefore thou will not at all; how daring and presumptious is this heart? what promises of
pleasure and security in sin does it make? but when conscience is awakened, and
the expectations of thy vengeance received, it is not less ready to despond,
then it was before presumptious and daring: Therefore Lord, though I desire to
serve thee out of a principle of oneness with thee, and affection to thee, yet
no bonds are too many to restrain rebellious corruptions, and I had rather the
Rod should be ever held over me, then I should grow wanton, through the want of
it.

(118)
Mount Taurus has his head continually covered with snow, though elevated far
toward the Sun, when the much more low lying valleys are parcht with excessive
fervor, because the beams of the Sun passing upon those Hills obliquely, affect
them with little heat, whereas below the heat is doubled by reverberation.
Those that are (as I may call them) single-guilt Auditors, that give the word
an hearing, and but an hearing, are left with cold and snowy affections; but
those have their hearts (like the Disciples journying to Emaus) burning within
them, that reflect the word back again by meditation.

(119)
Philip Duke of Burgundy was wont to say, That the Citizens of Gaunt love their
Princes Son well, but their Princes never. Such is the fond heart of man,
disliking and weary of what is in present, and reaching after what is to come,
which when obtained we as much disgust and loath, as we before fondly pursued.

(120)
Grinoeus lying upon his death bed, said, That he was going to that place,
where now Luther and Calvin agreed well together. The differences of Judgment
that are between good men, will be composed, or at least qualified in this
life, when persecution comes; but they will be extinguished in the other
world, when we shall see no more in aenigmate, but face to face: but the
animosities that are between evil men, arising from corrupt hearts, and
cursed lusts, shall be exasperated in Hell, (where like the Army of Midian)
every man's sword shall be against his brother; the Devils shall torment men,
and men one another, and there shall be consent in nothing, but weeping and
wailing and gnashing of teeth.

(121)
Lewis the Eleventh King of France, having been a great oppressor of his
subjects by excessive Taxes, when he grew old resolved to redress that and
other mischiefs, whereby they had been oppressed; but was in a short time after
this purpose prevented by death. There are twelve hours in the day, wherein men
may work, but we are bad accomptants, and reckon for the most part, that but
five, which is past Eleven, and therefore as to all good purposes begin too
late; but happy is he that always makes use of the present, for he is sure not
to be disappoynted, nor misreckoned.

(122)
Three Martyrs being bound to one stake, one of them finding his heart sadded,
and fainting through the apprehension of the danger, went from under the chain
and fell down and prayed, and therein finding that comfort he wanted, rose up
joyfully, and going to his fellows, together with them courageously suffered.
Lord, we can sail no further in this troublous Sea, then the gales of thy
Spirit drive us; if those fail, we are presently becalmed, even then when our
course is most vigorous; it is thou that not only winds up our souls, but art
the spring that moves them, if that be down their motion to thee-ward cease,
for it is thou that gives us to will and to do, of thy good pleasure.

(123)
Agesilaus hearing news of the overthrow of Pisander, at the very time of his
joining battle with the Thebans, caused the contrary tidings to be reported in
his Camp, least his Soldiers should be discouraged; and came out himself with
a Garland of flowers on his head, and publicly sacrificed to the Gods, giving
them thanks for the goodnews. We have seen much such politic Religion in our
days, when there has been praying, and fasting, and giving of thanks, not
according to the truth of our concernments, but men's ambitious ends: But, Lord,
though thou have been thus mocked, and Religion made a stalking Horse to
Policy, yet be thou found nevertheless of those that seek thee in truth, and
thy services not less used, because they have been thus abused.

(124)
Theramenes coming out of an house, was no sooner abroad, but the house fell
down, and crushed them that were in it; which good fortune the Athenians
congratulating, he said, O Jupiter! what is it, for which thou have farther
reserved me? And not long after engaging for the Commonwealth against the
thirty Tyants, was by them put to death. Lord, when thy goodness succoureth us
in our dangers, and gives us those deliverances which thou deniest to others,
let us take care not so much to enjoy our selves in that safety thou have
vouchsafed us, as to answer those ends wherefore thou have preserved us.

(125)
I read of the sister of Edward the third, married to David King of Scots, that
she was called Jane Make-peace. How fortunate were it, if not every Kingdom,
but every Family had one deserving that name? For what animosities are bandied
between kindred and kindred, neighbor and neighbor, man and wife, which an
indifferent skill piously affected might easily compose?

(126)
It Is said of the Army of Vitellius, that in their march from Germany against
Otho, were vigorous and full of courage in enduring the troubles and hardships
of the War, and ready to execute the commands of their Captains; but in their
march out of the City against Vespatian, they were faint for War, but prompt to
all sedition. Lord, we are then ready to dispute thy Commands, when we are
unwilling to do them; and we are then ready to charge thy ways as full of
difficulty, when we are full of sloth: We think this will excuse our neglect,
to say, That we do what we can, when indeed we do but what we will, measuring
our ability not by our strength, but laziness: yea, we quarrel with
discipline, and find many faults with the rigor, or equity of it; it is not
because the rule is not straight, but we are crooked, and it is irksome to
comply with it.

(127)
It Is said of Galba, that He could not so well be accounted virtuous, as
without vices. It Is not seldom that civility is mistaken for grace, and we
please our selves that we are not as others are, then that we are what we
should be. Peter speaking of those that may apostatize, expresses them, not by
their actings of grace, but Their escaping of the pollutions of the world: The
sinfullnesse of some sins may be discovered, and through the light of
conscience there may be an abhorring against them, where yet there is no hearty
closing with good, not affectionate application to the ways of Righteousness.
Lord, let therefore the new creature be formed in me, whereby I may not only
Be purged from dead works, but purified to serve the living God.

(128)
Thomas Hawks going to the fire, was requested to give them a sign, whether
the pain of burning were such as might be with patience endured, which he
promised to do by lifting his hands over his head; so being in the fire, and
now to all men's apprehensions past moving, the holy man remembered his promise,
and lifting his arms aloft, clapped his burnt stumps together three times, and
then sunk down without any further appearance of life. That the torment of fire
should be tolerable to the body, is past imagination, unless it had first
lost the sense of feeling; but God that made the Bush burn, but not burn up,
and torments bodies in Hell with fire without consumption, can make fire
consume the body, but not torment. Yea if men can make their consciences
(naturally tender) past feeling by custom in sin, is it much that God should
make the body past feeling that is dedicated to his service, and so cause a bed
of fire, to become a bed of down? Lord, if such an exigence by thy Providence
befall me, let me not be solicitous what the suffering is, but for thy
assistance to bear it.

(129)
In the contest between Vitellius and Vespatiau for the Empire of Rome, there
were overtures made to Vitellius of agreement, to which he (enervated by sloth
and luxury) was willing to hearken, consulting what place of preferment to
Condition for; being contented himself to forge he had been Emperor, if
others would not have remembered it. It often falls out, that they who have
led the foremost ranks in Religious designs, while godliness has been
prosperous; when it has met with smart opposition, have so far degenerated, as
by a shameful apostasy to side with the adversary, glad of any poor
advantages that may be had thence, not ashamed to forget they were professors,
but when they observe others remember their former profession.

(130)
A Schoolmaster walking with one of his Scholars by a neighbors Orchard, the
Lad plucked a Fig that hung over the Pale, which the Master seeing, rebuked him
sharply, and took it from him; but presently eat it up himself. Oh the very
many who have greedily devoured those things, which they counted a crime for
others to look upon, and have declaimed that as sacrilege, wherewith they have
filled their own Purses, having weathercock judgments, turned about with the
wind of their own conveniences, and can tell you (as Ployden by the Hogs) That
the case is altered.

(131)
Protogenes that famous Limner was seven years in drawing the Picture of
Jalisus, which when Apelles saw, he said, That the grace of the work was much,
but allayed by the length of the time. I have heard such Sermons as have been
Elephantis partus, the works of those who have thought a Sermon cannot well be
conceived under a year, or some months at least: But I could never meet with
any answering the expectations of so tedious a birth, but they have been
outdone (as to the ends of a Sermon, which is to inform the judgment, and stir
the affections) by those, who have brought forth such issues two or three times
in a week at least.

(132)
Pyrrus being admitted by the Athenians into their Castle, Pyrra at his
departure advised them Never more to admit any Prince upon the like account
again; for it was too great a temptation for an ordinary fidelity to avoid.
Time was when I gave my soul that liberty to discourse with temptation, that
it was not my strength but thy mercy, Lord, brought me off; let not that
success make me more adventurous, but the sense of my danger, for the time to
come more circumspect and wary.

(133)
In the fields about the City Narvi in Italy, drought causes dirt, and rainy
weather makes it dusty. How strangly contrary are the effects of the means of
grace on the disobedient? the bright rays of divine truth giving occasion to
corrupt reason to resist it more strongly, and the gentle showers of the word
raise the dust of vile affections and passions, (by a certain Antiperistasis,
like Salt in a Pot of Snow, conducing to their farther obduration) that of
their own nature would mollify and soften.

(134)
Some travelers in Ethiopia finding some trees in a valley convenient for
their repose, alighted there to ease themselves ad cattle; which while they
were doing, one among them observing a black cloud behind him, advised them to
a speedy departure from that place; which they had scarcely done, but so great
a torrent of waters came down there, where before was nothing but dry ground,
driving all before it, so as had certainly been their ruin if they had not
complied with that advice. I observe by those clouds of unruly passions arising
in my heart upon the presentation of some objects, that my soul will he
mightily endangered, if those occasions of sin be not avoided: Oh that my
retreat may be therefore as speedy, as my danger is certain.

(135)
A motion being made in the Senate for the restoring of some Achaians to their
country, who had been long banished thence; which being much argued too and
fro in the Senate, Cato stands up, and tells them, It seems they were not
busy, that could attend so long dispute, whether Rome or Greece should bury
those decrepit Achaians. If we compare our ambitious thoughts, and emulous
animosities, with our haftning to our graves, we shall find our funerals
deserve our care, more then our designs; for while we contrive how to supplant
one another, death plays the Jacob with us, and supplants us all.

(136)
The Ambassadors of the late King or Sweden, having been over with us, our
Gallants had soon taken up their fashion of wearing Muffs: a mode unagreeing
with our temperate Climate, so as the weaker Sex, embrace it more for
ostentation, then need; and unbecoming the masculine Sex, who should be men of
action, and ready prim'd to execution; which made me wonder that we being so
extremely self-lovers, and selfe-conceited, should so far value others
inventions, as so unbecomingly to be their Apes, and that the fashions of every
Country should have so many followers, those only of the Kingdom of Heaven
excepted.

(137)
There is a fountain in Dodone which extinguisheth lighted firebrands put into
it, but lights those that are extinct. Lord, if I come to thy word fraught
with carnal wisdom, I go blinder away then I came: Therefore let my mind be
dark as to the consultations of flesh and blood, without fire as to worldly
desires, that it may be enlightened by thy counsels, and enkindled with an holy
zeal to thy service.

(138)
They say that a great part of the Land of Egypt was Sea, but by the earth
which Nilus brings down with it, and sends abroad in its overflowings; is now
become firm land, and exceeding fruitful. Lord, this heart of mine was all
Sea, estuating with raging passions, and productive of innumerable monstrous
desires; but by thy grace it is now in some part good soil: Oh let this Sea
diminish daily, and this good ground grow every day more and more fruitful.

(139)
Our Countriman says, That he observed in his travells in Italy, that where
our Lord Christ has one votary, the Virgin Mary has twenty, much more
frequent Altars, and enriched Temples, and services more abundantly repeated.
So taking is superstition, that whereas true Religion being of divine
appointment has but rare, and calmly affected applycants, humane inventions
has Tritum atrium, many and zealous devotoes, Bring thy son (say the
Abiezrites to Joash) that he may dye, because he has thrown down the Alter
of Baal. We heard no such thing before spoken of, when Gods Alters were said
desolate.

(140)
There is a tree called Pacovere in Brazil, which bears fruit at a certain
time very plentifully, but never save that once. How many such are there, who
at some fit have appeared gallantly upon a Religious account, but have been
never after heard of as engaged in any godly design; that like Hushai have
stepped in to play their part, but are never mentioned more. But Lord, let my
soul be like the Orange tree full of successive fruit, and let not the tree
fall, but so as that it may beat down some of the Devils buildings with it.

(141)
There is a people in the South of Africa, which though they have twenty wives
a piece, or more, yet bury their children as soon as borne, not being willing
to be combred with their education. Our teeming hearts are Instar viginti,
incredibly fruitful of corrupt thoughts; but though they will conceive and
bring forth, it is our prudence to stifle them in the birth, for they cannot be
brought up without, not our trouble only, but our ruin.

(142)
The Tiger (they say) when hungrey is a very valiant creature, not dreading any
enemy; but when full, will flee from a dog. Many have there been very daring
and undaunted in the engaging in, and patrocination of good works, when their
estates were mean; but when they have been warm with wealth, and well furred
with large revenues, any feeble opposition has quelled their courages.

(143)
In the time of Dionisius that Sicilian Tyrant, the Sea was fresh for an whole
day in the Bay of Siracusa. Lord, my heart has a natural saltness, not one
drop is to be fetched thence, but has an original unsavourinesse: But Oh,
thou that art able, would cure that otherwise incurable disease; speak the
word, and thy servant shall be made whole; smite thou the Rock of my heart,
with the Rod of thy word, that thence may flow the living spring of divine
charity.

(144)
Isocrates is said to sell one Oration of his for twenty Talents. Surely
Learning is not so much degenerated as the price is fallen; but if the enticing
words which man's wisdom teaches be at so dear a rate, how precious should
those volumes be, of which Lord thy holy Spirit is the inditer?

(145)
A certain Samian named Elpis, on the African shore met a Lion; from whom
flying, and recovering the next tree, the beast draws near, making shows that
he had a bone in his throat, with many supplicant postures requires his help;
who at length persuaded to descend, and performing the office desired, had
thanks returned him by the Lion, with a constant tribute of the beasts he
caught, during all the time of his abode in that coast. It Is not rare to find
high flowne persons, like this Lion submissive to, and supplicating the help of
those of meaner consideration in their necessities; but it is rare to find such
imitating this Lion in their gratitude.

(146)
There is a beast called Catoblepas, whose eyes whosoever sees dies
immediately; but yet (according to its name) having an heavy head, looks
always downward, and so being seldom seen is less pernicious. How virulent
and ragefull are those instruments of Satan, and whither would not their malice
extend its self, but that the divine Providence has so ordered it, that those
cursed Cowes, should have short horns?

(147)
The Sea-Tortoises being delighted with the morning Sun, so long please
themselves in that enjoyment, that their shell being dried with the heat of the
Sun, they cannot merg themselves when they would, but floating above the water,
become an easy prey to them that design the carching them. The soul that too
long, and unretiringly beslows its self on the pleasures of this world, will
find its self in no capacity to engage in spiritual affairs, but at hand to
be taken captive by the Devil at his will, and in a promptness to be
debauched by every temptation.

(148)
It Is observed, the Storks which in great numbers come in Summer, and depart in
Winter, are never perceived when they come, though that they are come be
apparent. The infusions of grace in those piously educated, though the time
when may many times not be discovered, yet the being of it (if it be) will be
manifest, and by the effects of it evident.

(149)
Histories tell us, and my self have known, that where Wood has been grub'd,
Fountains have sprung up, where before there were none, If we would but pluck
up those inordinate desires, which waste our estates in vain superfluities,
what abundance would there be of profitable conveniences to supply others?

(150)
Agesilausbeing desired by one, to hear a man that exactly counterfeited the
Nightingale, answered, it would not need, for he had often heard the
Nightingale her self. When we are called upon to hear the determinations of
Counsels and Fathers, and to observe the practice of Antiquity (which it were
well if we did exactly imitate the truth) it might be replied, It were not
amifse, but that we have God himself speaking to us in the Scriptures, which
is better.

(151)
The Ambassadors of the French King charging the Earl of Charalois in bitter
terms, with a confederacy with the Duke of Britain; the Earl many times
entreating his Fathr Philip that he would give him leave to speak for himself,
the old Duke in the end said, I have already answered for thee, as me-thinketh
a Father should answer for his Son; but if thou have a mind to speak thy self,
bethink thy self to day, and speak to morrow, and spare not. The words which
we are to speak to captious greatness, need much premeditation, that they may
admit of no exception; But Lord, there is not a word in our mouths, which is
not written in thy Book, for which we must nor give an account to thy justice:
But Oh that therefore I were so wary as to set a watch before the door of my
mouth, that I offend not with my tongue.

(152)
Two brothers traveling upon the road, fell in discourse of a woman known to
them both, which one of them praised as very handsome, the other thought her
fair, but not so fair; which difference in Judgment (though nothing pertinent
to either) yet grew to that pass, as that they fell together by the ears, and
had slain one the other, if not accidentally parted. How many different
opinions are there among us (Brethren of the same Religion as to fundamentalls)
so far from being necessary to Salvation, that it is questionable whether they
be any thing pertinent, which yet we are so hot about, that nothing but blood
will part us, when the things for which we have quarelled, would pose a good
invention to tell you, what tendency they have to the edifying of the Body of
Christ.

(153)
The Leigeors having broken the peace made with the Duke of Burgundy, for
performance of which, they had given 300 Hostages; it was debated in the Dukes
Counsel what should be done with the Hostages: The Lord of Contay advised to
kill them all; a person of great wisdom and moderation, and never before
observed to speak so cruelly. How uncharitable is it to censure any man, for
one Act committed? when a sudden passion or acrimonious humor, may bias the
mind quite beyond its accustomed tenor.

(154)
Of those Hostages which they of Liege had given to the Duke of Burgundy, for
the performance of their Covenants with him, upon their breach of which he sent
home unharmed; the greatest number proved unthankful, and took Arms against
the Duke: but five or six of them were so mindful of the benefit they had
received, that by their means he entered Liege, an enterprise so eminent, that
a servant of the Duke said, he durst hardly have craved of Gods hands so great
success. Excellent is it to do good, and to communicate; for though the
subjects of our benefaction may many (as in a Lottery) prove blankes, yet we
may many times meet such a prize, as may make ample amends.

(155)
The City of Venice begets wonder in the beholders, in this chiefly, to see
so many stately and magnificent structures, lifting up their towering heads, as
if, like the Poets Venus, they had been begotten of the Seas foame, and in that
place ejected; or else seated there by as great a miracle, as that Faith should
work, which should say to that mountain, be thou removed, and set in the
midst of the Sea. The excellent and glorious virtues of the servants of God
deserve our view and imitation; but this makes them works of wonder, that they
have their seat in such hearts, as are not unlikely only, but having in some
respe4ct an impossibility to such productions.

(156)
Ericthonius being lame in his feet, first invented the Chariot to hide that
imperfection, and Pericles being long headed, was therefore always represented
with an Helmet; and our Queen Anne covered the Wen in her neck with a Ruff,
which she first brought in fashion. How do we wish that the deformities of our
bodies never were, or might ever be hid, a crooked leg, or gibbous shoulder,
how it troubles us; which yet if concealed, can never be rectified: but happy
we if we were as sensible of the deformities of our souls, for the remedying of
which crookednesses, the holy Spirit has given us such strait rules to comply
with.

(157)
Ravillak that murdered Henry the fourth of France, though in his execution he
suffered most exquisite torments, yet was observed never so much as once to
name the name of God, or any other way make show of repentance. Who would put
off repentance to a dying bed, in confidence to have it then at our call? when
sickness with the very presentations of death its self, leaves that heart
unmollified, which custom in sin has hardened.

(158)
Alibiades went to one of his friends houses, that had a great feast, and bad
one of his servants take away half the Plate that stood on the Cupboard,
wherewith the guests incensed, said, It was a bold and injurious part; nay,
says the Master, very favorable has he dealt with us, that he has left us
any, when he might have taken all. Lord, when thou cuttest off our
suprfluities, we are ready to repine that thou dealest hardly with us; but what
cause have we rather to acknowledge thy clemency and goodness, that may
take all, and yet leavest us any thing, that can claim naught.

(159)
Fabius Maximus rode on horseback to his Son being Consul, then disparching
affairs of State in the Market place; which the Son seeing, senr an officer to
command his Father to alight, and come on foot, if he had any thing to say to
the Consul: While all wonder at the unhandsomnesse of this Command, the Father
alights, and hasting to his Son, embracing him; applauds his magnanimity, that
he had preferred the honor and interest of the Commonwealth, before that of a
Father. Lord, thine is the Sovereign interest of the world, and happy we, if
the sense of that lie so much upon our hearts, as that whatsoever is dear, and
precious to us else, be made to vail Bonnet to thy concernments.

(160)
A Lacedemonian having lost his Son, and being reproved as indulging his
sorrow, in that he wept for him, answered, I am not so much to be reprehended,
Natura enim me flebilem fecit. Lord, if we much lament the loss of our dear
relations, let it not be the effect of our impatience, but the issue of our
affection.

(161)
Dionisius being expelled Sicilia, and banished to Corinth, was asked, What
good the doctrine of Plate had done him; who replied, To bear this adversity
patiently. Lord, if the times any when should prove so disasterous, as to
prevent the more favorable effects of thy truth, as instead of that love and
veneration it should beget, to render the professors of it the subjects of
persecution, yet let us never be disappointed of this fruit, that we know how
in patience to possess our souls.

(162)
Alexander being at Troy, one offers to show him Paris his Harp; I marry (said
he) I should like it well, if thou could show me that of Achillis. When the
Papists show their store of relics to their credulous votaries, methinks it is
a sad story, they should conceal the Key of Heaven so, as they neither enter
in themselves, nor suffer those that would.

(163)
When the Duke De Birois was beheaded, he demeaned himself more like a Lion in
a toil, then a Lamb on the block, and was by the executioner rather trapan'd
to death, then fairly submitting to that present necessity; So that while we
admire the courage of his life, we abhor his unchristianlike death: Whereas our
Earl of Essex, though rather beyond him in high magnanimity, yet manifested
abundance of Christian meekness on the Scaffold. Certainly it is an unsound
maxim of our Duellists, that a man cannot be valiant and religious; or, that
Joseph's answer to his mistress, How shall I do this, and sin against God? would
not do well in a challenge. But surely Lord, we are then most courageous, when
we are least bold to sin, and most obedient to thy word and Providence.

(164)
Alcibiades being accused by the Athenians, and hiding himself, when found, was
asked, if he mistrusted the justice of his Country, no says he, not in
another matter; but my life being concerned, I will not trust my own mother
least she should mistake, and put in a black bean instead of a white. In the
concernments of this life, we are desirous to be most secured, and will not
leave important affairs upon any uncertainty: but the Salvation of our souls
which it might be thought we would not trust our dearest relations with, we
suffer to rely only on the Colliers faith, and are willing should depend upon
the most improbable persuasions that can be imagined.

(165)
Agrippina being accused by Syllana for imagining treason against her Son Nero,
made this her defense, That Syllana being barren, might think it as casie to be
rid of Sons as adulterers, but had she known the power of maternall affection,
there would have been no probability to accuse of that for which nature it
self had provided a defense. Lord, if others who never tasted how good the
Lord is, sin against thee, though the crime be manifest, yet it is less
unnatural; but if thy Sons be accused, if that relation prove not their
innocence, 'twill agravate their guilt.

(166)
Charles Duke of Burgundy being discomfited at the battle of Naucy, passing
over a River, was overthrown by his Horse, and in that estate was assaulted by
a Gentleman, of whom he craved quarter; but the Gentleman being deaf, slew him
incontinently: Yet afterward, when he knew whom he had slain, he died within
few days of mere melancholy. When God intends to bring judgments on us, he
not only finds executioners to effect his purposes, but sends such as are as
deaf to our entreaties, as we have been to his counsels.

(167)
Subonis Flavius being one of the conspirators against Nero, and asked by him,
why he regarded the military Sacrament so little, as to conspire his death?
answered him; That he was faithful to him while he deserved to be loved, but
he could not but hate him; since he was his Mothers, Brothers, and Wives
murderer, a Waggoner, Stage Player, and Incendiary of the City: then which
speech (says the Historian) nothing happened to Nero more vexatious; for
though he were prompt to do wickedly, yet impatient to bear the wickedness he
did. It is not the least part of our conviction, and vanity, that we are not
ashamed to be what we are ashamed to be thought; when to be evil is a real
defection, to be thought so, but imaginary, and rather to them that think so
then to us, being an evil conception existing in their minds, not otherwise
applicable to us then as we are guilty.

(168)
The Courtiers of Galba, though under a severe Prince, were yet as injurious to
the Commonwealth as those of Nero; because Galba being old, and their time not
likely to last long, they made use of it while it endured; like the Dragon
which laid about him, because he knew he had but a short time. How much does
the consideration of the shortness of time, conduce to the expedition of humane
affairs? what odds between our have in a Winters, and in a Summers day? Yet
alas, how little does the brevity of our lives, enforce our endeavors to be
spiritually rich; we loyter away our precious opportunities in doing nothing,
or that which is worse then nothing.

(169)
It Is said of Charles the Ninth, King of France, that accustoming himself to rip
open the bellies, and pluck out the bowels of those Beasts he took in hunting,
grew very cruel, being not only the Author of that unparalled Parisian
Massacre, but also many times furious to those near about him, and beloved by
him, often to their very great danger. It Is safe not to have to do with the
very introductions to iniquity: a wise man would not come near that precipice,
the very beholding of which will make a man giddy: it is common prudence to
avoid that place, where we judge the Air infectious. Our hearts are so
fruitful of cursed lusts, that they generate not by coition only, but by
imagination: Happy he therefore that is taught to fly the very appearance of
evil, and to hate, not the leprous body only, but the very Garment spotted
with the flesh.

(170)
When William the Conqueror had taken sure footing in England, having seized
the greatest part of it, and intending an expedition into Kent, to take that in
also, the Kentlshmen under the conduct of their Bishop well appointed met him
not far from Smauscombe, having every one a green bough in his hand, and
behind them a vast tract of Woodland. The men with boughs thus appearing like
a Wood, and the Wood behind being thought by the Conqueror to be men with
boughs, he was unwilling to hazard his present Conquests, by engaging with so
considerable a force as he judged them to be, and therefore chose rather to
condescend to those Conditions, which they presented to him: the ground of that
saying, Kent was never conquered; and the cause that that County has those
immunities the other have not. When times turn, and persecutions threaten the
godly, they poor hearts, think that there is a vast Army of opposition against
them, and that their deliverance is far off; like those Jews who said the time
of this captivity is long; therefore are ready to capitulate with the enemy,
and comply with those things which are neither safe, nor honorable: when alas
the Lion is not so fierce as he is painted, nor opposition so strange, but the
breath of the Lord can blast it; nor persecution so tedious, but yet a little
while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

(171)
Margaret Meering being excommunicated by Rought, out of that Congregation of
Protestants whereof he was Pastor, wherein she seemed to have hard dealing; yet
when Rought was imprisoned for the truth, she above all others affectionatly
ministered to him, and suffered Martyrdom for the truth with him. It Is an huge
argument of a gracious heart, to submit to reproof; many that have been active
for Christ, have yet fallen off upon such an account. Abner that more than
once, and more than any, ventured his life for the house of Saul, yet deserted
it, being check^ by Ishbosheth concerning Rispah.

(172)
Vitellius in his passage to Rome, after the victory obtained by Caecinua and
Valens against the Othonians, would needs see the place where the battle was
fought, which if but newly stricken, yet would have rendered an horrid
Spectacle, so many mangled bodies, and divided joints, and carcasses of men and
horses, which careless death had there promiscuously scattered, giving a sad
representation; but it being the fourtieth day after, the corrupted gore, and
putrefaction of so many unburied bodies made the sight beyond imagination
horrible, which yet Vitellius with delight beheld, rejoicing in the slaughter
of so many Citizens, without the least discountenance, or show of miseration.
To how great hardness of heart, and height of inhumanity does custom in sin
bring the soul! what would be trembled at by those that are but beginners in
iniquity, is accounted sport by those flesht in ungodliness; Let the young men
arise, and play before us, said Joab: Rare sport where the play-mates run their
swords in each others side, and fell down dead together.

(173)
A certain person of our Country, having a suit with another a long time for a
small plot of ground not worth 40 pounds, left by Will 500 pounds per annum for
the maintenance of the suit after his death. Oh the imperfection of our Laws,
or corruption of our Lawyers, that any suit can admit of so tedious and costly
a decision; but alas, did he look for peace in Heaven, that would have a Civil
war thus survive him?

(174)
Alcibiades having done huge exploits, for which the Athenians called him from
bannishment and made him their General, sending him out with a Fleet of an 100
sail; they were so high-flown in their expectations from him, that they looked
to hear soon after his departure of the subduing of no small Countries by him,
beyond all possibility of accomplishing, which he not effecting, but yet as
much as in reason could be expected, they change their former conceit of his
sufficiency, into suspicion of his fidelity, and without more evidence
condemned him. Lord, we are high in our expectations of great things from thee,
and are ready to murmur, as if too straightly dealt with by thee, not because
thou give us not what we have cause to expect, but because we expect that
which there is no cause thou should give us.

(175)
Harvey affirms the heart (though the fountain of life) yet to be without
feeling; which he proves by a Gentleman he had seen, who by an Imposthume had
an hole in his side, through which not only the Systole and Diastole of the
heart might be discerned, but the heart it self touched with the finger, which
yet the Gentleman affirmed that he felt not. It Is an argument that such a soul
is of eminent and public conducement, useful to derive good to others, that
is less sensible of private injuries; when those peevish spirits that are
intent upon their particular affronts, are taken up with their own to the
neglecting of what they might benefit the public by.

(176)
In the reign of Nero, there were very many undone, not by their enemies only,
but by their friends, who too solicitously intending their safety, that very
means rendered them suspected, and became their ruin. If Satan cannot destroy
us as an enemy, he endeavors it as a friend; if he cannot fasten his
remptations upon us under the notion of sin, and the ugly hue of a direct
opposition against God, he alters his method, and transformeth himself into an
Angel of Light: if he cannot persuade to a neglect of Gods service, then to a
superstitious worship of him; he is like an enemy when he fawns and frowns, and
is ever not to be suspected only, but resisted always, for he is ever the
father of lies.

(177)
King Edward the second being taken by the Queens forces, was committed to some
persons to convey him to a place of safety, who going about to shave him that
he might not be known, took cold water out of a ditch to wash him with, saying,
That should serve his turn now; to whom he answered, That he would have warm
water whether they would or no, even his own tears. Though the cruelty of
enemies, and calamity of persecuting times, may deny us the many conveniences,
and deprive us of the advantages of this life, yet do what they can, they
cannot deprive us of Gods favor, if we deprive not our selves of it by a
simple compliance.

(178)
It Is siad of the Lion, that being proveked, he beats himself with his own
tail, to raise his anger, and incense himself, that his spirits being stirred,
he might lay out himself more forcibly. Those that are of melancholy and
froward spirits, when disasters befall them, either by their too much poring on
their present sufferings, or misboding worse, make those burdens heavier, and
(like wind in rainy weather) set them close, and tie knots upon their Whipcord,
and pin their Rods to make them yerk the more severely.

(179)
Richard the first, being reproved by a Friar, and told, That he had three
Daughters, which if he did not dispose of, would undo him, Pride,
Covetousness and Leachery; he answered, If the were the business, he would
bestow them presently; Pride to the Knights and Tempplars, Covetousness to the
Cistercian Monks, and Leachery to the Friars. When good advice is given us, we
enervate the strength thereof, or pervert the use by quarrelling with, or
recriminating the person that gives it; whereas if good counsel come from a
Balaams Ass, or the Devil himself reprove sin, if the Conscience plead guilty,
reformation is a due debt.

(180)
Demosthenes coming to Corinth, with design to enjoy the famous Courtizan Lais,
she asked him so great a sum, that he returned, saying, He would not buy
repentance at so dear a rate. Sinful pleasure is never to be purchased at
easy terms, sin being so full of iniquity, that it never demands an equal
compensation, no less then a precious immortal soul will serve the turn in
lieu of those pleasures which perish in the using, and are no sooner found then
lost.

(181)
Edward the first, before the death of his father, with other Confederates
undertaking a voyage to the Holy Land, by the way they invaded Tunis, where
having taken a very great spoil, the rest purposed with their booty to return
home, which design the Prince withstanding, but in vain, said, That as he had
vowed a journey for the recovery of the Holy land, so thither he would go,
though none but Fowen his Horse-keeper accompanied him. It is good to have the
heart in such tune, as to join in concord with others in a religious design,
to be glad when it is said tous, Let us go up to the house of the Lord; but it
is better to lead in such company, to be Captains of the Lords Host; but then
we show what spirit we are of, when like Elijah, we are very jealous for the
Lord in such general defections, that we seem only left, that we can tread the
wine press alone, though of the people there be none with us; can say as
Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord, though all Israel beside desert his
interest.

(182)
Lewis then Duke of Orleance, rebelling against Charles the eighth, King of
France, and joining in confederacy with the Duke of Britain, was taken prisoner
in battle by the Earl of Trimovil, being afterward King of France, and moved by
some about him to be revenged of the Earl, said, That the Earl had done nothing
but his duty, and wished, That he might never find a worse Subject in time of
need, then the Earl in that action had approved himself. Such preaching as does
search the heart, awaken conscience, and hedge about the soul with thorns that
it cannot find its paths, and takes it captive in the Lords bonds, is under the
censure of men as unreasonably austere and rigorous; but when their eyes are
opened to discern the true interests of their souls, they then find that that is
the preaching fit for the recovery of souls, and that they had never been
cured, if they had not been cauterized.

(183)
Richard the first, being in his Palace at Westminster, had news brought him,
That the French King besieged [one of his Towns beyond the Seas; whereupon he
vowed, That he would not turn his back till he had raised the siege; and]
immediately caused the walls to be dug down before him, and without farther
delay, hasted over, and relieved the place. How many good purposes are lost for
want of present execution; while we pretend to consult for the fittest
opportunity, we loose the present opportunity; and while we are determining
what time to repent in, we leave our selves no time wherein to repent.

(184)
A certain Priest in France being converted to the truth, and imprisoned for
it, being brought to examination recanted, upon which recantation being
delivered out of prison, was in the very passage out slain by two Gentlemen
that bare an old grudge to him. Lord, they that will not lose their lives upon
that excellent accoutn of thy glory, how just is it that it should be lost to
them upon the unprofitable account of humane frailty or others malice? what
rare husbandry is ti then to lose the life for thy sake, when that Rose is
offered up a sweet savor to thee, and shall be richly rewarded by thee, which
otherwise would have faded of it self, or have been clipped off with the rest of
the Bush.

(185)
One claiming Justice of Aristides for injuries that another had done him, told
him, That the same person had spoken very unhandsome and vile words of
Aristides himself; to whom he said, Friend, if he have wronged thee ought,
prithee make it appear, for upon the account of righting thee am I at this time
here, not to vindicate my own wrongs. When will it be that judgment shall not
be perverted, that the equity of the cause, and not the affection of the party
accused, shall be considered? for how often has it been sufficient to put and
keep those sheep in the Pound, not because they have trespassed, but have not
our mark upon them; and have dispatched those Doves, not because they have not
been innocent, but not of our color.

(186)
A Bishop being charged with an heinous offense, and condemned to dye for it,
had grace given in to him before his execution, so that with floods of tears he
lamented his sins, and with an heart abundantly poured out he besought the Lord
for pardon, saying, That he had said prayers before, but never prayed till now.
What odds is there between the tongue when it is the tuned instrument of others
invention, and when it is the tunable instrument of the hearts affection; when
the breath that moves it is not out of the bellows of a formal devotion, but
the breathings of the soul to God and pantings after him? how differently is
the Lord affected? the languid oscitancy, and distracted perfunctoriness of
prayer not dictated from the heart, like an arrow shot from a broken bow,
falling short of the Throne of Grace, but it is the inditings of that spirit of
prayer and supplication, that lays bands upon the Divine Majesty, and will not
let him go until it has a blessing.

(187)
Philip King of Spain being minded by one of his Courtiers, That that was the
day of his father the Emperors resignation, answered, and of his repentance
too; intimating that that resignation was no sooner done, then wished undone.
With what unresolvednesse do we resolve to desert the world, our hearts having
secret practice with it, even then when our understandings are convinced of the
vanity of it, and we profess most against it? our repentance though as to the
matter of it, not to be repented of, yet to be repented of as to the manner.

(188)
Pliny reports of a Maid in his time, On her marriage day changed into a man;
and others tell of the same metamorphosis so real, that some afterward have
had wife and children. Those that are espoused to Christ in the bond of the New
Covenant, are truly changed from the effeminacies of lust, and of a vain
conversation, and become masculine, enobled to generous and heroic designs,
pressed to quit themselves like men.

(189)
Archimedes being intent upon a Mathematical demonstration, at the time when
Syracusa was taken, a Soldier breaks into his study upon him, with his sword
directed at him, to whom he turned about and said, Prithee friend let me alone
till I have finished my Demonstration; with which the rude fellow incensed, run
him through, without more ado. With what content have those refined souls
bestowed themselves in the search of humane Science, when with high
satisfaction to themselves they have hunted forth out of the rude mass some
more sublimed notion; with what exultation have they clapped their hands at, and
applauded their own (...), when as yet their wisdom was but of the earth
earthy; with what rare delight then may we be employed in the search of those
divine mysteries which the very Angels themselves desire to pry into.

(190)
The very suspicion of Protestanisme is almost Capital where the Inquisition is
established; but the Jews are by public allowance suffered in Rome it self,
under the Popes Nose; though the Protestant agree very much with the Papist in
his belief as a Christian, the Jew not at all. In Turkey the Christians have
free exercise of their Religion, but the Persian Sect is so hated, that a Zelez
slew an Ambassador of theirs, only upon the account of that difference, though
the Christian wholly disavow their Mahomet, the Persian only dissents about his
Successor. Thus we daily see a greater disgust because of some petty
differences in circumstantials, where yet there is agreement in the vital part
of fundamental truth, and holy living, then because of those notorious
profanesses which unchristian a man, and make him as an Heathen man, and a
Publican.

(191)
A Crocodile out of the River Niger drew in with ihs tail nine slaves chained
together, and devoured them, but the Chain not being digestible, proved his
destruction, being found in him dead. Lord, at how great sins dare this heart
of mine venture, and at how long a train? as the Ox drinks down water in huge
quantity, and with great delight; but there is a Chain of guilt with it, surely
deadly, that can neither be vomited, nor vented; this makes me cry, My bowels,
my bowels, I am pained at my very heart; but the comfort is, there is Balm in
Gilead, and a Physician there.

(192)
At the siege of Rochel a certain Soldier from the walls observing the Duke of
Anjou, (afterward Henry the 3d.) to stand viewing the Fortifications, fired at
him, which one of the Esquires of his body perceiving in the very moment stepped
before him, and saved the life of his Lord, by the loss of his own Lord, the
arrows of thy vengeance are levelled at the Caul of my heart, and it is justice
that they should smite me under the fifth rib; but let that Jesus who saves his
people from their sins, called (...) a middle person, step between, Let the
chastisement of my peace be upon him, and by his stripes let me be healed.

(193)
Marcellus at the taking of Syracusa, being greatly desirous to save the life
of Archimedes, gave strait charg through his army, That every person should
endeavor his safety; but a Soldier breaking in upon him at his study, (not
knowing him) slew him. How much better is it to be one of those marked out by
him with the writers Ink-horn by his side? how much greater security in being
one of those who sigh and cry for the abominations done in the midst of the
City? how much more certain safety had Jeremiah, Baruch, and Ebedmelech, when
Jerusalem was stormed by Nebuchadnezzar, being those to whom God had promised
their lives for a prey.

(194)
Fabius Maximus dying suddenly the day before the end of his Consulship, Rebius
sued to be Consul for the few hours of that year which remained. Lord, how
short have thou made our lives if compared with the Crow or Stag? and how much
shorter are they made by many cross accidents? and how much shorter do we
make them by our many intemperances? and how much shorter yet are they made by
thy just judgment, when for our presumption and carelessness in thy worship we
are sick and weak, and some fall asleep, and yet how fond are we of this little
remnant, that we often hazard an immortal soul for it; But Oh, do thou direct
my aims to that which admits of no termination as to extent of time, or
enjoyment.

(195)
Some Roman Soldiers flying from Amida, when taken by the Persians, wandered in
the deserts almost choked with thirst, till they came to a deep well, whence
yet they had nothing to draw the water with, till necessity found out this
invention, They pulled off their shirts, and cut them out into long slips,
which they tied together, making a bunch at the end, by which through a
manifold repetition squeezing the hunch, they drew up water enough to quench
their thirst. When we come to the word to draw water out of the wells of
salvation, we are unfurnished of Pitchers for that purpose, our ears are dull
of hearing, our hearts fat, and hard to understand here a little, and there a
little; a frequent repetition must be often applicatious, for of much we carry
away but a very little, our judgments but a little informed, our affections
but a little rectified or elevated. Alas, alas, they that think rare
attendances will serve the turn, or that they shall be told but what they know,
manifest that they are not sensible of their own dullness, nor consider that
the Apostle Peter thought it meet to put those often in remembrance who knew
those things, and were established in the present truth.

(199)
A certain person that had sold a street of houses, and laid out the money in
costly apparel, came to Court, and being in a prease there, cried to them, To
make way for one that had an hundred Tenements on his back. Lord thou have
said, That thou art pressed under our sins as a Cart is pressed under sheaves;
and the burden of our iniquity brings down from thee a burden of punishment;
yet is the weight of sin fo far from being grievous, that instead of lamenting
the pressure, we boast of the number; but if we are not weary and heavy laden
with the sense of our transgressions now, they will at that day press us down
into the lowest hell.

(200)
Near the Lake Agnano there is a Cave, into which (for the experience of
Travelers) the neighboring Inhabitants are wont to put their Dogs, which are
no sooner in, but they are as dead immediately, with eyes set, and tongues
hanging out; but taken thence presently, and thrown into the Lake, they
recover; for which cause those Dogs no sooner see a stranger coming, but if not
timely prevented away they get them packing to the adjoining mountains, not to
be got again to make a new experiment. Lord thou said, In the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shall dye the death; and we never descend into acts of
iniquity, but we are afresh dead in trespasses and sins, and that
irrecoverably, if not washed by faith and repentance in the fountain opened for
sin and for uncleanness; but if we have so escaped, when temptation again
presents it self, shall we not get us packing, by no means to be brought to
another trial?

(200)
Cleopatra the wife of Cyricoenus, having taken Sanctuary at Antioch after her
husbands overthrow, her Sister Gryphina, the wife of Gryphus most importunately
solicited her death, and though Gryphus much persuaded her desivery, yet she
her self commanded the Soldiers in to dispatch her, but a few days after, the
same Gryphina falling into the hands of Cyricoenus, was by him made a sacrifice
to his Wives Ghost. They are not our times alone, that by their mutability have
taught men that great lesson of moderation; all ages have witnessed, That the
Lord is at hand, a just Judge to execute vengeance on those who have not by
their miseration to others showed their sense, that they also are in the body,
even those whom God sent out to be his Executioners, he has afterward plagued
because they did their work without pity.

OCCASIONAL Observations.
(1)
IN that emendation (as it is thought to be) of the English Tongue, by the
addition of foreign words of diverse Languages, though possibly we may speak
more finely, yet not (which is the end of speech) more significantly, but
always more laborioufly, few English words being more then dissillables, the
other generally having their antepenultimaes. A competent estate, and that
which is far greater, are not differenced as to the content of the enjoyer; for
though this may ruffle more, and the pomp may be greater, yet it signifies the
same to the owner: He that has an horse to ease his insirmity, is as well
supplied in that for which an horse is useful, as he that must stay till four
or five servants be ready to accompany him; and he as well stored that has an
honest entertainment wherewith to bid his friend welcome, and can shake hands
with him in token it is hearty, as he that with a numerous service and
solicitous ceremony, must complement his Guest to a Nonplus.

(2)
They say, That he who will find an Hare sitting, or Partridge lying, must
always keep in his mind the Idea of those creatures as they are in that
posture, which the fancy being prepossessed with, will presently apprehend
them, or any like them. When the mind is forestalled with prejudice, either
against persons or things, it soon believes what it pre-conceiveth, and will
either find crimes, or make them.

(3)
I had a Bullock so swollen with wind, that it break his Diaphragma, and the
poor creature dyed in great torture; yet I considered it fared better with it
then with a man afflicted with the Gout or Stone, because wanting reason its
miseries were not aggravated by a reflection of the mind upon the pains
suffered. It is not the least of the happinesses of a man having grace, that he
is able to discern those gifts, and to behold himself like the Kings Daughter,
all glorious within; so shall it be no small addition to the infelicities of
the damned that they shall have the exercises of their reason which they have
so much abused, to consider the goodness of that God of whom they are
deprived, and the greatness of those miseries by which they are punished.

(4)
Two Goats meeting together on a long narrow Bridge, the straitness of which
was such, that neither could go by other, nor turn about to go back, one of
them lay down flat, while the other went over him, and so there became easy
passage for both. When the interest of dissenting parties meet in such
narrownesses as are hard to be accommodated, how much would the submission of
one part to the present necessity, conduce to the advantage of both?

(5)
Being to confer the going of my Watch with a San-Diall, which was to be set by
the Compass, and finding it not to agree therewith, my unwillingnesse to have
my Watch convicted of error, made me ready rather to set the Dial by my Watch,
then my Watch by the Dial. Lord, how many times has my self-love induced me by
false interpretations and glosses to bring the strait rules of thy Word, to a
compliance with my irregular affections? then by an holy submission to make my
affections comply with the rules of thy Word.

(6)
I saw a Kitling practicing the way to mouse, with active motions and ingenuous
turns, gaining an aptness to prey in all postures; and I observe other
creatures by a natural instinct are prompt to those functions which are proper
to their species; but man knows nothing, except to cry, but what he is taught.
Lord, as my great desire is, that those whom thou have given me may not be as
they were, born fools, so give me to care chiefly, that they may be spiritually
wise.

(7)
Being abroad one day my Horse got loose, and run away from me, and would not
be recovered till he came to the Stable Door; I followed after him full of
anger, and purposes of punishing, till I thus considered, Lord, am I thus angry
that a creature by thee subjected to my Dominion, does thus shake off the yoke
and retract his serviceableness, when I a Subject to thy Sovereignty by an
original and every way unlimitted right, so often have with drawn my service
from thee; Oh let me with more diligence, and universality approve my obedience
to thee, and with more patience suffer neglect from them.

(8)
The motion of the Primum mobile, not only hurryes about the inferior Orbs,
but even the Comets also seated in the air, are whirled about with the same
Circulation. Not only those of the same gang are turned about by the vertigo of
Faction, but many times also well meaning souls of different Principles and
designs are transported by their vicinity with the same passions.

(9)
Thunder is rare with us in the winter, and prodigious in that season,
according to that saying, Winters thunder is Englands wonder, because those hot
and dry vapors of which Thunder is generated, are not exhaled from a rigid and
congealed earth, as ours then for the most part is. Lord, when my heart was
frozen in that Winter of impenitency and unbelief, the thunder of conscience
was not frequent, that inconsiderate estate seldom producing any such
apprehensions, but since my soul has been brought out of that Prison,
conscience has been londer, and its checks are more often. O let conscience
every day have less cause to speak, but let it every day be more quick of
speech.

(10)
The return of the Sun is no less certainly expected in Green-land, where the
night is of some months, then with us in the Summer Solstice, when day is
never quite shut in. Lord, that eternal glory which thou have promised, and I
by faith have apprehended, how far off so ever, is no less certainly expected,
then that daily bread wherewith I am by thee so frequently supplied; nor let me
more despair of the Sunshine of thy favor in the long night of trouble, then
in those perplexities which endure but for a very little season.

(11)
Passing with a Candle from one room to another, I saw they were only
enlightened as I brought the Candle in successively one after another, but as
soon as the Sun arose, they were altogether and at once enlightened. Lord, the
knowledge which I have of my heart is only by degrees, as I view the affections
and actions of it one after another, but thou beholdest them at one view, those
that are past, present, and to come. Oh do thou who art so perfect an
Anatomist, and so exactly know my frame what it is, straiten what is
irregular, cure what is corrupt, and supply what ever defect thou find there.

(12)
I took a Plumb-stone, and would have cracked it, but could not, I would have
cleft it with a knife, but it was not penetrable, I set it in the ground, and
after a few days I found the kernel had shot out a tender sprout which had
split the shell, and ^ade its passage through. Lord, the hamnser of assliction
breaks not this stony heart, the sharp sword of thy threatenings pierce it not,
but let the sweet efficacies of thy mercies quicken the infused principle of
thy grace, that it may cleave all obstacles, and send forth sh^^ts bearing
fruit to thee abundantly.

(13)
Being in London, and desirous to know the time of the day, I viewed the
Clocks, and by the first I saw it was past eleven, by the next but half an hour
after ten, the third was as much in the other extreme, and the fourth dissented
from the other three; then I applied my self to the Dials, but I found them (as
the Clocks) only agreeing in disagreeing from one another; hence I concluded,
there could be no dependence on them, who concurred so little with themselves;
I therefore turned my self to observe the setting of the Sun, which though not
always the same, yet has a motion ever regular and agreeable to it self, and
to dispose of my affairs by that. The variety of opinions among learned men
manifests, That there can be no certainty where there is so much dissent;
therefore in the conduct of my life, Lord, give me Nullius jurare in verba
Magistri, and to respect not so much what men say, who can and do err, as what
thy Word says, which is always consonant to its self, and erreth not, but as
misapprehended, or mis-reported by us.

(14)
Two persons being in competition for a place of honor, a third engages
vigorously for one of them against the other, the obliged person soon
forgets those civilities done him, having obtained his ends, and grows shy
of his Benefactor, being confident that his merits called for that requital
which he meant not; but the dis-obliged person graves the opposition of that
third person on his mind with the pen of a Diamond, and catches at the next
opportunity to show his animosity by a smart Animadversion: Vespatians Captains
relieved not the Citizen of Taracene in the miseries which for their interest
they suffered, when they of Capua are by them severely punished for the
injuries which they had offered. Lord, who would displease thee to please men;
when our services are rewarded by thee, not according to their merit, but thy
goodness, and our dis-services through thy Son are both forgiven and forgotten:
The business of Vriah is then past over with silence, when David's uprightness
after many Generations has a frequent and honorable memorial.

(15)
Being abroad one day, and without a Dinner, a Comrade who had forethought the
worm would bite, had provided a piece of powdered Beef, of which he was willing
to communicate, which though it were dry of it self, and not a drop of drink to
wash it down, yet I eat it up very savourily, and (as Darius by his
puddle-water) gave it great commendation. Lord, how many of thy mercies through
our fulness are nauseated by us? which want would make more relishing, and
our necessities render precious.

(16)
Having a design to plant a nursery with Crab-stocks. I found many in Hedgrows
and other places, which I had many times before past by, and not observed.
Lord, fix the aim of my soul on thy glory, and my affections on things above,
then those opportunities tending to spiritual advantage, will be with
promptness embraced, which before were neglected, or not observed.

(17)
Upon the Rode to London I met a Team at a stand, and neither skill of the
Driver, nor strength of the Horses could move the Cart out of the slough till
another Team came, which joined with the former, drew it out presently. The
cries of particular Christians have not removed those evils wherewith they have
been pressed, when the united supplications of the Church have been heard; so
well pleased is the Lord with the unity of his people, that what they agree of
on earth, he has promised shall be done for them in Heaven.

(18)
I fell one time into company, where he was counted of the best wit, that could
devise the shortest Grace, and most stomachs there were too squeamish to digest
a Thanksgiving that did descend to express particulars. But surely, such wit
will be of no use in the Kingdom of Heaven, and those affections will no wise
agree with that place, where praise shall be the only employment of glorified
spirits.

(19)
Walking in the streets, I met a Cart that came near the wall, so I stepped aside
to avoid it, into a place where I was secure enough, but being desirous to be
out of all possibility of danger, I got off further. Lord, sin is that great
evil of which thou complainest, that thou art pressed as a Cart is pressed;
how can it then but bruise me to powder? Oh let me therefore think my self
never sufficiently secured from its danger, nor the occasions of it far enough
avoided.

(20)
I met a Coffin made of such sweet wood, and adorned with such curious hinges,
and decked with such stately appurtenances, as seemed to give ornament to death
it self, and make a grave desirable, which yet in a few hours was to be
covered with dust. How is the life of man employed about, and intent upon
matter of ostentation? and how much of a vain show is used in death it self,
that so fully discovers that all is but a vain show.

(21)
Being in company with some persons, one among them undertook to relate a
story, which he had but begun, as the rest fell to other discourse among
themselves, so as that he was fain to beg their attention by many Parenthesis
of commendation that it was a very pretty story. How vain is it to prostitute
words to those, that either think they have too much wit of their own to value
the conceits of others, or that have too little to apprehend them?

(22)
Horsemen say, that ill-bred Mares usually bring the fattest and
well-favouredst Colts, which yet afterward prove unhandsome Jades, whereas
those of a good strain are meager and unsightly for the first year, but after
are of rare shapes and proof. The freest and fattest promises are usually of
the leanest performances, whereas they that engage slowly, perform surely.

(23)
On the Rode to Guildford, I passed by a Chalk-pit near the way, the top of
which was railed about, I observed it was not for fence, but caution, for the
avoiding the stupendous precipice, whereby the unwary traveller might be
endangered. Lord, if thou have set us bounds in thy word, it is not out of envy
or ill will unto us, as the Devil suggested to our first parents, but
wherever we are by thee limited, it is for our advantage and security, not
our detriment.

(24)
Viewing one night a bon-fire made upon an hill a great way off, and comparing
it with the evening star, it seemed bigger and brighter then that, but after I
had looked upon it a while, I perceived it to decay in greatness, and light,
till at last it was not to be discerned, but the star retained still the same
quantity and beauty, though now and then a Cloud for a time did obscure it.
Many have appeared like burning and shining lights while the fuel of worldly
advantages has lasted, but when that fails, they disappear; when those Lamps
lighted with the Celestial fire of divine grace, though the clouds of cross
occurrences, or mist of temptation, may sometimes hinder their appearing so
glorious, yet they are always the same by a regular and unchangeable
brightness.

(25)
A neighbor of mine had a little child, which with a fall put its arm out of
joint, which the father by its unquietness perceiving was going to a
Chyrurgion for remedy; but while he was in consultation about it, the Child
got another fall, and thereby had his arm set right again, so that it found
ease, and grew cheerful upon it immediately. Lord, why are we out of heart
when cross occurrences befall us, and think our selves undone when the great
ones frown on us, and are ala mort when our expectations are disappointed; thou
art he who by thy all-disposing providence can make the very same things (as
the thrust of the Spear the impostumed person) harm and heal us.

(26)
A Rose-bush clipped in May, and so disappointed of bearing fruit in June, yet
gave forth a plentiful crop of Roses in November. Lord, if the Spring and
Summer of my life has been (like One^imus) unprofitable, and without that
truit which might well be expected; it is of thy mercy that I was not
eradicated, when as the fruitless fig tree was accursed, though the time of
figs was not yet come. Oh therefore let my former barrenness be recompensed
with such a fruitfullness, as may out-goe the usual account of a November
season.

(27)
I passed by an Ants Nest set upon so steep a bank, that their provision as
fast as they brought it thither tumbled down again to the bottom, which they
(as Sisiphus with his stone) with continual labor setcht up again, yet for
diverse years changed not the situation of the Nest, though a much more
convenient place was hard by. How many inconveniences do foolish and absurd
customs beget us, while like the Irish who tie the Plow to the Horse tail, we
pertinaciously stick to those practices which reason condemns as inconvenient
or erroneous, when a more sober advice would easily present us with that which
would be more useful, though less used.

(28)
I saw a sheep in a very rainy day, whose well-grown fleece as it kept him
warm, so it drank in the wet, and thereby made the inconveniency of the rain
much greater. As the grace of God makes a man able with patience to bear his
sufferings, so it makes his sufferings more, for beside his particular griefs,
he has a fellow-feeling of all the concernments of Gods people too.

(29)
I overtook a friend traveling to his house, which though it were a Mile out
of my way, yet for his good company sake, I went along with him. Lord, if thy
providence effect thy glory, though out of the way of my temporal advantage,
yet let me not be unwilling to comply with thy providence, though with the
loss of my present accommodations.

(30)
A box wherein was some quantity of Civet, being opened the scent thereof
diffused it self to all the bystanders, but was not alike resented by all; not
that the odor had not an equal diffusion, but because their senses were not
alike good, or prepared to the reception of it. If there shall be different
enjoyments of the glory which shall be hereafter revealed, it is probable the
odds will be not in the different manner of revelation, but measure of
apprehension. Lord, let therefore my heart be enlarged with the love of thee
now, that it may be filled with the more enjoyment of thee then.

(31)
I saw an Orchard planted with choice of, and the choicest of fruits, but no
good husbandry bestowed upon it afterward, but suffered to lie undigged and
overgrown with Nettles, and cropped by Cattle, so that the Trees were hinderly
and shrubbed, having nothing near attained that growth which otherwise they
would. I heard a Sermon the other day, wherein I heard such smart and
seasonable exhortations as possessed my soul with many pious purposes, which yet
alas wanted that good husbandry which should have caused those thoughts to
flourish into good works. I am sensible I have lost a precious advantage, I
will therefore bestir me to recollect them out of the rubbish of impertinencies
which lie in my heart, and will take care of them that they be fenced with
circumspection, stak't with resolution, dug about with religious exercise,
wed with caution, and watered with prayer.

(32)
An Hog was wallowing in his mire, while the neat Cat sat licking her self and
washing her face, not willing to wet her foot, though for fish so much desired;
I praised her cleanliness, and would have done more, but that I considered it
was not out of election, but disposition, that she was so cleanly. Lord, some
sins are escaped me, not because I have chosen thy precepts, but I have a
natural disinclination to them; if thou had never forbidden it, I should
never have been a drunkard, that cloud in the brain, and fretting heat in the
stomach, which but one draught between meals always occasioneth, is a
sufficient bridle against that intempenance; But Oh that all the considerations
which Divine or Humane Light afford, were sufficient to check those sins to
which my constitution violently prompteth.

(33)
Going by water, the water-man was very curious of my sitting, if I turned
about, he said It hindered his Boats going; every motion was to him a fault,
and my tongue could hardly be removed from side to side, but 'twas complained
of, and this that our passage might be more speedy. How nice a thing is peace
of conscience, how small a more offends it, not acts of sin only, but purposes
to sin, nor those only, but abortive motions, yea, concupiscences not consented
to, the pure eyes of an infinitely holy God, are something paralled by the
quick sense of a tender conscience.

(34)
The blood in the Arteries is full of spirits and pulse which it loses in the
veins, and therefore is returned again into the heart to receive there new heat
and refection. Every institution, though in its first instruments it were
lively and profitable, yet in its after traductions, it generally grows languid
and corrupt, and had need of a review. Religion in the Primitive times was like
blood in the Arteries, but now as in the Veins, and sure it had need be often
returned to the heart, again rectified by the Word.

(35)
I saw a Tree which grew by a too potent neighbor that over-grew it, and dript
it shrewdly, but yet it thrust forth its boughs, endeavoring to gain the open
Heavens, and the Suns uninterrupted aspect, Lord, thou know those inordinate
desires which grow so near my heart, how much my soul is dript by them, and how
weak all my actings of grace are because of them; if it be thy will let them be
grub'd up by the roots; if otherwise, let my soul be averse and turn away from
it, endeavoring after a free acting to thee, that I may partake of the dews of
thy grace, and the shining of thy favor.

(36)
In a field of Oats, I observed there were some taller then the rest, and of a
much fairer show, which when I had examined, I fund were light and husky, and
no wise comparable for substance with the rest, for these were wild ones. In
the worship of God those things which are of humane invention seem much more
plausible, and carry before them a much greater show of devotion then those
which are of divine institution: what a glorious appearance to the eyes of
flesh and blood has a curiously engraved Crucifix, or a Popish Procession
compared with the simplicity of the Sacramental preparation; how laudable seems
the Salt and Spittle, and those other knacks of Papistical Ceremony in respect
of the Baptismal Lotion, but you will find that as these are fair, so they are
wild, not being of divine appointment and empty, not having the divine promise
to make them virtual for the nourishment of souls.

(37)
In a street of London, as I passed by, I observed over an Entry written, This
is Court, which when I considered to make true English of, I observed between
is and Court a Flower de luce fairly carved, whereby I understood that
superscription intended to tell you, That there was Flower de luce Court. God
has discovered his truth to us (...), sometimes signifying his mind to us in
figures, and not in words at length, sometimes by things done, as when
Torquatus cut off the heads of the highest Poppyes; sometimes by very
omissions, as Melchisedechs Genealogy; sometimes by half words, as that
important truth of Christ's Divinity, where a piece of a word (...) in
opposition to (...), differenceth the Messiah from the whole Creation;
therefore it is unsafe to conclude any thing from the word, till with much
caution we consider how, and what is concluded.

(38)
A person accustomed to walk with a fine staff neatly painted, met with his
adversary, with whom words grew to that height that they came to blows,
whereupon he threw away the fine staff then in his hand, and caught up a rough
Crab-tree Cudgel, fit to give such unkind embraces as he intended. When men
look upon their concernments as but indifferent, they like well to make use of
those fine persons, who think they get so much repute and reverence by the
polished sentences that man's with teaches, but when they apprehend their souls
lying under pressing exigences, they then desire to apply themselves to those
whose holiness and zeal, and soul-searching Ministry have begotten an
expectation of soul-good from them, and who by their being an example of good
works have made their very youth venerable.

(39)
I saw a Picture of the King on horseback, and though I had no skill in
limning, yet I misliked one of the horses legs because it held not a Symmetry
with the rest of the Horse, nor agreed with that posture wherein the horse was
represented. There is no better way for a less discerning judgment to judge
of the motions of the heart, whether they be of the Spirit of God, then to
observe their agreement with the mind of the Spirit, discovered in the Word,
with which if they are not harmonions and analogicall, it is certain they are
not indicted by that Spirit which is always like it self, and in whom is no
variableness, nor shadow of changing.

(40)
Being to speak with a person whose Chamber was four pair of Stairs high, I
was almost tired with climbing up to it, having been well traveled before
hand; which made me to think that if there were a Jacobs ladder whose top
should reach to Heaven, and that were to be ascended by bodily action, it would
be a matter of no small time and labor to get thither, an age would hardly
suffice for its accomplishment. Can it then be that those cold wishings and
wouldings should ever bring a man thither, or that it will be so easy at the
last gasp to leap out of the Devils lap into Akrahams bosom.

(41)
Ointment made as hot as can be, applied to an horse outwardly, will not
scall'd him, but a drench given him inwardly little more then blood warm, will
kill him. Employ an hypocrite about any thing of outward action, let it be
never so eminent, and he will keep pace with your expectation, there is no
foiling him upon that account, but engage him on that which shall necessarily
require self-deny-all, or the mortification of his secret lust, in that you
shall find him more jadish then could be imagined.

(42)
A person that went naked neckt, was reprehended by a friend, as using a garb
immodest and unlawful; which she gainsaying, they agreed to put their
different judgments to the decision of a grave Divine of their acquaintance,
to whom the Lady presenting her self, demanded his opinion whether it were
lawful for her to use that mode? to whom he answered, That he conceived that
guize unlawful for those whose azure veins meandring in their soft and pearly
bosoms, might be a temptation to lust, but he thought it lawful for her whose
swarthy skin and course grain afforded no such temptation. How great and
manifest is our pride and vanity, that to follow the fashion we not only
subject our selves to thole garbs which are inconvenient and trouble-some, but
also discover those imperfections that cause others to deride and scorn us.

(43)
I went to hear a Sermon, and intending to join with the Minister in his prayer
before it, he began with so low a voice that I might guess what he said, hear
I could not, yet was I in the posture of a Supplicant, and my mind directed
thereto, but my time was merely lost, being unfitted for a private devotion
with the expectation of that which was public, and not in a capacity to join
in public devotion, because I heard not what was said. Miserable Papists, how
are they abused with their Latin Service, wherein they cannot pray by
themselves being disturbed by a noise of words, nor with others being ignorant
of the Tongue, for which blind devotion yet our Country men took arms in
Edward the sixth days; yea, indeed how heartless is that devotion, that
understands not what it does, or minds not what it understands?

(44)
A Gentleman of quality, but no good qualities, professed a great deal of good
liking to me, and affection for me; I begun to consider what I had done that
might oblige such a person whom all good would disoblige; I began to suspect I
had not walked uprightly, and that he had misconstrued my civillity for
approbation; thus I parted from him with much distrust of my self; but the next
time I came into his company, his countenance was altered, and I had such an
aspect from him as was usual from such as he. Surely things and men receive
much of discovery from the men that like them, there being an eternal
opposition between the bad and good; and from their love we may judge much of
the quality of the object; whence I ever suspected that those ways in worship
or otherwise were not good, which your profane, swearing, wicked persons
contend and stickle for. Phocian making an Oration to the people of Athens,
which was generally by them applauded, said to a friend that stood by, What
unhandsomess has slipped from me, that this evil people so much approve of.

(45)
Reading of a Book which treated of horseman-ship, I found this Tetrastick.

If a Colt have four white feet keep him not a day;
If he have three white feet put him soon away;
If he have two white feet send him to thy friend;
If he have one white foot keep him to his lives end.
I could not devise the reason why the odds of white should be so great odds in
the choice, or what a black or white foot should conduce to the goodness of
the horse; but sometime after I had a gelding, an able horse indeed, but for
that cause only not approved, because he had three white feet, for the white
foot before, was much more brittle and hoof-bound, and far less than the other
that was black, so that he was never hard traveled, but he complained of it;
whence I concluded, that whiteness in the hoof did either cause, or argue
brittleness and other faults besides. There is no such Doctor as experience;
how much is the doctrine of Assurance inveighed against as an inlet to
licentiousness, as if that soul must be bold to sin, that had certainty to be
saved, whereas to the soul that has had experience of this affair, there is
nothing then the contrary more manifest; for that Spirit which seals the soul
to the day of redemption, seals it by the impression of its own holiness upon
it, begetting thereby in it an opposition to sin, so as that if there were no
hell to fear, yet sin would be resisted, as that which is contrary to that holy
principle, and destructive to this new creature; yea, this Spirit acts the soul
to God as its highest and chiefest good; for which cause it presses after him
with all acts of duty and serviceablenesse, whereby it may more enjoy him, and
dreads sin more than death, as being that which separates it from his God, whom
he loves and prizeth above life it self.

(46)
The heart of Oak grows from the top to the bottom of the Tree, as appears
when if the upper part of a young Oak be cut off, there will be heart to be
seen, but at the lower end not any. Our zeal for ways of worship, or ought
else should have its original upwards, beginning in conviction of the judgment
from clear and apparent evidence of truth, whereas that which is not according
to knowledge, is like a mettal'd horse, but headstrong; or like strong purges
in unskilful hands, rather likely to kill, then cure.

(47)
When I observe how many sparks of fire may be stricken out of a little shiver
of a Flint, I have been ready to think that a Paradoxical expression, as cold
as a stone, and have wondered it should not burn ones fingers; but I considered
that fire is generated or manifested but by contrition, by which yet other is
extinguished. There are many persons of such meek and calm tempers, that you
would think they had no fire, for you shall not discover any heat; but let them
be opposed in matters of Religion or otherwise, it is like the rubbing of a dry
stick till it inflame, by that opposition they gather heat, and show more sire
then could possibly be imagined.

(48)
At a Sermon I saw a person so earnest to write it that he left his devotion
before the prayer was done to provide tackling ready for the purpose; but as
though he had been a Clock wound up for one hour, as soon as the glass was out,
his fit was over, though the discourse were continued a little longer, and more
pertinent and useful then the former part. The Apostle says, The Spirit of
the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, so as that they are not impulst into
disorder and confusion; and as that is a preposterous worship wherein one
service leaps over the back of another, so is that a pursy devotion, the pulses
whereof are numbered exactly with the sands of the glass; and they have a
carnal Religion, who think not days and nights too tedious at Cards, or a
Tavern, but would have been sadly put to it, had they been Paul's Auditors, when
he preached till midnight.

(49)
Two Merchant ships met at Sea with 16 sail of Turks men of war, against whom,
though it were impossible to make such resistance as to come off, yet they were
resolved to sell their lives at a dear rate; therefore with utmost height of
courage they fought them for a while, which the enemy seeing, and observing
their resolution such, as that their prize would not equal their loss, they
drew off and left them. In that contest which our souls have with our spiritual
enemies, he that fights most resolved comes off best; weak resistance
incourageth the assault, and he that parlyes is like Eve in Paradise more than
half lost; the surest way to overcome is to resist steadfastly in the faith.

(50)
Some English Merchants being in Africa, and hunting there the wild Bore, they
had one in chase, and almost tired him, so that he manifestly gave out; when a
lesser, but a fresh one, was difloged from the adjoining thickets and joined
himself with the former, by whose company he was so animated, that he assumed
new courage and strength, so that he escaped the hunters hands. We read in Acts
2.42. That the new Converts continued in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship,
not so much to show their compliance to Christian discipline, as to be
fortified with that consociation. Mal. 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord
spoke often one to another. The People of God in their troubles, are not a
little animated by the assistancy of fellow sufferers: Paul, when he saw the
Brethren, took courage, Acts 28.18.

(51)
I was in a place where a story was painted in the windows, it was very rare
and curious, but me-thought the workmanship did not make amends for the harm it
did in darkning the windows, whose principal use is to give light. There are
many Ceremonies which have a fine appearance when they are used in divine
worship, but methinks they make not amends for the harm they do in distracting
the mind from that inward intention so principally required in divine
adoration, having a tendency rather ()as a Noble person said of a great Ladies
singing Mattens, that it heightened or destroyed, he knew not whether, all the
hearers devotion) to delight the carnal, then raise the affections of the
inward man.

(52)
Looking upon a Spinster, I observed that if the Flax be drawn out too fine, it
breaks and is useless, if too grossly it is gouty and unhandsome, but the
mean as the strength of the Flax will bear, is best to the sight and for use.
The handling of any subject too finely is seldom profitably, and too rudely is
tedious and disgustfull, but as the strength of the subject will bear (like
Bird-lime at a due rate) takes most, and holds best.

(53)
I observed then too, that it is not the pulling out the Flax alone that makes a
thread, but the twisting of it, and rendering it upon the quill. It Is not a crew
of words or sentences poured on us like hail, that benefits the mind, or makes
a cord to draw it forth to action, but our considerate observation, and prudent
application to our particular use.

(54)
And then I saw a broken end is not thrown away, but applied to the Flax, and
with gentle handling made an useful thread with the rest. A dissenting brother
is often rendered unprofitable, not so much by his own peevishness, as our
slighting, who if complyingly dealt with, might in time wind on the same bottom
with the rest.

(55)
A Wood-pecker by a job of her bill against a Tree, knows by the sound whether
it be hollow, and then pierces an hole through the outward solid part, and
lays up its brood in the hollowness. If by the vanity of our discourse Satan
discover that our hearts are hollow and empty of good thoughts, he will with
temptation soon pierce our best defenses, and lay up a brood of vile lusts
there.

(56)
When wild beasts get into Corn or good Pastures, they are more eyefull and
circumspect then at other times, always harkening after the least intimations
of danger. When affairs succeed prosperously with us, our cautions should be
greatest, for our dangers are. David took more harm upon the roof of the house,
then in the Cave.

(57)
A parcel of fat sheep are designed by their owner to the slaughter, this to
day, that the next, and another the day following, while they rejoice in their
ease and full feeding, and neither forethink, nor foreknow the evil hour. How
often fares it thus with the sons of men, who pride it in their enjoyments,
and rejoice in their plenty, not considering that God above has appointed
death to seize on them, they know not how soon, nor caring to provide for the
day of visitation.

(58)
If any danger threaten the Conies, they send presently to their holes; so the
Doves fly to their windows. When troubles are abroad, the Saints security is
in their Rock Christ.

(59)
The hunting Spanniel beats the fields with much labor and sagacity to find
his game, which when he has found, they spring and flee away, and his sport is
to run with an antery after them; and thus, when the day is spent, he comes
weary, and faint, and hungry home, for what he has got all day will not fill
one of his teeth at night. thus is it with foolish worldlings, who with much
labor and heat of desire, hunt after the things of this world, which when
found, flee away, and their delight is in pursuing, not enjoying; and when the
day of life is spent in these endeavors, the night of death finds him weary
and faint, without one crum of comfort to refresh a departing soul with.

(60)
Milk will pierce through those wooden vessels through which water finds no
passage, though seemingly much thinner. Curious and polisht discourse, though
it may seem more taking, yet penetrates less then that which is plain and more
solid.

(61)
I had a Spanniel, which having hunted indesatigably after his game, and
happily caught eat it not, nor afterward when it was roasted would touch a bone
of it. I have seen such covetous worldlings who would not enjoy those goods
which with much care and pains they sought to get, but have gone with tattered
backs and pinched bellyes, not because they had not full, but would have fuller
Coffers.

(62)
Partridges that have lain fast when the net has been run over them have
escaped the danger, when those which have thought to escape by flying away have
flown into the Net, and lost their lives. Those lawful means which God has
afforded and allowed us, would have secured us, when unlawful means which we
have thought better, have been our ruin.

(63)
The Partridge that has been once entangled in a Net, and has escaped, will
be sure to flee away if the Net be but shown the second time. Surely, he is
more than brutishly unwise, that has been snared in a temptation, and
recovered by repentance, that will not be shy afterward.

(64)
The Spanniel sets at a distance from the Partridges, as if he meant not to
meddle with them, nor intended their death or danger, but thereby points them
out, and betrays them to destruction. Temptation at the first assault usually
speaks us fair, as if it designed not our harm, but if not then resisted or
avoided, into how deadly precipices are we hurryed by it?

(65)
The best Setter if disused from the sport, and hunted like a common Spanniel,
though there may remain some principles of his art in him, yet he will soon
lose the practice of it, and become like one of them, and it will require no
small time and pains to restore him to his former excellency. The most
sanctified person if he forbear the exercises of Religion, and engage in the
pursuit of the world with the worldly, though the seed of God may remain in
him, yet he will find himself much degenerated, and no small ado to restore in
him those lost habits of virtue.

(66)
The most punctual Setter if not kept strait to his rules, will soon get a
trick of running in, or contract some other evil habitsd. 'Twas the Apostles
counsel to Christians, to walk accurately, and not without great reason, for
if we walk not close by rule, we shall soon grow unruly.

(67)
It Is the Setters excellency to hunt for his game with the highest metal, but
when he has found it, to observe his distance, else he incurs his Masters
anger, and lash. In seekking after the things of this world, it is Solomon's
advice, What thou take in hand to do, do it with all thy might; Yet when they
are obtained, to keep the soul from too near a conjunction by immoderate love,
least God be angry, and thou plagued.

(68)
The experienced Setter ranging the fields, takes no notice of the Larks, and
other small Birds, that foolish Curs run at; but let him cross upon the scent
of Partridges, he points at them presently, and sets down there. The religious
soul while he is conversant in this world, though he meet with many fair
appearances of pleasure and profit, which worldlings with hue and cry pursue,
yet he baulks them as not being for his purpose, but let him cross upon an
expedient that conduces Heavenward, he takes to it presently, as being that
which he had in his design.

(69)
A Net has many holes, therefore seems not dangerous, but in that is the
couzenage, for there is none passable. Sin seems to present us with many fair
hopes of evading, but if once entered in, is like a grated prison whence no
coming out till the payment of the utmost farthing.

(70)
Close a Woodpecker in her hollow tree with a wedg driven in never so forcibly,
yet, if you kill her not, she will make her way through again. If vile and
revengeful thoughts get room once in our hearts, unless they be mortified with
much contrition and holy sorrow, they will show themselves in sad effects,
notwithstanding all the bars that nature or reasn can lay upon them.

(71)
I saw a Land-skip having Mountains and Trees, and Castles, and Groves, which
though particularly expressing that variety in a Landscape requisite, yet those
several things were so jointly placed, that together they represented a man's
head. Gods dealings with his people have such various aspects, that they seem
nothing less then to promote their benefit, and appear nothing different from
the distractions and confusions which befall other men, yet are they by the
divine providence so disposed, that according to the Apostle they do cooperate
to effect their good.

(72)
I rode by a field which was very good ground, but yet bear a pittyful crop,
not but that the Land was in very good heart, and fit for an ample production,
but the husbandman presuming upon its strength, had been wanting to give it
that tillage as was requisite. How many by too much confidence have miscarryed
through presumption of their abilities, engaging in divine affairs with so cold
preparation, that they have come off poorly, without that answer upon their
spirits, that might have been otherwise expected.

(73)
I saw a vessel of water upon the ground, and I observed it spread its self to
every part, to the searching of every cranny, and filling of every crevice. The
new birth is said to be by the water and the spirit, the spirit in that birth
being as water, not only that it cleanses the soul, but that it diffuseth it
self universally, leaving not any part unsearched, not any lust unmortified,
but engaging the soul to cleanse from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and
perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

(74)
I had a Lamb whose Dam forsook it as soon as it was yeaned, they brought it
home and suckled it upon one of the Cows, which in a few days grew as fond of
it, as of her own Calfe; the Lamb grew up, and applied her self wholly to the
Kine, bleating after them (if at any time she mist them) and by no means
associating her self with the sheep, her natural companions. When God made a
Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, he gives this as a reason, Because he knew
Abraham that he would teach his children, and his household after him to keep
the Commandments of the Lord: Good education having so great an influence,
that it generally engages men to a profession, sometimes so introduces grace,
that the time when conversion has been wrought is not discovered, and we may
impute it somewhat to this cause, that we find a series of religious persons in
David's family and some others. Good cause to be persuaded that the faith which
dwelt in the Grandmother Lais, and Mother Eunice, would be in the son Timothy
also, when from a child he had known the holy Scriptures.

(75)
The beams of the Sun as they are scattered at large do not much heat, when at
the same time contracted in a burning-glasse, they inflame combustible matter
fitly placed. The beams of Gospel light as they are diffused in public
preaching, much affect not, but if gathered together by recollection, and
applied by serious consideration, then is the soul like to take the holy fire
of divine grace at them.

(76)
I rode by a Garden where I saw store of grass growing in the walks, and other
plants heaped one upon another in disorder, which had a most ungrateful sight
in that place, which yet did not much amiss in the adjoining field. Those that
have given their names to God, they are his Garden, and disorderly lusts raging
there, are much more provoking the eyes of divine glory then in those who are
professedly profane; the man without a wedding garment might have escaped, (at
least without so severe an Animadversion) if he had not intruded to that
nuptial feast.

(77)
I had a Clove-Gilliflower of a very good sort, which being set in a cold
ground, and not that care had of it that should have been, the first and second
years it bear Cloves, but the third year only single white ones. If the heart
be planted with the generous purposes, and the most noble resolutions, yet will
there be a forsaking of the first love, and a degenerating into low and carnal
complyances; where there is not a constant culturage exercised, and care had to
keep up the bent of the soul, and actuate grace, for if the last things be not
better then the first, the latter end will be worse than the beginning.

(78)
I saw two parcels of Cattle turned into one Close of ground, where at their
first meeting they showed their distinction by their separation and hostility,
but after they had so entered common for a few days, their opposition ceased,
and they mingled one with another, without any difference. There is nothing
preserves Faction, like Separation; a community in privileges and
preferments, dissolves those distinctions and animosities which would have been
still kept a foot by a diverse aspect. The Pope in that great defection from
him, renewed in the days of Queen Elizabeth, when he saw there was no
likelihood of a present return, yet kept his faction on foot, by that Bull
forbidding them any community with the Protestants in worship, whereby that
party was kept visible and entire, which otherwise would have mouldred away,
and have been swallowed up of that which was more prevalent, and they were
preserved as Recusants, that would have been lost as Papists.

(79)
A Landscape having the particulars so disposed of, as that together they
represented a man's head; being showed to many, none apprehended it other then a
Landscape (as it seemed to be) but being told that it was a man's head, and
seeing the reason of the representation, and their fancy possessed with it, they
could not apprehend it as any other. When men unacquainted with the mystery of
Godliness, are conversant in the external worship of God, they are intent
only upon the opus operatum, and are taken up merely with the outward
performance; but when the vail is taken off their hearts, they then perceive
there is a further design, ordinances being so disposed by the divine grace,
that the result of them may be the inward man, and the dedication of the
affections of the heart to God.

(80)
Being engaged in a long and difficult employment, and considering how much was
yet to do, I grew faint, and half resolved to desert it, but looking back and
finding how many leaves were dispatched, I took courage, and resolved not to
end, till I had ended. In my progress heavenward, when I look forward and view
those Legions of lusts from within to be fought with, beside those oppositions
from without which emerg daily, and the many difficulties which on every side
make that way strait, I am even at a stand; but when I turn mine eyes, and
behold how much the grace of God has already conquered, I resolve through
divine assistance not to sit down till there be not a Canaanite left, for
though the difficulties are many and great, yet ipso opere poscitur animus, and
every fight leaves me stronger and more expert.

SCRIPTURE Observations.
(1)
IT is recorded of Solomon, that he was seven years a building of the Temple,
but thirteen years in building his own house, (1 Kings 6. ult.) not that he
bestowed more cost or curiosity upon his own, but he had more industry and
expedition in that of God. It Is a Proverb with us, of that which goes slowly
on, that it is Church work; men act carelessly and coldly in things that concern
the interest of God, but are active and affectionate in their own affairs; The
zeal of thy House haeth eaten me up, was the speech of him whose heart mis-gave
him in that he dwelt in an house of Cedars, and the Ark of God under Curtains.

(2)
When Pharaoh sought to slay Moses upon the slaughter of the Egyptian, Exodus:
2.15. We read that Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the Land
of Midian; and yet Heb: 11.27. its said, By faith he left Egypt, not fearing
the wrath of the King. Though Moses's flying out of Egypt was an act of present
necessity, yet it was an act of former election, he had made choice to suffer
affliction with Gods people, before ever he slew the Egyptian; so that though
Pharoahs wrath was the proximate cause, yet it was not the remote and more
principal one, but his faith in closing with Gods interest, to which therefore
his leaving of Egypt is worthily attributed. How differently does God deal with
us, to what men use to do? in our eminentest acts of kindness for them, if
there be any probability of an imputation that we aim at our own interest, the
thanks is wholly lost, and we are reckoned not as their friends, but our own:
But God has very much of charity for us, and reckons those things done only
upon the account of his glory, wherein yet we had much of respect to our own
safety.

(3)
We read 2 Samuel: 13. ult. That David was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he
was dead, when as the reason why he mourned for his son every day, was because
he was dead; a Paradox indeed: but that the divine providence has so ordered
it, that as our joys are allayed with their griefs, so our griefs are
counterpoised with their comforts, our very poisons having their Antidotes, and
the sting of Scorpions never so readily and so surely cured as with the oil of
Scorpions. David cease to lament Amnon being dead, because being dead he was
past recovery; this very thing bringing ease to our sorrows that they cannot be
eased.

(4)
We find John Baptist with most apparent evidence pointing out Jesus to be the
Christ, ( John 1.29.) yet afterward sends his Disciples to him with this
doubtful question, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another? (
Matthew: 11.13.) Though Jesus had given by his many miracles greater evidence
that he was the Messiah, adding the witness of his works to the divine
revelation, yet John's faith is weaker. With what favorable allowances must
even the excellencies of the people of God be laid in the balances? this very
man set apart by God to bear witness to Christ, and doing that office of
preparing the way of the Lord so fully, and with so much integrity, is here
found pitifully halting; what great reason is there that our obedience should
be sincere, for it is never full, and that our hearts should be upright, for
they are never perfect. But what abatement was this to John's testimony? could
the people rely on his witness who himself questioned it? but says our
Savior, I have greater witness than that of John. God never lays the stresse
of his designs upon men's shoulders, so as that they should miscarry through
their frailty, he ever takes care to secure the issue of his own purposes
though instruments show themselves to be men and not God.

(5)
When Joseph brought his father before Pharaoh, the Text says, ( Gen: 47.7.)
That Jacob blessed Pharaoh. Yet the Apostle says, Heb: 7.7. That without
controversy the less is blessed of the better. Better in that place is taken
for the more honorable; yet Pharaoh was the King of a potent Realm, Jacob the
Head of no great Family; though Pharaoh was more honorable with men, yet Jacob
was more honorable with God; his interest was greater in Heaven, often
reckoned as one of the first three Worthies in that Court. As to the business
of blessing, greatness can be content goodness should take place. A wicked
King of Israel can call Elisha Father, and style him The Chariots of Israel,
and the Horsemen thereof. Goodness makes it self honorable, even among those
that hate it, and such as dislike the practice of it, yet like well the
blessings that come by it.

(6)
When Abraham was to offer up Isaac, He bound him, and laid him upon the Altar.
( Genesis 22.9.) We read not of any reluctance in Isaac, yet to make sure work he
is bound. Abraham knew not how flesh and blood might strive at the very pinch,
and disturb the service. It Is good to be sure, and not to allow that any
Latitude, which is sometimes refractory, always weak; it is an happy providence
that prevents the hazard of a shameful retreat, by taking away the means of
flight. Though Ridley came with all willingness to the stake, yet he said to
the Smith that fastened the Chain about him, Good fellow, knock it in fast, for
the flesh will have its course. The good man knew how much ado he had to
persuade it to that encounter, and he knew not how it might start at the push.

(7)
When Peter had an express command from the Lord to follow him, yet he asks,
And what shall this man do? ( John 21.21.) When there is no show for us to
dispute Gods Commands, and argue about our duty, instead of doing it, then we
needlessly interpose in the concernments of others, and mind their business, not
our own, making a stand in our way to Heaven, and delay our following Christ,
while we turn about to look on others and are unconcernedly inquisitive after
their affairs.

(8)
We have some expressions in Scripture wherein we may suppose an hyperbole, as
that of the left handed Benjamites slinging stones to an hairs breadth; some
wherein an hyperbole is manifest, as John ult. ult. But does God that cannot
lie allow himself a Latitude to speak beside the truth? or does he comply with
the exorbitant modes of men? neither; but God speaking to men, speaks after the
manner of men; who because they cannot just hit the white, and describe the
thing exactly, do when the thing is eminent, rather shoot beyond it, then
beneath it, allowing the hearer to make such abatement as the necessity of the
thing requires, sometimes as the convenience; as in those (we may call them
complementall) expressions; 1 Samuel: 24.14. As when David calls himself A Dog, a
Flea. Abigail will be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of David,
verse. 25.41. Ziba may take all, seeing the King was come again in peace.

(9)
When I read the condition of the oath which the Spies made to Rahab, ( Joshua
2.19.) that they would be quit of their oath, if at the taking of Jericho that
Scarlet thread were not tied in the window. I thought the tying of it there,
would be let alone till Jericho were besieged, especially to avoid suspicion,
that the Spies were conveyed that way; but the first thing I read of after the
Spies departure, is The binding of the Scarlet thrend in the window: She
thought that Cord whereon her life hanged, could not be hanged out too soon,
might have been too late. Oh the irrationality of a late repentance! Must the
body be besieged with sickness before that work be done upon which eternal life
depends? How often is it that that is never done, because we think to do it
late; and what we intend to do anon, we therefore do never? And surely that
work is fittest to be done to day, concerning which it is so unsafe to boast of
to morrow?

(10)
When the brethren of Joseph met with trouble in Egypt, they said one to
another, ( Gen: 42.21.) We are verily guilty concerning our brother. There were
many years had passed since they had sold him, and we hear not any thing of it
till now, and yet we find no prompter but their own consciences. There is this
advantage by affliction, that it gives the soul a stand, and makes it look
about it, begets that observation which before it had not; those threshing
instruments discover that chafe before not seen; and when we are emptied from
vessel to vessel, we see those Lees not till then apprehended; Art thou come
to call my sin to remembrance, and slay my son? (says that woman) Not to call
her sin into Gods remembrance, that it might be punished with the death of her
son, as by the death of her son to call her sin into her remembrance; what it
was appears not, probably the unlawful generation of that son forgotten long
since, and put in the wallet behind, but exposed to view upon this occasion.

(11)
When I read Jacobs dream, and his words upon it, ( Gen: 28.17.) I wondered at
the coherence between them; the dream representing nothing but mercy, words of
grace, promises of benefaction in the most abundant manner; and yet when he
awakes, he cries, How dreadful is this place? who would not have expected
other inference from such words as those? But Gods countenance though clear
with smiles, yet strikes awe in the beholder; the evidences of Gods love are so
far from begetting presumption, that they leave the soul in an holy trembling,
and fear to offend. When God gives into the soul the Charter of its spiritual
privileges, and richly lades it with the freight of divine promises, then is
it most sensible of its distance, and ballasted with the apprehension of its
own unworthiness: When God makes Abraham of his counsel, and tells him what he
would do, then cries Abraham, That he is but dust and ashes.

(12)
When Lot parted from Abraham, and had his choice given him, whither he would
go, he chooses the plain of Jordan, having respect to the fruitfulness of the
place, and its being watered every where, but without consideration of the
wickedness of the inhabitants, which yet the Spirit of God intimates should
have been thought of, for it is immediately added, ( Gen: 13.13.) But the men of
Sodom were sinners before the Lord exceedingly. But how ill this carnal
project succeeded, besides the grieving his righteous soul from day to day,
with the unrighteous conversation of the wicked, being carried captive by the
Kings, and after dispoiled of all his substance in the ruin of Sodom. It being
just with God, that when we prize the wealth of this world, before that of a
better, and the health of the body, before that of the soul, so to dispose of
it, that we fail of our design, and that proves to our loss in that very way
wherein we intended it for our gain.

(13)
A Promise being made to Abraham of a son, we read ( Genesis 17.17.) He fell upon
his face and laughed, saying, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred
years old? and shall Sarah that is ninety years old bear? The like promise
being made to Sarah, we read ( Gen: 18.12.) she laughed too, saying, After I am
waxed old shall I have pleasure? my Lord being old also. Surely, there appears
no such difference, either in the words or laughter, as there was in Gods sense
of it, for Sarah is reproved, Abraham applauded. What odds does the heart make
in humane actions, God discerning a vast difference in the very same works;
those services which are performed by heartless Formalists, having a rank
favor in Gods nostrils, the same services acted by a truly religious Votary,
being a most acceptable Spectacle in the eyes of divine glory.

(14)
I observe a strange ambition in Sarah and Rachel, that rather then they would
be wholly childless, they would have them by their maids, and that which it is
like they would have stormed at upon another account, yet they themselves upon
the score of satisfying their fancies, are the Authors of; and if their
husbands get children to be born upon their knees, it shall qualify the
apprehensions of their own Sterility. Lord, I am sensible of my barrenness,
that I have been to thee very fruitless; the immortal seed of thy Word, how
often has it been cast upon my heart without any productions? but let my
desire to fructify be such, that I may endeavor others may bear upon my
knees, that that seed through my means may be diffused to others also.

(15)
We are told Heb: 9.4. That in the Ark there was the pot of Manna, Aarons rod
that budded, and the Tables of the Covenant. Yet (1 Kings 8.9.) it is said,
There was nothing in the Ark but the Tables of the Covenant. When I observed
the diversity of those Texts, I thought (and I suppose truly) that the Relative
(...) had for its Correlative (...) not (...), so that the pot of Manna, and
Aarons rod, are noted as the Contents of the Holiest of Holyes, not of the Ark,
to which agree that Scripture, Exodus: 16.33. where there is mention made of
laying them before the Testimony, not in the Ark, that being reserved as a
peculiar Bibliotheca for the Tables of the Law, there being by divine
appointment, a more solemn and peculiar custody allotted to them, then to any
thing else in the world beside, not only to keep them for observation, as to
preserve them from violence, neither abstraction nor addition being allowed
there, but exact and punctual compliance; the most prudential consultations of
humane reason always meeting with unhappy success. Saul's providence in
preserving the best of the spoils of Amaleck for sacrifice, because beside the
rule, find a curse instead of acceptance, and is told, Obedience is better than
the fat of Rams.

(16)
When God sent Gideon to deliver Israel, ( Judge. 6.12.) he bespeaks him, The
Lord is with thee, Thou mighty man of valor. What needed there mention of
Gideons valor, when the weapons of that warfare were to be spiritual, rather
then carnal, a strong faith rather then a strong arm; to blow with the
Trumpets, and cry, The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, required rather good
Lungs, then a valourous heart; besides 'twas Gods purpose to glorify himself
immediately in this delivery, therefore chose the three hundred that lapped,
rather than the other thousands, so that the veriest Coward had been rather for
Gods turn, then a man of courage. But though the work was the Lords, the
enterprise was daring, and required a well fortifyed mind to undertake it; the
exposing of three hundred in such a posture to an army that covered the earth
like Grasshoppers, could not but stagger him who desired a sign that God would
save Israel by his hand, when he had thirty two thousand men following him;
therefore the Lord thus be speaks him, questionably whether Indicatively or
Imparatively, to show him so, or make him so, or at least more so, therefore
the Commission is, Go in this thy might, or thus, Wade mighty; but however if
Gideon were high in valor, he was low in humility, though cried up by the
testimony of an Angel, and so hard a matter to be a good Soldier, and not a
Braggard too, yet not a word of his boasting through the whole story. God can
well allow us our portion, when thereby we intrude not on his interest.

(17)
In the 2 Same 13.5. we find Jonadab of counsel to Amnon in the ravishment of
his sister Tamar, and in the 32. verse either of counsel or conscious to his
murder; we read him indeed advising in the execution of the wickedness, but not
admonishing of the punishment. Those Decoyes are frequent, who cog us into
danger, but there leave us. I have read of an evil spirit that was wont to
entice men into mischief, and then make himself sport with their troubles; it is
the Devils play to laugh at those miseryes, whereinto those things brought us
to which he advised us.

(18)
A charge is given by David to Ziba to till the Land for Mephibosheth, and to
bring him the fruits, that his masters son might have food to eat; and yet at
the same time there is a promise made, That he should eat bread continually at
the Kings Table. Surely David's provision was not so short, as that there needed
a supply from Ziba; there might have been mention made of Rent to his Coffers,
but it seems impertinent to provide food to eat, where to talk of a supply had
been a disparagement: But Mephibosheth had a son, and it is probable store of
Attendants, and for these is the food intended, reckoned as his, because for
his Dependants; besides, under the name of food other necessaries are
understood, though less necessary; as bread, promised to Mephibosheth at
David's Table, because the staff of man's life, and therefore principally
mentioned, though only so, excludes not the other delicacies which at the Kings
Table were to be had. When we pray to God for our daily bread, we intend also
the other conveniences of life, and that for us and ours; and when God
promises to give us food, so that we need not take thought what we shall cat,
yet then he intends we should be provident for our own diet: David's court sie
must be accompanied with Ziba's industry.

(19)
In the History of the Kings of Israel, the Scripture refers us to the Books of
Nathan, Gad, Jasher, and others; if these books were not (...), as it is
probable they were not, yet being thus referred to, they were of Divine
Authority, though not a priore, by Divine Inspiration, yet a posteriore, by
Divine approbation, and like Leather money, though no silver, was yet current
being stamped; even those words of the Heathen Poet, being quoted by the Spirit,
are (being so) of like Authority; but why are we referred to them for our
confirmation or information? Indeed God to establish our weakness, repeats his
Command that we be strengthened, Be strong, yea, be strong; we have the same
things reiterated: God thinks not much to shoot two Arrows out of his Quiver,
to strike the mark dead, that like a Partridge killed by a Merlyn, it may not
so much as quiver a wing, though the first did mortally would it. By two
immutable things whereby it was impossible for God to lie, could God have lied,
had there been only a single asseveration; and did that impossibility arise
from the Duplication? surely not to God who cannot deny himself, and changes
not, but as to us, in condescension to whose weakness God makes that Bond
double, which before was so strong that Heaven and Earth should be dissolved
first; but why are these books then lost? Even miracles that swadled the
infant-truths of the Gospel were left off, when by time they had gathered
strength to stand alone; yea, God expects we should not be always Babes, and
therefore reckons upon the time, whereas for the time, ye ought: I have many
things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now; which yet were said when
they could bear them; all things are not fit for all times; those Books might
be meet for the present Generations, that were not so for those that followed.
John points with the finger, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world; yet the Disciples are charged To tell no man that he was the Christ.
Besides, as God will sometimes help our weakness, so at other times try our
faith: Hence that universal silence, or perversion in profane story, of what
the Divine makes mention; how short a touch does Josephus give of the Lord
Christ, who yet copiously handles things (even to common judgment) far less
memorable; yet of those Books that were written and lost, or Traditions, has
God taken care to insert so much in the Scriptures as was pertinent for his
Church; for which cause those words of Enoch are recited by Jude, whereas what
was written or said by him besides, is perished.

(20)
Though God be often attested to be no respecter of persons, yet we find him
dealing differently with diverse persons in diverse cases. Gideon requires a sign
more than once, and is favorably complied with; Zachary does so but once, and
has his own dumbness given him for an evidence; But it is no wonder, if God
who knows the thoughts, deal diversely to our thoughts. Gideons faith like a
child newly come to its feet, desires that it may be upheld by a sign, and
pity it should not be led, that was willing to go. Zachary stands at a gaze,
and seems not so much to desire confirmation, as to dispute the possibility of
the thing from the improbability, arguing that such a thing would not be,
because naturally it could not be, withal tacitly suspecting the Messenger;
therefore the Angel tells his name, and gives a sign, not only to confirm the
truth, but chastise his unbelief: They were good men both, and well beloved,
but their different tempers required a different dispensation. God is not
partial though he use variety of threshing instruments, for the good corn in
all is not discovered otherwise; the wheel must be turned over some, when the
rod will suffice for another.

(21)
We read Gen: 3. ult. that when Adam was expulsed Paradise, That was a flaming
sword turning this way and that way to preserve the Tree of Life. It Is to be
wondered at, that that place then should need a Guard to defend it, which now
needs a finger to point at it, the judgments of learned men varying about
nothing more, than the site of it; no peculiar Tree, no particular beauty,
distinguishing that Garden, nor yet those Rivers issuing thence, so punctually
described, giving other then a guess at it. Did that Garden which Adam in
innocence was to Till, afterward when the ground was cursed, degenerate with
the rest, and more hastily into a wilderness? and as Corruption opes-morum est
pessima; So here it should be Citissima too; like Apostates that grow worse,
more and more speedily, than other wicked ones. But well might it be, that that
Guard should be remitted; for though Adam at his first removal from Paradise,
might have desires of returning, the present sense of so great a loss being
then upon him, yet this sense every day abated, as the strength of sin got
ground and prevailed; so than that was at first desired, was afterward less,
and at last forgotten; besides, habits of sin gathered strength daily, and were
confirmed by repeated acts, and that depravation of nature whereinto Adams fall
brought minkind, was more and more inhanced, and by custom in sin man was
daily farther debauched, so that as Gods judgments increased continually, so
the means of like were farther removed, and man's thoughts for it, and
possibility to attain it, every day decayed.

(22)
After the death of Jacob, when the sons of Israel feared Joseph would remember
against them what they had done to him, they make this their plea, Forgive the
trespass of the servants of the God of thy father. There is no greater
argument to prevail for a mutual compliance, then unity of Religion; for what
should keep those at a distance, that are joined together by that straitest
obligation, that are one in that most superlative one thing?

(23)
When the mother of James and John requested the Lord, ( Mat: 20.21.) That her
sons might sit, one on the right hand, the other on the left; our Lord replies
to them (as it seems at the first view) quite besides the purpose, asking them
a question little pertinent to that they treated him about; for what
appertained their drinking of the cup he should drink of, and being baptized
with the same baptism, to the sitting at his right hand and left, in his
Kingdom? but if we consider it, it will appear very much, for these young men
were solicitous about what was to be had, not what was to be done; their eyes
were upon the end, more than the way; the reward, than the work; thought more
of reaping, than sowing, yea, before they had sown; therefore our Lord
remembers them of the Teary seed-time, puts them in mind of the bitter cup and
baptism, wherein the deep waters should go over their soul; 'twas time to tell
them of the Stony, Thorny Rode, that talked of setting down, before they had
well set out. What store of Suitors would Heaven have, if there were no more to
do, but go in and possess the Land, if there were never an Anakim to be fought
with first; beside, the way to glory is through the place of a skull: Christ
must suffer these things, and enter into his glory, to the Throne over the
Thorn; If we suffer with him, we shall be glorified together; they that are
before the Throne of God are such as came out of great tribulation, and have
washed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

(24)
I find no sort of men more frequent than the Pharisees in their disputes with
Christ, of none fewer that believed; we find these captious hearers, curious
questionists, censorious observators, but have any of the Pharisees believed on
him? these had Cats eyes that saw best in the dark, knowing men in the
impertinencies of the Traditions of the Elders, and therefore witty to dispute
against the truth; no men farther removed from conversion, then the carnally
wise, and superstiriously religious. But beside, to talk of Religion seems to
be the business of these men, they ask what is the great Commandment in the
Law, rather then take care to do it; Religion should have its rice in the head,
and flow thence to the heart; but when it is a standing Pool there, when men are
ricketty, great heads but unproportionable hearts, are all for disputation,
nothing for observation: like those who study the Philosophers stone, while
they would be rationally rich, they become really poor.

(25)
The Apostle Peter puts a strange question. (1 Pet. 3.13.) Who is he that will
harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? Who will? Nay, Who will
not? What a Cloud of sufferers upon that very account might be here called in
to confute the Apostle; nay Paul might be set against Peter, he says, (2 Timothy
3.12.) All that will live Godly in this life must suffer tribulation; yea,
Peter against himself, (1 Pet: 2.19.) where he speaks of a man for conscience
toward God enduring grief, suffering wrongfully; but the Apostle speaks de
jure, not de facto, and verily innocence is not a little consolation to the
sufferer; a good conscience carrying always Balm along with it to anoint the
stripes, and Sugar to sweeten the bitter Cup, that tyranny or cruelty may
enforce upon us; beside, the confidence (uprightness having holdnesse) makes
the forehead as an iron wall, serenes the front, so that it retorts the shame,
brings the oil of gladness instead of the confusion of face, which clouds the
guilty: An huge satisfaction too arises from the reflex act of the soul, when
it looks into its self, and finds fair weather there, whereas guilt has an
ugly hue, and terrible look, and always brings terror and affrights with it.

(26)
When the Herodians came to Christ with design to betray him, though the Lord
had power to have avoided their cruelty, as he did that of the Jews, yet he
chooses rather by a prudent reply to evade their Trap; Caesar's image upon their
Coin being an argument either of his right or power, so that they must pay
Tribute out of justice or necessity, yet with such a limitation as would surely
keep them within bounds, reserving to God his due, that that Sovereign Lord be
not deprived of his right, while the petty ones be complied with. Our Savior
would not run himself into the Lions jaws, when he might go out of his way with
a good conscience: Religion does not entangle a man in unnecessary and
impertinent snares; God allows we should stand aside when the immediate
concernments of his glory do not call us out; precious in the sight of the Lord
is the death of his Saints, and therefore to be exposed, but upon a very
eminent account, not squandered away: Those that would not acept deliverance,
did so, not because they were prodigal of their lives, but could not have
equal conditions; for the simplicity of the Gospel, and Dove-like innocence,
may well shake hands with the Serpentine prudence, and an honest policy.

(27)
When our Savior sent out the seventy Disciples to preach, he charged them
not to go from house to house, Luke 10.7. yet Paul herein witnesses his
integrity to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, that he had taught them
publicly, and from house to house, ( Acts 20.20.) Paul's practice did not clash
with the Lords precept; our Lord forbids such a going from house to house, as
was upon the account, not of teaching, but of entertainment. He would not that
his servants should (like beggars) go from door to door; low and unworthy way
for livelihood, agree not with the profession of those whose maintenance is
called double honor; They are sent out without a scrip, yet must make no base
shift for their provision; but observe a comely gravity in the same house,
remain eating and drinking such things as they give, not by an unhandsome
crouching to beg that hire, which a true labourer may challenge as his due.

(28)
In the charge which Paul gives Timothy, to bring the things he left at Troas,
he takes especial care for his Books and Parchments. The chiefest furniture of
a Minister is his Library, and that which men reckon much as his commendation,
that he is a good Scholar, there being nothing more contemptible then a dull
headed illiterate Preacher; but here is the mischief of it, that while they
require Brick of us, they give us no Straw, their maintenance being such, that
if it hold out to buy a Cloak, there is nothing left for Books and Parchments.

(29)
When our Lord was invited to the Pharisees house, he sets down with unwashen
hands, ( Luke 11.38.) 'twas not unknown to him what was the Tradition of the
Elders, or the Pharisees judgment in that respect, neither may we think him
uncomplying with such things of decency and cleanliness, as humanity required;
and though he might with a good conscience, and would it is probable have washed
before dinner, yet we see him therefore refusing it, because they would make
that necessary which was indifferent. The very Esse of external worship being
divine appointment; while men go about to make that Religious which God left as
indifferent, they actually destroy what they intend to establish; for which
cause the Lord does not only reprove such injunctions of theirs as were
contrary to Gods Law, but such as were beside it, arguing hereby that they
worshipped God in vain, because they taught for Doctrine the Commandments of
men; and this very thing emphatically sets a Character upon Jeroboams time,
appointed by him for worship, that it was the month which he had devised of his
own heart.

(30)
He that should have read that prophecy in Hosea, ( Hos. 12.1.) would little
have thought of such an interpretation as the Spirit gives; for who would have
imagined that those words, Out of Egypt have I called my son, should foretell
Joseph's bringing up Jesus out of Egypt. It Is hard to deduce certain conclusions
from passages merely prophetical, and as dangerous to engage in things of
practice, only upon the conduct of such light as those places afford, they
being intended rather for confirmation than narration: for which cause we find
those predictions of our Savior concerning his sufferings and resurrection;
hid from the Apostles; but after they were effected, then they remembered that
he had said these things unto them, and they believed the Scriptures, and the
word which Jesus had spoken.

(31)
When I heard Herod's promise and oath to the daughter of Herodias, That he
would give her what soever she should ask, to the half of his Kingdom, ( Mark
6.22.) I expected she should have come in and requested some lusty boon, a
Duchy at the least, but behold she desires John Baptists head in a Charger;
there could be no such satisfaction in the Heremites head, that the impotent
soul should thus desire it, if malice had not set so great a price upon it: But
whither will not the spirit of revenge transport us? the good man had reproved
an incestuous marriage, and no less then his head must pay for it, though
purchased at so dear a rate, as half a Kingdom; but it seldom is, that the
purchases revenge makes, are not like Copyhold Land, paid for twice, as this
woman in a short time after dearly found; for what the Prophet reproved, Caesar
disallows and punishes.

(32)
When Mary Magdalen stood weeping at the Sepulcher, she turns about and sees
Jesus, but knew him not, Joh. 20.14. It does not appear that the body of Jesus
was changed after his resurrection, as to what it might be known from another
by; for he shows Thomas the print of his nails, and it is said of the Disciples
traveling to Emaus, That their eyes were withholden that they should not know
him, implying that otherwise they would; but we find no such cause here, yet
she mistakes him for the Gardener. The good woman was intent upon her sorrow,
and was suprized with so sudden and unexpected a discovery: It is most dark at
day break, and Gods way of revealing himself is usually by contraryes, as
Abraham believed in hope, against hope; God steps in with such unlooked for
mercies, that his people does not believe their own enjoyments; Psalm. 126.1.
When God turned again the captivity of Sion, we were like those that dream,
Thought they dreamed, not crediting that deliverance real, but imaginary; when
we think comforts are farthest off, it is but turn about, and they are before
us, for God delights that his mighty arm be made apparent, and then to save
when his people have no power, and there is none shut up nor left.

(33)
Our Lord says to Mary ( John 20.15.) Woman why weepest thou? whom seek
thou? and yet she knows him not; but when he says Mary, she cries Rabboni; when
he bespeaks her with the general name of Woman, he is undiscovered to her, but
when by the peculiar name of Mary, he is owned by her as Master; So great a
difference there is between general and particular calling; how many have
unprofitably heard Christ speaking to them in is word, till he has called them
by name, and that word by a particular application has been laid upon their
hearts? Yea, what odds is there between public preaching, and particular
speaking? how many have received more instruction and edification by one hours
private discourse, than by multiplied hours spent in public Sermons; and much
were it to be wished, that there were care had, as to teach publicly, so also
from house to house.

(34)
When the man asks our Lord whether there were many that should be saved,
Luke 13.23. instead of answering his curiosity he replyeth by a profitable
admonition; he diverteth his thoughts from the useless speculation of an
abstracted general, into the useful consideration of his particular interest,
that instead of knowing the number of those that should be saved, he should
strive to be one of the number; well were it, if those little-edifying
questions between Calvin and Arminius about Calling and Election, were
converted into serious endeavors to make our calling and election sure, and
there were more care to advance Christ's Kingdom in our hearts, then to dispute
when and where his personal Reign shall be upon the earth.

(35)
If that controversy had been proposed to one of our Rabbis, which the woman
of Samaria did to Jesus, ( John 4.10.) Whether Mount Gerizim, or Jerusalem,
were the place where men ought to worship, they would have told you a story out
of antiquity, wherein possibly they would have reached no higher than the age
after Sanballat, and so have mist of the true stream, by not ascending to the
true Primitive fountain; but our Lord reduces this controversy about worship
to the proper consideration of the true object of worship, not disputing how,
or where, or when, but what was to be worshipped, and directing the mind to
such worship as was suitable, (and therefore likely to be acceptable) viz:
spiritual, like the Spirit we worship; and therefore we shall find God calling
men off from Ceremony, as he has called them on to further discovery; as he
revealed himself more clearly in Gospel light, so the shaddows fled away, and
Ceremonies were reduced to be much more simple in furniture, and fewer in
number.

(36)
The Apostle James lays a necessity upon us to make our faith public by good
works, ( James 2. ult.) saying, Faith without works is dead; yet the Apostle
Paul enjoins us to keep our faith private, saying, Have thou faith? have it to
thy self before God, Rom: 14. 22. Not that the Apostle Paul ho had so
manifoldly evinced the excellency of faith, and its efficacy to justification,
was unwilling it should be manifested by its fruits, or were not as much for
good works as the other, but the difference between them is in the different
faith spoken of; St James speaking of that general faith, St Paul of a
particular; the object of the first being all Gods will revealed; the object of
the latter being something concerning which Gods will has not been
particularly revealed; the first is that for which there must be a contending
by the Saints; but no contending for the latter, no imposing of that upon
others, no censuring, no judging for not observance; to be zealous in the first
is faithfulness, in the latter is factionsness; of that there must be a public
profession, of this such a private observation as may agree with the generals
we allow, and with our particular persuasion; no dissolving of the golden Chain
of Christian Charity for any difference of judgment in this, wherein a thing
and its contrary, eating and not eating, a day and not a day, may be alike
laudably observed.

(37)
We find the reason why God brought variety of judgments upon the Jews, till
he had removed them out of his sight, and destroyed their City by
Nebuchadnezzar, to be the sins of Manasseh, and the innocent blood which he
shed, which the Lord would not pardon 2 Kings 24.3, 4. yet we read those sins
were pardoned to Manesseh, upon his faith and repentance; and the present
judgment under which he suffered, removed; yea Manasseh departed this life
long before the destruction of Jerusalem, so that the calamities then suffered,
little pertained unto him, whom the grave had secured against such after-claps;
but though Manasseh were dead, and his iniquities forgiven to him, yet his
posterity did approve his doings: That reformation begun by himself, and
carried on to much perfection by his son Josiah, was quickly interrupted by the
wicked posterity that followed, they by their assent subscribed to the long
Bed-roll of those sins which the Father had disclaimed, and added a new score
of their own iniquities; therefore it was just with God to reckon to them, and
make them pay that account which they themselves had approved; and this is the
way whereby a wicked generation may entail themselves heirs to the iniquities,
and consequently to the plagues of all precedent ages; thus all the blood from
that of righteous Abel, to that of Zacharias the son of Barachias, is reckoned
to the unbeleeving Jews, and therefore wrath brought upon them to the
uttermost: Wherefore no wonder if we see estates gotten by bribery, or
oppression, melting away like the untimely fruit of a woman, while the
succeeding heirs instead of making due restitution, justify the rapines of
their progenitors, and spend that by riot and prodigality which they got by
extortion and cruelty.

(38)
When our Lord commanded the Legion out of the possessed that haunted the
Tombs, ( Mark 5.10.) we read That he besought him much, that he would not send
them out of the Country; I began to think why the Devils should desire to
abide in those parts, but I found the people of the place came to Christ, and
desired him to depart out of their Country; no wonder the Devils desire there
to abide, where the people pray the Lord to be gone; it is a sweet content to
the Devils to have their Mansion there, where the inhabitants love their Hogs
more than their souls, and give Christ not so much entertainment as they would
do a Swineherd. It Is like these were Countrey-Farmers, who knew no more
Religion than a Collect for rain and fair weather in its season. God has
promised his presence where two or three are gathered together about the
affairs of his worship, and the Lord says, His Father and He will come and
sup, and make their abode with him who loves him and keeps his
Commandments; so contrarily, the Devils delight to possess those houses from
whence all acts of Religion are banished, and God is not named, unless, as by
the damned in hell, that he may be blasphemed.

But whereas one Evangelist says, not out of the Country, another says not
into the deep; though verily, there be not much difference between Hell and
some houses, as to the sins and blasphemies committed there, yet is there odds
to the torments. Hell is Gods house of Correction, from whence those spirits
are sometimes sent to be the Executioners of Gods displeasure, and it is their
terror to be remitted thither, therefore we hear them crying out to our Lord,
Not to torment them, not to send them into the place of torment. Till the
consummation there is use of the Ministry of those evil Angels, and till then
(I think it is probable) their sufferings are not always alike grievous, nor
yet their sins till then at the highest; for though their executions be
according to command, yet their malice in the execution increases their
transgression; and though they are now reserved in everlasting Chains under
darkness, yet it is to the judgment of the last day, when that everlasting
fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, shall be ready for them.

(39)
The Disciples might well marvel at that question of our Savior, ( Matthew.
9.20.) when he asks, Who touched me? The people pressed upon him, and thronged
him, and he might rather ask, Who touched him not? than who did? Alas, those
many thronged without consideration, without design; and as they pressed without
any purpose, so to no purpose; as without intention to be benefited, so without
benefit; but the touching of Christ was a plot of the woman's, a project to be
healed, an act directed to that end; for which cause the Scripture reports her
healing not as casual, but the result of her design, and therefore records the
discourse which she had with her own heart about it; such touching of Christ,
had power to extract virtue from him, and attract it, to bring it out from him,
and bring it in to her, whereas the other left him as it found him, no
diffusing of efficacy to those, who were not prepared by any thought for it; so
great a difference is there between doing what we mind, and not minding what we
do; the means of grace are seldom applied to with design, and desire of
benefit, that men are dismissed altogether without what they came for; but never
marvel if those are sent away without any spiritual profit, that came without
any other design then to see and be seen.

(40)
When our Lord in the storm is awaked by his Disciples, ( Mark 4.38.) they
propose such a question as does tacitly charg him with a neglect of their
lives, Master, carest thou not that we perish? I expected rather they would
have minded him of his own danger, than have complained that he minded not
theirs: for his jeopardy was greater being asleep, and at least the same, being
embarked with them in the same bottom. But thus it often is with the servants
of God in their distresses, that they are apt to charge God foolishly, and say
of their sufferings as the wicked of their sins, The Lord does not see, neither
does the holy One of Israel regard; when as in all their afflictions, he is
afflicted, and their griefs are his: He has entwisted their good with his
interest, and he that touches them, touches the Apple of his eye; then will
the Lord be wanting to secure his own cause, when he is careless whether those
perish who uprightly serve him.

(41)
When I read of the simplicity of John the Baptist, I admire to hear that Herod
feared him, such a simple Fellow in such mean array, with a Leather Girdle, and
Raiment of Camels hair, poorly clad, and meanly fed, to be a terror to so great
a Potentate; if he had been in his Pontificalibus, with his Cross-Keyes and
Triple-Crown, and the Thunderbolt of Excommunication in his hand, he might have
scared a Prince; but says the Text, He knew him to be a just man, and an holy.
What an honorable impression does holiness fix upon the foreheads of the
righteous? what an awe it begets in the greatest, in the vilest; even the very
Rabshakehs while they scoff, they tremble. That Image of God to which the Lion
croucht, when Adam was in innocence, and the fierce Tiger did his homage, where
it is renewed it makes the meanest honorable, and brings to remembrance that
God, to whom the proudest must give up their accounts.

(42)
John in the Revelation declares his error in worshipping the Angel that
showed unto him those things, (Rev: 19.10.) We find him an impartial reporter
against himself, so great a fault set down without any the least extenuation,
not so much as a mistake pleaded; the Angel indeed in his answer seems to
imply, that John thought him other than one of his fellow servants, but John
himself calls him one of the seven Angels with the vials. So free are the
servants of God to take shame to themselves, while others ransack far and near
to find out excuses to palliate their crimes, or post them to others, (as Saul
charge his sparing the spoils of Amaleck upon the people, whose voice he
obeyed) they are full and open in their confessions, and ready to take that
blame from which all would acquit them, besides themselves; they cry like
David, Lord, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but these sheep, what
have they done? But which is yet more, we find John not long after faulty upon
the very same account, ( Rev: 22.8.) and it seems very probable if you compare
Cap. 19. verse. 10. with Cap. 21. verse. 9. to the very same Angel; he that had
so clearly before discovered himself to be a fellow servants, and so seriously
admonished him not to do it, and so fairly directed him to the proper object of
worship; surely, there is something in it, that so holy a person as John, so
informed before hand, and at the time of such divine Revelations, should be set
forth to us, thus the second time failing; but verily God foresaw what great
idolatry there would be committed in the world by the worshipping of Saints,
and therefore by this action of John's either fore-shewed it, or presented a
Caution against it; a Caution indeed, for how great an argument is it, That
Saints are not to be worshipped, seeing they are but fellow servants? for can
that Sovereign Lord endure that servants should be made his fellows, or that
fellow servants should have such worship from their equals, if not in present,
yet at least in future enjoyments?

(43)
The Apostle Paul in that his reasoning the ease with his Corinthians, (2 Cor
12.18.) uses much of argument to excuse his not putting them to charges; we
might have expected rather something of Apology that he had been burdensome,
than that he had not; but it is an ordinary Craft to charge the not requiring
of those courtesies (when the opportunity to do them are past) as an
unkindness, which if requested when in their season, would have been grumbled
at; but what cannot be reckoned as a downright injury, is yet imputed as a
design; this not being burdensome as a crafty fetch to draw them in, that they
might be more securely and fully preyed upon afterward by those whom he sent
to gather his harvest after him; as if Titus and the brother that came with
him, were appointed to do that which Paul would not; so impossible is it for a
Minister of the Gospel not to have been his good evil spoken of; these very men
that quarrelled with Paul because he put them not to charges, were contented
the false Apostles should bring them into bondage, devour them, take of them,
buffet them on the face. The vile exorbitants of lewd Teachers, are more
favorably suffered than the pious endeavors of religious Pastors, wherein the
edification of their flock is merely intended.

(44)
In that Treatment which our Savior gives the multitudes that followed him, he
seems very impolitick in drawing Disciples after him, to profess, That who
will be his Disciple, must hate father and mother, wife and children, houses
and Lands, must take up the Cross and follow him. To give such hard Almonds to
such soft Teeth; was this the way? a Country person would have taken another
course, he would have feasted his neighbors with good cheer, and have soaked
their hearts with strong liquor to have molified their affections, and have
made their minds pliable, this had been a likely way to have done good, to have
brought them fairly on; but our Lord likes no Cupboard Suitors, not those who
follow him for the Loaves, his servants must meet with storms, therefore he is
for such as will stand to their tackling; it is seldom therefore but the Lord
quickly tryes what metal they are of: Those that draw Disciples after them,
they number their followers by the poll, but our Lord (as Gideon with his Army)
sends thousands away that are base and fainthearted, wherefore they are often
alarmed, and it never is that Godliness is long prosperous, that those who are
approved may be made manifest, and they that are otherwise may not be hid.

(45)
We do not read that the men which owned the Colt were any of the followers of
Jesus; yet as soon as they were told by the Disciples which were sent, That the
Lord had need of him, without further dispute they let him go (an invincible
argument with co^siderate men) what could there be replied in such a case? had
it been equal to have denied? Might not that Sovereign Lord require for his
own use, who supplies so much for ours? may he not justly take any thing that
gives all? What a ready compliance is there in particular natures, to that
which is more universal? The heavy water will shift its Region, and from the
low valleys, spout over the lofty mountains to avoid a Vacuum; and the massy
Iron forgot its weight, and swam like Cork at the command of the Prophet; and
shall not every creature deny its private interest to serve him, upon whose
influence the whole world depends? and it were better ten thousand worlds
should perish, then he should be in the least a sufferer: And shall we boggle
to part from those vile lusts upon his account, concerning which it may be
asked, What profit had yet in those things? Well may those generous Heroes be
memorized now, and to eternity, who were willing to be blotted out of Gods
Book, and be accursed from Christ, rather than the eminent concernments of
divine glory should be impaired; could these thus freely sacrifice their
Hecatombs, when we make so dainty of our Turtle Doves, and young Pigeons?

FINIS.

