I Do appoint FRANCIS TYTON, and THOMAS BASSET, to Print the Trials of EDWARD
FITZ-HARRIS, and OLIVER PLUNKET; and that no others presume to Print the same.

Fr. Pemberton.

THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF Edw. Fitz-Harris, Esquire FOR HIGH TREASON, At the
Bar of the Court of King's Bench, at Westminster, on Thursday the 9th of June,
in Trinity Term, 1681. AS ALSO THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF Dr Oliver Plunket,
Titular Primate of Ireland, for High Treason, at the Bar of the Court of
King's Bench, the same Term.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton, and Thomas Basset, Booksellers in
Fleetstreet. 1681.

Trinity Term 33 Car. 2. Regis.
On Thursday 9. June 1681. Edward Fitz-Harris was brought to the Bar of the
Court of King's Bench; and the Court being sat, proceeded thus.

Mr. Thompson. MY Lord, I ^oved you the other day that before Mr. Fitz-Harris
Trial, he might give such evidence as he had to give against Sir John Arundel,
and Sir Richard Beiling, concerning the death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, before
he be convicted of Treason; and we understood that it was the direction of the
Court, That we might move it this morning before Conviction, that he might
declare upon Oath here in Court what he knows of that matter against those
Gentlemen: for after he is convicted, I believe it will be too late for us to
think of it; Mr. Godfrey has a great deal of reason to desire what I now move,
that his Brothers Murderers may be prosecuted, and we hope all the favor that
can be granted in such a Case, will be granted unto us; for there has been a
design of late set on foot to make it be believed that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
murdered himself, notwithstanding that clear Evidence that has been already
given of this matter, and notwithstanding that several persons have been
Convicted and attainted upon that Evidence. So that these Gentlemen think
themselves obliged to prosecute this matter as far as they can, and beg of
your Lordship, that what can be done for them may: And particularly, that he
may perfect his Discovery against the two named at his last Examination before
the Grand Jury, and that his Examination about them may now be taken by the
Court.


Lord Chapter Justice. Look you Mr. Thompson, That that you moved before, had some
reason in it, that he might be examined, and give Evidence to a Grand Jury, and
we told you he should; but if there be never a Grand Jury Sworn, yet who can he
give Evidence to? would you have us take his Examination, and afterward give
it in Evidence to the Grand Jury?


Mr. Thompson. My Lord, I only say then it is our hard hap that he is not
examined before a Grand Jury.


Lord Chapter Justice. But do you think it is fit for you to move this ^ow?


Mr. Thompson. My Lord, I understood it was permitted me by the Court the other
day to move again, and I move by the direction of my Client, and I submit it to
your Lordship.


Lord Chapter Justice. You know it cannot be granted: go on and swear the Jury.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I beg that my Wife and Solicitor may be by to help and
assist my memory.


Lord Chapter Justice. Let your Wife be by you, if she please, and if you think
it is any advantage to you, with all our hear^s; If she will, let her go down to
you.


Cl. of Crown. Crier make an O yes, whoever can inform, etc.


Mr. At. General. My Lord, I know not what the effect of this may be; if his
Wife be instructed to instruct him, that ought not to be permitted, with
submission; suppose she should come to prompt him (and for certain she is well
Documentized) that your Lordship will not suffer.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. My Lord, she comes prepared with papers in her hand.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. I will not show them without my Lords permission.


Lord Chapter Justice. If she brings any papers that are drawn by Council, prepared
for him, without doubt it is not to be allowed.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. No, no, it is only my own little Memorandums.


Lord Chapter Justice. Whatsoever is written by her Husband, for help of his
memory, in matter of Fact, let her do it.


Fitz-Har. My Lord, I humbly beg my Solicitor may be by me too.


Lord Chapter Just. We allow no Solicitors in Cases of High Treason.


Cl. of Crown. Edward Fitz-Harris, hold up thy hand (which he did) those good
men which thou shall hear called, and personally appear, etc.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I desire they may be distinctly named as they are in the
Panel, that I may know how to make my Challenges.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, I must humbly offer it to your Lordship^ Consideration
for the Precedents sake, whether any Person can assist the Prisoner as to
matter of Fact?


Lord Chapter Just. Yes, and it is always done to take notes for him, and to help
his memory.


Mr. Ser. Jefferies. But my Lord I would acquaint your Lordship what is the
thing we find in this Case, Here is a particular Note given into the Prisoner,
of the Jury, pray be sure to challenge such and such, and don't challenge the
rest: God-forbid but his memory should be helped in matters of Fact, as is
usual in these Cases, but no Instructions ought to be given him sure. And My
Lord, the Example will go a great way, and therefore we are in your Lordships
directions about this matter.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I hope it is but just, for I have had all the
disadvantages in the World. I have been kept clo^e Prisoner, and have not been
permitted to have any one come to me, to help me in my preparation for my Trial.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I pray your Judgment in point of Law* I doubt not you
will do the King right, as well as the Prisoner, I could not get a Copy of the
Panel, till last night about 4 a Clock; ^ere is prepared a Copy with crosses
and marks who he should challenge and who not, and truly, My Lord, since I had
the Panel* upon looking over it, I do find the Sheriff has returned three
Anabaptist Preachers, and I know not how many Fanatics, and since there are
such Practices as we find in this Case, we doubt there may be more, and
therefore I pray she may be removed.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. I will not be removed.


Fitz-Harris. Is it fit or reasonable for me that I should stand here without
any help?


Mr. At. Genesis In case you be Guilty of this, you deserve no great favor.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. Surely the Court will never suffer the Kings Council to take
away a man's life at this rate.


Lord Chapter Just. Mrs. Fitz-Harris, You must give good words: And if you will not
be modest, and civil, I promise you we will remove you presently.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. If you do remove me, that is the worst you can do to me,
what should I come here for without I may help my Husband?


Lord Chapter Just. If she do bring him instructions to except against such and
such Jury men, she does misbehave herself, and must be removed.


Mr. At. Genesis This Paper that we speak of is a Copy of the Panel, and there
are particular marks a great many.


Mr. Sol. Genesis A Woman has a very great privilege to protect her Husband, but
I never yet knew that she had liberty to bring him instructions ready drawn.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. My Lord, The Lady Marquess of Winchester did assist in the
Case of my Lord Stafford, and took notes, and gave him what Papers she pleased.


Lord Chapter Just. Sure it is no such huge matter to let a man's Wife stand by him,
if she will demean her self handsomely and fairly.


Mr. At. Genesis It is not, if that were all; but when she comes with Papers
instructed, and with particular directions, that is the assigning him Council
in point of Fact.


Lord Chapter Just. Let her stand by her Husband, if she be quiet: But if she be
troublesome* we shall soon remove her.


Fitz-Harris. It Is impossible I should make my defense without her.


Mr. Ser. Jefferies. I see it is a perfect formal Brief.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. Must he have nothing to help himself?


Fitz-Harris. In short the Kings Council would take my life away, without
letting me make my defense.


Mr. At. Genesis I desire not to take away any Papers from him, if they be such
as are permitted by Law.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, His Innocence must make his defense, and nothing else.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. My Lord, We are in your Lordships judgment, whether you will
allow these Papers.


Lord Chapter Just. Let us s^e the Paper.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I will deliver them to my Wife again.


Lord Chapter Just. Let it be so.


Cl. of Crown. Call Sir Will. Roberts (who did not appear.) Sir Michael Heneage.


Sir Michael Heneage. My Lord, I am so ill I cannot attend this Cause.


Lord Chapter Just. We cannot excuse you Sir Michael, if there be not enough
besides, it is not in our power to excuse you.


Sir Mich. Heneage. I must suffer all things rather than lose my health.


Lord Chapter Just. Well stand by till the rest are called.


Cl. of Cro^n. Sir Will. Gulston, Nicholas Rainton, Charles Vmphrevile (they
did not appear.) John Wildman.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I desire he may be asked, before he be called to the
Book, whether he be a Freeholder in Middlesex.


Major Wildman. I am a Prosecutor of this Person, for I was a Parliament man in
the last Parliament, and I dare not appear, My Lord, for fear of being
questioned for breach of the Privileges of the Commons.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I pray he may answer that question, whether he be a
Freeholder in Middlesex?


Major Wildman, I pray to be excused upon a very go^d reason; I was one of them
that Voted the Impeachment aga^^^t this man.


Mr. At. Genesis Are you a Freeholder in Middles^x, upon vour Oath?


Lord Chapter Just. Look you Major Wildman, you are returned upon a Panel here,
you have appeared, and your appearance is recorded; you must answer such
Questions as are put to you, it is not in your power to deny.


Major Wildman. I beg the excuse of the Court, I cannot serve upon this Jury.


Lord Chapter Just. If you be no Freeholder the Law will excuse you.


Maj. Wild. Perhaps there may be some Estates in my name, that may be
Free-holds, perhaps, I may be some Trustee or the like.


Mr. At. Genesis Have you any Freehold in your own right in Middlesex?


Major Wild. I don't know that I have; if it be in the right of another or as
Trustee, I take not that to be a Freehold.


Cl. of Crown. Call Thomas Johnson.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. Let him be sworn, there is no exception against him.


Lord Chapter Just. Hold your peace, or you go out of Court if you talk again.


Mrs. Fitz-Har. I do not say any thing that is any harm, My Lord.


Cl. of Crown. Swear Tho. Johnson, you shall well and truly try, etc.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I pray the Clerk may not skip over the names as they are
returned.


Cl. of Crown. Sir, I call every one as they are in the Panel, and don't do me
wrong.


Lord Chapter Just. It may be he does not Call them as they are mentioned and set
down in the Panel, for all have not appeared; but calls those only whose
appearance is recorded.


Cl. of Crown. I have called them as they are here set down.


Lord Chapter Just. Well let them all be called for, may be they will appear now
that did not appear before.


Cl. of Crown. Maximilan Beard.


Mr. Beard. My Lord, I desire to be excused, I am very infirm and very ancient,
Threescore and Fifteen years of age at least.


Lord Chapter Just. Why did the Sheriff return you, if you be of that age, you
should be put out of the Freeholders book; but stay you are here Impannel'd,
and have appeared, if there be enough we will excuse you.


Mr. Just. Jones. He ought to have Witnesses of his age, and if he would not
have appeared, he might have had a Writ of Privilege for his discharge in
regard of his age.


Lord Chapter Just. Well we will set him by, if there be enough besides we will
spare him.


Cl. of Crown. Isaac Honywood, (he did not appear) Lucy Knig^tley, who (was
Sworn.) Henry Baker.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I challenge him for the King.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, why should he challenge him? I desire to know the Law,
whether the 2 Foremen should not try the challenge, and not the Court or the
Council.


Mr. Ser. Maynard. If the King challenge, he has time to show cause till the
Panel be gone through; the Law will have the minus suspecti, but yet if there
want any, the King must show good Cause.


Cl. of Crown. Edward Probyn.


Mr. At. Genesis I challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Crown. Edward Wilford (was Sworn)


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, Must not Mr. Attorney show his caus^ now?


Lord Chapter Just. Look you Mr. Fitz-Harris, either side may take their exception
to any man, but the cause need not be shown till the Panel is gone through, or
the rest of the Jurors challenged.


Cl. of Crown. John Kent of Stepney.


Mr. Kent. My Lord, I am no Freeholder.


Lord Chapter Just. Then you cannot be sworn here upon this Jury.


Cl. of Crown. John Wilmore.


Mr. At. Genesis We challenge him for the King.


Fitz-Harris. For what cause?


Mr. Ser. Jeff. We will show you reasons hereafter.


Cl. of Crown. Alexander Hose^ (was Sworn) Giles Shute.


Mr. At. Genesis Are you a Freeholder Sir?


Mr. Shute. No.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Whitaker is got near him, and he tells him what he is to do,
My Lord.


Fitz-Harris. Here is the Lieutenant of the Tower between me and him.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. But the Bar is no fit place for Mr. Whitaker, ^e is not yet
called to the Bar.


Cl. of Crown. Martin James.


Mr. At. Genesis Are you a Freeholder Sir?


Mr. James. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Then Swear him. (which was done).


Cl. of Crown. Nathanael Grantham.


Mr. At. Genesis Are you a Freeholder Sir?


Mr. Grantham. No.


Cl. of Crown. Henry Beiling.


Mr. At. Genesis Are you a Freeholder Sir?


Mr. Beiling. Yes.


Mr. Fitz-Harris. Then I challenge him.


Cl. of Crown. Benjamin Denis.


Mr. At. Genesis Is he a Freeholder?


Mr. Denis. No.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, you ^^e what pra^^ices here are, most of the Jury are
no Freeholders.


Cl. of Crown. John Pre^^on. (did not appear) John Viner of White-Chappel.


Mr. At. Genesis He has fetched them from all the Corners of the Town here, yet
not all of them Freeholders neither.


Cl. of Crown. Swear Mr. Viner (which was done) William Withers (was Sworn)
William Cleave (Sworn) Thomas Goff (Sworn) Abraham Graves.


Mr. At. Genesis Ask him, is he a Freeholder?


Mr. Graves. No.


Cl. of Crown. Henry Jones.


Mr. At. Genesis Is he a Freeholder?


Mr. Jones. No.


Cl. of Crown. Ralp^ Far.


Mr. At. Genesis Ask him the same Question.


Crier. Are you a Freeholder Sir?


Mr. Fa^r. Yes.


Cl. of Crown. Then swear him (which was done) Samuel Freebody.


Mr. At. Genesis Are you a Freeholder Sir?


Freebody. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Then Swear him (which was done.)


Cl. of Crown. Gilbert Vrwin of Covent Garden (did not appear.) Edward Watts of
Westmi^ster.


Mr. At. Genesis Are you a Freeholder Sir?


Watts. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Then we challenge you for the King.


Mr. At. Genesis John Brads^aw of Holborn (did not appear) Isaac Heath of Wapping
(no Freeholder) Edward Hutchins of Westmi^s^er.


Mr. At. Genesis We challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Crown. John Lo^kier of Westminster.


Mr. At. Genesis Are you a Freeholder?


Mr. Lockier. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Then Swear him.


Cl. of Crown. Count these. Thomas Johnson.


Crier. One, etc.


The Names of the 12 Sworn are these*
Thomas Johnson. Lucy Knightly. Edward Wilford. Alexander Hosey. Martin James.
John Vi^er. William Withers. William Cleave. Thomas Go^^e. Ralph Far. Samuel
Freebody and John Lockier.


Cl, of Crown. Edward Fitz-Harris hold up thy hand. Gentlemen you that are
Sworn look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his Charge.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I humbly beg ^en, Ink and Paper.


Lord Chapter Just. Let him have Pen, Ink and Paper.


Cl. of Crown. You shall have them presently (which were given him.)


HE stands Indicted by the name of Edward Fitz-Harris, late of the Parish of
St. Martin in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Gent. for that he as a
false Traitor against the most Illustrious, and most excellent Prince our
Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the grace of God King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, his natural Lord, not having the fear of God in
his Heart, nor weighing the duty of his Allegiance, but being moved and seduced
by the Instigation of the Devil; the Love, and true, due, and natural
obedience, which a true and Faithful Subject of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, toward him our said Sovereign Lord the King, should and of right ought
to bear, wholly withdrawing; and with all his might intending the Peace and
common Tranquillity within this Kingdom of England to disturb, and w^r and
Rebellion against our said Sovereign Lord the King to stir up and move, and the
Government of our said Sovereign Lord the King, within this Kingdom of England
to subvert, and our said Sovereign Lord the King from the Title, Honor and
Regal name of the Imperial Crown of his Kingdom of England to depose and
deprive, and our said Sovereign Lord the King to death and final Destruction to
bring, and put the 22. day of February in the 33. Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, now King of England, etc. and diverse other
days and times, as well before as after at the Parish of St. Martin in the
Fields in the County of Middlesex Traitorously did compass, imagine and intend
the killing, Death, and final Destructon of our said Sovereign Lord the King,
and the Ancient Government of this his Kingdom to change and alter and wholly
to subvert, and him our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is, from the
Title Honor and Regal name of the Imperial Crown of his Kingdom of England to
depose and deprive, and War and Rebellion against our said Sovereign Lord the
King to stir up and Levy within this Kingdom of England. And his said wicked
Treasons and Traitorous Compassings, Imaginations and purposes aforesaid to
fulfill and perfect, he the said Edward Fitz-Harris, as a false Traitor,
together with one Emund Everard a Subject of our said Sovereign Lord the King,
did then and there Traitorously assemble himself, meet and consult, and the same
his Treasons and Traitorous Compassings, Imaginations and purposes thenand
there to the said Edmund Everard in the hearing of diverse other Subjects of
our said Sovereign Lord the King, openly, Maliciously, Traitorously and
advisedly speaking, did publish and declare; and to persuade and induce the
said Edmund Everard to be aiding and assisting in his said Traitorous
Compassings, Imaginations and purposes, he the said Edward Fitz-Harris as a
false Traitor, Maliciously, advisedly and Traitorously to the said Edmund
Everard a great Reward then and there did offer, and promise to procure; and
for the further Completing of his Treasons aforesaid, and to incite the
Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King as one man to rise, and open
Rebellion and Insurrection within this Kingdom of England to raise against our
said Sovereign Lord the King; and our said Sovereign Lord the King from the
Title, Honor and Regal name of the Imperial Crown of his Kingdom of England to
cast down and depose, he the said Edward Fitz-Harris as a false Traitor, a
certain most wicked and Traitorous Libel, the Title of which is in these
English words following, The true English man speaking plain English,
Traitorously, Maliciously and advisedly, in writing to be made and expressed,
did then and there cause, procure and publish. In which said Libel the said
most wicked Treasons, and Traitorous Compassings, Imaginations and purposes
aforesaid of him the said Edward Fitz-Harris, to excite and persuade the
Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King of this Kingdom of England against
our said Sovereign Lord the King to rise and Rebel, and our said Sovereign Lord
the King from the Style, Honor, and Regal name of the Imperial Crown of this
his Kingdom of England to deprive and depose, in writing are expressed and
declared amongst other things as follows: If James (meaning James Duke of
York, the Brother of our said Sovereign Lord the King) be Conscious and Guilty,
Chs (meaning Charles the second now King of England) is so too, believe me
(meaning himself the said Edward Fitz-Harris) both these (meaning our said
Sovereign Lord the King, and the said James Duke of York) are Brethren in
Iniquity, they (meaning our said Sovereign Lord the King and James Duke of
York) are in confederacy with Pope and French, to introduce Popery and
Arbitrary Government as their actions (meaning the actions of our said
Sovereign Lord the King and James Duke of York) demonstrate. The Parliaments
Magna Charta and Liberty of the Subject are as Heavy Yokes they would as willingly
cast off, for to make themselves (meaning our said Sovereign Lord the King and
the said Duke of York) as absolute as their Brother of France. And if this can
be proved to be their aim (meaning our said Sovereign Lord the King, and the
aforesaid Duke of York) and main endeavor, why should not every true Britain
be a Quaker thus far, and let the English spirit be up and move us (meaning the
Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King of this Kingdom of England) all as
one Man to self Defense? Nay and if need be to open action, and fling off these
intolerable Riders? (meaning our said Sovereign Lord the King and the said Duke
of York) And in another place in the said most wicked Traitorous Lib^l were
contained amongst other things, these false Seditio^s and Traitorous sentences
in these English words following. J and C. (meaning the said Charles our
Sovereign Lord the King, and his said Brother James Duke of York) both Brethren
in Iniquity, corrupt both in Root and ^ranch, as you (meaning the subjects of
our said Sovereign Lord the King) have seen they (meaning our said Sovereign
Lord the King and the said Duke of York) study but to enslave you (meaning the
Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King) to a Romish and Frenchlike Yoke.
Is it not plain? Have you (meaning the Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the
King) not Eyes, sense or Feeling? Where is that old English Noble Spirit? Are
you (meaning the Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King) become French
Asses to suffer any load to be laid upon you? And if you (meaning the Subjects
of our said Sovereign Lord the King) can get no Remedy from this next
Parliament, as certainly you (meaning again the Subjects of our said Sovereign
Lord the King) will not; and that the K. (meaning our said Sovereign Lord the
King that now is) repents not, complies not with their advice, then up all
(meaning the Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King) as one man. O brave
English men! Look to your own defense ere it be too late, rouse up your
Spirits. And in another place in the said most wicked and Traitorous Libel are
contained amongst other things, these false Seditious and Trait^rous sentences
in these English words following, to wit: I. (meaning himself the said Edward
Fitz-Harris) will only add that as it is the undoubted right of Parliaments to
make a Law against a Popish Successor, who would prove destructive to our Laws
and Liberties; so it is their undoubted Right to dethrone any Possessor that
follows evil ounsellors to the Destruction of our Government, (Meaning the
Government of this Kingdom of England.) And in another place in the said
Traitorous Libel are contained these English words following: Then let all
(meaning the Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is) be
ready, then let the City of London stand by the Parliament with offers of any
money for the maintaining of their Liberties and Religion in any extreme way,
if Parliamentary Courses be not complied with by the King; (meaning our said
Sovereign Lord the King) against the Duty of his Allegiance, and against the
Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, etc. And
against the form of the Statute in this Case made and provided upon this
Indictment.

Upon this Indictment he has been arraigned, and thereunto has pleaded Not*
Guilty; and for his Trial has put himself upon God and his Country, which
Country you are, etc.

Crier make proclamation. O yes if any one will give Evidence, etc.

Mr. Heath. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, this is
an Indictment of High Treason against Edward Fitz-Harris the Prisoner at the
Bar, and the Indictment sets forth, that the 21. of February, in the 33 Year
of the King at St. Martins in the Fields, he did Compass and Imagine the death
of the King, and to raise War and Rebellion within the Kingdom. And the
Indictment does set forth, that for the Accomplishment of this, he did meet and
assemble with one Edmund Everard, and several others, and did discover this his
Traitorous purpose to the said Everard, and did persuade him to aid and assist
therein; and offered him great rewards if he would so do. It further sets
forth, That for the further perfecting of this Treasonable Imagination of the
said Edward Fitz-Harris, he did frame and make a Treasonable Libel, and the
Title of the Libel is The true Englishman speaking plain English; and in that
Treasonable Libel, are these Treasonable words contained, If James be Guilty
(meaning the Duke of York) Charles (meaning the King) is so too, etc. And the
several words, that have been read to you in this Indictment, are contained in
the said Libel, which I shall not repeat. To this Indictment he has pleaded,
Not Guilty; if we prove it upon him you are to find him Guilty.


Mr. Ser. Maynard. May it please your Lordship, truly it is a sad thing to
consider how many have been found Guilty of Plotting against the King, but none
have gone so far as the Prisoner at the Bar; for they designed only his Death,
but this Person would have carried on his Treasons by a means to Slander him
while he was alive, and thereby to excite the people to such a Rebellion as you
have heard. I shall add no further words, the thing is not aggravatable, it is
so great an offense in it self; but we will call our Witnesses, and go to our
proof.


Mr. Attorney. General. My Lord, Yesterday you had here the Primate of Ireland,
who was found Guilty, for a Notable High Treason in Ireland: you have now this
day before you one of his Emissaries, who is come over into England, and who
has here committed one of the most execrable Treasons that ever was brought
into a Court of Justice; I must needs say that it will appear to all the
Auditors this day, that here is the Highest improvement of the Popish Plot, and
aggravated with such Circumstances as show they have out done themselves in it.
Hitherto those Cases that have been brought into judgment before you, have been
the attempts upon the Life of the King, in Instances either of Shooting,
Stabbing or Poisoning: I say hitherto they have gone no further than to
Practice these things, and that by Popish hands, they have kept the Plot
amongst themselves; but now they have gone one Step further, that is, by
attemping to Poison all the Protestants of England, as much as in them ^yes,
that they should by their own hands destroy one another, and their Lawful
Prince, that is the Treason now before you, and I take it with submission, they
can go no further. For it is impossible to arise to a Higher p^ece of malice and
Villainy than to set the p^oples Hearts against their Prince, and to set them
together by the Ears one against another. This we shall prove in the Course of
our Evidence, to be the design of the Prisoner at the Bar. The general design
has been opened to you out of the Indictment, to kill and destroy the King,
and to depose him from his Government; and we shall charge him with all those
several Overt Acts, which I shall open to you: First several meetings to
consult about this matter at Gray's Inn and several other places, which My Lord,
I think there is no question to be made, but is an Overt*Act to make
High Treason We shall go further, and show that these designs he had to depose
the King, and raise his people against him, he does declare openly to Mr.
Everard, which is another Overt Act within the new Statute. We shall My Lord,
go further yet, and prove the great Rewards he has offered to Mr. Everard for
joining with him, and being assisting to him in this affair, part in ready
money, and part in Annual Pension. And there your Lordship will find where the
Spring is, from whence all these mischiefs arise, some foreign power, but the
Papists, the Priests are at the bottom of it, they are the Persons that set him
on, and these must draw in a great Person beyond Sea, who must reward this
Gentlemen for being a Partner in this Plot. And we shall prove some money paid
in hand. But then My Lord, that which was the effect of this Consult, is the
framing this pernicious Libel, for so give me leave to call it.

My Lord, the Indictment is modest, but when you come to hear the Libel it self
read, you will find it so; and it was not prudence, that so Vile a thing should
appear upon Record. And truly I believe in a Protestant Kingdom it is the first
attempt of this Nature that ever was: For My Lord, it is to defame the whole
Royal Family, it is to stain their Blood, and to make them Vile in the sight of
the whole Kingdom, and of all Posterity. My Lord, this Libel in its particulars
charge that most excellent and Innocent Person, our late and never to be
forgoten Sovereign King Charles the first, to be the author of the Irish
Rebellion; it charges our present Prince with the Exercise of Arbitrary
Government, to be a Papist, to be a person that deprives his Subjects of all
manner of Liberty, and Property; in express Terms it charges him with this,
than which nothing can be more false, for there is none of his Subjects, I
think, but must say that our most Gracious Prince, for the time he has Reigned
may Vie with the best 20. years of any of his Predecessors for the preserving
the Liberty and Property of the people, for giving us p^ace and plenty all our
time, for the permitting and securing to them the free current of the Law, and
for securing their Civil and R^ligious Rights.

My Lord, when we have gone through the Evidence about the Contexture, and this
Libel is read and produced, we shall prove the design of it, and how it was
framed, and the Eyes of the world will be opened, and you will see that this
was no intention, no Engine framed to trapan, or ensnare any private Person, or
as it was secretly bruited abroad, to be put in such men's Pockets; but a piece
of the greatest Machivilian Policy that ever was invented, and prepared for a
public Press, as a Catholic Poison to infect all the Kings Subjects, and
excite them one against another.

And we shall prove that this person in the several methods that I have opened,
has proceeded to Accomplish his Traitorous de^^gns of Dethroning the King: nay
he has said, it is resolved among them now that nothing else will do it, but
the Poisoning the hearts of the people with hatred to their King, and malice
against one anot^er. And when we have proved the matter fully, through all the
parts, we must leave it to the Jury, who I question not will do themselves, and
all other Protestants right, as well as their Prince; We shall now go to our
Evidence, and first we will call Mr. Everard; but My Lord, I would only first
observe to you, that this Gentleman Mr. Fitz-Harris, and Mr. Everard, were both
employed in the French Kings service, and there acquainted together: Mr.
Everard came early off, and became a Protestant, leaving the French Kings
service, because he found their several Plots and designs upon England. Then
comes Mr. Fitz-Harris to him, and because he looked upon Mr. Edverard, not to
be rewarded according to his merits, invites him over, with telling him those
things that the Witness himself will tell you, back again to the French
Interest.


Then Mr. Everard was Sworn.

Fitz-Harris. Look me in the face, Mr. Everard.


Mr. Everard. I will Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you acquaint My Lord, and the Jury how you came first
acquainted with the Prisoner, and then tell the several passages between you.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Tell your whole knowledge of this matter.


Mr. Everard. My Lord, I came acquainted with Mr. Fitz-Harris beyond Seas, when
we both were in the French Kings service, and upon Conference with him of late,
especially about the beginning of February last, he renewed his acquaintance,
though at several times before we had several discourses, whereof I did not
take much notice; but in those meetings in February last, and in those Visits
he paid me then, we had several discourses tending to represent the
disadvantages, and sufferings I fustained for adhereing to the Protestant, and
English Interest; and besides comparing in the other Balance, what advantages
I might expect if I would re-ingratiate my self into their Interest.


Lord Chapter Just. What Interest?


Mr. Everard. The French, and the Popish Interest. And there was an Opportunity
in my hands, wherein I might be servicable to my self and others; and he told
me there were several persons amongst whom were some Parliament men, that did
adhere to the French Interest, and gave an account to the French Ambassador of
every days proceedings; and as I was looked upon to be the Author of a kind of
Pamphlet, that was called an answer to the Kings Declaration, concerning the
Duke of Monmouth, therefore I should be fit to serve them, especially to make
such another Pamphlet to reflect upon the King, and Alienate him from his
people, and his people from him. Whereupon I told him I would do any thing that
was for my true Interest, but I did conceive with my self, that that was none
of it. He appointed a time when we should meet again, but I sent him a Note, I
could not meet possibly that day, which was Monday, as I remember the 21. of
Februrary: However he was impatient, and came to me and told me he would give
me Heads and instructions tending to that Pamphlet I was to write, to
Scandalize the King, and r^se a Rebellion and Alienate the hearts of the
Kingdom, and set the people together by the Ears. Upon this he gave me some
heads by word of mouth: as soon as I parted from him, I met with one Mr. Savile
of Lincoln's Inn, and as soon as I met with him I acquainted him with what was
passed, and told him I wished rather than 10l. I had met him sooner, half an
hour before: why what is the occasion says he? why said I, there is a person
that has had such and such discourse with me, and one of his main Errands
amongst others, is for me to write a Scandalous Libel reflecting upon his
Majesty, and the Government. And upon this I said, Mr. Savile, I shall not
confer with him any further, unless I have some body by to witness what he
says, he speaks most commonly French, and sometimes English; and therefore it
must be one who understands both the Tongues well. So we went into the City
together that afternoon to one Mr. Crows, who is a silkman in Queen Street;
said we Sir, you are a moderate impartial man, and understand French, we desire
you will be present to over-hear some proposals that are made to me tending to
set our Country together by the Ears, and he comes from a Popish party. Mr.
Crow said he would be willing to undertake any thing to serve the Protestant
English Interest, but he would not undertake to speak French so well as to be
able to understand all nice passages, and words that might be proposed. And
then Mr. Savile and I went to Mr. Smith a Durham Gentleman, and made him the
same proposal, I had made to Mr. Crow, desiring him that he would come and
over-hear our discourse, and I would place him in a fit place. Mr. Smith
assented to the propositions, and said he would. Mr. Smith asked me what day
and time we were to meet; I told him to morrow at 6 or 7 a Clock at night at my
Chamber in Graies-Inn; but further he said we must have other witnesses, for
one witness would not be sufficient; so we went to the Exchange Coffee house,
and there we met with Sir William Waller, to whom we made the same proposal,
that since we must have some that understood French and keep the thing secret,
till it were time to have it come out, he would please to undertake it: Sir
William Waller promised to come, but failed that first meeting, which was to be
on the Tuesday; then we went to another French Merchant, who was proposed by
Mr. Savile, but he was not within; so then we must rely upon one witness for
that meeting. Mr. Fitz-Harris was to meet me about 2 a Clock at my Chamber in
Graies-Inn, where Mr. Smith and Mr. Savile were to meet likewise, and they came
first to the Tavern just at the Corner of Fullers Rents, which has a prospect
into the Court: And from thence I saw Mr. Fitz-Harris in the Court pointing to
another Gentleman that was with him, up to my Chamber, and he was walking
suspitiously up and down. Then I went out of the Tavern, and came up to my
Chamber, and after a little while Captain Fitz-Harris came up to my Room, I
placed him in another Room, where my Wife was, and shut the door to whilst I
sent word to Mr. Smith to come into the outer Room, and shut himself into my
Closet. There was Mr. Smith in the Closet, and there was an hole or two for the
purpose made through both the Planks of the boards, and the hanging* but the
hangings hung over the hole that it might not be discerned by Mr. Fitz-Harris,
and he could raise it and then see who was in the Room and hear their words;
for I placed my Chair toward the Closet which had an angle outward, and now
and then I did stand against the whole, and now and then sat to give Mr. Smith
advantage, and to give Mr. Fitz-Harris no suspicion. When we were so placed Mr.
Fitz-Harris asked me what I had done as to the thing proposed, this Libel that
I was to draw up; I said I was busy, and had not been able to finish it, but
here are some heads of it said I, and showed him half a Dozen Lines drawn up
together; and when I had read them, Sir said I, is this your mind? yes said he,
but I must add much more than this is to it. Then Mr. Fitz-Harris proceeded to
give me further instructions; and so repeated what instructions he had given me
before, that the King and all the Royal Family must be traduced to be Popishly,
and Arbitrarily inclined from the beginning, that King Charles the First
especially had an hand in the Irish Rebellion, and that likewise King Charles
the second, that now is, did countenance the same, as did appear by bis
promoting those very officers that were in the Irish Rebellion, Fitz-Girald,
Fitz-Patrick, and Mont-Garrat, which should be named in the Libel. Besides
that, the Act made at the Kings coming in, forbidding any to call the King
Papist, was merely to stop peoples mouths that they should not call him a
Papist, when he should incline to further Popery, and did intend by his actions
so to do. And besides his adhering so closely to the Duke of Yorks Interest,
was to be another argument of it, his hindering the D. of York from coming to
his Trial, and to be proceeded against by the Parliament, and hindering the
Officers that were put in by the D. of York, from being cast out: Another
argument was because those Privy Counselors and Justices of the Peace, that
did adhere to the Protestant Interest were turned out of all places of Trust;
and besides he said it did appear to the people consequently, that the King was
Conscious to himself, that he was as Guilty as his brother, and was as much a
Papist as his brother, and it was in the peoples power as well to depose a
present Popish Possessor, as a Popish Successor, and that the people must be
stirred up against him, and encouraged to blow the Trumpet, and especially that
the City, and Common Council must be encouraged to stand by the Parliament; and
seeing the King was such that no hopes was to be had of the Parliament at Oxon,
they were bound to provide for themselves, and to advance some hundreds or
thousands of pounds to the Parliament to settle the Protestant Religion without
the King, if Parliamentary ways would not succeed. These were some of the
instructions.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he say any thing that day about a reward you should have?


Mr. Everard. He spoke in the general about a Reward, but he spoke more fully
to that the day after; he did not then come so much to particulars, then some
part of those instructions I writ in my Table Book which is to be produced
here, and others of them in another scrole of Paper. He then desired to know of
me when the Scheme of this thing would be ready; said I, you may come to
morrow; I will says he, come about 6 or 7 a Clock in the Evening. In the mean
time I writ a Letter to Sir William Waller in French, which I sent by a Porter,
and therein I said, Sir you have missed a great opportunity of rendering a great
service to the King, by not coming to see me when you were expected; for the
person, the French Emissary whom I spoke of to you, has proposed very
Scandalous S^ditious things to be written, and there fore I desire you not to
fail, as you tender the Kings Interest, to come to my Chamber at 6 a Clock at
night. Sir William Waller received my Letter and came thither accordingly, I
placed Sir William Waller in another Room, and I placed my own Chair at a
narrow Table near the place where Sir William Waller was, and there through the
Wainscot and Hangings, we made a slit, whereby Sir William Waller might see
into the next Room where Mr. Fitz-Harris and I sat; but before I placed him
there I showed Sir William Waller two Copies of the instructions for the Libel
drawn up: said I, Sir, here are 2 Copies which are both the same, and I desire
you to counter mark them, that you may know them again, and thereby see what
alteration will be made; for here are no Blots now, and by that you will find
the alteration. Sir W^ll^am Waller while my back was turned, counter marked
those Copies. I went into the next Room, and I had not been long there, but Mr.
Fitz-Harris came in, I placed the Table near the Alcove, where Sir William
Waller was within his hearing and seeing. Mr. Fitz-Harris asked me what I had
done in the business: Sir said I, here are 2 Copies of it, pray will you see
how you like it. So he took one and I took the other.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. My Lord I must interrupt this Gentleman, for I see they
continue to give the Prisoner Papers.


Fitz-Harris. It Is only a Paper of the names of my Witnesses.


Lord Chapter Just. Go on Sir.


Mr. Everard. My Lord, Captain Fitz-Harris did read one Copy of this Pamphlet
and did amend it, he did add somethings and struck out other things, then said
I is this Sir according to your liking? yes, says he, but I must add something
for it is not yet full enough; but says he this must be fair Copyed out; for
it is not fit for the French Ambassadors Confessor to read, who should present
it to the Ambassador. Upon this I told him it should be done against the next
day, but in the mean time I told him, Sir, these are very Treasonable things,
and this a very Treasonable Project: oh, said he the more Treasonable the
better, and that will do the effect better. What is that Sir said I? that is
says he, to set these people together by the Ears, and keep them clashing, and
whilst they are so in clashing, and mistrusting one another, the French shall
gain Flanders* and then said he, we shall make no bones to gain England too.
But Sir said I, you spoke of some recompense for me, what shall I have for
venturing this? why says he after this Libel is delivered up, and that has
gotten you their Confidence that you are Trusty, then I w^ll gain the French
Con^essor who is very shy* and may so well be, because (...) of the Confessors
of an Ambassador has been already trapann'd (...) an occasion. Therefore he is
very wary, but he must have (...) under your hand, which he shall have by this
Libel; and (...) days you shall have 40 Guinies, and a monthly Pension* (...)
some thousandof Crowns, for my Master the French (...) as to these things: the
Spanish Ambassador is so very (...) a man, that he cannot keep a Table; but
sai^ ^e, you (...) rewarded by the French King, and be not discouraged by the
(...) for I am in as great danger as you. After some such instructions, and
^^couragements, that Mr. Fitz-Harris gave to go on in the wo^k, he departed,
and I cannot well call any thing to mind of more particulars, but upon
Questions asked me perhaps I may. But then that time, or the next time, Captain
Fit^*H^rris gave me half a sheet of Paper, for I told him I may chance to
forget part of your instructions, therefore pray wri^e what is in your own
mind, and in that Paper he writ down that it was in the peoples power to depose
a Popish Possessor, as it was to oppose a Popish Successor, and certain other
Treasonable heads; the half sheet of Paper is to be produced in Court, under
his own hand, which he has confessed besides other Treasonable instructions,
that he gave me by word of mouth: but he at that time departed, and came the
next day to have a Copy of the Treasonable Libel writ out fair, and promised me
^o meet me at the Boarded house, where we usually met in Holborn at Mr.
Fashions, and I did there come and deliver him a Copy of this Treasonable
Libel, and he said I should hear in a few days from him, and should have a
recompense, and this should be, but as an Entrance business; for I should be
brought into the Cabal, where several Protestants, and Parliament men came to
give an account to the Ambassador, how things were transacted, but to morrow
said he, I cannot go to receive the Libel back again, for I am to go to
Knights-bridge.


Fitz-Harris. Where there?


Mr. Everard. To my Lord Howards, for said he, you have seen his Son often with
me, my Lord Howard is very civil to me, he was my Fathers Lawyer.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you ask him any Questions Mr. Fitz-harris?


Fitz-Harris. Did you write this Libel?


Mr. Everard. Yes, by your Instructions I did.


Fitz-Harris. Do you believe I had any Traiterous intention in it?


Mr. Everard. Yes.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. You said the more Treason the better, Mr. Fitz-Harris.


Fitz-Harris. Were you put upon this to Trapan others?


Mr. At. Genesis It Is no Trapanning to ask them to come, and hear you give him
those Instructions sure.


Fitz-Harris. But I ask him this Question, Mr. Attorney, was he put upon it to
Trapan others?


Mr. Everard. Can you mention any Person that I was to Trapan?


Fitz-Harris. Were you put upon it to Trapan the Protestant Lords, and the
House of Commons?


Mr. Everard. No, I was not.


Fitz-Harris. Is this the same Libel that was read in the House of Commons upon
which I was Impeached?


Mr. Everard. Yes, I believe, Mr. Fitz-Harris, it was.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Everard, because he puts you upon it, and to satisfy all
the world, I ask you upon your Oath, did any Person whatsoever put you upon
this to Trapan other persons, or to put it into their Pockets as it is reported?


Mr. Everard. I was put upon it by none but Mr. Fitz-Harris, of whom I asked
what will be the use of this, said he we shall disperse them, we know how.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he tell you in what manner?


Mr. Everard. No, he did not tell how.


Mr. At. Genesis To whom was it to be delivered?


Mr. Everard. I was to deliver it to Fitz-Harris, who was to deliver it to the
French Confessor, and it was to be drawn in the name of the Non-Conformists,
and put upon them.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. What Religion is Mr. Fitz-Harris of?


Mr. Everard. He was always looked upon to be a Papist.


Fitz-Harris. When did you see me at Mass?


Mr. At. Genesis Has he not owned himself so?


Mr. Everard. He has owned himself at several times to be a Papist.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What did he say to you about your being a Protestant, and what
Cause you had to turn to the Popish Relig^on.


Mr. Everard. He said I was under great disadvantages, and had much loss by
leaving them, I had better have adhered to the^ Interest still. He had this
Discourse with me at several Meetings, and gave me several Visits, some at my
Chamber, some at Gray^^^nn Walks, sometimes at the House with black Posts in
where we talked of several things.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. I am sorry he kept such a Rogue as you are Company.


L. C. J. Officer take her away if she cannot hold her tongu^, and give better
language.


Fitz-Harris. She will speak no more my Lord.


L. C. J. Stand still then, and be quiet.


Mr. At. Genesis What was your Discourse at the Alehouse?


Mr. Everard. To give Instructions to set the people together by the Ears, and
one most effectual means was by scandalizing, and Libelling the Government, and
especially the King.


Mr. Jones. Did any body else assist you in drawing the Libel?


Mr. Everard. There is at the latter end of the Libel a Paragraph that was
taken out of another Book, there was a scandalous Libel that was brought by the
woman that carries Paper-books about, and out of that to make short work, and
out of The Character of a Popish Successor, in which he said were many things
material, he would have some of the Expressions of this Libel taken; so I
Copyed some of the Queries out of that Paper which was said to be a Letter
intercepted to Roger L'Strange, and that day that I was under examination
before Mr. Secretary Jenkins that Libel lay before him upon his Table. He asked
me if I had seen that, I told him yes, for I had Copyed in that Paper that was
the Libel, those Queries, and then said he here is a Warrant to be given out
against Curtis for it.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. After such time that you had carried him the Copy that
Sir William had marked, and he amended it, did you show it Sir W^lliam W^ller
presently.


Mr. Everard. Yes immediately, and I asked him, Sir says I, is there any
alteration, yes said he, I see alterations, and showed them one. Do you know
the difference of Hands said I, yes said he I do, and suppose will give you an
account of it.


Mr. Johnson. My Lord, I humbly beg Mr. Everard may be asked who those
Parliam^nt men were, that were to concur with the French Ambassador in this
design?


L. C. J. Did he name any Parliament men?


Mr. Everard. No he did not, he said I should know them hereafter.


L. C. J. Then he did not name any?


Mr. Everard. No, he did not.


Mr. At. Genesis Then Swear Mr. Smith. (which was done) Pray Sir will you look
about, and give an Account what you know.


Mr. Smith. Will you have an Account how it came first to my knowledge?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes the whole, from the bottom to the top, from the beginning to
the end.


Mr. Smith. I remember about the 22 th. or the 21 th. of Feb. either one or the
other Mr. Everard, and one Mr. Savile came to my Chamber, and told me the same
Design that Mr. Everard has repeated before, and that there was an Irish Gent.
an Officer of the French Kings Army that was to manage the thing; he was one
that could speak French very well, and they desired me to be concerned in it
because I understood French. Upon this I told him I would willingly undertake
such a business if I thought there were any convenient place in the room where
I might hear, and see, undiscovered. After he had told me as he has before told
your Lordships, that it was to make a difference between the King and his
People, and to misrepresent the King as I shall inform you by and by. I went to
his Chamber after we had spoke to Mr. Crow, who would not undertake to speak
French so well as to be capable of understanding all; but at last we met with
Sir W. W. who undertook the matter. I walked immediately after Dinner to the
Chamber, and saw the conv^ni^ncies, and the next night we expected Sir W.
Wa^^^r, but he not coming that night I went into the Closet my self till
^i^^-Harris came according to the appointment. When Fitz-Harris came there were
two Chairs set, one Chair next the Closet where I stood, and another opposite
against me, that opposite against me was that where Mr. Fitz-Harris set, and
Mr. Everard was next clos^ to me, and I looked out through the hole, and I
heard there were some little discourses about the business in hand. At last Mr.
Everard stands up, and goes to the side-board, and brings a piece of Pap^r,
about hal^ a sheet as I think with him, and he read it, which was a Seditious
kind of Paper which I shall tell you of by and by, and he asked him in French
whether this were agreeable or no, to which the Gent. answered it was well, but
something must be added to it. Upon this Mr. Everard took out his Note-book,
and read something therein, and then Mr. Everard desired him to instance what
heads he would have more than were there, to which Fitz-Harris replied, that he
would have him to represent the King as a Papist, which might be demonstrated
by several reasons; first his ad^^ring to the Duke of York, and peremptorily
resolving to espouse that ^nte^est. The s^con^ reason was the preferring such
as were the Dukes (...) ^oth at Sea and Land, and keeping in Office those that
were p^^fe^r^d by the Duke, known Papists, and this was also another reason
(...) pro^e that head of the Instructions, that the King after his Resto^atio^
^^ocured an Act to be made, that it should be Treason for any to call (...)
Papist, and this was only that he might the better, and with the more ease
introduce Popery into England. He charged likewise King Char^^s the First to be
a promoter of the Irish Rebellion, and that Charles the Second furthered and
approved it; that is another Instance. That the Parliament at Oxford was only a
sham to delude the people, and that such a King was not to be trusted with such
a people, n^^ther as to their Lives, Liberties, or Religion but that the people
must prov^de for themselves in time, and blow the Trumpet boldly. Another
Instance was, as it was the undoubted right of the people to make Laws against,
and to oppose a Popish Successor, so they might depose a Popish Possessor. To
this effect was the substance of what was said.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he name a Reward that Mr. Everard was to have?


Mr. Smith. There was a Reward mentioned, but I don't remember any particulars.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he tell who set him on work?


Mr. Smith He said if they did but set England together by the Ears the French
would get Flanders, and at length prevail here, and Mr. Everard should get an
Interest in the Common Council, and make it his business that they should make
a kind of an Address to the Parliament, and promise to stand by them with their
Lives and Fortunes in opposing Popery, and Arbitrary Government, and if
Parliament-ways failed, to assist in another way; and if the King hindered the D
of Yo^k to come to a legal Trial, that then they should take other Courses.


Mr. At. Genesis What did he desire from Mr. Everard, when he seemed to boggle at
his Instructions?


Mr. Smith. Mr. Everard said he would do these things, yet he was in great
danger; Why says Mr. Fitz-Harris, so am I and a great many more; what other
Conference was betw^en them I know not, for I never saw them together after.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Look you Sir, is this the same Person?


Mr. Smith. Yes, I did know him to be the same person that night he was taken.


L. C. J. You could see him where you were?


Mr. Smith. My Lord, I saw clear enough, there was three Candles lighted, and I
was as near to him, as I am to your Lordship.


L. C. J. You were not in the Room?


Mr. Smith. I was in a little Closet close by.


Mr. At. Genesis You know nothing of the Paper of Instructions?


Mr. Smith. I remember he told me of such an one, but I was not there the
second night.


Sir Fr. Withins. Mr. Everard said they were Treasonable things, what then said
Fitz-Harris?


Mr. Smith. He said the more Treason was in them the better.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. And the particulars were to set the people together by
the Ears, and to bring in the French King.


Mr. Smith. It is all one in Terms.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. How was it?


Mr. Smith. That the King and the people should be set at variance, then the
French King would fall upon Flanders and Holland, and afterward would take
England in his way, and make no bones of it.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Will you ask him any Questions Mr. Fitz-Harris?


Fitz-Harris. Do you believe that I did it with a Treasonable intention.


Mr. Smith. Sir I am not to judge of that, I am not of your Jury, nor to answer
any such thing.


Fitz-Harris. What do you think Sir pray?


Mr. Smith. You could have no good Design to bring about by any such matter (I
think) as this Paper is.


Fitz-Harris. Is this the same Paper that was read in the House of Commons?


Mr. Smith. Sir, I was not of the House of Commons I don't know what was read
there.


Mr. Johnson. Mr. Everard did seem to hint at a Design among some Protestant
Lords, and Parliament men, and others Dissenters from the Church of England, I
desire to know whether Mr. Smith heard those words?


L. C. J. That was not the first night.


Mr. Smith. I did not hear it.


L. C. J. Look you Mr. Johnson, Mr. Smith was not present at the second
Meeting, then Sir Will. Waller was there, it was only the first night Mr. Smith
was there, and he speaks to that. Therefore as to the alteration of the Copy,
and some other things, he tells you that was done the second night, and then
was the Discourse concerning the French Confessor, and those other things which
you mention.


Mr. At. Genesis I believe the Jury misapprehend Mr. Ev^rard in that too.


L. C. J. It was only what Fitz-Harris told him.


Mr. At. Genesis But I see the thing stick with the Jury* therefore I would fain
ask Mr. Everard this Question, Did you declare an^ such thing, or was it Mr.
Fitz-Harris that told you?


Mr. Ev^rard. Mr. Fit^-Harris told me, that several Parliam^^^ men were joined
with the French Ambassador to give him an (...) of things, but he told me
besides, this must be drawn up as it (...) the Name of the Non-Conformists to
Father it upon them, yet (...) there was one word in it thou as if it were in
the (...) says he it must not be so, but it must be under the (...)
Non-Conformists, that it may be common to all the (...).


L. C. J. So you must take the ^ense of this right (...) Mr. Everard tell* you
some Parliament men, and Lord (...) in this bus^n^ss but (...) Fitz-Harri^'s
design was to ingag^ (...) and he (...) to encourage him to it. So that the
(...) ^^me Lords and Parl^^m^nt m^n (...) him to go on.


Mr. (...) (...) my Lord, so that h^re does appear there was so^^ other
^^terest than the French Interest in th^s matter, if wh^t Mr. Fitz-H^^ris said
was true.


Mr. At. Genesis Fitz-Harris said so to engage him.


L. C. J. Look you Mr. John^on, We do all (...) b^lieve and hope, there was no
such thing as that any Lord, or an^ (...) Commons of En^land were so engaged,
it was his Interest as Mr. Fit^-Harris took it to mention it so to engage this
G^ntleman.


Mr. Ever^^d. I did not say Lords.


L. C. J. What did you say th^n?


M^* Ev^rard. Parliament men in General.


Mr. A^t Genesis Then Swear S^r Will. Waller which was done.


S^r F^a^. Withins. Pray Sir William will you give an account of what you know
of this matter.


^^r Will. Waller. My Lord, the last time I was here in this Court being
Summoned to give in my Evidence. I did make some difficul^^ of it upon the
account that this Person was Impeached by the Commons of England in Parliament,
but Mr. Justice Jones having declared the Law, required me in such a Case to
give in my Evidence, I am now ready to give it in, and shall do it asbriesly as
I can.


L. C. J. Well Sir pray go on.


Sir Will. Waller. My Lord, upon the 22 th. or 23 th. of Fe^. last Mr. Everard
met me in the City, and told me he had a business of very great concernment to
Discover to me, whereupon my Lord we went into a place where we might
conveniently discourse together, and he told me in short, that Mr. Edw.
Fitz-Harris that unfortunate Gent. at the Bar had been with him several times,
and endeavored to engage him in a business, which would in effect turn all
into Confusion in England, and render the King very odious in the sight of his
Subjects. Many things he did there tell me, and earnestly pressed me (...) join
in this design to endeavor the Discovery of it. I was indeed at the first shie
of meddling with it being no way in the Commission of the Peace, and so not
liable to engage in a business of that nature, but I was afraid to discourage
Mr. Smith, who voluntarily, and ingeniously offered himself for the Service of
his King and Country, but I did not go that afternoon, being willing to hear
whether the business wen^ on, and was likely to come to any thing; the next
morning Mr. E^^rard writ to me this Letter (plucking out a Paper.)


Mr. J^st. Doil^^n. (...) i^ Sir.


Sir Will. ^^lle^. My Lord, in effect it was this, to let me know Mr. Smith had
been with him the night before, and that according as they had laid the^ (...)
Mr. Fitz-Harris did indeed come, and had some discou^se in the (...) of Mr.
Smith, several things beyond what the^ (...) ^cqu^^nted me with, things of the
highest nature imagin^ble, an^ (...) he ^arnestly pressed me, as I tendered the
welfare of my (...) that I would not fail to come that Afternoon to be (...)
^ar-w^tness of the Treasonable practices that were in hand. I (...) upon my
self then obliged to go, and did according to (...) he gave me, go about three
of the Clock in the (...) to a Tavern at the lower end of Fullers-Rents near
Grays-I^^, and there we were to discourse furth^r of the business. I had not
been t^ere long, but I looked out of a back Window, and spied Mr. (...) with
another Gent* in a Brown colored Suit, walking just before Gray's Inn Door. I
don't know the name of the Court, ^^t th^re I saw them walking, but in their
going he frequen^^^ looked up at Mr. Everard's Chamber, and pointed at it. When
he was gone, I told him it may be Mr. Fitz-Harris may come sooner than ^he h^^r
a^pointed, therefore I think it will not be amiss to go without ^urther d^lay
to your Chamber, and s^e what Convenience there may be to lie (...) where I may
be both an Eye and an Ear-witness I went to his Chamber, and when I came into
the Room there was a little (...) which I thought not so convenient for me, and
I rather chose to ^^ok about if I could find another place more convenient. In
short in ^^e next Room I found by my Cane there was a door, and (...) I turn^d
up the Hangings there, and in the door there was a (...) I opened a little with
my Knife, and ripped a whole in ^he (...) which looked into the Room where the
Gent. was to (...) Mr. Fitz-Harris came, Mr. Everard had given me a large
account much after the same manner that he has given in his T^^timony here,
and he showed me two Papers: I took the two Papers, and gave them a private
Mark that I might know them again, and withal we placed a Table, and a Chair
ready against Mr. Fitz-Harris's coming in, and agreed that he should be placed
so, as that through the hole I might have a full sight of him, but lest by an
accident he should be removed from thence, I desired Mr. Everard to ask him
three Questions. The 1 st. was, whether he had not Married a Daughter of one
Captain Finch's whose Father was killed in his Majesty's Service; the 2 d. was,
whether as he read over the Paper it was drawn up according to his
Instructions; and the 3 d. was, who was the Person that should recompense Mr.
Everard for running so great an hazard. According to these Instructions the
Table being placed and every thing in Order about seven a Clock, or between six
and seven Mr. Fitz-Harris came in, and being fate down he began to ask some
Questions, amongst others --


Then some Complaint was made by the (...) (...) of Papers given to Mr.
Fitz-Harris.

Fitz-Harris. Pray my Lord, I beg that Paper may be given to my Wife again.


Mr. At. Genesis I pray it may be given to the Court.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. I pray they may be read.


Mr. Sol. Genesis It Is not the duty of a Solicitor to (...) Papers, he was only
appointed by the Court to run of Errands, he is not to advise, or furnish with
matter of Defense.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. My Lord, this is an offense Committed in the face of the
Court, therefore we pray the Person that has done it may be Committed.


Mr. Just. Dolben. It is nothing but the Resolutions of the House of Commons,
give it him again.


L. C. J. If Mr. Whittaker lies there to trouble the Court, we shall find
another place for him.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, Mr. Whittaker has done his duty now, and what Service
your Lordship appointed him, for I think he may be sent away for here is no
more business for him.


Sir Will. Waller. Mr. Fitz-Harris came in I think it was between six and seven
a Clock, and coming there he fate himself down in the Chair prepared for him,
and Mr. Everard, according to the Instruction^ I had given him, did ask him
several Questions, but Mr. (...) did ask him first whether he had finished the
Paper according to some Instructions he had given him. Mr. Everard produced two
Papers, the one was the Copy of the other as I counted. Mr. Fitz-Harris had one
given into his hand, and the other Mr. Everard had Mr. Everard after he had
read a little in it did ask whether this was drawn up according to the
Instructions Mr. F^tz-Harris had given he answered it was exactly according to
the Instructions he had given him. After he had read a little further says Mr.
Everard to him, this is a business of very dangerous Consequ^nce, what reward
shall I have for running so great an hazard, he told him aga^^ thus, Sir says
he I think I run an equal hazard with you; for (...) have a Paper under my hand
which will r^nder me liable to dan^^^, and then he went on and read further,
and if Mr. Attorney will (...) to let me see the Paper, there is one particular
Clause it that I to^k special ^otice of.


M^. A^t. Genesis Would you have the Libel, or the Paper Sir William?


S^r Will. Waller. The Libel Sir, *which was given him) There wa^ one ^assage
in it which I remember, and it was this (^^^aking of the Kings preferring
Persons that were engaged in the late Irish (...) the Paper was first (prefers)
but says Mr. Fitz-Harris in Fr^^ch it must be (has promoted) several passages
of this nature I heard him alter, and I saw him alter with his Pen. For after
such time as Mr. Fitz-Harris was gone out of the Room I went immediately into
the ^oom where Mr. Everard was and took notice of the Paper, and the ^nk upon
the Paper was hardly dry.


Mr. At. Genesis Look upon that, that is the Original, and the other the Counter
part.


Sir Will. Waller. Here is the mark (then pointing to the bottom of the Paper*
These two Papers I marked both together, and this is the Paper Sir was (...) I
do remember it more particularly, for this Paper I ha^ (...) my own Custody,
and signed it afterward.


L. C J. (...) on.


(...) H^ was asking him, pray Sir said he, what Rewa^^ (...) ^^y (...) Mr.
Fitz-Harris you shall be very well pa^d you shall not ne^^ to (...) you shall
have all manner of encouragement. T^is (...) will b^^ng a considerable
Advantage to you, and you shall ^e o^^erwise preferred than when you were in
the French Kin^ ^^^vice ^ays (...) you cannot but know how you have
beenslighted and neglected not with^tanding the Service you have done, and the
French (...) i^ the Person that is to recompense you for your pains, and he
spoke of ^orty* but truly I did not hear whether it were Guinys, or what it was
that he should have for present payment, and I heard him speak something of a
Pension he named three Thousand Crowns, but whether annually or how I cannot
tell. Pray Sir said he wh^t shall I do in this ^ase for I do not know, I am but
in a low Condition, and have occasion for money, why says he the French
Em^assador will supply you, and you shall certainly as soon as the Paper is
perfected have your re^ard and says he there are a great many more that we have
employed in businesses of this nature, to create misunderstanding between the
King and his people, by which means the French will easily over run Flanders
and the ^ow-Countr^^s, and then England will become an easy Morsel. And this
is the subs^^nce of what I remember.


Fitz-Harris. Do you believe I had any such Design as Treason in it.


Sir (...) Wall^r. I cannot say any thing to that, I only speak as to the
matter of ^act.


Mr. At^. G^n. Did he declare he had many more employed in the Service?


Sir Will. W^ller. Yes he did say so. And said he there are two Pa^l^^ment ^en
^^at frequent my lord Sha^tesbury's who my Lord does not (...) ^^at do come and
found him, and then go and acquaint the (...) ^mbassador with all they can
discover.


^it^-Har^^s. Is th^s the same Paper by the Oath you have taken, for which I
was Impeached by the Commons in Parliament?


Sir Will W^ll^^. (...) it is a Copy of the same Paper, and that Paper (...) did
read i^ the House.


Mr. A^t. Genesis It Is the Original.


Mr. Joh^^on. My Lord, I desire to ask Sir W. Waller one Question, Sir you have
heard the Indictment read, then pray tell us whether this very Libel be
expressed in the Indictment according to what was deli^ered in the House of
Commons.


Mr. At. Genesis You shall hear that by and by your selves. For you shall hear
the Paper read to you with the Indictment.


Sir Will. Waller. This is a Copy of that Paper.


Mr. Johnson. Does Mr. Fitz-Harris stand Impeached by the House of Commons upon
the same Treasons mentioned in the Indictment?


Sir Will. Waller. Yes, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Upon the same Treasons?


Sir Will. Waller. Upon this Treasonable Paper he does. For as soon as ever I
had communicated this Paper to the House, and I had made my Report of the
Treasonable transactions of Mr. Fitz-Harris, the House immediately proceeded to
the Impeachment.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Does the Impeachment mention that Paper? Or what particular
Treason he was Impeached upon?


Sir Will. Waller. I know nothing of that. But upon this Paper that Impeachment
was grounded, that is all I can say.


Mr. Sol. Genesis That this Libel was spoken of in the House of Commons, is true,
but it does not appear upon the Impeachment that he was Impeached for that
Libel.


L. C. J. Have you any more Witnesses?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, we have to other matters. But we desire to let them alone
till the Libel be read.


Mr. Johnson. My Lord, we beg we may have the comparison of the Libel with the
Indictment.


Fitz-Harris. I would ask Sir W. Waller one Question more upon his Oath,
whether he had any design of Trapanning me, or any body else in this thing.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Had you any design to trapan the Prisoner, or any body?


Sir Will. Waller. No Mr. Fitz-Harris indeed not I.


Fitz-Harris. I looked upon you always as a Person that was my Enemy.


Mr. At. Genesis What, because you were a Papist?


Fitz-Harris. No, it was upon another account, I appeal to Mr. Justice Dolben.


Mr. Just. Dolben. What do you appeal to me for?


Mr S. Jeff. Have you known Mr. Fitz-Harris before, Sir William?


Sir Will. Waller. Yes, many years.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. What Religion was he reputed to be of?


Sir Will. Waller. A Roman Catholic.


Fitz-Harris. I am not bound to continue so always.


Mr. Jones. Then show your Conversion.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray let the Libel be read.


Then the Paper was produced.

Mr. At. Genesis Sir W. Waller, and Mr. Everard, is that the Paper?


Mr. Everard. This is the Paper.


Mr. At. Genesis Is it interlined with his own hand?


Mr. Everard. Yes; for there is the words (have promoted) that I said before,
he altered.


L. C. J. Gent. pray mark this now, you will hear the Clauses contained in the
Indictment read, and you shall hear this Paper read, and then your selves shall
be Judges whether it does contain them yea, or no.


Mr. Johnson. We desire to see it at the Bar.


Mr. At. Genesis Here is a Copy of these Clauses you may Examine it by that.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. It Is not the whole Libel, but only some Clauses of it he is
Indicted for.


L. C. J. Yes, Brother. But what they desire is only to see whether so much as
is contained in the Indictment, is also in the Libel.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Swear Mr. Astrey then; which was done.


L. C. J. Look you Gent. this is one that is entrusted with the Affairs of the
Crown. He is now Sworn, and I ask him this Question for your satisfaction. Mr.
Astrey, Are the English sentences that are in the Indictment also comprised in
the Libel?


Mr. Astrey. My Lord, I did examine this Indictment with the Libel at Mr.
Attorney Generals Chamber as well as I could, and they are in terminis the
same, the words in the Indictment, and the words in the Libel.


Mr. Johnson. My Lord, if all be not in the Indictment that is in the Libel
then perhaps there may be some Connection with what is antecedent, something to
explain those Clauses the Indictment mentions so that they may bear another
Construction. Therefore we would have all read.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. It must be all read to them.


L. C. J. Yes, Brother it shall be wholly read to them, though it need not be
expressed de verbo in verbum in the Indictment, yet for their satisfaction it
shall be wholly read to them.


Mr. Sol. Genesis These Gentlemen are very cautious I perceive.


L. C. J. Look you Gent. if you will attend the Court we will give you what
satisfaction we can, pray Mr. Solicitor give them leave to speak to the Court;
what you desire Gent. is reasonable enough, that you may hear the Libel to see
whether these are not Clauses taken out of a Paper which may have another
Import in the Paper than they have when they are taken out. That is your
meaning.


Mr. Johnson. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. To that intent you shall hear the Libel read distinctly, you shall
have the very Clauses of the Indictment by you that you may look upon them.


Mr. At. Genesis The other part of the Libel will do it.


L. C. J. Pray Mr. Attorney don't direct me, they shall have the Indictment
whilst Mr. Astrey reads the Libel, that they may see the import of the words.
And you do not apprehend it aright. Mr. Johnson does not desire to see whether
Mr. Astrey read right, but whether those Clauses in the Indictment are of the
same import in the Indictment that they are of in the Libel. Therefore they
must have a Copy of the Indictment whilst Mr. Astrey reads the Libel, and Mr.
Astrey pray mark those Clauses when you come to them, for you will find they
are dispersed up and down the Libel.


Mr. Astrey. I do not Swear to that very Paper, but I believe you will find
they are rightly taken out of the Libel in the Indictment.


Mr. At. Genesis This is the Copy of the Indictment Clauses.


Cl. of Cr. reads. Friend I thank thee for the Character of the Popish
Successor --


Then one of the Jury having the Copy in his Hand, and not finding it exact
desired a true Copy.

Sir Will. Waller. Here is a true Copy of it I took my self and read in the
House.


Then the Libel was read through, and the Clauses particularly observed.

L. C. J. Gentlemen, now you have heard it read. And you may observe there is
nothing in this Paper can extenuate or mitigate the Clauses, but abundance to
make them more horrid and exceedingly aggravated.


Mr. At. Genesis Then call Mr. Savile who was the person Mr. Everard did meet
with, and acquaint with this business. (but he did not appear) Then call Sir
Philip Lloyd and Mr. Bridgman. My Lord, the next piece of Evidence we shall
give is this, Sir Will. Waller and Mr. Everard do both say, that he gave part
of his Instructions under his own hand, we shall produce the Paper and prove he
acknowledged it to be his own hand.


Then the Paper was produced.

Mr. At. Genesis Who writ that Sir?


Mr. Everard. Mr. Fitz-Harris.


Mr. At. Genesis Are those the Instructions he gave you to frame this Libel?


Mr. Everard. These are part of the Instructions my Lord, other part I took in
my Table Book before Mr. Smith.


Mr. At. Genesis We will prove it by other Witnesses, Sir Philip Lloyd, and Mr.
Bridgman.


Mr. Bridgman Sworn.

Mr. At. Genesis Did the Prisoner acknowledge that to be all his own Handwriting?


Mr. Bridgman. Yes my Lord, Mr. Fitz-Harris did acknowledge it to be all writ
with his own hand.


Sir Philip Lloyd Sworn.

Sir Fr. Withins. Look upon that Paper Sir, (which he did) Did Mr. Fitz-Harris
acknowledge it was his Handwriting?


Sir Philip Lloyd. Yes he did, and that I might bear Testimony of it the
better, I writ with my own hand on the back of it, that he did so.


Mr. At. Genesis Read it.


Cl. of Cr. read. After this Sham Meeting of the Parliament at Oxon which no
body expects any good of, it will be necessary, etc.


Mr. Sol. Genesis These words are likewise in the Indictment.


L. C. J. When was that given to you Mr. Everard, For -- Mr. Fitz-Harris it
seems owned it before the Lords in the Council, but Mr. Everard Swears the
delivery of it, what time was it?


Mr. Everard. It was either Monday, or Tuesday.


L. C. J. In February was it not?


Mr. Everard. Yes, and I asked Captain Fitz-Harris according to Sir W. Wallers
Queries, whether he had given Instructions according to what he would have
contained in the thing, yes said he; but have you not enough under my own hand
to do it by.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Lord, we have done our Evidence, we will leave it now to
hear what the Prisoner will say for his Defense.


L. C. J. Mr. Fitz-Harris if you have any thing to say for your Defense this is
your time to do it.


Fitz-Harris. Yes, my Lord Dr. Oats I desire may be called.


Mr. At. Genesis If you have any Witnesses name them.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. Yes, yes Dr. Oats, and ask him what he heard Mr. Everard
say.


L. C. J. What say you to Dr. Oats, here he is.


Fitz-Harris. Pray Dr. what have you heard Mr. Everard say about this Libel
since I was taken.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, after this business was talked of abroad having heard that
Sir William Waller and Everard had made the Discovery, I did Discourse Mr.
Everard about the business, and about the Libel. He told me he wrote the Libel,
and when I would not believe it the man was a little angry that I would not
believe it. And then I told him he was a man very unfortunate in speaking; for
he spoke but badly; he said though he was unfortunate in his Tongue, yet he was
as fortunate in his Pen, and that he took a great deal out of the intercepted
Letter to Roger Le'Strange, and I then asked him what the Design of it was, he
told me it was to be Printed, and to be sent about by the Penny Post to the
protesting Lords, and the Leading men in the House of Commons, and they were to
be taken up as soon as they had it, and to be Searched, and to have it found
about them. I then asked him if there were any other Persons concerned in it
besides those publicly talked of, he told me the Court had an hand in it, and
the King had given Fitz-Harris Money already, and would give him more if it had
success. This he told me at Oxford, and before he went thither, and after.


Fitz-Harris. Mr. Sheriff Cornish, I do beg you would declare what his Majesty
told you, when you came to him from me, when I was at Newgate.


Mr. Sheriff. I do not know what you call me for, Mr. Fitz-Harris.


Fitz-Harris. I desire you to acquaint the Court what the King said to you when
you came to him from Newgate from me.


Mr. Sheriff. My Lord, I shall desire your Lordships opinion in this matter,
whether it be seemly or decent for a Subject to declare, what Discourse his
Prince is pleased to have with him.


L. C. J. Look you Sir, if you give any Evidence, give it. We are not to direct
any Witness whether they shall give their Evidence, or not.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Sheriff, you ought to do it openly if you give any,
therefore pray let us hear you.


Mr. Sheriff. My Lord, I cannot remember what was said relating to this
particular matter. There was a great deal his Majesty was pleased to discourse
with me concerning things of several kinds and Natures, my Memory may fail me,
but if Mr. Fitz-Harris please to ask as to any particular matter.


Fitz-Harris. What the King said when you came from Newgate to him, to acquaint
him that I would make a Discovery. Did he say I was employed by him, and
received any Money, and what for?


Mr. Sheriff. My Lord, I do remember something of that kind. When I was giving
his Majesty an account that I found the Prisoner at the Bar in a disposition to
make a Discovery, his Majesty was pleased to tell me he had often had him
before him and his Secretaries upon Examination, and could make nothing at all
of what he did say or Discover to them, and his Majesty was pleased likewise to
say, that he had for near three Months before acquainted him, that he was in
pursuit of a Plot a matter that related mueh to his Majesty's Person and
Government, and the King did say in as much as he made great Protestations of
his Zeal for his Service, he did Countenance and give him some Money, I know
nothing more.


Mr. At. Genesis Did the King ever declare that he saw Fitz-Harris in his Life,
or that he ever was in his Presence?


Mr. Sheriff. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Ay, but before his appearing at the Council Table, did the King
ever say he saw him, or before he was Arrested for this Fact?


Mr. Sheriff. Yes, his Majesty was pleased to say about three Months before, he
came to him and pretended he would discover a great Plot to him.


L. C. J. Have you any other Questions to ask Mr. Sheriff.


Fitz-Harris. No. Where is Colonel Mansel.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I desire that if the Prisoner have any more Questions to
ask me he may do it, because the Crowd is great, and I would go out.


Fitz Harris. Sir, I have many more Questions to ask you, I desire you would
please to stay.


L. C. Just. You must stay if he have any more Questions to ask you. Here is
Col. Mansel, what say you to him?


Fitz Harris. Col. What did you hear Sir William Waller say after this
Discovery was made?


Col. Mansel. That which I heard Sir William Waller say, was this; I had
occasion to speak with Sir James Hayes, and enquiring for him, I found he was
at the Dog Tavern; so I went up, and found in the Company, Sir William Waller,
and another Gentleman one Mr. Hunt, and some more. After the rest of the
Company were gone, and only Sir James Hayes, Mr. Hunt, my self, and Sir William
Waller left, Sir William was giving an account of this Business, and said, The
King, when I had acquainted him with it, told me I had done him the greatest
piece of Service that ever I had done him in my life; and gave me a great many
Thanks. But I was no sooner gone from thence, but two worthy Gentlemen gave me
an account, that the King said, I had broken all his Measures, and he would
have me taken off one way or another.


Fitz Harris. Did he say any thing, that it was a Design to put the Libel upon
the Protestant Lords, and the House of Commons?


Col. Mansel. There was that said.


L. C. Just. What was said? don't come with your imperfect Discourses here, but
if you give Evidence, tell what was said.


Col. Mansell. Sir William Waller said, That the Design was against the
Protestant Lords, and the Protestant Party.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. I do not doubt that it was against the Protestant Party.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Recollect your self; Was it against the Protestant Lords, or
the Protestant Party?


Col. Mansell. He said, the Protestant Party.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis So say We.


Fitz Harris. Did he not say it was another Sham Plot, Sir, against the
Phanaticks, and the House of Commons? Where is Mr. Hunt?

[Mr. Hunt appeared.


Mr. Hunt. What would you have with me, Mr. Fitz Harris? I never had any
conversation with you in my life.


Fitz Harris. No Sir; But what have you heard Sir William Waller say concerning
my Business?


Mr. Hunt. My Lord, I would rather I had lost my hearing for that time, than
have heard it to repeat it. Sir William Waller did tell me, at the Dog Tavern,
where was Sir James Hayes and Col. Mansell by, after he had read over the Libel
to us, there was a great deal of Company more, but he only gave us the
curiosity to see what the Libel was. And when he had read it, he did tell us,
That the King gave him particular Thanks for that good service he had done him
in detecting Fitz Harris; but he said he was told by two Gentlemen that had
heard the King speak it, who were of undoubted credit, That the King was in an
extreme passion, bestowed many hard Names on him, and said, He would give any
thing in the World to take him out of the World; that he was an insufferable
vexation to him, and that he had broken all his Measures. And he said the same
things again, in the presence of Sir Philip Harcourt, and my Lord Radnor's Son
Mr. Roberts, at Capt. Hall's Chamber, in Pembrook College in Oxon.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis What did he say about the Prisoner?


Mr. Hunt. This was about the Libel of Fitz Harris, that the King gave him
particular Thanks about that Business; and afterward the King did expr^ss
great passion, in some short time after he was gone; and he did say he was
informed by two Witnesses that heard the King say it, He knew not what to do
with him, he broke all his Measures.


Fitz Harris. Did he not say this was a Design against the Protestants?


Mr. Hunt. He did say it was a Design to contrive these Papers into the hands
of People, to make them Evidences of Rebellion; and that was his apprehension
of the thing. And he said further, (for I am a Witness here, and must speak all
my knowledge) that he had another Plot which he had traced near to a full
discovery, a more horrid Plot than this or Dangerfield's, for, he said, this
was the Counter-part of Dangerfield's Plot. I hope he will not deny it, if he
be asked, here he is, and upon his Oath; I am not, and I desire not to take
credit unsworn, but am willing to give my Testimony on Oath.


Fitz Harris. Where is Dr. Carry?


Mr. Sheriff Cornish. Dr. Carry is not well, my Lord, and cannot come.


Fitz Harris. Then Mr. Sheriff Bethell.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I pray I may be discharged.


L. Chapter Just. Doctor, we have nothing to say to you, but the Prisoner has more
Questions to ask you. It Is not we that detain you, but you stay upon the
Prisoner's account.


Fitz Harris. Mr. Sheriff Bethell desires to know what you can say concerning
Mr. Everard.


Mr. Sheriff Bethell. My Lord, I know nothing of Mr. Everard as to this
Business, save that he told me he writ the Libel himself. And I confess, my
Lord, further, that before ever he knew my face, or before ever he heard me
speak a word in his days, he put in an Information of Treason against me, at
the instigation of one that is known to be my mortal Enemy; and it was so
groundless, that though it was three Years ago given in, yet I never heard a word
of it till Friday last. I can bring Witnesses of this, persons that sent the
notice of it to me.


Fitz Harris. Pray call Mrs. Wall.

(Who came down from her Seat.)
Fitz Harris. Mrs. Wall, Pray will you tell the Court, have not I conveyed some
Libels, and Treasonable Papers to the King by your means, and received Money
upon that account.


Mrs. Wall. Not as I know of.


Fitz Harris. Did not you receive some of them from me to give to the King?


Mrs. Wall. No indeed not I.


Fitz Harris. Is the Footman here that was by, when you paid me the Money?


Mrs. Wall. Yes, and the Porter too, though you have not Subpoena'd them.


Fitz Harris. How long ago is that?


Mrs. Wall. Two Years ago.


Fitz Harris. Was it not about Christmas last was twelve month I gave you the
Libel about the King and your Lady; and the King thanked me extremely, and I
had 250 l. given me? Come, Mrs. Wall, don't think to trick me out of my Life in
the Case, for I will not be tricked so. Pray tell the Court, Can you deny that
I had the 250 l? speak, Mrs. Wall, had I 250 l?


Mrs. Wall. That was not the Question you asked me at first.


Fitz Harris. But speak, had I it?


Mrs. Wall. There was 250 l. I think it was 200, or 150, or 250 l*


Fitz Harris. What use was it for? and upon what account?


Mrs. Wall. You do know it was not for any Libel.


Fitz Harris. If you have any mind, tell it.


Mrs. Wall. There it is.

(Delivering in a Paper to be read.)
Cl. of Cr. The humble Petition of Edward Fitz-harris. --


Mrs. Wall. I really took him for as honest a Man as ever I knew in my life,
and had it been in my power to have done him a kindness, I should not have
failed to have done it.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Was he your Countryman, Madam?


Mrs. Wall. Yes, he is, and my Relation too. I knew you to be the Son of a very
suffering Loyal Family; and while his Mother was in Town, he came often to our
House; and when she went away, he left visiting the House a great while. And
you, Mr. Fitz-harris, did once tell me, You could bring in People to the King's
Interest, that were very considerable. So I spoke to the Secretary of State
about you, that there was one that had been with me, and told me, that he could
bring in those to the King and Duke's Interest that were very considerable. The
Secretary of State desired me to know who they were; and then he named to me
one Thomas Merrey, and another Person who I desire to be excused from naming.
The other Party he did name, was thought considerable, both for Quality and
Understanding. And the Secretary desired me to get him in if I could.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Pray, Madam, who was it?


Mrs. Wall. I desire Mr. Fitz-harris may tell you.


Fitz Harris. No, Mrs. Wall, pray do you tell it, since you have spoke of it.


Mrs. Wall. I say nothing but what I will take my Oath of.


Fitz Harris. Then you will never swear that which is true. Pray, Mrs. Wall,
speak, who was it?


Mrs. Wall. I desire I may not name him, but he may.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis He will not.


Mrs. Wall. Truly, I do not think it convenient for me to name such Persons as
those are upon such accounts.


Fitz-Harris. Pray, Mrs. Wall, name the Person that I would have brought into
the King's Service.


Mrs. Wall. If the Court commands me, I will; otherwise I will not.


Fitz-Harris. Did you ever, upon any such account as this, receive any Money for
me, speak the truth?


Mrs. Wall. God forbid your Blood should lie at my door; I assure you I should
be sorry for it. He told me, these Persons were considerable for the King's
Interest, and could do him extraordinary good Service. So, as I said, I spoke
to the Secretary of State; and he would know who they were. And when he was
told who they were, as for one of them, Thomas Merrey, he was not thought worth
the looking after, for he was thought an inconsiderable Rascal; but as for the
other Gentleman, he was thought a Man of Worth, and a Person, that if he would,
could really serve the King. Upon this, when you first came, I was never at
rest for you; and therefore, after a while, before you came again, I gave the
Porter order to tell you, I was not at home; and I desire the Porter may be
asked the Question. But when I next saw the Secretary, I desired that he would
give them a positive Answer, one way or the other; and the next time I saw you,
this was your Business, and I told the Secretary of Sat of it. You gave me
this Paper, and desired me to solicit for your Quit-Rent in Ireland, for you
were in great misery, and had been a great Sufferer. So I spoke to the Duchess
of Portsmouth, and she spoke to the Secretary of State; that if this Man be so
considerable a sufferer, it is convenient to give him something for his
encouragement; and if you will give him something, said I, give it him quickly.
I was 4, if not 6 months a getting this money.


Fitz-Harris. But will you say it was upon that account? When was that money
paid?


Mrs. Wall. I never thought I should be brought in for a Witness; or that you
would have abused me thus for my kindness.


Fitz-Harris. When were those Papers given you that you produced?


Mrs. Wall. I wish I may never see the Face of God, if I know any more than
what I give Evidence; there are the Papers, they will tell you the time.


Fitz-Harris. Did I give them you?


Mrs. Wall. You or your Wife did; and I suppose your Wife's condition was yours.


Fitz-Harris. Was not the money received before ever those Papers were given you?


Mrs. Wall. Nay, Mr. Fitz-harris, I will tell you more; send to Mr. Henry Guy,
and let him tell you when he paid it you.


Fitz-Harris. Call the Porter, and the Footman if he be here.


L. Chapter Just. If you will ask any more Questions of Mrs. Wall, do.


Fitz-H. Did not I come to you the Wednesday before I was taken, and told you,
I desired to speak with the King, and that I had a Libel to present to him?


Mrs. Wall. No, so far from that, that it was the Thursday before you were
taken, you came about nine a Clock at Night to our Lodgings, and sent up to my
Chamber; and I sent word that Mr. Cowling was there, for I did not care to see
you; but you sent word up, you had something of Consequence to tell me. So I
came down, and you desired me to bring you to the speech of the King; which was
a thing you did never desire before: And you said thus, If you did but see the
King, you believed you could say something to him that might do him service.


Fitz-Harris. Did not I say here is the Libel that I come to deliver to the
King now?


Mrs. Wall. No, as I have a Soul to be saved.


Fitz-Harris. Mrs. Wall, I did, and this was what you said at the same time;
That since my Lord Sunderland was gone, you could have no secret Service. I did
desire to speak with the King privately, those were my words; and you told me,
you could not so easily do business with the King since my Lord Sunderland's
time.


L. Chapter Just. We must not let you hold a Dialogue between your selves, you must
speak that the Court may hear.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Was not he a Roman Catholic?


Mr. Wall. Yes, we looked upon him so, and upon that account we said it was
dangerous for him to go near the King.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Did you know that ever he was admitted to the King?


Mrs. Wall. Never; but he has been talking with me in a Room as the King
passed by.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Did the King ever take any notice of him, speak to him?


Mrs. Wall. The King never took notice of him, nor spoke with him by my means,
nor gave him money, other than what I speak of, nor the Dutch. of Portsmouth.


L. Chapter Just. Look you, Mrs. Wall, I think you do say that there was some money
paid to Mr. Fitz-harris, pray speak plain upon what account was it paid.


Mrs. Wall. My Lord, it was for the bringing of my Lord Howard of Escrick, who
is there; since you press me to it, I must tell, I think my Lord will not deny
it.


Lord Howard. I will never deny the Truth.


Fitz-Harris. Where was my Lord Howard of Escrick?


Mrs. Wall. He was not so much for the King's Interest, or that which they
call the King's Interest.


Fitz-Harris. How long is this since?


Mrs. Wall. Two Years ago since he came first to me; but whether it be a Year
and an half since my Lord met with the King, I cannot tell.


Fitz-Harris. When my Lord was admitted in to the King, I did wait on him to
that purpose, to bring in my Lord Howard.


Mrs. Wall. I desire that my Lord Howard may be asked, whether he don't
remember, when the King was coming, Mr. Fitz-harris was put out of the Room
first.


Fitz-Harris. You say, I never showed any Libel to the King.


Mrs. Wall. I tell you what I said since to this Gentleman that is here; I
wish you shad shown the Libel unto me, that I might have been in a capacity of
saving your Life.


Fitz-Harris. You said, that I had the 250 l. for bringing in my Lord Howard.


Mrs. Wall. I say, it was upon promise to bring in Persons that would be
useful and serviceable to the King.


L. Chapter Just. She is your own Witness, and she tells you, two Persons you did
undertake to bring in, and for that you had this Money.


Mrs. Wall. It was his Poverty and this together.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Mrs. Wall, I conceive he never discovered this Libel
unto you; but, pray, did he ever discourse with you about Everard? and what
Character did he give him?


Mrs. Wall. Once he did, and he said he was an honest Man; and asked me if I
would be acquainted with him? I told him, No, for he had a knavish Reputation;
he was an Informer, and I cared for no Informers.


Fitz-Harris. Mrs. Wall, to let the World see how you shuffle about me, When
did the King see my Lord Howard first, when I brought him?


Mrs. Wall. I don't know, ask my Lord Howard.


Fitz-Harris. Did not I speak to the King in the outer Room? and did not you
get me to make a stand there?


Mrs. Wall. Mr. Fitz-harris, don't make me tell that thing.


Fitz-Harris. Pray speak the Truth, Mrs. Wall.


Mrs. Wall. I defy you, and all Mankind, to say I do otherwise. You did desire
me to tell the Duke, that you would first bring my Lord to him, and then to the
King; and I spoke to the Duke, and he said you were a Rascal, and he would not
meddle with you; this you know.


Fitz-Harris. Did not my Lady Portsmouth tell me, the Duke was angry, etc?


Mrs. Wall. Mr. Fitz-harris, when you came to me upon such an Errand, was it
reasonable that I should bring you, upon every trifle, to the speech of the
King, and I should not bring you then, it is without sense and reason.


L. Chapter Just. You must not ask Questions, but Answer. And, Mr. Fitz-harris, do
you design to detect Mrs. Wall of Falsehood? she is your own Witness, you
consider not you can get nothing by that.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, when you see the Papers produced, you will find it is
upon another account.


Mrs. Wall. Is this your hand, Mr. Fitz-harris?

(Showing him a Paper.)
Fitz-Harris. But is not this upon the account of a Pension granted in Ireland?
Pray let the Gentlemen of the Jury see, this is of another different nature; I
appeal to my Lord Howard of Escrick, whether he did not speak to my Lady about
it.


Lord Howard. I did so.


Mrs. Wall. My Lord did second my Lady to get you some Charity.


Fitz-Harris. So that the money received here, was plainly upon another account.


L. Chapter Just. Look you, if you will have any Papers read, they shall be read.
But the Gentlemen of the Jury must not see any Papers but what are read.


Then the Petition of Mrs* Fitz-harris, and the King's Letter to the Duke of
Ormond, was read, about a Pension in Ireland.

Fitz-Harris. My Lord, if you please, I have something further to say to Mrs.
Wall. But I desire to ask Mr. Cowling a Question, and that is, Sir, What Mrs.
Wall said to you about my Business?


Mr. Cowling. My Lord, I think, the day after this Man was examined in the
Council, I came to Mrs. Wall, and she told me, That the second or third night
before he was taken, he came to her to bring him to the King; but she sent down
stairs, that she would not let him come up. But asked him, why he did not go to
one of the Secretaries of State? No, said he, I cannot go thither without being
taken notice of; but I Will tell you my Business. No, said she, if you will write
down your Business, and give it me in a Paper, I will carry it to the King; and
if the King have a mind to speak with you, you shall be sent for. No, said he,
I will not do that. Then, said she, I must b^g your pardon if I don't bring you
to the King. And Mrs. Wall said further to me, truly her Blood did chill when
she said so, for she was afraid he was come to do the King a mischief.


Mr. Attorn. General. This was three or four nights before he was taken.


Fitz-Harris. Is Sir Robert Thomas here? (He did not appear) Then I desire my
Lord Howard to stand up.


Lord Howard. Have you any thing to say to me, Mr. Fitz-harris?


Fitz-Harris. Yes, my Lord, if you please. My Lord, I desire your Lordship will
please to tell, what my Lady Portsmouth did express to you concerning me, at
your coming thither; and whether I did not introduce your Lordship; and how
civil she was to me upon that account; and how she undertook to get my
Quit-Rent for me.


Lord Howard. Sir, I shall answer as particularly as I can all your Questions;
but it will be necessary to introduce my Evidence with the Relation of the
whole Transaction. You know, about October last, about the beginning of the
month, for it was, as I take it, ten days, or a fortnight, before the ^itting
down of the Parliament, You did make Applications to me, in the Name of the
King, whether with or without his privity I cannot say; but you did make
several invitations to me, of putting my self into the possession of an Honor
I was altogether unworthy of, of waiting upon the King. I gave you my Reasons
why I thought my self unfit for that Honor, because I was not in any capacity
of doing the King any Service: And I looked upon the King as a Person too
Sacred, and whose Time was too precious to be trifled away upon one that had
nothing to offer to Him, and therefore I refused it. But notwithstanding this,
was reinforced by you; and when I still persisted in the denial of that which
was an Honor I ought rather to have sought, but only because I thought my self
incapable of deserving it. After several Applications, I did at last tell you,
besides the impertinency of it, I did also apprehend it might be the occasion
of some indecency; for perhaps I might thereby put my self upon d^claring my
self in some of my Sentiments, very much differing from those of his Majesty.
And for me to seek an opportunity to express my Contrari^ty to his Majesty's
Thoughts, would be both rudeness and imprudence; and therefore I did then
ultimately answer you, I would by no means be prevailed with. Then you did
lower it, and said, It should suffice, if I would wait upon the Dutches^ of
Portsmouth. Truly, I told you, as to that too, you did me a great Honor, and
greater than I could*expect, for I had nothing (I was afraid) worthy her
trouble; and therefore I desired to know what it might mean. In short, you did
resolve it into this, That you did find the King under great app^ehension, that
there was something deep in the Hearts of some, that stood at a distance from
his Majesty, and opposite to his Interest; and that the Parliament stood at an
irreconcilable difference with the King. Truly, said I, I am a Person not ^it
to speak in the Name of a Parliament, for in a little time they will speak for
themselves; but if I were to speak, or should presume to speak in the Name of
the Parliament, or the whole Nation, I should say, I believed the King would
find his Parliament meeting him with as great Affection, Duty, and Loyalty, as
any Parliament ever met any King of England. You said, Then you were confident,
and you cited her Grace the Duchess of P^rtsmouth for it, that the King came
to meet them with inclinations to gratify them in any thing they could desire.
Then, said I, to what end need I come there, for the Parliament will speak its
own Sense speedily. Pray do me that kindness, as to go and satisfy the
Duchess of Portsmouth, and to let her know she may now have an opportunity of
declaring how willing she is to be a good Instrument between the King and his
People. Said you, I can assure you, that she is altogether for the same
Interest that you look toward; for you are very much mistaken if you think she
is a Friend to the Duke of York. My Lord, in short* after much entreaty, I did
give my self that honor, which I have no cause to repent or be ashamed of, to
go to Whitehall, humbly to kiss my Lady Dutchess's hand, and receive her
Commands. But when I came there, I was surprised with a greater Honor of
finding the King there, and I think it was an opportunity, wherein my time was
not ill spent as to my self, but I am afraid this 250 l. if it were given for
the bringing me thither, his Majesty does not think he has deserved it at this
time.


Fitz-Harris. Your Lordship came there in October last.


Lord Howard. Because I will do you all the right I can, it was, as I take it,
the beginning of October, and about the 10 th, because the Parliament sat down
the 23 d, and as I remember, it was a fortnight before. This was the first time
that I owe you thanks for the honor of seeing the King. After that, a matter
of ten days, I had a second opportunity, and by your means also. This was the
last time I had the honor to se^ the King, but in public. After this, I must
confess, when the Parliament was ended, I did then, willingly enough, invite my
self to the honor of waiting upon the Duchess, and give her thanks, and tell
her, I was sensible she had endeavored, as much as in her lay, to persuade the
King into a good Opinion of the Parliament, and to give them time of Sitting,
and thereby to give them opportunity of explaining their Intentions for his
Service and Advantage. This was also the last time I had the honor of seeing
her. At last, parting from her, I did make it my humble request to her, that
she would be pleased to represent your Condition to the King, since by your
means I had the honor to be showed the way to her Graces Lodgings.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, did not I come to you with a Message, the night before
my Lord Stafford was condemned?


Lord Howard. You say right, and it was in my thoughts, and yet I thought it
too tender a thing to speak of; and therefore I thought it so, because, I must
confess, at that time (you must excuse me) I did believe you did not come with
that Authority you pretended to make use of. After the time that unfortunate
Lord had had his Trial, and the House were preparing their thoughts for the
sentence, I was indisposed, and came not to the House that day; which provoked*
the House so much, that they were near committing me to the Tower; but truly I
was so ill in Body, and had so little a mind to have my Vote mixed with his
Blood, that perhaps I should have run the hazard of going to the Tower about
it, if that had been all. But the night before you came to me, and told me, as
a great Secret, That you did bring it as the desire of the King, and as that
which he would take as a great instance of my resignation to his Will and
Pleasure, and that for which I might promise my self all the greatest
kindnesses possible for a Prince to show to his Subjects, if I would go the
next day and give my Vote for my Lord Stafford. Sir, said I, I have all the
Obligations of Nature and Blood to dispose me, as much as can be, to favor my
Lord Stafford, as far as can consist with the integrity and sincerity of a
Judge; but though I was wavering in my own Thoughts the day before, now by the
Grace of God I will go, though I be carried on Men's backs to the House. Now I
see there is so great an account put upon it, for I see it is the Concerns, not
only of my Lord Stafford, but the Protestant Cause; and then, said I, If all
the Relations I have were melted down into my Lord Stafford, if I had but
breath enough to pronounce his Doom, he shall die.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis My Lord says, he did not think you came from the King when
you came with that Message.


Lord Howard. Sir, can I do you any more Service? I shall be willing to do it
if I can. I cannot deny but I had, by your means, the honor of waiting upon
the King and the Duchess, but I have so little reason to value my own worth,
that I cannot imagine how it should turn to the King's Service.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I desire to have liberty of going away, the Crowd is so
great I cannot stand, and the Prisoner has nothing to say to me.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis My Lord, that may be part of the Popish Plot, to keep Dr.
Oats here, to kill him in the Crowd.


Fitz-Harris. Have not you something more to say Doctor? truly I forget, my
memory is so distracted.


Dr. Oats. I know not, if you have any Questions to ask me, I will speak Truth.

(But he had none, so the Doctor went away.)
Mrs. Fitz-harris. Call Mr. Fanshaw.

(who did not appear.)
Fitz-Harris. My Lady Duchess of Portsmouth.


Mrs. Wall. She is not come, because the Court is very full; but if the Court
will send for her, she will come presently.


Fitz-Harris: My Lord, I beg that my Lady Duchess of Portsmouth may be sent
for.


Mrs. Wall. She gave me Commission to say, If the Court would have her to come,
she would so do.


L. Chapter Just. We cannot send for her, if she please to come, so, we have no
occasion to send for her.


Mrs. Wall. I presume he cannot ask her no Questions, but what I can answer.


L. Chapter Just. We will not prejudice the Prisoner in his Questions, nor send for
her, unless she will come.


Fitz-Harris. Will you send one of your Footmen, Mrs. Wall, I am a Prisoner,
and have no Body to send. In the mean time, where is the Porter?


Mrs. Wall. Here he is.


Fitz-Harris. How long is it since you paid the money to me from my Lady
Portsmouth?


Porter. I cannot tell indeed, it is so long since.


Fitz-Harris. Let him have his Oath.


L. Chapter Just. No, that he cannot have.


Fitz-Harris. Was it not Christmas last was twelve month?


Porter. I cannot indeed tell what time it was.


Fitz-Harris. You dare not speak the Truth.


Mr. Just. Dol^en. You disparage your own Witnesses.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. He has no Witnesses can say any thing for him, and
therefore he must find fault with what they say.


L. Chapter Just. Have you any other Witnesses, Mr. Fitz-harris?


Fitz-Harris. Yes, my Lord, my Lord of Arran.


L. Chapter Just. What say you to my Lord?


Fitz-H. Did not my Wife show you this Libel the Sunday that I was taken?


E. of Arran. I do not remember I ever heard it, till I heard it read in the
House.


Fitz-Harris. Did you not read it, my Lord?


E. of Arran, No, not that I remember.


Fitz-Harris. Did not I tell you, I was carrying it to the King?


E. of Arran. Not that I know of.


Fitz-Harris. Was it not a dispute, whether this was Treason, or not?


E. of Arran. You did show me a Libel, but whether this, or no, I cannot say;
perhaps it was this. I took him for an honest Man, my Lord; I have known him
five Years, and knew his Family to be a good Family; I happened to be at Dinner
with him the day he was taken. After Dinner there were some Papers he pulled
out, and I threw them away. I told you, you would do your self a mischief, some
time or other, in meddling with such Papers. There we drank a Bottle or two of
Wine together, and then we parted. As soon as I came home, I heard this
Gentleman was seized on, and taken, which surprised me much. And this is all
the account I can give of the Matter.


Fitz-Harris. Then your Lordship did not read the Paper?


E. of Arran. No indeed not I.


Fitz-Harris. Did not I tell you, I had a promise of a Quit-Rent for
Secret-Service?


E. of Arran. I do not know particularly what he told me of the Quit-Rent; bu^
I was willing to do him all the good I could, about a Reversion of a Pension
that he had in the Right of his Wife; that was part of my Business that day,
and thinking he very well deserved it. I am very sorry to see that his Fathers
Son, as the Phrase is in Ireland, should be accused of such a Crime.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis My Lord, before you go, I desire to* ask you one Question;
Did you observe ever that he was employed by the French King, or the French
Ambassador's Confessor?


E. of Arran. No, my Lord, never as I heard of. He used to speak as honestly as
any Man; I thought him of the best and loyallest Principles of any of his
Religion.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. What Religion did you take him to be of?


E. of Arran. He always owned himself a Papist, and he and I have had some
Disputes about it.


Fitz-Harris. Mr. Secretary Jenkins, I desire to know of your Honor, what the
King said of me?


Mr. Sec. Jenkins. I remember the King did conjure him, to declare who the
Author of the Libel was.


Fitz-Harris. You are a Man of Honor, Sir; Did not the King own he had
employed me?


Mr. Sec. Jenkins. I never remember the King did own he had made use of him, by
Mrs. Wall's means, or otherwise.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord Conway, don't you remember it?


E. of Conway. No, not upon my Honor. But I have heard him say, He did
formerly employ you in some trifling Things.


Fitz-Harris. Did not the King declare in Council, that I had gotten Money of
him?


E. of Conway. That was for my Lord Howard of Escrick's Business.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Now your Lorship is here, I would ask you, Did you ever
hear the King declare when he first spoke with the King?


E. of Conway. The King never spoke with him till after he was taken; he was
taken the 27 th of February, and the King never spoke with him till the 28 th,
the day after.


Fitz-Harris. Did not you tell me, if the King did put himself upon the
Parliament, they would use him as his Father was used.


Mrs. Wall. I never told you any such thing. You promised me to bring in my
Lord Howard of Escrick; but they found themselves mightily mistaken in what was
promised he would do when he came in.


L. Chapter Just. Why, Mr. Fitz-harris, you cast any thing upon any Body to make a
noise.


Fitz-Harris. Where is Mr. Peacock?


Mrs. Fitz Harris. I would know of her what Mr. Bulstrode said.


L Chapter Just. That every Body may see you are fairly dealt with, you shall have
all the liberty that can be given. You must not ask what another said, but call
them themselves to say what they know. Here is Mr. Bulstrode himself.


Fitz-Harris. Mr. Bulstrode, then, What Message did you bring from the King to
my Wife?


Mr. Bulstrode. No Message at all; but I Will tell you what I know.* Mrs.
Fitz-Harris, soon after her Husband came to be close confined, delivered a
Petition to the King in the Park; and the King was pleased to give it to me, as
he frequently does. Mrs. Fitz-harris came to me to tell her what the King said
to it. Said I, the King has given me no commands at all in it, but this, Carry
it to the Secretary of State, for I cannot say any thing to it. For the King
generally tells me what he will have done with such a Petition. But she was so
very importunate, I asked the King again; Sir, said I, Mrs. Fitz-harris is very
importunate what is Your Majesty's Pleasure in it. Said the King, If she have a
mind to Petition the Council, she may, I will neither meddle nor make with it.
Afterward I met her several times, and she said, her Husband was very severely
and hardly used, and she was denied the liberty of coming to him Said I, I hear
he is guilty of a very foul Thing, and there is no way to help him, but by
discovering the Author of that villainous Libel. For she asked me, what I
thought of her Husband; and she told me, she intended to try what she could do
for him. I said there was no way to do any good, but to make a full discovery
of the Author. Then, said she, if the King would but let me speak with him, I
am sure I could do him service, and prevail with him to discover the Author. So
I told the King of it; and the King said, If she will come and be examined,
with all my Heart. And as soon as ever I heard she was come to Town, I told her
what the King said: And she told me she would willingly come; and if the King
would give her leave to speak with her Husband, she did not doubt to prevail
with him. That night, about midnight, after I was in Bed, and had been in Bed
two hours, she came to my door and knocked me up. So I rose, and put on my
Nightgown, and went down, and I heard a Voice which I thought was hers. So she
came out of the Coach to me, and told me, said she, I am come to you to beg of
you, that you would be secret, and not to let the Court know that I was to come
to have any Conference with you, for if you do, I am undone and ruined, for
there are some Persons, my Friends, that will not look upon me if they hear any
such thing. The next morning I went to her, and told her, the King had directed
she should be examined in the Afternoon, and she should come down to be
examined: Which she did; and as soon as the Council was up, I told his Majesty
she was below. So he ordered some to examine her; but when I told her of it,
said she, If the King will not speak alone with me, I will not speak a word,
nor be examined. This is the truth of it, I assure you, my Lord, upon my
Salvation.


Fitz-Harris. Where is Mr. Peacock?


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. What did Mr. Bulstrode say to me?


L. Chapter Just. Look you, Mrs. Fitz-harris, and you Gentlewoman, you must not be
heard to talk of Discourses amongst your selves, and to examine what discourse
passed between Person and Person, up and down; that is not to be permitted in a
Court, the Witness is here, ask him himself. What has been said to her will be
no Evidence.


Mrs. Fitz-Harris. What offer did you make me?


Mr. Bulstrode. None* I told you this would be the way to ruin your Husband.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, I beg of you, may not I ask what he did say?


L. Chapter Just. No, it is no Evidence.


Fitz-Harris. Then call Mr. Henry Killigrew.

(But he not appearing, the Prisoner would have asked what he had been heard to
say, but it was not permitted.)
Mrs. Wall. Here is the Footman, Richard Perrot.


Fitz-Harris. How long ago is it since you brought the Money to me from my Lady
Portsmouth?


Perrot. I never brought any.


Fitz-Harris. Was it not he brought the Money?


Mrs. Wall. Ask him.


Fitz-Harris. Was my Lord Howard ever at your House before October last?


Perrot. I do not know.


L. Chapter Just. What use do you make of that?


Fitz-Harris. Pray, my Lord, when did you go to my Lady Dutchesses's? Was it
before October last?


Lord Howard. I think not, I take it as near as I can, it was just before the
Session of Parliament.


Fitz-Harris. It was ten days before the Session.


Then my Lady Duchess of Portsmouth appeared, and a Chair was set for her.

Fitz-Harris. I am sorry to see your Grace come here upon any such account, but
I hope your Grace will excuse me, it is for my Life. I desire to know of your
Grace, Whether I was not employed to bring several Papers to the King, and
among the rest, the Impeachment against your Grace: And thereupon your Grace
was pleased to tell me, That it was a great piece of Service to bring those
sort of Papers; and if I could find out Men serviceable for that purpose, I
should do the King good Service. I told your Grace, I knew one Master Everard,
who knew all the Intrigues, and all the Clubs in the City, and could tell all
the desings of my Lord of Shaftsbury, and all that Party. And your Grace did
encourage me to go on, and I did, by your Grace's Direction, and by your means
I came to speak with the King about it.


Lady-Dutchess. When must I speak?


Sir George Jefferies. Now Madam; And will you Grace now be pleased to stand up.


Lady-Dutchess. I have nothing at all to say to Mr. Fitz-Harris, nor was
concerned in any sort of business with him. All I have to say is, He desired me
to give a Petition to the King to get his Estate in Ireland; and I did three or
four times speak to the King about it. But I have not any thing else to say to
him; I never spoke to him about any thing else.


Fitz-Harris. Does not your Grace remember what Directions I received about my
Lord Howard?


Lady Duchess. I know nothing of that, I sent you not to my Lord Howard.


L. C. Just. If you will ask any Questions of my Lady, do; but do not make any
long discourses.


Fitz-Harris. My Lord, my Lady may forget. Madam, does not your Grace remember,
you undertook, upon the account of those Papers I conveyed, that you would
procure me my Quit-Rent?


Lady Duchess. I never had any Papers.


Fitz Harris. Not that Paper of the Impeachment against your Grace?


Lady Duchess. No.


Fitz-Harris. Upon what account then had I the Money I received?


Lady Duchess. For Charity.


Fitz-Harris. I am sorry your Grace is so much under Mrs. Wall's influence.


Lady Duchess. I come not here to wrangle with you, Mr. Fitz-Harris, I am come
here to say what I know, and will not say one bit more.


Fitz-H. Have I had any Money of your Grace since you knew my L. Howard?


Lady Duchess. You never had but that for Charity.


Fitz Harris. When did your Grace ask it for me?


Lady Duchess. I do not remember the Time. Mr. Fitz-Harris, if I had any thing
in the World to do you good, I would do it; but I have it not, and so cannot see
that I am any ways more useful here.

(Then her Grace went away.)
L. C. J. Mr. Fitzharris, have you any more Witnesses that you would have
called?


Fitzharris. No, my Lord.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Will you apply them you have called?


L. C. J. Well, have you any thing further to say?


Fitzharris. Yes, my Lord, I have something further to offer for my self: I
will tell you what I know, since my Witnesses will not do me justice. Gentlemen
of the Jurie, you are my Judges in point of Law as well as Fact, and my Blood
will be required at your hands, if you do not do me right. My Lord, I cannot
forbear complaining to the Court of the hard usage I received in Prison,
contrary to the Statute of the 31th of his Majesty's Reign; greater oppression
has been done to me than to any before: my Lord Stafford, Sir Thomas Gascoign,
and others, had all the liberty they could desire, to enable them to make
their defense against their Trial; which I have had denied me. But my defense
consists of two heads, and I shall rely upon the Consciences of the Jurie for
the issue: though my Lady Portsmouth, and Mrs. Wall, and the rest, are pleased
to say, that I was not employed, nor received money for secret services, yet
it is very well known I did so.* As to Mr. Everard, when I met with him, though
now he has made it a French story, yet if he would tell the truth, he knows
that it was otherwise: he told me he was well acquainted with my Lord of
Shaftsbury and my Lord Howard, and in several Clubs of the City he knew all
their Intrigues; and that Speech that went by the name of my Lord Shaftsbury's,
my Lord gave it him before it was printed, and he several other things of that
kind. So then I told him, it was a business of the greatest consequence that
could be, if he would continue those Discoveries. And whereas he says, I would
betray the People to the French Interest, it is very well known I was always an
Enemy to the French Interest; but I humoured him in his discourse, and
discoursed him to reduce the Paper that he accuses me of under some heads; and
that Paper I no sooner had, but I came to Whitehal with it: And though he said
he was to have forty Guinnies, and so said Sir William Waller too, yet it was
only forty shillings that he desired for his poverty I would lend him. And
as to what he talks of three thousand Crowns Pension, it is a very unlikely
business. When I came to Whitehal, I was advised to go to my Lord Clarendon, or
Mr. Hide. Accordingly I did show it to a Gentleman who was to give it to my
Lord Clarendon, but before he could get to him, I was taken. Now, my Lord, I
hope what I did was with a design to serve the King in discovering what was
designed against him, according as I was employed, though both the Secretaries
are so unkind as not to declare it; when I know I am in the right, I am not
ashamed to speak it, though my life be losed upon it, and I refer it to the
Gentlemen of the Jurie: I was taken before I could come to the speech of my
Lord Clarendon. Next, I hope, Gentlemen of the Jurie, you will consider these
are great Persons that I have to do with; and where great State-matters are at
the bottom, it is hard to make them tell any thing but what is for their
advantage: and so I am left in a sad condition. But, my Lord, in the next
place, I think it is impossible for any Jurie to find me guilty, without
prejudging of those Laws which are not to be judged by any Jurie or inferior
Court: for if they judge me and bring me in guilty, it is murder in them; and
let the Bench tell them what they will, it is of that dang^rous consequence,
that it overthrows the Government. My Lord, here is the Impeachment of the
House of Commons, and here is a Copy of the Votes of the Commons thereupon;
and though they be not Laws, yet they are such Declarations of the Parliament,
as that afterward no other Court ought to meddle with that matter; and the
inferior Courts do not use to meddle with Parliament-matters: and so,
Gentlemen, you will lay at your own doors what would lie at theirs, if you
meddled not. For though the Court have overruled my Plea, yet the matter is
plain before you now who are my Judges, and my Blood will lie at your doors,
and you must answer it if you do me not justice. And there is no insufficiency
of a Plea, as to matter of Law, will excuse you in point of Fact; and you are
obliged, as you will answer the contrary to God and your Consciences, to do me
right. And I hope your Lordship and the Jurie will take particular notice of
this: I have been a close Prisoner and had no manner of help, nothing at all
allowed me to refresh my memory; which if I had had means to do as I ought, I
could say a great deal more: But this I insist upon, If the Gentlemen of the
Jurie do bring me in guilty and convict me, they do shed my Blood, and
overthrow the Law and course of Parliaments: Whereas if they bring me in not
guilty, my Impeachment ^^ands good still, and I am liable to answer that
Impeachment before the Parliament; and I hope you will consider the persons I
have had to deal with, and that it cannot be made so plain as in matters
wherein we deal with common persons. I submit to what you shall think fit.


L. C. J. You have done, Mr. Fitzharris.


Fitzharris. My Lord, I have done; only I would examine one Gentleman if he
were here, but he does not appear. But here is a Copy of the Impeachment and
Votes of the House of Commons, I desire I may deliver them to the Jury.


L. C. J. No, no; that cannot be.


Fitzharris. Sir William Waller does declare upon Oath, That for this very
thing I was impeached by the House of Commons; and that I desire them to take
notice of.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Therefore you are not guilty: Is that the consequence?


Mr. Soll. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, you
have heard our Evidence, and what the Prisoner has said. The Crime for which
he is accused, that is High Treason, and it is Treason in conspiring the death
of the King, in endeavoring to raise Rebellion here, and that in order to
destroy the King and the Liberty of all the People, and bring them under the
slavery of the King of France. This is the Treason he was indicted for; and the
proof of this Treason is very full; it is proved to you by three positive
Witnesses, and all men of credit, of whom you cannot have the least suspicion.
They prove to you, that Mr. Fitz-harris is the man guilty of this Treason; he
was the contriver of it, he was the mover of it first to Mr. Everard, and he
gave him those instructions to pursue those purposes of raising a Rebellion
here, in order to destroy the King, by contriving a seditious Pamphlet to set
the people together by the ears; and he came to him in order to perfect this
Libel. This is proved by Everard, who upon the first motion of it to him, did
acquaint Mr. Smith immediately and Sir William Waller that such a design was on
foot, and desired them to come and be Witnesses of it. They both came, and
heard the communication between the Prisoner and Mr. Everard to contrive such a
Libel as has been opened to you, and they swear it positively. Now what
defense does the Prisoner make to it? Truly I cannot say whether it have more
of folly or impudence in it; for it is a defense of a strange nature, for it is
inconsistent with it self, and shows what a make he is of; and the latter part
is a pursuing the same Treason he stands indicted for, which is the rendering
the King odious to his people, by those insinuations that he did this by the
Kings order. The first part of his Defense is, I am not guilty, for Mr. Everard
is the man that did contrive it, and he is the Author, and it moves from him.
Now pray consider the parts of your Evidence, and see if there be any
possibility for you to be induced to believe any thing like it. It Is proved by
Mr. Everard positively, that he came to him first; and when you consider this
Objection that is made by Mr. Fitz-harris, and consider on the other side who
were the Witnesses, and who is the man that makes the Objection, you will then
see no cause in the world for you to give any credit to it. The Prisoner says
he was trepan'd into it; for that, pray consider he is an Irish Papist, one
that has all along made it his business to defame the proceedings about the
Popish Plot, to ridicule it, to deny that there was ever any such thing, and to
laugh at the Justice that was executed upon the Popish Offenders who died for
the Plot. The Witnesses that prove it against him have been zealous prosecutors
of the Plot, men that have discovered many of those who were guilty of it, and
brought them to Justice; men that have been material Evidences upon the
discovery. Mr. Smith is a man that spoke materially in the Trial of my Lord
Stafford, and for which service, I believe, the Papists, and Mr. Fitz-harris
himself, owe him little thanks. As for Sir William Waller, all men know how
busy and active he has been to bring in men that were guilty of the Plot, and
he has suffered for it. Now if you can believe that Mr. Smith and Sir William
Waller should be guilty of a Trepan that was to be put upon Fitz-harris, a man
of that persuasion you hear of, (and you must believe that, or you cannot
believe the defense the Prisoner makes) I leave it to you. Mr. Everard could do
nothing alone, why then Sir William Waller must be guilty of this contrivance,
and of setting of Fitz-harris on work and Everard too: But this is so unlikely
a story, that if there were any to assert any such thing* you could not
possibly give any credit to it. But when you consider what has been proved,
and what has been showed you under the hand of Fitz-harris himself, then there
is no room I am sure to doubt. They do positively swear, both Smith and Sir
William Waller, they heard him own that he had given instructions to Everard.
They prove to you that he mended this Libel in several places, they not coming
up to the Instructions he had before given. They prove part of the Libel
written with his own hand, and that is Treason enough; for that is certainly
Treason, That it is the undoubted right of the people to dethrone the King. I
never heard of that doctrine any where but among the Papists, and it is a Papist
that preaches that Doctrine to you now. As this is an Evidence in a matter
beyond any contradiction in the world, his own handwriting of part, and his
owning the giving the Instructions; so there is no room in the world for you to
believe that ever he was drawn into this by Everard; or that he was the man
that was the original Contriver of it, and trepan'd him into it. But it appears
plainly upon the proof, that it moved originally from Fitz-harris; that it was
the malice of his heart that promoted it; and that the contrivance was how to
raise a Rebellion here. For when he had read part of the Libel, and Everard
told him that it was Treason, why, said he, I meant it so; and the more
Treason, the better; the more odious you make the King to be, the more likely
it is to raise the people into a Rebellion; and the sooner you raise the people
into a Rebellion, the more like you are to accomplish the design of bringing
the people into slavery to the French King, and so at once to destroy all
Liberty and Property, and all that is sacred. No body can believe but Mr.
Fitz-harris is guilty of this Libel and Contrivance to dethrone the King, and
raise a Rebellion here, as the Witnesses have sworn. Now as you cannot possibly
doubt but this moves from Mr. Fitz harris, so then consider the inconsistencie
of the second part of his Defense, and the impudency of it too. For as before
he pretended he was drawn into it by Mr. Everard, so now he would make you
believe he did not do it out of a traitorous design, for that he was employed
about these affairs; and this comes under the Title of Secret Service; and he
would fain have it that you should believe the King should hire him to raise a
Rebellion against himself, to defame himself, and to incense the minds of the
people against him. And this must be the service that he is put upon; he had no
traitorous intent in himself, but he was to trepan all the Lords that stood
zealously up for the Protestant Religion and Property, and that by direction
from whom? from the King, whom Fitz-harris would have all people to believe to
be a Papist; and he would have people believe that he is an innocent man, that
he was only employed upon such a special piece of service; that the King
should be at great pains to employ Mr. Fitz-harris to destroy himself and the
whole Nation, and to stain his whole Family; and upon what reasons would he
have you to belive it? As first, you observed how inconsistent it is with the
former part of his defense, that he was trepanned into it; now he did not do it
from Mr. Everard, nor with a treasonable intention. But certainly this is a
Treason that nothing can be said to palliate or excuse, and I am sure he has
said nothing will do it. Yet all the defense he has made has tended that way:
for though he have not arrived to the confidence to say such a thing is, yet he
has insinuated by the method of his proceedings, that he would fain have such
a thing believed, and that the man had no traitorous design in it. Now what
Evidence has he produced for it? He has produced to you Evidence that he has
had money from the King, and has been sometimes at the Duchess of
Portsmouth's. That he had money from the King is true, but it little became him
to mention it, for it was charity to relieve a man in necessity that was ready
to starve, and was forced to go all the ways to work he could to move
compassion; he urged the sufferings of his Wives Father; you heard the Petition
read as a ground for supply; and he has so far prevailed upon the Kings
Charity (which he has abused) as to have a sum of money given him, and he has
had the benefit of it; but he has made a very ill return for it; for the
thanks he has given to the King for this his Charity, is to fly in the face
of him, his Family, and the Government: he has endeavored to raise a
Rebellion, and when he is brought to his Trial, he continues to defame the
King, which is an aggravation of his Treason if possible. And now having no
proof in the world for these malicious insinuations, and all the Witnesses that
he has called to make out what he would fain have believed, and dares not
mention, (not proving any such thing) you will have little reason, Gentlemen,
to believe any thing that comes from him, especially if you consider the nature
of the Libel it self, it is impossible this man should ever be set on work to
contrive such a thing as this, to defame the King and all his Family, to raise
a Rebellion, to overthrow all Religion, Liberty, and the King himself; it is
impossible to be believed. But I fear I press too much upon you, as if I did
suspect there could be men in this Kingdom so bad as to believe such a
malicious insinuation. Gentlemen, I leave it to you; you hear what our Evidence
is, three Witnesses that positively swear this Treason against the Prisoner.
Now as you have this positive Evidence on the one side, so you have no color
of Evidence to the contrary; and it is impossible for you not to find him
guilty. It is to deny the light of the day; and it is a thing of that
consequence, that all Ages, when they hear of it, will say that there is no
Justice to be had, if an English Jury do not find a Verdict according to their
Evidence. For what security has a man for his Life and Estate, if twelve
substantial men of a Jury shall dare to go against plain and full Evidence?
It Is all the security an Englishman has, for all he enjoys, that he is to pass
through the hands of twelve honest men of his own Country. And if it be
possible for a Jury to go against Evidence so plain as this is, I say, no man
is safe in his Life or Estate.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Gentlemen, I desire to take notice of what Mr. Fitzharris
was pleased to conclude withal. He says, his Blood is to be required at your
hands; and therefore he would fain by that means insinuate you out of your
^onsciences. But I think if you consider the circumstances that have been
given, and all the Evidence, it will be impossible for men that have any
respect to their Credit and their Consciences, to acquit this Gentleman. In the
first place, it is known, and it has been given in proof to induce the
probability of the matter evidenced against the Prisoner at the Bar, that he
is a known Roman Catholic; they are all Protestants, and good Protestants; and
you are all Protestants too. And then the case goes thus far further; You that
are Protestants must take it upon your Oaths* that these Gentlemen have sworn
false, and convict them of wilful Perjurie; and if you do convict them, it must
be upon the bare Allegation of a Papist: And I hope never to live to see the
day that men that are of good Credit, and Protestants, shall by an Allegation
(though never so confidently affirmed at the Bar) be presumed to be guilty of
Perjurie. So that I say, my Lord, besides the baseness and venom of this
impudent Libel, which certainly no honest man in the world will give the least
countenance to, here is Evidence enough from himself; and you cannot believe it
proceeds from any direction from the Crown (as this man would insinuate,) and
therefore he has given us the greatest Evidence by his libelling at the Bar:
and he has not only libelled the Crown, but he has called up some Witnesses
on purpose to libel the rest of his own. And then I hope you will take notice
how he did insinuate with Mr. Everard at the beginning; When you were in the
French King's service, said he, and have been neglected ever since you left it:
If you will come and join with me, without peradventure you may get
encouragement fitter than that poor and mean way that you are reduced to by
embracing the Protestant Interest. He gives him a method likewise to walk by:
he thought him the person that had writ some Pamphlets before, and therefore
was fit for his purpose, and ought to be encouraged. And he does tell you the
words not only against the present Government, but that which every good
Protestant must needs abhor and tremble at; he bids him take care to libel the
whole Family. He tells him withal, You must be sure to say that the late King
of blessed memory was concerned even in the Irish Rebellion; and that this
King has promoted those persons that his Father had countenanced for that
Action: and he tells him the names of those persons that were so promoted.
After this is done, what does Mr. Everard do? he goes and makes a Discovery:
He tells the circumstances and the persons, to whom, when: And the persons he
made that Discovery to, do in every circumstance agree with time, place, and
all. The first night this appointment was, I hope you will remember, that when
Mr. Everard had so placed that Gentleman against whom there is not the least
word said or imagined to find fault with him, he takes notice of the
Instructions; owns that he had given him instructions; and takes particular
notice of one passage, That when Mr. Everard said, But there may be danger in
them, is not this Treason? the Prisoner made answer, The more Treason the
better. Aye, but then this is dangerous, how shall I venture upon such matters?
Why have you not my hand in it? I am as guilty as you, and in as much danger.
What then was the Reward? there was to be at present forty Guinnies, and an
annual Pension; but to whom was Mr. Fitzharris to discover this? not to the
King, but to the French Ambassador, and the Conf^ssor was to be the man that
was to give the Reward; Flanders was first to be subdued, and the parts beyond
the Seas, and then Engl^nd would be but a morsel for them, they could take that
in the way. All this was done, which is plainly sworn by Witness that had a
place made a purpose for him to over-hear all that passed. And, my Lord, for
the next Witness there is Sir William Waller; there is this, besides what is
sworn, agreeing in circumstance: He tells you both, to their very Money, that
it was forty somewhat, but he cannot say Guinnies; and he tells you something
of the Pension, a great many thousand Crowns; and he tells you particularly of
that circumstance of the French Confessor and the French Ambassador. Besides
all this, does not Sir William Waller tell you this very thing, That he espied
him with a Pen and Ink, that he gave a Note of the Libel it self, and he heard
him give the directions? and when he came into the Room, he saw the Ink fresh
upon the Paper; and when he heard him give directions for the alteration of
particular words, he said, You have not worded it according to my mind in such
and such particular places. But, my Lord, there is this Venom in it further to
be taken notice of, That he gave his instructions to draw it so, as that it
might best take effect according to his intention: for when Mr. Everard thought
it might do well to make it with thou and thee, as though it should be the
desi^ne of the Quakers, he said, No, by no means; but put it in (...) the
phrase, as if it was the design of all the Protestant (...) and so by that
means would draw the Odium upon them, and bring them in danger as well as
others. And this is confirmed too by Sir William Waller; so that in every
circumstance he has snewed the venom of his design. But in the last place,
which surel^ the Gentlemen of the Jury will not forget what Sir William Waller
said, That Fitzharris did say, I have taken care already to disperse abundance
of Libels amongst our Party: And when Everard told him of a Libel that was
some while before, he said, He had seen that a great while ago, and there might
be somewhat in it to the purpose. And for the Answer that has been given to
it, my Lord, I think it does not bear any sort of relation to the Charge that
is upon him: for whatsoever discourse, or whatsoever he has urged, is not much
to his purpose. He has brought here a Nobleman; but after all, I would put
him in mind of one thing that Nobleman said, He did believe he came to him in
the name of one that sent him not: and so will every body say that has heard
the Evidence; for all his Witnesses do positively deny that they ever knew of
any such matters as he speaks of. And now, my Lord, I could be very glad if
this Gentleman (instead of saying as he has said) would have come as soon as
he had this Libel from Everard, and discovered it immediately to somebody
himself before he had carried it on, as Everard did before the thing was
perfected. And so, Gentlemen, we do think upon this Evidence we have left you
without all manner of excuse, it being impossible, upon such a proof as this
is: and considering the nature and venom of the Libel it self, the base
venomous malicious instigations he made use of to effect it, and the ends for
which it was done, to bring in the French to set us together by the ears, to
render the King odious to his People; and the person it is acted by, a known
Irish Papist; I cannot doubt of the issue: and I do hope when I see so many
honest Gentlemen and Protestants at the Bar, they will be loath to forfeit their
own Souls to eternal damnation, to save a man that is guilty of such a Treason
as this.


L. C. J. Have you done, Gentlemen?


Sir Geo. Jefferies. Yes.


L. C. J. Then look you, Gentlemen of the Jurie; Here is Mr. Fitzharris
indicted for Treason against the King, and it is for endeavoring to take away
his life, to make him odious to his Subjects, to incite them to a Rebellion,
and to raise Arms here in this Kingdom against our King our Sovereign. And by
the Indictment it is said that he has declared these Endeavors and these
Intentions, by causing a scandalous and evil Pamphlet or Libel to be written,
with an intent to be dispersed through the Kingdom. The words of the Libel you
have heard particularly read; some of them are taken out and mentioned in this
Indictment. Mr. Fitzharris has been arraigned, and has pleaded Not guilty;
and you are to try the single matter before you, whether Mr. Fitzharris be
guilty of this Treason. That this is Treason, and contains a treasonable
matter, Gentlemen, is so plain, as no body living can doubt it: But it is a
Treason of as high a nature as peradventure ever was in the Kingdom of England,
and tends as much to that which would be the destruction both of the King and
Kingdom. The King's life, all our lives, all we have that is dear to us, or of
any advantage or avail in the world, are concerned in this. For what does it
tend to? It tends to a popular insurrection, to raise the people up in Arms,
that like a Deluge would over*run and sweep away all. It is to undo the
Government and all Order in the Kingdom, and to destroy the Life and Being of
all that is good amongst us. Amore virulent and villainous Book certainly was
never written; nor any thing that tended more to Sedition, or to incite the
people to a Rebellion: such a Book as peradventure no wellgovern'd Kingdom ever
heard of the like. It tends to defame the King and all his Ancestors, and to
blast all that shall come after him, to raise us into a Tumult. And what is all
this to do? to settle the Roman Catholic Religion amongst us. And this is such
a piece of the Art of the Jesuits, which peradventure has out-gone all they
have done before. It seems to be their hand directly, and we are all concerned
as Englishmen to take care of such Villainies. This is the nature of the
Treason that is comprised in this Book. Whether Mr. Fitzharris was the Author,
or Directer, or Contriver of this Book, is the Question before you. (For
plainly (without any suppose) the Book contains in it as high a Treason as ever
was.) And as to that, Gentlemen, you must consider that this appears evidently
to be a design of the Roman Catholic Party; it is a Jesuitical design: for
this is that they aim at, to confound all things, that they may fish in
troubled Waters. And you see they have found out an apt Instrument, an Irish
Papist, one that has been all-along continually concerned with them, and
intermedled in several of these Plots and Papers. Gentlemen, the Evidence that
is given here against him is by three persons, and there is great Evidence from
the matter that is produced, besides those persons. There is Mr. Everard does
declare to you the whole of this, and Mr. Fitzharris's application to him to
write this Book. He tells you the intention of it, and he gives you the very
grounds upon which this was to be written; that is, to raise Sedition, that was
the first instruction; to raise a Sedition in the Kingdom, and this was to
busy us at home, that the French King might get Flanders and the Low
Countries, while we are confounded at home: and then the Catholics have their
Game to play, and carry all before them. Look you, Gentlemen, Mr. Everard is so
cautious, that he walks not alone in the Case, but with a great deal of
prudence declares it to others, that they may be Witnesses in the case for him.
Mr. Smith does agree in all things for the first night that Mr. Everard has
declared, how that he heard the directions owned as given by Mr. Fitzharris for
the writing this Book, and he heard the design of it, he heard there was a
Reward promised to him for the doing of it, and he tells you some of the
instructions. The next night Sir William Waller was present; and he tells you
all the instructions of that night, and that Fitzharris owned them, that he
gave those instructions in the private Consult. But that that is not to be
answered, Gentlemen, is his own instructions in writing; what can be said to
that? If you were doubtful of the Credit of these Gentlemen, yet Mr.
Fitzharris's own instructions in writing under his hand, are an Evidence beyond
all control in the world that he gave those directions; and these are Treason,
that is plain. And therefore it does seem to be as strong an Evidence against
Mr. Fitzharris of this Treason, as peradventure ever was given against a
Traitor. There is not any one Witness that stands single, but there are two to
each night; and his own instructions written by himself do not stand upon the
Evidence of a single Witness, for he owned it in the presence of three
Witnesses: So then a stronger Evidence cannot be given that he was the Author
and Director of this Book.

Then, Gentlemen, you must consider what he says for himself in excuse of this
horrid Treason that these Witnesses seem so fully to fix upon him. The first
Witness he brings is Dr. Oats, and he does tell you, That having some
discourse with Everard, Everard should say, this was a design of the Court,
and was to be put into some Lords, and I think into some Parliament-mens
pockets; and then they were to be apprehended. I think this is Dr. Oates's
Testimony. Mr. Everard is here upon his Oath, and he testifies no such thing in
the world: It Is easy for one to come and say, I heard a man say so; perhaps he
said it by way of conjecture* but that is no Answer to direct proof. Mr.
Sheriff Cornish is the next Witness, and he says, He had some discourse with
the King, and the King should say, He thought Mr. Fitzharris had been an honest
man, and had given him some money.


Mr. Sheriff Cornish. No, my Lord, the King said he took him to be an ill man.


L. C. J. Then it seems I was mistaken; his Majesty did not tell him he took
Fitzharris to be an honest man, but an ill man. But that he had formerly some
money of the King upon pretense of doing him some service, now that brings it
out what the Kings meaning was: For it seems there had been begged some money
for him, and the King at my Lady Portsmouth's desire, by way of charity, gave
him some little matter of money; he boasting and telling the King he could do
him some service. You see what manner of service it is ^e would have done for
Him and the Kingdom. Then as to all the rest of his Evidence, there is Mrs.
Wall and my Lady Duchess of Portsmouth; and he has examined them concerning
the money he has received, and they both declare upon what ground that money
was given: It was given, they tell you, for a Gratuitie from the King to him;
and upon his boasting, says Mrs. Wall, that he could do the King service, and
bring over persons to his interest. I think there is no other Witness very
material: For as for Mr. Bulstrode's Evidence, it signifies nothing at all; it
is not material for him or against him in the case: A discourse about
delivering a Petition to the King from his Wife. Now, Gentlemen, you must
consider what ill use this Gentleman designs to make of the Kings charity and
favor to him; he gave him some money to relieve his Wants, and now would he
interpret this and insinuate this to be given for ill purposes, for to make him
trepan his Subjects; which is another piece of virulencie that these Papists
always exercise against the King; they always make an ill use of his best
actions, and an ill interpretation of them. For, Gentlemen, can it be believed
that the King would ever design such a thing as this is, to blacken his Family
for ever, to stir up all his Subjects against him, to endanger his Crown and
Kingdom, and all that he has in the world? And all this to what purpose? No
colorable design can be made of it. This is such a thing to excuse such a
Villainy, as never was heard of, by wresting the Kings charity and generositie
to such ill purposes; but that some men have the confidence to do any thing. I
must leave it to you. Here are three witness his own hand to these
instructions, and his making a Declaration that it was not treasonable enough,
nor virulent enough. All these things are strong Evidences in the Case. And if
you believe these Witnesses and his own handwriting, it is a plain case you
must find him guilty.


Fitz-harris. May I have liberty to speak one word?


L. C. J. Gentlemen, I had forgot one thing. For fear it make an impression in
you, because I see he has inculcated it often and often, and that is, the
Impeachment that was by the Commons House of Treason against Mr. Fitz-harris in
the Lords House. I must tell you, Gentlemen, that is not before you at all; the
matter of that was by way of abatement pleaded to the jurisdiction of this
Court, and that is now over. You must have no consideration, nor can have any
consideration of that now. Your question is not whether we have authority to
try this Cause, but you are impannell'd and sworn to one point, and that is,
whether Fitz-harris be guilty of this Treason or not: Whether the Court have
authority to do it, is another question proper for our determination, and we
have determined it; but there is nothing of that lies before you in this Case.
Therefore you must not be mis^ed with any thing that he talks so fondly of
concerning the Impeachment, or concerning his blood lying at your doors, that
surely will signify nothing to men of understanding at all.


Mr. Johnson. My Lord, it is our unhappiness to come before you under these
circumstances. We have understood there is a Vote of the Commons of England in
Parliament, that says this man shall not be tried in any inferior Court; now
we take our selves to be the Judges of this man in part under your Lordship's
directions.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. You are not Judges of it, you are only to try the fact.


Mr. Johnson. I only offer my sense, and if the other Gentlemen think
otherwise they will speak it. I think the office of a Juror is such, that it is
within his power to acquit or condemn according to the Evidence as it lies
within his own Conscience. Now if we should acquit this man, (we have no
assurance we shall acquit him, only suppose it) then there is nothing against
him but what lies in a Parliamentary way, and we shall forejudge their Cause.
Therefore, I say, I do not know how far by Law we are compellable to give a
Verdict in this Case upon him.


L. C. J. Look you, Gentlemen, we would consult your satisfaction as much as we
can in all things; and it is reasonable that if you have any doubts you should
propose them to us, and to that purpose we are to give you satisfaction, and
will in all things. I must tell you, as to the Jurisdiction of the Court, that
is not at all before you; and as to the Vote of the House of Commons alleged
by him, if any such there be, that cannot alter the Laws of the Land, nor
justify any of us in departing from our duties, no more than if a Letter or
Mandate should be gained from the Prince or chief Magistrate of this Kingdom to
any of us in derogation of Justice, (as it is possible by surprise to be) we are
to take notice of the one, no more than the other. We are upon our Oaths to do
Justice according to the Laws of the Land: You likewise are upon your Oaths,
and sworn to do Justice in your Sphere; and your Oath is, That you shall
enquire truly whether he be guilty or not; and if he be guilty in your
Judgments, you can no more spare him than you can condemn an innocent person.
It never was pretended by any man, nor will it be asserted by an^ man that
understands himself or the constitution of the Government of this Kingdom, that
a Vote of the House of Commons can change the Law of the Land. It cannot excuse
us, if we deny to try a man that is brought before us; nor will it excuse you,
being under an Oath, justly to try him. If you should (because the ^ommons
House have voted that he shall not be tried) declare that man innocent, who in
your own Judgment you believe to be nocent; You nor we are not to consider
what will be the consequence of this, if this man be acquitted or condemned;
that is not before us. You and we too are tied precisely to the Laws of the
Land, and by that Law must this man be judged. As to our parts, we must do it
as to the Law, and you as to the Fact. But I Will tell you further, Gentlemen,
this doubt was moved to us by the Grand Jury, before the Bill was found; we had
an intimation that they would move such a doubt to us as seems to be your doubt
now. Therefore for their satisfaction, and the taking away any scruple that
might be in the case, all the Judges of England did meet together, and
seriously debate the matter and substance of all this; and it was not our
Opinion of this Court only, but the Opinion of all the Judges of England, That
we had a Jurisdiction to try this man. This we have told you, because we would
satisfy all men to go on fairly in the things that are before them. Therefore
that being put out of the case, you must consider of your Verdict, and give it
in upon this Trial.


Mr. Johnson. We do not doubt, my Lord, but your Opinion in this case will
indempnifie us from any future Charge by the Commons of England. But it lies
before us to consider what we are bound to do in the case.


Mr. Just. Jones. Gentlemen, I suppose you do not doubt but we are all of the
same Opinion. It is no marvel indeed to hear a man that stands in Fitzharris's
place, to object any thing that may cast a mist before your eyes. And yet it
cannot but be wondered at too, that when three Protestant Witnesses have sworn
precisely, he should have the confidence to urge any thing of this nature; he
wh^ appears by the Indictment it self, and the proofs made upon the ^^dictment,
to have endeavored to destroy all the Laws of England, all Magna Charta, all
our Liberty and our Religion, and to inslave us to the King of France: for that
appears pla^nly the design, if you have any credit to the Witnesses that are
produced: He that would have pulled down all that is sacred amongst us, is so
zealous for the Authority of the House of Commons. We have all of us a great
reverence for the House of Commons, and for their Opinions; but as my Lord has
told you, so I tell you my Opinion, That a Vote of the House of Commons does
not in the least sort alter the Law: for indeed if it did, it were to give a
Legislative power to the Commons, which does only belong to the King, the
House of Lords, and the Commons together. And, Gentlemen, though Mr. Fitzharris
says, If he be acquitted here by you, yet he should remain to be questioned
again in Parliament; there is no man in the world can doubt, if he were
acquitted here, and were questioned in Parliament, but he would say, He has
been upon his legal Trial by his Peers, and that he has been acquitted by his
Peers upon solemn Evidence. But, Gentlemen, you are to consider what is your
business: Your Office is to be Jurors, not to be Judges; you are not to take
upon you any such Authority. Your Commission is your Oath, and by that Oath you
are sworn to inquire whether the Prisoner be guilty, as he is indicted, or not:
If you, as Englishmen, can say he is not guilty, let it lie upon your
Consciences, and the danger of the King's Blood and Life be upon you.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Gentlemen, I desire to speak one word to you, to let you
know I am of the same Opinion with my Lord, and with my Brother; and I cannot
but wonder at you for making this scruple: for if there were any thing in what
you have said, it concerns us that are Judges, and not you at all; for it is a
matter of Jurisdiction: and whether we have a Jurisdiction or not, we must
satisfy our selves that we have a Commission to do it; it concerns not you. Do
you but consider the Oath you have taken, That you will well and truly try,
and true deliverance make betwixt our Sovereign Lord the King, and the Prisoner
at the Bar, according to your Evidence: And you have sworn a true Verdict to
give upon it, and do you now scruple whether you should give any Verdict or no,
when but even now you have sworn you will give a Verdict? If any such thing as
this had been in your heads, (for it might be then in your heads as well as
now) why did not you speak of it before you took your Oath? You now lie under
the obligation of an Oath to give a Verdict according to your Evidence, and
would you acquit him against such an Evidence as has been given? For besides
what Sir William Waller, Smith, and Everard have deposed, the very Note sworn
by Sir Philip Lloyd and Mr. Bridgman to be owned by Fitzharris as his hand,
contains Treason enough in it, if there were no more: Therefore there must be
something more in it, than for the sake of such an unreasonable scruple.


Mr* Just. Raymond. I am of the same opinion, truly.


Mr. Johnson. My Lord, I took the liberty to speak it now; I could not speak it
before: for I was not then to inquire what I was to be sworn to, nor could I
know what would be the matter that would come before us, till we were sworn.
Therefore I humbly beg your pardon that I made the Motion.


L. C. J. We are not at all troubled at any thing you have said; do not mistake
us, we do not take it ill from you that you acquaint us with your Scruples: We
are ready to give all satisfaction we can, to any that are concerned before us;
therefore we are no way troubled that you made any such Scruple, but have given
you a fair Answer to it.


Mr. Johnson. My Lord, I desire a Note of the Names of the Jury.


L. C. J. Give it him, Mr. Astrey, or else the Crowd is so great he may not
know them.


Then the Jury withdrew for half an hour, and at their return being called over
and appearing, the Clerk took the Verdict.

Cl. of Cr. Edward Fitzharris, hold up thy hand. (which he did.) Look upon the
Prisoner; How say you, is he Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands
indicted, or Not guilty?


Foreman. Guilty, etc.


L. C. J. I think you have found a very good Verdict, and upon very full and
strong Evidence.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Will your Lordship please to give Judgment?


L. C. J. We will take time for that.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Will you give a Rule to have him brought up to morrow?


L. C. J. Move us another day for it.


Fitzharris. My Lord, I hope I may have the liberty of my Wife and some Friends
now to come to me*


L. C. J. Any Friend I think may come to you: but, Mr. Fitzharris, you must be
modest in the using that liberty we give you. You have heretofore abused your
liberty; I do not love to exasperate things to one in your circumstances, but
you must be prudent and careful, knowing your own condition, that you do
nothing prejudicial to the King or Kingdom.


Upon Wednesday June 15. 1681. Edward Fitzharris was brought to the Bar of the
Court of Kings*bench, to receive his sentence.

Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I humbly pray your Judgment against Mr Fitzharris, who
is convicted of High Treason.


Silence proclaimed during Judgment.

Cl. of Cr. Edward Fitzharris, hold up thy hand. Thou have been indicted and
arraigned of High Treason, and have thereunto pleaded Not guilty, and for thy
Trial put thy self upon God and thy Country, and thy Country have found thee
guilty: What can^t thou say for thy self, why Judgment of Death should not be
given against thee, and Execution awarded according to Law?


Fitzharris. My Lord, I think it will be prejudicial to the Kings service, that
Sentence should pass before I have made an end of the Evidence I have given in
against my Lord Howard.


L. C. J. Mr. Fitzharris, we can take no notice of any thing of that nature.
When you are asked what you can say why Judgment should not pass against you,
it is, What legal matter you have, what matter in Law, to excuse your self from
that Judgment? For this is nothing, the saying you are to give Evidence; we
know nothing of that, it will not delay Judgment a minute. And for what you say
it will be prejudicial to the Kings service, it is the King that prays Judgment
against you by his Attorney.


Fitzharris. I beg the Kings mercy for Transportation, my Lord.


L. C. J. We can do nothing in that.


Fitzharris. Nor to give me time before my Execution? I can say no more, my
Lord.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Fitzharris, you have been here indicted for a very
great and heinous Treason, a Treason that is in truth of the first magnitude;
for it is a Treason that tends to the rooting up the whole Government of this
Kingdom, and the destroying of us all; plainly, both of the King and of all his
Subjects. It does not only destroy the Peace and Quiet, but it tends in truth
to the utter destruction of the whole Kingdom, and to bring us into a Confusion
and Disorder, never to be avoided or retrieved, if your Designs should have
taken effect. You have been here arraigned, and put your self upon the
Country, and they have found you gultie of this Treason: it is a thing you
should well consider; for certainly, you have contracted to your self a mighty
Guilt in such a thing as this is. You have endeavored the destruction of the
King, and in such a way as must have in truth destroyed all his good Subjects
together with him. Your design has been to excite the People to a Rebellion,
and a Popular Insurrection, that would have swept away all like a Deluge, if it
had taken effect. In truth it is a Treason against all mankind, the stirring up
of the People is; it is of evil example to all mankind, the stirring up of the
People against their natural Lord, to whom we owe all Allegiance and Obedience.
But your design in this was by setting the People of England together by the
ears, to bring in the Roman Catholic Religion upon such as should be left. It
seems you are an Irish Papist, and sucked in very ill principles where you have
lived; and you have here endeavored to do as much mischief in this Kingdom by
that treasonable Book, as lies in any one man's power perhaps to do. It is a
mercy and a happiness, that it has pleased God in his providence to deliver
us out of your hands; for this was your design, if you could have brought it
about: But it has pleased God now to bring you to Justice for it, and the
Judgment of the Law must pass upon you. Now that Judgment is this: You must
return to the Tower from whence you came, and from thence you must be drawn
through the Streets of the City of London to Tyburn; there you shall be hanged
by the Neck, but cut down before you are dead; your Bowels shall be taken out
and burnt before your face, your Head cut off, and your Body divided into four
Quarters to be disposed as shall please the King; and I pray God to have mercy
upon your Soul, to give you a sight of your sin, and repentance for it.


Fitzharris. My Lord, I hope I may have the liberty of my Wife to come to me,
and any friend.


L. C. J. You have that liberty already.


Fitzharris. No, not without the presence of a Warder.


L. C. J. We will not restrain them as to that, let them come to you.


Officer. There is no Rule of Court for it, my Lord.


L. C. J. We will not restrain any thing of your Wife's coming, there is no
Rule to restrain her; but let him have that liberty that other Prisoners in his
condition usually have had in the Tower, his Wife to come to him, or any other
^riend or Protestant Minister whatsoever.


Officer. Pray let it be put into the Rule of Court, my Lord.


L. C. J. We make no Rule, there does not need any. Look you, Mr. Fitzharris,
we lay no restraint upon your Wife or any other Friend; but if your Wife be in
another condition that she cannot come to you, we cannot meddle with that.


Mr. Just. Jones. We are not to deliver her out of Prison.


L. C. J. No, we make no Rule, but take off the hands of the Court from
restraining any one to come to you.


Then the Prisoner was taken away, and in pursuance of this Sentence, the last
day of the said Trinity-Term, being the 22th of June 1681. a Writ issued out of
the Court of King's Bench directed to the Lieutenant of the Tower of London,
reciting the Judgment, and commanding him to deliver the Prisoner to the
Sheriff of Middlesex upon Friday the first day of July next following, to be
executed according to the Sentence. Which Writ follows in these words.

CAROLUS Secundus Dei gratia Angl. Scot. Franc. and Hibern. Rex fidei Defensor,
etc. Loc. tenen. Turris nostrae London. salutem. Cum nos in Cur. nostra coram
nobis consider averimus quod Edwardus Fitzharris nuper de Parochia S. Martini
in Campis in Com. Midd. Genesis pro quibusdum altis proditionibus unde ipse coram
nobis Indictat. est, and superinde per quandam Juratam Patrie inde inter nos
and prefat. Edwardum capt. convict. and attinct. existit, de Turr. nostra
London. per medium Civitatis nostrae London. pred. usque ad Furcas de Tyborne
trahatur, and super Furcas illas ibidem suspendatur, and vivens ad terram
prosternatur, ac interiora sua extra ventrem suum capiantur, ipsoque vivente
comburentur; Et quod caput ejus amputetur, quodque corpus ejus in quatnor
parts dividatur, and quod caput and quarter. ill. ponantur ubi nos ea
assignare voluerimus: Ideo tibi precipimus sirmit. injungend. quod die Veneris
primo die Julii prox. futur. apud Tower Hill cum Vic. Midd. convenias, and
pred. Edwardum Fitzharris eidem Vic. Midd. deliberari facias, ut idem Vic.
executionem de eo in forma pred. sieri faciat, prout inde nobis respondere
volueris. Test Francisco Pemberton apud Westminster. xxijo die Junii, Anno Regni
nostri xxxiijo.

Per Cur. ASTRY.

And another Writ at the same time issued out of the same Court, directed to
the Sheriff of Middlesex to receive the Prisoner from the Lieutenant of the
Tower at the time appointed, and to execute him according to the Sentence.
Which Writ was in these words.

CAROLUS Secundus Dei gratia Angl. Scot. Franc. and Hibern. Rex fidei Defensor,
etc. Vic. Midd. salutem. Cum nos in Cur. nostra coram nobis consider averimus
quod Edwardus Fitzharris nuper de Parochia S. Martini in Campis in Com. Midd.
Genesis pro quibusdam altis proditionibus unde ipse (...) nobis Indictat. est, and
superinde per quandam Jur. Patrie inde inter nos and prefat. Edwardum capt.
convict. and attinct. existit, de Turr. nostra London. per medium Civitatis
nostrae London. pred. usque ad Furcas de Tyborne trahatur, and super Furcas
illas ibidem suspendatur, and vivens ad terram prosternatur, ac interiora sua
extra ventrem suum capiantur, ipsoque vivente comburentur; Et quod caput ejus
amputetur, quodque corpus ejus in quatuor parts dividatur, and quod caput and
quarter. ill. ponantur ubi nos ea assignare voluerimus: Ideo tibi precipimus
firmiter injungen. quod cum Loc. tenen. Turr. nostrae London. pred. die Veneris
primo die Julii prox. futur. apud Tower Hill convenias, and ipsum Edwardum
Fitzharris de prefat. Loc. tenen. recipias, and Executionem de eo in forma
pred. facias prout decet. Test Francisco Pemberton apud Westminster. xxijo die Junii
Anno Regni nostri xxxiijo.

Per Cur. ASTRY.

All which was accordingly performed on the day, and at the place appointed.

FINIS.
THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF Dr. Oliver Plunket Titular Primate of IRELAND.
THE Third of May 1681, in Easter, 33 Car. Secund. Reg Dr. Oliver Plunket was
Arraigned at the King's-Bench-Bar for High Treason, for endeavoring and
compassing the Kings Death, and to levy War in Ireland, and to alter the
Religion there, and to introduce a Foreign power: And at his Arraignment,
before his Plea, he urged for himself, that he was Indicted of the same
High Treason in Ireland and Arraigned, and at the day for his Trial the
Witnesses against him did not appear, and therefore he desired to know if he
could be tried here for the same fact? The Court told him, that by a Statute
made in this Kingdom, he might be Tried in the Court of Kings*Bench, or by
Commission of Oyer and Terminer in any part of England for Facts arising in
Ireland, and that this Arraignment there (he being never tried upon it) was not
sufficient to exempt him from being tried here; because till a Trial be passed,
and there be a Conviction or Acquittal thereupon, an Arraignment, barely, is no
Plea: For in such Cases the party is not put Twice in danger of his Life, which
only is the thing the Law in such Cas^s looks after to prevent. He then desired
time for his Witnes^es, which they told him he could not do till after Plea
pleaded; whereupon he pleaded Not Guilty, and put himself upon the Country for
his Trial; and after some consideration had about time to be allowed him to
bring his Witnesses from Ireland, the Court appointed the day for his Trial, to
be the first Wednesday in next Term, which was full Five Weeks time.

And accordingly on Wednesday the 8 th of June, in Trinity Term, he was brought
to his Trial, and Proclamation, as in such Cases is usual, being made, it
proceeded thus.

Cl. of Cr. Oliver Plunket hold up thy hand, those good men which thou shall
hear called and personally appear, are to pass between, etc.


Plunket. May it please your Lords^ip, I have been kept close Prisoner for a
long time, a year and an half in Prison; when I came from Ireland hither, I was
told by persons of good repute, and a Councellor at Law, that I could not be
tried here; and the reasons they gave me were, that first the Statute of Hen.
8. and all other Statut^s made here, were not received in Ireland* unless there
were an express mention made of Ireland in them: So that none we^e received
there but such as were before Poyning's Act. So I came with that persuasion
that I could not be tr^ed here, till at my Arraignment your Lordships told me
it was not so and that I must ^e Tried here, though there was no express
mention made of Ireland. Now, my Lord, upon that, whereas my Witnesses were in
Ireland, and I knew nothing of it, and the Records upon which I very much rely
were in Ireland, your Lordship was pleased to give me time from the 4 th of the
last Month to this day; and in the mean time, as your Lordship had the
Affidavit here yesterday, and as Captain Richardson can testify, I have not
dispatched only One, ^ut Two to Ireland, into the Counties of Armagh, Dublin,
etc. and where there were Records very material to my def^nce; but the Clerk of
the Crown would not give me any Copy of any Record at-all, unless he had some
express Order from your Lordship: So that whether it were that they were
mistaken, or wilfully refused, I could not get the Records which were very
material for me. For in some of those Records some of those that accuse me were
convicted of high Crimes, and others were Outlawed and Imprisoned, and broke
Prison; and there were other Records also of Excommunication against some of
them, and I could not get the Records, unless your Lordship would instruct me
in some way or other, how I can get over them that are most material for my
defense. The Servants that I sent h^nce, and took Shipping for Ireland, were
Two days at Se^, and cast back again, and from thence were forced to go to
Holly head, and from Holly-head in going to Dublin they were Thirt^^^ or
Fourteen days, the Winds were so contra^y; and then my S^r ^nt went about to go
into the County of Armagh and Derry, that were a Hundred miles from Dublin, and
Mead, and other places; so that in so short a time, my Lord, it was morally
impossible for them to have brought the Witnesses over; and those that were
ready to have come, would nor stir at-all, unless they had a Pass from hence,
because some of them were Roman Catholics, and they had heard that here some
were taken Prisoners that were Roman Catholics, and that none ought to come
without a Pass; and they being Witnesses against the King, they might be
clapped up here, and brought into very ill condition: so they sent one over
that made Affidavit.


L. C. J. It was the Affidavit was read here yesterday.


Plunket. So that, my Lord, I conceive your Lordship will think I did it not
oat of any intent to put off my Trial, for Captain Richard^^n is here, who
knows that I writ by the Post, and desired them to come with the Pacquet-Boat,
and they writ over to the Captain after they were Landed; so that I depended
upon the Wind and the Weather for my Witnesses, and wanted your Lordships Order
for the Records to be brought over, and that their Examination might be brought
into Court, and their own original Examination here might be compared with it.
So I humbly beg your Lordships favor, the Case is rare, and scarce happens in
Five hundred years, that one should be in my circumstances. I am come here
where no Jury knows me, nor the quality of my Adversaries; If I had been in
Ireland I would have put my self upon my Trial to morrow without any Witnesses,
before any Protestant Jury that knew them and me. And when the Orders went
over, that I should be tried in Ireland, and that no Roman Catholic should be
upon the Jury, and so it was in both the Grand and other Jury; yet then when I
came to my Trial, after I was Arraigned, not one appeared: This is manifest
upon the Record and can be proved.


L. C. J. There was no prosecution of you there.


Plunket. But, my Lord, here is no Jury that knows me, or the quality of my
Adversaries; for they are not a Jury of the Neighborhood that know them, and
therefore my Case is not the same with other Cases. Though I cannot harbor, nor
do not, nor will not, nor ought not, the least conceit of hard measure and
injustice; yet if I have not full time to bring my Records and Witnesses
altogether, I cannot make my defense. Some were there then, some afar off, so
that it was a miracle that in Six or Seven Counties they could do so much as
they did: But they got in Seven or Eight of them, yet there were Five or Six
wanting: Therefore I beseech your Lordship that I may have time to bring my
Records and Witnesses, and then I will defy all that is upon the Earth and
under the Earth to say any thing against me.


L C. J. Look you, Mr. Plunket, It Is in vain for you to talk and make this
discourse here now; you must know, that by the Laws of this Kingdom, when a man
is Indicted and Arraigned of Treason or Felony, it is not usual to give such
time; it is rare that any man has had such time as you have had, Five Weeks
time to provide your Witnesses: If your Witnesses are so cautious, and are such
persons that they dare not, or will not venture for fear of being apprehended,
or will not come into England without such and such cautions, we cannot tell
how to help it* we cannot furnish you with Witnesses, you must look to get your
Witnesses your self* If we should stay till your Witnesses will come, perhaps
they will never come here, and so you will escape out of the hands of Justice.
Do not be discouraged in this, the Jury are Strangers to you peradventure, but
they are honest Gentlemen, and you shall have no other upon your Jury; and you
may be confident, that if there be not some Fact proved against you, that may
amount to Treason, you shall be discharged; they are persons that understand so
much, and we will direct them so much. You shall have as fair a Trial as if you
were in Ireland; but for us to stay for your Witnesses, or send you back to
Ireland we cannot do it: Therefore you must submit to your Trial. We heard your
Affidavit yesterday, and we did then tell the Gentlemen that moved it, as much
as we tell you. You are here to be tried, look to the Jury as they are called,
and except against them if you will.


Plunket. My Lord, I desire only to have the favor of time, some time this
Term.


L. C. J. We cannot do it.


Cl. of Cr. Swear Sir John Roberts.


Pl^nket. I humbly present this to your Lordship, I am then in eminent danger
of my Life, if I cannot get Ten days to have my Witnesses over: I desire I may
have but to the One and Twentieth of this Month, and then if they do not come
you may go on.


L. C. J. We cannot do it, you have had Five Weeks time already.


Plunket. I desire but a few days.


Crier. Sir John Roberts, take the Book, look upon the Prisoner; You shall well
and truly try, etc.


Plunket. My Lord, I desire to know whether they have been of the Juries of
Langhorn, or the Five Jesuits, or any that were condemned?


L. C. J. What if they have? that is no exception.


Then the Jury was sworn, whose Names follow.
Sir John Roberts, Thomas Harriott, Henry Ashurst, Ralph Bucknall, Richard
Gowre, Richard Pagett, Thomas Earsby, John Hayne, Thomas Hodgkins, James
Partherich, Samuel Baker, William Hardy.
Cl. of Cr. Oliver Plunket, hold up thy Hand. You of the Jury look upon the
Prisoner and hearken to his Charge.


HE stands Indicted by the Name of Oliver Plunket, late of Westminster, in the
County of Middlesex Dr. of Divinity* for that he as a false Traitor against the
most Illustrious and most excellent Prince our Sovereign Lord, Charles the
second, by the Grace of God* of ^ngland, Scotland, France and Ireland King, and
his natural Lord* the fear of God in his heart not having, nor weighing the
duty of his Al^egiance, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the
Devil* the cordial Love, and true and due natural Obedience* which true and
fait^ful Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King, toward him our said
Sovereign Lord the King do and of right ought to bear, utterly withdrawing, and
contriving, and with all his might intending the Peace and common Tranquillity
within the Kingdom of Ireland, as also of this Kingdom of England to disturb,
and War and Rebellion against our said Sovereign Lord the King in the Kingdom
of Ireland, then being the Dominion of our said Sovereign Lord the King in
parts beyond the Seas, to st^^ up and move, and the Government of our said
Sovereign Lord the King there to subvert, and our said Sovereign Lord the King
from his Regal Power and Government there to Depose and Deprive, and our said
Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, to Death and final Destruction to bring
and put, and the true Worship of God within the said Kingdom of Ireland, by Law
established and used, to alter to the Superstition of the Romish Church; the
first day of December, in the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles
the Second, now King of England, etc. the two and thirtieth, and diverse other
days and times, as well before as after, at Dublin in the Kingdom of Ireland in
parts beyond the Seas, with diverse other false Traitors unknown, traitorously
did compass, imagine and intend the killing, Death and final Destruction of our
said Sovereign Lord the King, and the ancient Government of his said Kingdom of
Ireland to change, alter, and wholly to subvert, and him our said Sovereign
Lord the King, that now is, from the Crown and Government of his Kingdom of
Ireland a^oresaid to Depose and Deprive, and the true Protestant Religion to
extirpate, and War and Rebellion against our said Sovereign Lord the King there
to move and levy. And to fulfill and accomplish his said most wicked Treasons,
and Traitorous compassings, imaginations and purposes aforesaid; he the said
Oliver Plunket, the said first day of December, in the abovesaid Two and
thirtieth Year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King, that now is,
with Force and Arms, etc. at Dublin, in the Kingdom of Ireland, then being the
Dominion of our said Sovereign Lord the King in parts beyond the Seas,
Maliciously, Devilishly and Traitorously did assemble and gather together
himself, with diverse other Traitors unknown, and then and there devilishly,
advisedly, maliciously, subtly and traitorously did consult and agree our
said Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, to Death and final Destruction to
bring, and from his Crown and Government aforesaid to Depose and Deprive, and
the Religion of the Romish Church into the Kingdom of Ireland aforesaid to
introduce and establish; and the sooner to fulfill and perfect his said most
wicked Treasons, and Traitorous Imaginations and Purposes, he the said Oliver
Plunket with diverse other false Traitors unknown, then and there advisedly,
maliciously and traitorously did further consult and agree to contribute, pay
and expend diverse great Sums of Money to diverse Subjects of our said Sovereign
Lord the King, and other persons unknown, to procure them the said persons
unknown, o^r said Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, Traitorously to kill,
and the Romish Religion into the said Kingdom of Ireland to introduce and
establish. And that he the said Oliver Plunket and other Trait^rs unknown,
afterward, to wit, the said first day of December, in the Two and Thirtieth
Year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King abovesaid, at Dublin
aforesaid, in the Kingdom of Ireland aforesaid, within the Dominion of our said
Sovereign Lord the King, with Force and Arms, etc. unlawfully, maliciously,
devilishly, and traitorously did receive, collect, pay and expend diverse great
Sums of Money to diverse persons unknown, to persuade and induce diverse other
persons also unknow^, the said false Traitors in their said Treasons to help
and maintain, against the Duty of his Allegiance, and against the Peace of our
said Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, His Crown and Dignity, and against
the form of the Statutes in that Case made and provided. To this Indictment he
has pleaded, Not Guilty.

Mr. Heath. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, This is
an Indictment of High Treason against Dr. Oliver Plunket the Prisoner at the
Bar, and it sets forth, that the Two and thirtieth year of the King, at Dublin
in the Kingdom of Ireland, he did compass and imagine the Death of the King,
and to deprive the King of his Kingdom of Ireland, and to raise War to
extirpate the Protestant Religion in the Kingdom of Ireland, and to establish
the Romish Religion there. And it sets forth further, That for the
accomplishment of these Treasons, the Defendant with several others did meet
together at several places at Dublin in the Kingdom of Ireland, and elsewhere,
and at these several meetings did consult and agree to put the King to Death,
to raise War, to extirpate the Protestant Religion, and set up the Romish
Religion. And the Indictment further sets forth, that to accomplish these
Treasons, the Defendent did raise great Sums of Money in the Kingdom of
Ireland, and did get several persons to contribute several Sums for these
Treasons; and that the Defendent with others did disburse several Sums of Money
to several persons, to persuade them and entice them to be aiding and assisting
in these Treasons, and to recompense them for them. To this Indictment the
Defendant has pleaded, Not Guilty. If we prove these things, you are to find
him Guilty.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Lord, We will quickly come to the Evidence. But in
short, You have heard his Charge is as high as can be against the King, and
against the Nation, and against all that is good. The Design and endeavor of
this Gentleman was the Death of the King, and the Destruction of the Protestant
Religion in Ireland, and the raising of War: And to accomplish this, we charge
him, that there was a Confederacy made, Assemblies and Consultations had to
these ends, and raising Money to accomplish it. Gentlemen, Dr. Plunket was made
as we shall prove to you, as they there call him, Primate of Ireland, and he
got that Dignity from the Pope upon this very Design. He did by Virtue of that
Power, which he thought he had gotten, make out Warants, Significations, I know
not what they call them, to know how many men in Ireland could bear Arms from
Sixteen to Forty; he raises Taxes upon the People and the Clergy there. But,
My Lord, the particulars will best fall from the Witnesses that we shall call
and prove it by, and we need not make any aggravation; for such a thing as this
cannot be more aggravated than it is.


Mr. At. General. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
the Character this Gentleman bears, as Primate under a Foreign and Usurped
Jurisdiction, will be a great Inducement to you to give credit to that Evidence
we shall produce before you. We shall prove, that this very Preferment was
conferred upon him upon a Contract, that he should raise Sixty Thousand Men in
Ireland, for the Pope's Service, to settle Popery there, and to subvert the
Government. The Evidence that we shall give you, will prove how it leads to
destroy the King, and I take it according to the resolutions that have been, to
raise War in the Kingdom, and to introduce a Foreign Power, will be certainly
Evidence of an Attempt and Machination to destroy the King. As Soon as he was in
possession of his Primacy, he goes about his work. There are two great
necessaries to be provided, Men and Money. For men, having this great Spiritual
Jurisdiction, whereby, indeed, all that are under it are become Slaves, he
issues out his Warrants to all the Clergy of Ireland, to give an Account, and
make Return from the several Parishes, of all the men in them above Fourteen
and under Sixty. And Returns were accordingly made by them, that he might
accordingly take a measure what men to pick out for the Service. The next thing
was Money, My Lord; and your Lordship takes notice, that when the Mind is
enslaved, the Purse, nay all the Body bows to it. He issues out his Warrants to
his Clergy, to make a Collection of Money, in all parts great Sums were Levied,
and when they were Levied, we shall give you an account by our Proofs, that
several Sums were issued out, and sent into France to further the Business.
There was also provision made of great Ammunition and Arms, and we shall prove
in particular, several delivered out by this Gentleman's Order, to carry on
this thing; and to go through stitch with this business, he takes a view of all
the several Ports and places in Ireland, where it would be convenient to land:
For they were to have from France an Auxiliary Forcce, and upon his view he
pitched upon Carlingford as the place. We shall prove the several
Correspondencies between Rome and him, and France and him, and several
Messengers employed, and Moneys issued out from time to time for their
maintenance. This will be the course of our Evidence; and we shall begin first
with some that do not speak so particularly to this Doctor, but prove there was
a general Design in all parts of the Kingdom of Ireland, to bring in the King
of France, and extirpate the Protestant Rehgion: And then we shall call the
particular persons to the particular Facts against him. First we call Florence
Wire. [Who was sworn.]


Mr. Soll. Genesis Are you sworn, Sir?


Wire. Yes, Sir.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray give the Court and the Jury an account of what you know of
any Plot in Ireland, to introduce the Romish Religion, or to bring in the
French King.


Wire. Yes, I know there was a Plot, both before Plunket's time, and in his
time; for it was working in the years 65, and 66. but it was brought to full
maturitie in the year 1667. For then Col. Miles Rely, and Col. Bourne was sent
to Ireland from the King of France, with a Commission to muster as many men as
he could, promising to send an Army of 40000 men with a Commission, upon St.
Lewis day in August next following, to land at Carlingford to destroy all the
true Subjects, to destroy the Religion as it was established there, and to set
up the French King's authority and the Roman Catholic Religion. And one Edmond
Angle that was a Justice of peace and Clerk of the Crown, sent for all the
Rebels abroad in the North to come up into the County of Longford, and they
marched into the head-Town of the County and fired the Town; the Inhabitants
fled into the Castle: then they came up to the Goal, thinking to break it open,
and by setting the Prisoners free, to join them with them; but then Angle was
shot, received a deadly wound, and dropped off his Horse, and they fled. So then
when they were without the Town, one Charles Mac Canell alighted, and took away
all the Papers out of his Pocket; which if they had been found, would have
discovered all. This occasioned Col. Bourne to be suspected; and being so
suspected, he was taken Prisoner, and turned to Newgate in Dublin. Then Col.
Riley fled away again to France, and the Plot lay under a Cloud during the life
of Primate Raley the Prisoner's Predecessor. This Primate Raley died beyond
Sea. Then many of the Popish Religion would h^ve had the Primacie conferred
upon one Duffy; but the Prisone^ at the B^r put in for it; which might have
been opposed, if the Prisoner had not engaged and promised that he would so
manage affairs, that before the present Government were aware, he would
surprise the Kingdom, provided the Pope and King of France would send a
competent Arm^e to join with theirs for the effecting of it. So the first Year
of his coming over, I was in the Frierie^at Armagh: I was an acquaintance of
the Friars, and they invited me. And one Quine told the Prisoner, that they
thought Duffy would have been Primate. Said he, It Is better as it is; for Duffy
has not the wit to do those things that I have undertaken to do; meaning that
he did undertake to supplant the Protestant Religion, to bring in Properie, and
put the Kingdom under subjection to the King of France.


Mr. Soll. Genesis How do you know that?


Wire. Those were the words, and in the meaning I knew before, because I had
heard it talked of.


L. C. J. Who was the first of these Primates you speak of?


Wire. Edmund Raley. He set this business on foot first.


L. C. J. About what?


Wire. About calling the Rebels together out of the North when they came to
Longford.


L. C. J. What Year was that?


Wire. It was in the year (67.)


L. C. J. When died he?


Wire. He died a little while afterward.


L. C. J. Then Duffy would have it conferred upon him?


Wire. Yes, after Raley's decease he would have had it conferred upon him; and
there was a contention between him and the Prisoner, who did engage he would
bring things to that full maturity, that before the present Government were
aware he would do the work.


L. C. J. How do you know this?


Wire. I know this, because I had an account of it from certain School-fellows
that were with me in Ireland, then studying in Rome; they wrote this to me,
desiring me I would take a good heart with the rest of my Countrymen, and
assuredly in a short time the Kingdom would be relieved, and the Irish restored
to their former patrimonies.


L. C. J. This you speak of their information. What do you know of your own
knowledge?


Wire. All that I know is, he coming into the Friery of Armagh --


L. C. J. About what time?


Wire. It is either 10 or 11 years ago, and there was a Fast there, and I was
invited by the Friars, being their acquaintance; one Quine one of the Friars
told him --


L. C. J. Told whom?


Wire. The Prisoner, that he did expect Duffy should have been Primate; but the
Prisoner made answer, It Is better as it is; for Duffy had not the wit to manage
the things that I have undertaken for the general good of our Religion.


L. C. J. Now tell me this: What things were those he had undertaken? did he
explain himself?


Wire. No further than those words: But I did conceive this was his meaning;
because I knew partly of it my self, knowing of the former Plot.


L. C. J. I ask you only what words came from him; and you say they were, That
Duffy had not the wit to manage what he had undertaken for the general good of
their Religion.


Wire. Yes; and then again in his Assembly, kept by him, he charged his
inferiors to collect such several sums of money as he thought fit, according
to the several Parishes and Dignities, to assist and supply the French Forces
when they came over.


L. C. J. How know you that?


Wire. I have seen the Money collected; and I have seen his Warrant sub poena
suspensionis to bring it in, to redeem their Religion from the power of the
English Government. Again, there were those Rebels that went to Longford --


L. C. J. What time were those Collections?


Wire. From time to time since he came into Ireland.


L. C. J. About what time?


Wire. 9 Year, 8 Year, 7 Year ago, and the last Year of all.


L. C. J. Then it was several times, you say?


Wire. Yes; and he procured the Macdonels a piece of money out of the
Exchequer, pretending to do good service to his Majesty; but he sent them for
France, meaning they should improve themselves, and bring themselves into
favor with the King of France, and come over with the French King to surprise
Ireland. This one of the said Rebels told me. So I have seen the Prisoner's
Letter directed to the grand Torie Flemming, desiring that they should go to
France, and he would see them, in spite of all their E^emies, in Ireland ^afe
ashore. And Flemming should return again a Colonel, to his own glory, and the
good of his Country.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know his hand?


Wire. Yes, I do, as well as my own. I have seen Capt. O Neal, Son of General O
Neal, coming every Year into Ireland, and carrying three Regiments to the
French King into France; and he used to come over to Ireland every Year to get
a recruit; and he did get my Brother to go with him, and so much importuned me,
that I could hardly withstand him; but I did not yield to his desire: He told
me it was to improve me for my good; to improve my self in Military Discipline,
and then I should return for Ireland a Captain under the French King, to
surprise the Kingdom and settle the Popish Religion, and then I should be
restored to my Estate.


L. C. J. Who told you this?


Wire. Capt. O Neal. And in the mean while, says he, I hear Dr. Plunket is the
only man entrusted in Ireland to make these preparations, and get things ready
against the French King's coming, who is to land at Carlingford.


Mr. At. Genesis How often were you in the Doctor's company?


Wire. Not very often.


Plunket. I never saw him with my eyes before in all my life.


Wire. I have seen him in the Priory the first year that he came over to
Ireland; and you know the meetings held at George Blykes house in the Fives;
and I have seen him in his own house.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How come you to know the Prisoners hand?


Wire. Because I was well acquainted with his hand, seeing his hand amongst the
Priests.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Did you ever see him write?


Wire. Yes, in the Priory, and in his own house.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How often?


Wire. Not often.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How often?


Wire. Ten or a dozen times: I should know his hand from all the writing in
London, if it were among never so many. Let me but see it, I will know it.


L. C. J. Have you ever heard him own himself Primate?


Wire. Yes, my Lord, he writes himself Oliverus Armacanus Primas and
Metropolitanus totius Hiberuiae, that is his Style.


L. C. J. Who did he say made him Primate?


Wire. The Pope, my Lord.


L. C. J. Have you heard him say so?


Wire. Yes, I heard him discourse of it in the Priory.


Mr. At. Genesis He was a public Officer, and they might well know his hand.


L. C. J. I believe any body that has seen us write but a little, would soon
know our hands.


Wire. His hand is as well known over Ireland, as mine is among my acquaintance.


L. C. J. Well, go on.


Wire. During the time of his Imprisonment, I have seen his Commands to some of
his inferior Dignitaries, commanding them sub poena suspensionis, to bring in
the moneys assessed for bringing in the French Army; and that there was no
better time than the time of his imprisonment to bring it in.


L. C. J. Who were they, you say, that were commanded sub poena suspensionis?


Wire. Since his taking, I have seen in the time of his Imprisonment his
Commands to his inferior Dignitaries, not to be forgetful of the Moneys that
were assessed toward the supplying the French Army; and that rhere was no
better time to bring in the French, than when he was in prison.


L. C. J. How long ago was that?


Wire. The first of February (79.) The second and last of it was in July and
November last.


L. C. J. And this was to bring in the Money?


Wire. Yes, to supply the French Army. And that there was no better time than
during his imprisonment, and they should not be so much suspected.


L. C. J. And these Mandates you have seen under his haud?


Wire. Yes, I have, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of his summoning or issuing out these Warrants
for Lists of men?


Wire. I have not seen any of the Warrants; but the Priests have told me they
were commanded by his Warrants to let him know how many there were in all their
Parishes from 16 to 60.


Mr. At. Genesis You say you never saw the Mandates?


Wire. No, I did not.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. What do you know about the Prisoner's viewing the Ports?


Wire. I have seen him going about from Port to Port, to Derry, to
Carriefergus, Castle Down, and Carlingford, and all about.


Mr. Serj. J^fferies. When he went to take a view of those Ports, can you tell
to what purpose he did it?


Wire. Yes, I heard it among the Church, That he went on purpose to view the
Seaports to know the strength of all the Garrisons, and to see which was the
most convenient way to bring in the French Army.


Mr. Serj. Gefferies. Did you ever speak with the Prisoner at the Bar about his
going?


Wire. No.


Mr. Serj. Gefferies. What place did he pitch on as most convenient?


Wire. Carlingford.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you in the Prisoner's company when he viewed the Ports?


Wire. I have seen him go to and fro; I did not go all the Circuit round with
him.


Plunket. Did you ever see me at Carlingford?


Wire. No.


Plunket. Did you ever see me at any other of the Ports?


Wire. I have seen you at Hamiltons coming back from Derry. Do you not remember
that you lodged at at Sir Geo.?


Plunket. I never lodged there in my life.


Sir. Fra. Withings. Have you any thing more to say concerning the Plot in
general?


Wire. No, in general I have not.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. He has not only given an account of the general, but
fixed it upon the Prisoner.


Mr. At. Genesis Dr. Plunket, will you ask him any questions?


Plunket. You say you remember you saw me at my first coming as Primate ten
Years ago, and that you were at the Priory when I was there?


Wire. Yes.


Plunket. You were invisible to me.


L. C. J. If you will ask any question, do; but do not make these kind of
observations.


Plunket. Tell me this, Why did not you acquaint some Justice of the peace then
with what you knew, that which you had heard 7 years ago?


Wire. When I first knew it, I was as willing to have it concealed as they.


L. C. J. What is your question, Dr. Plunket? pray tell it us.


Plunket. He says, my Lord, that ten years ago I had such a design in hand, and
he knew the money was collected for these very ends, and he knew of the design
from that same Capt. O Neal whom I employed and sent abroad; and that I had a
design to bring in the French at Carlingford, and went about to all the Ports
in Ireland, and pitched upon that as the most convenient; and yet it is so
inconvenient for the bringing in a foreign Force, that any one that knows any
thing of the Maps of the world, will easily conclude it otherwise. But, I say,
my Lord, why did not he tell some Justice of the peace that I was upon such a
design, but let me live in Ireland ten years after, and never speak of it till
now?


L. C. J. What say you to the Question?


Plunket. When he saw me all the time, and to the time of my taking Prisoner,
and never said one word; for I was a Prisoner six months only for my Religion,
not one word of Treason spoken of against me for so many years: why did not he
acquaint some Justice of the peace with it before?


L. C. J. What Religion were you of then?


Wire. I was a Roman*Ca^holick.


Plunket. And are you not so now?


Wire. Yes, I am so.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Therefore it will be no wonder that you did not discover it.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. But I ask you, Why did not you discover it all this time?


Wire. Because I was a Papist my self: The first that did discover it, he and I
did consult about it, I had charged him so to do, and I set him on work; but he
was ill paid for having discovered it: you got him to be trepanned, that he
has gone in danger of his life for it.


Plunket. Who is that man?


Wyre. Moyer.


Sir Fra. Withins. Call Henry O Neal, (who was sworn.) What know you of any
design in Ireland to introduce the Popish Religion?


O Neal. In August (78) Bishop Tirril came with 40 odd Horsemen to
Vicar General Brady's house, and alighted at the door; and he gave them there
an Oath, which they took willingly and freely from hand to hand, to forward the
Popish Plot against the Protestant Religion, to make an end of them all in one
hour from end to end in Ireland; and said he, I will come within two days with
an Order from the Ld. Oliver Plunket; and you need not be afraid, for the Ld.
Oliver Plunket and I have sent some gold and money into France to get men and
bring them from France over Sea: and do not fear, this will go on in one hour
through all Ireland from end to end. In September (78) a little while after,
the same meeting was in a place which they call Virginia, in the County of
Connaght, where they took a Priest, he is here, and he was with me, and desired
me to come up to Dublin and discover this; and there I did discover it to Sir
John Davis; which is all that I can say: for this Plunket, I never saw him in
my life.


Mr. Jones. You were a Papist then?


O Neal. Yes, I was.


Mr. Jones. Are you a Roman Catholic still?


O Neal. Yes, I am.


Mr. Jones. And were you acquainted with all these Orders?


O Neal. Yes.


L. C. J. How came you to know of this Oath?


O Neal. I was in the house with them; I was one concerned to take my Oath with
them, and I durst not but take the Oath.


L. C. J. Had you the Oath of secrecy given you?


O Neal. Yes: and so this Priest commanded me to go along to Dublin and
discover it.


Mr. Serj. Gefferies. What is his name?


O Neal. John Macklegh.


Sir Fra Withins. Do you know any other transactions about the Plot?


O Neal. No, I will not swear for all the world more than I know.


Sir Fra. Withins. -- Then call Neile O Neal, (who was sworn.) What do you know
of any design carrying on in Ireland against the Government and the Protestant
Religion?


N. O Neal. I will tell you all I know: I was at Vicar Bradey's house the 21 of
August.


L. C. J. What Year?


N. O Neal. (78). And Bishop Tirril came with 40 Horsemen to the house, and
went into the house, and discoursed a little while; and they took their Oaths
every one round to keep secret the Plot to destroy the Protestant Religion and
the Protestants, that they might have their Estates again. And he said they did
not need to fear: for, said he, you have a very good man to assist you, and
that is the Lord Oliver Plunket, and you need not fear but it will go through
all Ireland.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you ask him any questions?


Plunket. Why did he not discover it before?


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Were you a Roman Catholic at that time?


N. O Neal. Yes, and am so still.


Mr. Paget Jury-man. I desire he may be asked how he came to be there?


L. C. J. You say, I think, this was at Vicar General Bradey's; how came you to
be there?


N. O Neal. I was there several times before that; for my Nurse, or my
Foster-mother (I don't know which you may understand best) was Housekeeper to
him.


L. C. J. Were you required to take the Oath?


N. O Neal. No, my Lord, I was acquainted in the House, I had been there two or
three weeks before.


Plunket. Why did not you tell it to some Justice of the peace?


L. C. J. He was a Papist, and so he is now.


N. O Neal. There were many there that were wiser than I, that did not discover
it.


L. C. J. How old are you?


N. O Neal. I believe about two and twenty years old.


L. C. J. And this was but in (78.)


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Owen Murfey. (which was done.) Come, what say you?


O. Murfey. Mr. Edmond Murfey discovered the Plot; he went to one Lieutenant
Baker and did discover the Plot to him, that there was a design to bring in
the French.


L. C. J. Speak out aloud, I cannot hear you.


O. Murfey. All I know is from Mr. Edmond Murfey --


L. C. J. What do you know of any your own knowledge?


O. Murfey. Mr. Lieutenant Baker told me, that he did hear of the French --


L. C. J. Speak what you know your self.


O. Murfey. If it please your Lordship, this is more: I saw that Evidence that
Edmond Murfey did produce in Ireland, when he was sent to the Goal there; but
without Trial or any thing.


Mr. At. Genesis Then swear Hugh Duffy. (which was done.) Speak aloud, and tell
my Lord what you know of this Plot and the Prisoner. You know the Prisoner,
don't you?


Duffy. I know him, yes, I know him well enough.


L. C. J. What say you more of him?


Duffy. My Lord, I say, I have seen this Dr. Oliver Plunket raising several
sums of money to carry on this Plot; sometimes 10 s. per An. sometimes 20.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Of whom?


Duffy. Of all the Priests in Ireland; of every Priest according to his Pension
and Parish.


L. C. J. In all Ireland?


Duffy. Yes.


L. C. J. And toward the proceedings of the Plot?


Duffy. It was to give to his Agent which was at Rome, and for the carrying on
the business.


Mr. At. Genesis How come you to know this?


Duffy. I was Servant to Dr. Duffy, who was infinitely beloved by this man: he
was Father Confessor to the Queen of Spain: there was nothing that happened
between them, but I was by all the time.


L. C. J. Were you Chaplain to him?


Duffy. Yes.


L. C. J. You are a Papist then?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis This man is a Friar, my Lord.


L. C. J. Were you in the Company with them?


Duffy. Yes, I was.


L. C. J. What did pass there?


Duffy. About the Plot, how they could confirm the Plot: And this man Plunket
said, he could prevail with the King of France, and the other with the King of
Spain.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray acquaint my Lord particularly when this was, and in what
place, and what they said.


Duffy. It was in (73) (74) and (75) at his own house; and at he kept three or
four Jesuits there, and a matter of a hundred Priests.


Mr. At. Genesis What passed in the company?


L. C. J. Who else was there?


Duffy. The discourse, my Lord, was always about the Plot, how they could
contrive the matter between them; and so they did conclude afterward to raise
so much money upon several Priests, all the Priests in Ireland, sometimes 20 s.
sometimes 40.


L. C. J. A piece, do you mean?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What discourse had they about the French at any time?


Duffy. Yes a hundred times; he talked several times, that he did not question
but he should prevail with the King of France not to invade Spain: And I have
seen his Letter to Cardinal Bouillon to expostulate with him about the King of
France, why he should wage War with the King of Spain who was a Catholic, but
rather should come and redeem Ireland out of its Heretical Jurisdiction.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see the Letter?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Why, do you know his hand?


Duffy. Yes, I know it as well as I know my own; I know it if there were a
thousand papers together.


Mr. At. Genesis And what was the import of it, pray?


Duffy. That Cardinal Bouillon should prevail with the King of France not to
invade Spain: and the contents of the rest of the Letter were, That he did
admire he should not rather wage War with the King of England; who has been an
Apostate, and help their poor Country that was daily tormented with heretical
Jur^sdiction.


Mr. At. Genesis How came you to be in France? were you employed?


Duffy. I went to France to live there in a Covent.


Plunket. Did Cardinal Bouillon show you my Letter?


Duffy. Yes.


Plunket. What year?


Duffy. (77.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir, you were speaking of raising of money.


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see any Precept about it?


Duffy. Yes. I have seen several Precepts; I was Curate to one Father Murfey;
and while that man was with Dr. Oliver Plunket, and other Jesuits, I did
officiate in his place, and he sent his Letters to me to raise 40 s. and 20 s.
a time, several times.


L. C. J. You your self?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What for?


Duffy. It was to send to Dr. who was at Rome.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you send any money that you know of?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Tell what time you gave the money your self.


Duffy. In (73) (74) and (75.)


Mr. At. Genesis Where?


Duffy. At his own dewlling place at


Mr. Just. Jones. Of what quality was the Prisoner amongst you?


Duffy. He was Primate of all Ireland.


Mr. Just. Jones. Under whom?


Duffy. Under whom? under the Pope.


Mr. Just. Jones. How do you know he was so?


Duffy. We had it in his Writings.


L. C. J. Did he style himself so in his Letters?


Duffy. Yes, if he writ but to the least man in the Country, he would write,
Oliver us Armacanus Primas totius Hiberniae.


L. C. J. And so you always understood him?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you present at any of the general Consultations or Meetings?


Duffy. Yes, I was.


Mr. At. Genesis What number might meet at that time?


Duffy. Five hundred men and women.


Mr. At. Genesis Where was this?


Duffy. At Clouds.


Mr. At. Genesis What was the occasion and design of that meeting?


Duffy. Confirmation from the Bishop.


Mr. At. Genesis And what was done there besides?


Duffy. The second thing was, that the Gentlemen of the three Counties should
conclude together about this matter.


L. C. J. About what?


Duffey. About joining the French and Spanish together.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Where was that meeting?


Duffy. In the County of Monaghan.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Was the Prisoner there?


Duffy. Yes, he was the chief man.


L. C. J. When was this?


Duffy. In (71) to the best of my knowledge.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Were you there your self?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What was the transaction of that day, besides the Sacrament of
Confirmation?


Duffy. It was agreed that the Gentry of Armagh, Monaghan, and Conaght should
join together; and then they went into a private Council to get a List of all
the Officers that were in the last Rebellion, and those that lost their Estates.


Mr. At. Genesis How do you know that? Did you go into the Consult?


Duffy. Yes, I was in the same Consult my self, and was as willing to proceed
in the matter as any one in the world.


L. C. J. Where was this?


Duffy. Within two miles of Clouds, at one Father house.


L. C. J. Was that at the time when there were so many persons met? Pray speak
again what was done there besides Confirmation.


Duffy. Why, they were withdrawn aside into a Garden; some stood up, and some
sat down; and Oliver Plunket stood in the middle of them all as a Prelate, and
every one kneeled before him and kissed his hand.


Mr. At. Genesis What was then said?


Duffy. Then they did Consult and gave special order to some of them to get a
List of all the Officers in the late Rebellion, and that losed their Estates,
and that they should be more forward than others to proceed in that wicked
design.


L. C. J. What was that design?


Duffy. To destroy all the Protestants together.


Mr. At. Genesis Was it to mingle the Irish, and Spanish, and French Army
together?


Duffy. Yes, it was.


Mr. At Genesis Did you hear the Prisoner speak about it?


Duffy. Yes, and he made a Speech before them concerning our own Faith and
Religion.


Mr At* Genesis Was there any mention of money at that time?


Duffy. It was, that every man of them that could dispose of money should
provide some for those Gentlemen that would soon come into Ireland.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Who were those Gentlemen?


Duffy. The French Army and the Spanish Army together.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you at any other meeting?


Duffy. No.


Mr. At. Genesis After he was taken, do you know of any Order he sent out to
gather money?


Duffy. Yes, at the Assizes of Dalkieth, I think it is June two years ago, he
was apprehended --


Mr. At. Genesis Indeed he was first apprehended as a very busy Papist.


Duffy. I have seen two or three several Orders to raise money, and for the
same purpose; and that it was the only time to bring the matter to an end when
he lay in Goal himself.


Mr. At. Genesis Was that the effect of the Letter?


Duffy. Yes; and that the French and Spanish Kings should take the advantage
that now was offered whilst he was in Prison.


Mr. Just. Jones. You say some money was sent to D. Cray?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. Just. Jones. To what end?


Duffy. To comply with this design.


Mr. Jones. Where was that Dr. Cray?


Duffy. He was at Rome, he was made a Bishop there.


M^. At. Genesis Who employed him there?


Duffy. This man employed him always.


L. C. J. What was his Name?


Duffy. Cray.


Mr. Jones. You say some of the Priests paid 20, some 40?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. Jones. Did the Lay Gentry agree to pay nothing?


Duffy. I don't know for the Gentry.


L. C. J. But I think you paid something your self?


Duffy. Yes, I paid for two or three years my self.


L. C. J. And that was for the design?


Duffy. Yes, for the French and Spanish Army, and all the purposes together.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of any Precept to be given in of all sorts of
persons of such an age?


Duffy. I gave a List of the age of every person from 16 to 60.


Mr. At. Genesis By whose order?


Duffy. By his order.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. To whom did you give it?


Duffy. To Dr. Plunket.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. That is, to the Prisoner?


Duffy. Yes; out of my own Precinct.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you an Order from him?


Duffy. Yes, it was directed to the Parish Priest; and I being Curate in his
place, received the Order.


Sir Fr. With. To what purpose was it?


Duffy. To know what men in Ireland were able to bear Arms.


Mr. Just. Jones. What was the number contained in your List?


Duffy 250.


Mr. Just. Jones. What in one Parish?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. What was the Parishes Name?


Duffy. Coghan.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know any thing of his going to view the Ports?


Duffy. I accompanied him to Carlingford.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you?


Duffy. Yes, in person I did.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. What did he say?


Duffy. He went round about the place where some of the Custom-Ships come in;
there was a great Castle there near the Sea, and he went to view the place, and
could not get a Boat: And there was a great talk of Carlingford to be one of
the best Havens in Ireland; there was no great Garrison at the place, and any
Ship might come to the Gates of the Town and surprise it, being a little Town.


Mr. A^t. Genesis What did he conclude upon that?


Duffy. That he might get the French Army to land safely there.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of delivering any Ammunition and Arms?


Duffy. He did send some of this money to get Ammunition into Ireland.


Plunket. You say you were Murfey's Curate; Can you show any such Institution
as you say came to you to raise money?


Duff. I could have brought them, but I thought it needless.


Plunket. Can you name any other person I received money from?


Duffy. I have seen your Paper of the County of Monaghan.


Plunket. Have you seen any of them pay any moneys?


Duffy. Yes, I have seen twenty of them pay money.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Why you are acquainted with this man, are you not, Mr.
Plunket?


Plunket. My Lord, I believe I have seen him.


Mr. Just. Dolbin. Don't you know he was Chaplain to Bishop Duffy?


Plunket. No; I never was in his company.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Pray tell him what time of the year it was that you were
at Carlingford.


Duffy. It was at the end of the year (77) and the beginning of the year (78.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, if you can recollect, was you once, or twice, or twenty
times in his company?


Duffy. As I am a Christian, I have been a hundred times in his company. And
when you were creating Priests, you would always send for me to be present; and
I wonder how the man should forget himself.


Plunket. I do not say I have not seen him, or that I am a stranger to the man;
but in the company of Bishop Duffy I never saw him, nor I never sent him
Orders to pay any money: and if he did pay any money, he might show the Order.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. If he did pay any money, you did ill to take it.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray let him have fair play to ask any Questions.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Tell how you came to remember that you saw him at Sir Nich.
Plunkets.


Duffy. Dr. Duffy did send me to Sir Nicholas Plunkets, and I met Dr. Plunket
as I was coming out of the City. I had been half a year at the Spanish
Ambassadors, and he sent me for Ireland again, and then I lived at the Convent
in Dublin; and then when I knew that he would come to Town, I went to
Rings-end, where the Ships came in, to meet him.


Plunket. You say you were with him at my house?


Duffy. Yes.


Plunket. If you were, you were invisible: But I ask you, Why did not you tell
this to some Justice of the Peace?


Mr. Just. Dolben. Good Mr. Plunket, he tells you he was as willing to forward
it then as you.


L. C. J. How come you now to change your mind?


Duffy. I went into France in (77) and I was not there a year altogether; but
when I have seen how the poor people there are brought into such slaverie by
the French King, I thought of it, and had rather the Devil should reign over
us, than the Frenchman.


Mr. Just. Dolben. He gives you a very good rational account why.


Duffy. I have been at Sir Nicholas Plunkets, and Dr. Patrick Plunkets, where
there fell some variance about something this man had done to Father Duffy.
Says Bishop Duffy, I might have had you drawn and quartered, if I were as ill
a man as you; and I might have been Primate of Ireland, if I would have
undertaken those things that you undertook. Upon that, says Sir Nicholas
Plunket, What is that? Why it was said it was to raise 60000 men in Ireland at
any time whenever the French or the Spanish King should wage War with England,
Scotland, or Ireland. And this man did confess before my face to Father Duffy,
that it was not only to exalt himself, but all the Roman Clergy, and all the
Gentry that had lost their Estates.


Plunket. Mr. Duffy, one word with you; Is not this out of malice to me for
correcting some of the Clergy?


Duffy. You had nothing to do with me, for I was a Friar.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Edmond Murfey. (which was done.) Tell your whole knowledge
of Dr. Plunket and the Irish Plot.


Murfey. May it please you my Lord, I was one of the first Discoverers of this
Plot; but of nine Witnesses, I have but one in Town.


L. C. J. Well, tell your own knowledge.


Murfey. Now I beg your Lordship as to Dr. Plunket, that you will respit it
till next Term, I could bring ten Witnesses.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you speak your own Evidence.


Murfey. I refer it to the King and Council what Evidence I have given.


L. C. J. Do not trouble your self, be directed a little; you are here now to
speak what you know concerning any Treasons, or any other matters against the
King, done by Dr. Plunket; speak your own knowledge; for as to other Witnesses
we do not call you.


Murfey. If I be called in question for this Evidence --


Mr. At. Genesis Come, Sir, you have been at the Spanish Ambassadors lately,
answer my Question: Have you ever been with Plunket in Ireland?


Murfey. Yes, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Have you ever heard him own himself Primate of Ireland?


Murfey. Yes, titular Primate.


Mr. At. Genesis Under whom did he claim that Authority? under the King, or
under the Pope?


Murfey. I think he could not be under the King at all.


Mr. At. Genesis Under whom then?


Murfey. It must be either the King or the Pope.


L. C. J. Answer me directly, Did he claim to be titular Primate under the Pope?


Murfey. I suppose he did.


^. C J. Was he reputed generally so to be?


Murfey. Yes, my Lord.


Mr At. Genesis Mr. Murfey, remember what you swore before the Grand Jurie; pray
recollect your self whether that be true, and tell all.


L C. J. You are upon your Oath, you must speak the truth and the whole truth,
you must not mince or conceal any thing.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Were you sworn before the Grand Jurie?


Murfey I was sworn before the King and Parliament.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Did you give in any Evidence to the Grand Jurie?


Murfey. Yes, I did.


Mr. Serj. Jeff Was that you swore before the Grand J^rie true, upon your Oath?


Murfey. I cannot say but it was.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Repeat it, tell my Lord and the Jurie what it was, and tell
the truth.


Murfey. I have forgot it.


Mr. At. Genesis Why then I would ask you a little; you remember I was by, and
it is no laughing matter, Mr. Murfey, you will find it so. What do you know of
any Orders issued out by Mr. Plunket, to raise money from the Priests?


Murfey. I know there was Orders, and I took the Orders my self in my hand.


Mr. At. Genesis From whom had you those Orders?


Murfey. From another, and not from him.


Mr. At. Genesis Under whose hand were those Orders?


Murfey. They were from the Primate.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see any Order under Plunket's hand for raising of money?


Murfey. No, but under the Vicar-generals, by his authority, as I suppose.


M^. At Genesis Upon your Oath, did you not swear before the Grand Juri^, that
you saw the Orders under his hand?


Murfey. No, I did not: or I was mistaken, for it was only by his direction.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray had ^ou any converse with Oliver Plunket about the raising
of money?


Murfey. Oliver Plunket about the raising of money?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, that is a plain Question.


Mu^fey. It was about other matters I conversed with him.


Mr At. Genesis But did you converse with him about money?


Murfey. No, not about the money.


Mr. At. Genesis Upon your Oath, did you converse with him about bringing in the
French?


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Declare the truth, come.


L. C. J. Come, don't trifle; What discourse have you had with the Prisoner
about raising of money, or bringing in the French? either of them, Sir.


Murfey. I know this, if the D. of York and D. of Ormond had proceeded
according to their Intentions, it was a general expectation at the same time,
that all the French and Irish would come and fall upon the English Nation, as I
understood.


L. C. J. Pray answer the Question directly, You must not come and think to
trifle with the Court, you must speak the truth, you are sworn to it; you must
not come to quibble and run about to this and that and the other, but answer
directly, Have you had any discourse with the Prisoner about Orders for raising
of Money in Ireland?


Murfey. Yes, I have seen Orders from his Vicar General for the raising of
money.


L. Chief Just. Has he owned them to be by his direction*


Murfey. Not before me, but others he has.


Mr. At. Genesis Have you seen any money paid to him?


Murfey. To whom?


Mr. At. Genesis To Plunkett.


Murfey. To the Vicar General I have.


L. C. Just. But to Plunkett.


Murfey. None to Plunkett.


L. C. Just. Have you had any discourse with him at any time about the raising
of money, which the Vicar General gave order for?


Murf^^. I have had discourse with the Vicar General.


L. Chapter Just. Sir, don't trifle, have you had any with him?


Murfey. With him?


L. Chapter Just. Yes, with him.


Murfey. Yes, I have had some discourse with him.


Lord Chapter Justice, Tell me what that discourse was?


Murfey. I think it was about this. If the D of York, and the D. of Monmouth
fell out together, that he had some men to raise about that matter, and if the
D. of Monmonth would raise the P^^te^^ant Religion --


Mr. At. Genesis You see he has been in Spanish hands.


L. Chapter Just. Were you a Protestant Sir.


Murfey. No, I am a Priest.


Mr. Serg. Jeff. He is to seek yet.


Murfey. I am indifferent whether I be a Protestant or a Papist.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord he is a Priest in Orders, and so has acknowledged
himself.


Murfey. Yes, I am a Priest, but it makes me forget my self to see so many
Evidences to come in, that never knew Plunket.


L. Chapter Just. Sir, you refuse to answer those Q^estions that we put to you here.


Murfey. What I said before the Parliament I answer punctually.


L. Chapter Just. You are asked questions here, and produced as a Witness, will you
answer directly or not?


Murfey. Yes, I will.


L. Chapter Just. Then let me hear what discourse you had with the Primate Plunkett
concerning any Money raised by him or his Vicar General.


Murfey. May it please your Lordship, first of all I did not impeach Primate
Plunket, but the Officers and Justices of the Peace.


Mr. Jones. Had you any discourse with him, yea, or no?


Murfey. That he should find so many Catholics in Ireland if the D. of York
and the D. of Monmouth fell out.


Mr. Just. Jones, Why it plainly appears what you drove at at first, to put off
this Trial if you could.


L. Chapter Just. The Papists in England have been at work with you.


Mr. Serg. Jeff. I perceived this Gentleman was very busy looking upon his
Hat, I desire he may be searched if he have no Paper about him.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Solicitor and my self heard the Evidence he gave to the
Gran^-Jury.


Then h^ went out of the Court and would scarce be persuaded to come back again.

Mr. At. Genesis We both heard him, and he gave the fullest Evidence, much fuller
^o all Instances, and particulars of this High Treason, much fuller than Duffy
to the Grand Jury. Afterward about 3 Weeks ago the Trial coming on, he ran
away and lay hid, I took a great deal of Pains to find him out, and sent
Messengers about, at last I heard he was got to the Spanish Ambassadors, I
sent, and they spyed him in the Chapel; but the Spanish Ambassadors servants
fell upon the Messenger and beat ^im, the Ambassador was first sent to about
it, and his Excellency promi^ed that he should be brought, and when he was
found he told me but the last night, that all he had sworn before the
Grand Jury was true, and he was ready to make it out again.


L. Chapter Just. And now he says, he knows not what he said then, and pray take
notice of that.


Murfey. I told the Grand Jury this, that my Lord Plunket had a design to get
60 or 70000 men in Ireland, if the D. of York and the D. of Monmouth should
fall out.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you tell a word of that to the Grand Jury.


Murfey. Yes Sir, or I was mistaken.


Mr. At. Genesis Not one word of that did he then say.


L Chapter Just. Do you own this man, Dr. Plunket, to be of your Religion?


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Do you know this Seeker?


Plunket. He says himself he is indifferent to be a Protestant or a Papist.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. I will only try you by one question more, for you are sought
out, and it may be you may be found; Do you know how many men he was to raise
in Ireland? remember what you said to the Grand Jury.


Murfey. 70000 Men.


L. Chapter Just. What were they to do?


Murfey. For establishing if occasion should be --


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Establishing, establishing what?


Murfey. Of the Romish Religion.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Well, so far we have got 70000 men to establish the
Romish Religion, what, was Plunkett to do this?


Murfey. As far as I understood.


Mr. Just. Jones. And you understood it by himself?


Murfey. I received Letters from the Vicar General to get so much money
collected, and as soon as I got the Letters to my hands, I sent them to a Privy
Councellor.


L. Chapter Just. Do you not know that he was engaged to assist the French Army?


Murfey. I do not know that by him, but by others.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Did you ever discourse with him about it?


Murfey. I did discourse with him about several matters.


Mr. Just. Dolb. About the French Army?


Murfey. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Do you know that he did endeavor to bring them into Ireland.


Murfey. I had a Correspondence in France at the same time --


L. Chapter Just. With whom.


Murfey. With one Mac Carty.


L. Chapter Just. And do you know that he had Correspondence in France.


Murfey. Yes, I know that.


Mr. Just. Dolb. With whom had Plunket Correspondence in France.


Mu^fey. He had Correspondence with Dr. Cray, and others in France as I
understood by others.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Was the end of that Correspondence to bring men from France
into Ireland.


Murfey. Yes, so far as I understand.


(...) Just. Dolb. You understood the Letters when you read them, did you not.


Murfey. I know not how these People come to swear this business, whether they
had not malice against him --


Mr. At. Genesis Well, Sir, pray give you your Evidence, we will take care of the
rest.


Mr. Just. Dolb. I reckon this Man has given the best Ev^dence that can be.


L. Chapter Just. Yes, it is Evidence that the Cathol^cks have been tampering with
him.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. I desire he may be committed my Lord* because he has fenced
from the beginning

[which was done accordingly]
Mr. At. Genesis Swear John Mac Legh.

[which was done.]
Sir Fran. With. Tell my Lord and the Jury what you know of any Plot in Ireland
to bring in the French.


Mac Legh. I was a Parish Priest in Ireland in the County of Monagh^n, and Dr.
Oliver Plunket received several Sums of Money in Ireland, and especially in the
Diocese where I am. I raised some of it and paid him 40 s. at one time, and 30
s. another time, in the year (74) I paid him 40 s. in the year (75) I paid him
50 s. and it was about July, and it was for the better advancement of the
French coming in.


Mr. Jones. Did he tell you, that the money was to be employed that way.


Mac Legh. Yes, that the money was to be kept for Arms and Ammunition for the
Roman Catholics in Ireland.


L. Chapter Just. Before you paid it, did you receive any order from him?


Mac Legh. Yes, I received an order sub paena su^p^nsion^^, and there was a
public Order throughout Ireland, or we would not pay it; nay several would not
pay it, and they were to be suspended.


Plunket. Can you show any of the Orders under my hand?


Mac Legh. Yes I can show them, but only they are a ^ar off, I did not expect
to have them asked for.


Plunket. Have you no Superiors of your own?


Mac Legh. Yes, but you being Lord Primate, you could suspend Bishops and
inferior Clergy together.


Plunket. When was this?


Mac Legh. In the years (74) and (75.)


Plunket. What is the reason you kept it secret all this while?


Mac Legh. In the year (77) I did discover it to one Mr. O Neale, who I sent to
Dublin to discover this Plot. I was in France my self my Lord.


Plunket. How many years is it since you returned from France?


Mac Legh. In May in the year (78.)


Plunket. Why did you not speak all this while till now?


Mac Legh. I did send one Mr. Henry O Neale to Dublin, for I durst not go, lest
I should have been suspended and excommunicated.


Mr. At. Genesis This is the Priest that Henry. O Neale speaks of.


L. C. Just. Is not this a very good reason; if he had come to Dublin to
discover, you would have suspended him.


Plunket. But my Lord, then he might have shown my suspension and brought me
into a Praemunire.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. If you please Dr. let us who are for the King have done
with him first. I would ask you another Question Sir, were you at one Vicar
Bradeys House?


Mac Legh. Yes, I was.


Mr. At. Genesis Tell what was done there?


Mac Legh. There was Bishop Tyrrell came there with 40 Horsemen well mounted
and armed, he came into the House about 10 in the morning* and staid till about
11 at Night, I was very much among them, and was as willing to be of the Plot,
as themselves.


Mr. At. Genesis Tell what was done there.


Mac Legh. There Bishop Tyrrell said, that he had order from Dr. Oliver
Plunkett and others to partake of the Plot to bring in the French and subvert
the Government in Ireland, and destroy the Protestant Religion and the
Protestants.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there an Oath given?


Mac Legh. Yes, they were all put to their Oaths, which they did take willingly
to keep it private during their Lives time, and the reason was they were to
have their Estates during their Lives time.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Now tell us when this was?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, Henry O Neale and Phelim O Neale speak to the same
purpose.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Do you remember whether Henry O Neale was there? Did he
take the Oath of Secresy?


Mac Legh. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of any Letters from Plunkett?


Mac Legh. In France I landed at Breast, and going through Brittany, I met with
Bishop Tyrell and Dr. Cray, who was my Lord Oliver Plunketts Agent, and Duke
John of Great Brittany came into them; for he heard of these 2 Bishops being
newly come out of Rome, sent for them, and I being a Priest of Tyrrels Diocese,
I went along with them, and they were well accepted, and he showed Dr. Oliver
Plunketts Conditions with the King of France, which was this; to get Dublin and
London Derry and all the Seaports into their own hands, to levy War and
destroy the Protestant Religion, and that they should have him to protect them
during his Lifetime.


L. C. Just. Did you see those Conditions?


Mac Legh. A Copy of them I did, the Governor of Brittany did show them to the
Bishop.


Mr. Sergeant Jefferies. What Language were those Conditions in?


Mac Legh. They were in Latin, Sir.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Was Edmond Murfy put out of the Diocese.


Mac Legh. Not as I know of.


L. C. Just. What do you know of his being Primate? Upon what Conditions was he
made Primate?


Mac Legh. He was made Primate by the Election of the King of France. And upon
his Election, he made those Conditions with the King of France, to raise Men to
join with the French, to destroy the Protestant Religion.


Mr. Just. Jones. You know that man, Dr. Plunkett?


Plunkett. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you ask him any Questions.


Plunket. None, but what I asked the others.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Then if that is all, he has given you a good Answer to that
already, he was as forward then as the rest.


Mr. At. Genesis Then swear John Moyer,

(which was done.)
Mr. J. Jones. What do you know concerning any Plot in Ireland, and Dr.
Plunkets being in it.


Moyer. I know him first, my Lord, to be made Primate of Ireland, engaging that
he should propagate the Roman Faith in Ireland and to restore it to the
Catholic Government, and I know the time by relation, that I came to Rome
within two Months after his being made Primate of Ireland upon the same
Conditions, that have been related to you, and I was brought into the Convent
of St. Francis in Rome by one father and this father was very intimate with
Cardinal Spinola, and when he used to go abroad he used to carry me along with
him as a Companion, and there I found several of the Roman Cardinals say, That
the Kingdom of Ireland should come under the Catholic Government by the way
and means of the Lord Primate Plunket.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of your self?


Moyer. As I was coming then from Rome, I happened to come into a Convent of
the Order of St. Francis, and there came out of Ireland a young Gentleman of
the Family of the O Neales, who has been my Lord Primates Page.


Plunket. I never had a Page.


Moyer. You termed him so my Lord in Ireland, and as I came, this young man had
a packet of Letters with him, as tho they were commendations to enter him into
the College de propaganda side, directed to the Secretary of that College.
And thinking them to be Letters of Recommendation, an old father called one
Thomas Crawley, and I thought it not prejudicial to open the Seal; and the
Contents were these, I translated them 5 years ago, and here are the Contents
following, if you please they may be read, I will do my best to read them in
English, the original were in Latin, and some phrases in Italian. And when I
was surprised by Mr. Murfey the last year and taken suddenly, all my Papers
were taken away before I could return back again, by the Soldiers and the
Tories, I only kept a Copy of this Letter I had in English as near as I could,
and if I did not diminish any thing by the Translation; upon the Oath I have
taken, I have not put any thing in it, but what the Contents of the Letter were.


L. C. Just. Was that Letter under his own hand?


Moyer. My Lord cannot deny that.


Plunket. Do you know my own hand Writing?


Moyer. Does your Lordship deny, that I know your hand?


Plunket. Pray Sir will you answer it?


Moyer. Yes I do very well.


Plunket. When did you leave Ireland?


Moyer. I will tell you that, my Lord it is some 14 or 15 years ago.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. You were giving an account of the Letter, read it.


Moyer. Here is the Contents, Illustrissime Domine, It was directed to Seignior
who is now Secretary of the College de propaganda side

(so then he read his Paper.)
Mr. Sol. Genesis You say, you Translated that out of a Letter under the Prisoners
own Hand.


Moyer. Yes, I translated it immediately, and to prove it, I have statutes
which his Lordship made in the general National Council, which are under your
own hand my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis When did you make this Translation?


Moyer. Five years ago.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Where did you make it?


Moyer. I made it out of the Original in Ireland.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Where is the Original?


Moyer. When I was taken by Mr. Murfey and Mr. Hethrington the last year, the
Soldiers and Tories came and took them away with other Papers I had of the same
business.


L. C. Just. Was the Paper you translated that from, of his hand writing?


Moyer. No my Lord, the Paper I took this out of, was a Copy of the Original.


L. C. Just. Was the Original of his hand Writing?


Moyer. Yes, it was.


L. C. Just. Where did you take it?


Moyer. In Caprennica, when I met with my Lords Page.


L. C. Just. What made you take a Copy of it?


Moyer. It was in Latin and Italian, and I translated it afterward.


L. C. Just. And the English Father, you say, made bold to open it.


Moyer. Yes, because he thought 'twas a Letter of Recommendations, but the
Original of the Statutes made at Clouds, I did take the Original and gave a
Copy to the Page.


L. C. Just. Have you the Original here?


Moyer. Yes my Lord, under his own Hand.


Plunket. That Is another thing.


L. C. Just. But we would know that other thing.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. My Lord, I desire that he would produce it, it is his own
hand Writing, see whether his Grace can deny it.


Moyer. The signing of it is his own hand Writing, I got the Writing along with
the Letter, and thinking to have a Copy of the one as well as of the other; it
was the Statutes I got, and I never knew I had them till I was in Madrid in
Spain.


Then the Paper was shown to the Prisoner.

Plunket. My Lord, it is my hand.


Moyer. Indeed my Lord, it is your own hand.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. He owns it.


Moyer. And there is an Order in those Statutes, wherein Ireland was bound to
send so much Money to Rome upon such a design.


Then the Witness read the Title in Latin.

Mr. Just. Dolben. Look out that Clause for the raising of the money.


Moyer. My Lord, it is that I look for. Cum toti Clero in Hibernia necessarium
sit.


Mr. Just. Dolben. That is but negotia generally.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. That was to solicit their Affairs.


Mr. At. Genesis It Is 500 l. in the whole.


Plunket. Is it 500 l?


Moyer. It Is in Figures a 5 and two (00)


Plunket. My Lord this is Counterfeit, it is put in by other Ink.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Like enough so.


L. C. Just. Nothing more ordinary, you leave a blank for the Sum, and then,
may be, you put it in with other Ink.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How much do you say was the Money, Dr. Plunket.


Plunket. My Lord, every Agent that is kept at Rome has a maintenance, as all
Countries have their Agents at Rome.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How much was it?


Plunket. It was 50 l. a year.


L. C. Just. Look you Mr. Plunket, consider with your self 50 or 500 in this
Case is not 5 farthings difference, but the money was to be raised by your
Order.


Plunket. Ay, but whether it was not raised to this Effect, There is never a
Nation where the Roman Catholic Religion is professed, but has an Agent for
their Spiritual Affairs at Rome, and this was for the Spiritual Affairs of the
Clergy of Ireland.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. And the Letter was for Spiritual Affairs too, was it not?


Plunket. I desire nothing, that is a truth, every Nation has an Agent, and
that Agent must be maintained; and the reason is this, because we have many
Colleges beyond Sea, and so there is no Country of Roman Catholics, but has
an Agent in ^ome.


L. C. Just. You had better r^serve your self till by and by, to answer that
and the Letter together; for this is but a small part of the Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis About this Letter you were speaking of, Pray, will you tell what
f^ll out about it.


Moyer. I will tell you how it fell out afterward. Then I came along into
Marseilles in France, and there were 2 Captains that had as much notice as I
had in that Letter, for they were discoursing that they would advance
themselves in the French Kings service, and hoped, that by the King of France's
help to have the Roman Catholic faith set up in their own Country; why, that
discourse passed off for I was mightily afraid of any such thing, because I
was of another opinion; for perhaps I might think the Roman Catholic faith
would flourish as well as ever it did, and hoped so as well as any body else,
but not by the Sword. As I came to Madrid, there came one Hugh O Donnell Son to
O Donnell with Letters of Recommendation, and those Letters were to entitle the
young man Earl of Tyrone, and likewise that his Majesty, the King of Spain,
should help him for Ireland, according to the form of the Letters he had. And
then as I came for Ireland, speedily after there came Letters of Recommendation
to me, that I should present my self to my Lord Primate, to hear Confessions
and be heard Preach. I came to his Lordship at his own House the 9 th of
December (74) and there he kept me several hours, and approved me; and the Copy
of the Approbation I have to show. Andafter a long dispute we went aside, and
went to to look Father Patrick, and there he showed me such and such things.
And after a long discourse I told my Lord Primate, I see your Lordships Letter,
which you sent by young O Neale, in such a place, and he showed me the Contents
of it and said, ay, my Lord, it is a good Intention and Design, if it can be
done without bloodshed, then my Lord mused a little, and said he, well Father
Francis (which is my name in Religion, my Christian Name was John) pray will
you keep it secret, well my Lord said I, you need not fear; for said he, what
ever I have done herein was not for my own good, but for the public good of
the Catholics. Well said I, it is well. Then does he commend me into the Parish
of where this Mr. Murfey here was to put in a Bull, that I had from my Lord
Primate, which Bull was brought here last year; and there he proffered me high
Promotions, if I would further such things, and solicit such Gentlemen as I
knew would be private in such a business, such as were old Commanders among my
Friends and Relations. Shortly after this I saw Plunket and Bishop Tyrrel and
Captain Con O Neale, practicing to bring Soldiers ready for Ireland, as soon as
they could get opportunity. This Captain Con O Neale coming to the place where
we kept our Priory, and he and his Brothers were Sons to General O Neale. And
there Captain Con comes in the Night time and lodges with us, and discoursed
with his Brother and I, because I was his Companion beyond Sea, about these
matters, That he expected my Lord Primate and Bishop Tyrrels coming thither
that Night, to make some proposals about the Church and other Affairs. After 10
a Clock or thereabouts, my Lord Primate and Bishop Tyrrel came with others in
their Company, and there they and Father O Neale did consult amongst
themselves, that they should send Captain Con to France and to Barcellona with
such and such Instruments; and sending those Instruments away, Captain Con
departs the Country and goes for France soon after; and speedily my Lord
Primate undertook, that he and Bishop Tyrrel should view Munster and Vlster,
and other parts of Ireland, to see how affairs stood. Soon after my Lord
Primate calls a General Provincial Council, and sends out his Orders to levy
such and such Taxes and Subsidies, and Warrants to all the Parish Priests, that
they should give them new Lists to know whether the Numbers they had sent to
Rome before, would comply with that List. And then O Neale went to view the
Forts of Charlemont and Dun-Gannon, whilst those Lords did collect the money;
the Orders I have seen with my own proper Eyes, and his own man confessed
before the Council in Ireland that my Lord gave them under his hand.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. What year was this?


Moyer. It was in (76) to the best of my remembrance.


L. C. Just. Look you Sir, was this at a Provincial meeting.


Moyer. Yes, my Lord, a General National Council, to send over Instruments, to
tell them, that they were ready to assist any Foreign Army, that should help
on the design.


L. C. Just. And to raise money?


Moyer. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Have you paid him any money?


Moyer. I was exempted my self; but I have seen others.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How many?


Moyer. I believe 30.


Mr. Just. Dolben. It was not then a secret thing then, but openly done by them.


Moyer. Yes, I saw them when they came with orders, there were 4 Priests, and
they had a great Cloak-bag going with Orders up and down.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Why were you exempted?


Moyer. Because I am a Regular Priest.


Sir Fra. Wythins. You say you saw the Orders for raising of money, how do you
know for what it was to be employed?


Moyer. It was there specified down.


Plunket. Can you show any of the Orders?


Moyer. I could not take them, they did not concern me.


Sir Fra. Wythins. How was it specified?


Moyer. To Levy so much Money per Priest. I cannot remember the particular
Sum; but that every Priest should give so much toward an Agent in Rome to
Solicit their Business, and forward it.


L. C. Just. What year was it?


Moyer. (76.)


L. C. Just. Was any of the Money specified for raising an Army, or bringing in
the French?


Moyer. It was both for the Agent and to summon a National Council, to get
things ready prepared to entertain and accept the French Army when it should
come. I am not so good in expressing my self in English.


L. C. Just. Your sense is good, it is no matter for your expression.


Mr. Jones. What more do you know?


Moyer. I know that he had the same Council, and that they did agree upon the
business, and this I know by one Patrick Borne, and I being willing that this
wicked Action should be hindered, sent to the next Justice to discharge my self
of it, which Justice was as favorable to the business as my Lord himself was.


L. C. Just. Will you ask him any Questions, Mr. Plunket?


Plunket. I desire to know when he left Ireland.


Moyer. I cannot tell how to number the years, but I think it was in 62 or 63,
to the best of my remembrance it was 16 or 17 years ago.


Plunket. When did you return?


Moyer. I came back in 74, you know it my Lord.


Plunket. Very well, when did you see the Letter with the young man in
Caprennica.


Moyer. In (72.)


Plunket. How then did you know my hand, which you had never seen?


Moyer. I have seen it several times to several Instruments, to Seignior and I
have seen several other Letters of your hand.


Plunket. How did you know my hand?


Moyer. I cannot positively say, I then knew your hand, but according to
relation, I heard it from those Cardinals I conversed with at Rome.


L. C. Just. But now you are acquainted with his hand, is it the same hand
which you have seen up and down in Writings with his name to?


Moyer. Yes my Lord, it is the very same hand.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. I ask you Sir, when you came back again and told him you
had seen such a Letter under his hand with O Neale, did he own it to you?


Moyer. Yes, he did own it, and that he did not do it for his own benefit, but
for the public.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Did he desire you to be secret?


Moyer. Yes, he did, and to be discreet, and he would see me highly promoted.
And my Lord, you sent Proposals to me, to give me 100 l. that I should not
prosecute you, according as they told me, and they gave me one Guinny in hand
for it.


L. C. Just. Some of it came to the hands of Murfey I believe.


Plunket. My Lord, I cannot say any thing to this, my hands are tied, because
my Witnesses are not here. My Lord, if I had my Witnesses and Records, I did
not care for all these Witnesses.


L. C. Just. But you know, you had time to bring them.


Plunket. My Lord, I desire to know whether this be his hand,

(showing the Paper to Mr. Moyer.)
Moyer. Yes, I believe it is.


Plunket. I desire it may be read.


Moyer. Yes, I am very well satisfied it should.


Cl. of Cr. Reads. For my very Reverend Father An^bony Guardian of Armagh, Your
Letter and Citation -- It Is dated in July (78.)


Plunket. He can best read it himself.


Cl. of Cr. Read it right

(the Paper being delivered him.)
Moyer. My Lord, I pity him with all my heart, that a man of my own Function,
should be brought into Question for such things as these are, (he reads) Very
Reverend Father Guardian, it is dated 1 July (78.) Your paternities paternal
Letter and Citation homeward, I did instantly peruse. As for my Lord Oliver
Plunk^t, I wrote a Letter to him the day before I saw your Reverends last, that
he might cause my fame, which is as dear to me as my Life, to be recalled, or I
should cause his Name to be fixed at every public place, which by the Almighty
I will do, nature and all reason compelling me to do it.


Plunket. My Lord, I say this, he says he came to my House when he came over,
and I imparted this secret to him, yet you s^e I had denounced him throughout
my whole Diocese, and he here calls me by all those Names of Elemas, Simon
Magus, and Barjesus, and it is impossible if I had communicated such a secret to
him, that I would deal so with him.


Mr. Just. Dolben. He does not say, you imparted this s^cret to him, but he
says, when he told you of the Letter, you answered him, but you seemed
surprised and mused first.


L. C. Just. You seemed to flatter him then, and told him you hoped to see him,
the best of his Order, highly promoted.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How came you to fall out, Moyer?


Moyer. When first they had this meeting at Brantry, s^^ing a Cloud a coming,
and dreading a War, and the cons^quences of it, I went and applied my self to
Sir Hamilton one of His Majesty's Privy Counselors in Ireland, and I gave in
all my Informations the 7 th December (76.)


Mr. Just. Dolben. And thereupon he denounced you Excommunicate?


Moyer. Yes, and afterward, when he saw I was in Communication and Familiar
with these Privy Counc^llors, then he was certain I had discovered the matter,
and then he got a great many Devices to get the Letters out of my hand.


Plunket. You shall see under his own hand all the Stratag^m of this, if I had
my Witnesses here, you should then see under his own hand, upon what account he
f^ll out with me. Pray my Lord ask him if this other Letter be his hand.


Moyer. I believe it is my own hand.


L. C. Just. Read it.


Moyer. (Reads,) Very Reverend Father Guardian (then speaking) My Lord, you
know that I was loath to discover my self, being among People knowing of the
Plot.


L. C. Just. Well, read it over.


Moyer. (Reads) The 23 th of April (78) I was somewhat comforted by your
Letter. But now I hope your Reverence has considered what wrong I have
sustained, by my envious Adversaries Calumnies, only for standing, as I have a
Soul to save, for your Rights and Privileges, as also for endeavoring to
hinder my Native Countries ruin and destruction.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Read that again.

(which he did.)
Plunket. Observe, that I was his Adversary, for standing for the Rights and
Privileges of the Friars.


Mr. Just. Dolben. As also for endeavoring to hinder his Countries ruin and
destruction.


L. C. Just. The one and the other were the reason of your falling out.


Moyer. (Reads on.)
Moyer. My Lord, I was I confess a begging Friar, and stood up for the
Privileges of the Friars.


Plunket. Did you write any Process to Rome against me?


Moyer. No, I never did it.


Plunket. My Lord, does not he say I was in disgrace at Rome?


Moyer. No, nothing of that.


L. C. Just. I don't hear it, but what if he did? what is that to the purpose?


Plunket. To show his Contradictions, now he says, I was great in Rome, and but
then in his Letter he says, I was in disgrace at Rome. Now he says, all that he
had against me, was for his Friars, and to hinder the destruction of his
Country, because I hindered the Friars to beg there, is the Destruction of his
Country, as he was doing there. Upon that he fell out with me, and upon that
his own Superiors sent this Order.


L. C. Just. We cannot meddle with your Superiors Orders, they are nothing
before us.


Mr. Serj. J^fferies. My Lord, I think for the present, We have done our
Evidence.


Plunket. My Lord, to show what was part of the falling out, I would ask him if
he was Indicted for any Crime, and found Guilty by a Jury?


Moyer. That was for discovering, for I discovered it before.


Plunket. My Lord, he confesses he was Convicted for giving Powder and Shot to
the R^^^ls.


Mr. Just. Dolben. No, no he does not say so, produce the Record, if you have
any of such thing.


Moyer. To satisfy the Court.


Mr. Serj. Jeff^ries. Look you Dr. Plunket, if you will ask him any Questions,
that by Law he is bound to answer, do it of Gods name, we will not interpose,
but if you ask him any Questions that may tend to accuse himself, we must tell
you, he is not bound to answer them.


Plunket. He has been Convicted and found Guilty, he will Conf^ss it himself.


L. C. Just. He is not bound to answer such a Question.


Moyer. It was a Tory swore against me, that you did absolve.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Don't tell us a story of your Tories.


L. C. Just. Look you Mr. Plunket, don't mispend your own time; for the more
you trifle in these things, the less time you will have for your defense, I
desire you now to consider, and well husband your time for your defense; what
have you to say for your self?


Plunket. My Lord, I tell you, I have no way to defend my self, in that I was
denied time to bring over my Records and my Witnesses which are 10 or 12. And
if I had them here, I would stand in desiance of all the World to accuse me;
but I have not sufficient time to bring over my Records and my Witnesses, and I
am brought here from out of my Native Country; were I in Ireland, there both I
and they should be known: but when I was to be tried there, they would not
appear; and it is all false and only Malice. These Men used to call me Oliverus
Cromwellus out of spite.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. You are very like him, a destroyer of the Government.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. Were not you acquainted with him?


Plunket. This is all I can say, If I had my Witnesses here I could make my
defense.


L. C. Just. Here are some things, that if you can give an Answer to, you will
do well to do it; for they stick close to you. They do testify against you
here, that you did undertake to raise a body of men in Ireland, 70000 men they
speak of out of your own Natiou, and all these were to join with the French,
for the introducing the Religion of the Romish Church into Ireland, and settling
that again there. And that you in order to this, did take a Survey of all those
Roman Catholics that were able to bear Arms, from 16 to 60; and there is
plentiful Evidence, that you did go a Circuit there to peruse all the Towns,
and see which might be most Convenient for the taking in, and entertaining the
French, and landing their Forces; and Charlemont, you did design that for one
strong place to be taken, and Dun Gannon for another, and that you did design
the French Army to land at Carlingford, and all that was with you, tells the
reason you gave, why that should be the place, that they might come up with a
burdened Ship to the very Gates of the Town, that you did in order to the
entertaining these Foreign Forces, raise Money, That you did send out your
Orders sub poena suspens^on^s to all that were of the Roman Clergy, and that
this Money was receiv^d, s^veral of them testified that they paid it to you,
and this man has seen great n^mbers of persons pay money to you upon these
accounts. All these are Treason, what say you to them. It does import you to
consider what Answer you can give.


Plunket. My Lord, first as to the first point, I answer, that I never received
a Farthing of Money out of my own District, and but for my own Livel^hood, and
that I can prove by those that have received it for me, that I never received
over threescore pound a year in my life, unless some Gentleman would now and
then give me 10 s. for my relief. For my Lord, this is the way in Ireland,
every Priest has so many Families allotted to him, and every Roman Catholic
Family gives 2 s. a year (as they that profess that way, know) and the Priests
give me who am Superior over them, in my own District, some 20s. some 30 s. and
I never got so much in my life as to maintain a servant, and this was attested
before the Council in Ireland.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Ay, but the Witnesses say, out of your own District you sent
into another Bishops Diocese to Collect money.


Plunket. My Lord, I say I could never get so much as to keep a servant, and
till now I never got a farthing out of my own Diocese, unless I have been
called to an Arbitration or some such thing, it may be for my Journey and
expenses 40 or 50 Miles they would give me something for my maintenance, If you
should find any thing else, I will be cont^nt to suffer, and if my Evidence
were brought from Ireland, there is nothing but what would be made clear, both
under their own hands and by Records, and that is all well known, and was
attested in his Presence before the Council in Ireland, which threescore Pounds
was a very small thing to maintain me, andI never had above one servant, and
the House I lived in was a little Thatched House, wherein was only a little
Room for a Library, which was not 7 foot high, where once this fellow came to
affront me, because I had hindered him from begging* and that is for the money.
For the Men, I defy any one that ever see me make a List of Men in my life, or
can produce any List made by my order. I was never in my l^^e at Kingsale, at
Cork, at Dun-Gannon, at Lymrick, etc. or those parts of Munster which were the
chief Ports where the French should come in, and not in Carlingford which is
the narrow Seas in Vlster, which any one that knows the World will judge to be a
very improper place for the French to land in. It Is all one as to say that the
French should come in at a poor place where they could get nothing* it being at
the Narrow-Seas, and they never saw me there in their Lives.


L. Chapter Just. Yes, one does say, he was with you.


Plunket. Well, one does say he saw me there, but if I had my Witnesses here, I
could prove he was a Friar, and declared an Apostate by his own Pr^vincial, as
this Gentleman is, and because I hindered them to beg in my Districts, therefore
they have this Malice against me, that is all. Well my Lord, that is for that,
I was never in my life in Connaght, And they cannot say, I took any List in
Vlster, nor was 12 Miles in Munster in my life, But thus my Lord, Sometimes
there would be, as our way is, so many Families assigned to every Priest, (and
this is the plain truth,) this Priest perhaps complains to me of the
Inequality, my Companion near me has 150 and I have but Threescore, which I
must rectify; though I never knew ^ut one of these Complaints. And if I had my
Witnesses from Ireland and the Records, I would defy all these Witnesses
together. For my sending to Rome, I had never an Agent in Rome for these seven
years past, because I was not able to maintain him, and indeed it was a great
shame to us; because there is never a Community of Friars, that has a College
beyond Sea, but has some Agent at Rome.


L. Chapter Just. It Is a shame to have one there, not to want one.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Well, if you have Witnesses, I cannot tell what to say.


Plunket. If I had gotten but to the latter end of the Term, I had defied them
altogether. And your Lordship should have seen under their own hands what they
were.


L. Chapter Just. You forget this all this while, your own Letter; wherein this
matter is, that you had ^earched the Towns and considered it.


Mr. At. Genesis He does deny there was such a Letter, he does not own there was
such a Letter.


Plunket. I my Lord, I never did write such a Letter. And that young man that
he speaks of, I could prove, if I had my Witnesses, that he never was in any
service or Company in Ireland, nor writ any Letters by him.


L. Chapter Just. Did you never send any Letter by one O Neale?


Plunket. No my Lord, but he went over a begging.


Moyer. This young man's Brother in Law will testify, that he was your
Lordships Page.


Plunket. I have 3 Witnesses that he came there begging, naked, and was Sick 3
Months, and went over a begging, and was at Rome as a stragler.


Moyer. Call Hanlet,

(who came in)
Sir Fran. With. Did you know Neale O Neale?


Hanlet. Yes.


Sir Fran. With. Whose servant was he?


Hanlet. My Lord Plunket sent him to Rome; he was sent there with his Letters
and I saw the young man and the Letters.


Mr. Jones. Did he come a begging there?


Hanlet. No.


Plunket. Where did you see him.


Hanlet. At Mant.


Plunket. Where is that?


Hanlet. In France.


Plunket. And you saw him with my Letters?


Hanlet. Yes.


Plunket. And this man says, the Letters were opened at Caprennica, because he
thought they were Letters of Recommendation.


Hanlet. Why, he went that way afterward, and they were not opened, when I saw
them.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. Did you know he was the Doctors Servant?


Hanlet. Yes, he was.


Plunkett. Did you see him in my Service?


Hanlet. I saw him in Mant.


Mr. J. Dolben. How do you know he was the Bishops Servant.


Hanlett. Because he showed me his Letter.


L. C. J. Was he owned for his Servant, and was he taken for his Servant.


Hanlett. Yes.


Plunkett. Did he go on Foot, or on Horseback.


Hanlett. He went on foot.


Plunkett. He was in a poor Condition in a place not above four Miles from
Rome, that I can prove.


L. C. J. Did he beg as he went.


Hanlett. No.


L. C. J. Mr. Plunkett, if there is any Question you will ask of the Witnesses;
or if there be any Evidence you would give your self, this is your time for the
doing of it; if not, we must leave your Case to the Jury, who have heard the
Evidence all along.


Plunkett. Only this my Lord, your Lordships sees how I am dealth with. First
and foremost, I have not time to bring my Witnesses, or my Records, which if I
had, I would not weigh one Farthing to leave my Cause with any Jury in the
World. Besides all this, I am brought out of my own native Country, where
these men lived, and I lived, and where my Witnesses and Records are, which
would show what these People are. I sent by the Post and did all that I could,
and what can I say when I have not my Witnesses against these People, they may
swear any thing in the World; you cannot but observe the Improbability of the
thing in it self, and unto what a Condition I am brought. My Lord, my Life is
in imminent Danger, because I am brought out of my own Country, where these
People would not be believed against me.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, I think this matter lies in a narrow Compass, the
Evidence has been long; I would only repeat the short heads of that which has
been given at large. He is Indicted for a Conspiracy to kill the King, the
Overt Act is an Endeavor to introduce a foreign Power into Ireland, to raise
an Army, and levy War there; and the Proof of it has been very full. The Proof
in general, that there was a Plot to introduce the French, is plain by all the
Witnesses, and the Proof in particular upon this Person at the Bar, has been
as plain as any thing can be. They prove to your Lordship in general, that
there was an Expectation that the French should come in, that there was an
Invitation of Florence Wire the first Witness, to go over into France, and
speedily he should have a Command upon his return, in Ireland, that there were
Preparations; for this appears by the Oath of Secrecy given to several men.
Forty men that came along with Bishop Tyrrel to keep it private during their
Lives; and there was a farther Proof of that general Conspiracy by Duffy, that
when there was a general Meeting of so many thousand People for Confirmation,
there was by the Gentlemen at that Meeting a secret Consultation how to carry
on the Design, and how to list Men, and to look out the old Officers in the
late Rebellion, and to see what Posture they were in, as to the management of
this Design, and this comes now particularly to the Prisoner who was by at this
Consultation, so the Witnesses do tell you. But that that comes nearer to him,
is, that he did issue out Orders for the raising of Money, and that he did
raise Money pursuant to those Orders, and did receive Money for that very
purpose; this is proved by three Witnesses, Duffy, and Mac Legh who paid the
Money, and by Moyer the last Witness, who saw him receive it from several
Persons. This is positive upon him; nay, they say farther, that there was a
List made of the several men, in the several Parishes, that were able to bear
Arms upon occasion, from sixteen to sixty, and there was a List of a matter of
threescore thousand men that were ready upon any Occasion to rise for the
Purpose, and this List was delivered over into the Hands of the Prisoner at the
Bar. There is one Witness, Duffy, that says farther, that he saw a Letter
under his Hand in France to the Cardinal Bouillon, to invite the French King
into Ireland, and he did wonder that he should spend his Time and Blood in Wars
against Spain, which was a Roman Catholic, and not come into Ireland to
extirpate the Heretics. And this Letter is confirmed by another Letter, which
was seen by Moyer, a Copy of which is produced, which he translated from the
Original in Latin, and the Letter was sent to Rome by Neale O Neale, whom the
Prisoner says he had no Concern for, but to give him some Recommendations.


Plunkett. I gave him no Recommendations.


L. C. J. No, he says he did not give him any, nor sent any Letter by him.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then he urged, that he went along begging by the Way, but it is
proved he was sent by him, and sent with Letters, and that by his Brother in
Law, who met him at Mants. And it is proved by Moyer, who saw the Letter opened,
taking it to be but a common Letter of Recommendation, he read the Letter and
took a Copy of it, and translated that Copy, which Translation is enough to
verify all the matter which the Witnesses have sworn, for it is agreeing to what
he said to Cardinal Bouillon in his other Letter, that it was more proper for
the Catholic Princes to agree together to extirpate Heresy, than to vary
amongst themselves, that now was the time: for there were threescore thousand
Men ready to rise upon such an Invasion. This is the Substance of the Letter,
and this proves fully the Conspiracy this man was engaged in, his receiving
Money, his Listing Men, and his Invitation of foreign Princes. And this is
fully proved.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. And so his Viewing the Ports too.


Mr. Sol. Genesis It was likewise agreed that Carlingford should be the Port, and
it is like enough to be the Port, for it is a very large Port, that Ships of the
greatest Burden may come up to the Town, and the Town it self but a weak Town.
This is the Substance of the Evidence, and this is Proof enough, we think, to
convict any Man of this Fact.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. My Lord, I shall trouble you but with one word that has
been omitted. I think it is a Cause of great Example, and that thing which the
Prisoner seems to make his Excuse has been answered by a Favor and Indulgence
from the Court in a very extraordinary manner. For, in as much as this
Gentleman would make it a very hard Case, That he is brought out of his own
Country, and has not his Witnesses; it is very well known that by a particular
Favor of the Court, which is not usual in these Cases, he had between five and
six weeks time for preparation for his Trial: so that truly as to what does
appear, I think all the Witnesses that have been examined, are Witnesses to be
credited, except you Gentlemen, of your selves can convict upon your own
Knowledge these Persons of any Misdemeanor, which I think you cannot, much less
of Perjury. But besides, the Witnesses we have produced, all which speak to the
Plot in general, and four of them fix it upon the Person at the Bar; they speak
particularly, and every one agrees in Circumstances, and that other that spoke
mincingly, I put it upon; it is the greatest Evidence that can be. For that
Person that could come before a Grand Jury, and there be the main Witness, but
when he comes here, must be scru'd and pumped to discover the seventy thousand
men. And I suppose you did observe how difficult it was to kno' of him, whether
this Person was Primate of Ireland, or whether it were from the Authority of
the King or the Pope, a very probable thing, that he should be such a one as
the King designed to be Primate and Superintendent of Ireland. Further my Lord,
this I desire to take notice of too, that Wire, the first Witness, fixes four
particular things upon the Prisoner at the Bar, which have not yet been taken
notice of. First, he fixes a Discourse with another Person that was Competitor
with him for this very Office, Bishop Duffy, and he gives the Reason why he was
admitted into the Office rather than the other, because he was a man of greater
Ability to carry on the Design, and though he does not give you an account of the
Design; yet the rest of the Evidence do, and make it to be the Design then
carrying on. Another thing is, he tells you of the sending one into France,
that was to come back again in order to this Design, I think his name was Mac
Donnel, and then the great Tory Flemming and he were to come back again
Colonels in the Army that was to be raised. The next Person, that fixes it
upon him, is Mr. Han O Neal, and he gives the plainest Circumstances, That at a
time in August when Bishop Tyrrell came to the House of one Bradey with so many
men well equipped with such and such Arms, and took the Oath of Secrecy; he
himself, but not only he, but the other Priest Mac Legh, was present at the
same time, and took the said Oath, and he does tell you that that very Priest
was sent to Dublin to discover it at that very time, and so he has fixed the
Person, and Time, and the Business they came about. Then Mac Legh comes and
tells you the same thing in every Circumstance; ay, but says the Prisoner at
the Bar, and he would make it to be a great Objection, How chance that they
have concealed this all the while, and not discovered it to some Justice of the
Peace? Why, says one, I was under your Jurisdiction in that place, that is the
very Reason he gives wherefore he durst not, and says another, I was concerned
and as earnest as the Prisoner or any body else, but going into France, I
observed the slavery that all the Subjects were under, under the Tyranny of
that King, and apprehending that the same King was to come into Ireland by the
means of these Gentlemen; I was concerned at it, and had rather the Devil
should reign over us than such an one, and therefore I will discover it. And he
said very well I think, that he had rather have the Devil to reign; for it
seems to be him, or one in his shape that reigns after that manner. And there
are two Persons that swear to the vey year that they were obliged to raise the
money, and swear positively, they saw his Orders Sub poena suspensio^is, I do
not know whether they mean hanged or suspended from their Office. But it seems
it was so terrible, that it made them pay twenty Shillings a piece for three
years successively. And there is another Gentleman that tells you, that out of
a small Living, wherein he was concerned only as Curate to a third Person it
had been paid two or three times, and another though he was exempt himself from
the payment, yet so great a Confident was he of the Prisoner's at the Bar, that
he was present when he saw thirty or forty pay this Tax, and whereas the
Prisoner at the Bar would make it thought a strange thing, that he should raise
so much money, who had but an house seven foot high, it seems there is above
that thatched house a Chapel.


Plunkett. There is no Chapel.


Sr. Geo. Jefferies. But now my Lord, that which substantially proves what
these Witnesses say, is the Letter that is sent to Rome to the Secratary of the
College de propaganda Fide, which is the last Letter that the last Gentleman
speaks of, wherein he does particularly take notice, that he had taken care to
raise such moneys, and view all the Ports and Places of Strength. And my Lord,
that which is a very great Circumstance to back the Evidence of the first
Letter to the French Cardinal Bouillon which was taken notice of by the first
Witness, and there is such a passage in this too, that the Catholic Princes
should not spill one another blood, when they might better employ it here in
Ireland for the Propagation of the Faith; this last Letter takes particular
notice of that very instance too, that instead of drawing their Swords against
one another, they had better come to promote the Catholic Faith in Ireland.
These four Witnesses are punctual and precise in every particular Circumstance
of the Case, and against them there is nothing but the common Objection. If I
had such Records, and Witnesses here I could make my Defense, that is, if he
had those things that he has not, he might appear to be another man than he is;
but I am sure, as it appears upon the Evidence that has been given by all the
Witnesses, there is a plain Proof and a full Proof of every Treason laid to his
Charge.


Plunkett. My Lord, I desire these Witnesses may be called

[giving in a Paper.]
Crier. David Fitz-gerard, Eustace Commines and Paul Gormar.


L. C. J. Who gave him this Paper, he had it not before?


Stranger. I was told that these were good Evidences for Dr. Plunket, and I
gave him the Names.


L. C. J. Where are they?


Stranger. They are hard by.


Mr. At. Genesis Where is Eustace Commines, for he was one that gave in Evidence
against the Prisoner.


Then Paul Gormar appeared.

L. C. J. What would you ask him?


Plunket. I desire to know of him, whether Mr. Moyer did allute and intioe him
to swear against me?


Gormar. Indeed my Lord he never did.


L. C. J. Will you ask him any more?


Gormar. But this my Lord, Mr. Moyer and I were in Discourse, and he said if
there was Law to be had in Ireland, he would show Mr. Plunket his share in it.


L. C. J. Well, what of that?


Gormar. My Lord, I did come out of Ireland to reveal what Plots the Irish had
against the King, and as for this Mr. Plunket, as I have a Soul to save, I
never heard of any Misdemeanor of him.


Mr. J. Dolben. How came you here to day?


Gormar. I was summoned.


Mr. J. Dolben. By whom? Was it the Attorney General or Plunket that summoned
you?


Gormar. Here is the Summons.


Mr. Serj. Jefferies. It is a common sub Poena.


Plunket. I never sent for him,


Gormar. It was not against you, they know I had nothing against you, I thought
you did more good in Ireland than hurt, so I declare it.


L. C. J. Have you any more Witnesses? If Fitz-Gerard or Commines will come, we
will hear them.


Plunket. My Lord, I have not any more Witnesses.


L. C. J. Look you Gentlemen of the Jury, This Gentleman here Mr. Plunket, is
indicted of High Treason, and it is for Conspiring the King's Death, and
endeavoring to bring the French Army into Ireland for to invade that Kingdom,
and to plant the Romish Religion in that Kingdom. You have had Evidence against
him that has been fully examined. And these things do seem to be very plain by
the Witnesses, That he himself has taken a Commission, or a Grant, or what you
will please to call it, from the Pope to be Primate of Ireland, that he has
taken upon him to make Laws as the Provincial, and that he has undertaken and
endeavored to settle the Popish Religion in that Kingdom, and in order to
that, he has invited the Aid of the French Army, and that he has for the
better landing of them, looked out what places were most convenient for them;
That he hash set a Tax upon the Clergy within his Province for the facilitating
of all this, and for the making preparations for the entertainment of this
Army. This the Witnesses testify against him, and that there were some Towns,
as D^ngannon and another Town, that were to be betrayed to the Frenh. Now you
must consider concerning these Witnesses: If you believe the Evidence that has
been given, and which has been repeated by the Kings Counsel, and if you
believe that he did design to bring in a French Army, to establish the Roman
Religion there again, and that he took upon him to raise money for that
purpose, surveyed the Ports, and made such provisions, as the Witnesses speak
of, and was in that Conspiracy; you must find him Guilty, I leave it to you, it
is a pretty strong Evidence, he does not say any thing to it, but that his
Witnesses are not come over.


Plunkett. I can say nothing to it, but give my own Protestation, that there is
not one word of this said against me is true, but all plain Romance, I never
had any Communication with any French Minister, Cardinal, nor other.


Then the Jury withdrew for a Quarter of an Hour, and being returned gave this
Verdict.

Cl. of Cr. Oliver Plunkett, hold up thy hand. How say you, is he Guilty of the
High Treason whereof he stands Indi cted, or not Guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


Plunkett. Deo Gratia, God be thanked.


Then the Verdict was Recorded, and the Court rose. And the Keeper went away
with his Prisoner.

On Wednesday 15mo. Junii, 1681. Oliver Plunkett was brought to the Bar to
receive his Judgment.

Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I pray your Judgment against the Prisoner Oliver
Plunkett.


Cl. of Cr. Oliver Plunkett, hold up thy Hand; Thou have been Indicted of
High Treason, thou have been thereupon Arraigned, thou haft thereunto pleaded
not Guilty, and for thy Trial have put thy self upon God and the Country, which
Country has found thee Guilty, what have thou to say for thy self, why
Judgment of Death should not pass upon thee, and Execution be thereupon awarded
according to the Law.


Plunkett. My Lord, may it please your Lordship, I have something to say, which
if your Lordship will consider seriously, may occasion the Courts Commiseration
and Mercy. I have my Lord for this Fact been Arraigned in Ireland, and brought
to my Trial there. At the Day of my Trial all the Witnesses voluntarily
absented themselves, seeing I had Records and Witnesses to convince them
evidently and show what men they were, and the prepensed Malice that they did
bear to me, and so finding that I could clear my self evidently, they absented
themselves, on the day of my Trial no Christian appeared, but hither over they
come, and procure that I should be brought hither, where I could not have a
Jury that knew the Qualities of my Adversaries, or who knew me, or the
Circumstances of the Places, Times, and Persons; the Juries here as I say were
altogether Strangers to these Affairs, and so my Lord they could not know many
things that conduce to a fair Trial, and it was morally impossible they should
know it. I have been accused principally and chiefly for surveying the Ports,
for fixing upon Carlingford for the Landing of the French, for the having of
seventy Thousand Men ready to join with the French, for collecting Money for
the Agents in this matter, for the assisting of the French and this great
Utopian Army. A Jury in Ireland consisting of men that lived in that Country,
or any man in the Wo^^d that has but seen Ireland in a Map, would easily see
there was no probability that that should be a place sit for the French to Land
in, though he never was in Ireland, yet by the Map, he would see they must come
between the narrow Seas all along to ulster, and the Rocks, and such places
would make it very dangerous; and by their own Confession it was a poor Town,
and of no strength, a very small Garrison, which had not been so, if it had
been a place of any Consideration. And whereas I had Influence only upon one
Province, as is well known, though I had the Title of Primate of all Ireland, as
the Archbishop of Canterbury has of all England; yet the Archbishop of York
will not permit him to meddle with his Province; and it is well known by the
Gentry there, and those that are accustomed to the place; That in all the
Province of Ulster, take Men, Women, and Children of the Roman Catholics, they
could not make up seventy Thousand. This, a Jury there my Lord had known very
well, and therefore the Laws of England, which are very favorable to the
Prisoner, have provided that there should be a Jury of the Place where the Fact
was Committed, as Sr. Thomas Gascoine, as I have heard, had a Yorkshire Jury,
though he was tried at London. And then after my coming here, I was kept close
Prisoner for six Months, not any Christian was permitted to come at me, nor did
I know any thing, how things stood in the World. I was brought here the third
of May, to be Arraigned, and I did petition your Lordship to have some time for
my Trial, and I would have had it put off till Michaelmass, but your Lordships
did not think fit to grant so long, but only till the eighth of this Month,
when my Witnesses who were ready at the Sea side, would not come over without
Passes, and I could not get over the Records without an Order from hence; which
Records would have shown that some of the Witnesses were Indicted and found
Guilty of high Crimes, some were e imprisoned for Robberies, and some of the
Witnesses were ^nfamous People, so I petitioned the eighth of this Month, that
I might have time but for twelve days more, but your Lordship thought, when the
Motion was made, that it was only to put off my Trial, and now my Witnesses are
come to Coventry yesterday morning, and they will be here in a few days, and so
for want of time to desend my self in, I was exposed to my Adversaries, who
were some of my own Clergy, whom for their debauched Lives, I have corrected,
as is well known there. I will not deny my self, but that as long as there was
any Toleration and Connivance, I did Execute the Function of a Bishop, and that
by the second of Elizabeth is only a Praemunire, and no Treason. So that my
Lord, I was exposed Defenseless to my Enemies, whereas now my Witnesses are
come, that could make all appear. I did beg for twelve days time, whereby you
might have seen as plain as the Sun, what those Witnesses are, that began the
Story, and say these things against me. And my Lord, for those Depositions of
the seventy thousand Men, and the Moneys that are Collected of the Clergy in
Ireland, they cannot be true, for they are a p^or Clergy that have no Revenue
nor Land; They live as the Presbyterians do here, there is not a Priest in all
Ireland, that has certainly o^ uncertainly above threescore Pounds a Year, and
that I should Collect of them forty Shillings a piece, for the raising of an
Army, or for the Landing of the French at Carlingford; if it had been brought
before a Jury in Ireland, it would have been thought a mere Romance. If they
had accused me of a Praemunire for the exercise of my Episcopal Function,
perhaps they had said some thing that might have been believed, but my Lord, as
I am a dying Man, and hope for Salvation by my Lord and Savior, I am not guilty
of one point of Treason they have swore against me, no more than the Child that
was born, but yesterday. I have an Attestation under my Lord of Essex's hand
concerning my good Behavior in Ireland, and not only from him, but from my Lord
Berkly, who was also Governor there, which the Kings Attorney saw; But here I
was brought, here I was tried, and having not time to bring my Witnesses, I
could not prove my Innocence, as otherwise I might. So that, if there be any
Case in the world that deserves Compassion, surely my Case does; and it is such
a rare Case, as I believe you will not find two of them in Print, that one
Arraigned in Ireland, should be tried here afterward for the same Fact. My
Lord, if there be any thing in the world that deserves pity, this does, for I
can say, as I hope for Mercy, I was never Guilty of any one point they have
swore against me, and if my Petition for time had been granted, I could have
shown how all was prepense Malice against me, and have produced all
Circumstances that could make out the Innocence of a Person. But not having had
time, and being Tried, I am at your Mercy.


L. C. J. Well, you have nothing further to say in Bar of Judgment, you have
said all you can?


Plunket. I have nothing further to say, but what I have said.


Then Proclamation was made for silence, while Judgment was passing upon the
Prisoner.

L. C. J. Look you Mr. Plunket, You have been here indicted of a very great and
heinous Crime, the greatest and most heinous of all Crimes, and that is,
High Treason; and truly yours is a Treason of the highest Nature, it is a
Treason in truth against God and your King, and the Country where you lived.
You have done as much as you could to dishonor God in this Case; for the bottom
of your Treason was, your setting up your false Religion, than which, there is
not any thing more displeasing to God, or more pernicious to Mankind in the
world. A Religion that is ten times worse than all the heathenish
Superstitions, the most dishonorable and derogatory to God and his Glory of all
Religions or pretended Religions whatsoever, for it undertakes to dispense with
Gods Laws, and to pardon the breach of them. So that certainly a greater Crime
there cannot be committed against God, than for a man to endeavor the
Propagation of that Religion; but you, to effect this, have designed the Death
of your lawful Prince and King. And then your design of Blood in the Kingdom
where you lived, to set all together by the Ears, to destroy poor Innocent
People, to prostitute their Lives and Liberties, and all that is dear to them,
to the Tyranny of Rome, and France; and that by introducing a French Army. What
greater Evil can be designed by any man, I mention these things, because they
have all been fully proved against you; and that you may take notice, and
repent of them, and make your Peace with God, by a particular Application for
Mercy for all these Faults; For it seems to me, that against God, your Prince,
and fellow Subjects, you have behaved your self very ill, designing very great
Evil to all these; and now it has pleased God to bring you to Judgment.

I must tell you, peradventure what you urge for your self might introduce
Pity, if it were to be believed, that is, that you are Innocent, and had
Witnesses to prove it, but we cannot suppose any man Innocent, that has had a
Legal and a Fair Trial, and a Trial with as much Candor to you, as your Case
could bear, or as perhaps any man in such a Case ever had. You had time upon
your Request to send for your Witnesses, to help you in your Defense, and to
have proved your Innocence, if you could have done it; Time long enough to your
own Content, you your self thought it so, at the time it was given. To give a
Prisoner under your Circumstances, five or six weeks time to send for
Witnesses, is not usual, we could have put you upon a present Defense, and
hurryed you out of the World by a sudden Trial, if we had had any Design
against you; but we go on in a fair way, and with legal Proceedings, and with
as much Respect to you, as in such a Case could be used, for we gave you all
the fair Hearing and Liberty that you desired to have.

Look you, as to what you urge, that your Trial was in this Kingdom, whereas
your Offense was in another, that is a thing that does not become you by any
means to object; for you have had a Trial here by honest Persons, and that
according to the Laws which obtain in this Kingdom, and that too of Ireland,
which is by a Statute not made on purpose to bring you into a Snare, but an
ancient Statute, and not without Presidents of its having been put in Execution
before your time. For your own Country will afford you several Presidents in
this Case, as O Rurke, and several others that have been Arrained and Condemned
for Treason done there. So that you have no reason to except against the
legality of your Trial. You say, now you have Witnesses that could prove all
this Matter, why that lies in the Mouth of any Man that is condemned to say;
but pray consider with your self, what Regard ought to be given to this. We
cannot help it, if your Witnesses don't come, you may remember they wanted not
Time nor Opportunity to come over, but you told us they would not come unless
they had a Passeport.


Plunkett. My Lord, they got a Pass to come over afterward, and so in eight
Days they came hither.


L. C. J. You might have provided your self, if they wanted such a thing. In
the first place, no body is bound to give it them; much less could you expect
it for them without asking.


Plunkett. I could not get the Copies of the Records neither by any means,
unless I had an Order from the Council, and they would not give that Order,
unless your Lordship appointed it.


L. C. J. We cannot tell that, you should have petitioned in time.


Plunkett. How could any one soresee, unless he was God Almighty, that they
would deny it, or that he could not get out a Copy of a Record, paying for it,
without a Petition. All the Friends I had, told me upon Motion there, it might
be had, but here I have it under the Lieutenants and Councils hands, that they
would give no Copy of Records without Order from hence, which before I could
know it, it was impossible for me to have them ready against my Trial.


L. C. J. Look you Sir, I do speak this to you, to show you that those
Objections, which you seem to make against your Trial, have no weight at all,
but in this Case it is not the Jury that are so material as the Witnesses
themselves. I appeal to all that heard your Trial, if they could so much as
doubt but that you were Guilty of what you were charged with. For consider,
here were Persons that were of your own Religion, the most of them Priests, I
think almost all of them in Orders.


Plunkett. There were two Friars, and a Priest whom I have endeavored to
correct this seven Years, and they were Renegadoes from our Religion, and
declared Apostates.


L. C. J. Look you Sir, they gave an Evidence very home to your matter; you had
Liberty to examine them, and they gave you a rational Account of any thing you
asked. Let me but put you in mind of one thing. You made Exceptions to one's
Evidence, (and indeed that was very much of your Exception to all) why he did
not reveal this in all that time: Truly he told you he was of your mind, till
he went into France, and saw what a Slavery and Mischief you endeavored to
introduce upon his and your own Countrymen, and this his Spirit rose against,
to see what a Condition Ireland was like to be brought into. And pray, did not
he give you a full Answer to that Question?


Plunkett. I had sufficient Witnesses to prove he was an Apostate, and was
chastised by me, and therefore had prepensed Malice against me.


L. C. J. Therefore I have spoken this to the Satisfaction, I hope, of your
self and all that hear it. I do now wish you to consider, you are near your
end. It seems you have lived in a false Religion hitherto; it is not too late
at any time to repent, I wish you may have the Grace to do so; In the mean time
there is no room for us here, to grant you any king of Mercy, though I Will tell
you, we are inclined to pity all Malefactors: Who ever have done evil, we are
inclined to pity them, and wish heartily that they may repent, as we do, that
you may, of what you have done. But all we can do now, is to say, what the Law
says, and that is to pass Judgment upon you.


Plunkett. May it please your Lordship to give me Leave to speak one Word. If I
were a Man that had no care of my Conscience in this matter, and did not think
of God Almighty, or Conscience, or Heaven, or Hell, I might have saved my Life;
For I was offered it by diverse People here, so I would but Confess my own
Guilt, and Accuse others. But my Lord, I had rather dye ten thousand deaths,
than wrongfully accuse any body. And the time will come when your Lordship will
see what these Witnesses are, that have come in against me. I do assure your
Lordship, if I were a man that had not good Principles, I might easily have
saved my own Life, but I had rather dye ten thousand Deaths, than wrongfully to
take away one farthing of any man's Goods, one day of his Liberty, or one
minute of his Life.


L. C. J. I am sorry to see you persist in the Principles of that Religion.


Plunkett. They are those Principles, that even God Almighty cannot dispense
with all.


L. C. J. Well, however the Judgment which we give you, is that which the Law
says and speaks. And therefore you must go from hence, to the place from
whence you came, that is to Newgate, and from thence you shall be drawn through
the City of London, to Tyburne; there you shall be hanged by the Neck, but cut
down before you are dead, your Bowels shall be taken out, and burnt before your
Face, your Head shall be cut off, and your Body be divided into four Quarters,
to be disposed of as his Majesty pleases. And I pray God to have Mercy upon
your Soul.


Plunkett. My Lord, I hope I may have this Favor, of Leave, for a Servant and
some few Friends that I have, to come at me.


L. C. J. I think you may have Liberty for any Servant to come to you, I know
nothing to the Contrary.


Plunkett. And some Friends that I have in Town.


L. C. J. But I would advise you to have some Minister to come to you, some
Protestant Minister.


Plunkett. My Lord, if you please, there are some in Prison, that never were
Indicted, or Accused of any Crime, and they will do my Business very well; for
they will do it according to the Rites of our own Church, which is the ancient
Usage, they cannot do better, and I would not alter it now.


L. C. J. Mr. Richardson, you may let his Servant come to him, and any Friend
in your Presence, to see there be no Evil done, nor any Contrivances that may
hereafter have an Influence upon Affairs.


Mr. Just. Jones. Be you present, or some body.


Plunkett. My Servant I hope may come, without his being present.


L. C. J. Yes, yes, his Servant may be with him alone. Well ^r. we wish better
to you, than you do to your self.


Plunkett. God Almighty bless your Lordship. And now my Lord, as I am a dead
Man to this World, and as I hope for Mercy in the other World, I was never
Guilty of any of the Treasons laid to my Charge, as you will hear in time; and
my Character you may receive from my Lord Chancellor of Ireland, my Lord
Berkley, my Lord Essex, and the Duke of Ormond.


Then the Keeper took away his Prisoner, and upon Friday the first of July, he
was executed according to the Sentence.

FINIS.
Lately Published
THE Arraignment and Plea of Edward Fitz-Harris Esquire, with all the Arguments
in Law, and Proceedings of the Court of King's Bench thereupon, in Easter Term,
1681. Price, 1 s. 6 d.


