The SPEECH of the Honorable Sir George Treby, Knight, Recorder of the City of
London, upon the Presenting the honorable Dudley North and Peter Rich Esquires,
Sheriffs of the City of London and County of Middlesex, in the Exchequer
Chamber at Westminster, on the 30th of September, 1682.
Mr. Baron Crawley,
THe Kings and Queens of this Kingdom have made several gracious Grants and
Confirmations to the City of London, and the County of Middlesex; and in these
Grants they did make Reservations, and intend that they should be attended with
the new Sheriffs at their coming into their Office, and with the old Sheriffs
that are going out, and it is upon this occasion that we present them here.

Here is the Lord Mayor attended with the Citizens, and they have proceeded to
the Choice of Sheriffs, which they have made and sworn; and the persons who are
the present Sheriffs, that are presented here, are the honorable Dudley North
and Peter Rich, Esquires: from these persons they raise great Expectations,
considering they are men of great Sincerity, Loyalty and Fidelity; and that
they will recommend their Office to the esteem of all good people, and that
they will at Iast cause this honorable question to be put, Why was not every
man for these men at first?

These worthy Gentlemen that were the late Sheriffs Mr. Pilkington and Mr.
Shute have given an account of their Office to the City, and now they are come
to do it to the King here before you.

The Honorable Mr. Baron Crawley's Reply to Mr. Recorders Speech.
Mr. Recorder,
YOu have certified these worthy Gentlemen to be Sheriffs of the City of
London, and County of Middlesex; and I do admit of the Choice, and do not doubt
but these Gentlemen will so discharge the Trust reposed in them, that it may
make high for the Honor of the King ( whom God long preserve) and the Good of
all his Loyal Subjects. And I do desire God would grant an happy Union between
his Majesty and the ancient City of London, That they may all live in Peace and
Unity one amongst another.

This speech of the Recorders, and Reply of Mr. Barons, was to the purpose and
effect above.

London, Printed for Jonas Hither, 1682.


