A TREATY OF PEACE, Concluded The 29. of September, 1642. being Michaelmas
day, That all Forces assembled together in any part of Yorkshire, County, or
City of York, shall be disbanded, and all those under Captain Hotham now in
Doncaster, and all other forces in any other parts of the Country, under any
other Commanders belonging to the Garrison of Hull, shall retire to Hull with
all speed possibly, and that Captain Hotham shall begin to march from
Doncaster toward Hull, upon Saturday next, the first of October, 1642.

Here is also the True Copy of a Letter sent from Prince Rupert to to his
Majesty from Bobford; September the 24. 1642. Printed at York by special
command, and reprinted at London.

Likewise the Copy of another Letter sent from a Gentleman of Yorkshire,
containing many special and remarkable passages of what strength of men, Horse
and Ordinance, there is in that County.

London, Printed for I. Benson. 1642.

The copy of the Treaty of peace for YORKSHIRE.
FIrst it is agreed at a treaty concluded this present 29. of September being
Michaelmas day that all forces assembled together in any part of Yorkshire or
County or City of York shall be disbanded, and all those under the command
of Captain Hotham, now in Doncaster, and all other forces in any other part of
the Country under any other commanders belonging to the garrison of Hull,
shall retire to Hull with all speed possible, and the said captain Hotham
shall begin to march from Doncaster toward Hull, upon Satterday next.

2 It is agreed that no hostile or violent act shall hereafter be done to the
garrison of Hull, either directly or indirectly, by pretense of any aid or
assistance whatsoever, upon the person of any man within the county of York,
or within the county or city of York nor upon the goods, dither in the
county aforesaid, or in the county of Kingstone upon Hull.

3 It is agreed that the commissioners or Array and orders and ordinances, of
Parliament for the Militia be wholly suspended in this county, until such
time as some course be agreed pon, for the ordering of the Militia by the King
and Parliament, and this without disputing either the legalitie or illegalitie
of either, as finding neither so necessary at this time, as for the setting
them a foot to involve this great county in blood.

4 It is agreed, that no commissioners be imposed upon this county, but such
as are legal and presidented in good times.

5 It is agreed that no army or forces whatsoever shall be suffered to enter
this county in hostile manner by virtue of any pretense or command whatsoever,
and they who shall attempt to do it, the whole county shall rise against them
with force as enemies against the peace, and to be suppressed

6 It is agreed, that if any carriages for the household either of the King or
Queen be to pass this county, that to prevent all other armed forces under
pretense of such a conduct to come amongst us, we shall take order to see them
quietly conducted by the sheriff of the county, with such a convoy as he
shall appoint and we like, and with no other, and if it shall happen the
Queens Majesty shall return out of Holland through this county; that we
shall humbly beseech her Majesty to forbear the bringing with her any
multitude of armed forces, but to believe that we shall wait upon her Majesty
with such an honorable safe convoy, as shall befit our duty and her honor.

7 It is agree that if any warlike provision be desired to be passed this
county for his Majesty's service, that we shall humbly petition his Majesty
that he would be pleased to convey them some other way, being it may be
occasioned to interrupt our peace.

8 It is agreed that none shall be arrested in this county as delinquents to
either party, but by a legal peacable and quiet way; that is by the legal
officers and their assistants only, and not by armed men and soldiers, who may
be an occasion to bring fire amongst us.

9 It is agreed that whomsoever in this County can be made appear either to
be the ^uthor contriver or assisting to the burning or pillaging of sir Edward
Roods his house or any other man's in this county, we shall all see them if
they be able make restitution, and howsoever to be brought to Justice.

10 It is agreed that a general amnestia be made between all the Gentlemen
and others of this county, of all former unkindnesses and differences which
have been bred by these distractions, and that we hereafter will be as one
man, to defend one another according to the law against all others, l^aving all
others to be punished by the law of the land, and not by force and violence.

11 It is agreed that it is intended by disbanding the Armies that his Majesty
shall have liberty for removing of all such his canons and munition as he has
now in this county.

10 It is agreed that all the arms which do belong to any of the trained
bands of this county which have been taken from them since the 21, September
instant by either part, shall be presently restored, and that capt^ine Hotham
shall leave behind him when he returns into Hull all those brass pieces
belonging to his Majesty which he has of his, which are now in Doncaster
excepting such as he himself from Hull.

13. It is agreed that no further forces during this difference between King
and Parliament be either Razed in, or paid by this County for this War order
then such as are already levied, and really rased, and all such ^o go out of
the Country without raseing any more.

14. ^t is agreed that a humble Remonstrance and declaration of these
resolutions be presently sent both to the King and Parliament, accompanied an
humble Petition from us all, that according as we have so unanimously agreed
for our particular peace, so they would be pleased to commiserate this
distracted Kingdom to do the same, for the general peace of the whole,

Henry Bellasse William Savile Edward Osburne John Ramsdon Iugram Hopton
Francis Nevill Tho^^^ Fairefax Thomas Mayleverey William Lister William White
John Ferrey Thomus Stockdayle.


A true Coppie of a Letter sent by Prince Rupert to His MAJESTY.
SIR,
THe bearer will with all the Circumstances tell Your Majesty our Proceedings
at Worcester. I shall only say this, That upon Your Majesty's commands to
succor the Town, we went thither with our Forces and found the Rebels on both
sides of the Town, no Ammunition, nor nothing fitting to entertain so great a
Force as the Lord of Essex would have brought that night. But all things in so
great a disorder, that certainly we had all been lost, had we not by a great
chance met with ten Troops of their Horse, and five of their Dragoners,
which we did entirely rout, and killed most of their chiefest Officers. The
Manner and the Names, I leave for the said bearer to tell you. Your Majesty
will be pleased to accept this, as a beginning of Your Officers and my Duty;
and I doubt not, as (certainly) they behaved themselves all very bravely and
^^llantly, that hereafter Your Majesty shall find the same behavior against a
more considerable number. Of this Your Majesty may be very confident, as also
of the endeavors of

SIR, Your Majesty's most Obedient Nephew, and humble Servant. RVPERT.
From Bobsort this 24. of Sep. 1642. Sir, This Gentleman has behaved himself
so gallantly, That I must needs humbly desire Your Majesty to Knight him; which
will encourage him and all others to continue the Affection for Your service.



The Circumstances Related by Master Crane, who is Knighted. He is (I hear)
Prince Ruports Cornet.
THat at the first Charge, Prince Rupert, Prince Maurice, Master Fox, and two
more, charged and defeated a Troop, whom they knew not to be enemies, till they
were upon them, by their Orange color Skarfes.

That seven Cornets are taken, some I saw.

That several Officers are killed on their side, particularly, Douglas and
Sandis; that the last repented before his death, for having borne Arms against
the King.

That several men are taken, as Captain Wingat of the House of Commons, and
others. That we have but three killed in all.

That but three of ours of quality have been hurt; Master Wilmott in the back,
and the worst of any: but yet he Marches in a Coach and is merry. Sir Lewis
Dives through the Shoulder. Master Biron (a brother of Sir John's) over the
face. I hear he has said, That Prince Maurice is a little hurt, but I
understood him but those three.

That Brown, who commanded in chief as Colonel of Dragoners, was one of the
first that ran away.

That our Men are very hearty with their Victory, and the spoils of the killed
(as Horses, Arms, Buffe-coates, Money in their Pockets) and the enemy (as they
hear) much dishartened, and not likely to make so great haste from about
Worcester as they meant.

The CORNETS Mottoes.
Pro Rege and Regno. Exurgat and Discipabuntur. Pro Raege and Religione. Si pro
Patria Morior non Moror.
The rest so to^ne, the Mottoes could not be read.

News from Yorkshire.
Captain Hotham, Sir John Hothams Son having fallyed out of Hull with 600. men
lies now at Doncaster, and intercepts all Letters upon Monday last, Septem. 26.
My Lord Fairesay came to Leedge and brought with him 100. men to settle the
Militia, Sir John Savile came with 100. Men more to his aid, but the
Commissioners for the Commission of Array sent out of Pontefract, whereby they
lay, two troops of Horse, who met Sir John Savile at Loft-house kilde, one man
hurt, six took 18. horses, and some prisoners, Sir John being one, and all
their Arms, all which were carried to Pontefract Castle, and were there kept
until yesterday, in Levy of which prisoners they took my self and 6. other
Gentlemen prisoners and kept us prisoners four hours, the same day Monday for
the prevention of bloodshed, there was a Treaty of peace, a copy of which I
have sent you by Sir John Ingram Hopton, Master Francis Nevile, pro Rege and my
Lord Fairefax, Master Stockdale, and Master Farres, pro Parl. it was concluded
that six of each side should meet at Rothwell on Thursday the 29. of this
instant Septem. and did conclude a peace, God of his mercy grant it through
this whole kingdom,

Yours N. N.
Postscript.
There are at Pontfract 800. Horse 13. pieces of Ordnance 4000. foot ready to
March if occasion be. Here is at Knaresbrough 100. Dragoners 800 foot at
Sheffeild 500. foot all which are to be disbanded, for I am informed he
marched homewards last night 5. miles onward on his way,

Your Friend to use.



FINIS.

