THE TRIAL OF John Hambden, Esquire
The 28 th day of November, 1683. Ann. 35. Car. 2. Reg. John Hambden Esquire being
brought up by Writ of Habeas Corpus, from the Tower of London, and there being
an Indictment preferred against him for Misdemeanor, His Majesty's Attorney
General, prayed that he might be A^^igned upon it, which was done in this
manner.
Cl. of Cr. JOhn Hambden, You stand here Indicted by the Name of John Hambden,
late of the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex,
Gent. For that you being a Pernicious and Seditious Man, and a Person of a
Wicked mind, and of an impious, unquiet, and turbulent Disposition, and
contriving, practicing, and falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, maliciously,
turbulently, and seditiously intending the Peace of our Sovereign Lord King
Charles that now is, and the common Tranquillity of this Kingdom of England, to
disquiet, molest, and disturb, and as much as in you lay, Sedition within this
Kingdom of England, to incite, stir up, and procure, and the Government of our
said Lord the King in this Kingdom of England into danger to bring, And that
you the said John Hambden, your most Impious, Wicked, and Seditious Intentions
aforesaid, to fulfill and perfect, and bring to effect the last day of June, in
the Five and Thirtieth year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King
that now is; and diverse other days and times as well before as after, with
Force and Arms, etc. At the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County of
Middlesex, unlawfully, unjustly, maliciously, and seditiously did assemble your
self, meet, consult, conspire, and confederate with diverse evil disposed
Subjects of our said Lord the King to the Jurors unknown, and with the said
Persons did treat concerning your said most Wicked and Seditious Compassings,
Imaginations and Purposes aforesaid, to be executed, fulfilled, and brought to
effect; and further that you the said John Hambden your most Wicked, Impious,
and Seditious Contrivances, Practices and Intentions aforesaid, to fulfill,
perfect, and reduce to effect, then, and there, viz. the last day of June in
the 35th. year aforesaid, and diverse other days and times, as well before as
after, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, with Force and Arms,
etc. falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, maliciously, and seditiously did consult,
consent, censpire and confederate of an Insurrection within this Kingdom of
England to be made, and of procuring and providing Arms and Armed Men to be
prepared in diverse places within this Kingdom of England your same most Wicked,
Impious, and Seditious Intentions and Compassings aforesaid, to fulfill and
perfect: And that you the said John Hambden, your most Wicked, Impious, and
Seditious Intentions aforesaid, to fulfill and perfect, and bring to effect
afterward, viz. the last day of June, in the 35th year aforesaid, at the
Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, with Force and Arms, etc. falsely,
unlawfully, unjustly, wickedly, maliciously, and seditiously did consult,
agree, and consent that a certain Person to the Jurors aforesaid unknown,
should be sent into Scotland to invite and incite diverse evil disposed Subjects
of our said Lord the King, of his Kingdom of Scotland, to come into this
Kingdom of England to advise and consult with you the said John Hambden, and
others the aforesaid evil disposed Subjects of our said Lord the King in this
Kingdom of England, concerning Aid and Assistance to be expected and supplied
out of the said Kingdom of Scotland, your said most Wicked, Impious, and
Seditious Intentions and Compassings aforesaid, to fulfill, effect, and promote
in manifest contempt of the Laws of this Kingdom of England, to the evil and
most pernicious Example of all others in the like case offending, and against
the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity.

How say thou, art thou Guilty of this High Misdemeanour whereof thou
stand Indicted, and have been now Arraigned, or not Guilty?


Mr. Hambden. Not Guilty.


Upon which Plea issue was joined between His Majesty's Attorney General, on
behalf of the King and Defendant, and Bail was then taken for the Defendants
appearance the next Term. Hillary Term 35, and 36. Car. Secundi Reg. In the
beginning of the Term, Sir Thomas Jenner, Knight, His Majesty's Sergeant at
Law, and Recorder of the City of London, Moved for a Trial at the Bar, in the
Case between the King and Mr. Hambden, which was by the Court appointed to be
on Wednesday the 6th of February in the same Term.

Die Mercurii 6. Februarii, 1683. Anno Regni Reg. Car. Secundi. 36. Cl. of Cr.
Call the Defendant John Hambden.


Mr. Williams. He appears.


Cl. of Cr. Gardez votrez Challenges. Call Sir Charles Gerard.


Crier. You shall well and truly try the Issue between our Sovereign Lord the
King, and John Hambden, Gent. and a true Verdict give according to your
Evidence. So help you ^^d. Jurat. Sir Charles Gerard.


Cl. of Cr. Roger Jennings, Esquire Jur. Henry Hodges, Esquire Jur. Joshua Galliard, Esquire


Mr. Williams. We challenge him for the Defendant.


L. Chapter Just. What is your Cause of Challenge?


Mr. Williams. If your Lordship please to let him go through the Panel, we
will show cause if there be not enough left without him.


L. Chapter Just. No, show your Cause now, it being against the King.


Mr. Williams. He has an Employment under the King, He has an Office in the
Forest, and that we say is our Cause of Challenge.


L. Chapter Just. What then if he have?


Mr. Williams. My Lord, We suppose then he is not an indifferent Person to try
this Cause.


L. Chapter Just. Ay, let me hear that now proved and defended by any Gentleman of
the long Robe, that that is a good cause of Challenge. Show me what Law there
is for it.


Mr. Williams. To be of the Kings Robe, or Pay, or Sallery, is an exception in
any Case wherein the King is concerned.


L. Chapter Just. Show me any Law for that if you can, Mr. Williams, I know you are
a Lawyer.


Mr. Wallop. It is the Opinion of my Lord Coke in his Institutes, that it is a
good Cause of Challenge.


L. Chapter Just. But there is the Opinion of all the Judges in Henry the Fourths
time against it.


Mr. Wallop. It is my Lord, fol. 156.


L. Chapter Just. But I can cite you three or four Books, and you have them all
together in Rolls Abridgment, Title Challenge, where he sets down four Books
one after another, That it is no cause of Challenge, even to be the Kings
Tenant, and there is a great deal of reason for it. For if that were a good
Cause of Challenge, mark the Consequence, then all Persons that hold Lands in
England hold them mediately or immediately of the King, and so the King could
have no Freeholders to be Jurymen in his Cause.


Mr. Williams. This is a more special Cause of Challenge than that.


L. Chapter Just. What can be greater than that of being the Kings Tenant?


Mr. At. Genesis Especially when all the Land of England was held of the Crown,
as originally it was.


Mr. Trever. My Lord in 2d. Rolls 646. Tit. Trials, There is the express
Opinion of my Lord Rolls, That to be of the Livery or a menial Servant of the
Crown, is a good Cause of Challenge.


L. Chapter Just. And look you but in the 1 st Case in the 1 st Part of the
Abridgment, Title Challenges, where he mentions 3 or 4 Books to the same
purpose; and it is quite otherwise.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, In that of 1 st. Rolls, he only cites some Books, but
the other is his own Opinion.


L. Chapter Just. Well, make out your Fact if you have a mind to it: but it is well
known that neither Mr. Sergeant Rolls, nor my Lord Coke, when he delivered that
Opinion, are to be reckoned such Authorities in Crown matters.


Mr. Williams. We will ask him, my Lord, if you please. I suppose he will not
deny it.


L. Chapter Just. No, make out your Fact if you will have any benefit by it, it is
only a Challenge to the favor, which ought not to be in the Kings Case. I am
very glad that we are now to debate this matter with Men of the Robe, because
we have had a strange sort of Notions and Reflections spread abroad of late, as
though the Judges now adays gave strange sort of Opinions, and as though Persons
that had been blemishes at the Bar, were preferred to do strange things when
they come upon the Bench; but truly I wonder to hear that it should be a doubt,
when at the same time that which we gave as our Opinion about one particular
Challenge, that is as to Freeholders, it was the Judgment of all the Judges,
That that was no Challenge, and all the Counsel that were concerned in that
Case, know it was the Opinion of all the Judges. But now if we meet with
Lawyers, I shall be glad to have the matter fairly argued and debated, and pray
show me what Law or Reason is for it.


Mr. Wallop. Certainly my Lord, there is a great difference betwixt the general
Allegiance of all Men, and so of a general tenure, and the dependence of any
particular Person who is a menial Servant, and receives Wages of the King.


L. Chapter Just. I would desire to know of you Mr. Wallop, which is the greater
Challenge, to say such a one is Tenant, or such a one is immediate Servant to
J.S?


Mr. Wallop. There is a great difference, my Lord, I think, between an
immediate Tenant, and the general tenure of all Subjects.


L. Chapter Just. But certainly the Law is thus, if he were an immediate or a
mediate Tenant to any but the King, if his Lord were party to the Suit it would
be a good Challenge, but the being Tenant to the King is no good Challenge in
the Kings Case.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I take it, the Act of Parliament that takes away the
Court of Wards and Liveries, has altered the Law as to that matter of Tenure;
for now we hold in Socage, and that other Tenure is destroyed that was between
the King and his Subjects.


L. Chapter Just. But pray how comes it to be a Challenge now that was not one
before? Does that Act of Parliament make it a good cause of Challenge? If it
does, show it. I tell you the Old Books are against it.


Mr. Williams. I speak, my Lord, to the Tenure, That that is nothing at all now
to be objected, because all is now in Socage.


L. Chapter Just. I would not have Mr. Attorney insist upon a Jury-man, but yet
with-all I would not have it gone away with as Law, that it is a good Cause of
Challenge.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, We finding in some Cases that are in our Books, that it
is held to be a good Cause of Challenge, lay it before the Court.


Mr. At. Genesis How many 100 Errors do you find in my Lord Coke, notwithstanding
all his Learning?


L. Chapter Just. I say if I was Mr. Attorney, I would not contest for any
particular man to be a Jury-man, I speak that as my advice, but I would not
have it taken for Law, nor would I have it broached abroad, that though the
Judges now were of one Opinion, yet the Law truly was of another.


Mr. Jones. If all that receive Sallery, or Wages from the King, are not to be
Jurymen in the Kings Causes, then all the Deputy Lieutenants and Militia
Officers, which generally are the most substantially Freeholders, are excluded
from being Jurymen.


Mr. Just. Wythins. Who will say so, Mr. Jones? No Lawyer in England surely
will say so.


Mr. Williams. Offices where there are no profit, will not be the same
exception.


Mr. At. Genesis But he is no menial Servant of the Kings.


Mr. Williams. What is he then?


Mr. Wallop. We hear that he is Keeper of one of the Kings Forests, and has a
Fee for it.


Mr. Williams. Well, we will ask him upon a voyer dire.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, The Fact is quite otherwise, and I desire they may make
it out.


L. Chapter Just. Truly I think it is not tanti to insist upon any particular man,
but I find we are in Age that is so full of Cavils, that if we act but
according to the Presidents that went before us, we are thought to act as
Originals, and to make new Laws, when we only follow the Rules that we have
received from our Predecessors. And I say there was no such Challenge at Common
Law, that ever I read of in any of our Books, nor is it any Challenge by the
best Authorities extant.


Mr. Jones. I desire them to show me any such President, That any man was
challenged by one that was tried at the Suit of the King, for a Challenge to
the Favor, but we must do unpresidented things, or else there will be no
satisfying of some Men.


Mr. At. Genesis I would fain know, what one Opinion in a straggling Book is
against the Current of all our Law?


Mr. Williams. Which do you call a straggling Book, Mr Attorney? my Lord Coke's
Institutes, or my Lord Rolls Abridgment?


L. Chapter Just: I say the better Opinion of the Books is on the other side, and
the greater number too.


Mr. At. Genesis First of all, I do know of my own knowledge, he is no menial
Servant.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Attorney, I do debate it for Learning sake, truly I know not
the Man, nor whether he be the Kings Servant, or not, but I speak against
allowing the Challenge, that if he be set aside, it may not be taken as a
President, and so pass for Law that the Kings Servants cannot be Jurymen. I
would have you quit the man by consent, but not as a force-put, as though the Law
were so, for the Law I think is otherwise.


Mr. At. General. He is none, my Lord, they mistake.


L. Chapter Just. Nay, I know nothing of the man, I tell you only what I think.


Mr. Wallop. He receives Wages, or a Fee from the King for his Office.


Mr. Just Wythins. I would never for my part while I live, nor never did, while
I was a practiser, stand upon any particular Jury-man.


Mr. At Genesis He may be a Jury-man by Law sure.


L. Chapter Just. There is no doubt of it, Mr. Attorney.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, If your Lordships have given your Opinion, I desire he
may stand by.


L. Chapter Just. Well, Mr. Attorney waves him, Let him stand by.


Mr. At. Genesis But for no Reason that has been offered.


L. Chapter Just. No, no, I don't hear any thing of Reason offered for it.


Cl. of Cr. Mr. Galliard. You may go down. Thomas Harriott, Esquire Jur. Thomas
Earsby, Esquire Jur. William Avery, Esquire Jur. John Sharp, Esquire Jur. Richard
Shoreditch.


Mr. Williams. We challenge him for the Defendant.


L. Chapter Just. What is your Cause of Challenge?


Mr. Williams. There is the same exception to him.


L. Chapter Just. If Mr. Attorney will consent, with all my heart.


Mr. Sol. Genesis No, we humor'd you in one, we will not humor you any more.


Mr. Williams. Nay, here is something more clear for us, He is a Sergeant at
Arms attending His Majesty.


Mr. Just. Wythins. You know our Opinions already, Mr. Williams, unless Mr.
Attorney consent, we cannot do it.


Mr. Williams. We only acquaint Mr. Attorney with it, we must submit to your
Rule, he is certainly Sergeant at Arms, he came in the place of Dereham that
let my Lord Gray escape.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray prove it, I don't know it for my share.


Mr. Williams. Will you ask him the Question?


Mr. At. Genesis Pray prove it. Are we to gratify your Clyent? Pray let him
better instruct his Counsel.


L. C. Just. If Mr. Attorney consent not, then he must be sworn.


Mr. At. Genesis If there be enough without him that do appear let him stand by.


Cl. of Cr. Stand down Mr. Shoreditch.


Charles Good, Esquire Jur.


Mr. At. Genesis That it may appear how fair things were carried, they would not
strike out one of these Men when they came before the Protonotary, as they
might have done.


Mr. Just Wythins. Truly that was not well done, to trouble the Court when you
might make your exceptions there.


Mr. Williams. We did not know it then, now we do, we offer it to the Court.


Cl. of Cr. Sam. Rouse, Esquire Jur. Hugh Squire, Esquire Jur. Nehemiah Arnold, Esquire
Jur. and John Bifeild, Esquire Jur.


Then the Jury were numbered, and the 12 sworn were these.
Sir Charles Gerard, Baronet. Jur. Roger Jennings, Esquire Jur. Henry Hodges, Esquire
Jur. Thomas Harriott, Esquire Jur. Thomas Earsby, Esquire Jur. William Avery, Esquire Jur.
John Sharp, Esquire Jur. Charles Good, Esquire Jur. Samuel Rouse, Esquire Jur. Hugh
Squire, Esquire Jur. Nehemiah Arnold, Esquire Jur. John Bifeild, Esquire Jur.
Cl. of Cr. Gentlemen of the Jury, You that are sworn, Hearken to your Charge.
The Defendant John Hambden stands Indicted by the name of John Hambden, of the
Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Gent. ( Prout in
the Indictment, mutatis mutandis) -- To this Indictment he has pleaded not
Guilty, and for his Trial puts himself upon the Country, and the Kings Attorney
General likewise, which Country you are, your Charge is to inquire whether the
Defendant be Guilty of the great Misdemeanour whereof he stands Indicted, or
not Guilty; if you find him Guilty, you are to say so; and if you find him not
Guilty, you are to say so, and no more; and hear your Evidence.


Then Proclamation was made for Evidence in usual form. Mr Holoway. May it
please your Lordship, and Gentlemen, you that are sworn, I am of Counsel for
the King upon this Indictment. Gentlemen, the Indictment sets forth, that the
Defendant being a Seditious Malicious Evil disposed Person, and Seditiously and
Maliciously intending to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, the last day of
June, in the 35. year of his now Majesty's Reign, and diverse other days and
times, at the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, in your County, did unlawfully
assemble, and confederate himself with diverse Evil-disposed Persons, Subjects
of our Lord the King, and then and there, with those other persons did Falsely
Maliciously and Seditiously consult and conspire to make an Insurrection in the
Kingdom of England, and to provide Arms and Armed men in diverse places of the
said Kingdom. And the better to complete his Evil Intentions, the said last day
of June, did consult and agree to send certain persons, to the Jurors unknown,
into Scotland, to invite several Evil-disposed Persons there to join in this
Conspiracy. This is the Substance of the Charge, and to this he says, He is not
Guilty; If we prove him so, we do not question but you will find it.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of this Jury, Mr
Hambden stands Indicted of an High Misdemeanour, for conspiring with several
others, to raise Rebellion within the Kingdom, and to crave the Assistance of
the Brotherhood of Scotland. Upon the face of the Indictment, Gentlemen, it
appears to be a very high Crime, and the matter of this indeed has been
formerly in examination in other Trials, and yet the Party you may observe do
not acquiesce in those Trials, but think the Persons accused lay under very
great hardships, and that to a very great degree, as not having the advantage
of Counsel, nor to have their Witnesses examined upon Oath; and therefore,
Gentlemen, the King is pleased to go less in this Case than in the others, That
this Gentleman, who is now before the Court, may clear his innocence, if he has
any Witnesses to do it. And if there be any advantage that the having of
Counsel can contribute to his Cause he has that allowed him too.

The Course of our Evidence, Gentlemen, will be this. We shall prove to you
that Mr. Hambden with five other Persons, (I shall name them) The Duke of
Monmouth, my Lord Russel, Mr. Sidney, my Lord of Essex, and my Lord Howard,
they met several times, (the particulars we shall give you an account of) one
was at Mr. Hambden's house, another was at my Lords Russels, where they did
contrive together, and took upon them to be a Juncto or a Counsel of Six
collected out of the wisest men of the Kingdom, to consider how they might
better the Affairs of the Nation, and how they might make a Stir: For they
thought there was no way possible otherwise of doing it, but by their joint
Counsels to carry on a Rising. And that they might do it the Better, they
resolved to crave the Assistance of Scotland. Gentlemen, We shall give you an
account of their Consults and Debates, and shall show you, that at length they
came to a Resolution, That the rising was to be carried on jointly in London,
and the several parts of the Kingdom, in several Countries at once. Then they
came to think, and consider whether it were not best to send into Scotland, to
draw them in too. And thereupon it was agreed by this Juncto, That they would
send thither, and the management of it was committed to Mr. Sidney, to send
some fit Person into Scotland, to treat with the Malcontents there; and the
better to carry on this joint Design, some of them were to come up to London.
And they were to have a pretense to treat about going to Carolina, and the
purchasing some Shares in the Plantation there, of which my Lord Shaftsbury was
a chief Governor. We shall prove to you, Gentlemen, besides all that I have
opened, That the Person to whom that trust was committed, Mr. Sidney, according
to the Duty that he had taken upon him, does employ one Aaron Smith, which all
that know him, do know him to be a fit Engine for such Counselors, and a fit
Instrument for such a Conspiracy. We shall prove he actually was in Scotland,
and that he went into Scotland upon this Errand. And then we shall prove, That
those Gentlemen that were sent to, and were the Persons named in their Consults
to be treated with, came here soon after to Town, and as soon as ever this Plot
was discovered, they fled and absconded themselves. Gentlemen, If we shall
prove all this matter to you, I think it will be without any Question clear,
that this Gentleman is notoriously Guilty of this High Misdemeanour. And
indeed, if you observe it, one of the Persons has given Judgment against
himself, the Earl of Essex. But the Party have been so diligent and officious
as to fling that upon the Government; but that matter we shall have before the
Court in Judgment to morrow. For two of the others they have received the
Judgment of the Law; for two more of them the King has been pleased to take
them into his Mercy; the one is my Lord Howard, who is summoned to appear here
to day; the other is the Duke of Monmouth, who has confessed all this matter,
and has taken his Pardon, and we have Summoned him also to be here this day;
that the World, if they will have their Eyes opened (I mean the discontented
World) may see there is nothing sought but the Peace and Quieting of the
Kingdom.

Gentlemen, If we prove all this matter to you, I shall be glad to hear the
Defense of the Counsel, and the Defense made by Witnesses upon Oath.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, we will call our Witnesses, and first we begin with the
Duke of Monmouth.


Mr. At. Genesis Call James Duke of Monmouth.


Crier. James, Duke of Monmouth.


Mr. At. Genesis Call him again.


Crier. James, Duke of Monmouth.


L. Chapter Just. Was he served with a Subpoena?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we will prove we have served him in all places where he
was like to be met with; That we left Subpoenas with his Servants, who promised
to deliver them to him.


L. Chapter Just. Prove it.


Mr. At. Genesis Where is Mr. Atterbury? Swear him which was done Pray will you
give the Court an account, Whether you did serve the D. of Monmouth with any
Subpoena? In what places you were to serve him, and who you left it with?


Mr. Atterb. My Lord, On Friday last was Seven-night, I was commanded by Mr.
Attorney General to carry a Subpoena to serve upon the Duke of Monmouth, and to
go to his House at Moor Park, where it was generally discoursed he was. I did
go and take a Subpoena from Mr. Burton, by Mr. Attorney's Order, and went to
the Duke's House at Moor Park. When I came there, the outward Gate was locked,
and I went to an House where the Keys are kept, and having got the Keys, I went
down to the House, and I saw there one of his Servants fothering of Cattle; and
coming up to him, I asked him if the Duke of Monmouth was in the House? He told
me, he could not well tell, whether he was or not, but he thought he was gone
to London, for he saw the Calash, and 5 or 6 Horsemen with it, and they said in
the House, that it was the Duke that was gone to London. I asked if there were
any Servants that were nearer to his Grace in the House, that I might speak
with? They said, Yes, there was the Housekeeper or Steward, one Mr. Rawkins
that attended upon the Duke. I desired to speak with him, and he came out to
me; I asked him if the Duke was there? He seemed to be unwilling to give me an
answer. I asked him the second time; but he did not say he was, or he was not.
I told him then, I had a Subpoena, which I brought with me by Mr. Attorney
General's Order, to serve upon his Grace, which was to require him to attend
here this day, to testify his Knowledge in a Case between the King and Mr.
Hambden. He told me, Sir, said he, give me your Subpoena, and I will take care
the Duke shall have it. He took it of me, and I came back to London presently.
As Soon as I came to Town, I had a second Subpena given me to serve upon his
Grace, with which I went to the Dukes House at the Cockpit.

When I came there I spoke with the Porter, I think his Name is Johnson, (b^^
the Porter he is, and I remember him a Servant there many years) I asked him if
the Duke were there? He told me he did not lodge there. I told him I had a
Subpoena to serve upon his Grace to appear as this day, the same as I said at
Moor Park. Says he, Mr. Atterbury, I will take care the Duke shall have it to
night, or to morrow morning early.


L. Chapter Just. When was this?


Mr. Atterbury. It was of the same day, Friday was seven-night last. I was told
afterward by one that I met with, that the Duke did lodge at Mr. Row's House,
who is a Servant to the Duke, one of his Gentlemen. He lives in the Pall Mall,
it is either his House or his Lodging, but they call it his House. I had a 3 d
Subpoena given me to the same effect. And when I came there, I asked for the
Duke, and a Woman came to the Door, Mrs. Manley (I think they call her) she
seemed to make little answer to what I said. Said I, Pray will you give this
Subpoena to the Duke, or to Mr. Row to give it the Duke? She took it of me, and
said, she would give it Mr. Row certainly to give to the Duke. And yesterday,
or the day before, I met Mr. Row at White Hall, and says he to me, Mr.
Atterbury, you brought a Subpoena to my House a little while ago? Yes, Sir,
said I, I did, had you it? Yes, I had the Subpoena, says he. Then says I, I
hope you gave the Duke it? To that he made me no answer, but nodded his head,
and smiled, and went away.


L. Chapter Just. Now call his Grace again.


Crier. James Duke of Monmouth. But he did not appear.


Mr. At. Genesis Call William Lord Howard. who was in the Court. Pray swear my
Lord Howard. which was done


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord Howard, Pray will you be pleased to give the Court and
the Jury an account what you know of any meeting by the Gentleman that is now
accused and the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Russel, your self and others, and
when? Tell what you know?


L. Howard. My Lord, in January last was 12 Month, about the midst of January I
was called out by Colonel Sidney, being then in my Lodgings in
Southampton-street, and carried by him to Mr. Hambden's House, I do not know
what they call the Street, but the same side of the way with the Fine House
that is in Bloomesbury --


Mr. Jones. By my Lord Mountagues House that now is, you mean?


L. Howard. Yes, of the same side of the way. When I came there, there was my
Lord Russel, and the Duke of Monmouth, Colonel Sidney and I went together, Mr.
Hambden was then in the Room where they were. Afterward came in my Lord of
Essex, this made up six. When they were there, we fell into Discourses --


Mr. At. Genesis Pray my Lord, before you come to tell the particular Discourses,
give an account how, and upon what grounds you came to have this Juncto of Six?


L. C. Just. If you please, my Lord, Pray give an account of the preliminary
passages.


L.Howard. My Lord, After the disappointment given to an Undertaking that was
begun by my Lord Shaftesbury, which was in October or November before, in
November he dyed. After that, truly I cannot say, but that Colonel Sidney and
my self might be, and were the two first that did give the Rise to it. For
being in Discourse, We said it was absolutely necessary that there should be
some Council erected to give some steadiness to the Motions --


L. Chapter Just. My Lord, I would not willingly interrupt you. But you seem to
speak of a disappointment given to an Undertaking by my Lord Shaftsbury. Pray
what was that Undertaking?


L. Howard. Your Lordship has heard of that before, and know it very well.


L. Chapter Just. Though we know it, the Jury do not. They have not heard it
Judicially at least.


L. Howard. Because it has been in the Printed Books, every body I suppose
knows it.


L. C. J. But that they cannot judicially take notice of.


L. Howard. That is something a long History, my Lord


L. C J. Though it be we must hear it.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray make it as short as you can my Lord.


L. Howard. So much as I can give account of is this. It was about the day
after Michale's day that I came to my own House having been before in Essex,
and that I think was Saturday. The Monday following Captain Walcott came to me
and dined with me, and after Dinner told me My Lord of Shaftsbury had left his
House, and had betaken himself to a private Lodging, and had hid himself from
the rest of his Friends; but had a great Kindness for me, (which Kindness truly
I wish he had spared) and desired to see me, I took time to consider of it; but
I bid him go back to my Lord of Shaftsbury and tell him if he had any thing of
an extraordinary Nature to acquaint me with, I would come and assist him all I
could. He came the next day again and showed me to my Lord Shaftsbury's
Lodgings: He lodged then at one Watson's House a Citizen, I know not what
Street they call it; but it was in a little Street down by Wood-street. And
when I came to him, I found my Lord Shaftsbury very much differing from what he
used to be, which was more cautious, and presently he fell to tell me that he
was forced to withdraw himself from his own House, for fear of being attacked
again by Sham-Charges and Plots, and false Evidence as he had before: For now
he said, He saw they had the Possession of all Juries by having those Sheriffs
which were imposed upon the City, as he said, and he could not think his own
life or any Man's Life safe; for to be accused was sufficient to bring his Life
into very great danger, and for that Reason he had with drawn himself to that
private retirement; and being there he was resolved to make some speedy Push
for recovering of the Liberties of England, that there was Preparation made in
the City of several 1000 of Men that were all in Readiness to Rise, and that
for his part he was resolved to be set on Horseback; for get on Horseback he
could not; and that there were great numbers that were ready when he did but
hold up his Finger to be drawn together at any time: That diverse had been drawn
out of the Country to join with them by insensible parties of Horse, I think he
named about fourscore or an hundred. Which since I found were to be headed by
Col. Romsey upon the day of making and declaring the Sheriffs; but finding
there was nothing done, he withdrew himself and his Man thither; but there was
such a general Preparation in the City, that if some Lords did not unhandsomely
desert them they should be in readiness for Action quickly. I asked him who he
meant? He told me, the Duke of Monmouth and my Lord Russel had very
unhandsomely deserted him; for they had promised and undertaken to be in
Readiness with Men out of several Countries in which they had an Interest, he
named Somersetshire, Devonshire, and Cheshire, I think, and that my Lord Gray
should be disposed of into Essex to do the same there, and if they had held on
this Resolution it had been such a sure Game that it could not have failed: But
says he, they are started, and say they cannot be in Readiness to do it. My
Lord, I very much wonder that those Persons you named should engage in any
Design, and fail of performing what they promised! Says he, I Will assure you
it is so. And so he proceeded to speak several sharp things of the Duke of
Monmouth upon the account of his Ambition, that he thought to have all under
his Command: Which was a Secret lurking Ambition in him, that he said, he
always suspected the Duke to be guilty of. And now he found his suspicions
true. That unless he might Command all, he would do nothing. But for his part
since he found the matter so, he was resolved to go on alone rather than fail
in his Design. Said I, my Lord, I should be very forward to concur with you in
any thing; but I wonder your Lordship should step into an Action of such danger
thus divided from those that are most likely to assist you in it. I cannot help
it, said he, I have left my House and must go on. My Lord, said I, pray give me
leave to go to the Duke of Monmouth and expostulate the matter with him and I
will come and give you an account again. Says he, it is to no purpose, I dare
say. Said I, my Lord, pray let me go and try, for I would not have you divided,
but I will promise you this, I will not tell him I come from you, but as from
my self discourse it with the Duke. Well, said he, if you will you may. This
was upon Tuesday, I think the 3 d. of October, the 3 d. or 4 th. So I went to
the Duke of Monmouth the next day which was Wednesday, and finding him not at
home at his House in Sohoe, and being told he was at Moor-Park, I took an
Occasion to go to Moor-Park, and I came there a little after Dinner, and took
him aside, and told him all this that I now have spoken about my Lord of
Shaftsbury. Says he, I think the Man is mad, What does he mean? We did
undertake to do this it is true; but not by that time he speaks of, and things
are not ready, I know not what his own Fears make him do; but he does act so
preposterously that he will undo us all. Said I, my Lord, all that I shall
desire is, that there may be an interview betwixt you, and discourse the thing
with one another, or else it may be a thing of very fatal Consequence for him
to step into an Action of this danger and concern while you are thus divided.
With all my Heart, says the Duke, I would have nothing more, I desire to speak
with him. This made me recoil back again to my Lord of Shaftsbury the next day,
and I told him all this, and desired he would give a meeting, says he, I see
they are false then to say they did not engage, they were engaged, and that
against this time too, the Confirmation and Swearing of the Sheriffs; and now
for me to meet with them, I know I shall run out into Passion and Anger, and
therefore it is better omitted. Said I, my Lord, I must positively insist upon
it. I must have an interview between you, for it is a Madness for you to go on
thus divided in so great a Business. I could not prevail, he would not; but he
told me, if I would I might go to them from him, and let them know I had been
with him; (for before I pretended to have it from a third hand, and not from my
Lord himself,) and if they would be in a Readiness with what they promised from
the Country, he would ask nothing from the City, he would take that place upon
himself, if they would perform their engagement for other Parts; but he
resolved to go on. So I went to the Duke of Monmouth's again, and told him,
what he said, That I could not by any means get him to an interview. Says the
Duke, he is a strange Man, I know not what to do with him, we will all be in
Readiness as soon as we can; but it is impossible to do it so soon. I went to my
Lord of Shaftsbury again on the Saturday, and did then positively engage him
that he would give a Meeting to me, and the Duke of Monmouth, and some others.
And we appointed time and place, he appointed to come out in a Parsons Habit,
and a black Perrywig to his own House, which he thought the safest place,
because he would not discover his Lodging to any of them for fear it should
come to be known. With these Instructions I came to the Duke of Monmouth to
prepare him about it, and proffered him to be ready the next day at Evening
with my Lord Russel to go to him. All this while I had not spoken to my Lord
Russel, but only to the Duke of Monmouth. And the next day when I came from
Church to my own House, there met me a Message from Colonel Romsey, who I
understood by my Servants had been there, and left his Name. With this Message,
that he came to tell me the Gentleman that was to meet could not meet. This was
so confused a matter that I was Impatient till I knew the meaning of it. I took
my Coach and went directly to the Duke of Monmouths again, and he told me
Colonel Romsey had been with him and told him, my Lord of Shaftsbury was
apprehensive there were a great many Tories about his House, and he feared
being discovered, and therefore had removed his Lodging, and so could not meet;
but we should hear from him in two or three days. So that was the last time
that I saw my Lord of Shaftsbury, or indeed in a direct Line did hear from him;
collaterally by Walcott I did afterward hear; but by this means we were at a
loss. After this the Duke of Monmouth did tell me (for he did not own to me
that he saw him, but indeed swore to me he did not see him; but I find since he
(did. That he would do what he could to prevent any untimely dangerous
undertaking. But after this it seems they had a Meeting at Mr. Shepherds House,
where my Lord Shaftsbury sent a Message to him and my Lord Russel; but the Duke
of Monmouth only told me that my Lord Russel had met with him, and seen him;
but he never owned that he had met him himself, or seen him. About four or five
days after, Captain Walcott came to me, and told me such a day was set for the
Riseing. Upon which being startled, I had nothing to do, but recoyl back to the
Duke of Monmouth, and endeavor to stop any rash Proceedings, and it was
stopped as I thought, and so it continued for two or three days, and at that
time, which was in October there was a Rumor up and down whispered as if
something would be attempted; but what it was we did not know, but thus it went
on for two or three days, and then it meeting with a disappointment upon the
Consultation at Mr. Shepherds, my Lord Shaftsbury took up his Resolution to be
gone, and went away to Holland, and dyed in Holland. This is the Substance of
that account which I can give of those former Transactions.


Mr. At. Genesis Now give an Account of what was subsequent to this.


Lord Howard, This was in November. After this there being frequent Conferences
between Colonel Sidney and me; for Colonel Sidney by the way knew nothing of
all this, and I was cautioned by my Lord Shaftsbury that I should not tell my
Friend Sidney any thing of it, and asking him the reason, why I should not?
Says he, I cannot well tell; but you will wonder when I tell you that his own
Friend Major Wildman has barred him and would not let him know it. The
Gentleman is now dead; but I will assure you he did know nothing of this for a
Month after: For he was gone into the Country; but after my Lord Shaftsbury
was dead, I told him the History of all these Transactions, which he was before
a Stranger to. After this, when I had acquainted him with what had been
intended in London, and what Preparations had been made, and how what was
intended had been suppressed, and in what posture affairs then stood. We then
took up a Resolution to form a Council that might for the time to come give
such Directions as might regulate the Motions of this Affair. Thereupon we
began to think of the Persons who they should be. He undertook to speak to my
Lord of Essex and Mr. Hambden, and I was to bring the Duke of Monmouth to a
right Understanding with him in it. So I went to the Duke of Monmouth, and told
him Col. Sidney did present his Service to him, and would willingly wait on
him, but that he thought it would do him hurt, because he was a person of such
Note, and thereupon so obnoxious that it might prejudice him to have him seen
to come to him; and therefore if his Grace would please to appoint any third
place, he should be very glad to kiss his Hand. Says the Duke, I do not know
any where truly to appoint. Why then, said I, I will tell you a place: Let us
even go to his House (having before prepared Colonel Sidney for it) and take
him by Surprise and dine with him, and then there will be the less Suspicion.
But, said I, you must not expect to be treated as the Duke of Monmouth, because
he does not expect you; but take him as a Philosopher, and dine with him as he
uses to dine at his own Table. Says the Duke of Monmouth, I care not for
Entertainment; I will go with you: And there at that time did the Duke of
Monmouth undertake to bring in my Lord Russel and my Lord of Salisbury. This
was the only Discourse preparatory to it that ever I knew of. Within a
Fortnight or three Weeks after; nay, I think it was less than Ten Days after,
Colonel Sidney came to me, and told me, my Lord of Essex was very forward in
it. The Duke of Monmouth would prepare my Lord Russel, and my Lord Salisbury;
and he himself did not doubt but Mr. Hambden was very willing to be in it too;
and they had appointed a Meeting at Mr. Hambden's House, and he would carry me
thither to the House; and this was the first Meeting that I knew of; and there
we met all Six.


Mr. At. Genesis About what time was that?


Lord Howard. It was about the middle of January; and truly I think I could
reduce it to a certain day or two by the persons where I lodged.


Mr. At. Genesis What was debated there?


Lord Howard. When we came there every one discoursed what he would. There was
a Discourse of the Time and Places where to rise; but among other things it was
resolved as a principal Point, that there should be a Preparation made for the
Design, by a Treaty with those of Scotland, and an Understanding settled with
Argyle, and a Messenger sent to my Lord Argyle and others. And before this was
done, we could not be ripe for any Resolution: But this must be speedily done.


L. Chapter Just. Pray, my Lord, give me your Favor, I would not interrupt you;
but to make things clear as we go, I desire to ask you, when you came first to
Mr. Hambden's House, who spoke first, when you were all met together?


Lord Howard, Every body discoursed what they pleased.


L. Chapter Just. But who gave an Account of the Reason of the Meeting? Will you
please to recollect, and tell what you know who began the Discourse?


Lord Howard. Something introductive to it was said by Mr. Hambden, we being at
his House, as it is natural to conceive for any Gentleman at whose House People
are met, to say, Pray let us sit down, and talk of our Business. Something
leading and introductive was said by him.


L. Chapter Just. Pray, my Lord, as near as you can remember, will you give an
Account what was the thing he began to discourse of? Did he seem to take any
Notice, or have any Knowledge of your Meeting, and other things before?


Lord Howard, It was a general Hint and Intimation to us of the Ends of our
Meeting, that we were there come to consult and advise one with another how to
put things into a better Method and Posture than formerly: And he desired that
we would sit down and discourse of these things. My Lord, I would not charge my
self with Particulars positively.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Upon what Questions did you debate and consult, my Lord?


Lord Howard, Those were started severally. Some would speak of the Time when
it should be, whether it were not convenient now or when? Others offered
something concerning the Places, whether it should be begun in the City or in
the Country, or both together. Others took it into Consideration what Persons
were to be prepared in the several Countries to be assisting in it that were
probable to carry it on. And then some discoursed concerning the raising of
Money, and then what sum should be raised, and I think that was started by the
Duke of Monmouth; but I am sure the sum that he named was 20 or 30000 l. The
last thing that was talked of, but which was concluded to be the thing
principally to be taken care of, was the settling such a Concurrence and
Correspondence with Scotland that they might chime in at the same time, that so
we might give as many diversions both from home and abroad as could be at one
and the same time.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord Howard, Did Mr. Hambden discourse of this matter?


Lord Howard, I cannot speak to the Discourse of any one in particular; for I
cannot say it was put to the Vote as we formerly express it, but it may be said
we were all consenting and concurring.


Lord Chapter Just, Did any of you dissent from the Riseing?


Lord Howard, No, no my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Did any of you oppose it at all?


Lord Howard, No, no, That was discoursed of as a thing resolved.


L. C. J. I ask you this Question, my Lord Howard, Was there any sort of
Complaint made of the Government, That it was uneasy and that occasioned you
to enter into these debates?


L. Howard, There was I cannot say a Complaint, because there was no Person to
complain to; but it was spoken of as a matter of great grievance, that such a
Force and Violence should be put upon the City in their Election of Officers,
and the tendency of that as to all Juryes though I cannot distinctly remember the
particular things.


L. C. J. You say you were talking of a Messenger to be sent into Scotland to
my Lord of Argyle and others to chime in with you in this matter as you say,
pray did you come to any Resolution about that, and what did you resolve upon?


L. Howard, That there should be one only at that time. And afterward it was
the matter of the debate at the next Meeting, which was that Meeting at my Lord
Russels, which was about this time twelvemonth in February sometime.


Mr. A. Genesis How long after the first Meeting at Mr. Hambden's was that?


L. Howard, My Lord, I think it was about a fortnight.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was there?


L. Howard, The same Persons that met before. But then there was little spoken
of but the Business of Scotland.


L. C. J. Was Mr. Hambden there at the second Meeting?


L. Howard, He was there.


L. C. J. At my Lord Russels you say it was?


L. Howard, Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What Resolution did you come to then?


L. Howard, Then we came to a Resolution that some Body should be sent, and we
began to discourse who was sit, and Col. Sidney he propounded Aaron Smith, to
some of the Company he was known, to others not; but those that did know him
did approve of him as a fit Person.


Mr. At. Genesis To whose Province was that committed of sending this Person into
Scotland?


L. Howard, Col. Sidney undertook it himself.


Mr. At. Genesis Did the rest consent to it?


L. Howard, Yes, no body did oppose it; but left it to him.


L. C. J. Did you Name the Person then that was to go?


L. Howard, He was not so named as to be with any solemnity approved or
disproved; but it was left to Col. Sidney to manage it, and he naming Smith as
a fit Person (he told us that by the by not to put it to the Question for our
Approbation) and some of us knew the Person, others did not. I was one that did
know him, and did think him a very fit Man to send.


L. C. J. Pray, my Lord, who was the Person? Be pleased to tell the Jury so as
they may know it.


L. Howard, Aaron Smith.


Mr. J. Withins, Had you any discourse with Col. Sidney, my Lord, afterward
that he was sent?


L. Howard, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Pray give an account of that?


L. Howard, About three or four days after this Meeting at my Lord Russels, I
went to Visit Col. Sidney at his House, and while I was there in the Room, he
went to his Cabinet, and out of a Drawer where there was five or six hundred
pound in Gold as I could guess, he took a good many pieces, I do not know
directly how many; but he took out so many as he said was threescore Guineys
that he was going to carry to Aaron Smith, I went not in my own Coach, and
therefore went away with him in his Coach, and he set me down at Southampton
Street at my own Lodging. I went no further, but he did, and he told me
afterward it was conveyed to him, and that he did go.


L. C. J. How long was that after your second Meeting at my Lord Russels where
you say you entrusted Col. Sidney to send one into Scotland?


L. Howard, I think it may be less then a Week, four or five days, that I saw
him carry the Money. After this he said, he had given him this Money, and was
gone: And when he was dispatched, in a Week after I was making enquiries after
him, and Col. Sidney said, he had not heard of him since he went away; but
about a fortnight or three Weeks Col. Sidney said he had heard of him, That he
was at New Castle and stayed there; but he wondered he could hear no more of
him. I then went into Essex, and when I came back from thence, he told me, he
was come, but I had never seen him, not to this day, indeed I had once
appointed a Meeting with him at Mr. West's Chamber; but something or other
happened, we did not meet.


Mr. At. Genesis We have done with my Lord Howard, if they will ask him any
Questions they may.


L. Chapter J. They know their time, when the Kings Attorney has done with any
Witness then they may examine him, if they please. If they will not call your
other Witnesses.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you ask him any Questions?


Mr. Jones. No, no, by advice they are to ask him nothing.


Mr. At. Genesis We shall give your Lordship and the Jury an account in the next
place, that we have traced Aaron Smith into Scotland. And for that we shall
call some Witnesses which indeed we did not produce before at any Trial,
because we had not then discovered so much. We shall bring you the Person at
whose House he lay at New Castle, and the very Messenger that was sent with him
to conduct him a by-way into Scotland. Call Sheriff and Bell.


L. C. J. Look you Gentlemen, You that are at the Bar, there you must let the
Jury stand by themselves. I see there are a great many others intermingled with
them, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, If any whisperer talk to you, we expect
that you should tell us who they are; for we will suffer no remarks to be made
but what are openly made to the Court, and the Jury by the Counsel of both
sides.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Sheriff and Bell which was done


M. Williams, What is this Man's Name Mr. At.? Friend what is your Name?
Witness, My Name is Sheriff,


Mr. At. Genesis Pray give my Lord and the Jury an account What you know of any
Person that lay at your house some time since and whether you have seen him
since? My Lord this Gentleman did not know Aaron Smith before, and therefore I
desire Mr. Atterbury may be called and examined again. Mr. Atterbury, do you
know Aaron Smith?


Mr. Atterbury, Yes, I know him very well.


Mr. At. Genesis Had this Gentleman a view of Aaron Smith?


Mr. Atterbury, Yes, he had. He was brought where Aaron Smith was, and this
other Person was by before him too, and I was by when they had a view of him.


Mr. At. Genesis Now pray give an account what you know of the man you saw?


Mr. Sol. Genesis Where is Aaron Smith?


Mr. Atterbury, He is in the Kings Bench Prison, and he was brought by Habeas
Corpus to White Hall before the King. where these two persons were brought
likewise, and there this man Sheriff did own that Aaron Smith was the man that
was at his house; and the other Bell owned that he traveled toward Scotland
with him, and that he was hired to show him the way into Scotland.


Mr. At. Genesis Did Aaron Smith say any thing?


Mr. Atterbury, He would not Answer any thing at all, nor say a word.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray give an account Mr. Sheriff, who it was that lay at your
House, and when it was, and what he said was his Business, and by what name he
went?


Mr. Sheriff, Indeed his Business I did not know; but he was at our House
about the middle of February, it was there abouts.


L. C. J. When was it? what February?


Mr. Sheriff, The last February.


Mr. At. Genesis You say he was at your House last February, pray tell the Court
where that is?


Mr. Sheriff, At New Castle.


Mr. At. Gen, Do you keep any Inn there?


Mr. Sheriff, Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What Sign?


Mr. Sheriff. The Sign of the Black-spread Eagle.


Mr. At. Genesis And what did he do there?


Mr. Sheriff, He stayed there one Night and went away, and returned again in
twelve days or thereabouts, and came to my House again.


Mr. At. Genesis Whither did he go from you?


Mr. Sheriff. He went Southward as I suppose, I know no further.


Mr. At. Genesis But when he first came to your House, which way went he?


Mr. Sheriff. He went Northward toward Scotland, as he himself said, And
desired to have one to show him the way: And I sent for this Man, and when he
came to him he hired him to go with him, and I was by.


L. C. J. When he first came to your house about the middle of February was
twelve month, Whither was he bound then, Northward or Southward?


Mr. Sheriff, He was going to Scotland, that is Northward.


L. C. J. And you say after he came back again, and lay another Night at your
house.


Mr. Sheriff, Yes, ten or twelve days after he did.


L. C. J. And which way went he then?


Mr. Sheriff, Then he came Southwards toward London.


L. C. J. Did you take exact notice of the Man?


Mr. Sheriff, Yes, I saw him before his Majesty and the Council.


L C. J. And upon your Oath that same man you saw there was the same man that
lodged at your house in February was 12 month?


Mr. Sheriff, Yes, it is.


Mr. At. Genesis What name did he go by at your house?


Mr. Sheriff, He went under the name of Mr. Clerk, but what his Surname was I
cannot tell.


L. C. J. Had he a servant with him?


Mr. Sheriff, He had a man with him that stayed at our house during the time
of his going Northward?


Mr. At. Genesis What did he call his name.


Mr. Sheriff, Will. Langston.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he desire you to furnish him with a guide?


Mr. Sheriff, He told me his Servant did not know the way, and his horse was a
little lamish, and desired me to get a guide for him. For after he had dined at
our house it happened to be a rainy day, and he could not go further that
night, and therefore desired me to get him a man that knew that Country, and I
sent for this same man, and he hired him; and he went along with him next
morning, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Whither was he to go?


Mr. Sheriff, Truly I did not know; but he told me he did not know the way
into Scotland, and I directed him to a Gentleman's house at Jadbrough in the way.


Lord Chapter Just. Is that the Road to Scotland?


Mr. Sheriff, Yes, the high Road to one part of Scotland.


L. C. J. Did he tell you to what part or place of Scotland he was to go?


Mr. Sheriff, He named the West of Scotland, I think he named Douglas, but I
do not know what place certainly he designed for.


Mr. At. Genesis Then where is Bell?


Bell, Here.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you a view of this man they call Aaron Smith?


Bell, Yes, I had.


Mr. At. Genesis Give an account, whether you saw him in the Northand when and
where.


Bell, This man, Mr. Sheriff, sent for me. I live at New Castle and there I
keep Hackney Horses to serve any Gentlemen, or be a Guide to them as there is
occasion, and Mr. Sheriff sent for me, and when I came he told me the
Gentleman wanted a Guide into Scotland. We immediately agreed, it was upon
Thursday night before that we call Easter Eve.


Lord Chapter Just. When was it say you?


Bell, It was the Thursday before Easters-Even, so they call it with us, that
is Shrove-Tuesday.


L. C. J. Ay, they call it so in those places, because it is the Even of the
Fast of Ash Wednesday, the beginning of Lent -- Well go on.


Bell, We went away on Friday the next morning on our Journey towords
Jadbrough, and the 2d day which was Saturday in the afternoon my horse tired,
whereupon he left me with my horse and took the Man's man of the house where he
left me to guide him, for my horse would not ride up with him being tired, and
he resolving to go on, and he bid me follow him on the Sunday morning to
Jadbrough Town, which I did, and we stayed there all Sunday. And on Monday
morning I saw him take horse and another man that was his guide, and away they
went, as I think, he said toward Douglas he was going. And he paid me, and I
returned again from him to New Castle and left him.


L. C. J. Pray how far was this, you say you went with him to Jadbrough, how
far distant is that from New Castle?


Bell. To Jadbrough my Lord?


L. C. Just. Yes.


Bell. It Is Forty Miles my Lord.


L. C. Just. How near Scotland is it?


Bell. It Is within some six Miles of the English Border.


L. C. Just. Did you see him at any time after that?


Bell. I saw him at his coming back again; being at Sheriffs house, his Wife
asked me if I would go up and see the Gentleman that I went with toward
Scotland: So I went up, and he made me eat and drink at the Table with him.


Mr. At. Genesis What Name did he go by?


Bell. He went by the name of Clerk.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any Servant with him?


Bell. There was a Man that came with him as a Servant there, and was all the
time at New Castle, that he was gone toward Scotland, till he came back again.


L. C. Just. Mr. Attorney, Did this Man see Smith at the time the other saw him?


Bell. Yes, I did.


L. C. Just. And is that the Man that went by the name of Clerk at New Castle,
and that you went with toward Scotland?


Bell. Yes, It is.


Mr. Atterbury. And when they charged him with it, Aaron Smith did not deny it.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you go any by-Road to get into Scotland?


Bell. No, it is the Road Gentlemen usually go to Jadbrough, and so on; because
it is something the nearer way to that part of Scotland, as we judge it to be,
therefore Gentlemen use it.


Mr. At. Genesis Is it an high-open-Road?


Bell. Yes, it is the high-open Way to that part of the Country.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord Howard, Pray were the Names of any of the Scotch-men
mentioned at your Meeting, that were to be sent for?


L. Howard. Yes; There was my Lord Melvin, Sir John Cockram, and one Cambell.


Mr. At. Genesis Now, my Lord, We will give you an account, That as Smith went
into Scotland, so these persons soon after came into England.


Jury-Man. My Lord, We desire that my Lord Howard would name those Scotch-men
that were to come.


L. Howard. There was my Lord Melvin, Sir John Cockram, and one Cambel, one
that was of my Lord Argyles Name and Family; and there was another Name, but I
cannot remember what that Name was.


Mr. At. Genesis We shall give you an Account, my Lord, That they came
immediately after this to Town; and at the breaking out of the Plot, they
Absconded.


L. C. Just. Mr. Attorney, Has my Lord Howard his Pardon?


Mr. Attorney. Yes, my Lord, he has.


L. C. Just. Then your Lordship may be covered.


L. Howard. I cannot tell, but they may ask me some Questions.


Mr. At. Genesis Then you may be uncovered when they ask them, in the mean time
your Lordship may be covered. Swear Sir Andrew Foster which was done. Pray Sir,
will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you know about the Cambell's, and Sir
John Cockram's being in Town? Or any other Scotch-men that you know of?


Sir Andrew Foster. My Lord, I did see those Gentlemen in the beginning of last
Summer. Sir John Cockram, and Mr. Monrow, and Cambell the Son, I did see; but
the Father I did not, but I do know he was in Town, tho I saw him not.


Mr. At. Genesis How do you know it?


Sir Andrew Foster. I had Messages from them.


L. C. Just. Sir Andrew, You say, you saw Sir John Cockram, and Monrow?


Sir Andrew Foster; Yes.


L. C. Just. Did you see any body else?


Sir Andrew Foster. I saw Sir George Campell the Son.


Mr. At. Genesis What became of them upon the Discovery of the Plot?


Sir Andrew Foster. Sir John Cockram did Abscond, and Mr. Monrow was taken into
Custody.


Mr. At. Genesis What became of the others?


Sir Andrew Foster. The Campells were both in Custody.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see any Commission they had?


Sir Andrew Foster. I did see a Commission that Sir John Cockram had.


Mr. At. Genesis What was it for?


Sir Andrew Foster. To make a Purchase of some Plantations beyond Sea, I think
it was Carolina.


L. C. Just. Ay, where my Lord Shaftsbury had an Interest.


Sir Andrew Foster. It was some of the West Indies.


L. Howard. I did omit that passage my Lord --


Mr. At. Genesis Pray was it discoursed then, what should be the Blind for these
Gentlemen that were notorious Dissenters, that they should come to Town from
Scotland about?


L. Howard. It was to carry on a Plantation in Carolina. The Scotch Gentlemen
were personally known to my Lord Russel only; and my Lord Russel was to write
the Letter to them, and, I suppose, did.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Atterbury, What do you know of these Scotch-men coming to
Town; and what became of them afterward?


Mr. Atterbury. My Lord, about the beginning of July, Fourth, Fifth, or Sixth,
or thereabouts, I had some Information, That there were some Scotch Gentlemen
that had been shifting up and down, and at that time were about Blackfriars,
lodged there secretly. I immediately went with the King's Proclamation, and
some Warrants that I had to apprehend some Traitors that were fled: And when I
came, I found that Mr. Common Sergeant having Notice of them, had beat up their
Quarters, and they were endeavoring to escape by Water; but there they were
catched. There was Sir Hugh Campel, and Bayley, and Sir George Campel, and some
others, I know not the Names of them all; truly I cannot tell whether Monrow was
not another, but Sir Hugh Campel I had in my Custody, and Bayley was
immediately committed to the Gatehouse; and the rest of the Gentlemen I
afterward took in a cunning Hole by Moor-Fields, in a back house. And when I
came there, I found them lyeing on the Bed in the middle of the Day; and had
them Prisoners in my Custody two or three Months; and then they were all sent
out of my hands into Scotland Prisoners. Six of them there were, my Lord, that
I saw.


Mr. At. Genesis We have done my Lord, only we desire that a word of a Record may
be read.


Mr. Williams. What Record is it Sir?


Mr. At. Genesis Of Colonel Sidneys Attainder.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, We shall desire your Judgment, whether that Record
ought to be read against Mr. Hambden; I perceive by Mr. Attorney, that it is a
Record of the Conviction of Mr. Sidney, which ought not to be given in Evidence
against Mr. Hambden upon this Indictment.


Mr. At. Genesis We make use of it, to show how upon former Trials, upon this
Evidence, Verdicts have gone.


Mr. Williams. We are in your Judgment, my Lord, if by Law it may be given in
Evidence against Mr. Hambden, who is neither Party nor Privy to it, nor
Indicted for the same Offense.


Mr. At. Genesis Let it alone then.


L. C. Just. Well, Mr. Attorney does not press it. What say you to it,
Gentlemen, for the Defendant?


Mr. Williams. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I am
of Counsel for Mr. Hambden the Defendant upon this Indictment here before you.
This Indictment is a severe Indictment: It is a very high Crime of which my
Clyent is Accused. How far the Evidence tends to reach it, you have heard; and
I shall, with the patience of the Court, particularly observe it to you. But I
shall first speak to the Indictment it self: It says, that Mr. Hambden being a
person of a turbulent Disposition, and Seditiously intending to disturb and
disquiet the King's Peace, and to stir Sedition, and to bring the Government
into danger, did Conspire, etc. As to this matter, Gentlemen, there is no
manner of Proof of what the Indictment charges, as to the Disposition of the
person Accused; nor that he had any other design, than what my Lord Howard has
now Sworn. Then it says further, that Mr. Hambden did Consult and Conspire
with diverse persons to execute these purposes; and particularly for the making
and raising of an Insurrection in the Kingdom. This is laid as the particular
Fact: And for this purpose, he did further Conspire with several persons, to
provide Arms and Armed-men: And for their fulfilling of this, he did further
Consult with several persons, that some persons should be sent into Scotland to
stir up the Kings Subjects in Scotland, to a Concurrence and Conjunction with
some People in England, about this his evil design. How far this Indictment is
proved, upon the Defendant, Gentlemen, is the Question before you. He has
pleaded Not Guilty, and hopes to satisfy you he is not. Gentlemen, as to what
Evidence has been given you so far as it is Positive, and Affirmative; I mean
the Testimony of my Lord Howard in that part, it is impossible for us that are
of Counsel for the Defendant directly to contradict him with Proof, or to give
a direct positive proof in answer to it: I say it is impossible for us to
contradict him, who gives such a positive Evidence of Fact. By the Evidence of
my Lord Howard, he tells us there were Six Persons in this Council, as he is
pleased to call them. By his Evidence, three of the six are dead, my L. Russel,
Col. Sidney, and the Earl of Essex; He himself is the Fourth, the Defendant is
the Fifth, who cannot give Evidence for himself; and the Duke of Monmouth, who
is the Sixth, being away, there is not any person in being, that should
contradict my Lord Howard's Affirmative in this part of his Evidence but the
Duke of Monmouth: Whom we cannot have here, since it appears by the Evidence
Mr. At. Genesis could not prevail to have him at this Trial; therefore proof of
that nature cannot be reasonably expected from my Clyent, to acquit himself by
a positive Contradiction of what my Lord Howard has sworn. Then in this Case we
must, as in all Cases where a person does Swear directly against a Defendant,
endeavor to satisfy and persuade your Lordship and the Jury upon
Circumstances arising out of this Fact, and further Circumstances attending the
Fact, and by probable Arguments and reasonable Inductions out of the Evidence,
that this Gentleman, the Defendant, is not guilty of what he is charged with.

In the first place, we shall observe upon the Testimony of my Lord Howard,
that as to some things he is very Positive, and Particular: He has an
Incomparable Memory, and speaks particularly to Persons, particularly to
Places, particularly to Times. But Gentlemen, as to that which is the principal
part of his Evidence, and which most affects the Defendant, and wherein it
concerns us to contradict or disprove him, he is wanting as to that
Circumstance of Time. He that is so exact in his Memory as to other
Circumstances, is not positive, nor any thing like positive, as to the Times of
the Meeting. For they would imagine, that the first Meeting the Defendant was
concerned in, was at his own house. He describes the House and the Place very
exactly, but as for the Time, he only says it was about the middle of January:
He carries other things in his memory positively; and whether it might not be
expected in a Case so remarkable as this, and which so nearly and highly
concerned himself, that he should be as particular in the Time, as he is in
other things, you may rationally judge. His Lordship sometimes is very
particular as to Time: He tells you in his Relation about my Lord Shaftsbury,
that his going to him, was on the Saturday after Michaelmasday; and then he
pursues it to the Second and Third of October. He is positive to many several
Days; upon which I would observe, that he being particular to a Day, as to
other things, may well be expected to be ready, (if it be true,) to be as
particular as to the Time of this Meeting: But therein he is to seek; he is
doubtful as to that. And you must give us leave Gentlemen, to make this
Observation, That since he will not be particular to that Time, we do apprehend
that he gives himself a little Loose, that we may not meet with him to
contradict him in that Circumstance: For if he should be positive therein, as
he is in the other matters that concern not the Defendant, we might perhaps by
clear pregnant Circumstances contradict, if not disprove his Lordship, that it
is not probable, (if possible,) it should be true what he affirms. But
Gentlemen, we must answer it as well as we can; and since he is so Cautious, we
must meet him by Arguments in another way. Another thing we should observe upon
my Lords Evidence, is this; That my Lord, tho he be particular as to many Facts
and things relating to my Lord Shaftsbury, where he names other particular
Persons, I think Coll. Romsey and Walcot, and names the particular Discourses,
particularly instancing in them between him and my Lord of Shaftsbury, between
him and Walcot, and between him and other Persons; yet he has not made use of
any one Circumstance of Fact in this Case of the Defendant's now before you,
that does justify what he has said, save only that of Aaron Smith; not any one
Circumstance of Fact. So that there is no more than the bare Saying of what my
Lord Howard is pleased to deliver no more than his Oath, nay, no more than his
Observation, and Inference of much of what passed in the Company of several
persons, without any concurring Circumstances in Fact to Justify or Confirm his
Testimony. It might have been an easy matter, if all that my Lord Howard says
was true, that there was such a Meeting at Mr. Hambden's House by such and such
Persons, to prove that such Persons, or some of them, met there. But that there
should be no Person to prove, that these Gentlemen, or any of them, were there;
nor any other Fact or Circumstance in the world, to go along with my Lord
Howard to justify his Asseveration, is very wonderful, and may well make it
doubtful that it should not be true: And the rather Gentlemen, (if it be true
as my Lord Howard would have it) because there was a second Meeting of all
these persons at my Lord Russel's, which was so public and open a place, and
yet no man to Concur or go along with my Lord Howard in any one thing; no
particular Fact assigned to justify his Testimony as to this Meeting, is
strange, if it be true.

So then Gentlemen, there is no more than what my Lord Howard has Sworn,
without any one Circumstance to back it, to prove the Defendant Guilty. My
Lord, taking this upon the main of my Lord Howards Evidence, it will be pretty
hard too upon the nature of the Fact, that he is pleased to prove against this
Gentleman, to make an Answer to it: And truly, I think as hard for you to
believe it. Gentlemen, He would imagine, That there should be men Raised, men
Armed, a discourse of Money, and this done, as he would have it, about the
middle of January; and yet nothing at all done, though there appears no manner
of Discovery of this very evil Contrivance, till about July. Neither is there
any thing done in order to the Raising of Men, the Arming of Men, or the
levying of Money all this while. So that there is no one Fact of any kind
whatsoever, that goes along with what my Lord Howard has said.

My Lord and Gentlemen, Another thing we would desire to observe, is this, and
here we shall begin with what we have to say, as to our own Arguments and
Circumstances, that we have to take off from the Testimony of my Lord Howard in
this case: In the first place, it appears by the Evidence of my Lord Howard,
That he was very deep in a Conspiracy against the Government, and to make a
disturbance in the Kingdom long before this, that he now speaks of against the
Defendant, that is plain enough; for he tells you, That my Lord Shaftesbury and
He at Michaelmass were contriving of Projects to Overturn the Government, and
raise a Rebellion. It appears plainly by his Evidence, That my Lord
Shaftesbury, when he left his house, was resolved upon it, and my Lord Howard
was very Solicitous to carry on the same Design; nay, he was so Active in it,
that he tells you, That he did create Messages between my Lord of Shaftesbury,
and the Duke of Monmouth, and would needs go by a false insinuation of his own,
to draw in the Duke of Monmouth, by telling his Grace his Information he had
from Walcot, and not saying he came from my Lord Shaftesbury, with whom he says
he had been discoursing; but he would put it under some sort of Disguise, the
better to prevail. So that it appears, my Lord was very Criminal, and Guilty,
in this Case. Why then Gentlemen, my Lord being so highly Criminal, and there
being a Discovery of this Conspiracy by Keiling, and Romsey, and West, having
made a more manifest Discovery, and this happening in July, Then it was high
time my Lord Howard might conceive for him to Secure himself, and save one, he
being thus Guilty, as he declares: It is but reasonable to conjecture, he then
began to place his Security in a Pardon; and that there were no other means to
save his Life; and that the way to it, must be by some further Discovery of a
Conspiracy against his Majesty and the Government: And having since obtained a
Pardon, it is agreeable, That whatsoever my Lord Howard has done in this Case,
he has done for his own sake, to purchase his own Pardon for a Treason he was
so deep in, and to outdo all the Witnesses that went before him, by fresh
Testimony against the Defendant and others: This might incline him to go an
Inch or two, or more, beyond the Discovery of Keiling, West, and Romsey; to
have but said the same thing that was proved by Three or Four Witnesses before
him, might not perhaps have availed him: may not the indifferent believe it in
this Case, to be the Interest and Security of my Lord Howard, by these means to
merit his Pardon? May it not be believeable, that what he has said, he has
said only for his own sake, and that he has, by exposing this Gentleman, and
the Blood of others, procured himself a Pardon?


L. C. Just. What do you mean by that, Mr. Williams?


Mr. Williams. By being a Witness against the Defendant and others, he has
procured his own Pardon.


L. C. Just. That is a little harsh Expression --


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I explain my self thus --


L. C. Just. It Is an harsh Word, and too roundly expressed; You had need to
explain your self; It Is a little too rank, as though the King's Pardon were to
be procured by Blood.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I intend nothing of hardship, or amiss, but to speak
according to my Instructions, and to make the best Observations I can out of
the Evidence for my Clyent: I will express my self as well as I can, That my
Lord Howard being a Witness against Men in a Case of this high Nature; and
there being other Witnesses before, and besides himself, to the Discovery of
the late Conspiracy against the Government, it concerned him to give an home
Evidence in the Case, or else he could not have any expectation of his Pardon:
For if he had done no more than what others had done before him, when there
were three Witnesses besides, and they had got the start in the Discovery, his
discovery had been in vain; and therefore he was concerned perhaps to strain,
that he might make such a Discovery as might answer his end; and this will
arise naturally, I suppose, out of what has happened in this Case: For it
seems, though it was something long before he got his Pardon, now he has it. My
Lord, another thing is this, How far my Lord Howard will be credited in this
Matter, we shall leave his Credit to you Gentlemen, upon what we shall prove.
For we shall make it out by persons of great Honor, and persons of great
Integrity, That upon Discourse concerning this Conspiracy, my Lord Howard did
declare, That he knew of no Persons that were Guilty of having any hand in it;
he declared it upon his Honor, he declared it upon his Religion, and he used
all the Asseverations that were possible for a Man to offer, to make himself
believed.

My Lord, It may be Objected, as it has been some times, that that was to
outface the Conspiracy, and so stop the Prosecution of that he knew himself so
Guilty of: But however, thus far we may make use of it for the Defendant, That
if my Lord Howard would, in the Face of Heaven, pawn his Honor, his Trust, his
Conscience, and his Religion, to assert that which was not true, and under all
those Vows and Engagements, affirm an Untruth; a Man that would deal so, and
speak an Untruth with that Solemnity, I think is not a Person of the same
Credit, as a Person of certain known Truth and Veracity. For if a Man will say
one thing one time, and that with solemn Vows and Asseverations, and Swear
another thing the quite contrary another time, he does not stand so fair for
Credit, I think, as he that always maintains, and avows the Truth. So far we
may make use of it very safely, I think, as to my Lord's Credit.

My Lord, Another matter that we have to urge, is, That since the Trial of my
Lord Russel, and since the Trial of Colonel Sidney, my Lord Howard has in
discourse owned, that my Lord Russel died Innocent. If that be true, it will
have a great weight sure with you Gentlemen, to discredit my Lords Testimony:
For then he has Contradicted what he has Sworn. For if my Lord Swore, that my
Lord Russel was Guilty, as all the World knows he did; and afterward Soberly,
and Publicly, shall have said he died Innocent, he has contradicted his own
Evidence, and his own Oath; and sure is not to be believed as to what he Swears
now against the Defendant. My Lord, It did not rest there; but since the Trial
of Colonel Sidney, it will be proved by Witnesses, that my Lord Howard did
declare, That Colonel Sidney had hard Measure. This will be proved by
Witnesses; and it is rather to be presumed, He meant hard Measure as to his own
Testimony, which he was best knowing of, than of any thing else as to his
Trial. Now, how this Person of Great Honor can Solve this, and how it can
stand with his Oath, and his Honor; I will leave it to you Gentlemen to judge
of it. My Lord, I have another matter to say, That with me seems to have very
great weight: My Lord Howard, upon some occasions has said, being in discourse
with a very great Intimate of his, and the man being speaking of the World to
come, speaking of Eternity, speaking of the Immortality of the Soul, speaking
of the Rewards and Punishments of another Life; my Lord Howard should say to
him, How long will thou persist in this Folly? How long will thou be so
Foolishly prevailed upon, as to believe the World was ever Made, or will ever
have an End? My Lord, If a Person be of that Opinion, and a Man's Judgment in
such things will discover it self in his Words; How far the Testimony of a man
of that persuasion shall influence a Jury when he stands single, when there is
no Fact to Justify him, in point of probable Circumstance, will be easily
observable, and I must leave it to the Gentlemen of the Jury to consider.

My Lord, We have another saying of my Lord Howards, which we shall give you an
account of in the Proofs, and that was in Relation to his Pardon. Being free in
discourse, as my Lord is a Man very liberal that way; and his Friend inquiring
whether he had his pardon: No, says he; Nor I cannot have it, till the
drudgery of Swearing be over. Truly it is a very odd thing, That a Man should
call that Drudgery that is his Duty. To testify the Truth, is as much the Duty
of every honest Man, as any thing else. Men have died for the Truth, and we
Look upon those as Martyrs, and the best of Martyrs that dye for the Truth.
Now, that this Noble Lord, or that any man should call this a Drudgery, which
is so manifest a Duty, by giving a true Testimony to preserve the King's Life,
and support the Government against the Contrivance, and Conspiracies of Evil
men, is but an odd Insinuation; and truly I think is rather to be taken in this
sense, as to my Lord, That he did strain a little to make his Discovery the
more profitable to him; and so did say more (so far I may safely go) then any
one else did say. And my Lord, This is that that I would observe upon the first
part of the Evidence.

As for that part that Concerns Aaron Smith, the Evidence given by Sheriff and
Bell, I submit that to your Lordship, how far that can any way affect Mr.
Hambden the Defendant. It is introduced to Fortify the Testimony of my Lord
Howard, and it is introduced by himself thus: That at their Meeting at Mr.
Hambden's House, there was a Discourse of some Assistance to be had from
Scotland; but says he, at the second Meeting at my Lord Russels, then it came
to a further discourse, and Colonel Sidney did undertake to name a Person to
send thither; and a Person was named; he does not say Mr. Hambden was concerned
in it, or that Mr. Hambden named the man, or any thing particular as to Mr.
Hambden, more then that he was in the Company. Mr. Hambden had no hand in the
undertaking, or sending him into Scotland; that was altogether the part of Mr.
Sidney; save this, that he says my Lord Russel Writ the Letter that was to go
by him. It does not appear Mr. Hambden was at all concerned in it, but only was
there.


L. C. Just. And consented to it?


Mr. Williams. I would not strain any thing my Lord, further than the Evidence
is.


L. C. Just. Nor do not Misrepeat it neither.


Mr. Williams. I design not any such thing, my Lord.


L. C. Just. But you do though: For he Swears it, every one of them consented.


Mr. Williams. By silence it must be then. For he does not say, That he said
any thing. He Swears only Colonel Sidney undertook to manage it, to send a
Person; and my Lord Russel to write the Letter.


L. C. Just. And all the rest Consented to it.


Mr. Williams. What is meant by Consent, when nothing was said, I must leave to
the Jury. I must agree, the L. Howard did Swear, that my Clyent was in their
Company, but how far he did, or did not Consent, does not at all appear; and
how far this will Charge my Clyent, I must leave to you Gentlemen. But the
Proof, as to this matter, stands thus; that Aaron Smith was at New Castle in
February last, that he went publicly. Now, my Lord Howard says, that he went
to agitate a Confederacy between the Malcontents of Scotland, and those in
England. Now it is strange, that a man that was to agitate such a Concern,
should go publicly with a Servant to New Castle; so publicly as to be known
again; and of his own accord, tell them he was going to such a place in
Scotland. And be it so in Fact, Will any man apply this to any thing was done
before (as my Lord Howard says about a Consultation to join in Rebellion?)
Will any man think, that he should talk at that kind of rate, if that were his
Employment, and tell whether he were going? But I rely upon this, in point of
Evidence. It Is not proved yet, that Aaron Smith was in Scotland. That he came
within Six miles of the Borders of Scotland, is proved; but it is not proved he
was in Scotland, or did Agitate any Conspiracy there; or did any thing more,
than go within Six miles of the Borders of Scotland. But then they would press
it further, and they say, that there were some Scotch Gentlemen, that in the
Summer came here into England, and that they hid themselves, when the Plot was
Discovered. It does not appear my Clyent had any Conversation with these Scotch
Gentlemen, or any of them, or was ever in their Company. It Is a very remote
inference to bring any thing of this to affect my Clyent in this High Charge.

My Lord, We shall add one thing more to disprove that part of the Indictment,
that lays the Imputation of Turbulency and Sedition to the Charge of Mr.
Hambden; and which also will show the improbability of his being concerned in
any thing of this Nature. We shall prove him to be a Person of a sober
Conversation, of a retired Life, and studious Disposition; and as an Evidence
for the Defendant, we shall prove, that he, in October 1680. left England for
his Healths sake, and went into France for the recovery of his Health. He
continued there till about Michaelmas was Twelve Month, then he returned. It Is
true, he continued in England from Michaelmas, to the time they speak of; but
we shall make it plain, that in February, my Clyent, and my Lord Mountague had
adjusted matters between themselves, to go the beginning of Summer again into
France, there to continue and abide some time for their Healths. Here is a
strange kind of imagination, that this Contrivance between my Lord Howard, and
my Lord Shaftesbury, that was going on before this time, and that was
Disappointed, and my Lord Shaftesbury went away, and afterward Dyed in
Holland, was taken up by my Clyent, and those other Persons when my Clyent, as
we shall prove, never intended to stay in England. My Lord, he was a
Parliament Man in both the last Parliaments, but appeared in neither of them,
being all the while in France, for the Recovery of his Health. We shall prove
him to be one Studiously inclined, that he lived a Retired Life, and kept very
little or no Company; and you will hear from Persons of very great Honor and
Quality, what he is, as to his Person, and as to his Opinion; and then we shall
submit it to you Gentlemen of the Jury, whether you can believe him Guilty of
this he is Charged with, which is your Issue. You are to try, whether he be
Guilty, or Not Guilty of the Crime Charged in the Indictment.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, and Gentlemen of the Jury, I desire to make one
Observation, before we call our Witnesses.


L. C. J. Pray do not take up our time altogether in Speeches, but go on to
your Evidence.


Mr. Wallop. I desire to observe but one thing, my Lord.


L. C. J. Make your Observations at last, but spend not our time in Speeches. I
know you will expect to be heard at last, and so you shall whatever you will
say.


Mr. Williams. Call the Earl of Anglesey, the Lord of Clare, and Lord Paget.
Mr. Ducas. who appearing was sworn Now we have him here we must begin with him,
my Lord. Mr. Ducas, Pray what did you hear my Lord Howard say at any time
concerning this Conspiracy, and who were concerned in it, and who were not?


Mr. Ducas. My Lord Howard came once to the house of Colonel Sidney, I believe
it was about 8 days after the Imprisonment of Colonel Sidney, and when he was
in the house, I ask't him, What is the matter my Lord? he did answer me, he was
told there was a Plot against the King and the Duke, and one general
Insurrection to be made, and that Colonel Sidney sent a man into Scotland, to
which thing my Lord Howard swear laying his hand on his breast, saying, God
knows all things, and God knows I know nothing of that; and I am sure if
Colonel Sidney had known any thing, he would tell me; and I said, what is the
matter, my Lord? are you afraid? and he made answer to me, No honest man is
safe in his own house, I pray you lend me a Bed to lie in. And he asked me
about the Goods of Colonel Sidney, because of the Plot and such things, and he
desired to have them removed to his house; and he said, rather then go to the
Tower he would do any thing.


Mr. Williams. Speak again to the Jury that did not hear you, what said my Lord
Howard to you?


Mr. Ducas. He said, rather then to be a Prisoner again he would do any thing.


Mr. Williams. Who to be a Prisoner again?


Mr. Ducas. My Lord Howard.


Mr. At. Genesis What things were spoken of?


Mr. Ducas. He said he would do any thing.


Mr. Williams. Were you speaking of the Conspiracy? Of the Plot?


Mr. Ducas. He spoke of the Plot, and said he knew nothing of it.


Mr. Williams. What did he say Sir?


Mr. Ducas. He said to me and swore, he knew nothing of it, and called God to
witness.


Mr. Williams. Pray did he then say he would do any thing rather then go to the
Tower, when you were talking of the Plot and Conspiracy?


Mr. Ducas. Yes, he would do any thing rather then be a Prisoner again.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray what did he say?


Mr. Ducas. He raised up his hands on high, and said, he knew nothing of the
Plot, or of the Insurrection, or that Colonel Sidney had sent any man into
Scotland.


Mr. Williams. When was this?


Mr. Ducas. I believe it was 8 or 9 days after the Imprisonment of Colonel
Sidney.


Mr. At. Genesis What day of the Month, and what Month was it?


Mr. Ducas. He was Imprisoned about the end of June.


L. Howard. My Lord, It would be necessary that I should make an answer to
this, and I know not whether I should make a particular answer to every one:
for here is a whole set of Witnesses, I see.


L. C. J. No, let them alone. You must not interrupt them, they must go on with
their Evidence; and when it is a fit time for you to answer them, the Council
for the King will call you.


Mr. Williams. Pray swear Mr. Howard which was done Pray Sir, will you please
to acquaint my Lord and the Jury what you know, of what my Lord Howard has said
of the Plot, and who were concerned in it?


Mr. Howard, My Lord, what I have said is in the Paper of Mr. Sidney's Trial,
and truly I can say no more than what I said there.


Mr. Williams, pray speak out Sir, and tell it again to this Jury.


Mr. Howard. I was told I spoke it very loud then.


L. C. J. Pray Sir speak as you please, We wont direct you in what Key you
shall speak. Speak in what Key you will.


Mr. Howard. Then if you will have me speak it, I will speak it as loud again.
My Lord, is Mr. Hambden here?


L. C. J. Yes, there he is.


Mr. Howard, In the first place I do not know Mr. Hambden, My Lord, I cannot
promise to speak the very words that I spoke the last time, I cannot make them
so fit as one tally fits another.


Mr. At. Genesis Consider, Sir, you were not Sworn then, you are Sworn now, That
is the difference, and therefore pray consider of it.


Mr. Howard, My Lord, As near as I can, I will repeat the same words again, I
had little Acquaintance with my Lord Howard; But meeting him often at my
Brothers House, (and being he was extraordinary pleasant Company, I must needs
say that he was so, and a Man of great Wit) and I coming from White Hall, he
asked me what news of the Plot? I told him there were some People that were in
the Proclamation, or would be, and I named their Names. Says he, I know none of
them except Rombald, I think; and by chance I met him passing through the Old
Exchange, and he saluted me very kindly. After this my Lord Russel was taken,
and when my Lord Howard heard that, says he, then we are all undone. And I very
much fear it is a Sham Plot, since they have seized upon my Lord, and I doubt
he is a lost man. After that, I think as near as I can remember -- The next
thing was this -- If you look upon the Book, you will see what I said there.


L. C. J. We are not to look upon the Book, man. You must give your Evidence
your self Mr. Howard, I hope you do not Swear by Book? Let the truth come out
in Gods Name, whatever it be.


Mr. Williams. Ay, my Lord, We desire to have truth come out.


L. C. J. Ay, whether it be of one side, or the other, God forbid but truth
should be spoken. Mr. Howard go on.


Mr. Howard. Then my Lord Colonel, Sidney was taken, and says my Lord, I am
extremely troubled for Colonel Sidney, for he is my very good Friend. said I,
why are you not concerned for my Lord Russel? He is of your Blood, says he, he
is a man without exceptions. There is no man of such honor as he, but I am
concerned for Colonel Sidney as that particular man that has obliged me above
all the World, but I never heard my Lord Howard name Mr. Hambden in all my life.


Lord Howard. I Will give you a reason for it My Lord, if you please, why I said
so.


L. C. J. My Lord, This is Evidence for the Defendant. If the Kings Counsel
will call you afterward to make Answer to any of these things, then is your
time to speak. We will not let them interrupt you when you come to speak, nor
must you interrupt them now. We are bound to hear both sides, and so by the
grace of God we will do.


Lord Howard. My Lord, I desire both he and his Brother may stay in Court, for
I have something to say to them.


Mr. Williams. Pray what did you hear my Lord Howard say concerning the Plot?


Mr. Howard. He did deny it possitively, and said they acted nothing but what
was Legal, and he said it 500 times over.


Mr. Williams. Did he deny it?


Mr. Howard, Yes he did.


L. C. J. But when he said they acted nothing but legally, what did he mean?
Was this Plot legal?


Mr. Howard. I had former Discourses with my Lord Howard at other times, and I
asked him; My Lord, what tends all this to? Your going up into the City and
making these meetings? says he, we intend nothing but what is legal. There is
not one man in the Company that I know of, intends any thing else.


Mr. Williams. What was my Lord's Opinion of the Plot in June or July, or
August?


Mr. Howard. He said he knew nothing of it, nor could he believe there was any
such thing. When those Persons were named that were to kill the King, Lord
Bless me, said he, can there be such a thing in nature, that any men should be
so wicked, but that there is one man of Honor or Estate, or Conscience that
ever had any such thought, it can never into my Head, I can never believe it.


Mr. Williams. When was this?


Mr. Howard. When Rombald and those other People were put into the Proclamation.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Howard, Then I will ask you your Opinion, whether in your
Judgment, every man that was in the Plot could not have said so much?


Mr. Howard. I suppose every man in the Plot would have defended himself as
well as he could, but I cannot tell what way.


Mr. Thompson. Sir, did he barely affirm it, or with Asseverations and
Imprecations?


Mr. Howard. My Lord, was not upon his Oath before me.


Mr At. Genesis Mr: Howard. Don't you believe a great many that were concerned in
this Plot would deny it?


Mr. Howard. I am to give my Opinion only for my self, not for other People.


L. C. J. Have you done with him?


Mr. Williams. Yes my Lord.


L. C J. Then go over Sir.


Mr. Howard. My Lord, I am troubled with Fumes, and cannot well endure a Crowd,
therefore I desire I may have leave to be gone.


L. C. J. You may go if you please.


Mr. Williams. Call Mr. Edward Howard, but he did not appear


Then Swear my Lord of Clare and my Lord Paget, which was done L. C. J. Well
what do you ask my Lord of Clare?


Mr. Williams. My Lord of Clare, Will your Lordship please to acquaint the
Court and the Jury, what you heard my Lord Howard say concerning the late
Conspiracy?


E. of Clare. My Lord, Some indisposition I have had of late, together with the
great rigor of the season has confined me to my House this six Weeks, so that
I should not come here but upon this Summons of a Subpoena, which I thought I
ought not to refuse. I suppose I need not repeat much of what was said at
Colonel Sidney's Trial.


L. C. J. My Lord, You must give what Evidence you have to give now,


Mr. Williams. My Lord, The Gentlemen of this Jury have not heard it, therefore
you must say it all over again to them.


E. of Clare. Sometime after Mr. Sidney was taken, my Lord Howard came to see
me, and complaining of the Times, said, That all things were very sad and
dangerous, and if ever he was questioned again, he would not Plead, but desire
them only to count Noses, for the quickest dispatch he thought was best: I
replied, sure his Lordship was in jest. He said, No, he was in earnest, for he
was confident if he came to Trial, they would have his Life, let him appear
never so innocent. I said, I hoped not so, it was only his Lordships fear, and
because of that, I thought it might be presumed he would venture much, rather
then be Tried. And discoursing of the late Primate of Armagh's Prophecy; He
said, for his part, he thought the Persecution was already begun, and he did
believe it would be very sharp, but withal, he hoped it would be but short; and
then he began to wish himself beyond Sea till the Troubles were over; and in
compliance with his Lordship I did wish so too. But as to Sidney, he did with
great asseverations very much assert his innocence. He said, he thought he was
not guilty of any of the things laid to his Charge; and spoke with large
Encomiums in his praise, as he had obligation to do, and seemed to bemoan his
misfortunes; which I said I had then reason to believe he was real in, for I
believe never any man was more engaged to another then he to Colonel Sidney. I
told him there was a discourse of some Writings of Mr. Sidneys that were taken;
he said he was confident they could make nothing of any Writing of his; I told
him, I supposed he meant legal they could not do it, This was the most he
said, as to Mr. Hambden, he mentioned nothing that I know of.


Mr. Williams. Did he seem to declare any Opinion about the Plot or Conspiracy
in general, That there was any such thing or not?


E. of Clare. I do not remember it.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord of Clare, Did you never hear my Lord Howard before this
complain of the Government that it was amiss, and was to be rectified?


Earl of Clare. Yes, he often did complain. Every body knows my Lord's way of
discourse.


Lord Howard. Pray will you ask him, if my Lord of Clare used to fall out with
me upon those discourses.


E. of Clare. My Lord was always good Company.


Mr. At. Genesis You mean a Propos, My Lord.


E. of Clare. I understand what you mean by a Propos, you are a Learned man, I
know.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord of Clare, if I apprehend your Lordship aright, my Lord
Howard was discoursing of the Primate of Armagh's Prophecy, and said he thought
the Persecution was already begun, and would be sharp, though he hoped it would
be short, and he wished himself beyond Sea till the Troubles were over, and
your Lordship wished your self so too?


E. of Clare. No, I said in compliance with his Lordship, since he wished
himself beyond Sea, till the Troubles were over, I wished he were there too.


L. C. J. But I perceive all these discourses concerning the Government are
reckoned but jests and matter of Laughter, but it is a very rank way of jesting
I assure you.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, We call our Witnesses seriously, they are the Kings
Council that jest.


Mr. At. Genesis Was this before my Lord Howard was taken?


E. of Clare. Yes, but after Mr. Sidney was taken.


L. C. J. Well, who do you call next?


Mr. Williams. My Lord Paget, Pray what have you heard my Lord Howard say
concerning the Plot, and when?


L. Paget. My Lord sits there, and I believe he may remember it was about the
7th of July, the Saturday before my Lord went into the Country, to the best of
my memory, which was, I take it, the 9th of July. Upon Saturday the 7th at
Night my Lord came to see me, I told him I was glad to see him abroad, and not
concerned in the Disorders that were then so general; My Lord told me he had
been wished joy by several, and he took it ill, because it looked as if he were
guilty. It Is true, my Lord was a man of great finess and readiness in
discourse, and came easily into all Company, my Lord said that was true, but he
had so carefully behaved himself, that he was sure they could not touch him
with any thing, nor did he know any thing of any body else that he could charge
them withal.


Mr. Williams. When was this my Lord?


L. Paget. This was the 7th of July.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray good my Lord, Why did you joy my Lord Howard, had you any
reason to mistrust my Lord?


L. Paget. No other reason, then because I knew he was a man of great freedom
in discourse, and might be concerned upon that account.


Mr. At. Genesis And he would frequently discourse against the Government I
suppose?


L. Paget. No, I never heard my Lord discourse against the Government in my
life.


Mr. Williams. Swear Dr. Burnet which was done Pray will you Doctor acquaint
the Court, what you heard my Lord Howard say concerning the late Plot, and when?


Dr. Burnet. My Lord Howard came to see me the day after the discourse of the
Plot broke out, Thursday I think it was, on Wednesday it began to be talked of.
The thing was little understood then, but in general a Plot was discovered, and
my Lord with a great many Protestations, lifting up his hands and eyes to
Heaven, protested he knew of none, and believed there was none, and spoke of
the whole thing as a Contrivance.


Mr. Williams. This was the day after the Discovery broke out?


Dr. Burnet. Yes, the day after that I first heard of it.


Mr. Williams. Had you any other discourse with my Lord about it?


Dr. Burnet. I had not seen my Lord before of some Months. And then he spoke a
great deal to me. He told me he had been in Essex, and after that he went to
the Bath, and went so early and came away before the Company came, because he
would avoid all danger. And he expressed great apprehensions of fear of
Sham-Plots, and spoke of False Witnesses and former designs of that Nature. The
truth of it was, one had possessed me much with a belief of the thing, it being
then but a secret, but he strove to dispossess me of that belief, and his whole
discourse ran upon that for an whole hour, and expressed, as I said, great fear
of some Sham-Contrivance, and spoke much of false Witnesses, wishing that he
were beyond Sea.


L. C. J. What, he spoke as if there were like to be great heats and stirs, I
suppose?


Dr. Burnet. No, the talk was about the Discovery, which he said he believed
was a Contrivance.


Mr. Williams. Did my Lord Howard use to come to you some times?


Dr. Burnet. Yes, he used to come frequently to see me.


Mr. At. Genesis Dr. Burnet, Pray let me ask you one Question, you spoke of
solemn Declarations and Protestations made by my Lord Howard, what gave the
occasion to such a Solemnity?


Dr. Burnet. I will tell you the occasion truly, tho it was never asked me
before. It was thus, I being possessed with the belief of the thing by one that
assured me it was true, and would soon appear to be so, I argued upon that
belief to convince my Lord Howard, that it was true, and he argued a great deal
to dispossess me of that belief. And I said, if there be any such thing I pray
God forgive them that are concerned, but certainly it is one of the
monstrousest ill things that ever was done; for hereby they have done all that
could be done to ruin the Protestant Religion. He was smoking a Pipe of
Tobacco, and he laid down his Pipe, and lifted up his hands and eyes to Heaven,
and protested to me, he neither knew of any such thing, nor believed it, but it
was all a Contrivance.


Mr. At. Genesis By his discourse, you possibly might understand what he meant,
did he mean being privy to the Murder of the King or the raising of Rebellion?


Dr. Burnet. There was not a word then of the Assassination, but it was all of
the Plot in general.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he make no distinction?


Dr. Burnet. We talked of nothing but Plot in general. For the particulars were
not then known. It was only about the general notion of a Plot.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray what was the reason you had to believe it?


Dr. Burnet. There was a Gentleman from Whitehall that came to see me, and he
did assure me it was true, as being one that had it from a Privy-Councellor.
This was on the Wednesday when the Council sat long about it; and nothing of
particulars was then let out, but only a discourse in general of such a thing,
and he said it would be found to be a certain truth.


Mr. At. Genesis But Doctor did not you a little wonder at the carriage of my
Lord Howard? That a man that was not accused, that you heard of, should make
such solemn Protestations?


Dr. Burnet. My Lord, he said just in this manner as I have told you, when I
said, Pray God forgive them if any have been concerned in such a thing, he laid
down his Pipe, and lift up his hands and eyes. Whether he thought I suspected
him or no, I cannot tell, he best knows his own thoughts.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he say a word of Mr. Hambden?


Dr. Burnet. No, there was not any particular person named.


Mr. Recorder. Doctor, he would not make you his Confessor.


Dr. Burnet. His whole hours discourse was to dispossess me of the opinion and
belief I had entertained of the Plot.


Mr. Just. Holloway. This was about July you say?


Dr. Burnet. I cannot remember the very day of the Month, I believe it was the
latter end of June, but I am sure it was before any body was Committed, that we
heard of.


Mr. Recorder. Dr. Burnet, you say you did believe there was a Plot then?


Dr. Burnet. Yes, I did so, and he labored to dispossess me of that belief.


Mr. Recorder. Pray do you believe it now?


Mr. Williams. What a question is that, Mr. Sergeant?


Dr. Burnet. I make no doubt of it, Sir, as to the Assassination.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord Newport, Why do you lift up your hands? you don't do
well; for it is a very proper question.


L. C. J. Well call your next Witness Gentlemen?


Mr. Thompson. Swear Mr. Gisborne which was done


Mr. Williams. Pray Sir, will you acquaint the Court and the Jury what you have
heard my Lord Howard say about the late Conspiracy?


Mr. Gisborne. My Lord only said he knew nothing of the Plot; that is all I can
say.


Mr. Williams. When was this?


Mr. Gisborne. The Saturday before he was taken into Custody; then it was that
your honor did say so, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Ay, and 100 more I believe would say so, that might be concerned
in it for all that.


Mr. Williams. Swear Mr. Blake which was done Pray acquaint my Lord and the
Jury, what discourse you had with my Lord Howard about his Pardon, and what he
said to you?


Mr. Blake. My Lord, About the Month of October last my Lord Howard sent to me
to know how I did, and desired me to come and make him a Visit. The next day I
went and waited upon my Lord at his Lodging at White Hall, and after the
Complements passed, my Lord began a discourse of the Plot, and I told him, That
I heard none of the Witnesses had their Pardons, but only Keiling the first
discoverer. My Lord told me no, but he had a Warrant for his Pardon, and with
that he plucked it out and showed it me, and I read it. And then I told him I
thought it was of no avail without he had his Pardon actually under Seal. He
said no, but he had their word and honor; But, said he, when I first received
the Warrant, they said I should not meddle in it till I heard from them again;
which I have not yet, and I ascribe it to no other reason but only this, That I
must not have it till the drudgery of swearing it over.


Mr. Williams. When was this?


Mr. Blake. In October last some time. So I then took my leave of my Lord, and
my Lord desired me to come and see him at Night about 6 a Clock in the Evening,
for he had a great many came to him, but then he should be at leisure, and had
many things to say to me.


Mr. At. Genesis At that time did my Lord express himself as discontented, and
that it was irksome to him to be brought as a Witness?


Mr. Blake. He only said those words that I have told you, and looked up and
turned up his eyes toward Heaven when he said so.


Mr. Williams. Pray where is Mr. Benjamin Mercer? swear him. who was sworn


L. C. J. What do you ask him?


Mr. Williams. We bring him to prove that my Lord Anglesey was served with a
Subpoena, but is so ill of the Gout he cannot come.


L. C. J. If that be all, there is no question of it, but that he was Subpoened.


Mr. Williams. If your Lordship please, We will prove in what condition my Lord
Anglesey is, and then we hope your Lordship will give us leave to prove what my
Lord has said concerning my Lord Howard's discourses with him.


L. C. J. No certainly, Mr. Williams, and I am sure you ask it not as expecting
it should be granted.


Mr. Williams. I lay it before your Lordship and the Court.


L. C. J. Ay, you lay it before us, but you are a Lawyer, do you your self
think fit it should be done?


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I must submit it to you.


L. C. J. Come, will you consent, that what the Duke of Monmouth has said,
shall be given in Evidence, and then I presume the King's Council will consent
to your request.


Mr. Williams. I consent? Here is my Clyent, My Lord, in Court, I can consent
to nothing.


L. C. J. But if so be there be leave given on one side to tell what another
person has said, why should not it be consented to on the other side, that it
be proved what a 3d person that is absent has said for them?


Mr. Recorder. Ay, will you consent that we prove what the Duke of Monmouth has
said?


Mr. Williams. We don't know what the Duke of Monmouth has said.


L. C. J. But you do know it is not Evidence, nor fit to be granted what you ask.


Mr. Jones. You know that it is not for your purpose what he has said.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, We must go according to our Instructions.


L. C. J. But you know the Law, why should you offer any such thing? your
offering it will make the Lay gens that know not the Law, think that the Court
put hardships upon people, in denying things which you that understand the Law
know cannot be granted.


Mr. Williams. I do not press it my Lord, but leave it with you.


L. C. J. Why do you spend our time in urging things that are nothing to the
purpose, and cannot be allowed?


Mr. Williams. Now my Lord, We will go on to another part of our defense, and
that is, to call Witnesses to the Reputation of Mr. Hambden, and his behavior,
to satisfy you, that he cannot be such a person as the Indictment says, and as
he must be if it be true what this Gentleman my Lord Howard has sworn.


Mr. Thompson. We will first examine my Lord Paget. who stood up


Mr. Williams. My Lord, We ask you to that question. Have you known this
Gentleman Mr. Hambden, and what a sort of a man is he?


Lord Paget. I have good reason to know him. I have known him a great while,
and have always believed him an Honest and a Prudent man, a man of Honor and
Virtue and Integrity, my Lord; and I have had no reason to have other Opinion
of him. I know he has been always ever since he came abroad into the World a
man that has loved his Study, and Books and a contemplative life. And
therefore I should not be apt to believe, That he could apply himself to a
thing so contrary to his own nature, and to that way that he delighted in, and
had always hitherto applied himself unto, I mean to engage in a design of so
much Malice and Wickedness.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, You have had a long Conversation with the knowledge of
Mr. Hambden, you say. What say you as to his Disposition; Because this
Indictment says he is a Person of a Turbulent, Factious, Seditious Spirit?


Lord Paget. I have always known him a quiet peaceable man, not meddling in
Business, very Friendly, free from all Turbulency, not of much acquaintance nor
desirous to make much.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray my Lord Paget, upon the same Oath you have taken, have you
not at any time heard him express dissatisfaction as to the Maladministration
of the Government?


Lord Pagett. No, never to me in the least.


Mr. At. Genesis Not at the time of the last Westminster Parliament?


Lord Pagett. No, I never heard him then, nor at any time else.


Mr. Willams. Mr. Hambden was then in France, and not in that Parliament, tho
he was a Member. Where is Mr. Pelham?


L. C. J. Here he is. He sits down here pointing to the Table What would you
ask him? He was Sworn


Mr. Williams. Sir, Will you please to acquaint the Court, what acquaintance
you have had with Mr. Hambden, and how long? And what you know of him?


L. C. J. You hear the Question, Sir, how long have you been acquainted with
Mr. Hambden?


Mr. Pelham. I have been acquainted with Mr. Hambden about five or six Years
living near him, and all that I could observe from him was, that he was a man
much addicted to his Studies, kept much at home, and I never observed that he
had much acquaintance, but as to the business before you, I know nothing of it,
nor ever heard him speak any thing relating to it.


Mr. Williams. As to his Spirit and Disposition, is he a Turbulent Man?


Mr. Pelham. No, I never found him any thing like it. We never talked together
of matters of that nature.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you ever in his Company at any time when he discoursed
about Government?


Mr. Pelham. No, I was never with him at any time when he discoursed of any
such thing.


Mr. Williams. Sir Henry Hobart.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, We oppose his being a Witness. He is one of his Bail.


Mr. Williams. That was upon the Habeas Corpus Act, not upon this Indictment.


Mr. At. Genesis If he be Bail for the Defendant, my Lord, he cannot be a Witness.


Mr. Williams. I appeal to the Rule of Court, whether he was not Bail upon the
Habeas Corpus Act only?


Mr. At. Genesis Appeal where you will, the Bail cannot be a Witness.


Mr. Williams. We moved for an Habeas Corpus the beginning of last Term upon
the late Act for Habeas Corpus's. And then at the last day of the Term upon
Habeas Corpus he was brought up thither, and was Bailed upon that Writ.


Mr. At. Genesis Are not you one of the Bail, Sir Henry Hobart?


Sir Henry Hobart. I was one of his Bail, I think it was for his appearance.


L. C. J. If he be one of his Bail that he shall appear in this Court the first
day of this Term, and so from day to day till he shall be discharged, and
remains under that Recognizance, then in any Case against him, he cannot be a
Witness for him.


Mr. At. Genesis But they mistake the matter, He was then charged with this
Indictment, He then Pleaded to it, and was Bailed to answer the Indictment; and
surely in that case he can never be a Witness.


L. C. J. That is certainly very true, and you know the Law so well Mr.
Williams that I wonder you will insist of it; in every ordinary Case it is
every days practice to deny the Bail to be Witnesses.


Mr. At. Genesis Here is the person principal, will they render him in Custody?


L. C. J. Ay, what say you, will you render him in custody? Then we will
discharge the Bail.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I will tell you what we will do.


L. C. J. Tell me what you will do! answer my question, will you render him in
Custody?


Mr. Williams. We will change the Bail, My Lord, and find some other sufficient
Person to stand in Sr. Henry Hobart's place, rather then lose our Witness.


L. Chapter Just. With all my Heart.


Mr. Williams. Here is Mr. Ashhurst, my Lord, a Gentleman of very good value.


L. J. C. But you must render him first, and change the whole Bail. They must
enter into new Recognizances.


Mr. Will. I cannot tell whether we can do that so very well, because the others
I am afraid are not all here. He is a mighty material Witness I am sure.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, Mr. Williams says he is a material Witness, let him be
sworn, I am so fair, I Will consent to it: Let us hear what he can say. Which was
done.


Mr. Will. We thank you Mr. Attorney. I am afraid you will not live long, you are
so good natured.


L. C. J. But you are like to live for your good Nature, Mr. Williams.


Mr. Thompson. Sir Henry Hobart, How long have you been acquainted with this
Gentleman, Mr. Hambden?


Sir H. Hobart. I have known him any time these Ten years.


Mr. Williams. How has he been, Sir, as to his Disposition and Spirit? Did you
ever find him to be of a turbulent temper?


Sir H. Hobart. Very far from it always.


Mr. Will. Have you had any intimate conversation with him?


Sir. H. Hobart. I have known him all along, I say, these Ten years, but of
late, I have had more converse with him some few years in Travel.


Mr. Will. Had you much conversation, Sir.


Sir H. Hobart. I was with him continually at Paris, and abroad.


Mr. Will. What say you as to his Loyalty and Principles? Was he a Factious,
Seditious Person?


Sir H. Hobart. Sir, He always expressed a great esteem for the Government, and
great respect and duty to the King.


Mr. Will. Pray Sir, when went Mr. Hambden abroad to go into France?


Sir H. Hobart. He went into France for his Health about November, (80.) I
think it was.


Mr. Will. How long did he continue abroad, Sir Henry?


Sir H. Hobart. I found him in Paris the May after.


Mr. Will. How long did you tarry there, Sir, your self?


Sir H. Hobart. I went from Paris in June, and came back again to Paris about
October, or November the same Year, and I found him in France still.


Mr. Will. And when do you take it, he returned into England.


Sir H. Hobart. I was with him till he came over, which was about September,
(82 I think.


Mr. Thompson. What do you know, Sir, of his intentions to go again beyond Sea?


Sir H. Hobart. When, Sir, do you mean?


Mr. Thompson. Since that time he came over, you say in September, (82.)


Sir H. Hobart. He told me of it often, I think it was about March, more
particularly once at his own house.


Mr. Thompson. What March, Sir?


Sir H. Ho. March (83.)


Mr. Thompson. That is last March.


Sir H. Hobart. Yes, last March, he talked of it several times particularly,
once I went about some business of my own, and then he discoursed a great deal
of his going over with my Lord Mountague, that now is; for he told me his
health was not yet established, for he came over out of an hot Country in
Autumn and had been all the Winter in this colder Country, and the Air he found
had impaired his health again. And it was not only what he told me, but I had a
Letter from a Friend of mine in France to whom I had sent to desire him to come
over; but he writ me word, no, Mr Hambden was coming over again, and he would
not come back yet.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he tell you when he intended to go over, Sir Henry?


Sir H. Hobart. As soon as Mr. Mountague, my Lord Mountague that now is, could
get ready who was to carry his Lady over with him.


Mr. Will. Sir, Do you know of any preparation made by Mr. Hambden for it?


Sir H. Hobart. He had resolved to take his Lady with him, because Mr.
Mountagues Lady went, and so I believe did prepare accordingly.


Mr. At. Genesis Did Mr. Mountague go over?


Sir H. Hobart. He did not go then, but since he is gone.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you in France then at this time?


Sir H. Ho. This was in England at his own house.


Mr. Will. Pray, Sir, what is his Disposition?


Sir. H. Hobart. He was always inclined to a studious Life, and kept very
little Company.


Mr. At. Genesis Was this in March, 83?


Sir H. Hobart. Yes, he came over in September before. I always observed him to
be of a retired temper.


Mr. At. Genesis You say in 1680. he went into France, and in (82) he came over
again?


Sir H. Hobart. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Sir Henry, since you conversed so much with him; Have you
heard him since the last Parliament at Westminster, or at any time have you
been by, when he has discoursed his Opinion about Government.


Sir H. Hobart. Truly, Sir, I don't take my self to be capable of discoursing
with him about any such matters.


Mr. At. Genesis Have you heard him at any time complain of the Male
Administration of the Government?


Sir H. Ho. No, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Have you never heard any such thing from him?


Sir H. Hobart. No, never.


Mr. Will. Swear Dr. Lupee. -- My Lord, We must desire an Interpreter, for the
Dr. Speaks French only.


L. C. Just. Swear an Interpreter.


Mr. Will. Dr. Burnet, or if he be gone, call Sir Henry Ho. again. We must beg
the favor of you, Sir Henry to be an Interpreter, you understand the French
Tongue very well.


Sir H. Ho. I will do it with all my Heart, Sir, as well as I can.


L. C. Just. Swear him.


Crier. You shall well, and truly, Interpret between the Court and the Witness,
Then the Dr. was sworn, and the Oath repeated to him by Sir H. H. in French.
and the Witness and the Court according, to the best of your skill and
knowledge: So help you God.


Mr. Thompson. Sir Henry, Will you please to repeat what Questions we shall
ask, and what Answers he makes?


Sir H. Ho. Yes, Sir, as well as I can, I will.


Mr. Will. Pray, Sir, ask the Dr. this Question, If he be acquainted with Mr.
Hambden?


Sir H. Ho. Yes, he says very well. He lived near two years with him.


Mr. Thompson. How long is it since?


Sir H. Ho. Four years since he says.


Mr. Will. Pray in that time, What was his Disposition? Was he a Seditious and
Turbulent Man? Or was he a studious retired Man, or What?


Sir H. Ho. He says the two years he lived with Mr. Hambden, he kept him
Company in his Studys, and all that time he found he had no other inclinations
but for study and knowledge, and his inclinations were very Virtuous. He always
observed in his Discourse a great submission, and respect that he had for the
Laws of his Nation and his Prince, and to that degree he was a faithful Subject
to the King, that once he told him in discoursing with him of the late Popish
Plot, that he was ready to Sacrifice his Life and Fortune for the King's
service.


Mr. Thomp. Ask him what discourse he had with him of the Plot since it brake
out?


L. C. Just. Will that be any evidence do you think, Mr. Thompson? Will Mr.
Hambden's declaration be any evidence, he being a Person accused? Do you think
he would tell the Doctor, or any Body else that he was Guilty, when he was like
to be questioned? That would have been a wise business indeed. You say, he was
a very studious Man, and a learned Man, truly if he had done that, he had
bestowed his time in Learning to very good purpose.


Mr. Will. My Lord, That, that we would ask him is this; This Person the Doctor
being discoursing with Mr. Hambden upon the discovery of the late Conspiracy,
and of the dangerousness of the time, he would have advised Mr. Hambden to have
gone; no, he said, he would not, for he was an innocent Man, and would not stir.


L. C. J. Well, ask him what you will, but his declaration of his own Innocence
cannot be taken for Evidence.


Sir H. Ho. He says, since this Plot was discovered, he was going one Day to
visit Mr. Hambden, and going through long Acre he met a French Minister, a
Savoyard Minister, -- But, my Lord he speaks so fast, and goes on with so much
at a time, that I cannot remember it all.


Mr. Will. Well, what said that Minister to him?


Sir H. Ho. He says this Minister asked him, if Mr. Hambden was not concerned
in the Plot, and upon that he went and told him what the Minister had said to
him -- He says, he told Mr. Hambden, that the Duke of Monmouth, and my Lord
Gray were hid -- He says, upon that Mr. Hambden said to him, I will never fly,
nor conceal my self, for my Conscience reproaches me in nothing.


L. C. J. Ask him why does he think the French Minister, the Savoyard as he
calls him, should ask whether Mr. Hambden were in the Plot?


Sir H. Ho. He says Mr. Hambden said he would rather die innocent then fly with
the imputation of guilt upon him.


L. C. J. But ask him the Question I put, Why should that Savoyard Parson say
so? what reason had he to think Mr. Hamdden was in the Plot?


Sir H. Ho. He says the Minister did ask him, but he cannot tell what Reason he
had to think so.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Sir Henry, ask him this Question; How long ago it was
since he left him?


Sir H. Ho. Four year he says.


Mr. At. Genesis Where was it in England or France?


Sir H. Ho. Whilst he lived in Bloomsbury, he says.


Mr. Will. Call Dr. Needham and Monsieur Justell, who appeared and Monsieur
Justell was sworn. Pray, Sir H. Hobart will you ask Monsieur Justell who speaks
French too: If he know any thing of Mr. Hambden's Resolution to Travel with Mr.
Mountague into France?


Sir H. Ho. He says, Yes. He did tell him he was going into France, and he
offered to carry some Books for him along with him.


Mr. Will. What Company was he to go in, and what time?


Sir H. Ho. He says, Sir, he cannot be exact to the Month when Mr. Hambden spoke
of going over, but he says it was a great while before this Plot came to be
discovered.


Mr. Will. Was it some Months before?


Sir H. Ho. It was a Month before it was known he says.


Mr. Will. In what Company was he to go?


Sir H. Ho. He said he was to go with Mr. Mountague.


Mr. Conyers. Pray, Sir, Will you ask him, Was he employed to get any French
Servants to be with him?


Sir H. Hobart. Yes, he says.


L. C. J. Ay, but what was the Question; for there is such a crowd of People
before the Council that the Court cannot hear Mr. Conyer's Question.


Mr. Can. My Lord, I asked him, Whether he was employed to get any French
Servants to be with Mr. Hambden.


Sir H. H. Yes, he says.


L. C. J. Well there is Dr. Needham, What do you ask him?


Mr. Will. Then Doctor Needham was sworn.
We call Dr. Needham for this purpose my Lord, to prove that these Gentlemen
that are accused, Mr. Hambden, and my Lord of Essex, and the others, had very
little esteem, and mean Opinion of my Lord Howard. And how one, they so little
esteemed should be let into so great a secret, will be very strange to imagine.
Dr. Needham, Pray, what can you say of any of these Gentlemen's Opinions of my
Lord Howard? What Opinion had my Lord of Essex of him?


L. C. J. Is my Lord of Essex now before us? What is that to this Case, Mr.
Williams? Let my Lord of Essex have what Opinion he would of him; How does that
concern the Defendant?


Mr. Will. I tell you why, I offer it my Lord. --


L. C. J. But pray, offer what is evidence, and keep to the business before you.


Mr. Will. Falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus. If we can prove that, what he has
said of my Lord of Essex is false he is not to be believed against the
Defendant.


Mr. At. Genesis Ay, but upon the evidence of my Lord Howard, all the rest were
convicted.


Mr. Will. I offer it only upon what is here to day before you. He says, my
Client, and my Lord of Essex were confederate with him upon such a design. Now
if my Lord of Essex was not there, then he is false in that, and that he was
not, we offer this as evidence, --


L. C. J. But it is not a proper Evidence in this Case.


Mr. Will. It Is a sort of evidence. --


L. C. J. Ay, it is a sort of evidence, but it is not to be allowed. If you will
prove Mr. Hambden's Opinion you may, but you must not for him bring proof of
what my Lord of Essex, a Third Person, thought of my Lord Howard.


Mr. Will. I only offer it thus --


L. C. J. Offer what is Evidence Man! You are a Practiser, and know what is
Evidence, but you have offered two or three things to Day, that I know you do
at the same time know is not evidence, and I speak it that it may not be
thought we deny you, you or your Clyent any thing that is according to the
course of Law. You that know the Law, know it is so as we say. Mr. Attorney has
gratified you in waving three or four things already, but nothing will satisfy
unless we break the course of other Trials.


Mr. Will. My Lord, What I take not to be Evidence I do not offer, and where
the Court overrules me, I have not insisted upon it.


L. C. Just. No!


Mr. Will. No, my Lord.


L. C. J. But you would have insisted upon it, if Mr. Attorney would have been
so easy as to consent, and the Court would have let you. Pray keep to the
Business, and the methods of Law; you know the Law very well.


Mr. Will. My Lord, I humbly apprehend this may be Evidence, and I lay it
before you. My Lord Howard has proved that my Lord of Essex, and Five more, of
which Mr. Hambden was one, met and consulted about such matters. We may I hope
be admitted to prove, That my Lord of Essex was not there; for if we can take
off his positive proof, as to any one of the Circumstances, we take off from
the Truth of the Fact. If all the Persons were not there; then my Lord Howard
is mistaken in that, and accordingly must not be believed in the rest;
Therefore my Lord, I press it no otherwise: He has proved these Six Persons
were there I offer this as some Evidence, That it is unlikely it should be so,
because my Lord of Essex had so little Opinion of my Lord Howard, that he would
never consult with him about any matter.


L. C. J. Then certainly my Lord Howard is to be believed to all intents and
purposes, for here is a Record of the Conviction of my Lord Russel, and of
Colonel Sidney and all upon the Testimony of this Gentleman my Lord Howard, and
is not that more to support his credit then a flying Report of a third Persons
Opinion of him. And yet after all we say it is no Evidence against Mr. Hambden,
and has been waved by Mr. Attorney.


Mr. Will. Then I will not press it, my Lord.


Mr. J. Withins. It is no evidence certainly, Mr. Williams.


L. C. J. It seems my Lord of Essex had such an Opinion of my Lord Howard's
Evidence, That he thought fit to cut his own Throat rather than abide the Trial.


Mr. Will. Call Mr. Murray.


L. C. J. Suppose my Lord of Essex had said, That he was out of the Plot, and
Mr. Hambden was in, would that have been good Evidence against Mr. Hambden do
you think? Pray mind what is the business before you?


Mr. Will. Swear Mr. Murray. Which was done.


L. C. J. Well, what do you ask this Man?


Mr. Will. My Lord, We call him as to what I opened of my Lord Howard's Opinion
of the World to come, and rewards, and punishments there.


L. C. J. Mr. Will. Pray take notice of this, Private discourses that People
cannot come to make answer unto, because they cannot imagine to have them
objected, are a very odd sort of an Evidence.


Mr. Will. Therefore I opened it warily and tenderly my Lord, the Witness will
tell you the story better than I.


L. C. J. I cannot tell what Mr. Williams has said, or I have said in heat of
talk or vanity. God knows how often all of us have taken the great Name of God
in vain: Or have said more than becomes us, and talked of things that we should
not do.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, how can my Lord Howard be prepared to give any answer
to this?


L. How. My Lord, This presses hard upon my Reputation my Lord. I profess
before God I do not know this fellow, I never saw him in my Life before as I
know: But a Company of impudent fellows take the liberty of saying what they
please.


L. C. J. To rake into the whole course of a Man's life is very hard.


L. How. I would fain have these fellows dare to say this any where else of me.


Mr. Will. Well my Lord, we will wave it.


L. C. J. They do not think it a fit thing to press it.


L. How. But my Lord it concerns me in my Reputation; who is this Rascal they
bring here? God's life who is he?


L. C. J. We must be tender of Men's reputations, and not let every thing come
as evidence when it is not fit to be evidence, to put Slurs and Scandals upon
Men that they cannot be prepared to wipe off. Is he convicted of any crime? If
he is you say something, show the Record of it.


Mr. J. Withins. Mr. Will. you know the Case adjudged lately in this Court, a
Person was indicted of Forgery we would not let them give evidence of any other
Forgeries, but that for which he was indicted, because we would not suffer any
raking into Men's course of life, to pick up evidence that they cannot be
prepared to answer to.


Mr. Will. We have that respect for my Lord's Honor too as not to press it,
only we had it in our briefs, and we must go according to our Instructions.


L. How. I desire to know who that Rascal is; What is he? Where does he live? I
will make him an Example.


L. C. J. Pray compose your self my Lord, There is nothing of this pressed.


L. How. To say, I am an Atheist my Lord! What can be a greater reflection?


L. C. J. He has not told us any such thing as yet. And we will take care that
nothing shall be offered but what is fitting.


L. Ho. I vow to God my Lord, I do not know the Man.


L. C. J. My Lord, Do you think that every thing that a Man speaks at the Bar
for his Client, and his Fee, is therefore to be believed, because he said it?
No, the Jury are to take nothing here for Evidence to guide them of what the
Counsel say, but what is approved. They are to judge secundum allegata and
probata, that is their duty.


L. Ho. Does that fellow look like a Man of that Figure, That I should say any
thing, or have any conversation with him?


L. C. J. My Lord, I don't know what he is. Go on Gent.


Mr. Will. My Lord, We have done with our Evidence. If Mr. Attorney will leave
it here, we will.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we will not mistrust the Evidence, nor the Court.


Mr. Hambden. My Lord, I desire to speak a word my self, if you please.


L. C. J. Ay, in God's Name. You, or your Counsel, I will hear all you will
say, and as long as you will speak, provided you speak within the bounds of
decency.


Mr. Will. My Lord, I think it best to leave it to the Court: We hope we have
made it clear that our Client is Innocent.


L. C. J. Would to God you were Innocent, that is the worst wish I wish you,
but we will either hear him or you speak, speak as long as you will.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord. I desire to make but one Observation.


L. C. J. Ay, in God's Name make what Observations you will.


Mr. Wallop, I hindered you from making your Observations at first, because I
knew it would be desired after the Evidence was over.


Mr. At. Genesis Then my Lord, I expect to be heard too. If Mr. Hambden makes a
Speech, I will reply, or if his Counsel do it, I expect the last word, for I
will have neither the Party, nor the Counsel to speak after I have summed up
the Evidence for the King. Mr. Hambden, and his Counsel are all one.


Mr. Wallop. I have but one short Observation to make.


L. C. J. Go on then, Mr Wallop* and say what you will.


Mr. J. VVithins. I think it is very fit you should do it of both sides; it is a
cause of great concernment.


Mr. Will. My Lord, We will leave it here I think.


L. C. J. Take your own course, Do not say we hinder you of saying what you
will for your Client.


Mr. At. Genesis Let them do what they will.


L. C. J. I Will sit still, make speeches every one of you as long as you will.


Mr. Just. VValcot. It Is fit they should speak what they can for the advantage
of their Client.


Mr. Will. My Lord, We leave it to the Court.


L. C. J. Gentlemen of the Jury, the Evidence has been something long, and the
Counsel both for the King, and for Mr. Hambden against whom this Indictment has
already been found by the Grand Jury, having left it to the Court to Sum up
all, I shall do it as well as I can: And the Question before you Gentlemen is,
Whether the Defendant be guilty of the Offense charged in the Indictment, or
not Guilty, and there having been so long an Evidence on the one side, and on
the other, it will be fit for me according to the best of my remembrance to
help your Memories by recollecting what has been said on both sides which I
shall do as near as I can, and if my Brethren will please to supply any thing
that shall be omitted by me, nay, if the Counsel for the King, or for the
Prisoner will put us in mind of any thing that has been spoken, and proved
either against, or for the Party indicted, in God's Name let them have liberty
to speak it: For it is fit the Question should be left before you with all
fairness, and according to the best of my Observation and Memory thus it stands.

The first thing Gentlemen that is considerable to you, is, that there is such
an Indictment as has been already opened unto you, that is preferred against
Mr. Hambden, that does set forth, that Mr. Hambden is a Seditious-Person, and a
Man according to the Language of the Indictment (which are words of course and
form in an Indictment of this Nature) of an evil disposition, designing to
disturb and distract the Government, and that he with several other Persons did
conspire to Bring in troubles, and perplexities upon the Government; and in
order to that, that there were some meetings between him and several other
Persons and that there was a design to conciliate some Persons of another
Nation to go along with them in their design, particularly some in the Kingdom
of Scotland. This is the purport in the Indictment, to which the Defendant has
pleaded not Guilty.

Gentlemen, The Evidence for the King has been of this sort, they did at the
beginning, which yet I must tell you by the way, is not any thing of Evidence,
but the Kings Counsel would make some Overtures to press on their side, as the
Defendant, and those that are of Counsel for Mr. Hambden have made some little
hints to press on their side, that some Witnesses the one and the others would
have had here, were subpoena'd but could not be here. It seems by the proof,
Here was a meeting, as it was between Six several Persons, and they Name them,
the Duke of Monmouth was one, the Lord Howard another, the Lord Russel a Third,
the Earl of Essex a Fourth, Algernoon Sidney a Fifth, and Mr. Hambden the
Sixth. As for my Lord of Essex he is gone to his long home, my Lord Russel, and
Mr. Sidney have received Sentence, and been executed. So there remains Three
Surviviving, and say they that are for the King: We produce my Lord Howard, and
we have taken care to Summon the Duke of Monmouth by leaving Subpoenas where it
could be thought he was to be met with, with Promises of his Servants to
deliver them to him in order to have the Duke to be a Witness for the King this
Day. I presume the meaning is, They would infer from that, that they would give
an account of the fairness of this proceeding, tho it has been a matter that
has obtained a sort of belief in the World, as tho the Duke of Monmouth had
denied, that there was any such thing as this Confederacy and Conspiracy: And
that has given People occasion to be of very different Opinions, and
persuasions about the matter; but say they, to show we are not afraid to have
the Truth come out, we have done as much as in us lay to get this Person
hither: Therefore we have left Subpoena's at his Houses, at his Lodging with
his Servants, and they have promised to take care they should be delivered to
him, and he is not come. Against this on the other side, say they, for the
Defendant, We have taken all the care we could to bring my Lord Anglesey, who
was to have been a VVitness for the advantage of the Person indicted, but my
Lord Anglesey is at present afflicted with a fit of the Gout, and for that very
reason we cannot have him here. And so they show, that they have been very
zealous to get VVitnesses on their side to vindicate their Reputation, but they
did not meet with that effect that they desired. These two things Gentlemen are
matters that are used both against him one way, and for him another.

But now to come home to the Evidence upon which this matter is to turn, and
here you are to consider, that whatsoever has been said or offered by the Kings
Counsel on the one side, or the Counsel for the Defendant on the other side, (I
call him so, for it is but a Trespass tho a great one) You must not take into
your consideration at all any further then as their Allegations are supported
by the Testimony that has been given: And whatsoever the VVitnesses have said
either for or against him, and our of that Testimony as near as I can remember
I will give you the Objections, and their Answers with the Observations, that
have been made, or do naturally arise out of the facts in proof.

My Lord How. In the first place gives an account of this matter, and Gentlemen
the times will be wonderful material, and therefore I beg you would take a
Pen, and Ink, and mark these material circumstances as you go. For in all
matters of fact positively proved, which also have their Credit supported by
circumstances which do accompany them, the Testimonies given of such Facts are
to be valued according as those circumstances keep touch with, and humor as I
may so say, the Fact that they are to Evidence the truth of.

My Lord How. does therefore in the first place acquaint you, that about
Michaelmas there was a discourse between him and my Lord of Shaftesbury, and
that was concerning a rising intended to be had, and he tells you how that my
Lord Shaftesbury was fully resolved upon it; That things at length came to that
pass; That he was forced to go from his own house, as he said, being
disappointed by the Duke of Monmouth and others who had promised to join with
him, and was retired to the house of one Watson in or near Woodstreet. But he
understanding where he was, my Lord How. went to him, (I think he says my Lord
Shaftesbury sent to him) when he came, my Lord Shaftesbury told him, That although
there had been such a disappointment by those Persons he named, yet that did
not take off his edge, but he was resolved to go on himself, nay tho his body
was infirm, yet he would be set on horseback, tho he was lifted up to appear
in the head of a party that he had prepared, and were ready when he would call
them. And he began then to reflect upon the disappointment of the Duke of
Monmouth, and as tho the Duke of Monmouth had only a prospect to advance
himself, and had only an Eye upon his own particular Interest. That he so
managed matters as if he designed to have the sole disposition of all things
whatsoever, and began to be uneasy with the Duke of Monmouth. My Lord How. did
endeavor to have prevailed with my Lord of Shaftesbury for a reconciliation
between the Duke of Monmouth and him, it being a matter that required so much
safety and security, and did desire him that he would have some intercourse
with the Duke of Monmouth in order to conciliate a friendship between them,
that they might go hand in hand. You find he was under some difficulties about
this matter, he was not able to bring the thing about; for after he had spoke
with the Duke of Monmouth, and prevailed with him, my Lord of Shaftesbury was
peevish, and talked at a distance, and when he had appointed a meeting one
time, it was prevented, my Lord Shaftesbury went away into Holland, and there
died in Holland. This is the substance of what my Lord How. says as to that
matter.

But Gentlemen this is material, and I Will tell you why I think it material;
because the Counsel for the Defendant have made it an Objection particularly to
my Lord Howards testimony, That my Lord Howard is particular as to the day
after Michaelmas day, but he is not so particular when he comes to speak of
other times upon which the true Question before you depends. For now he speaks
more generally as to the meetings at the Defendants, and my Lord Russells, that
they were about the middle of Janu. and the beginning of Febru. and is not
particular as to the day. I speak of this because that has been made use of as
an Objection against my Lord Howards testimony. And I will tell you as near as
I can all the Objections that have been made against this Testimony after such
time as I have settled it and laid before you what the whole of it amounts to.

Then comes my Lord Howard and says, that meeting with the Duke of Monmouth
some time after this they began to talk together, and they thought that tho the
business had failed in the managery of my Lord of Shaftesbury yet it was fit
there should be a reassuming of the business again, but in order to settle
matters that things might not go inconsiderately on, it was thought fit that
they should resolve themselves into a certain number that were confident one of
another, in order to Steer and Transact these matters the better among
themselves. And they must be persons fit to be trusted and for whom there
should be an undertaking among them for their Faithfulness and Integrity; for
all Persons are not fit to be trusted, but only such as they agreed upon. The
Duke of Monmouth he undertook for my Lord of Essex and my Lord Russell, those
were the Persons for whom he would engage, as likewise for my Lord Salisbury.
And then they began to talk of some more, particularly of Mr. Sidney, but he
was a Cynical man, and a Philosopher, and they were first to come to him, and
to treat with him in another manner then the rest. He was not to appear as the
Duke of Monmouth, but to take him in his retirement and privacys, and then they
might be the better able to break the matter to him. And he says accordingly
there was a time designed on purpose; and at that same time the Duke of
Monmouth and my Lord Howard did go and attack Mr. Sidney, they found him on a
private day, and Dined with him; and upon that Dinner the whole matter was
broke up, and put into some Method; Then was the whole Design contrived as to
the Persons that were to be engaged in this Matter; and he says, They agreed
upon Six. The Duke of Monmouth undertook for my Lord of Essex, and my Lord
Russel and Col. Sidney undertook for Mr. Hambden. He speaks of my Lord of
Salisbury, but my Lord of Salisbury was never there among them, and so I put
him out of the Case, I quit him from being of their Number, because there was
but Six in all, my Lord of Essex, and my Lord Russel, who were undertaken for
by the Duke of Monmouth, Mr. Hambden undertaken for by Mr. Sidney, and my Lord
Howard; for by that time Mr. Hambden was come into the Matter upon Col.
Sidney's undertaking.

Now we are got, Gent. by these steps till we come about the middle of January;
but says my Lord Howard, I cannot positively say, it was this day, or that day
of the Month; but being about the middle of January, I conjecture it was about
the 14 th, but he is not positive to the day. He says, accordingly they went to
Mr. Hambden's House, which was the place first designed for them to meet in. He
says, there accordingly they did all Six meet; and that it being Mr. Hambdens
House, they thought it most proper for him who was Master of the House, who
usually bids his Guests welcome, to break silence, and to impart the business
of the Design they met about. He says, accordingly Mr. Hambden after the first
Complements of Entertainment, did give an account of the business they were
come about, and that it was in order to have a Rising. This he says was
proposed by Mr. Hambden. He tells you, then they fell into Debate about the
time when, concerning Men, and Arms, and Money; and likewise concerning the
Places. He tells you, the Places wherein the Rising was designed to be, were
Devonshire, Cheshire, Somersetshire, and other places, that is, as to the
Circumstance of the Place. Then he tells you concerning the time; it was
Debated, Whether it should be all at one time, or at several times? Whether
they should only begin here, and the Country fall in, or all at once? That
likewise they had in consideration the business of Money, and that his Grace
the Duke of Monmouth did speak of 30 or 35 Thousand Pounds, or some such Sum at
that time. But then, as was natural for men of Deliberation and Consideration
to consult about, they took into Debate, that they might not go headlong, to
endeavor to conciliate another Party to chime in, as he says, along with them,
in the business they were going about, and accordingly it was thought fit, and
proposed, That there should be an endeavor to conciliate a friendship with
some Persons in Scotland, to fall in with them; and then he tells you, who the
Persons were, that were named: Some of the Names he remembers, and others he
has forgot; he speaks particularly of the Cambeles, Sir John Cockram, and my
Lord Melvin: and he says, other persons were mentioned, but he cannot remember
their Names: and my Lord Russel knew some of these persons, and the Duke of
Monmouth knew some others of them, because of his near Relation to the Earl of
Argyle, the person that you know was proscribed for Treason in the Kingdom of
Scotland. He says, that so far the debate of this Matter went, that they
thought fit a Messenger should be provided, a Trusty man to be sent in^^
Scotland to Treat with these Gentlemen about this Matter; and my Lord Russel, I
think he says, undertook to write a Letter to be carried by this Messenger to
these Scotch Gentlemen.

He says, pursuant to this Consultation at Mr. Hambdens, a Fortnight after, or
thereabouts, which brings it up to the beginning of February, then was the
Meeting at my Lord Russel's House, and there they Debated these Matters over
again, and the whole managery of sending a Messenger into Scotland, was left to
the discretion of Col. Sidney, and he undertook that Work, that was his Post
that he was to manage: and he does say, That he does very well remember, That
Aaron Smith was the person proposed then; and though he was unknown to some of
the Company, yet he was well known to others; and by reason of that knowledge
that others had of him, they looked upon him as a person very fit, and every
way qualified for it.

So that Gentlemen, here is proved a Consultation in order to the Raising of
Men to Infest the Government; a discourse concerning Money and Arms for this
End, and the Places where, and the time when; and of conciliating a Friendship
with some discontented persons in Scotland, to join, and chime in with these
Conspirators in England.

And then there is yet another Circumstance very Remarkable, Because tho my
Lord spoke it not at the same time that he delivered his Testimony, yet upon
the Question asked, he gives you a plain account of it; and it has a plain
dependence upon what went before. Said they among themselves, It Is proper for
us, as near as we can, to shut the Door against any Exceptions about these Men's
coming to Treat with us; but how shall we get them hither without Suspicion? We
must have some Shams, or Cant or other, to be a pretense for these People to
come into England; and that was agreed to be about some Plantation in Carolina.

This, he says, was the Result of that Meeting; and that when the Meeting was
broke up, about Three or Four Days afterward, (mind the circumstance of Time,
Gent. for it is very material) Col. Sidney and he met together, they went to
Col. Sidney's House, and there he saw him take Money out of a Till, where there
were several hundreds of Guineys, or pieces of Gold; and as he believes, he
says, he took Threescore Guineys, or some such Sum; and told him, it was to
give to Aaron Smith in order to his Journey into Scotland: That he went out
with him in his Coach, but Mr. Sidney set him down by the way, and he himself
went into London, telling him, he went to that purpose, to give Aaron Smith the
Money. Some time after, about a Week, or a Fortnight, or Ten Days after that,
he says, he met with Mr. Sidney again; and he says, Mr. Sidney gave him an
account, That he had heard Aaron Smith had been at Newcastle, but he had not
heard of him since that time, and that is another Circumstance in point of
Time, Gent. So that you have here a positive Oath made by my Lord Howard, that
Mr. Hambden was privy, and consenting to all these Debates, as to the Raising
of Men, and the Levying of Money, and about the conciliating a Friendship with
these men of Scotland, and about sending a Messenger into Scotland to that
purpose. And if my Lord Howard do Swear true, no man living can doubt but that
Mr. Hambden is guilty of this Indictment. The first meeting was at his House,
and there he did take notice of what had been formerly done, and proposed the
things, breaking the silence, and entering into the Debate; which shows that he
had been discoursing about it before, and had it in his thoughts before, or
else he could not have propounded it as the end of their meeting.

Now this, Gentlemen, Here is a positive Fact; and as Mr. Williams says true,
no man living can give any Answer to a positive Fact, but by some other things
that may be Circumstances to oppose that Fact. Now he says, there are no
Circumstances that have been proved, that will give any Credibility to what has
been deposed, besides the positive Oath of my Lord Howard. So that, says He,
your Fact, tho it be positively Sworn, is not supported by any Circumstances of
the Fact, that may give Credibility to it. And he objects very materially; for
if it be not supported by credible Circumstances, then indeed it would be less
material; yet I cannot say, it would not be at all material; it is material,
and you are to determine, whether you have sufficient Evidence given you, to
induce you to believe, That my Lord Howard is at this time Guilty of wilful and
malicious Perjury; for it is Perjury, and that in the highest degree, if it be
not true that he says; and God deliver all Mankind from being Guilty of any
such thing. I leave that to your Consciences, Gentlemen, who are the Judges of
it.

But says the Kings Council, Here are Circumstances that do support our Fact,
and the Credibility of it. For first, here is the Circumstance of Aaron Smith,
who was sent into Scotland by Mr. Sydney in pursuance of this design, and this
Circumstance my Lord Howard does subjoyn to what he has positively affirmed
against the Defendant. And this Circumstance is a thing that may be helped by
other proof; and what is this Circumstance? Say they, That Aaron Smith was sent
into Scotland; and in order to prove that, they have called one Sheriff, who is
a man that keeps an Inn at the Posthouse in New Castle, from whence Col. Sidney
told my Lord Howard, he had notice of his arrival at New Castle, but had heard
no more of him after that. And this Sheriff Swears directly, I saw that man
they call Aaron Smith, when he was shown to me before the King and the Council;
and Mr. Atterbury Swears he showed Aaron Smith to him, and then Sheriff swears
that man you showed to me, was the Man I saw at my House at New Castle, that
chimes in with the Circumstance of Fact that Mr. Sidney heard from him at
New Castle. And then there is the Circumstance of time when he saw him there;
Says he, I saw him the Friday before Shrovetuesday, which they in the North
call Fasters-Even. He came to my House on Thursday night, and went away the
next day, Friday; and he went with his Guide, the other man, Northward, in
order to his Journey into Scotland, as he himself said. Says he, I remember the
time very particularly, it was the Friday before Shrovetuesday last, this
February was Twelvemonth; and he went yet further; says he, I did not only see
him when he went away, but when he came back again, for he left his man at my
House all the time, and he tells you what his name was; for he says, Smith went
under the disguised name of one Clarke, and he did then talk of going to the
VVestern parts of Scotland, he named Douglas as he thinks, tho he is not
positive in that, but he is in the Person, that was the man. And says he, I
sent for this Person, the other fellow Bell, and he was the guide he had along
with him. And upon Bells Examination, What says he? Says he, I remember that
man came thither at that time to the other man's House; I take it upon my Oath
that is the man, and he went by the name of Clarke, he hired me to be his
Guide; I went out with him on Friday morning, and I went a long with him all
that day; but upon Saturday, which was the next day, going Northward with him,
my Horse tired, and failed me. Thereupon I was forced to be left behind, but I
overtook him on Sunday night following; I overtook him at such a place, and saw
him within six Miles of the Borders of Scotland. I take it upon my Oath, this
is the man that was there under the name of Clarke; and at his returning back
again, I took notice of him, I went up to him, I drank with him, and we had
discourse of our Journey. He told me at first, he was to go to the West of
Scotland, and so he went Northward. After that, which was about Ten or Twelve
days, he came back again, and so went Southward toward London. This he does
Swear directly to be at that time.

Now Gentlemen, The time is wonderful material in that Case, because that very
time Twelvemonth that they talk of, is the beginning of February. If you look
upon your old Almanac of the last year, (I happen to have one in my Pocket,
and look upon it, when the men gave their Testimony) and there you will find
that the Monday before Shrovetuesday, when he says, he left him within six
Miles of the Borders of Scotland, falls out to be the 19 th of February; I will
look upon it again, lest I should mistake; it is just so, and that humors the
time that my Lord Howard speaks of, which was about the middle of February, a
few days after, that he says the Money was given by Mr. Sidney; and then for
the time for Aaron Smith to get to New Castle, there is a fit space of time,
for it falls out that the Thursday that he arrived at New Castle, is the
fifteenth day of February, and so it falls in well with my Lord Howards
Testimony, and so the Monday that he parted with him at the Borders of Scotland
was the 19 th, which also just humors the time that he speaks of. So that here
is a Circumstance of Fact to confirm his Testimony, both as to the sending the
Messenger, and the Circumstance of time. That he is the same man, is proved by
these two Witnesses, who agree in this, That he was there about such a time;
and it does likewise humor that other Circumstance of place that Mr. Sidney
said he had heard from him from New Castle, but not since; and then there is
the other Circumstance, which backs and confirms all, There was not only a
sending for these Persons, but there is notice taken that these Cambeles, who
were to be assisting in this matter, were to come about the Sham, and under the
disguise of Purchasing Plantations in Carolina. About the beginning of June
they come to Town, the Two Cambels, Sir John Cockram, and Mr. Monrow. Sir
Andrew Foster he tells you, he met with some of the Men, and they told him,
They came about the business of Carolina; and so the Cant of Carolina is made
good in this circumstance that way; but when the Plot brake out, these men
sculk, one flies one way, another another; some were taken as they were
Escaping away by Water; others of them were taken upon the Bed at Noonday in
More-fields: Had the business they came over into England about, been a fair,
and a lawful, and honest Business, why should they hide themselves? Why should
any Man sneak and sculk, and be ashamed to own an honest and lawful business?
But this does humor and touch the thing exactly, as to that circumstance, That
Carolina was only a Cant for to disguise their coming over. These are the
only Two Circumstances that seem to be pretty strong for them, to prove, and
support the credibility of what their Witness has sworn.

For, Gentlemen, What a wonderful sort of Expectation would it be, That we
shall never Convict a man of High Treason, unless you can bring a man to be a
Witness that is not concerned? for then all these Persons must have been
acquitted, for they entrusted none, it seems, but these Six, they took care
they would keep it amongst themselves. Do you think they called their Servants
to be Witnesses of what they were about? That is a vain and idle imagination?
In the Popish Plot, what Witnesses of it had you there? Were they strangers to
the Plot? No, you cannot Expect any Witnesses but such as the nature of the
Case will bear.

This is the meaning of the Evidence that has been given for the King, and it
carries a great weight in it. But they have made an Objection, which indeed is
not remote, but may concern the Question very much. Say they, If we prove my
Lord of Essex was not there, or such an one was not there, would it not
discredit the Evidence of my Lord Howard? Yes, certainly, it would wholly
discredit it, and he were not to be believed at all; nay, which is yet nearer
to the Question, If Mr. Hambden, that had notice all along of the times fixed
wherein this Transaction was, to wit, about the middle of January, and
beginning of February. For because they talk of the Prints, Mr. Hambden had
from them sufficient Notice, and intimation of the Time. If Mr. Hambden, that
has had all this Notice, could have proved before you, That he was in France,
or any other Place at that time, That had been wonderful Material. But all the
Circumstances that are any way significant to support the Credit of this
Matter, are very well proved; and so the Testimony of my Lord Howard is by
these concurrent Circumstances of Fact, sufficiently supported.

Now, Gent. I must tell you, This being the Substance of the Evidence for the
King; I will now, as near as I can, give you an account of the Evidence for the
Defendant; It was opened by Mr. Williams very ingeniously for the advantage of
his Clyent; as every man is bound to say what he can for his Clyent. He made a
great many Objections against my Lord Howard; for if he could but shake the
Testimony of my Lord Howard, then he might easily bring off his Clyent; and if
you, upon any thing that has been offered, either in Evidence, or by way of
Observation fairly made from the Evidence, do believe my Lord Howard has
forsworn himself, you must find Mr. Hambden, the Defendant, Not Guilty; but if
you believe he has not forsworn himself, you must find him Guilty. So all our
matter is reduced into a very narrow compass; and therefore I must repeat it
again what I said at the beginning, If my Memory do not serve me to recollect
all right, the Council for the Defendant shall have free liberty to inform the
Court of what has been omitted.

First, says Mr. Williams, My Lord Howard was a man very deep in a Conspiracy
with my Lord Shaftsbury, by his own Acknowledgment, endeavoring to conciliate
a friendship between the Duke of Monmouth and my Lord Shaftsbury; and so he had
a great hand in the Plot; and what he might do on purpose to get himself out of
danger from that Plot, and procure his Pardon, is not known.

It is a very strange thing, that it should be an Objection before he had his
Pardon, That he did it for fear, and to get his Pardon; and when he has it, now
the Objection is, Because he has his pardon; and he got it, say they, by this
means. It seems, whether he had his Pardon or no, it must be an objection
against him: before he had it, he was under the fear of not obtaining it, till
the drudgery of Swearing was over: but now he has his Pardon, What now? Why, he
does it on purpose to accuse other people. Why, he says no more now, than what
he has said before he was Pardoned; and if after he is Pardoned, when he is
under no dread or fear because of his Guilt, he says the same things that he
did when he might be in fear, How can that be an Objection to him? It cannot be
thought he does it to save his own Life, for that is as safe now by his Pardon,
as it can any way be; and it is, and must be a great satisfaction to his mind,
and will be so to any other reasonable man's mind; and is a plain Answer to the
Objection of his fear, (for it is a captious Age we live in, that will make some
specious Objection or other, though it be not of any great weight). But how can
it be thought a man would come and Swear too much, or too far, for fear he
should not save himself: or as they call it, swear himself into a Pardon, when
he has his Pardon? It might be an Objection before; but as long as he is under
no such Terrors now, but stands right, both by the Laws of God and Man to be
heard as a Witness, I think it would be hard for any to come, and say, This man
would for swear himself. What should provoke him to come and forswear himself,
when he is under no danger as to his own particular? There might be an Umbrage,
I say, of an Objection before he had his Pardon, though it was, indeed, no
Objection before; not a rational weighty one, to set aside his Testimony. But
nobody knows which way in the World to satisfy the Minds of some sort of
people.

In the next place, Gent. says Mr. Williams, You are not positive as to the
time; You say, It was about the middle of January, and the beginning of
February, and that is too general and wide; but you remember particularly to a
Day the business between you and my Lord of Shaftsbury, That, that was the day
after Michaelmas day: how can you be so particular as to the one, and not as
particular as to the other?

Why, I will undertake that Mr. Williams, when he made the Objection, must
needs think of the Answer that would be given to it. It is notoriously known,
that the Pressures these Gentlemen thought they lay under, were what my Lord of
Shaftbury said, Now they have got the Juries into their own Power, and no man
is safe; They will find me or any man Guilty, as they please; Why, how came
they to get Juries into their own hands, but by having the Sheriffs as they
would have them? Now the Sheriffs that are to return Juries, are, as all men
know that know any thing, Sworn the day before Michaelmas day; Therefore he
might very well, and had good reason to remember that day; When such a
notorious thing happens to fall out at such a notorious time, it is easier for a
man to remember that time, than to speak to the particular time of an Action
done about the middle of a Month, where there is not such a notorious
Circumstance. Why, I can tell you very well where I was upon the day before
Michaelmas day; Upon that day, and the day after; for that very reason, Because
it was a notorious day about the Swearing of Sheriffs in London. But if you ask
me, Where I was the middle of January, or the middle of February, I cannot so
well remember that. But there is Credit to be given to a man that speaks to a
notorious Circumstance, and thereby proves the probability of what he says, tho
he should not be so particular in a thing that admits not of such a notorious
Circumstance.

Gentlemen, I make the Objections as they are stated on the one side, and on
the other side; and the Answers that naturally flow to prove the matters before
you one way or other; and you are to judge, you are to weigh them; and which
has the greater Credit with you, you are to take notice of.

He does say, in the next place, Here was a discourse of Arms and Armed men,
and a great sum of Money spoken of, but there breaks out nothing of this matter
till July following; but this debate was in January, and February before. For
that matter, the Answer that is given, and it seems to be a plain one, is, That
they were to conciliate a Correspondence with people that were abroad, and that
they could not go on till they had effected that, and till these people came to
join with them, which could not be without some time. And you hear the Cockrams
and the Cambels came not to the Town, till June or July; so that it was not
probable it should break out till then, because it was to be agitated upon
their coming here. And so that Objection is answered, They did not apprehend
any such necessity for present engaging in it. For, my Lord Howard, because he
thought it would be a work of time to settle the Correspondence, and get these
people to Town, went down to his Country house in Essex, and from thence to the
Bath, for he did apprehend some considerable time must be spent ere these pople
could come; and therefore he thought it convenient to take his retirement in
the mean time.

Ay, but it is strange, says Mr. Williams, and he makes that another Objection;
He would have my Lord Howard to draw in this Accusation of Mr. Hambden, to
procure his pardon, by going further than the other Discoverers had gone. It
seems, say they, Mr. Hambden was not thought of at first; But because West and
Keeling had discovered a Plot, my Lord Howard, to secure himself, must go a
step further than they, and (as the Defendants Council would have it) than the
Truth; and that is the stress of the Objection. But the weight of the proof is
quite different; for all men know, In the Plot there were several parts. There
was the business of Keeling and West, and that was the Assassination of the
King and the Duke; but the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Howard and those other
Gentlemen, were for the business of the Rising, tho that might be in order to
that other purpose; but they kept not Company with those that were engaged in
that part of the design. They were the Underlings, the Scoundrel Plotters, that
were concerned in the Assassination. But these Gentlemen looked upon themselves
to be the Privy Counselors, not to be the Executioners; they were to be only
Advisers, what was to be done after that other business was over; and their
Consultations were for raising of men for an Insurrection; not the business of
the Assassination of the King, that was not their Province. Can it then be an
Objection against my Lord Howard, because he gives a Testimony West and
Keeling could not give? Could they go further then the Killing of the King,
which was their business? If any man should have asked my Lord Howard about
that matter, he would have made Answer, It was not for that purpose that we met
together at Mr. Hamden's, and my Lord Russel's; no, that was upon a particular
business, and to a particular end and purpose.

Then he says too, That tho my Lord Howard comes here upon his Oath, and
declares these several matters that he has deposed; yet he has given a
different account of things elsewhere, and he has called several Witnesses to
that purpose. To whom my Lord Howard several times upon his Honor, upon his
Word, with Eyes lifted up, and Hands elevated to Heaven, and many extraordinary
Protestations, declared, That he knew nothing of the Plot; and say they, If a
man will at one time Pawn his Honor, and his Reputation, for the truth of a
thing, and after that, will come again to Swear against all that matter, That
is an Argument that does sink the Credit and Reputation of that Witness; and
thereupon they call you several Witnesses, some whereof are Persons of great
Honor and Quality. I think they begin first with Ducas, Servant to Col.
Sidney, and he tells you, After his Master was taken, my Lord Howard came
thither, and desired he might lie there; and desired the use of some Plate and
Goods of Col. Sidney's; and then asked, what was become of his Master? And when
Ducas told him what he heard of the Plot, that something was talked of, about
the Assassination of the King and the Duke, my Lord Howard lift up his Eyes,
and his Hands to Heaven, and declared he knew nothing of it, but he believed
Col. Sidney was a very honest man, and knew nothing at all of any such matter;
and as for himself, rather than he would be taken or confined again, he would
do any thing. This was the Evidence they gave as to him. Then they come with
Mr. Howard their 2 d. Witness; for I would take them in order as they were
produced, and he gives you an account, that he met with my Lord Howard, and my
Lord Howard told him he knew nothing at all of any Plot, and did believe that
Col. Sidney was innocent, and he did believe likewise that my Lord Russel was
innocent, and for his part he knew nothing of any such thing as a Plot, but he
says when he began to talk to him, why did he make such a Bustle and go so
often into the City and concern himself about the making of Sheriffs? he
answered, I do nothing but what is in a legal way, and he justified all that
was done to be only in a legal way.

When once people come to believe that the raising of Tumults, and making
Seditions, Stirs and Noises is a legal way to obtain their ends, as we know
it is the Tenet and Principle of a great many people, what will they not do
under that pretense, That all they do is according to Law? They think it is
lawful by the Religion they profess to resist and oppose the Government, and
the old Cause is a good Cause to this day in some men's Opinion, and they can
die in it, and thank God for being concerned in it. And there are some people
that say the raising of Arms by the King's Authority against his Person is
lawful by the Religion they profess, and they call themselves Protestants, (how
justly you may imagine) and if men will make Insurrections to difficult the
Government, it is Rebellion, and no man can justify it, let him pretend
Conscience or what he will, it is rank Treason. It is not saying, I am thus
persuaded in my Conscience that will excuse the Man, if I steer my self by the
Dictates of a good and regular Conscience, it can never be thought that I shall
commit Treason but it is the effect of evil Principles.

Was it not under the shape of Religion, That that blessed Martyr King Charles
the First of ever blessed memory came to the Block; nay, and I have heard of
some men in the late times that were engaged on that side, who finding that the
King did prevail at the beginning of the War, because he had Gentlemen of
Quality and Spirit to appear for him, were at a loss to know which way in the
World they should put a Spirit into the common people to oppose the King; and
some among them bid them be sure to put Religion to be but the pretense, and
that would make them run headlong to what they would have them. Whose Opinion
that was is not strange to any that know any thing of the History of those
times. So that when once people take it to be the Principle of their Religion
to oppose and resist all that are not of their persuasion, and for Religion
sake to resist Authority, then they think all is lawful they can do to preserve
their Religion as long as they are wound up to that Opinion.

Their next Witness, Gentlemen, is my Lord of Clare, and he gives you an
account of his Discourse with my Lord Howard. And by the way I must observe
what I am very sorry for with all my heart, To hear that among Gentlemen of
Quality and Honor Discourses of the Government and the Maladministration of
it as they think should be only matter of Jest fit for their recreation, and
laughter, only merry Table-talk, as though Government so sacred a thing were
as mean as any trivial Concern whatsoever. I am sorry to hear and see that
Persons of great Honor and Quality should esteem it so. And I must be pardoned
if I take notice of it: for matters of Government and yielding Obedience to
Superiors is a matter of Religion, it is a serious matter, and every Man ought
to make Conscience of it. To talk of Government with Reverence as well as pay
Duty and Obedience to it. And when I find it made a Jest I must be permitted to
say that is not so well done, and whoever it is that makes it so ought very
much to be blamed.

My Lord of Clare comes and testifies, That my Lord Howard told him, He did not
believe my Lord Russel was guilty of what he was accused of, much less did he
believe it of Col. Sidney, and when he began to talk about Writings found in
Sidney's Closet, he said, there can be nothing of his Writings found that can
do him or any Man else any hurt. This is the substance of what that Noble Lord
has said.

Then there is my Lord Paget, and he likewise gives an account, That he had
some Discourse with my Lord Howard about the Plot; and he told him too, That he
did not believe any thing of this Plot, or that my Lord Russel and others
accused had any hand in it. But I would observe this one thing upon my Lord
Paget's testimony, That still my Lord Howard was wished joy by every body, and
I am glad to see your heels at liberty, and the like. So that there was some
jealousy of his being concerned; some thing or other there was in it. Says my
Lord Howard, I look upon my self as affronted that any body should talk so of
me. He was concerned that they should suspect him. But something there was at
the bottom. Says my Lord Paget, I am glad to hear you are out of it. For he
began to imagine there must be some fire for all this smoke. That, Gentlemen,
was the Discourse he had with him. But he says, That with my Lord Paget there
were Discourses of his going beyond Sea, but he did not go.

Then comes Dr. Burnet, and he tells you, That there were Protestations made to
him, and he has got the same words as the French Man had, That he did it with
lifted up eyes and hands, he professed solemnly he was altogether a stranger to
any such thing. The Dr. says, He had heard there was a Plot, and was persuaded
of the truth of it, but he was a little shaken by what my Lord Howard said to
him. But now he is sufficiently satisfied there is a Plot, and I am glad he is,
for I think it scarce does remain a doubt with any Men that have any value for
the Religion and Government we live under. And I know not how they could be
better satisfied than by the Evidence that has been given of it, a main part of
which was given by my Lord Howard. All this was before my Lord Howard was taken.

Then comes in one Mr. Gisborne, and he tells you the same Story, That a great
while ago my Lord Howard told him he knew nothing of the Plot.

The next to him is Mr. Blake, and he tells you, That after such time as the
Plot was discovered, and after my Lord Russel was tried, and after my Lord
Howard had given Evidence at the Old Baily, he showed him the Warrant for his
Pardon, and Blake telling him that was not sufficient without an actual Pardon;
He replied, I think in my Conscience I shall not have a Pardon till the
drudgery of Swearing is over. But is that any argument? Here is a Man under the
drudgery of Swearing; therefore he did not know any such thing as he swears. It
carries thus much along with it, That it was uneasy to him, and there is a
kind of a force put upon him to swear as they say in order to his Pardon.

But now, Gentlemen, that will admit of this Answer, and a plain one certainly
it is, When a Man comes over and over again to tell the World such a story and
give such an account of himself, it must a little grate upon him though it be
his duty to tell the truth, and though as Mr. Williams says, He is the best
Martyr that is a Martyr for Truth; even so say I on the other side, he is the
best penitent that is a penitent for Truth, and he is the best Witness that is
a Witness for truths sake, and he gives the best testimony of his repentance
that by his testimony declares the truth though it be harsh and uneasy to him;
For if I have any ingenuity, and have lived in good credit in the World, it
must be a drudgery and irksom thing to call my self a Traitor so often in a
Court of Justice. It is true, he might have given it a more moderate Term, and
yet withal upon these circumstances he might have reason to call it in some
sense a Drudgery. But now, Gentlemen, As he did swear it before he had his
pardon from time to time upon all occasions when he was called as a Witness. So
now the Pardon is come, which they would have to be the reason of the
continuance of his Drudgery he swears the same thing. He has his pardon under
the King's Seal, and though it might be thought they would keep him within the
compass of his Tether till he had done his Evidence; now he has got that he
desired he swears the same thing. And now his pardon does not at all influence
his testimony, he is not under any fear, but is as free as any Subject the King
has, and now he is upon his Oath, he gives you the account you have had, and he
did say all the same things before such time as Col. Sidney, my L. Russel were
tried that he says now.

Then, Gentlemen, you have in the next place Witnesses called, several of them
to give you an Account of the Conversation and disposition of Mr. Hambden; for
says Mr. Williams, for a man to be guilty of a Crime of this nature there must
be some kind of evil disposition to it, and so Mr. Williams would argue and
make this inference. You see he is not a man of a turbulent, seditious and
factious Spirit and temper, he is a studious person, very retired, that has
been beyond Sea much, and came not home till such a time. And if there were
interlocutions between my Lord Howard and my Lord Shaftsbury it was before he
came into England, and so he was not concerned in them. He says, That March
last he was to go again, he had a mind to return again to France for his
health, and what reason have we to imagine he should concern himself in the
Plot? When he was so studious a Man, lived so retired a life, and intended to
go abroad so suddenly. And for this you have my Lord Paget, Mr. Pelham. Sir
Henry Hobart, Dr. Lupee, Monsieur Justel, and one Murray.


Mr. Williams. Murray, my Lord, we did not examine.


Lord Chief Justice. It Is true, I beg your pardon. Well then, these others tell
you, They have been persons very intimately conversant with him, they never
knew he concerned himself with any thing about Government, but was of a quiet
peaceable demeanor, and was so far from that which the Indictment talks of
Turbulency and Sedition, that they never had any discourse with him about any
such thing at all, save what Dr. Lupee says, who it seems lived with him about
two years, and kept him Company in his Studies, and that once having some
discourse about the Popish Plot; He said he would venture his Life and any
thing he had to preserve the King and Government against that Plot; he did very
well, and if he had since declared, he would have ventured his life to have
secured the King and Government, against this Plot, I should have been glad to
find him of that mind, I pray God you may find him to be so. But from the
Evidence even of that French man, it seems there was some Jealousy in the
World, and that he lay under hard Censures as well as other people. For
speaking of the Plot the Advice given him was this. My Lord Gray is gone and
the Duke of Monmouth is gone, why will not you go? Why should that advice be
given, if there were no suspicion of his being concerned. That he said I will
not go, and so they would make his staying here to be an instance and proof of
his innocence; Why Gentlemen, If that should be so, then there was the same
innocence in my Lord Russel, and Col. Sidney, and all of them: for all the
Council of Six every one of them stayed, except the Duke of Monmouth and he
indeed did abscond. And the same Evidence that made the Duke of Monmouth fly,
and my Lord Essex out his own throat convicted my Lord Russel and Col. Sidney,
and is now brought against the Defendant, and has from time to time been given
against the rest. We know no reason that they had to stay more than West or
Romsey had to stay and be taken, and yet that is not used by them as an
argument of their innocence.

These are the Evidences that have been given on the Defendants part; and I
tell you as I go along what Answers are given to it on the part of the King. As
to what is spoken of his intention to go again into France, if he designed to
go, why did he not go before all this mischief broke out? He came here at
Michaelmas, and I may say he came it may be at an unlucky time, when the City
and its Neighborhood was in a Distemper, and some Men were blown with fears
and jealousies. These might animate him, and inspirit him as they did other
people, and put them into a ferment; but you find him attending in Town
constantly here till the matter was discovered, whatsoever his intentions were,
it is much he did not put them into Action, it is strange he did not go all this
while, it had been much for his advantage That he had never come out of France,
or that he had returned thither much sooner.

Against all this that has been urged for the Defendant about my Lord Howard, I
will tell you, what is the Answer to it; and truly first I say, I am apt to
believe my Lord Howard did tell these Gentlemen what they here testify; but
was it ever thought That any Man that was guilty of High Treason would
presently proclaim his own guilt? Is it reasonable to imagine, my Lord Howard
would tell Dr. Burnet I am in a Plot, and Col. Sidney is in a Plot, and Mr.
Hambden is in a Plot, and make it his Common talk; nay, it is so far from being
an Argument of his Innocence, That more naturally it may be turned upon them as
an Argument of his Guilt. For if a Man had not been concerned in the business
at all, but were an honest Man, and free from suspicion, what need I talk or
concern my self to proclaim my own innocence not being accused? Why must I tell
Col. Sidney's Footman, This Man, the other Man, That I know nothing of the
Plot, and neither I nor any other Man I am sure is concerned in it? But that
shows there was a dread and apprehension upon him of something that he was
conscious of, and that lying within must have some vent, and this Over-Caution
is an intimation that there was something more than ordinary in the matter. We
take notice of it as a great Evidence against a Man that is accused for an
Highway Man, if he comes to such an Alehouse or Inn, and bids the People take
notice I am here at such a time of the day, and that is a circumstance of time
that will serve to answer a proof, it may be that may be brought against him of
a Robbery done such a time; but we always look upon that industry of theirs as
a piece of Artifice designed to patch up a testimony to evade a proof. So that
the Argument will turn the other way; and it is more for the advantage of these
worthy Gentlemen, that it should be turned the other way, for otherwise they
would be thought to be Persons ill-affected to the Government; that is Dr.
Burnet, my Lord Paget, my Lord Clare, and the rest. And if they have a mind to
be thought otherwise, they must let the Argument run that way as I say, and in
Charity we ought to believe the best of all mankind till we find otherwise by
them. We say then in Charity, We suppose He thought it not fit to entrust you
with his Confessions; for you are all Loyal Men, I know it is the best Answer
that can be given, and that which they ought to value themselves upon for their
own credit and reputation, and not to make it an Argument against my Lord
Howard, or against the credibility of his testimony in the metter.

I don't know truly, Gentlemen, That I have omitted any one thing that is
material, on the one side or on the other, of which there has been any proof,
but I must only repeat to you this, Here is a matter of great concern and
Consequence, a matter wherein the peace of the Government and the Kingdom is
concerned in a very high degree, a matter, that if there were another Witness
as positive against the Defendant as my Lord Howard, would amount to no less
than High Treason. But as there is but one Witness backed with these
Circumstances to corroborate his testimony, it is but only a Trespass, but I
tell you it treads very nigh upon High Treason, and the tendency of it was to
bring us all into Confusion and what would be the consequence of that but to
lay us open to the same mischiefs that we were under in the times of the late
Rebellion. For though Men pretend never so fair, and vail it under the names of
the Security of the Government and the Protestant Religion, yet they would have
done well to have tarried till they had a legal Authority to call them to
consult of these High matters that they pretend to secure, that had been well.
What had these Gentlemen to do to take upon themselves this Power without
Authority?

Gentlemen, You have heard the Evidence, and you see what it is. And I must
say, in the late Evidences you have had concerning another business of this
nature, I wish that might be said to preserve and support the Credit of some
Persons upon whose testimonies Lives have been taken away as has been said, and
is evident for the advantage of my Lord Howard. I do not find that he has been
guilty of Perjury, as being concerned in taking Oaths one way and then giving
Evidence another. I mean, first taking Oaths of Secrecy and then revealing;
not but that notwithstanding all this, They may be believed, and God forbid but
they should be believed according to truth. But I say, if Objections of this
nature are to prevail we must never expect any great Crime to be punished,
because we must stay till Persons that are strangers to the guilt of the Fact
come to give Evidence of it, which is impossible to be done.

Therefore, Gentlemen, I must resolve it all into one Head; You have the Case
of a Gentleman of Quality on the one side, and the peace and preservation of
the Government on the other side. You hear what is proved against him, the
Evidence given on his behalf, the Objections that have been made by the
Counsel, which all of them as near as I can remember I have repeated to you,
and I ask your pardon and theirs if I have omitted any thing, and I desire to
be minded of it. You hear the Answers that have been given. And because the
Counsel were unwilling to give the Court trouble or themselves to make long
Speeches and Observations, Therefore I have been necessitated to do it as well
I can.

Upon the whole matter, My Lord Howard has thus positively sworn the matter of
Fact charged in the Indictment against the Defendant; he has been supported by
the Witnesses that confirm the circumstances of Smith's going into Scotland,
the Scotch-Men's being here in June, and the Sham and Cant. of Carolina. All
which you have heard, and I make no question observed, and is not contradicted
by any thing I hear that carries any probability of an Answer. Therefore,
Gentlemen, I leave it to you, whether upon this Evidence you will take it upon
your Consciences and Oaths, That my Lord Howard is Guilty of wilful and corrupt
Perjury, Then you must find the Defendant not Guilty; But if you think he has
proved the matter fully, and his testimony is supported by those four
Witnesses, Atterbury, Sir Andrew Foster, Sheriff, and Bale, Then Gentlemen, you
must find the Defendant Guilty.


Juriman. My Lord, We desire to ask one Question. At the meeting at Mr.
Hamden's House, I think my Lord Howard says they went to Dinner.


Mr. Just. Holloway. No, it was at Coll. Sidney's they went to Dinner.


L. C. J. I know not whether you have taken notice of it, but I have, it was at
Coll. Sidney's they dined, not at Mr. Hambden's.


Then the Jury withdrew from the Bar, and within half an Hour the Jury
returned, and being called over answered to their Names, and gave in their
Verdict thus: Cl. of Crown. Are you all agreed of your Verdict?


Omnes. Yes.


Cl. of Cr. Who shall say for you?


Omnes. Foreman.


Cl. of Cr. How say you? Is the Defendant guilty of the Trespass and
Misdemeanor whereof he is impeached, or not guilty?


Foreman. Guilty. Which Verdict being recorded, the Court rose.


Martis 12. Februarii, An. 1683. B. R.

L. C. J. Mr. Attorney, Have you any thing to move?


Mr. At. Genesis I pray your Judgment against Mr. Hambden, my Lord, who was
convicted the other day of a great Misdemeanor.


L. C. J. Let Mr. Hambden come into the Court then. which he did.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I need not aggravate the hainousness of the Offense; for
it appears both by the Information, and upon the Evidence to be beyond all
Aggravation, wherefore I shall only pray your Judgment for the King, That you
would please to set a good Fine upon him, and that he find Sureties for his
good behavior during his Life.


Mr. Williams. May it please your Lordship, I am of Counsel for Mr. Hambden.


L. C. J. Are the Rules out in this Cause?


Mr. Williams. Yes, my Lord, they are out.


L. C. J. Well then, what say you for Mr. Hambden?


Mr. Williams. Mr. Hambden does attend here according to the Condition of his
Recognizance, and since Mr. Attorney has prayed your Judgment, I shall not
stir any thing as to the Indictment or the Verdict, but all I have to say for
him is this, Mr. Hambden is but Heir apparent, his Father is alive; and so
though he has the prospect of a good Estate, yet he has but little at present
in possession; Your Lordship knows what Magna Charta says, That there should be
a Salvo Contenemento in all Fines, and how far that may be an ingredient into
your Lordships Judgment, I leave to your Consideration.


L. C. J. For that matter I cannot tell what his Estate is, I have no knowledge
of him, nor of his Estate whether it be great or small, but Mr. Williams knows
very well, That the Crime in Conscience as well as Law in case it had been
proved by two Witnesses, would not only have wrought a forfeiture of all his
Estate, but a forfeiture of his Life too, and all his reputation, would have
bastardized his Children, would have attainted and corrupted his blood. So that
there is no sort of imagination but that the Crime was High enough of
Conscience; and certainly deserves, if we can impose it adequate to its desert
a very great punishment. Mr. Hambden, nor his Counsel can deny but that they
had a fair and a full hearing, They had the liberty to say and prove all that
they could, and you cannot but say Mr. Attorney was very fair in making several
Concessions that he might very lawfully and rightly insisted upon. So that
there can be no Exception of that kind. I am sorry That Mr. Hambden a Gentleman
of good Quality as he is by Birth, though he be a Person I never saw before he
came here the last day of the last Term upon his Habeas Corpus that I know of.
I say, I am sorry one of his Quality and Education, a studious Person as it
seems by his own natural inclination, and a learned Man should be so unhappily
engaged in a design of this horridly evil nature. But on the one side as well
as we must take care of the Subject, so on the other we must take care of the
Government. Here was a design of destroying the King, and subverting the
Government and bringing all into confusion. Of this Design the Defendant is
convicted, and we must take care to proportion the punishment, and according to
our Consciences and Oaths, and as we ought to have regard to the Offender, so
also we are to have regard to the Government that he has offended.


Mr. J. Wythens. Mr. Williams, It was Amercements that were spoken of there in
Magna Charta.


L. C. J. Ay, It was never meant of Fines for great Offenses.


Then the Judges consulted together. Mr. J. Wythens. Mr. Hambden, You know you
are convicted of a very great Offense as great an Offense as can be I think
committed, unless it were High Treason. For the matter of it would have made
you Guilty, if there had been two Witnesses. It was for conspiring to levy War
against His Majesty, and for conspiring to raise an Insurrection and Rebellion
within the Kingdom, a Conspiracy of which some other Persons being lawfully
convicted, they have suffered death for it. You are a Person of an
extraordinary good Family. and I am sorry one of your Family that has
flourished so long and through so many Generations in great honor and
reputation, and great prosperity under the Monarchy of England, should come to
conspire to deprive that King of his Government, whose Ancestors have protected
and defended your Family, and to spoil that Monarchy that has been the fountain
of so much prosperity and honor to it. I am sorry it comes to my turn to
pronounce the Sentence of the Court upon you, Mr. Hambden. I have not any
personal knowledge of you, but I have heard of you, and heard heretofore very
well of you. You have had a good Education and the Report of a learned and
ingenuous Person, which makes me yet wonder the more that you should engage in
such a horrid Design as this was. Indeed Mr. Hambden, I am satisfied no Fine
can be too great, if any can be great enough for such an Offense. We cannot
take cognizance what your Estate is, it is reported there is a great Estate in
your Family, it has been always represented to be so.


Mr. Hambden. I have nothing but for life, and that is but little neither.


Mr. J. Wythens. I know not what it is truly, Sir. But it was always reported
to me to be a very great Estate, but whatsoever it is, we are to look after the
proportioning the Punishment as near as we can to the Offense. My Lord, and the
Court have considered of the matter, and they think fit to give this Judgment
upon you.


They set the Fine of Forty Thousand Pounds upon you to be paid to the King,
and you must be committed till you pay it. L. C. J. And that you find Sureties
for your good behavior during your Life.


Mr. At. Genesis I pray he may be committed for his Fine.


L. C. J. Let it be so.


Mr. Hambden, If you will apply your self to the King, you may, and there
perhaps you may find mercy; we must according to the duty of our Places and
Oaths give such Judgment as the Law requires.


Mr. Just. Withins. Ay, In God's Name. You are in the King's hands, and he may
do what he pleases in it.


L. C. J. If a Crime of this nature should have a little punishment, it might
encourage Offenders, and if we were to judge according to some Verdicts that
have been given here for less Offenses, where Gentlemen have given very much
greater damages than thi^ Fine amounts to, this would be thought a moderate
Fine. I am sorry any Man should bring himself into these Circumstances: The
King as he is the Fountain of Justice, so he is also of Mercy, and you and all
the rest of his Subjects have cause to bless God that you live under a Monarch
that is very merciful. No doubt, If you give a good account of your Contrition
and sorrow for your great Offense, and decently apply your self to the King, he
will think of showing mercy to you; but Justice is our Work that are Judges;
and according to the methods of Justice we think we cannot inflict less than we
have done.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I pray his Bail may be discharged.


L. C. J. Ay, his Bail is discharged, he being committed.


Mr. Williams. And for the High Treason he is discharged by the Habeas Corpus
Act.


L. C. J. Yes, he is so, for there is no Prosecution.


Then Mr. Hambden was carried by the Marshal away Prisoner. FINIS.

