THE TRIAL and CONDEMNATION OF Several Notorious Malefactors, at a Sessions of
OYER and TERMINER holden for the City of LONDON, County of Middlesex, and Goal
Delivery of Newgate: Beginning August the 31. Ending September the 1. 1681. AT
THE Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY: With the Names of those that received
Sentence of Death, Burnt in the Hand, Transported, and to be Whipped.
Together with an Account of the proceedings against the Right Honorable the
Earl of Shaftsbury, and the Lord Howard Baron of Escreek. Mr. Wilmore, and Mr.
Whittaker, all Prisoners in the Tower.
ANN SMITH, a notorious offender received her Trial for stealing several
parcels of Linen Cloth, Silk, and other things to a considerable vallue, in
the Parish of St. Alhollows the less, the Goods being for the most part found
in her custody, the which she aleadged were brought to her, but failing to
prove the same, she was found Guilty.

Elizabeth Powel of St. Martins in the Fields, was Tried for Murdering her
Bastard Male-Infant, and hiding it in her Desk, the which she refused to
confess, till search was made, and then declared where she had bestowed it,
desiring the people to be good to her, for that it was Still-born, but she not
calling any to her Labor, to testify the same, according to the Statute of King
James, which there was read, she was brought in Guilty of Murder.

After the Court had sat about two hours, four Petitions we^^ humbly offered
to the Honorable Judges and Justices of the Peace sitting upon Commission of
Oyer and Terminer, and of Jail-delivery etc. viz. That of the Right Honorable
the Earl of Shaftsbury, tha^ of my Lord Howard, Barron of Escreek, that of Mr.
Wilmore, and tha^ of Mr. Whittaker, all remaining Prisoners in the Tower, as
charge^ with High Treason: Their Prayers by their Petitions (which the Court
ordered to be read) were, that being they had been Committe^ Prisoners for
High Treason, and there continued a considerable tim^ without any prosecution,
that they might be brought by Habeas Corpus, and proceeded against, or Bailed,
according to the Act made and provided, for the securing the Liberty of the
Subject, to which my Lord Chie^ Justice returned answer, That it was the
Opinion of all the Judges, it could not be done, the Tower of London not being
within the Jurisdiction of tha^ Court, but that they must referr themselves to
the High-Courts at Westminster, as the King's Bench etc. and there, if no
Prosecution was made, they might be releived by Bail, or words to that effect.

John Martyn a French Merchant was Tried for killing one Monsieur Rainbow, in
the Parish of S. Martins in the Fields, on the 22 of August last; they having
been formerly Dealers together, and Drinking at a Tavern, fell to high Words,
which occasioned Blows, and finally the Drawing of their Swords, when making
several Passes, the Prisoner wounded Rainbow in the Belly so mortally that he
fell; saying, He had his Deaths Wound; at which the Prisoner seemed to rejoice;
saying, so much the better, he owned him something a long time, etc. The
Prisoner could speak no English, and therefore had an Interpreter, at likewise
a Jury for the purpose, being half English and half French, who upon hearing
the Evidence on both parts, found him Guilty.

A Fellow was Tried for breaking open a House at Acton, taking thence Pewter
and Brass, and such like Household Goods; but being pursued, he dropped them in
a Close adjoining to the House, but the Fact being done in the Day time, he was
found Guilty of the Felony only.

Richard Eaton and William Tenant were Tried for Stealing 500 Weight of
Tobacco, valued at eighteen pound, from Dice Key, the Goods of one Mr.
Harrington, which Felony being plainly proved against the former, he was found
Guilty.

Roger Swinney was Tried for Stealing a Studded Watch, valued at three pounds
from Benjamin Smith, in the Parish of St, Martins in the Fields; which upon
search was found pawned at a Goldsmiths in Holborn for about 40 shillings: the
Prisoner pretended he had it of another party, that could not be now produced:
but by what was gathered from his Confession and the Evidences own Knowledge, he
was found guilty; having been once before condemned for Murder and Pardoned.

Barbara Orchard, was tried for picking the Pocket of Francis Chesmess a French
Gentleman, in Strand-Lane under pretense of picking him up; from whom she took
a Watch, a Tobacco-box, and some money: But it being committed in the
Nightime, and she not apprehended till some time after, she was acquitted.

Charles Stanly and Ann Camsel were tried for stealing about 5 pounds worth of
Silk, in the Parish of St. Dunstans in the West, on the 23 of July, which being
proved against them, by reason some part of the Goods were found in the Lodging
of the latter, they were both found guilty to the value of 10 d.

Henry King, a Country fellow, was tried for stealing an Horse from William
Edmunds on the 4th of July, valued at 50 shillings, the which he had before the
Justice acknowledged, he only borrowed to lend to a Friend in the Country, the
Prosecutor being his Master, but could not be persuaded to be so ingenious upon
his Trial: for want of which Plea, 'twas adjudged Felony, and he found Guilty.

John Clark was tried for stealing a Ring from one Mr. Horn, a Goldsmith in
Woodstreet, the which being found about him when appreded, the Jury brought him
in Guilty.

Three Bills for Subornation being drawn up against Mr. Smith, Mr. Macnamarra,
and Mr. Hayns, in order to be Sworn to before the Grand Jury, were offered to
the consideration of the Court, who after some Debate ordered them to be read,
the purport of which were, That they had been suborned against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, etc. The Council in the Cause for the Plaintiff being Mr. Smith,
but the Court would by no means allow they should be presented, by reason they
were drawn up without the knowledge of Mr. Attorney General, saying, That if
such practices were once allowed, it would prevent the course of the Law, and
render invalid all manner of Evidence.

This being overruled, Mr. Sheriff Bethel stood up and acquainted the Court,
That he had lately received an Information, that some persons had a Design
aginst his Life, and had offered to lay Wagers of accomplishing the Design by
Christmas next, and desired that he might wait upon the Right Honorable the
Lord Chief Justice, with his Information, but his Lordship was pleased to
answer, That he would not admit of any such thing in private, for what he did
in that nature must be done in open Court, directing him to attend upon Mr.
Attorney General with the same.

A while after the Grand Jury for London, presented Joanna Broom, for
publishing the Weekly Pamphlet, Entitled The Observator, and Benjamen Took,
for publishing a Pamphlet, Entitled, Heraclitus Ridens, as likewise Mr.
Thomsons Loyal Protestant Domestic Intelligence, as Pamphlets designed to
divide his Majesty's true Protestant Subjects, and much Reflecting upon the
Magistracy of this Honorable City of London.

Then they delivered in a Paper, Expressing their unfeined thanks to the Right
Honorable Sir Patience Ward Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of London, and the
Right Worshipful Slingsby Bethel and Henry Cornish Esqrs Sheriffs, for the good
service they had done the City in the Execution of their Offices, and
discharging their great Trusts, etc.

George Toms was tried for stealing a silver Watch Aug. 22. from W. Young, of S.
Leonards Foster, the which was afterward stopped at a Brokers in Hosier lane.
But upon hearing the Evidence, it proved That another whom he pretended sent
him to pawn the same, owned it at the Brokers shop, when he staid it: whereupon
the Prisoner was acquitted, the other party having made his Escape.

Clifford Glasium was tried for the Murder of John Tunk, the Circumstances
according to Evidence were these: The Prisoner keeping a Cooks-Shop near
Clarken-Well-Green, receiving some small Affront from the Deceased, who came
into his House, he endeavored to get a Constable to apprehend him, and
thereupon following him, as he pretended, to seeure him, and the Deceased
insisting to be gone, the Prisoner fell upon him, and, by throwing him down,
broke his Leg short off, and not content with that, continued beating him for
some time after: of which beating, and by reason of the Gangreening of his leg
in Eight days time he dyed: yet the Jury acquitted the Prisoner to the no
small Wonder of the Court.

William Wats was Tried for a Felony and Burglary committed in the Parish of
Stepny, in July last on the House of ^ndrew Grescom, and taking thence several
Goods to the value of 40 shilli^gs, which upon pursuit were found dropped in a
Court before the House, but he Pleading that he came to look for a Boat (the
Yard facing the waterside) and that he never was in the House, the Witness not
being able to prove the contrary, he was acquitted.

Loyalus Anderson, alias, Munson, one of the three Jesuits that have lain so
long under Conviction in Newgate, having obtained his Majesty's Gracious
Pardon; but with condition to depart the Land in 14 days, Pleaded the same upon
his Knees, and had it allowed; but being called upon to give Gloves as is usual
in such Cases, he Pleaded Poverty, but notwithstanding was not discharged out
of Custody, till he had given security to have the same performed.

William Hetherington having been Bailed out of Newgate, made his Prayer, That
seeing no Prosecution was made against him, he might be fully Discharged, which
was done by Proclamation.

Peter Drew received his Trial, for that he in the Parish of White-Chappel
Stole two Kettles and several other things, being the Goods of Henry Crackpit,
for which he was found Guilty to the value of Ten-Pence.

At this Sessions 7 persons received Sentence of Death, viz. Richard Eaton,
Roger Swinny, Henry King, Ann Smith, Mary Baker, Mary Lane, and Elizabeth
Powell; Ten burnt in the Hand, Two ordered for Transportation, and Three to be
Whipped. And so concluded this remarkable Sessions.

Printed for Langley Curtiss on Ludgate Hill.


