THE ROYAL OAK WITH Other various and delightful Scenes presented on the
Water and the Land, Celebrated in Honor of the deservedly Honored Sir RICHARD
BROWN Bar. Lord Mayor OF THE CITY OF LONDON The 29th. day of October in the
12th. Year of his Majesty's most happy, happy, Reign, An. Dom. 1660. And
performed at the Costs and Charges of the Right Worshipful Company of
Merchant-Taylors, Being twice as many Pageants and Speeches as have been
formerly showen, By JOHN TATHAM.

London Printed by S. G. for R. B. 1660.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir RICHARD BROWN Knight and Barronet, Lord MAYOR of
the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
IT is said by the Philosopher, that he merits more Honor, who can maintain a
City in Peace, then he that defends it in War, which is rather feared then
beloved, And Plutarch reports that Pyrrhus (though a Mighty Vaunter) confessed,
that Cyneas had won more Cities by his Wisdom, then he had Conquered with his
Sword. Corona Civica, and Corona Ovalis, the one of Oak, the other of Myrtle,
were ever held more lawdable by the Romans than their Corona Aurea, the Golden
Crown, otherwise Corona Triumphalis when the Chariot Wheels swet Blood; When a
City is to be punished with War, Sword, and Flame, any hair-braind Phaeton will
serve the turn, but to preserve it in Peace and Union, requires the Management
of a solid and wise Magistrate. My Lord, it is your happiness in this days
Triumph to come with Corona Civica, the Cities Love, and (I may say, and
flatter not) the soberer and better part of the Nations, The Company of
Merchant-Taylors, Honoueed by the Brotherhood of so many Edw. the 3. Rich. the
2d and Queen Ann his wife Hen. the 4th. Hen. the 5th. Hen. the 6.. Edw. the 4.
Rich. the 3d. Hen. the 7. 22 Princes and Dukes. 2 Dutchesses 1 Archbishop. 3
Ambassadors. 42. Earls. 5. Countesses 1. Viscount 73. Barons and Lords.
Kings and Princes, receive no small Joy that you were pleased to become a
Member thereof; witness the readiness of the Court of assistants, to promote
the honor of the Day, and in particular Mr. Mawrice Gethings, Mr. Thomas
Nevil, and Mr. John Smart, who took upon them the care of ordering, and
managing the whole business. My Lord, vouchsafe the acceptance of this
Dedication as the early tender of my serviceable affection who am

My Lord Your Honors Devoted Servant JOHN TATHAM

TO THE WORTHILY HONORED THE COMPANY OF MERCHANT-TAYLORS.
Gentlemen,
THough I may appear to you a stranger, your Goodness has not been so to me;
It is not long since I received a relish thereof. Wines are tried at the first
peircing, not by quantity, but taste, and by a little We may conclude the rest.
My Ambition is satisfied, in that this Year I have had the happiness to serve
you; if my endeavors fall short of your expectation, I shall blush that my
Abilities are not answerable to my Will, and beg your Pardon assuring you,
that I have done as much as the short allowance of my time would permit: but if
in the Survey thereof any thing meet with your liking, it will be honor enough
to him who is thereby Licensed to subscribe himself:

Gentlemen, The Humblest of your Servants JOHN TATHAM,

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Know thou do expect something to be performed, this day more then has
been in ordinary Triumphs heretofore; in regard it is Celebrated in Honor of a
Person of that superlative loyalty, and Integrity, as the present Lord Mayor,
Not to deceive thy Curiosity herein, let thine own eyes satisfy thee, and to
that end, repair to the Water, where the first Scene will be presented against
White Hall, consisting of a Rock and a Ship floating, Rigged, and Manned. On the
Rock is placed several Figures: Oceanus, the Father of Rivers directs his
Speech to the Lord Mayor, and nere double the number of Pageants, that formerly
were, are seen on the ^and I shall* detein thee no longer, but referr thee to
the show it self, or to the manner thereof set down in the Book

Farewell,
THE Royal Oak: With other various and delightful Scaens presented on the
Water and the Land, and Celebrated in the Honor of the deservedly Honored Sir
Richard Brown, Baronet; Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON, the 29. October in
the 12. year of his Majesty's most happy Reign, Anno Domi 1660.
And performed at the Costs and Charges of the Right Worshipful the Company of
Merchant Tailors.
The Mornings Business.
The whole Body being met at Merchant Tailors hall, that is to say:

FIrst, the Master and Wardens in their Gowns faced, with Foyns and Hoods, each
of them having a Page attending, habited with blew Cassocks, whire-stockings
and flat Caps; each Page bearing a Target with their Arms in one hand and a
Trunchion in the other.

2. The Assistants in their Gowns and Hoods.

3. The Livery in their Gowns and Hoods.

4. The Foyns Batchellors in Gowns and Hoods.

5. The Budge Batchellors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

6. Forty eight Gentlemen Ushers in Plush Coats, white Staves and Gold Chains.

7. Eight other Gentlemen carrying Banners in Plush Coats, and Sky colored
Scarffs about their Shoulders.

8. Three Gentlemen more in Buff Coats, and Sky colored Scarffs about their
middles.

9. The Foot Martial with a like colored Scarff about his Shoulder with six
Attendants, and each of them habited in a white Fustian Dublet, black Breeches,
blew stockings, a white Hat, and blew Hatband, and every one of them a
Trunchian in his hand.

10. The Sergeant, Trumpeter, with a sky colored Scarff about his Shoulders,
and eight other of his Majesty's Trumpeters, together with his Majesty's Kettle
Drums.

11. His Majesty's Drum Major with a like colored Scarff about his Waste, with
his Majesty's others Drums.

12. Twenty other Trumpeters divided and disposed of into eight Pageants.

13. Seven other Drums (whereof John Bibby Drum Major to the City is chief)
habited either in Buff coats or Buff colored Dublets, and blew Scarffs about
their wastes.

14. Francis Burgess Master of Defense with his twelve Attendants.

15. One hundred and twenty poor aged persons Freemen of the Company in blew
Gowns with red Sleeves, and red Caps, each of them having a Javelin in one
hand, and an Escochin in the other; Six other poor people also Free men of the
said Company in blew Jackets and red Caps appointed to carry the Silk-works,
and twenty four poor men in disguises, commonly called Green men.

Being so met and habited, as aforesaid, about eight a clock, the Foot Marshall
Ranks them out by two and two*

FIrst, the Pentioners in blew Gowns, in the head of them is placed three
Drums, one Fife, and the Ensign whereon the Crest of the Company is painted.

Secondly, The several Banners and Streamers carried by the poor men in blew
Coats; in the Front of them four Drums and one Fife.

Thirdly, The Budge Batchellors, in the front of them eight Gentlemen Ushers,
the other two Colors and six Trumpets.

Fourthly, The Foyns Batchellors, in the Front of whom is placed ten Gentlemen
Ushers, and two other Gentlemen, the one carrying the Companies, the other the
Cities Banner, and six other Trumpets in the head of them.

Fifthly, The Livery, in the front of them, twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and two
other of the said Gentlement, each of them carrying two Banners, and four of
his Majesty's Drums with one Fife.

Sixthly, The Assistants, in the front of whom is placed ten Gentlemen Ushers,
two other of the said Gentlemen, one carrying the Lord Mayor, the other the
Cities Banner, and eight other of the best Trumpets.

Seventhly, The Master and his four Wardens, each of them having a Page
attending, habited as aforesaid, carrying his Coat of Arms in the Escohin;
likewise ten other of the said Gentlemen Ushers, and two other of the former
specified Gentlemen, the one carrying his Majesty's, the other the Duke of
Yorkes Banner, his Majesty's Sergeant Trumpeter, and eight other Trumpets, in
the front of them.

Being thus Rankt out, the Foot Marshall places himself in the head of the
Pentioners, and leads the way toward his Lordships house, after them the
Banners and Streamers, the Master, Wardens and Assistants and Livery following
next them; after them the Wardens of the Yeomandry, the Foyns and Budge
Batchellors.

THe Master and Wardens being come to his Lordships house, or meeting him by
the way, the Gentlemen Ushers, Colors, Trumpets, Drums and Fifes, remove their
Stations, and now place themselves in the head of the Juniors; whereas they
were placed in the head of the Seniors before, and so lead on the accustomed
way toward Three Crain Wharff, beginning with the Pentioners and Silk-works,
and the Budge and Foyns Batchellors, the Livery, Assistants, and the Master and
Wardens march next the Lord Mayors Attendants.

The Pentioners and Silkworks being come to Colledge-hill, do open to the right
and left, making a lane through which the Drums, Fifes Trumpets, Colors,
Gentlemen Ushers, and Rich Batchellors do pass to the place assigned to
refresh themselves; and the Livery Assistants, Master and Wardens and their
Gentlemen Ushers do pass to their Barges laid at the Stairs at the East end of
three Crain Wharff.

The Lord Mayor, Aldermen and their Attendants pass into their Barge, laid at
the accustomed place.

Their Barges and all other the Companies, adorned with Streamers and Banners,
and fitted with Hoe-boyes, Cornets, Drums and Trumpets; being on the water move
toward Westminster, and by the way his Lordship is saluted with twenty pieces
of Ordnance, as peals of entertainment and joy; Against White Hall appears a
large Stage or Fabric at the one end whereof is a Ship, floating, rigged and
manned, at the other end a Rock with various Figures; one representing Oceanus,
who is said to be God of Seas, and the Father of the Rivers; He was son to
Coelum and Vesta; Archelous was his son begat of Thetis; and the Sirens are
said to be the daughters of Achelous; and Calliope to show his Majesty, he
walks or treads upon his Watery Regiment, several Fishes are discovered to
play at his Feet, and Tryton's sporting themselves; four Virgins clothed in
white loose garments, and their Brows circled with Sage, representing the
Nymphs that frequent Rivers.

Upon his Lordships approach Oceanus addresseth himself in these words.

Oceanus Speech.
I Oceanus of old Coelums race,
That like a Ring does Circle and Embrace
The spacious Universe, God of the Main,
And unto Rivers Lord and Sovereign
Am come to grace my Daughter, Silver Thames,
So much admired and loved by Or Cambden* Causabon speaks King James to be a
great lover of this River.
Royal James:
Whose peaceful reign did make her murmures sweet
Not harsh, her Tide run with harmonious feet:
It Is Peace that Barbs the Billows, scumbs the foam,
Inviteth Trade abroad, and brings it home:
My Lord, you are a Royal Substitute,
Your clear Election, is without dispute;
Employ your Interest, Trade may now increase,
And be envol'd within the Arm of Peace.
Then shall my Grand-Girles Sirens Britain is encompassed on the East by the
German Ocean Sea, on the West the Irish, on the North the Scottish, and on the
South by a narrow Sea, divided from Gallia Belgica
not betray, but sing,
And drink Carouses to great Britains King.
The Speech ended, his Lordship and the Aldermen and Companies make for
Westminster, his Lordship being landed, and the accustomed Ceremonies in the
several Courts performed, they return to Baynards Castle, in the way his
Lordship receives another Peal of Ordnance, as a token of joy; and at Baynards
Castle his Lordship and Attendants are entertained by the first Gentlemen Budge
and Foyn Batchellors, their several Attendants; and being in like Order as they
marched from his Lordships house, the whole body move up Paul's Wharff hill
toward the East end of St. Paul's, in the Front of which, the Gentlemen of the
Artillary march to show their affection and loyalty, who are led by Sir John
Robinson, the President of the said Fraternity, and Lieutenant of the Tower, in
his Scarlet Gown and Sword: After whom the Pentioners and his Lordships Company
march in the same manner and equipage as before. His Lordship being come to the
East end of Paul's, as aforesaid, is entertained by a Pageant or Scean
representing a Pavillion or Tent Royal, flankt with two Camels, the supporters
of the Companies Arms; on the back of each Camel a figure clothed in white, a
Banner in his hand, and on the 2. stages 9. figures are placed, 5. of them in
livery gowns, representing the Mr. and Wardens of the Company, and 4.
representing Persons of honor that have been free of the Company: under the
Pavillion sits the figures of 8. Kings that have been free of the Company. In
the front whereof sits Hen. 7. holding in his hand their first Charter or
Patent of Merchant Tailors; and on a lower seat is placed a grave Person
representing a Soldier and Senator, under his Gown a white Armor, holding in
the one hand a Gantlet, the property of a Soldier in the other a statute Book
as a Senator and maintainer of laws: All parts of this Scaen is beautified and
agreeable with their Arms: His Lordship drawing near, the person under the
Pavillion entertains him in these words.

Senators Speech.
My Lord,
I As a Senator, and Soldier do
(Relating to your Triumphs) wait on you,
You being both; A double Laurel now
Beset with Stars wreaths your deserving brow;
Who but a Senator can Soldier be?
It Is Valor to be read in Policy:
For when the Martialist is at a stand,
The wary Statesman takes him by the hand,
And leads him through the way did dangerous seem
" Nestor was more then Ajax in esteem;
" Strength without Wisdom, madly running on,
" Receives its own Precipitation.
The Oracle being asked why Jupiter
Was the chief God, Mars being the Soldier,
Replied, he has what to 'ther wants, he is wise;
Can when he please with Thunder clear the skies,
Implying that a Governor should be
Endowed with Courage and Philosophy,
Reasons best ward to Argue and dispute;
A watchful eye, and a heart resolute:
Great merrits require great rewards, nor is
There one more happy then your self in this;
You have obliged your King and Countries love,
Your received honors will not barren prove,
But multiply, since that the Government
Of our three States rest in one Continent:
For where all Rule, no Rule at all can be
Where dwells Confe^sion but in Anarchy? K. ^. descended l^n^^lly of the
Britains by Gadwallo, of the S^or^, by Fargus of the Picks of the daughter of
Hung^s of the Saxons, by the sister of Edger of* the Danes by the da^ghter of K
Christian. and that of the Normans by the death of Henry th. 20. Edw. 4th. 1480,

Nor can society possibly Twist,
When every one will be even what he list,
When Godlike-Monarchy, does keep in Aw,
Licentious freedom, by a penal Law;
Derivitive from Heaven; he that did spring,
From mighty Ancestors, is now your Kign,
By right succession As the hands of Heaven,
We bagg'd him, and he was as freely given;
To rescue us from Wolves, God under whom,
He is Vicegerent, safely sent him home,
To rule his People, that we may express,
By former Griefs, our newfound Happiness;
Nor ought we to omit the Antiquity,
Of the Honored Company, of which y' are free, Hen ^th. 1501. and the 17th.
year of his Reign. Sir John Percival. Sir Steph. Ienning. Sir Hen. Hoberthorne.

By a new choice; Edward the fourth first made,
Them Lynnen Armourers, a select Trade,
After incorporated by the Name,
Of Merchant Tailors, by that Prince of Fame.
and several Kings and Princes have thought good
To be admitted in their Brotherhood,
Fiveteen Lord Mayor from the Royal stem, Sir Tho. White. Sir Tho. Offley Sir
Will. Harper. Sir Tho Roe. Sir Robert Lee. Sir Leo. Hollyday.

Have received Knightwood, you the last otf hem;
Yet in as great Grace, with your Sovereign,
Who, cannot of your Loyalty Complain.
For through the thickest of your troubles you,
Have showed your sellfe to him a Subject true
And Providence that duty to requite, Sir Will. Craven Sir John Swymerton. Sir
John Gore Sir Rob. Ducy Sir Abra. Reynoldson,

Has now at last restored you to your right:
For which the Company, and City may,
Give hearty thanks for this so happy day. Sir Ric Brown.

The speech ended the Scenes quitts the place and is conveyed into Cheapside,
and make a halt about the Cross till further Order.

His Lordship drawing near the Nagg^-head Tavern is received by another scene,
seated like a wood in the midst whereof is a formal building like a house, on
the stage or vacant part whereof several persons in the habit of Wood-men and
Wood-Nymphs disport themselves, dancing about the Royal Oak, never out of
Action.

Upon the Companies approach, one of the Woodmen calls to the rest of his
Companions*

Mass, Gotheard, Mass, Logred, zen, ye, zen, ye, what a warren a gay voke are
yonden, Zibb, Tibb, Trot, Zquot Wab, Win, Nab, Gin, what done o mean wullo be
zen the vine zight, ho ho, what pestilent gay vellow's yon a Woodman it is the
Lord Mayor.

Che vears en not vor all that cham resolved to zay zomething tollen

A speech to the Lord Mayor in a Rustic Dyalect.
A Meezle take thee, Neame cham glad to zee thee
Give me thyn hond, how don mine Aunt I prithe
Had Iche but knowno this zame gaudy Noone,
Chad don'd on viner Clothes and viner Shoone.
The One we but Rusticks are, and woods done keep,
Ich know there is vine woole elongs to sheep,
And zome there are now were the vinest thread
In zimple Russet ha bin zheltered,
We Woodmen ha been honest Chil zay that
And a vart vort, cham sure that Iche know what
The sturdy Oak ha bin a vrend to zome
It wud no bow, no more o that but Mum
Iche hope your Lordship takes all in good part
Cham sure Ich love a Woodman wi mine heart,
" In down right English Sir you are welcome to
" that place of Honor has been long your due.
The Speech ended Mr. Dyamond and others tumble and after the Sumerset is
performed the Rusticks and the Nymphs make a great shout, at which noise (as
from the Wood) Silvanus the Rural God, attyred like a Huntsman, about his wast
a girdle of leaves, his Habit Russet, on his Breast a starr to distinguish him,
and in his hand a Bugle horn, Accosts the Lord Mayor in these words.

Sylvanus Speech.
No more of noise as you respect our Care At which they all bow. To the Lord
Mayor. Between Staff. and Salo^

Forsake your Natures, and be still as Air.
Er'e Time had laid his Iron Coat aside
And Peace was rather ravished then a Bride,
Whilst that the subtle Eye of Tyranny
Greedily hunted after Majesty,
The Close Trunck of the Oak did entertain
And so secured your royal Sovereign,
Twice she received him in her happy womb
At his conveying hence and coming home
As though a greater knot had been t'unty
Then e're was twisted in the Prophesy.
The pendant leaves his head enshadow'd round
(...) only to conceal but to be Crowned,
The Bark that brought him, flew* as though it meant
To steal upon us without Times consent*
Thus does the Oak draw a fresh breath from Fame
By the instinctive virtue of his Name;
And consecrated ought to be to Jove
Producing both the effects of Peace and Love.
The Rusticks shall be civilized and now
Embrace what heretofore they would not allow,
About the Royal Oak the Nymphs shall sing
And dance a measure to their Lord the King,
The Woodmen so refused, shall on each Tree
Inscription make of their quit slavery,
And for a Girdle in a Garter sense
'Bout the Oak write Honey soit qui maly Pence.
Which done his Lordship passes toward the East end of Cheapside, where he is
entertained by another scene, being a Chariot drawn by a Lion and a Lamb, in
the Chario is placed three figures, PEACE TRUTH and PLENTY the Chariot is
driven by Time who salutes his Lordship in these words:

Times Speech.
My Lord,
TIME is the Register of all Men's Acts
Or good, or bad, their virtue and their facts.
Although by violence he has bin made
a Property unto the Traitors Trade;
Yet Time (that every secret brings to light)
At last (you see) their Treacheries requites,
Pays them in their own Coin, the bloody stamp,
(...) has turned Surgeon, cured them of the Cramp.
" Treason may flourish for a little space,
" but Time at length writes Villane in its face.
Whilst Julius Caesar's death Revengless past
Rome nere was free from sword Fire Plague and Wast
Till Time revealed the Murderers and then
their better Genius did return again,
And closed up Ianus Temple. Though Time has
bin cursed by those had neither wit nor faith,
But rashly did conclude he would never mend
And therefore in despair did wish his End.
Yet he for every sore and malady
has brought you home a Sovereign remedy,
Occasion is his foretop, which had some
long since taken hold of, bad days had not come,
It Was not Times fault, but theirs that let him go,
He Is swift of foot, their Courage was but slow,
You have been wise in this (Sir) to your praise,
Oretak'n Time, renewed the Alchion days,
With such Alacrity, that poreing on
with serious eye, my Enchyridion
That monstrous Murder that outfac'd the Sun
Appears to me as yesterday but done,
So home has Justice followed them, their heels
are now tript up, each his own horror feels.
This was Times work, though wisdom was the scout
without Time nothing could be brought a bout
Peace is restored; Truth does in Triumph ride,
(not long since scorned, forsaken, and denied.)
Plenty their handmaid follows to maintain
the Majesty of the Heroic Train
It is a Maxim (Traitors bitter Cupp)
" wars makes Theives, but Peace does hang them up:
Since Time has done such Cures by Providence,
let him not be abused under pretense
Of this, or that, seeds of Phanatick brains;
But while you Govern (Sir) hold in the Reins;
And while the glorious starr-bestudy'd sky
retains a light your Fame shall never die.
The speech ended, his Lordship and the whole Attendance pass down the old
Jury, through Catt-eaten street and Ladd Lane, Mayden-Lane, from which place to
his Lordships house a Gallery is a made by the Company of the Merchant-Taylors,
on the North and on the South by the Gentlemen of the Artillery and their
Attendants, where another scene a Rock is placed on the top whereof is seated
a figure representing Peace and upon his Lordships entering into his house,
Peace salutes him from the top of the Rock.

PEACES SPEECH
AFter so many various Sceans of strife
Horror and Mischief acted to the Life,
By those that seemed to own th shapes of men,
But Monsters rather were of Caucus Denn,
Whole sulphurous Nostrells breathed into stine Jarrs,
Sword, Fire, and Famine, the effect of Wars,
Peace (that their hate and fury did exile)
Is once again returned unto this Isle,
And with her brought Truth to Illuminate,
Your hearts to nourish Love, and banish Hate.
Truth is the Center wherein all things meet,
The Chard by which Wisdom directs her feet,
The ground of science; scale to Charity,
The unmoved Rock; Tip of Eternity.
While Peace and Truth do flourish in the Land.
Plenty shall wait on it with a full hand,
Ceres shall cram your Barns, and Bacchus Crown
Your Boles, no more of Penury be known,
Trade long since dead revived, shall be again
By the Vertual Influence of your Sovereign,
Whose gracious Beams, like to the Sun does shine,
Upon his Subjects by a power divine,
Whose Immence, Majesty, and Glory shall
Outlast Times Age, and the Worlds Funeral.
Blessed be the happy minute of his birth
That elevates our Joys above the Earth.
Flora the Queen of May shall honored be
By all the sons of Lyrick Poesy,
And you my Lord, whose Prudent care has bin
Employed in the great work to bring him in,
Keep Faction down, suppress Seditions seed,
The bag being broke did the Imposthume breed,
Let it not gather to a head again,
Infectious matter dwells in a bad brain:
So shall your years and happiness increase,
Live in your Countries, love and dye in Peace.
The Speech being ended the Companies hasten to their Hall, the Gentlemen of
the Artillery take leave by their several Vollies.

In the undertaking of this days Triumph were employed, (by a person of
approved Judgment, who designed and modelled, the several Fabrics, and
Structures thereof) Capt. Andrew Dakers Paynter, Mr. William Lightfoot,
Paynter, Mr. Thomas Whiteing Joyner, Mr. Richard Clear, Carver, all of them
being the Cities Artificers, and deserve in their several qualities, ample
Commendations.


