THE TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE BEHAVIOR AND CONFESSION OF Alice Millikin, Who was
Burnt in SMITHFIELD On Wednesday the 2d. of June, 1686. For HIGH TREASON, in
Clipping the Kings Coin.
VEry many are the Instances of this sort of Crime; yet sad it is to observe
that nothing can deter, those who exercise themselves in t^^^ ^ort of
Wickedness.

Yet, if rightly considered, it is one of the most abominable Practices. For it
is not only a great dishonor to His Most Sacred Majesty and a perverse Abuse
of his Mercy and Clemency, bestowed on some Offenders of this kind; but
likewise the Community may suffer much prejudice by it, although the greatest
Mischief Redounds to the persons themselves, who Diminish the full Weight of
His Majesty's Coin: This Crime exposing them to an Ignominous Death, through a
covetous desire, to satisfy their Excess in a sinful Course of Life,
whereupon, that Saying of Solomon is visited, That Gain gotten by Deceit, is a
Vanity tossed too and fro, by them who seek Death: And that the Treasures of
Wickedness profit nothing, though they bring not the fears of the Unjust
presently upon them.

Thus has it happened to this person, of whom we give you this Relation.

Alice Millikin, Condemned the last Sessions for High Treason, she Confessed
the Fact; she was about Forty Years of Age, she was Born in Herefordshire, and
was brought up to make Gloves: She also Married a Glover in that Country; where
they lived some time, but afterward (as she told the Ordinary) her Hu^band
growing very froward to her, and wholly neglectful of his Trade, she was forced
to work hard, to get a Livelihood for her self and her Children, of which, one
Son is left, viz. David Millikin, who also was Condemned the last Sessions for
the same Fact, but has since received his Majesty's most Gracious Reprieve: He
was Bred up to the Trade o^ a Glover.

She said, That she often prayed to G^d to change her husbands heart, and to
Reform his wicked Life: But good Counsel made him more Obstinate and Averse
from his Duty to God and Man.

After a considerable waiting for his Amendment (but in vain) She left dwelling
with him, and came to London, where she was frequently hired to Wash and
Scour, and sometimes to be a Nurse keeping; But Poverty grew upon her, and
with it a Covetous mind, so falling into Bad Acquaintance, she lost her former
Employment, and living idly, she met with one Mrs. Chaston, who used the wicked
Art of Clipping, and is not yet Apprehended. She said she knew no more of the
Gang; but the said Mrs. Chaston, enticed her to assist her in Clipping: At last
she set up the Practice of it her sel^; which she now Laments too late, but
Begs God's and the King's Pardon of it.

She was much troubled, that she had been very neglective of God's Law^ and
breaking the Sabbath, and that she has not at any time adheared to the motions
of God's Spirit, nor improved the Opportunities she had, tending toward
Salvation.

That she is now truly sorry, that she bath misspent so much precious time and
delayed her Repentance, and that were it to be Redeemed, she would give all the
World, were it in her Power.

O^ Sunday, the Ordinary observing how false, slight, and fickle, Criminals
Vows are, of Repentance and Reformation, after they are sp^^ed, Preached upon
the S^xth Chapter of Hosea and the Fourth Verse, O Ephraim, what shall I do to
thee? O Judah, what shall I do with thee, for your Goodness is as the Morning
Cloud and as the Early Dew, it puffs away

In Prosecution of which Text, he laid down many Remarks, whereby we may
suspect Vows and Resolut^ons of Reformation, not to be sincere, and how it
comes to pass, that they are so often broken, with Directions so to make them
as to fix them, that they may become truly practicable. I mention this, because
Alice Millikin the Clipper, was very much affected with that Discourse, and
that Prayer made in her behalf. Indeed she appeared very penitent at any time
when she was prayed withal: And since the few days respite she has had, more
than she expected; the Ordinary asked her, if that Favor did not make her
secure as if she should not Dye.

She answered, No; She blessed God, she had improved the Time, having been
extraordinary earnest in Prayer, and does extremely desire to Repent thoroughly
of all her Sins se^ret and known. The Ordinary was early with her on Wednesday,
the day of her Execution, and exhorted her not to deceive her self with false
hopes of a Blessed eternity.

He instructed her more fully in the Nature of True Faith and Repentance, and
inquired many things relating to her Soul, which were too long here to give an
Account of.

She said, after I had prayed a considerable time with her; that she was much
troubled about the manner of her Death; yet said, that she hoped the Lord would
roll away the Reproach of it, because she truly desired to be reconciled to
him; And though she had not that Assurance of God's love, which she longed
after, yet she blessed the, Lord she had inward support of mind by cleaving to
Christ in her Death. She hoped he had made satisfaction to Gods offended
Justice for all her provocations of Him. She confessed they had been many and
great, and desired to Mourn that she could grieve no more for every sin, which
she endeavored to call to mind, and be rightly penitent for.

The Ordinary staid with her till the Sheriffs Officers came to demand her.
Then about Ten of the Clock she went on foot, guarded to the place of Execution
in Smithfield. I went along with her thither: She exhorted the People to take
Warning by her, not to offend in the same, or any other way against the known
Laws: she prayed for her self, and the Ordinary after that prayed for her, and
endeavored to comfort her, for she seemed very penitent. Afterward she went to
the Pedstall, and was fastened by a Rope to the Stake, with an Iron Hoop about
her middle, that she might sink through into the pile of Fire, after she was
stifled.

She warned all to beware of a Covetous heart, and in poverty not to distrust
God's Providence, but to fear and serve Him, and then the like fatal end will
not attend them.

After this I took my Farewell of her, and left her to be executed according to
Law.

Dated this 2d of June, 1686. Samuel Smith, Ordinary.

This may be Printed,

R. P.
June the 2d. 1686.
LONDON, Printed by E. Mallet, next Door to Mr. Shipton's Coffee-house at
Fleet-Bridge, 1686.


