Dr. TRIGG'S SECRETS, Arcana's and Panacea's

Approved by his long admired Experience and Practice, whereby he wrought such
wonderful Cures.

With his most Experienced Secrets particularly appropriated to Women's
distempers.

Now after death to fulfill his request published as a Legacy to his PATIENTS.

By EUGENIUS PHILANTHROPOS^

London Printed by R. D. for Dixy P^ge at the Turks Head in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange. 1665.

Imprimatur

Ex Aed. Lamb. Mart. 25. 1665.

G. Stradling. S. T. P. Rever. in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Archiepiscp. Cant. a
sac. domest.

TO THE READER.
THis opus posthumum (if it can properly be so Epithized) or if not, I leave to
the more curious then useful or profitable Critiks to spend their aerie brains
about determining; it is out of the Simpathy of Philanthropos to the good of
Man kind thus prescribed; and I Will assure you it is not filius ante but post
patrem; These not imaginary but real Experiments: Their virtue such that mauger
all oppositions of the Monopolitan furies, have run through all the raging
billows, and quicksands of swelling superbity. The Godess Urania has far more
splended Rays then to be folded up in a skin of Parchment, nor certainly ever
can brook any such confinement as to mix the buds of those more ingenious
spirits who endeavor to approach her Altar; but I will leave the Explication
hereof and applicato^, unto your candid interpretation; the matter herein is
made plain, it being communicable to every intellect, and as the intended
Legacy of the Author to his Patients freely spread amongst them; making good
this Adage, Vox Audita perit; litere scripte manent. So when man ceases by
vocal advice to communicate any further assistance to his fellow travelers in
this terrene Stage: His solid Experiments, dipped in this sable dye, which Age
nor Envy can never waste preserves the benefit thereof to everlasting
posterity; So then Reader take this and make use of it, and as you find the
profit, so return your respects to

Your affectionate (...)
May 1. 1665.
Mr. Turner's Dentrifices for the Teeth, and his Antidote against the Plague,
and all infectious airs and disseases; Essex and Kentish Agues and Foggs: Sold
by Mr. Rooks at the Lamb and Ink bottle at the East end of S. Paul's Church.

THE TABLE.
A. AChes. 52. 63. 129. Ague. 53. 59. 106. Adders stinging. 92.

B. Bruises. 12. 29. 52. 98, 99. 95. 9^. Difficulty of breathing. 24. 26. 27.
Weak Back. 40, 41. 82. Sore Breasts. 43. Burning. 47. 101. 86. 93. Blisters.
48. 98: Bleeding at Nose. 98. Broken Bellies. 77. Barrenness. 141. Baldder.
156, 157.

C. Catharres. 5. 23. 70. Consumption. 27. 34, 35, 36. 65. Canker. 28. 69. 73.
Cough. 35, 36, 47, 38. 82. Chin cough. 39. 102. Cramp. 52. 108. Chilblanes.
107. Chollick. 77. 95. Convulsions. 81. Choler. 95. 171.

D Drunkenness. 8. Drowsiness. 16. Dropsy. 27. 60. 97. 104. 71, 72. Easy
Delivery. 92.

E. Noise in the Ears. 20. 93. Ears pained. 21. Sore Eyes. 30, 31, 32. 73. 94.

F. Frenzy. 8. 12, 13, 14. Fevers. 14, 15. 164, 165, 166. 168, 169. 170. 173,
174. Flux. 30. 40. Face swelled. 44. Fistula. 44. 69. 73. Felon. 45. Falling
sickness 52, 53. 77. 87. 99. 101.

G Plague in the Guts. 27. 139. Glister. 49, 50, 51. Gout. 52. 80. Green
sickness. 60. 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147. Purge. 81. Pissing a bed. 148.

H. Head, 1. 2, 3, 4. 100. 108. Headache. 5. 9. 10. 82. Hypothondriack
Melancholy. 7. Heart to comfort. 25. 74. Hectic Fever. 175.

I. I^ch. 48 101, 73. 93. Iaundies. 10^. Impestume. 73. Knees swelled. 54. 71.
Kings Evil. 95.

L. Lethargy. 15. 101. Liver to open. 27. 60. 67. 99. Lameness. 52. Liver to
cool. 106. Lungs. 92. 93.

M. Maidenheads. 128. Melancholy. 7. Memory. 8. Mouth sore. 29. Milk to dry
up. 43. Mother. 47, 48. 82. 185. 141. Morphew. 108. Megrim. 173. Measles. 65.

N. Sore Nipples. 107. Nose bleeding. 77.

O. Old Sores. 63. 58, 82, 83. 88, 89. Obstructions. 80.

P. Ptissick. 26. 90. Pissing blood. 29. 109. 161. Pin and Web. 32. Plague. 64,
65. 178., 179, 180. Palsy. 85. 109, 110, 111, 112. Piles. 102. 82, 83.
Plurisee. 80. Pox. 149, 150, 151.

Q. Quinzey. 74.
R. Rheum. 23. Ringworm. 56. Rickets. 64. 83. Reds to stop. 75. Running of the
Reins. 151, 152, 153.

S. Sleep loose. 27. 40. 62. 79. Scurvy. 27. 60. 71. The Stones diseases. 41,
42. 104. 154. Sirrup of Sider. 45. Scalding. 47, 48. 101. Shingles. 48.
Sciatica. 48. 57. Swellings. 54. Surfets. 65. Stiches. 80. Stone. 157. Scar.
57. Scald head. 101. 91.

T. Sore Throat. 160. Terms to provoke. 127. 138. Terms to stop. 138.
Vertigo. 6. 8. 19.

V. Urin to cool. 29. 157. 158. Unguen. aureum. 54. Vomiting blood. 75. Vomits.
76. Ulcers. 94, 155. 160.

W. Whites. 41. 105. Wounds. 62, 63. Worms. 101. Wind. 81. Women's Privities.
129, 130, 131, 132. Womb. 133, 134, 135, 136, 137.

Y. Yard. 156. 159. 161, 162.
Experience is the best Mistress.
Of Diseases in the Head; and first for pain in head through Heat.

INternal Medicaments appropriated to this distemper are the distilled waters
of roses, of violets, purslain, water lillies, nightshade, gourds: Conserves of
roses, violets, citron, water-lilly flowers, sirrups of the same, condited
lettice: Of these may be framed julips, and potions, as need requires, as for
example.

Take sirrup of violets, one ounce and a half; barley water ten ounces,
oxys^cchar; half an ounce: mix it for two or three doses. or

Take sirrup of violets, one ounce and a half, of water lillies and endive,
each si^ drams, water of lettice, succhory and endive, each two ounces, make it
a julip for two doses; emulsions may be made of the four greater cool seeds,
poppy and lettice. as

Take of the four greater cool seeds husked half an ounce, of white poppey two
drams, barley water half a pound, lettice water three ounces, water-lilly water
and rose water each two ounces, syrup of violets, an ounce and a half, mix them.

For an Electuary.

Take of the Conserves of violets and roses, each one ounce, of water lillies
and condited lettice, each half an ounce, spec. dia marg. frigid, half a dram,
with sirrup of violets, make it an Electuary.

For outward Medicaments, for hot distempers in the head.

Take oil of violets, roses and nymphea, each an ounce, waters of roses,
letlice and sengreen, each two ounces, vinegar half an ounce, make thereof an
Epithema to be applied to the forehead.

For a Liniment for the same.

Take juice of lettice and plantain, each half an ounce, muscilage of the seeds
of fleawort, drawn with lettice water an ounce, oil of red roses and water
lillies, each one ounce and a half, boil them till the juice be consumed, and
make of it a Liniment for the temples and forehead.

Unguents are also proper for this distemper, of which I commend this that
follows.

Take oil of roses one ounce and an half, of poppy half an ounce, juices of
sengreen and nightshade, each one ounce, vinegar half an ounce, boil them till
the juices be consumed, and then add of white and red sanders, each half a
dram, muscilage of the seeds of flea wort half an ounce, camphire dissolved in
rosewater six grains, wax as much as will serve to make it an ointment.

Of distempers in the head, caused by cold.

When a disease springs from a contrary cause, use a contrary remedy so^ the
cure, though many medicines wo^^ sympathetically, and effect the cure th^^ way,
yet more do it by antipathy: Th^^ distemper must be resisted in the beginning,
and then it may easily be m^^stered, but if it reign long, till it get^ it
were an habit, the cure will be pe^^formed with great difficulty, if (...) all.
Simple medicines conducing he^^ unto, are piony roots, gathered the Moon
decreasing, and the roots of fennel, orris, cloves, aristolochia, angelic^
white dittany and valerian: And of leave^ use rosemary, marjoram, rue, betony^
sage, hysop, balm, calamint, organy pennyroyal, primroses: The flowers o^
stoechas, are in this much commended which carries away black, choler an^
phlegm, cleanses the brain nerves an^ organs of the senses, resists all
disease thereof being used either in potion, b^ decoction, or fomentation.

A Composition for cold distempers of the Head.

Take roots of piony and cloves, ea^^ two drams, marjoram, betony and sage,
^ach one handful, flowers of stoechas, two pugils, rosemary, lavender, each
one ^ugil, seeds of annis and fennel, each ^ram, boil them in a quart of
fountain water till a third part be consumed, then ^et it three hours in a hot
place, and then train it; and add to the colature of su^ar three ounces, and
clarify it for a ju^p, and in the boiling, hang in a cloth of ^loves, mace and
cinnamon, each half (...) dram, nutmeg two scruples.

A Cephalic powder for the Head and Catharres.

Take nutmegs, cardimoms, cinnamon, ^ignum aloes, each one dram, piony seeds and
coriander prepared, each two drams, ^pecies diambrae, and dia mosco dulcis,
^ach one dram, white amber half a dram; make thereof a powder.

For a Bolus for the Headache.

Take of the Conserves of betony and ^age, each one ounce, mithridate two
scruples; make it a Bolus for two doses to be taken at two nights going to be^^

For loss of Sleep.

Take sirrup of poppy and nympha^^^ each one ounce, lettice and purslain w^ter,
each one ounce and a half, speci^^ di^ margarit frigid. half a scruple; m^^^
them, and take it going to bed at twice.

A Julip for the same and to cause Rest.

Take violet and lettice water, each one ounce and a half, confect. alkerme^^
half a scruple, sirrup of poppy and vi^^ lets, each half an ounce; mix them
fo^^ one draught.

For the Vertigo.

Take of the Conserves of lilly co^^vally, betony, sage, rosemary, of each one
ounce, of marigolds, half an ounce species diambrae, diamosch. dull. each o^^^
dram, carroway seeds, cloves, cubeb^^ nu^meg, each half a dram, oil of
ci^namon two drops with sirrup of stoe cha^^ or rose water and sugar; make it
into a^ Electuary, whereof take the quantity (...) nutmeg, morning and evening.

Against Melancholy.

Take diacatholicon an ounce, confection hamech, a dram and a half, dissolve it
in a sufficient quantity of the water of borrage, balm and hart's-tongue, and
strain it for one draught.

A potion for the Hypochondriach Melanco^ly.

Take roots of cichory, borrage, scorzonera, polipody, bark of the roots of
capers, each two drams, roots of asarabacca one dram, of the leaves of balm,
betony, ceterach, fumitory, maidenhair, camedryos, each half a handful,
centaury the less, sea wormwood, each one pugil, of the cordial flowers two
pugils, citron pill, two drams, annis and sennel seeds each one dram, sena, and
dodder of time, each three drams, raisins one ounce infuse them in a close
vessel, in a hot place, and afterward boil them in balneo, to the colature
add of the juices of roses, borrage, and sumotery, each four ounces, sugar one
pound; mix them, and make it a clear drink, whereof take about 4. ounces at a
time.

An external application for pains in the head, and to cause rest in Phrensyes.

Take two handfulls of dog bryar leaves, four spoonfulls of wine vinegar, as
much breast milk, a nutmeg sheed small, infuse these in a dish, upon a chafing
dish of coals, and apply it to each side of the head upon the temples.

For the Vertigo and to restore lost Memory, and to comfort the Brain.

Take eyebright with the flowers, half an ounce, mace prepared with vinegar one
dram, coriander prepared 4. scruples, betony one scruple, cubebs half a
scruple, white sugar candy six drams, make them all into a fine powder, of
which take in the morning one dram, upon a piece of bread first dipped in maligo
wine, or with a poched egg.

Of the Drunken Headache.

This too too common distemper the Ethics call a voluntary madness, and
phisically it is termed morbus officialis, an official disease, it being the
office of too much drink to disturb first the Brain and internal senses; and
afterward to leave its dire effects in every member of the body; it obstructs
the ventricles of the Brain, with the relaxation and softness of the Nerves,
caused by the ascension of a multitude of vapors, elevated from the excess of
meat and drink, or wine and strong drink especially: This produces various
effects according to the diversity of men's natures; of which it is not my
purpose to treat here, nor to prescribe Medicines for to encourage Drunkards;
since in this perverse Age, Vice is degenerated into Virtue, (I mean it is
reputed so) it being counted an incivility, and sometimes worse to refuse to
pledge a health: But I would advise all men to beware of this mischief, yet if
it chance to surprise them, use this following Julep.

For the Drunken Headache.

Take of the seeds of Cabbages, plantain, purslain, each one dram; coriander
prepared half a dram, hartshorn burnt, a dram and an half: Make thereof a fine
powder, whereof take one dram in the juice of lemons, oranges, sirrup or
conserve of quinces or barberryes.

Or the following Julep.

Take of the powder before prescribed, one dram, sirrup of citrons, one ounce
and an half, of quinces one spoonful, waters of savory and endive, each an
ounce and an half; mix them for a Julep.

The following Electnary I also commend for the same distemper, and likewise
good to prevent Drunkenness, if you take of it before drinking.

Take Conserves of roses, rob of ribes, that is of currants, of barberryes, each
half an ounce, of bitter almonds blanched and bruised twelve, cabbage seeds one
dram, red roses one dram, with the sirrup of water lilies, make them all into
the sorm of an Electuary.

Of a Bruise or blow on the Head, or hurt thereof by a fall.

In the cure hereof, have these three things always before your eyes: First,
endeavor to mitigate the pain: Secondly, to hinder apostemation; and thirdly,
if there be a wound, to have a care to the cure of it; and regulate the patient
by due order of diet: If there be repletion in the body, then opening of a vein
is convenient; but if age and strength will not admit of that, then have
erecourse to the use of Clisters; to prevent an inflammation by evacuation of
the humors that way. as,

Take Pellitory, mercury, centory the less, with the flowers, sena half a
handful; boil them in fountain water, and in half a pint of the decoction
dissolve half an ounce of the Electuary, called benedicta laxativa, two drams
of oil of roses, and a little salt, and give it for a Clister.

For a discussing and digesting plaster for the Head.

Take Camonile, melilot, southernwood, and marjoram, each one handful, red
roses dried, wheat bran, meal of beans, lupines and barley; each half an ounce,
mirtles and cipress nuts, in number fifteen, or for want thereof, two drams of
balaustins, bruise what is to be bruised, and boil them with their juice, till
the herbs be soft, then work them together in a mortar, till they come to the
form of a Cerote, to which in the end add a little oil of camomile and dill;
then beat it again and apply it hot to the place affected.

Eor he Phrensy.

This affection sometimes follows a Fever, and it sometimes is in the
substance of the Brain: For the cure it is good to use frictions and ligatures
to the extremityes, to hinder the ascension of the humors: Lotions are
likewise proper to be used to the Feet.

There must be also used in this case, both Clisters and Blood letting; though
not by admittance, yet by compulsion; and the Clister must be held in with a
cloth, and to be repeated after bloudletting.

A good Clister for the Phrensy.

Take Mallows, and marsh mallows, both herbs and roots, pellitory, mercury, and
sena, each one handful, barley one pugil, five prunes, manna half an ounce,
seeds of gourds and sennel, each one dram; decoct them all in a sufficient
quantity of water, and in the Colature dissolve in it half a pint, of diacassia
half an ounce, benedict. laxativa three drams, solutive sirrup of roses three
spoonfulls, oil of violets one ounce and an half, the yolk of one egg; mix
them for a Clister to be injected at any time: Then on the next day after blood
letting, use this Laxative.

Take solutive sirrup of roses simple, two ounces, sirrup of villets six drams,
borrage water one ounce, lettice and anniseed water, each one ounce and a half;
mix them for a potion.

An Apozeme for the Region of the forehead.

Take leaves of Lettice, plantain and vervain, of each an handful, roses and
violets, each two pugils, red saunders two drams, seeds of plantain and sorel,
each two drams, six poppy heads; decoct them in equal parts of water and wine
vinegar, wherein dip linen clothes or a sponge, and apply it to the region of
the forchead.

Another frontal for the Forehead in the Frenzy.

Take of the distilled waters of red Roses, lettice, vervain, betony and water
lillies, each two ounces, of plantain and nightshade water, each one ounce, of
juice of purslain and sengreen, each one ounce and an half, wine vinegar one
ounce; mix them, and therein dip warm linen clothes and apply it to the
forehead: This is singular good fo such as are distracted with raging Fevers.

For the Lethagy.

This is the prodromus, or forerunner of the Appoplexie, and consequently of
death it self: For cure hereof Castoreum is much commended to be given in drink
with Oxymel: or thus,

Take of Castoreum, two scruples, mace one scruple; powder them very fine, and
give this powder in betony water, and sirrup of citrons.

An excellent secret for the Lethargy.

Take the conserves of Rosemary flowers, and primroses, each half an ounce, of
roses three drams, of aromaticum rosatum, one dram, laetificans Galeni, half a
dram, with sirrup of Stoechas, and juice of citrons; reduce them into the form
of an Opiat; whereof may be given, the quantity of a nutmeg at a time.

An excellent Powder to be used against the disease called Caros, which is
excessive drousiness, and profound sleepiness, which stupifies the senses, and
hurts the action of the principal parts.

Many have I known so subject to this distemper, that at all times and in all
places wheresoever they have sat down they have fallen asleep, but for remedy
of his evil.

Take Nutmegs, mace, galanga, each two drams, citron pill, cinnamon, the true
costus, of each one dram, the flowers of stoechas, roses, rosemary and
camomile, each one dram and a half, schenanth, spike and lavender, each half
(...) dram, Castoreum one scruple; bruise them into a ross powder, and in a
fine linen bag, apply them to the Corona^ Suitor, which is that which women
call the mold of the head; if it be sewed, o^ quilted in a fine cloth, the
patient may wear it at any time either at home o^ abroad under a Cap.

Having now prescribed a remedy for too much sleeping; I have provided helps
for them also, who are subject to too much watchings, how they may procure
sleep.

Pills to cause Sleep.

Take species diambrae two scruples, diamorsc. dull. half a dram, white amber
one scruple, ambergrease three grains; mix them, and with sirrup of citron
pills, make four and twenty pills thereof, whereof let the patient take three,
going to bed.

For the same intention, I commend the following Electuary.

Take of the Conserve of water Lillies half an ounce, styrax Calamita one
scruple, pearls prepared two scruples, ambergrease and musk, each one grain;
with sirrup of violets; make them a mixture, which may be reserved in a glass
for your use, when occasion requires, taking the quantity of an hazel nut.

A Decoction profitable for the same intention, especially where too much
watching have caused a distillation of Rheum upon the Lungs.

Take two Dates, three heads of white Poppy; make a decoction there of in a^
sufficient quantity of Lettice water to three ounces, then strain it, and
dissolve in the Colature half an ounce of sugar o^ roses; which give for a
potion whe^^ need requires.

Observe always in these kind of distempers, these remedies are not to be
exhibited, before the humor be evacuated by purgations; especially if the
affect be with matter, and much vapors are ascended to the head, which as
there be diversity of causes which procure distempers to the head, so there is
needful various kinds of purgations, as the diversity of the cause requries.

For the Hypochondriac Melancholy.

Take sirrup of Fumotery half an ounce, of endive and betony two drams, juice
of citrons one spoonful, waters of cichory, dodder and sumotery, each one
ounce, and a little cinnamon water; which mix for a potion, and use it as often
as occasion requires.

For the Vertigo First ^ake this purging Bolus, viz.

Take of Diacassia three drams, hiera pi^ra two drams, rhabarb in fine powder
one scruple; make it into a Bolus with a little sugar.

Then use the following Electuary to repress the vapors from the Head.

Take of the conserve of piony flowers, half an ounce, conserve of marjoram one
ounce, of roses two ounces, marmelad of quinces one ounce, citron pill half an
ounce, one mirobalan embelic, half an ounce of rob de ribes, coriander prepared
one dram, fennel seeds anniseeds and piony roots, each half a dram, red coral
one dram, Mastich one scruple, with sirrup of citrons make it an Electuary,
whereof take the quantity of a nutmeg after supper and dinner.

For singing and noise in the ears, which causes deafness.

Take white Hellebore, Castoreum, each two drams, costus a dram and an half,
rue and marjoram, each one dram, bitter almonds five drams, Euphorbium half a
dram; let them be bruised and boiled in wine over a gentle fire an hour, then
strain it and drop thereof into the ears; and let the patient receive the
vapor of this decoction, into the ears. or

For noise in the Ears.

Take oil of Bays three ounces, strong vinegar one ounce and a half,
Castoreum in powder half an ounce, juniper berryes one dram and an half; let
them boil in a close vessel till the vine gar be consumed, then strain it
through a cloth, and drop of it into the ears; but in all administrations to
these parts, observe his rule.

Never admit above three or 4. drops at a time of any medicine to be applied
into the ears, for a great quantity especially of any oleaginous matter is
hurtful; therefore always let your applications be very liquid that they may
the easier pass in and out, and not stick within to offend the head; and apply
all things warm only, neither hot nor quite cold, and always when you use any
new medicine or dressing, be sure to cleanse the parts well that no filth
remain of the old.

For grievous pains in the Ears.

Warm new Milk is good to be dropped into the Ears, so is the white of an
egg, being beat first into an oil o liquor, and the oil of sweet almonds,
and the oil of the seeds of white poppy.

A Composition for pain in the Ears.

Take of new Breast Milk if it can be had, two ounces of the whites of eggs
beaten half an ounce, goose grease a dram; mix and work them together and drop
into the ear, a drop or two at a time warm; oil of earth worms is very
profitable for this grief, a drop or two thereof being dropped into the Ear.

For the same, an excellent experiment.

Take a great Onion, and make it hollow, and put therein of Castoreum and
Euphorbium, each half a scruple, opium six grains, and fill it up with oil of
bitter almonds, oil of dill, or such like; and roast it under the embers; then
press out the juice and strain it; and use it a drop or two at a time.

For a Catharre.

The defluction of humors, from the head to the inferior parts, is generally
called a Catharre. Those that would be acquainted with it; let them contrary to
their use, but go wet and cold in their heads and feet, and they may quickly
have a companion that they cannot be so soon rid of again: It is usually the
forerunner of a Consumption, destroying the lungs by the distillation of
humors, like as rain dropping into an house through the roof, rots the wood
and timber and whatever it falls upon within.

To cleanse and evacuate the humor in a Catharre.

Take of the whitest Agarick half a dram, of rhabarb a dram, manna a half an
ounce, ginger a scruple and a half, diagrydium three grains; bruise and infuse
them all in waters of annis and fennel, each three ounces; boil it gently, and
strain it, and in 4. ounces of the liquor dissolve two spoonfulls of solutive
sirrup of roses, and one spoonful of cinnamon water, and give it the patient
warm in the morning.

Pills to suppress the Rheum.

Take of the mass of pills Cochie and Mastichine, each one scruple, Agarick
trochscated a scruple and a half, Trochis alhandali 4. scruples, with the
infusion of gum dragon in cinnamon water; make it into pills and roll them in
the powder of lignum aloes, and take one at a time, using them often; and that
the matter may be driven downwards from the superior parts, take a scruple of
these pills going to bed, or more or less according to the condition of the
patient; and in the morning take as much more, drinking after in a draught of
Maligo wine.

For stoppings of the Breast and difficulty of Breathing.

Take Licorice half an ounce, elecampane five drams, raisins stoned, and fat
figs, each one ounce, jujubes half an ounce; make of these a decoction in the
waters of scabious and hyssop, each half a pound, flowers of the sloe-tree, and
anniseed, each three ounces; in seven ounces of strained liquor dissolve of
manna five drams, and add to it a spoonful of cinnamon water, strain it all
through a linen cloth, and let the patient take half of it in the morning
fasting, and the remainder the day following.

A Drink to strengthen the Heart and resist Poison.

Take Cinnamon two drams, cloves, nutmegs, mace,(...)grains, cardamoms, each
one dram, zeadoary three drams, citron pills, galanga cubebs, long pepper, each
half a dram; bruise them grossly, and infuse them 24. hours in a linen bag, in
two quarts of the best wine adding one pound of pure fine sugar, whereof let
the patient drink every day a draught before dinner.

For trembling of the heart.

Take of the five opening roots, each half an ounce, cichory one ounce, bark of
Tamariske and citron pills, each one dram and an half, tops of wormwood, cardus
benedict. sage, each one handful, of the cordial flowers, each one dram;
bruise them and infuse them in wine, and drink of it as occasion requires.

A cordial Electuary to comfort the heart.

Take two handfulls of Borrage leaves, as much bugloss, one handful of endive,
rosemary, time, savory, hyssop, each half an handful; boil these in three
pints of fair water till half be consumed, then strain it, and add one pound
and an half of sine sugar, a few cloves, half an ounce of cinnamon, and a
quarter of an ounce of ginger finely beaten; then to boil it to the thickness
of honey, and take as much as a hazel nut in a morning when need requires.

For the Ptisick an approved secret.

Take a pint of Honey and put to it an ounce of flower of licoris, a quarter of
a pound of currants bruised, an ounce of sweet fennel seeds bruised, and a dram
of the flower of elecampane; stir all these together over the fire into the
honey, and so reserve it for use, taking the quantity of a nut at a time.

An opening Drink, helping shortness of Breath.

Take two quarts of running water, put into it two handfulls of unset hyssop,
and tops of rosemary, scabious, lung wort and maidenhair, each a handful, 10.
figs sliced, a root or two of elecampane; boil it to a quart, and sweeten it
with sugar candy, and drink it as occasion requires.

A Diet drink to cleanse the blood, open the Liver and Spleen, and is excellent
against the Scurvy, Dropsy and Consumptions.

Take Egrimony, speed well, liverwort, scurvy grass, water cresses, each a good
handful, of monks rhabarb and red madder, half a pound, horse radish,
liquorice, sassafras, each 4. ounces, sena 7. ounces, sweet fenel seeds an
ounce, 4. nutmegs; pick and wash the herbs and roots and bruise them, and put
them in a bag in three gallons of Ale, letting it work in the Ale, and at 4.
days old drink a pint of it every morning, and at 4. in the afternoon.

An excellent potion for the Plague in the Guts, and all Fevers and distempers
of Melancholy and adust Choler.

Take Sena 6. drams, rhabarb two drams, cremor tartari half a dram, sweet
fennel seeds a dram, a little cinnamon, infuse them all night in half a pint of
white wine, in the morning set it on the fire till a boil, and then strain it,
and dissolve in it over the fire an ounce of manna, then strain it again, and
add to it an ounce of solutive sirrup of roses, and so drink it, and about two
hours after drink some thin broth.

For a Canker, or any heat in the Mouth.

Take of red Sage and Rue, each an handful, of sorel and groundsel, each half
an handful, cut the herbs small and stamp them in a wooden mortar, then take
roach allom the quantity of a walnut, white coperas as much as a hazel nut, and
burn them together, take also as much coperas and allom unburnt, stamp this
with the herbs very small, then boil them in a pint of running water, with
three spoonfulls of English honey, till half be consumed, then let it run
through a strainer into an earthen veslel. when it is cold put it in a glass,
and when you use it you must gargle with it hot 3. times aday; you may lay some
of the herbs that remain in the strainor to the forest places if you see cause.

For the htat of the Vrin.

Take the rinds of Hazel, sleep them in ale or beer, and drink it for your
first and last draught every day and at any other time of you please.

Another for the same.

Distill Purslain in a common still, and drink of that water a quarter of a
pint every morning, sweetened with white sugar candy.

For a Strain causing one of spet blood.

Take a pint of good Sack, and set it on the fire, and put into it a good piece
of fine sugar, let it so stand till it be ready to burn, (burn it not) then
brue into it the yolks of 4. new laid eggs, strain it (bruing it continually
till it be like a cawdle, then drink a draught thereof first and last both
morning and night: Sirrup of Comphrey is likewise very good for the same
purpose.

Another for a Strain.

The powder of Corral and powder of rock amber beads, each half a dram, make
them up into past with a little gum dragon, conserve of red roses; this you
must eat morning and evening, and be ware of violent stirring, wine, women, and
meats with pepper.

For a Flux.

Put one ounce of whole Pepper into a quart of new milk, boil it unto a pint,
and drink half a pint thereof every morning, and fast three hours after it.

For the Pin or Web, or any other Rheum in the Eyes.

Take two new laid Eggs, make a hole in the crowns, put the whites, into a
sawcer, then put away the yolks, and take one of the shells and wash it with
fair water, and put half the white into it, then put in as much white coperas
as a peace, and so much roch allome, then fill the egshell up with the rest of
the white, the hole of the crown of the egg must be no bigger then a two
pence, that you may put it up with a little white dow, then wrap it in wet
paper, and rake it up in warm embers till it be very hard, (and if it be an
hour in rosting it is the better) then strain it very hard through a strong
cloth, drop one drop of this water into your eye lying on your back, morning
and night, and also at 4. of the clock if need be.

Another for the Eyes.

Take of Hogs grease very new 2. ounces, steep it in rose water six hours, then
wash it twelve several times in good-whitewine, wherein lapis caluminaris has
been quenched 11. times, let the grease sleep six hours in the last of the
wine, then take Tutia well prepared and finely powdered one ounce, of the stone
Hematitis well washed a scruple, of aloes well washed and made into powder
twelve grains, powder of pearl three grains; mix all this in your grease with
a little fennel water, till it come to a perfect salve, put as much as an
ordinary pins head, into the corners of both eyes next the nose, and anoint the
eyelids therewith when you are in bed.

For Rheum in the Eyes.

Take white Archangel flowers, and put them into sallet oil, and heat them
upon a chasing dish with coals, and lay them to the nape of the neck as hot as
you can suffer them.

For blear'd and watery Eyes.

Take a quarter of a pint of the purest running water, and put it into a vial
of glass, and put thereto 2. drams of the best white coperas, being first
beaten into very fine powder, then put thereto three or 4. spoonfulls of red
fennel water, (or for want thereof as many of the newest sprigs of red fennel
growing next the root) this being done lute up your vial close, and set it in a
skillet of fair water and warm it so till it begin to boil, then take it out
and so keep it for your use, let the patient morning and evening have a drop
dropped into the eye.

For a pin or Web in the Eye.

Take Nightshade, Balm, red nettles and vervain, each a like quantity, and a
good handful of bay salt, and beat them altogether, and if the right eye be
sore, lay it to the left wrist, and so on the contrary; If you make it in May
or June, it will keep all the year.

For Heat in the Eyes.

Take the white of a new laid Egg, beat it very well, then let it stand and
settle, and take a spoonful of the clearest thereof and as much breast milk,
and so much red rose water as both of them, mingle them together, put them into
a glass, and when you use it, warm a little thereof blood warm, and dip two
rags (folded three or four times double) being very fine and bind on the eyes
when you go to bed, and in the day time wash therewith your eyes as often as
you please.

A Water for sore Eyes.

Take six drams of Tutty, made into fine powder, as much aloes in powder, as
much fine sugar, a pint and a half o^ whitewine, as much white rose water put
all these into a pottle glass, stop it very close and sun it a month, shaking
it very well twice or thrice a day and so keep i^ for your use.

An Electuary for a Consumption.

Take Elecampane roots one pound wash and scrape them clean, cut them i^ little
square pieces, then take of radishe^ one quarter of a pound, slice them thi^
and as many wardens as the weight o^ both these, slice them thin likewsie,
mingle them altogether laying them in laine^ in a pipkin, and put between every
lain^ of them some honey, lute up the pipki^ close with past, bake it in an
oven with household bread.

A pint of Honey may be enough for this, when it is cold beat it to a pulp, in
a stone mortar, and take it at night an^ mornings as an Electuary.

A Julip for a Consumption, or any weak body.

Take a Capon that is fleshy and not fat, dress him clean, cnt him into about
ten pieces, wash him in white wine, cut every piece by it self, put into every
piece a small skewer that the flesh may not touch the bottom, then put them
into a jugge with a narrow mouth that will hold three pints or a pottle, then
put to it twenty raisins of the sun stoned, 4. dates quartered, two large
maces, a sprig of rosemary, stop it up close with a cork, then lute it with
paste and tie a cloth over that also, that no air get in, then set the jugg in
a pottle of water, and set bricks about it that it may not stir, so let it boil
six hours at the least, keep the pot full of water to the neck of the jug,
which may be done by having other water ready heated to fillit, then take it
out of the pot, and when it has cooled half an hour pour out the julip, if
there be any fat in the top, take it off, put to this ten grains of amber
grease in powder stir them together, and so put it up in your glass, and take
three spoonfulls of this at a time, warme^ when you go to bed, if the patient
be to^ hot, put less or leave quite out the ambe^ grease.

An electuary for the Consumption of the Lungs.

Take a pint of Honey, set it on the fire and skim it clear, put thereto two or
three ounces of searc'd licoris, as much anniseeds well dried, half a grain o^
long pepper, the lungs of a Fox beaten and searc'd, two or three leaves of Col^
foor cut like Tobacco, and a quarter o^ an ounce of the root of burdock, boil
the till it grow somewhat gluttinous, tak^ hereof (on a knives point) morning
an^ night, in your bed and other times yo^ please, letting it go leisurely down.

For a Cough or shortness of breathing.

Take a quart of running water, boyl^ therein a handful of unset Hyssop, till
(...) come to a pint, strain it and put thereto (...) quarter of an ounce of
licorice sliced, half a handful of raisins of the sun sliced, two figs, two
dates, sweet-fennel seeds and anniseeds half an ounce, boil these till almost
half be consumed, then let it run through a strainer and sweeten the liquor
with white sugar candy to your liking, so drink of it four spoonfulls at a time
bloud-warm, in the morning a quarter of an hour before you rise, and at night
when you are in bed lie on your back and let it go leisurely down.

A Sirrup for a Consumption and the Cough.

Take two hanefulls of Elecampane, slice it thin, boil it in fair water half an
hour, shifting it two or three times, then take two or three handfuls of
coltsfoot, two or three hand fulls of liverwort, one of hartstongue, and two
handfulls of egremony, one of maidenhair, a quarter of a handful of maiden
hyssop, an ounce of China roots sliced, two ounces of licorice sliced, a
spoonful of anniseeds, a good handful of raisins of the sun stoned, 4. or 5.
figs sliced, two spoonfulls of French barley bruised, and boiled in two or
three several waters; put all these into a pottle of running water, boi^ them
until more then half be consumed, and strain the liquor from the drugs, and
put in your elcampane boiled before, and a pound and a half of sugar, boil it
to a sirrup and keep it in a galley pot for your use.

Another for the like.

Nettle seed and Elecampane dried and beaten small, and make them into an
Electuary with honey, and give the patient every morning.

A China broth for the Consumption.

Take three quarts of fair running water, put it in a pipkin and set it over
the fire till it be ready to sees, then take it off and put into it a small
handful of China and another of Sassafras chips then stop it up close, and let
it infuse upon embers 24. hours, then take a middle sized Cock chicken, and
flea off the skin, and cut it open in the back and take out the garbage, and
beat it with a pestle, let it touch no water but put it into the China liquor
and put to it six or seven leaves of colts foot and a little maidenhair, thirty
raisins of the sun stoned, and a little stick of mace, then let these boil
together till half be consumed, let it be strained again very hard, set it on
the fire, boil it and skim it again, make it sweet with sugar and lemons, or
sower, as the patient likes it, and let him take of this a good draught morning
and evening, and at four of the clock in the afternon if he please.

For the Chin Cough.

Take a handful of Rue, and stamp it, then mingle it with English honey and
make it into a kind of Conserve, give it mornings and evenings, and afternoons
and nights to bedward, as much at a time as a damosin.

Another.

Roast an Egg rare, dress it and put as much flower of brimstone into it, as
will lie upon a twopence, mix it well together, and let the patient sup it
every morning fasting.

A Broth for the Spleen.

Take of Couch or grass roots, succory roots and fennel roots, of each half an
ounce, of the bark of caper, and bark of tamarisk, each two drams, currants and
capers (washed from the salt) each three drams, boil these in the belly of a
chicken with a branch of time and put in the bottom of a white loaf in the
boiling.

For a Flux.

Take bark of an Oak from the tanners, grind it to powder and searce it, put it
into new milk and byl them very well together, eat of this pap every morning
and what other time you please.

Another being also good for a weak back.

Take Bread that has been baked half a year at the least, grate it, put it
into a quart of new milk with a good stick of cinnamon, and a good piece of
isinglass, boil it to a pint, and thereof morning and evening you may eat what
you please.

For a weak back or the whites.

Take an ounce of Cinnamon, one ounce of white comphrey roots, one ounce of
polipodium of the oak, three ounces of white sugar candy, make all these into
powders, then mingle them together, and take so much at a time thereof as will
lie upon a sixpenny piece, every morning for the space of five days, and so
likewise in the afternoon, and drink a draught of red wine an hour after every
taking, this may be taken longer if there be cause.

A Plaster for swelling of the Stones.

Take a pretty quantity of Cows dung, and sees the same in milk, then make a
plaster thereof, and lay it meetly hot upon the swelling.

Another.

Take Comminseed, Anniseed and Fenegreek, of each a like portion, sees them in
ale, and stamp them, and temper them with fresh May butter, or a little oil of
olive, and so apply it to the sore.

Another for swelling in the Stones in the beginning of the grief.

If there be much inflammation in the Cods, you may make an ointment of
plantain the white, the yolk of an egg, and apply it to the grief twice or
thrice in a day, when the pain is intolerable and the party of good age, and
of a strong complexion, (if the premises will not help) make a plaster after
this sort, viz.

Take Henbane leaves a good handful, mallow leaves a handful and a half,
sees them well in clear water, then stamp them and stir them, and with a
little of the broth, bean flower, barley flower, oil of roses and camomile
sufficient, make it up, and put it on the swelling lukewarm, henbane is good
as Avicen says, to dissolve the hardness of the Stones by a secret quality.

Take new Milk and white bread, grate it mallows and red rose leaves, of each a
handful, then chop them and boil them together, till it be thick, then put in
honey and common turpentine, spread it on a cloth and apply it to the sore.

Another.

Take a quart of fair water half a pint, of oatmeal, two handfulls of
smalledge, half a handful of red nettles, boil all these well together being
first chopped, and put in about a quarter of a pound of sheeps suet minced, stir
them well on the fire, and apply part thereof as hot as the patient can suffer
it.

For an Ague in the Breast, as also to dry up the Milk.

Take good Aquavite, linseed oil, warm them in a dish upon a chafingdish with
coals, dip therein two cloths cut fit for the Breasts, and lay them on the
Breasts, as hot as can be endured; lay also a little lump of flax two under
each arm, being well dried and warm, and so dress the Breasts therewith both
morning and evening.

For a Swelled Face.

Take Rosemary leaves mince them, boil them with milk and oatmeal to a pultice,
then put thereto a spoonful of honey, apply it as often as there is cause, and
as hot as the patient can suffer it.

For any ordinary Soreness.

Take a pint of Ale yest, as much groundsel as comes to 2. or 3. handfulls, and
as much household leven as the quantity of an egg, set the yest upon the fire,
and then crum the leven into it, and let it boil a little while, then put in
the herbs, and the roots of them, and let it be boiled thick, and lay some of
it on a cloth every morning, and this will both draw and break and heal.

For a Fistula.

Take a handful of Sage, wash it, pick and shred it, boil it in a pint of
milk, till it be tender, then take a pennyworth of flax seed, beat it to
powder, and when the sage is tender thicken the milk with the flaxseed, when it
is bruised put thereto a pennyworth of oil of roses, use this two or three
days twice aday.

For a Felon or Boil.

Take half a pint of new Milk, and put some grated bread into it, boil them
together, then put thereto a handful of smalledge, and as much southernwood
being chopped fine, so boil them to a pultice, when it is boiled stir into it
almost a spoonful of castle soap scraped.

Sirrup of Sider.

Take of French Barley one spoonful, boil it in several waters, of madder
root, asperagus root, red dock root, each two drams thin sliced, Ceterach
epithimum, each half an ounce, polipody six drams, maidenhair two pugills, the
tops of hops a quarter of a handful, egremony and fumitory, each half a
handful, sweet fennel seeds, anniseeds, each one dram bruised, mechoacan one
dram and a half, the juices of 4 handfulls of scurvy grass, and of two
handfulls of watercresses infuse all these in 3. pints of sider (made of
pippins and pearmains) one night, in the morning boil them over a gentle fire,
until a pint or thereabouts of the liquor be left, strain it through a linen
strainer into a basin: Take three ounces of this decoction and infuse into it
being warm, half an ounce of the best Rha. thin sliced, and two scruples of
chosen cinnamon bruised 24. hours in a silver cup well covered, the next
morning strain out the liquor from the Rha. put into the rest of the former
decoction: This decoction being mixed with the infusion and juices put into a
skillet with a pound of powder sugar and the white of an egg well beaten and
mixed with some of the liquor, this don, set it on a fire of hot coals, when it
boils up take it from the fire, and strain it through a cotton strainer, then
the skillet being clean washed again, put in your liquor and let it boil over a
gentle fire unto the consistence and height of a sirrup: The dose or quantity
to take of this Sirrup may be one ounce and a half every morning, and it will
be the more effectual if you add one scruple of Cremor Tartari.

For a Burn or Scald.

Take three handfulls of the green rind of elder, as much green goose dung,
beat these and boil them a pretty while in a pound of fresh butter, strain it
out very hard, and keep it in an earthen pot, stir it till it be almost cold
and when you use it melt thereof and anoint the sore with a feather, and lay a
primrose leaf next the sore.

Another.

Take Barrows grease, sengreen, chop them and bil them altogether, then strain
it and use it.

For the Mother.

Take a great red Onon, and cut a round hole therein, and fill it with black
soap, and roast it in embers till it be soft, and apply it to the navel as hot
as may be.

For the same,

Give the patient a good draught of fair water and wheat flower mingled
together, and burn partridge feathers before them in a chafing dish with coals.

A precious ointment good for all kind of Sciaticaes, dry itches, strains of
sinews or veins, for any scalding with gunpowder, shingles, blisters, venoms.

Take Organy, mints, thyme, hyssop, spike leaves and flowers, wormwood, feather
few, orpen, sage, vervain, costmary, betony, mary golds, stems and flowers, of
each of these a good handful, and of valerian two good handfulls; take the
tenderest part of these leaves from the hard-stalks, stamp them very small, and
sees them in a clean pan with two pound of barrows grease finely tried, and 4.
ounces of deers suet, stir it diligently the space of an hour, then strain it
into a clear pan, let it stand all night, next morning let out the water
underneath the ointment, taking none but the purest of it, set it on the fire
again, melt it, skim it clear, put thereto 4. ounces of deers suet, then take
it of, let it stand all night as before, then warm it a little, then pour it
out on a clean board, cleanse the bottom of it very clean, so you may keep it
for your use 7. years.

A Glister.

Take posset drink a pint and a half, boil therein Mallows, violet leaves and
lettice, of each half a handful, camomile flowers and a little anniseeds
bruised; let it boil half away, strain out the liquor very well, and put
thereto sirrup of roses, and sirrup of violets, of each two spoonfulls, course
sugar three spoonfulls, so make a Glister.

Another.

Take Mallows, beets, mercury, violet leaves, pellitory of the wall, and course
wheat bran, of every one a handful, of camomile flowers or the leaf it self,
half a good handful, of fennel seeds bruised two spoonfulls, boil them in a
quart of fair water, till more then half be consumed, then strain it well, and
dissolve therein 4. spoonfulls of sallet oil, (or for want thereof as much
butter) and two ounces of course sugar: but if the party be troubled with wind,
you may add thereto a spoonful of bay berries bruised, and sheeps feet,
sodden with the wool on.

Another.

Take three quarters of a wine pint of Milk warm from the Cow, keep it in the
same temper by setting it in a skillet of hot water till you have dissolved
therein two ounces of diacatholicon, and two ounces of red sugar, and put it
into a bag, etc.

Another Glister.

Take a pint of Milk, a quart of beer, and make clear posset drink thereof,
take off the curd, then put therein of annisseeds, and sweet fennelseeds each
two ounces, boil these to half a pint or somewhat more, strain it out very
hard, and put thereto two ounces of brown sugar candy and a little bay salt
with two spoonfulls of oil of olive.

Another.

Take an ale-quart of Barley water, made with cool herbs and raisins (as you
make it usually to drink) set it on the fire; then flea a small cock chicken
(being still warm) and draw it, break all the bones, so put it into that
water, with a handful of endive, as much violet leaves, a succory root and a
parsley root, one ounce of fennel seeds bruised, boil all these to half a pint,
then strain it out hard, and beat into it the yolks of two new laid eggs, one
ounce of sugar candy, and two spoonfulls of oil of sweet almonds, and so apply
it.

All these Glisters to be taken in the body neither too hot, nor yet too cold,
(as milk from the cow) and unless in cases of necessity they are to be given
about 4. of the clock in the afternoon, and about two hours after the patient
is to drink a draught of mace ale; when it has done working they must go warm
and early to bed after a light supper.

For aches, bruises, gouts, stiches, lameness, cramps, etc.

Take Sage, Rue, of each one pound, of wormwood and bays each half a Pound,
sheeps suet clean picked three Pound; all these must be stamped together till
none of the suet be seen, but all one; then put thereto of oil olive pure and
sweet a pottle, and work it well together, and after put it into a fine basin,
and cover it and let it stand eight days, and then take it out, being moldy
as it is, break it into a brass pan, making a soft fire under it, always
stirring it till the herbs begin to become cracking and hard, and then take it
off, and set it a little while to cool, then strain ir, and when it is
strained, put into it an ounce of oil of spike, and anoint the geies therewith
warm.

For the falling sickness.

Take that part of a woman's Scull that grows on the hinder part of the head,
(it is whiterthen the rest of the scull) beat it very fine, and give the party
(in sirrup of violets) as much as a pease at a time.

To draw the ague from any sore or in the legs.

Take Wormwood and henbane, each a handful, shred them into a quart of milk,
put in a handful of red rose leaves, and as much beaten oatmeal as will make
it a pultice, a good quantity of swines grease, and when it is well boiled
apply it to the sore very hot.

For an old sore that runs with thin substance.

Take a pint of running water and a pint of whitewine vinegar; boil therein a
new piece of hollan, thus bath with this liquor a place a hands breath above
the sore, and lay the cloth on the same place, and this you must do morning and
evening until the cure be wrought.

For swelling of the knees or any other place that comes of wind.

Take a quantity of Sack, put therein some rosemary and a little pepper grossly
beaten, put them all into a stone jugg, stop it close, and let it boil softly
until half be consumed, then bath the place therewith that is grieved as hot as
may be, then dip a linen rag and bind it on the place two or three times aday,
keep it warm.

To dissolve any knob or hard swelling in the face or elsewhere.

Take of the whitest Frankincense, and the white of an egg, beat them to a
salve in a stone mortar, spread a plaster therewith, and so apply it to the
place grieved.

Unguentum aureum.

A prectious ointment for all manner of aches and bruises, and also for the
gout.
1. Violet leaves and flowers. 2. Primrose leaves and flowers. 3. Cowslip
leaves and flowers. 4. Elder leaves and flowers. 5. White Lilly flowers. 6. St.
John's Wort. 7. Rag-wort. 8. Mug-wort. 9. Sage. 10. Neppe. 11. Smalledge. 12.
Margerome. 13. Lavender. 14. Southernwood. 15. Rosemary. 16. Rose leaves blown.
17. Rue. 18. Lavender-Cotten. 19. Featherfue. 20. Tansie. 21. Lovage. 22.
Mynts. 23. Camomil. 24. Thyme. 25. Clarye. 26. Oak of Jerusalem. 27.
Penniroyal. 28. Safron of the willow. 29. Hyssop. 30. Balm. 31. White Mynts.
32. Marygolds. 33. Piony leaves. 34. Bay leaves. 35. Dill.
Take of each of the above named herbs and beat them in a mortar, and put them
in a pan, with a pottle of sweet sallet oil, and a quart of white wine, then
set it over the fire, and let it boil softly until the wine be consumed,
stirring it all the while, then take it from the fire and let it cool, then
strain it through a linen cloth and keep it in a glass; and when you anoint
herewith, you must chafe it in by the fire, and apply next to the place the
bladder of a hog, that the cloth drink not up the oil.

For a Ringworm in the neck.

Take hounds dung that is white and dry, stamp it, put it in an earthen pot,
with wine until it be thick, spread a plaster therewith an lay it on the
sore, and let the patient blood under the tongue.

For the Sciatica or other ach.

Take a quart of the oil of Trotters, and put thereto three handfulls of
neppe, two handfulls of camomil, boil them all on a soft fire, till it be very
green, then strain out the herbs, and put into it an ounce of ginger finely
beaten and searced, and stir it together as it cools; chafe the place that is
grieved against the fire with this ointment both morning and evening.

For a Scarre felstered with blood.

Taka Liturgy of gold 4. ounces, oil olive, young swines grease, each of them
two ounces, green coperas a quarter of an ounce, ceruce half an ounce; sees
them altogether on the fire (continually stirring them with an ashen stick, the
bark pilled off) put it being in the boiling three ounces of white wax, when it
^^ boiled to a pure white, take it off st^^ stirring it till it be cold, then
anoint you^ hands with oil, and work it up by roll^ wrap it in an oyled paper
and keep it in ^ close box.

A green salve to heal any sore.

Take Bears grease white washed and well drained half a pound, of the leaves
and flowers of S. John's wort, of knotgrass, of each of these a handful, of
ashen leaves to handfulls, beat them first very small, and then mingling them
with the grease beat them again, and boil them stirring them a good space, then
put in two ounces of yellow wax, and a spoonful of turpentine, so let them
boil a little, etc.

A Salve for a new wound.

Take Elecampane, english to bacco, the great orpin, Jacobs ladder, each half a
handful, beat these in a mortar very fine, then put to them above half a pound
of barrows grease, beat them well together until the grease be very green, and
then set them on a soft fire, a good space, stir^ing it continually: then put
to them yellow wax and rozen, of each one onnce, ^urpentine a spoonful,
camphire and al^oes, of each a little quantity, boil them ^ltogether, then take
them off and strain them, etc.

A medicine for the Ague to apply to the Wrists.

Take leaves of red Sage, as much rue, and about twenty leaves of stock
gilli^lowers; cut all these very small upon a trencher, then take two pieces of
calves deather (about 4. fingers breadth, etc.) and spread the same with venice
turpentine, and upon the turpentine spread the aforesaid herbs, and upon the
herbs you must scrape a nutmeg, so lay it to the wrists, an hour before the
fit, and when you perceive the fit to be coming, let the party eat a toste
sopped in aquavite and pepper.

An approved mediciue for the Gr^^ Sickness.

Take one ounce of the filings of ste^^ and lay it in soak 4. days in the best
wi^^ vinegar, then set it before the fire to dr^^ and then beat it to powder
and searce ^^ very small, then take two ounces of aniseeds, and beat them and
searce the^ small, and one ounce of fine sugar beaten and searced, then mingle
them together and put into it a spoonful of fine powder of red coral, there
must be twice a^ much of these anniseeds and sugar a^ there is steel, to be
done by weight.

They must take it in a morning fasting, as much as will lie upon a knive^
point at three times, and as much more two hours before supper, and use mode^
rate exercise after it till they sweat, and^ when they have done all, then take
^^ purge.

Purging-Diet Ale for the Dropsy, Scurvy, to open the Liver and Spleen.

Take Dock roots, madder roots horse radish roots, smalledge roots, po^pody of
the oak, sarsaparilla, caper and tamarisk roots, of each 2. ounces; of
agrimony, maidenhair, ceterack, tamerisk, ^curv ygrass, brooklime,
watercresses, green wormwood, each one good hand^ull, sena six ounces,
hermodactills and mechoachan, thabarb, agarick, each one ^unce; anniseeds,
sweet fennel seeds, ^oots of fassafras and licorice, each one ^unce, cinnamon,
ginger, mace, each ^alf an ounce; prepare these and put them into a thin bolter
bag, with two ^adds of steel, and hang in 4. gallons of new ale, letting them
work together with a pint of the juice of sea scurvy grass, and as much of
watercresses.

They are to drink morning and evening large draughts, so as to work 3. or 4.
times daily, also morning and evening to take two or three pills of steel.

Bleed the patient first at the liver right arm vein, and let out seven ounces
of blood, etc.

To purge the Spleen.

Take Ceterack, liverwort, miden hair, of each a handful, polipody of t^^ oak
six ounces; sena, bark of capers, ^^ marisk, ash and bay each one oun^^ and
roots of fennel, licorice and sm^^ ledge, as much seeds of sweet fenne^ and
nettles each two drams; boil a^ these in two quarts of the juice of scun^^
grass and watercresses, till all be ver^ thick, keeping it clean skimmed^ then
strain it and infuse in it over a gent^ fire, of rabarb thin sliced one ounc^
ginger sliced two scruples, safron a dram^ strain it very hard, and set it over
the fir^ again, and put into it half a pound o^ prunes clean washed with a
pound and ^ half of sugar, and a branch of rosema^^ being stewed; take 4. or 5.
spoonfull^ and 3. or 4. prunes in the morning, and at going to bed.

Agreen salve for any kind of ach, sore strain, bruise or wound.

Take two pound of Mutton and Bee^ suet tried together, and two pound of yellow
rosen, two pints of neats-foot ^oyle, and as much verdigrease bruised as ^will
cover it, and put them altogether into a brass kettle, and set them over a
clear fire to boil a good pretty while, and stir it till it be well melted, and
turn green, then ^ut the clearest of it out into a pipkin, and so it will keep
a year or two; if you will have it to draw a sore, you must put a little more
rozen into it, if it be to anoint any part that is bruised or streined, or any
^ch, then you must chafe it in with your hand, against the fire, and lay a warm
cloth upon it, etc. Probatum.

The yellow Salve good for any Sore.

Take Turpentine and Rozen each two ounces, and bruise them very small, and put
them into an earthen red pipkin, of bees wax one ounce, cut it very small, of
neats-foot oil two ounces, set them all on hot embers, stir them so, as they
may incorporate, skim it very clean, and take heed they boil not.

A Drink for the Rickets.

Take a handful of the bark of Ivy, ^^ much of the bark of ash, a good handf^^
of tamarisk, put it into two gallons ^^ beer, and when it is a fortnight old,
l^^ the child drink it with meat, and at ^^ times for six weeks or two months
sprin^ and fall.

To this quantity of drink slice a^ ounce of Rhabard, and put it in with the
bark.

A Direction for the Plague.

Take three pints of malmsey (or ^^ Muscadell) and boil therein sage and ru^
each a handful, till a pint be wasted, the^ strain it and set it over the fire
again, an^ put to it three penniworth of long pepper, and half an ounce of
ginger, and ^ quarter of an ounce of nutmegs, all be^en together, so let it
boil a little altogether, then put therein 4. penniworth o^ mithridate, two
penniworth of treacl^ and a quarter of a pint of the best ang^lica water.

Keep this carefully, and take of it morning and evening, a spoonful or two if
you be already infected, and swear upon it, if not, then take once aday one
spoonful, half in the morning and half in the evening all the plague time:
this is (if God please) sufficient, for there was never man, woman or child,
that it deceived. It is not only good for the common Plague called the Stiches,
but for the small Pox, Measles, Surfets, and other the like diseases.

The Snail Water.

Take a peck of garden Snails, and wash them in a great bowl of beer. Then make
your chimney very clean, and pour out half a bushel of charcole on the fire,
and when they are kindled thoroughly, then with a shovel make a hole and pour in
the Snails, scutter some of the fire amongst them, and so let them roste as
long as you hear them make a noise, then take them out, and with a knise and a
course cloth, pick them and wipe all the green froth from them very clean, then
put them into a stone mortar and bruise them shells and all, take also a quart
o^ earth worms, slice them and scour them with salt, then wash them and bea^
them to pieces in a stone mortar, then (the pot being made very clean, upon
which you set your Limbeck) put them into it, and about two handfulls of
angelica laid in the bottom, and two handfulls of selendine upon that, then put
in a quart of rosemary flowers, and also put in of rosemary flowers, and also
put in of egrimony bearsfoot, dock roots, of the bark of barbara tree,
woodsorrel and betony, of each two handfulls, rue half a handful, fenegreek
and turmerick, each an ounce, saffron well dried and beaten to powder the
weight of six pence, then pour in three gallons of the strongest ale you can
get, great measure and cover your pot, and let it stand so all night in the
place where you mean to put fire under it in the morning, then put to them
three ounces of cloves beaten to powder before you put fire to it, and put
thereto six ounces of hartshorn grated or filed to powder before you weigh it,
you must not stir it after the hearts horn is put into it, least it go down to
the bottom, then set on the limbeck, and receive your water in pints, or it may
be distilled in balneo, the first water is the strongest, and it must be
received by it self, the last is the smallest, and may be amended by putting in
of the strongest when it is used.

The water must be given to the patient in the morning, who must fast two hours
after it, and not sleep but use moderate exercise upon it, or it may be given
bet wixt meals two hours before each meal, he must take two spoonfuls of the
strongest with 4. spoonfulls of ale or white wine, and when you give the
smallest sort, you may give as much water as drink.

A Purge yet comfortable both for the Spleen and Liver.

Take a knuckle of Veal and cut away all the flesh and fat, then break all the
bones and wash them very clean, put it into a pipkin to a gallon of water, set
it a seething, scum it so long as any thing will arise, then put to it a
quarter of a pound of raisins of the sun stoned, and half as many currants, two
fennel roots, three parsley roots, one succory root, half a handful of
burrage, as much succory and endive, a like quantity of violet leaves and straw
berry leaves, half a handful of liverwort, as much scabius, let all these boil
together till half of the broth be consumed, then take it off the fire, put
into it half an ounce of the best sena a quarter of an ounce, of epithimum half
an ounce of tamarisk, then set it on hot embers and let it infuse three hours,
then take it and strain it into a basin, and take it for your use; this will
serve 4. days to take warm at seven of the clock in the morning, and at 4. in
the afternoon.

For any pain in the Ears.

Take a quart of new Milk, and put therein a good quantity of cloves bruised as
will make it strong, then set it on the fire in a clean skillet, and let it
boil till it has taken all the strength out of the cloves, then take it
boiling hot off the fire, and put it into a narrow mouthed pot, and hold it to
the Ear of the party that the sum may go into the head, and if it be cold heat
it again, use this for an hour together or more, as you shall find cause.

Te heal a Fistula, or any old Canker or Sore.

Take a gallon of Smiths water strained through a cloth, then take half a grain
of white coperas, and 4. penniworth of camphire, boil them together till the
third part of the water be consumed, cleanse it into a bottle or glass, if it
be a fistula, cleanse it with a squirt and so wash it to the bottom, dip a
cloth in the water being warmed and lay upon it, roll above and beneath the
place that it go no further, if it be not an open sore or a canker only, wash
it and dip a cloth and lay it on warm, and dress it thrice aday, and by Gods
grace it will heal it.

A General Cordial for the Catharh and Consumption.

The particulars are these; Avens, mousear, verven, S. John's wort, red sage,
plantain, hyssop, herb John, violet leaves, betony in the wood, rosemary,
smalledge seed an ounce, two ounces of elecampane roots sliced thin, worm wood,
marygold and the leaves, balm of the finest, spearmint.

Take of each of these herbs a pound weight, and infuse them in nine gallons of
strong ale, a day and a night, then draw it through a limbeck, and you shall
have an excellent water, which when you purpose to drink of it put in some
sugar.

It is good generally for any disease of the head and body and much
strengthening the stomach, drink it at all times as you will drink strong
water, and God bless it to you, Amen.

For Swelling in the Knees.

Take Rue and Burrage, and stamp them together with honey, and so apply it to
the Knees.

A purging Diet-drink, good against the Scurvy, Dropsy, and also to restore
and strengthen the body, to be used spring and fall.

Take Sassafras, lignum rhodium and mace, each half an ounce, china roots one
ounce, licorice six ounces, anniseeds 4. ounces, Roman wormwood, sage,
rosemary, betony, balm, mugwort, tormentil roots, Lady mantle, egrimony
clotsfoot, sanacle, mouseare, scabius, herb Robert, ragwort, marsh mallow
roots, and columbine roots, of each of these one handful; cut and bruise the
wood and roots, break or cut the herbs; boil all in six gallons of strong
ale-wort, till two gallons be consumed, then put the woods and herbs into six
gallons more of second wort, boil that likewise with a few hops, and strain it
out, and put in an ounce of rhabarb, and three ounces of sena, so set it on
working and tun it up with a rha^ and sena bag, drink thereof once, twice, or
thrice in a day as ye find cause, after ten days standing.

For an Impostume in the head, Dropsy, Fever, and all manner of aches and
Impostumes in the head.

Take Spikenard two penniworth, grind it, and boil it with vinegar, when it is
boiled and cold, put to it honey and mustard a sawcer full, mingle them
together, use a spoonful at once, hold it in your mouth two Creeds, then let
it out into a basin, use this when you go to bed, three days together.

Pro Gonorkaea, ad purgand. Renas.

Rec. Cassia fistula extract. sirrup de Nymphea two ounces, rhab. pull. two
drams, fiat electuar. recept. mane in posset. cum vino albo, 4. dies.

Post rec. A quarosar. rub. one pound, album de ovo recent. saccharum album and
muscat. 9. s.

For old wounds, Ulcers, Cancers, Scabs, Itch or Fistula's.

Take Virginia Tobacco stalks one pound, spring water one gallon, boil it to
three pints, put it into a bottle, the longer you keep it the better, the way
to use it is to wet a linen cloth in the water a little warmed, and so bath
well the wound or place, do so morning and evening.

For the M grim.

Take Betony, vervain, camomile, featherfue, wormwood, rosemary, each alike,
put them into a bag, and sees them in white wine, and lay them to the head as
hot as you can suffer it.

The Ointment for Reumatick Eyes.

Take hogs lard well tried 3. ounces. set to steep in red rosewater six hours,
then wash it twelve times in whitewine wherein lapis Tutia and lapis
Caluminaris has been quenched, then add the Caluminaris and Tutia being beat
red hot and quenched in whitewine (as before six times, each an ounce, lapis
hematitis two scruples, aloes twelve grains, seed pearl prepared six grains,
mix it very well together and add a little fennel water as much as shall be
necessary to make it liquid enough.

Anoint the eye lids herewith, it will take away spots or any thing that
grows about the eyes.

For a Quinzy.

Take album Grecum pull. a handful of rue beat small, boil them in sweet sallet
oil till they become thick, then spread it on a cloth, plaister-wise, and
apply it to the sore from ear to ear.

Against the trembling of the Heart, and Convulsion fits.

Take powder of Gold 1. penniworth, six penny weight of Amber, six penny weight
of pearl, six penny weight of coral, bezoar five grains, half an ounce of piony
root, twelve penny weight of a scull of an anatomy, pull. take as much as will
lie upon a six pence in a spoonful of endive water every morning, and drink a
good draught after it.

Take Cassia one ounce, Rha. pull. ten grains, sirrup. violar. recept in posseto
cum vino albo.

To boil Turpentine.

First wash it, then boil it in plantain or rose water till it come to the
consistence of wax, then take it out and reserve it, make pills; take 3. or 4.
when you go to bed.

For miscarrying, and to stop the Reds.

Take Claret wine a quart, mousear, shepherds purse, each a handful, boil it
altogether with a stick of cinnamon, and sweeten it with sugar, and drink a
draught of it often warm.

To stay vomiting blood, by reason of an inward bruise.

Quench Steel in Milk and drink it often; or take sperma-ceti in any warm
drink, once or twice.

For a Vomit.

Take roch Allom one ounce pull. and put it into half a pint of small beer, let
it stand warm all night, and in the morning strain it, and let the patient
drink it off, this fetches phlegm off the stomach.

Another.

Take five grains of Stibium in powder in 4. or 5. spoonfulls of whitewine, and
let it stand all night, and in the morning take the wine clean from the
stibium, and drink it fasting, and when it has once wrought, take posset drink
between every vomit.

To break a Boil or Felon.

Take a great Onion, cut the top, and take so much out of it as you may fill it
up with half a spoonful of Jeans treacle, and cover it with the piece again,
bind it with a thread, and roast it in the embers in a brown paper, and when it is
roasted, break it and mingle it together, and lay some of it to the Boil which
you would have broken.

For a Child with a broken Belly.

Take Polipody of the wall, Juniper berryes, comphrey roots, the skin of the
yolk of an egg, dry all these and beat them together, then put them in a pint
of good ale, and give it every day warm.

For the falling sickness.

Take Gold, pearl, coral, and bezoar, and amber, each 4. scruples, piony seeds
as much, and single piony roots alike quantity, pull. omnes, and take as much of
the powder as will lie on a groat, in a spoonful of white endive water every
morning fasting, until a quarter of the water be in such manner spent.

For the Colic.

Take Figgs good store, and new mustard made with vinegar, stamp them well
together, and put them into a linen bag, and as hot as you can suffer it lay it
on, and hold it to the navel and belly.

For bleeding at Nose.

Take Hemp or hempen halter, and hold about your neck.

A water to take away Wheals, Pushes, Kernels, Swellings, Bunches, and Warts.

Take oil of Bays two pound, white Frankincense, Mastich, gum arabic and
turpentine, each three ounces, beat those things which may be beaten, then
mingle them altogether, distill them in a limbeck, and after put into the water
half a pound of the ashes of earth burned, and then distill it again, and keep
it as a treasure to bestow on your best friends.

A Water for the Headache, and to cause rest in weakness or Childbed Women.

Take Primrose leaves and wood betony, each one handful, steep them twelve
hours in as much new milk as will cover them, then distill them together; then
in Cowslip time, steep in this water two good handfulls of cowslip flowers, and
one good handful of unset hyssop, so let it stand 4. hours, then still it
altogether, and give six or eight spoonfulls at a time warm with a little
sugar.

An ointment to assuage a swelled sore Breast, or any other swelling.

Take Egrimony and boil it in butter or hoggs lard to an ointment, and
therewith anoint the swelled Breast; also egrimony boiled in milk and thicked
up with bread, and put a little honey into it, and laid to the Breast, asswages
a hard swelled breast.

For bleeding Gumms.

Take the thin shaving of the inside of a piece of Spanish leather and hold
between the Gumms stays it.

For the dead Palsy.

Take 4. penniweight of the Horn that grows in the inside of a horses Knee,
dried and beat to powder, give it with two spoonfulls of the juice of the green
leaves of blew periwinkles in a fit, and let them drink a draught of hot sack
after it, do this every other day for three days, and tie the string of this
perewinkle on the dead member, and shift it every other day; these strings cure
the cramp, being tied on the grieved place.

For the Gout, Stiches, and to open obstructions, most excellent.

Take half a pound of red Saunders, and steep it in a pint and a half of white
wine, let it steep all night, the next morning strain it and drink it, do this
two or three days together, then forbear it as long, after take it again, in
half a score times taking it has cured those of the Gout, which for three
years together have not been able to go; it does work upwards and downwards 3.
or 4. times, and will for a little time make them sick, but is most harmless.

For a Plurisce of wind.

Take Horse dung, camomile and parsley fried with butter and vinegar, and apply
it as hot as may be suffered diverse times; or wet rye meal with the sick
parties water, and make a cake of it, slit the cake in the middle, and spread
with London treacle, and apply it to the side.

For the Wind, Mother, or Convulsions.

Take Coral, Amber and Jeat, each alike weight, beat them into fine powder,
take the quantity of an hazel nut, and put it into a spoon with some cawdle or
broth, take two or three spoonfulls, eat not in two or three hours after.

A sover agin water for old Ulcers.

Take two penniworth of pure white coperas, put it into a pint of clear spring
water, set it on a soft fire, that it may only simmer, take off the scum with a
feather, so soon as the coperas is dissolved, take it off and put it into a
glass or stone bottle; the longer it is kept the better it will be.

Use this defensive Plaster.

Bole Armonick, the white of an egg, and white wine vinegar; to keep the
orifice open put into the wound gentian wood.

A Purge.

Take Manna one ounce and a half, dissolve it in clarified whay, and drink it
in the morning fasting, use it two or three days as you see cause.

For heat in the Back.

Take juice of Lemons and vinegar, and dip a cloth in it, and apply it to the
Back oftentimes.

For the Headache.

Take oil of Wormwood, strong vinegar and rose water, and mingle them together
and boil them, and lay them as hot as you may suffer it.

To dry up a Sore that issues with water.

Take Ale or Beer, boil in it sage till it be strong, then put in a quantity of
allom and honey, and bath the part ill affected, and lay of the sage leaves
that were boiled on the sore place.

For the Mother.

Take about Michaelmas time, the ripest and rankest nettle seeds you can get,
dry them in the sun or in an oven, and so keep them close in a paper, and when
the patient feels the Mother to rise, take a spoon heaped of these seeds beat
in a mortar, in white wine or beer and let them drink it.

For the Piles.

Take white Starch pull. and put on the Piles; or a great onion, roast it, spread
it flat, and spread it over with mithridate, and apply it warm.

For the Rickets.

Take sallet Oil one pint, camomile with the flowers three handfulls, strip it
from the stalks, boil one handful first in the oil and take it up, then the
second, and the third, then put the camomil into two bags, and anoint the sides
stroaking it downward with the oil, then lay on the bags warm, anoint it twice
aday where the knots are, and lay speedwell in their drink continually, then
take a purge of Rha. five or six grains pull. in posset, use it nine days
together, then cease a fortnight, and use it again.

An Ointment for the Rickets.

Take Rosemary, Bay leaves, Camomile, tops of lavender, alehoof, unset hyssop,
each one handful shred together and beat in a mortar, and boiled together in a
pound of fresh butter an hour, then strain it out, and with this anoint the
child, his sides, knees, and down to his feet, evening and morning a quarter of
an hour; this must be made in May.

Take cloves of Fox-fern root, alias osmond, bruised and boiled in milk, take
it in the morning fasting and and fast an hour after it, or make the root into
powder and give it in beer.

A Sirrup for the Rickets.

Take running water one quart, Maidenhair, sage of Jerusalem, coltsfoor, each
one ounce, licorice sliced, anniseeds bruised each an ounce and a half,
Fox-fern root sliced one ounce, liverwort one handful, twenty figgs sliced;
boil all these to the half, then strain it, put to it fine sugar one pound and
a half, peatle prepared three ounces; boil altogether, then strain it, and give
the child one spoonful first and last.

Pills to stay vomiting and cleanse the stomach.

Take Alloes siccatrina, add to it nutmeg grated, two or three drops of sallet
oil, as much aquavite, and a little sirrup of roses, when it is dissolved
together, put a drop of oil upon your fingers, make it into pills, whereof
take two in a morning.

To make the Palsy oil to anoint twice aday for any benummedness.

Take Neats foot oil, rosemary tops. sweet marjoram two handfulls, lavender
tops or leaves before it shoot to blow, two handfulls, red sage one handful;
chop them small, and put them to the oil, and let it boil apace till the herbs
be changed, and the ointment of a fair green color, then strain it out and
keep it in a glass stopped for use, it will last seven years in its full force
and virtue; add to it camomile, wormwood, time and hyslop.

For the Stone in the Kidneys, and them that make bloody water.

Take milk and make a clear posset, wherein boil a handful of plantain, a
stick or two of licorice, a slice or two of comphrey root, drink them off first
and last, and sometimes drink the juice of plantain either by it self or in
beer.

Take also pills of Turpentine washed in plantain water, and made up in pills
with gum arabic, and rapt up in sugar and swallowed.

For a Burn or Scald.

Take Thorn-apple leaves, stamp them or cut them small, and boil them in Hogs
lard to any ointment. Probatum.

For the Falling -- sickness.

Take a Jay, pull off the feathers, then take out the gutts, and fill it full
with cominseeds and anniseeds, and then bake it till it is dry to beat to
powder with the head on and legs, drink this in porrage or ale.

Flos Vnguentorum.

Take Rozen, per rozen each a pound and a half, virgins wax and frankincense
each a pound and a quarter, mastich one ounce, hearts tallow or deers suet 4.
pound, camphire two ounces; melt that which is to be melted, and pound that
which is to be pounded, and sift it fine, and boil them over the fire, and then
strain them through a canvas cloth into a pottle of white wine, then boil them
all with the other ingredients together, then let it cool to blood warm, then
put to them a quarter of a pound of turpentine, stirring it till it be thorough
cold, and make it up in rolls, and keep it to your use, as the best and most
precious salve that can be made.

The Virtues.

This medicine is good for all manner of diseases that are written hereafter,
viz. for old wounds, and it is most cleansing and well soken, and gendreth
flesh and heals more in a week, than any other in a month, and suffers no
corruption in a wound, nor no evil flesh to be gendred therein, it is good for
the headache and singings in the brain, for all manner of impostumes, for
sounding in the ears, and sinews sprung or cut, and draws out a broken bone
or thorn, or any other thing that is in a wound; it is good for biting or
stinging of a venomous beast, and it heals all manner of botches without, it
is good for a fester, canker, noli me tangere, it draws out all ach of the
liver, spleen or reins, heals the emrods, and is a good cearcloth for gouts
and pestilent diseases.

Another flos Vnguentorum.

Take Rozen, per rozen each a pound and half, olibanum, dears suet, white wax,
of each 4. ounces, mastich and myrtle, each an ounce, venice turpentine two
ounces, whitewine a pottle, your wax and suet being finely shred, must be first
molten upon a soft fire; then put in your rozen and per rozen, and stir them
well till they be melted, then strain the stuff into a hot pan, then have ready
your olibanum, mastich and mirrhe, ground small and finely searced, and let it
all melt together, your white wine being something warm, pour in by little and
little, then take it from the fire, and put in your turpentine, and stir it,
and last of all, your camphire being in powder, and stir it till it be cold,
then make it up in rolls, and keep it in red leather to your use.

The manner how to cut the Plasters to cure these Diseases, are

For the Navel, three inches square.

To stop the Flux of the Belly.

For the Reins, six inches long and four inches broad.

For the Flux of the Reins.

For the stomach, four inches broad and six deep.

For the wind or pain in the stomach.

For shortness of Breath or Tissick.

Take eight or nine heads of Garlic, according to the constitution of the
party, peel and cut off the ends of each clove, and put them into a pipkin,
with a quarter of a pound of butter unsalted, boil it till the Garlic turn
red, then run it through such a thing as a milk strainer, then put it into a
pipkin again, with a quarter of a pound of butter more unsalted, and the best
honey one pound, boil it till the skim is well risen, then take it off and skim
it, and strew in an ounce of the powder of Elecampane roots, then let it boil
three or 4. Walms, take it off the fire, and stir in the powder of six
penniworth of Saffron, from the first to the last, you must stir it while it
is boiling, except the time while the skim of the Honey is rising; eat the
quantity of a small nutmeg every morning.

Scabs in Childrens heads.

Take fresh Butter, and boil in it Suit of a chimney (where there is no seacole
burned) till it be black, and therewith anoint the head, 'twill heal it though
there be holes that you may turn your finger in the head.

For a swelling or bruise.

Take elder stamped and fried with chamber lie and fresh butter, and laid all
over, takes away the swelling or bruise.

For the Lungs and Gonorhea.

Take Craw fishes boiled in milk, and eaten, and the milk drank first and last
and in the afternoon, sweetened with sugar.

For a perilous Cough.

Take Sage, Rue, Comin and powder of pepper, and sees them in honey, and make
of them an Electuary, and use then also a spoonful evening and morning.

Stinging of an Adder or Snake.

Take and drink the distilled water of dragons, or if you have none thereof the
juice, also stamp dragons and lay to the place, etc.

To procure easy delivery.

Take Hyssop, Vervain and Betony, each one handful, stamp them very small, and
strain them in good stale Ale, and let the patient drink a good draught and it
will help her presently without danger.

To heal a Scald or Burn

Take Barley meal with the juice of red fennel, make a Plaster thereof, and
lay it on the sore, and it will draw out the corruption and heal it.

To stay a Flux of Blood.

Take Willow leaves and bark, boil it in wine, and drink it.

For the noise in the ears, or Tongue swelled.

Boil Figgs in water, and let the patient drink thereof.

To purge the Head with Sena.

Take Sena pull. one ounce, ginger one ounce, twelve Cloves, fennel seeds two
ounces, cinnamon and tartar, each an ounce and a half pull. omnes; take therein
white wine, a dram after supper.

For Itch, Scabs and the like.

Take and decoct Fumitory in Ale a quart, then infuse in it sena an ounce and a
half, raisins of the sun stoned, anniseeds bruised, and a little ginger, drink
it with sirrup of roses.

Balsome for wounds, swellings, venomous bitings, and apostamations, old sores
and fretting ulcers, etc.

Take oil of Olive a quart, S. John's wort, betony, centory and self-heal, each
2. handfulls, stamp them, and mingle them well, and so let it still in a glass
all summer, and strain the oil from the herbs and so use it; add to it
tobacco flowers.

To heal watering Eyes.

Take red Rose water two ounces, and put it into a bowl-glass, then take male
frankincense, put it on the point of a knife into a candle of virgins wax
until it begin to melt, then still dip it in the water at least a hundred
times, until it turn thick like balm, distrain it through a sine linen cloth,
and anoint your eyes therewith.

To expel Rheum in the face.

Take the white of an Egg beat to an oil and skimmed, then temper it with the
wool of a Coneys skin to a plaster, warm it on coals and apply it to the
temples and the grieved place and bind it on fast with a cloth.

For the Colic or griping in the belly.

Take seed of Carduus benedictus stamped, and drunk in posset ale, or any other
drink does help the grief.

Passion of the Heart.

Take juice of Bugloss two ounces, cleanse and purify it at the fire, mix it
with white sugar candy two ounces, and let the patient drink it every night
going to bed ten nights together.

To purge Choler.

Take sirrup Violarum cum agaric. infused in Barley water, or broth of a hen.

Apurge for the Kings evil.

Take Lignum Vitae 4. ounces, infuse it on embers in 4. quarts of spring water
24. hours, then add to it Polipodian 4. ounces, sena two ounces, anniseeds and
sweet fennel seeds, each an ounce and a half, burrage, bugloss and For gloves,
each one handful, boil it away to the half; then give 4. or 5. spoonful^ to a
child every morning, for eight daie^ together sweetened with sugar.

For the Dropsy.

Take Broom, Betony, Balm, each three handfulls, put it into three gallons of
ale-wort, when it is ready to be stopped up, let it stand a week, and then drink
it constantly a week together, or a fortnight.

A Medicine for the Dropsy.

Take horse Radish roots sliced long ways thin two ounces, sweet fennel seeds
bruised two ounces, smalledge and fennel roots sliced each an ounce, the tops
of time, winter savory, sweet marjoram, water cresses, nettles, each one
handful; boil these in three pints of water and three pints of wine, a quart
of canary and a pint of muscadine, close covered till half be consumed, so
remove it from the fire, and let it settle 3. hours, then strain it, and into
every draught put in one ounce of sirrup of the five roots, it must be taken
thrice aday, in the morning, and at three in the afternoon, and fast an hour
after it, if the patient have the scurvy also, add to the draughts two
spoonfulls of the juice of scurvy grass, when the patient is ready to drink it.

The Ointment for the Dropsy.

Take wall wort and Elder leaves, sweet marjoram and water cresses, penniroyal,
each one handful cut and bruised, and set them to sees in a quart of sweet
sallet oil half an hour, then let them stand in the vessel three days, then
again heat them, and strain it hard out, and put in as many more of the said
herbs, and sees them as before and strain it, do so the third time, and keep
them as an excellent ointment, let the swollen body be anointed herewith once
in three days, and that in the morning by a goo^ fire, stroaking it downwards
an ho^ together.

For a sore Breast in great anguish.

Take dung of Geese, the newest you can get, and a little leaven and a little
time, stamp them together, and lay the^ to the Breast.

For a Bruise.

Take red Nettles, and a quantity (...) bay salt, bruise them together, and la^
them to the sore or bruise, this is to la^ to incontinently after one is
bruised, an^ often changing it will take away the pa^ and heal the bruise.

To stay bleeding at Nose.

Take the bone of a Carps head, kee^ it till it be dry, then beat it to powder
and take a little of the blood of the party and beat it to powder, then mingle
it together, and put it in a little ale or beer an^ let them drink it one or
twice,

For the same.

Let the party drink wine Vinegar pint.

For a cold Stomach and hot Liver.

Take half a pint of white wine, as much Fumitory water, let them have one
walme together, and sweeten it with sir^up of violets, take of it as you see
cause.

For the Falling sickness.

Take Piony roots in ale pull. drink it morning and evening, take the jay powder
in portage, and drink ale before it.

An Ointment for the spleen or a sprain, or for wind, or stitch in the side,
and good for a bruise.

An old Judge going from his horse back, broke a vein, and spit blood and pist
blood, and this ointment cured him by anointing him.

Take S. John's wort two handfulls, sweet marjoram, sweet basil, mints or
speremints, of the flowers of lavender, spike and red rose leaves, of each one
handful, maudlin and wild time, each half an handful, compound them well
together in a stone mortar, then put into them a pint of the best sallet oil
in a vessel close stopped, and set it in a place where it may have moderate heat
14 days then strain it, and put into it half a pint of malmsey, nutmegs half
an ounce, large mace an ounce and a half, and pretty quantity of cinnamon, boil
a^ these together till the liquor be nigh hall spent, and strain it out.

For pain in the Head.

Chew mace in your mouth and hol^ it that the fume may ascend, and smell to
spikenard.

For the same.

Take Vervain, vinegar and honey mingle them well together and drink (...)
oftentimes fasting.

For the Megrim.

Sees a little quantity of Aloes and mastick in whitewine, and drink thereof.

Against Drunkenness.

Take before you drink twelve spoonfulls of Betony water, and after drink as
^uch as you will.

For the falling sickness and Lethargy.

Take oil of Castor to anoint the ^ead.

For a worm in the stomach.

Take Neppe; stamp it and mingle it with white wine, and give it the patient
when he is grieved.

For scalding, burning, itch, scabs, scald head, or any heat.

Take Butter unwasht, melt it scalding not, then pour it into fair spring
water, and with a spoon labor it and wash it until the butter grow cold, then
gather the butter together, and pour out that water, and put fresh water to the
butter, till you find your butter very white, then work your water out of the
butter, then work in the powder of brimstone finely beaten, until your butter
be stiff and looks yellow with it, then take camphire and the feed of pompeons
clean picked and husked, grind the camphire and them together, and work it to
the butter, if you will skin any burn or sealed with it, add to it the powder
of a rotten post, else not.

For the Piles approved.

Take a little piece of Scarlet and burn it, and beat it to powder and searce
it, and put to it a little honey, and anoint the part with a little piece of
scarlet, likewise take horehound and hagtaper in powder fasting 4. or 5.
morning together.

For a Chin Cough.

Take the burre of an Eglantine tree and dry it to powder, and drink it in
posset drink.

Leaden Plaster.

Take two pound and 4. ounces of oil of olive the best, good red lead one
pound, white lead one ponnd, beaten into dust, spanish soap three ounces,
incorporate them in an earthen pot, and when the soap comes upward put it upon
a small fire of coals, continuing it an hour and a half, stirring it with an
iron stick, then drop of it upon a trencher, if it cleave not it is enough,
spread it on clothes, or lay it on a board till it cools, then roll it up, it
will last twenty years, the older the better.

The Virtue of this Plaster.

The same laid on the stomach provokes appetite, and takes away any grief in
the stomach, its a present remedy for the Colic, being laid on the belly, and
upon the back, it is good for the bloody Flux, Gonorr. and all weakness in the
back, for women with child to wear all the time they are with child, if they
find any weakness; it heals all swellings, bruisings and aches, it breaks
felons, pushes, and other impostumes, and heals the same; draws out any
rotten humor, not breaking the skin, and applied to the fundament heals any
disease there growing; the same laid on the head is good for the Evelo,
headache, and the eyes, eases corns, the gout, and for a strain, Probatum.

For a bruise on the Stones.

Take Mud of a Grind-stone and oil of roses tempered together and spread on a
cloth, and apply it to the place grieved, vinegar and water boiled together and
wet clothes dipped in it, and laid above a sore stays the humor, and makes it
heal the better.

For the Dropsy.

Take Hyssop, Time, water cresses and calamint, each two handfulls, fennel one
handful, Radish roots 4. or 5. taken out of the ground fresh, slice them thin,
licorice, anniseeds and comminseeds, each two ounces, boil all these together
in a pan or pot with the quantity of three galions of fair running water, till
a third part be consumed, then put in a pottle of sack, strain it all through a
linen cloth, then put it into a stone or glass bottle close stopped, drink of it
every morning, and at 4. of the clock in the afternoon, and as you find good of
it, continueit.

To cool the Liver.

Take Barley water, cast away the first, and in the second boil Cinquefoil,
burnet, strawberry leaves, burrage, sorrel, egrimony, each one handful, boil
it from a pottle to three pints and something more, strain it, and add to it
sirrup violar. two spoonfulls, rose water 1. spoonful, drink it morning and
evening, it cools the liver, and make the body soluble.

For the displacing the Mother or Whites with a Serringe.

Take Cinnamon bruised one ounce, pomgranet flowers three ounces red rose water
a quarter of an ounce, boil these in a pint and a half of red rose water, till
half be consumed, then add red wine half a pint, and strain it for your use.

A Receipt of Pills.

Take white Amber, Mastick, each one ounce, aloes the best two ounces and a
half, agaric two scruples, aristolochia the round and true one scruple, make
them all in fine powder, and with a little juice of betony or sirrup, make them
in pills, make five of a dram, and take two, three or five, going to bed.

They preserve the stomach from inward hurt, and suffer no ill humors to
putrify in it, for they cleanse, mundifie and strengthen the heart, stomach
and head, makes the party cheerful, they purge the Reins and Matrix, and helps
the eyes, they are safe without any danger.

For a sore Throat.

Take Plantain, boil it in running water to a pultis, and clap it to with a
cloth; this cured one that could hardly speak, scarce swallow, and made him
bring pieces of stinking flesh out of his throat.

An ointment for a joint Ague.

Take Colewort leaves chopped and boiled in butter to an ointment, strain it and
anoint the place ill, or boil ale to an and anoint the place with it, the same
is good for chilblanes.

To skin Nipples.

Take Bay leaves laid on the Nipples skins them; unguentum album skins the
Nipples.

For the same.

Take pure fine Sugar and burnt Allone, and plantain water, and a little red
rose water; boil altogether to a sirrup, dip fine rags in it, and lay about the
Nipples till it be whole, likewise butter and wax, and lay it on the Nipples,
being melted together.

Vnguentum album.

Take Hoggs Lard and wash it in plantain water, or red rose water, and mingle
them together with white Cerus.

Gargle for the throat for phlegm.

Take Mustard a spoonful, three or 4. spoonfulls of white wine, mingle them
together, use it every morning for phlegm; likewise vinegar and water, is good
for the same; but if it be for the palsy, take mustard and white wine vinegar,
and honey, and gargle at night going to bed warm.

For the Morphew.

Take Pippins and Elder berries baked together, or you may still it and drink
the water, because you cannot have the berries at all times.

Fainting fits in Lying Inn.

Boil Hearts horn and Saffron in ale or beer, and put a little sugar to it, add
to it a little winter savory.

For the Cramp.

Take Hoggs dung boiled in sallet oil.

To purge the Head.

Take pill Cochie a dram to an ordinary body.

For Children.

Take pill Mastichine, a pill or two for a Child.

Electuaries purging.

Take for Choler elect. de Succo roar for Phlegm dia Phenicon, for Melanholy
confect Hamec.

For the Palsy and to stay Rheum.

Take a quart of Ale, boil it in lavender, and put to it a little butter and
sugar, this drink morning and evening.

For the yellow Jaundies most excellent in great extremity.

Take English Saffron two penniworth in powder, two penniworth of tur^erick in
powder, and two penniworth of mace in powder, mingle it with as much fine sugar
as you like to your taste, eat every morning and evening as much in the pap of
an apple as three nuts; if you take a purge of rhabarb after it is good, or use
rhab. in powder with the rest.

For one that pisses blood.

Take oil of sweet Almonds, new drawn, and put a little fine sugar into it, or
white sugar candy, and take it of it first and last.

Likewise turpentine washed in plantain water, and made up in pills with a
little rose leaves, and a little coral.

A Drink for the Plague.

Give the party (finding himself sick) before he sleep six spoonfulls of
Aquavitae, and therein a spoonful of beaten Gunpowder, and so let him sweat
upon it.

To cure a Plague sore.

This belongs to Chirurgical operations; and care must be taken at first to
avoid repercussives, and apply attractive medicines.

A Plaster to ripen a Plague sore.

Take twelve fat Figgs, well beaten, one ounce, Nitre five drams, pulp of
raisins 4. drams, honey two dreams, wheat meal one dram, treacle 4. scruples,
with a sufficient quantity of oil of camomile, work it into an emplaister, and
apply it to the pestilential bubo.

Another pultis or cataplasme which does draw and ripen tumors and buboes in
the groin.

Take Mallows herb and root, scabious, southernwood, rue, each one handful,
roots of marsh mallows one ounce, fresh gathered white lilly roots, and onions
peeled, each three ounces; boil them in milk to a convenient thickness, strain
it, and add to the colature, bean and wheat meal macerated in vinegar each one
ounce, linseed and fenegreek, each half an ounce, orris three drams, figgs and
raisins bruised, each one ounce and half, pigeons dung one ounce, leaven six
drams, the yolks of two eggs; barrow hogs lard, gum ammoniacum dissolved in
vinegar 15. drams, oil of scorpions one ounce, treacle a dram and an half; mix
and boil them all together into a pultis, and apply it warm to the sore at it is
first appearing, and renew it every six hours.

To break the sore.

Take salt Butter, half an ounce, white mustard seed two drams, garlic 1.
dram, a little oil of camomile; make hereof a pultis and apply it warm, spread
it upon a cabbage leaf, and let it lie on 4. or 5. hours, and then if the
matter be soft and the skin not broken, open it with a lancet or potential
cau^cry of Cantharides.

When the Tumor is opened, it must be diligently cleaused, for which ose a
decoction of Aristolochia the round, Agrimony, self-heal, parsley roots and
g^^tian, which boil in equal parts of wine and water, and add a^ it a little
honey, which cleanse away the poisonous matter.

Then use Tents to the Ulcer with proper unguents, and lay on it a defensive
plaulet; and after the sore is cleansed and the putrefaction drown away use a
consolidating plaster, for which purpose this is proper.

A Consolidative plaster for a Plague sore.

Take dried leaves of Aristolochia the round one once, mastich, frankincense,
myrrh, each two drams, aloes, siccatrin one dram, lytharg. 4. scruples, red
lead one scruples, meal of lupines one dram; powder them very fine, then
dissolve deers suet one ounce, hoggs grease half an ounce, oil of S. John's
wort six drams, turpentine washed half an ounce, wax three ounces, incorporate
them over a gentle fire to the consistence of a plaster, which renew twice a
day.

An approved Cearcloth for Aches.

Recip. Burgandy pitch a pound, white Virgins wax a quarter of a pound, white
Frankinsense two ounces, let the Frankinsense be beaten and searced very small,
then take the wax and the pitch and melt them in two several pipkins, and when
they are melted pour the wax into the pitch, then strew in the frankinsense,
stir them well together, pour all out into a basin of fair water, and work it
up into rowls, with your hands anointed with butter for sticking.

Experienced secrets, particularly appropriated to Wowen.

For stopping of the Terms, with pains in the back, belly, and other Symptoms.

Take of the best Rubarb three drams, of anniseeds two pugils (a pugil is as
much as you can take up between your forefingers and thumb) water of mugwort
and penny royal, each three ounces, infuse the rubarb and seeds in the water,
and let it boil gently, then strain it through a linen cloth, and to it add
two ounces of solutive sirrup of roses, and one spoonful of cinnamon water, and
take it in the morning fasting.

To make a Woman's privity straight and narrow as a Maid.

In honest women this is not to be discommended, for too much amplitude and
laxity of this part, is oftentimes the cause of barrenness, and sometimes of
falling out of the womb, and renders them ungrateful to their husbands.

It may be amended by purging after the birth, and with fomentations, baths,
liniments, and astringent pessaryes; as a fomentation with Allom water, and
the decoction of astringent plants.

Take comphrey roots, bole ammoniac, sanguis Draconis, balaustes, allome,
mastick each half an ounce, powder them, and make thereof a pessary with
cotton, and anoint it with oil, and put it up.

A fomentation for the same.

Take oaken leaves, plantaine, each half a handful, comphrey roots, allome each
one ounce, pomgranate pills, balaustins, sumach, each half an ounce, boil them
in water, and foment the part with the decoction.

A wench that made a trade of often selling her Maiden head, used this
decoction for a bath, which so closed up her pudenda, that she passed for an
untouched Virgin, to admiration.

Of pustule's, tumors, and scabs about women's privy members.

Though this be most common to those that are infected with the French Pox,
yet others may be affected with it proceeding from adust, malignant and sharp
humors.

If it come from the Pox, take away the poisonous cause of the Pox, or else all
your labor will be in vain to go about to cure it.

But come it how it will, it is a troublesome and filthy malady, rebellious,
lasting, and hardly cured but with care and difficulty; and what man soever
accompanies such a woman, shall be infected therewith.

To cure pushes and scabs about women's privy places.

First prepare the humors with convenient medicaments, as borage, suchory,
endive, fumotery, and such like: Thence proceed to purging with sena, sirrup of
apples, of violets, of roses solutive.

Take Diacatholicon, and confectio. hamech. Also use pills de fumaria.

But if you find it proceeds from the Pox, or excessive Venery, use the
decoction of guiacum and sarsa pilla, making proper additions, and use
ointments proper for scabs and manginess. Or,

Take three ounces of fresh hogs grease, and two ounces of Juice of sumetiry,
half an ounce of quicksiver well killed, ceruse, litharge, of each one dram,
incorporate them well in a leaden mortar, till they be well mixed into an
unguent.

For Hemerods about the mouth of the womb.

Take the poplar Ointment, oil of roses, sweet almonds and new butter, of each
half an ounce, saffron a scruple, and the yolk of an egg, mix them for an
ointment.

For the same.

Take muscilage of quince seeds, and marshmallows, each half an ounce, oil of
roses, hens grease, each one dram, a dram of safron, mix them in a leaden
mortar.

A Pultis for the same.

Take marsh-mallow roots, three ounces, white lyllies an ounce, mallow leaves
and henbane, each half an handful, dill seeds two drams, boil them soft and
bruise them, add to them powder of the flowers of camomile and melilot, flower
of linseed and fenegreek, each one ounce, oil of sesamum, three ounces, safron
a dram, make thereof a pultis.

For Ulcers in the neck of the Womb.

Take comfry roots, bistort, each one ounce, leaves of planten, horse-tayle,
shepherds purse, sanacle, mous-ear -- yarrow, each one handful, red rose
flowers half a handful, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, and use
the decoction for an injection.

For a Cancer in the womb.

Take oil of violets five ounces, juice of ripe nightshade berries four ounces,
ceruse washed two ounces, burnt lead washed, prepared tutia, each one ounce,
frankinsense half an ounce, wax five ounces, mix them well in a leaden mortar
with a leaden pestle, till they change color.

For inflammations in the womb.

Inflammations in the womb are very dangerous, and oftentimes prove deadly to
women with child, therefore care must be used to apply apt remedies in the
beginning of the distemper: if the heat be much, take of the leaves of
sengreen, purslain lettice, planten, endive, nightshade, water lillies, vine
leaves, Venus navel-wort, of each of these half an handful, boil them in sharp
wine till they be soft, then take and pound them, and add two ounces of barley
meal, and two drams of bala stins, a dram of bole-armoniac, and a little oil of
roses, make it a pultis, and apply it to the region of the womb.

An unguent for heat and inflammation in the womb.

Take diachilon plaster two ounces, of the juice of Venus navel-wort, and
planten, each half an ounce, oil of roses one ounce, Saccharum Saturni a
scrupple, work them in a leaden mortar into an ointment.

A Pessary for the same.

Of the juices of the forementioned plants, with the oil of roses, and the
like, may be formed pessaries very proper for this purpose.

For a Bath for the same.

Take of the forementioned herbs, and of mallows, marsh mallows, mugwort and
fenegreek, of each what quantity you will; make a decoction thereof in a
sufficient quantity of water, and let the patient sit in it warm.

Injections for to cool the womb.

New milk and rose water together injected into the womb with a serringe have a
good effect, or you may take leaves of planten, Venus navel-wort,
water lillies, and lettice, each one handful, red roses, two pugils, boil them
in water, and add to the decoction an ounce of oil of mirtles, and half an
ounce of vinegar, and inject it.

For a Rupture of the womb.

Take wax, turpentine, goose grease and butter, each one dram, honey, deers
suet, oil of roses, mastick, ceruse, tallow, each two drams, mix them and
apply it inwardly in form of a pessary, and outwardly anoint the parts with
it, and apply it as a plaster.

For weakness of the womb.

Take seeds of wild parsnips, cumin, annise, carrots, each one dram, roots of
angelica and lovage, each half a dram, cloves, galanga, cynamon, each one dram
and an half, make hereof a powder, whereof take as much as will lie upon a
groat morning and evening, in wine or any other liquor.

For itching of the womb and privy parts.

I have known some women so troubled with this malady, that they could seldom
keep their hands from it; the truth is, this is an evil more troublesome then
dangerous. But for the cure:

Take allom, nitre, and flower of brimstone, each six drams, stavesacre one
ounce, work them well together with vinegar of roses and fresh butter into an
ointment, and therewith rub the place.

Fine flower of brimstone, and fresh butter unsalted, with the juice of a lemon
wrought together into an ointment, will cure the itching alone, and is also
excellent to kill crab-lice, and will cure the itch all over the body if it be
not too foul; then purging must be used with it.

For grievous pains in the womb. A Glister.

Take mercury, mugwort, calamint, pennyroyal, each one handful, of the flowers
of camomile and melilot, each half an handful, linseed and fenegreek each half
an ounce, decoct them in fair water, and to a pint of the strained liquor add
of the electuary of hiaera simplex, and Benedict. laxativ. each half an ounce,
oil of water lillies two ounces, electuary of bay berries half an ounce, and
give it.

An excellent powder for all pains and gripings in the womb and umbilicar
parts.

Take roots of angelica, masterwort, zedoary, each one dram, white dittany,
annise-seeds, carrot-seeds, cumin-seeds, schoenanth, each half a dram, cloves
and mace, each one scruple, sugar the weight of them all, make it a powder,
whereof let the Patient take a dram at a time in wine, or any other convenient
liquor.

To drive down the terms an Electuary.

Take of the conserves of betony, lavendar, balm, borrage, each one ounce,
condited roots of pimpernel, and condited orange-pill half an ounce, oils of
cynamon and fennelseeds, each three drops, make hereof an electuary with syrrup
of mugwort.

To stay the overflowing of the Courses, an Electuary

Take conserve of red roses two ounces, oak leaves; and tormentil, each one
ounce, planten-seeds, and red corral, each one dram, Lapis haematis prepared
half a scruple, with the juice of yarrow make it an Electuary.

A powder to stop the Terms.

Take mastick and red corral prepared, each one dram, pearls prepared, and
smarage, each one scruple, amber and lapis haematis, each half a scruple, make
it a fine powder.

For the plague in the Guts.

Take annise-seeds, fennel, bay berries, juniper berries, tormentil, bistort,
balaustins, pomgranate pills, each one ounce, rose leaves, a handful, boil
them in milk, strain it, and add the yolk of an egg, six grains of Laudanum
dissolved in the spirit of mint, prepare it for a glister, and give it warm.

For the same accompanied with a violent looseness.

Take a pint of red wine, fountain water a pint, cynamon bruised one ounce,
boil them till half be consumed, then take three new-laid eggs boiled very
hard, take out the yolks and beat them very fine with the decoction, strain it,
and drink warm three spoonfuls every hour.

An hysteric plaster for fits of the Mother.

Take Agnus castus-seeds a dram and an half, of all the kinds of sanders, each
one dram and an half, white roses in powder one dram, gum Tacamahaca a dram,
musk three grains, turpentine, wax, and laudanum, sufficient to make it a
plaster, which spread and apply to the belly upon the region of the womb.

A powder for the Mother.

Take carrot-seeds, cumin and wild parsnip-seeds, each one dram, make it into
powder, whereof give a dram at a time upon the approaching of the fit.

An Electuary for the same.

Take conserve of marjoram, of rosemary-flowers, bugloss, each two ounces,
treacle, mithridate, each two drams, species of diacinin, and diamosch. each
one dram, syrrup of mugwort make it an electuary.

To procure easy delivery.

Take savin, Aristolochia the round, ^ochis of mirrh castoreum, each one ^ram,
cinnamon and root of assara^acca, each half a dram, safron a scruple, give a
dram at a time in sa^in water.

An excellent secret to help barrenness, and procure easy delivery.

Take darnel and burn it, and let the woman receive the fume through a tunnel;
and take barley meal, darnel, mirrh, safron and frankinsense, and apply it
pultis wise upon the belly, it helps conception, and procures easy delivery.

The buds of the Sun-flower before ^ blossom, boiled and eaten with butter,
vinegar and pepper, do mightily excite to venery, and provoke ^ust more than
the Artichoke.

Nettle seeds are good for the same purpose; so is garden cresses and rocket,
eaten with lettice and purslaine.

A pessary made of the herb Mercury, and worn in the matrix, strengthens the
parts, comforts the womb, and stirs it up fit to conceive.

Of the white Fever, Maids disease, or green sickness.

This is caused by obstuction of the vessels about the womb, when maids come to
ripe age, and the natural seed begins to abound, exciting their desires to join
in fellowship with men, for want whereof the humors ascend to the greater
veins, and do stupifie the brain sometimes to simplicity, most times to
forgetfulness, and many times to raging madness, and do also vitiate the whole
mass of blood, which brings them to a pallid complexion.

This we must endeavor to help by Physic, when the maid cannot get her
desired cure.

These pills for this purpose I commend.

Take of the mass of the Pill called hiera, with agarick one dram and an half,
pills of opopanax three drams, extract of rubarb, centory the less, gentian
root, each one dram, steel prepared four drams, cuckoo pintle root prepared,
tartar vitriolated each two scruples, Chemical oil of wormwood one scruple, oil
of cinnamon and cloves each six drops, sirrup of the five opening roots,
sufficient to make it into a mass for Pills; of every dram hereof make six
Pills, and let the patient take two every morning, and as many at four a Clock
in the afternoon, drinking after it a draught of wormwood wine, or wormwood
beer, and exercise after it an hour.

The leaves of hagtaper or mullen, which grows common enough in the Country,
are good for maids to vvear in their shoes, to draw down their Courses, the
stopping whereof brings no small evil unto them.

To them that cannot so well swallow pills, I prescribe some opening Sirrups
and Decoctions.

An opening Decoction for the Green sickness.

Take roots of sichory, madder and licorice cleansed, each half an ounce, annis
and sennel seeds each two drams, hearts tongue one handful, damask roses and
borrage flowers, each half an handful, saffafras shaved thin one ounce, raisins
stoned one ounce and an half, cynamon half a dram, boil them together in a
sufficient quantity of fountain water, until a third part be waste, and let
the patient drink thereof as often as she pleases. To make it the more grateful
to the taste, you may sweeten it with sirrup of Lemons, or for want thereof
sugar may serve the turn.

An opening and attennating Sirrup for the Green sickness.

Take of the juice of succory and mugwort, both clarified, each five ounces, of
the before mentioned decoction eight ounces, juice of barberies four ounces,
sugar candy one pound, make them a sirrup, the dose whereof may be every
morning two ounces, with three ounces of cynamon water.

An Electuary for the Green sickness.

Tak juice of Elder berries boiled to a just consistence with sugar, which the
Apothecaries call Rob, four ounces, bay berries dried and powdered one ounce,
two nutmegs, burnt hearts horn one dram, species dearrhod. four scruples, white
amber half a scruple, sirrup of cichory one ounce and an half, so mix them
well together into a soft Electuary, whereof she may take the quantity of a
nutmeg twice or thrice a day.

Capers and broom buds are good for them to eat with their meat that are
troubled with this distemper.

There are outward means also to be used for the green sickness, as ointments
and plasters.

An ointment for the Green sickness.

Take oil of spiknard, and of bitter almonds each two ounces, juice of mugwort
an ounce, vinegar half an ounce, set it on the fire till the moisture be
consumed, and add to it in powder spiknard, squinanth and assarabacca root each
one dram, and with a little wax make a liniment of it, wherewith anoint the
region of the liver, and the parts about the womb.

Or else use this Ointment.

Take oil of sweet almonds and capers, of camomile and dill, each two ounces,
of orris and wormwood each one ounce and an half, of vinegar of roses one
ounce, juices of rue, alexanders and mint each one ounce and an half, boil them
till the juices be consumed, and then put to it powder of squinanth and spike,
of each a dram, with ducks grease and a little wax make it an ointment,
wherewith anoint the region of the Liver, the womb, and all the privy parts,
rubbing it well about the lips and mouth of the same, and then use this
plaster.

A plaster for the Green sickness.

Take camomile, melilot, southernwood, ground pine each one ounce, parsley
seeds, tops of wormwood, flowers of the lesser centory, each two drams, powder
them all, and take one dram of spike dissolved in Aqua vitae, and with a little
oil of marjoram and roses, and a sufficient quantity of wax, make it a
plaster, which lay on the region of the Liver.

For such as cannot hold their water.

Take hogs and sheeps bladders, hares stones, cocks throats, each half an
ounce, acorns two scruples, leaver of nepp and mace, each one scruple, make it
a powder, whereof give half a dram at a time in water of Oak leaves.

The stones of bores, and the claws dried to powder and given, are very good
for this purpose.

Also Diacinamom; and Frankinsense drunk in wine is commended, calamints,
mints, acorn cups, burnt ivory, mace, gum, arabic, and oaken bark applied hot
to the perineum.

A Plaster for such as cannot hold their water.

Take frankinsense one ounce, ladanum, mastich, burnt ivory, acorn cups, each
three drams, lignum, aloes and cinnamon, each one dram, styrax calamita, two
drams, juice of mints four ounces, wax enough to make it a plaster, spread
this plaster upon linen or leather, and lay it above the privy members upon
the place where the hair grows, and under the Gods as far as the Fundament.

For the French Pox an excellent method.

First begin with a purging potion.

Take of the decoction of tamarind six ounces, which infuse six hours upon hot
coals, seen half an ounce, rubarb two drams, hermodactills half a dram, cassia
newly drawn out of the canes one ounce.

Let it boil a wlam or two at the end of the infusion, strain it, and add to
the liuqor confectio hamec, elect. cariocostinum, each one dram and an half,
spirit of turpentine half a scruple, and let the patient take it fasting, keep
vvarm after it, and take posset drink as it works.

Then after a day or two take of the mass of the pills of fumitory, aurea,
each one dram, pill cochie two drams, meercurius dulcis three drams, rosin of
jollap two scruples, spirit of turpentine six drops, and with conserve of
wormwood a sufficient quantity, make it into forty Pills, whereof take three
at a time every other day.

Then proceed to Diet drink, which make thus:

Take Lignum vitae eight ounces, bark of the same two ounces, sassafras one
ounce, sarsa parilla four ounces, liquorice two ounces, juniper berries one
ounce, cynamon two drams, coriander seeds four drams, boil it in two gallons of
water till one be consumed, strain it and drink it for an ordinary drink.

For a foul running of the Reins, a poisonous Clap.

Take Prick-madam, one handful, quince seeds, rue, agnus castus, plantain each
one ounce, tormentil roots half an ounce, red rose flowers two pugils, vervaine
one pugil, juice of Lemons six ounces, water of the tree mallow flowers one
pint and an half; infuse the herbs in the water four days, letting them
macerate with the gentle heat of a bath, then strain it, and reserve it for
use. The dose is morning and evening three spoonfuls.

An Electuary for the Running of the Reins.

Take conserve of red roses, red corral prepared, hearts horn prepared each one
scruple, ballaustins two scruples, mix them and take the quantity of a nutmeg
twice or thrice a day.

An Ointment for the same.

Take oil of roses, mastich, and myrtles, each one ounce, balaustins half a
dram, with a little wax, make it an unguent, wherewith anoint the privy
members, and all the parts about them.

If coldness of the members accompany the distemper, then anoint the privy
parts with oil of wormwood, mastich and mynts, and ointment of marsh mallows;
but if the yard and parts be over hot, wash them with vvhites of eggs, planten
water, and juice of lemons, and anoint them with oil of water lillies; use
also the water of the sperme of frogs, and if the stones swell with heat,
make a pultis with barley meal, oil of lillyes, milk and ducks meat, and bind
on the cods.

To cool and take away the sharpness of the matter in the Running of the Reins.

Take of all the saunders oil of water lillyes, the unguent populeon, juice of
nightshade each a sufficient quantity, camphire half a scruple, mix them well
and bind them upon the genitals.

If the flowing matter be watery and thin, then use such things as are drying
and strengthening, and do help the digestive virtue of the stones, and correct
the vvatriness of the seed, as species Aromatic. rosat. sirrup of mints.

To correct the watriness of seed in Gonorrhea.

Take mints and Roman vvormvvood each one handful, agnus castus seeds, myrtle
berries and rose flowers, each two drams, boil them in red wine, and sweeten
it with sugere; take it often.

For the same.

Take old conserve of red roses one ounce and an half, amber and red corral
prepared each one dram, cloves, mace, frankinsense, each one scruple, with
sirrup of myrtles make it an Electuary.

Or use this powder in red wine to thicken the seed, and strengthen the stones.

Take mastich, frankinsense each one dram, amber half a dram, coryander seeds
two drams, vine leaves, mints each half a dram, sugar of roses one ounce, make
it a fine powder.

For Ulcers in the bladder or reins, caused by Venery.

Take polipody of the Oak, and licorice sliced, each half an ounce, of the four
greater cool seeds each one dram, violets and borrage flowers each two pugils,
jujubes half an ounce, damask prunes an ounce, raisins half an ounce, sena two
ounces and an half, infuse them one night in barley water, in the morning boil
and strain it, afterward in a sufficient quantity of the decoction dissolve an
ounce and an half of Manna, cassia new drawn three ounces, boil them to the
thickness of an opiate, adding in the end half an ounce of rubarb in powder.
The dose is an ounce to be taken in the morning once a week.

For Ulcers in the Bladder or Reins.

Take of cassia two ounces, manna one ounce, pulpe of sebestins and tamarinds
each one ounce, of the muscilage of flea-wort six drams, of the four greater
cool seeds, each one dram, juice of licorice two drams; with sirrup of roses
solutive make it an opiate. The dose is an ounce in a morning.

An Electuary for the French Pox.

Take guiacum wood finely powdered, and powder of sarsaperrilla, each one
ounce, species diatrion santalon, and diarrhod. abbatis each two drams,
conserve of suchory six ounces; with sirrup of suchory make in an Electuary.

For Ulcers in the yard, caused by the Pox.

Take oil of sweet almonds, ointment of roses each three ounces, wax an ounce,
mercury precipitate half an ounce, mxi them for use. For the itching under the
prepuce and the top of the yard, make a decoction with ducks meat and
pomgranate pills, and wash the place therewith.

To ease the grievous pains of the yard, got by a Clap.

Take mallows, marshmallows, linseed, dill camomile flowers, and mellilot each
a handful, boil them in water and foment the yard and stones with the liquor,
then lay on the boiled herbs pultis wise upon the parts.

The women may also use this decoction for the same purpose, injecting it into
the Matrix with a Serringe, and applying it pultice wise outwardly.

A plaster for the stone in the Bladder.

Take oil of spike, camomile and dill each six drams, oil of scorpions half an
ounce, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, pitch dissolved in vinegar each half an ounce,
olibanum three drams, euphorbium one dram, incorporate them into a plaster,
and apply it upon the bottom of the belly.

A plaster for Caranles on the neck of the bladder.

Take of the best aloes two drams, aristolochia and mirrh each half a scruple,
tutia prepared half a dram, liquid styrax enough to make it a plaster.

A drink to cool the heat of the Urine.

Take seeds of poppy, lettice, endive, and the four greater cool seeds each
half an ounce, sebestens in number seven, boil them in a sufficient quantity of
water till half be consumed, then strain it, and in four ounces of the strained
liquor dissolve one ounce and an half of the sirrup of water-lillyes, and give
it for a dose.

An outward application to cool the heat of the Vrin, and inflammations of the
Bladder, Reins and privy members.

Take of the distilled water of water lillyes three ounces, of the waters of
violets and house-leek each one ounce, juice of nightshade and house-leek each
one ounce, brest-milk one ounce and an half, oil of violets one ounce, mix
them, and dip therein hot cloths and apply them wet upon the members underneath
the cods, and above upon the bottom of the belly.

To mundifie unlcers in the bladder, and ease pains of them and in the yard, it
is good to inject Cows milk warm with a Serringe, or you may take the water of
milk distilled, with barley water and fine sugar, and inject it into the yard
with a Serringe.

But to dry and consolidate the Ulcer after it is cleansed, use this
consoliative with a Serringe.

take the whites of four eggs well beaten, to which add bole armonick and
dragons blood each two scruples, muscilage of flea-wort and woman's milk each
two ounces, powder that which is to be powdered, mingle all well together, and
inject it with a Serringe.

Take also this Electuary to heal the pains of the Ulcer.

Take lohoch of poppy, diatragcanth, frigid. each half an ounce, bole armonick
one dram, powder the bole armonick very finely, mix it, and make an electuary
with a little sirrup of violets.

Of Pissing Blood.

This generally proceeds from Ulcers in the reins and bladder, and sometimes is
caused by falls, blows and bruises; sometimes clear blood is avoided, and
sometimes blood mixed with corruption; sometimes watery blood, and sometimes
blood like stinking clots of flesh.

An Ointment for pissing blood.

Take oil of mirtles and roses each six drams, balaustins, pomgranate pills,
siumach, bole armonick each two scruples, powder what is to be poudred, and
with a little wax make it an unguent, wherewith anoint the reins.

A Potion for the same.

Take sirrup of violets, myrtles each six ounces, waters of planten, purslain
and endive each twelve ounces, mix them, and drink hereof often.

To cure a Priapismus.

A Priapism is an immoderate and continual erection and standing of the Yard,
without any desire or appetite to venery, or ejection of seed, wherein it
differs from another passion of the yard called Satyriasis, in which there is,
besides the standing of the yard, a coition and emission of the seed with
pleasure.

In the cure hereof the patient must be careful to avoid such things as
generate and increase windiness, and to use such things as dissolve and break
wind, outwardly foment the yard with this fomentation.

Take penny royal, origany, each half an handful, carawayes, ameos, anni-seeds,
fennel-seeds, cumyn-seeds each two drams, boil them in a sufficient quantity of
water till half be consumed, then dip in it a spong, and therewith foment the
yard.

To cure the continual standing of the yard, proceeding from too much heat of
the gential members.

In this case the patient must shun all such things as engender heat, and use
cold things: It is very good to hold the yard in cold water, and to anoint the
root of the yard with cool oils, as with oil of roses, water-lillyes, and a
little vinegar.

It is good also to wear a plate of lead, with a hole through it, for to put
the yard through upon the pecten above the yard, and let it come underneath,
fitting it to the place.

Vomiting is likewise proper for this distemper, but not Purging.

A gentle vomit, working without harm, which I always use.

Take an ounce of assarabacca roots, boil them in a pint of water till half be
consumed, then strain it, put to it two ounces of simple oximel, and giveit for
a vomit; but before the patient takes the vomit, take a hen and boil her,
making clear broth, and having the broth in readiness, about a quarter of an
hour after the patient has taken the vomit, let him drink a draught of the
broth, and so drink between every vomit until it has done working. Those that
cannot get hen broth, may use clear posset drink in stead of it.

In the distemper of a Priapisme, let the patient be sure to abstain from wine
and diuretic medecines, and apply to the loins and privy members this Pultis
following:

Take nightshade, purslain, lettice, water lillyes, boil them in water till
they be tender, then pound them, and apply them hot to the privy members.

For Fevers.

To cure a Sanguine Fever.

Take sirrup of endive an ounce and an half, of bugloss half an ounce, waters
of lupines, endive and bugloss each an ounce, mix it, and take it in the
morning.

Another digestive in the beginning of a Fever.

Take sirrup of wood sorrel an ounce and an half, sirrup of endive half an
ounce, distilled water of prunes, endive and sorrel, each one ounce, mingle
them, and take thereof at twice.

The distilled water of prunes I have always used with excellent success in
most Juleps for all Fevers, which you may easily prepare and keep by you, to
be ready upon all accasions.

Take prunes what quantity you please, bruise them and distill them in a common
still: And at any time, when occasion requires, you may give of this water
alone with a little sugar, if you have nothing else to add with it.

But usually I prepare it thus:

Take prune water four ounces, juice of oranges two ounces, sirrup of
gilliflowers two ounces, a few drops of spirit of vitriol, mix it, and let the
patient drink two or three spoonfuls at a time.

You may likewise keep juice of oranges at all times in readiness by you;
taking good store of oranges when they are most plenty, and press out their
juice, claryfie it, and put it in a glass vessel with a tap hole at the bottom,
and cover over the juice about an inch thick at the top with sallet oil, so you
may preserve your juice fresh as long as you please, drawing it out at the
bottom when you have occasion to use it.

In the beginning of a Fever have a special regard to the constitution of the
body; if the body be plethorick, or if blood or choler abound, let your
principal remedy be bloodletting; vomiting, and clisters also are very proper:
Then give such things as cool the heat, as fair water with the juice of lemons,
barberris, currants, pomgranates or quinces.

The distilled waters of endive, purslain, succory, sorrel, strawberries,
borage, bugloss, violets, roses, with which you may mix any of the sirrups of
the same herbs, flowers or juices.

In the beginning of Fevers the conserve of wood sorrel taken with Diascordium
mixed together, is of excellent use; you may take of the same conserve an
ounce, diascordium a dram, mix them and take it at twice; or you may take the
conserve and sharpen it with oil of vitriol, and eat it at any time against
thirst.

This following Sudorifick is with good success given in the beginning of
Fevers.

Take water of cichory and elder flowers each equal parts, in which infuse
hartshorn burnt and poudred a dram and an half, strain it, and dissolve in the
liquor sirrup of fumitory an ounce, juice of citrons two spoonfuls, salt of
wormwood one scruple, Bezoar stone eight grains, mix it and give it in the
morning fasting, warm, to provoke sweat.

Outwardly use this Epithema to the region of the heart.

Take rose water three ounces, borage and bugloss water each two ounces,
vinegar of roses half an ounce, juice of Lemons two drawms, red sanders one
dram, lignum aloes, half a dram. Dip linen cloths herein and apply them to the
region of the heart, and anoint the reins with oil of roses and violets.

For a putrid Fever, a Bolus to open the Belly.

Take cassia, manna, pulpe of tamarinds each halfa dram, oil of anniseeds three
grains, diagryd, four grains; give them for a Bolus.

It is very proper in this case also, to give a Clister; which prepare thus:

Take leaves of mallows, violets, pellitory, mercury, camomile flowers each one
handful, pearl barley, half an handful, boil them in a sufficient quantity of
water, and in six ounces of the colature dissolve cassia one ounce, sirrup of
roses solutive half an ounce, oil of violets or roses two ounces, the yolk of
an egg and a little salt, mix them for a Clister and put it up.

After the body is thus lenified, forthwith have recourse to bloodletting, as
the most necessary and best remedy; afterward if the Patient be very dry, give
him a Julep with prune water, sorrel water, and juice of lemons and oranges,
and spirit of vitriol.

An Emulsion to cause rest in Fevers.

Take of the decoction of sassafras four ounces, two dates stoned, boil and
strain them, and to the liqor add an ounce of white poppy seeds bruised, half
an ounce of gourd seeds, and sweeten it with sirrup of wild poppy flowers.

A Cordial Potion

Take water of borage and bugloss powers each five ounces, cynamon water half
an ounce, sirrup of le^ons and citrons each an ounce, spe^^ies liberant a dram,
diamag, frig, a scruple, give hereof a draught warm three or four times an hour.

For a Quotidian Fever.

Take manna an ounce and an half, and dissolve it in hen broth, adding a little
mace, strain it and drink it using it many days together.

For Chollerick bodies use this following Potion, in a quotian, tertian, or
quartan.

Take damask prunes in number ten, tamarinds an ounce, sebestins jujubes each
in number ten, raisins an ounce and an half, five dates, flowers of violets,
borage and bugless each one pugil, gourd seeds half an ounce, decoct these in
sufficient quantity of water and in the decoction infuse rubarb a dram and an
half, myrobalans citrine two drams, ginger one scruple, strain it and put to it
an ounce of solutive sirrup of roses, and give it the patient in the morning
warm.

In quartain Fevers, an excellent Potion to purg by Vrin.

Take of the five opening roots each half an ounce, Carduus benedictus,
hart's-tongue, tops of wormwood each one handful, flowers of borage, bugloss,
violets, roses, each half a handful, flowers of the lesser centory a pugil,
sena half an ounce, rubarb three drams, citron and orange pills each one dram,
cynamon half a dram, diagrid. six grains.

Let these be all cut and sliced very small, and then tied up in a fine linen
cloth or bag, which infuse in white wind, and let the patient drink thereof
every morning fasting a good draught.

For quartain Fevers, and Melancholy bodies.

Take sirrup of violets, bugloss, borage, and fumitory each one ounce; waters
of purslain, fumitory hartstongue, borage, bugloss each one ounce and an half,
make it a Julep for three doses.

A Decoction provoking Sweat and Vrin, good in tertian Fevers.

Take roots of parsley, sparagus, Kneeholm, nettles each one ounce, orris,
elecampane each half an ounce, twelve bayberries, flowers of camomile, tops of
dill each a pugil, calamint, pennyroyal each half a handful, seeds of comin,
annis, fennel, and citrons each one dram, decoct all in a good quantity of
water, and let the patient drink of it often.

For a burning Fever.

Take the distilled waters of cichory, sorrel, wild poppey, betony each one
ounce and an half, rasberry wine one ounce, sirrup of the juice of citrons,
lemons, barberrieseach half an ounce, yellow sanders half a dram, give of it
often three or four spoonfulls at a time.

For a Hectic Fever.

To keep the belly open take of the decoction of pruins four ounces, wherein
dissolve manna an ounce, let them be so hot as to boil up, then strain it, and
drink the liquor.

Afterward for the Hectic, use this Electuary every day.

Take conserve of roses and violets each half an ounce, cassia newly drawn and
boiled up with sugar five drams, species Aromat. rosat. half a dram, chemical
oil of anniseeds three grains, temper it together for an Electuary; it will
keep open the belly, and strengthen the heart, brain, and liver.

For the Pestilence.

In the time of the Plague it is good for preservation to use fumigations,
which you may prepare after this manner:

Take red roses, mirtles, citron citron pills, all the saunders of each two
drams, mirrh, storax, calamita, gum dragon, gum arabic each one dram, camphire
a scruple, a little musk, dissolve the gums in rose water and vinegar, mix and
work them all together into a mass, and form little rolls or troches of them,
which being dried, you may carry about you, and burn of them upon coals when
you have occasion.

Pills to be used in Plague time.

Take aloes six drams, mirrh three drams, safron one dram, rubarb two drams,
agarick trochiscated one dram, zcloves edoary, seeds of citrons peeled each one
scruple, citron dill half a dram, tormenti roots, red saunders each a dram and
an half, oriental bole washed and prepared two drams, camphire half a scruple;
reduce all these into a fine powder, and with the sirrup of the juice of
citrons make them into a mass, of which form pills of the bigness of a pease.
The dose is four Pills in a morning.

To comfort the Spirits, let the sick drink often of this following Julep.

Take waters of endive, sorrel, borage, bugloss, balm each equal parts, seeds
and pills of citrons each two drams, hartshorn burnt and prepared five drams,
boil them gently, strain it, and to the colature add sirrup of citrons, juice
of currants each equal parts, make it a Julep, adding a little cinnamon water,
and let the Patient drink of it often.

A Sweating Potion to be given in the beginning of the disease as soon as one
is infected with the Plague.

Take tormentil roots, white dittany, red coral, bole armonick prepared, terra
sigillata, each one dram, gentian root, vervaine each one dram and an half,
safron a scruple, make all these into a powder, whereof take one dram, treacle
half an ounce, sirrup of scabious and mugwort each one ounce and an half, water
of Carduus Benedictus, four ounces, mix it, and give it the sick party warm,
and let him go to bed and sweat well.

An Electuary for the Plague, to be taken every day.

Take juice of scabious, scordium, Carduus Benedictus each two drams,
Andromachus treacle three drams, citron seeds blanched a dram and an half, with
sirrup of the juice of barberryes a sufficient quantity, over a gentle fire,
make it into an Electuary, whereof let the sick party take a dram at a time,
more or less, as you find the operation of it: endeavor to sweat upon it, and
continue provoking sweat with Carduus posset drink, according as the patients
strength can bear it.

This following causes sweat, and abates the sense of the parts.

Take of the best treacle a dram, sirrup of wild poppy flowers one ounce, give
it in two ounces of Carduus water.

In all diseases whatsoever, labor to shun all vehement affections of the
mind, as Angar and Sorrow, and steadfastly six your hope upon our Heavenly
Father, the Great Physician, despising the World, in respect of him who works
all things for the best to them that fear him. Use his Means with praise and
thanksgiving, and patiently wait for his blessing upon them. To whom be all
Honor and Glory, for ever. Amen.

A Plaster to resolve cold and windy tumors in the J^ynts.

Take oil of dill half a pound, rosin of the pine tree two pound, common rosin
three pounds, new wax one pound, the powders of comin and barberries of each
one pound, melt what is to be melted, and then strain it, and put in your
powders.

For the bitting of a mad Dog.

Take galbanum, opopanax, sagapenum each half a dram, euphorbium, florentine,
orris, aristolochia the round, gentian root each one dram, crawfish shell, two
drams, wax sufficient, turpentine two ounces, mix them for a plaster.

A Plaster for poisoned wounds, bitings, and stingings of Serpents.

Take barberry meal and bean meal, each ten drams, licoras, marshmallow roots,
pitch, each five ounces, white-wax and goose-grease each ten ounces,
incorporate them with old oil and urin of a maid child sufficient for a
plaster.

A Plaster for the swelling of the Cods.

Take Bdelium, opopanax, sagaonum dissolved in vinegar, each half an ounce,
muscilage of marshmallows, linseede and fenegreeke each two drams and an half,
flowers of camomile and melilot each three drams, beam meal three ounces butter
half an ounces; with the decoction of figs and mallows, make it a plaster.

A Plaster to ripen Venereous Buboes.

Take mallow and violet leaves, each two handfuls, roots of marsh mallows half
a pound, white lilly heads four ounces, boil them in a sufficient quantity of
water, and be^^ them small, adding thereunto whe^^ and barley meal each a
sufficient quantity, common oil and butter ea^^ three ounces, hogs-lard two
ounce and an half, the yolks of two e^^^ mix them for a plasters.

FINIS.

