May 9. 1656.
THe whole Book of Psalms is an eminent part of the Holy Scriptures, and the
forty fifth is very eminent among the Psalms. As Solomon's Mystical Song of the
Loves of Christ and the Church, so, this Song of Loves (that is the Title)
written by his Father David, may well be called The Song of Songs, or an
Excellent Song. And as the Song is Excellent, so he that can hit the Tune of it
(I mean the spiritual sense of it) is an Excellent Singer. Having perused the
ensuing Exposition, I conceive this Author has hit it well, so well, that I
remember none (in our Language) who have hit it better. And though (possibly)
some may not be harmonious with him in all his notions upon it, yet I perceive
he intends no discord with any. And therefore I judge it fit to be published
for the use of the Spouse and Church of Christ, that the hearts of Saints may
be enlarged, in the opening of this Song, to know the Excellency of Christ,
together with the glorious present privileges, and after expectations they
have by him; as also the thankful respects and humble duties, which they owe
to him in Love, and which his transcendent Love should Constrain them to.

Joseph Caryl.

The MYSTERY of the Marriage Song.

And Mutual Spiritual Embraces between CHRIST and his SPOUSE, Opened, in an
EXPOSITION WITH Practical Notes and Observations ON The whole Forty-fifth
PSALM.

By W. TROUGHTON, Minister of the Gospel.

If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God,

1 Pet. 4.11. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in
my God: For he has clothed me with the Garments of salvation; he has covered
me with the Robe of righteousness as a Bridegroom decketh himself with
Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with Jewels,

Isa. 61.10. This is a great Mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and his
Church,

Ephesians. 5.32. LONDON: Printed by M. S. for the use of the Author. 1656.

To the Truly Honorable the Lord DEPUTY FLEETWOOD, AND The Lord Chief BARON
STEEL: AND To their Virtuous LADIES.
Grace and Peace be Multiplied.
I Have taken this opportunity to join you together in one Christian Epistle,
as hoping that you are united in one and the same Spirit and bond of Christian
affection, (which of all bonds is the strongest and most durable.)

There is ( Honorable and Beloved in the Lord) a twofold knowledge of
spiritual things.

1 That which is merely literal and carnal, and 2 That which is spiritual
and experimental.
Men may know Gospel Mysteries in a carnal manner, and be never a whit the
better for all their knowledge, nay it will aggravate their condemnation. 1 Cor
13.2. 2 Cor. 5.16.
Satan himself, and the evil Angels, being spirits (though spirits of
darkness) have more speculative literal knowledge of Divine Mysteries, then
all the men in the world besides. And have not many in our days abounded in
this kind of knowledge? who now manifest themselves to be ungodly men, turning
the grace of God into wantonness, and denying the Lord Jesus, wandering Stars,
clouds without water, carried about with winds, Trees whose fruit withers,
twice dead, plucked up by the roots. Ep. Jude 4, 12, 13.


This is that knowledge which puffs up 1 Cor. 8.1.
and makes men high in their own conceits. Ye reign as Kings without us
(says the Apostle 1 Cor. 4.8, 20.
and I would to God ye did reign [indeed, and that it were not only in
conceit] For the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.

These times (wherein Satan more then ever transformeth himself into an Angel
of light) 2 Cor. 11.14.
call aloud unto us for more then ordinary watchfullnesse, self-scrutiny, and a
continual exercise of our spiritual Armor, that we may stand in the evil
day Ephesians. 6 13.
Strong allurements and temptations from within, and from without, require much
faith, holy vigilance, distrust of our own parts and sufficiencies, and
constant dependence upon the grace, power, and wisdom of the Lord Jesus.

To have our hearts suited to a temptation, is one of the greatest miseries,
but to have them suited to the work of the Lord (which he calls us to) is an
unspeakable blessing

When there is a confluence of Creature enjoyments (the world putting on a new
Vizard, and Satan the God of this world 2 Cor. 4.4.
representing the honors and riches thereof in a fair and specious gloss
Mat. 4.8, 9.
that he may thereby the more insensibly delude us) truly it concerns the Lords
people (in such a case) seriously to watch, and to look narrowly to their
spirits principles and ends, and to keep their Garments pure and close tied
about them, least they walk naked, and their nakedness appear. Rev. 16.14.


What these Garments are, you will find in this explication of the Marriage
Song, which I recommend to all the Lords people, and particularly to you; and
wherein (I hope) you will meet with some seasonable practical Truths (from
each Verse) which I have contracted in as little room as possibly I could.

Such as are in high places, are in slippery places, especially if they walk in
pride, and according to the Principles and Rules of carnal wisdom and
policy, and not according to the simplicity of the word of Christ; and hereof
we have had many experiments in this last Age.

The best Rule of policy and prudence, is to prefer the doing of Justice,
before all earthly advantages; honesty and simplicity will be found to be the
best policy; The less of man the more of God, who confounds things that are
by things that are not. 1 Cor. 1.27.
Doubtless the Army (and the good people who have adhered thereunto) have
cause to say so, Let them not be high minded, let them not despise and insult
over their brethren, let them not seek great things for themselves. The holy
jealous God will more and more witness against an ambitious selfish worldly
spirit wherever it appears.

Certainly there was never any true, real beauty or excellency in the honors,
Titles, riches, pleasures of this world. Man at his best estate is but vanity,
and walks in a vain show. These outward things take to themselves wings, and
fly from us. But now God having in a great measure stained the pride and glory
of all flesh, and the day of his appearance approaching, there is less beauty,
sweetness, reallity in Creature enjoyments then ever. The older the world
grows, the worse it is: do we not see the earth reeling too and fro like a
drunken man, ready to crack and break under the weight and burden of sin and
vanity? May we not behold all parties (so far as they judge of things with a
natural eye, and according to humane prudence) even at their wits ends, not
knowing what to do? As for old corrupt forms, customs, constitutions, what
are they but as so many dead carcasses without life and power?

But we expect a new face of things; we look for a resurrection of Churches,
for a restoration of righteous and holy administrations, for a new Heaven and
a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness, holiness, peace and joy. Rev.
21.1.
Old things shall pass away, all things shall become New; O that men would
learn to be wise, and not go about to build the things which God will destroy,
nor to destroy the things which God will build; to do both, or either, is a
great transgression in the sight of the Lord.

You are not ignorant ( Honored and beloved in Christ) that there are great
thoughts and expectations among the Saints at this ^ay, concerning the Kingdom
of Christ, some (...) one way, some in another; nor should this ^e slighted as
a mere fancy, a Chymaera, an odd ^otion; doubtless there are many symptoms of
^he approaching glory of this Kingdom. God ^ath several seasons for revealing
his Truths, relating to the several Offices of Christ, and those truths which
specially concern his Kingdom and Government, will be more and more required
into, and cleared up in this last age, specially when God shall rent that vail
which is upon the Jews. 2 Cor. 3.15, 16.
But alas! methinks at pre^ent our hearts are not suited to the glory and
^iritualnes of this Kingdom (I am sure mine (...) not) and truly it is to be
feared, that many who speak great swelling words, do lust after a fleshly, and
not after a spiritual Kingdom (...) for though this Kingdom is and shall be
more and more outward and visible (the spirit of God breaking forth in the
glorious fruits and emanations thereof) yet the rise of it is inward. The
Kingdom of God is within, and comes without observation, Luke 17.20. John 18.2.
The King, subjects, Laws, weapons, obedience, administrations and
privileges, relating to this Kingdom, are heavenly and spiritual, not
worldly and carnal.

And indeed it is no small delusion, if (upon this consideration, that the
Saints shall rule the Kingdoms of the world) any one party whatsoever shall
grasp and ingrosse to themselves, the great things of this old corrupt
perishing world, and carry on designs suitable to the interest thereof, and
that from an old worldly spirit and principle; for though the Kingdom and
Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be
given to the people of the Saints of the most high Dan. 7.27.
yet shall not the Saints rule in a worldly carnal selfish manner, but in a
way suitable to the Justice, equity, and spirituallnesse of the Kingdom of
Christ, and to the Government of that new world, or world to come, which is in
subjection to Christ, Heb. 2.5. and which is daily expected by the Saints, I
must (for my own part) confess that I am an Expectant, humbly waiting on God
for more light and more love, and for a more pure self-denying, powerful
Ministry, then yet we have attained (the present Ministry even all of us being
deeply involved in the guilt and corruptions of the times) I wait for a
Ministry attended with the spirit of Elias, that will make crooked things
straight, rough things plain; that will exalt the valleys, and bring down every
mountain, that all flesh may see the salvation and the glory of God. This is
prophesied of as a forerunner of the exaltation of Christ's Kingdom, Isa. 2.
and when the Lord arises to shake terribly the earth, we should (according to
the Prophets counsel there) hide our selves in the clefts of the Rock Cant.
2.14.
even the blood and wounds of the Son of God, which is the souls steadfast
Ankor and Refuge in an evil and stormy day. Isa. 4.6. Heb. 6.19.


It is my frequent and earnest desire to the Lord, that all his people in these
Nations (which have been the stage of many miraculous providence) may be
thoroughly humbled. Such as have seen the Lord (with the eye of faith) will cry
out with the Prophet Isa. 6.5.
Woe is me I am undone, I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of
a people of unclean lips.

Verily there is none of us that have cause to boast; we have all sinned, and
come short of the glory of God; there is none that does good, no not one. The
best of us is but a lie and vanity, and we had need pray continually that God
would not enter into Judgment with us, for we cannot stand before him.

It would be (in my poor apprehension a blessed thing if there were among the
Lord people, Magistrates, Ministers, Soldiers (eve^ from the highest to the
lowest) such an u^versall serious self-abasement and humiliation, considering
the guilt and evil which adhereth generally to us all, for our worldliness
faction, ambition, murmurings, fleshly zeal and passions, self-seekings,
dallying with Religion, variableness and unstedfastnesse in the things of God,
rash swearing, violation of engagements and Covenants, compliance with corrupt
Opinions, doctrines, interests. In (...) word, for those many evils wherewith
eve^ good men of several ranks and employment^ have been entangled and
ensnared in the management of the late Wars, and public stupendous
Transactions in these Nations. Confident I am, there is no humble watchful
Christian (employed at this day either in Civil o^ Military affairs) but upon
serious examination will be sensible of many sad miscarriage^ and sinister ends.

This universal repentance (accompanied with faith in Christ's blood) might
(through Gods grace) produce good effects in this time of our sojourning in the
wilderness. And O that we could at length not only word it with God (who is an
all-seeing Spirit) but in good earnest take shame to our selves, and give glory
to him, who will ere long abase the pride of all flesh, that himself alone may
be exalted.

Give me leave to conclude with a word of humble advice, (which I trust is from
the Lord) Let it be your care ( Honored and beloved in the Lord) in these
unsettled times, ^o keep close (both in Judgment and practice) to Blood, Water,
and the written Word, (...) by which three things the Lord comes into, and has
communion with his people. 1 John 5.6.
To the blood of Jesus for your reconciliation and justification. To water
(whereunto the Spirit of God is compared) for your sanctification, and for
cleansing you from all filthiness of flesh and spirit (by the application of
^he blood of sprinkling) and to the written lord for your direction. To the
Law, and to the Testimony, if men speak not according to ^his, it is because
there is no light in them. Isa. 8.20.


Be not ambitious and desirous of the Honors of this vain, tottering,
inconstant, defining world; seek not after that which will not satisfy an
Immortal soul. Remember the example of Moses and Nehemiah, men of choice and
excellent spirits; nay of Christ your head and Savior, who did not please but
deny himself. Let your moderation be known to all men, the Lord is at hand.
Phil. 4.5.


New-Sarum, April 22. 1656. Your Honors affectionate Servant in the work of
Christ. W. TROUGHTON.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader;
THE Wise man says, That of making many Books there is no end, Eccles. 12.12.
At this day especially, the world is full of Books, yea the Nation wherein we
live, abounds in Theological Writings; which being duly considered, and
withal, how unfit I am every way to speak or write of Divine Mysteries, thou
may very well wonder that I should in such a time as this, thrust out this
piece into the world, and the rather because diverse godly men of eminent
abilities, Musculus, Rivetus, Mollerus, Ainsworth, Dixon, in Ps. 45.
have set forth Commentaries and Annotations on this Psalm, whose faithful
labors have been and are still exceeding profitable to the Church of Christ,
and from whom, or some of them at least, I do acknowledge that I have received
much light in this Exposition. Ingenuum est fateri per quos proficerimus. Plin.


As we should not build our faith on men's Judgments (for that is but a humane
Testimony, 1 Cor. 2.5.) so we must take heed of slighting and grieving the
Spirit of God in them, 1 Thessalonians 4.8. It Is no disparagement to the most
spiritual Christian to learn of the meanest Saint who is taught of God, much
(...) should he set light by them who are enriched abundantly with the Gifts of
Nature and Grace, and (...) whom God has given skill for opening and
Interpreting his Word.

I confess, I have been and am still backward t^ publish any thing of this
Nature, being conscious (...) my self of my great inability and weakness, and
(...) that spiritual wisdom, gravity, meekness, and judgment which ought
to be in those that writ^ Books of Divinity, specially in this Critical Age.

Besides, some may be ready to object that there (...) no new thing under the
Sun, and that what is said by me, has been said in effect by others before me^
But yet I can allege diverse Reasons for publishing this Book.

1 The Lord did by his Spirit impresse some truth (in this Psalm) upon my heart
in preaching an^ writing, and who knows but he may also set the same upon thy
heart in reading what is here published, that thou may be the Epistle of
Christ, writter by the finger of his Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.3.

2 If I had met with a fuller Exposition of the Marriage Song in English (such
there may be, but (...) have not seen them) I should not have published this;
and yet I say still, That I do honor and prefer the worthy labors of others
far before mine ow^ weak and inconsiderable abilities.

3 The Reader will meet with some things in th^^ Exposition suitable to the
present times, as those considerations touching Allegories, the in dwelling o^
the Spirit himself in the Saints and the fifth Monarchy which I have
propounded: He may also find some truths which may appear new to him; for
(according to our Saviors words) Every Scribe who is instructed to the
Kingdom of Heaven, should be like to him who brings out of his treasure new
and old, Mat. 13.52. Again

4 This Book may (by providence) come into the hands of some well meaning
souls, who through groundless prejudice debar themselves from hearing those
Truths which might minister light and edification unto them. Satan has
several ways and methods to hinder the progress of the Gospel, and prejudice
is one of those Engines wherewith he batters at the Kingdom of Christ. If
therefore I may (either by preaching or writing) discover and weaken the
interest of Satan, and do good to poor souls, I have my desire.

And what though few should be edified (by my poor labors) in this place where
many seem to love the t^uh in one, and yet despise it in another, and so have
the faith of Christ with respect of persons, contrary to 1 Cor. 2.5. James 2.1.
(a thing truly to be much lamented) yet if this work may be profitable to
others at a distance, it will be a mercy, and I shall esteem it far more then
all my labors. I do not here go about to instruct the Learned and Skillfull
(it might be thought pride in me so to do) but the weak ones, and such as the
Apostle calls carnal, and but babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1. may peradventure be
somewhat edified both in judgment and practice, by this Exposition.

5 I might further add, That there are not such opportunities as I could wish
for preaching and dispersing the Gospel of Christ (good men being too much
confined to Parish precincts) the consideration whereof makes me the more
willing that this should be published.

Let but Christ be exalted, and his Truth prosper, and then it matters not much
though the Creature be rend^ed contemptible and odious. That man is far from a
faithful Minister of the Gospel, who has not in some measure learned to go
thorough good and evil report, honor and dishonor. We are fools for Christ's
sake (says the Apostle) but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are
strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised; being defamed we entreat; we
are made as the filth of the world, and are the off scouring of all things even
to this day, 1 Cor. 4.10, 13.

I am convinced (Gentle Reader) that nothing that we can say or do to beget a
right understanding among them that fear the Lord will effect it, till God
appear more to our spirits, and humble our proud flesh This is thar which I
earnestly pray and wait for, this is that which will put an end to our
confusions. When God comes into his holy Temple, all the earth shall keep
silence, Hab. 2.20. His presence stilleth the noise of the Seas, the noise of
their waves, and the tumult of the people, Psalm. 65.11. When Christ rebuked the
winds and the Sea, there was a great calm, Mat. 8.26. Doubtless the sad
jealousies, dissatisfactions, and quarrels, which are among Christians at this
day, cause many poor sincere hearts who mourn in Sion, to retire themselves,
and live more contemplatively and alone, then otherwise they would do, and yet
(as a Father truly said) we are never less alone, then when we are most alone,
for then God is with us. Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut
thy doors about thee, hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until
the indignation be over past, Isa. 26.20. The prudent shall keep silence in
that day, for it is an evil time, Amos 5.13. Clouds of darkness,
dissatisfaction, and division, gather more and more, which nothing can allay,
or dispell, but the glorious presence of the Sun of Righteousness. Now it is
neither clear, nor dark, but at evening it shall be light. This lightsome
glorions evening is known to the Lord, though not to us, Zech. 14.6, 7.

Christian Reader, I do tender the good of thy soul, and therefore give me
leave (in this hour of temptation) humbly and meekly to propose unto thee some
things by way of counsel and direction, wherein I speak to my self as well as
to thee, and the Lord strengthen us both by his grace.

I. Endeavor in the power of Christ to come to the reading and hearing of his
word, and so to every part of Divine worship, with a single teachable heart,
willing to learn and to entertain truth for truths sake. Mind the presence of
the great God, and beware of prejudice, and of a forestalled Judgment, which
will render the purest Ministry and Ordinances, unprofitable. The Lord teaches
the humble, fills the empty soul, and dwells in the contrite spirit. John
wept because the Book was sealed, waiting in humility for the opening of it,
and behold the Lamb that late on the Throne, opened the Book for him, and to
him, Rev. 5.4, 5.

II. Do not imprison the light when it shines into thy soul, hold not the
truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. But let it have full scope and elbow-room
in thy heart and practice. The Lord takes away light from them that walk not in
the light: When the light shines in a man's face, and he struggles against it
all he can, with principles of darkness and carnal reason, and will not let
the light of the Gospel sway in him, God often leaves such a man to himself.
Sins against Gospel light, and conviction, are sins of a deep dye, and high
aggravation. He that knows his Masters will, and does it not; shall be beaten
with many stripes. As the bodies of those that live nearest the Sun, are most
hardened and scorched, so they that live under the light of the Gospel, and have
it swimming in their undeastandings, but do not receive it in love, are
commonly given up to the strongest delusions, and to the greatest hardness,
brawninesse, and insensiblenesse of heart, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.

And here I cannot but bewail the sad condition of my poor Native Country,
Romans 9.2, 3. Westmorland.
where many hopeful Plants not prizing the simplicity of the Gospel (which
holds forth a crucified Christ) have been blasted by the Impostures and
delusions of Satan, to the great scandal of their Christian profession. And
truly it is a great and unspeakable mercy, (and so I do thankfully acknowledge
it) that some of my Christian acquaintance, who were under those strong
delusions, are recovered out of the snare of Satan; let them henceforth take
heed of slighting the blood, word, Ministry, and Ordinances of Christ, let them
walk believingly and humbly before the Lord, least they fall again into the pit
of destruction, and so the latter part of the Tragedy be more dreadful then
the former.

III. Watch especially against spiritual pride, lest you be overcome with this
white Devil. Oh how apt are we to be puffed up with a high conceit of our
spiritual excellencies and seize, and to slight and despise others as
far below our selves? How ready are we to say (at least in our thoughts) stand
away, come not near to me, for I am holier and more spiritual then thou art? I
know more then thou do, Isa. 65.5. What if some have greater gifts of nature
and grace then others? surely they have no cause to be proud, and to boast of
them: What have thou which thou have not received? and why should thou boast
as if thou had not received it? If a man thinks himself to be something,
when he is nothing, he deceives himself, Gal. 6.3. We are but Stewards in the
Lords house, these Talents are bestowed on us, not that we should exalt our
selves therewith, but that we should faithfully employ the same for the
advantage of our Lord and Master. The greater the gifts are which the Lord
bestows upon a man, the more humble, diligent, and faithful he ought to be,
for Where much is given, much is required; and the better and more excellent
the things are, if a man be proud of them, the greater affront and injury he
offers to God, from whom every good and perfect gift comes. These flowers grow
not naturally in our own Garden, but are planted by grace above nature.

Spiritual pride is the evil of our times, there is much of it in our hearts,
and it is necessary we should have a thorn in the flesh, that we may not be
exalted above measure, 2 Cor. 12.7. If Satan should prevail against you by
this sin (as he knows the better how to tempt you to it, because it was his
own downfall) you are then lost for ever, and all your gifts, knowledge,
duties, sufferings, and the great name which you have had among the Saints,
will not help you, but rather aggravate your condemnation, so that it may well
be said that the pride of thy heart has deceived thee, O^ad. 3. Humility is
the way to true honor, but Pride (as the Wise man says) goes before
destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall, Pro. 16.18. From this root of
bitterness has sprung up the greatest error^ from time to time, and many in
our days having a high conceit of their own inventions, and supposed
excellencies, and looking at the glorious Gospel of Christ as a poor, low,
empty thing, have cast off (with contempt) the Scriptures, the Blood, Natures,
and Offices of the Son of God, and are a shame to Christian Religion When men
will not be wise to sobriety, but in the pride of their hearts like Lucifer,
soar aloft in vain and curious speculations, no wonder if they have a
dreadful downfall. O dear Christian Reader, let us tremble in the flesh, and
watch our hearts against the first risings of spiritual pride.

IV. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world; if any mon
love the world, the love of the father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. This love of
the world chokes the good seed, makes men to err from the faith, 1 Timothy 6.10.
and renders the Ministers of the Gospel unprofitable. Hence many forward
professors have become miserable Apostates: So Francis Spira, and Demas who
deserted Taul, and embraced this world: And alas! how many in our times have
in effect betrayed Christ and his cause, by an inordinate love of the riches,
honors, and pleasures of this world? having the Moon upon their heads, and the
Sun under their feet; whereas on the contrary, they should have the Sun ( i. e.
The glorious righteousness of Christ) upon their heads, and the Moon ( i. e.
all worldly and sublunary things) under their feet, Rev. 12.1.

A man may go far in Religious exercises, as a Magistrate, as a Minister of
the Gospel, as a private Christian, and yet in the end perish by this sin.
Queen Mary said a little before her death, That if she were opened, Callis
would be found in her heart. So truly it is to be feared, If the hearts of many
eminent professors were opened, the inordinate love of the world would be found
in them; and this is like to be the ruin of many, if God do not humble them,
and give them power against it by faith, for this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even faith in Christ, 1 John 5.4. Earthly mindedness is
a secret close corruption: The subtle heart of man has so many evasions,
turnings, and windings, that it is a hard matter to convince him of it. O let
us be jealous herein over our own hearts and ways: The most heavenly minded
Christians will acknowledge and be^ayle before the Lord and his people, their
too much conformity to, and compliance with this world.

V. Take heed of resting in outward forms of Church fellowship, Baptism, etc.
Not that I am against these, either in judgment, or practice; but I fear, that
many who seem to be zealous for the outward part of worship, rest much in the
letter and outside of things, being too too apt to censure their brethren, who
are not of their particular society and opinion. And truly I have observed,
that diverse Christians who have been forward, yea, rigid for the outward part
of worship, not minding as they ought to do, the vitalls of Christianity, have
at length cast off those forms as carnal and beggarly Rudiments. None so
ready to abandon Church fellowship and Ordinances, as those who have abused
them, ascribing that honor to them which particularly belongs to Christ and
his Spirit. Religion (especially now under the New Testament) lies not so much
in outward Observation, as in the Spirit and inward man, John 4.24. Though the
outward part of worship is not to be neglected, as there is opportunity.

VI. Let it be your care to love all the people of God, and in your place to
render and promote the general interest of the Saints throughout the world,
though thousands of them in some things differ from you. Truly I have found it
hard to love those that are not of my Opinion, but there is much pride in this;
can we give light to a dissenting brother till the Lord persuade him? Did not
the Lord wait long for us, before we embraced the light? Though many Saints be
not satisfied with our practice in every part of worship, yet so far as they
will join with us, let us join with them: If they will but pray with us, or
receive one of the Seals with us, though not both: If they will but discourse
with us of the things of Christ, though they will not hear us preach, yet let
us cherish these beginnings, remembering that golden Rule of the Apostle, As
many as are perfect let them be thus minded, and if in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you, Phil. 3.15. Let us seek
to overcome the scrupulous weak Christian by love, and if he will still keep at
a distance from us, yet let not the fault be on our side.

And here we should consider the true ground of Communion of Saints, which is
not their concurrence in this or that controverted point, but their fellowship
with Christ the head. This being manifested (though never so weakly) we ought
to receive them (though not to doubtful disputations) Romans 14.1. That which we
have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that you may have fellowship with us,
and truly our fellowship is with the father and the Son, 1 Jo. 1.3. How can
that man answer it in the great day of the Lord, who now refuses communion
with such as he is persuaded have communion with Christ? Let us not set bounds
and limits where the Lord has set none, but left us free. Nor should we only
have a tender regard to weak believers, but also to poor sinners who are yet
without Christ; we should even weep and lament over their souls, as Christ did
over Jerusalem. Some may be ready to say, that they are poor ignorant carnal
wretches, and have nothing to do with the Ordinances of God, and in the mean
while neglect their souls. But we should go to them, and beseech and entreat
them with tears in our eyes, again and again, to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor.
5.20. This is to be minded as Christ was, who conversed with Publicans and
sinners, and cherished in them the weakest beginnings, and O that there were
such a Gospel compassionate spirit among us!

VII. For the Lords sake let us not turn Religion into faction. Salvation by
Christ is common to all believers under various dispensations, Jude 3. And
therefore we should not ingrosse Christ to any one party, so as to exclude
others that believe on him. Some say they are of Paul, some of Aprllo, some of
Cephas, and some of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.12. When men shall speak so of Christ, as
if he belonged only to them and their party, what is this else but pride and
faction? Shall we serve a party or faction for interest take, to the prejudice
of the common Cause? God forbid; is Christ divided? Was this or that man,
party, or Opinion crucified for us? We are Christians, and ought in this
respect to own no other head nor Master, but Christ. The Apostle writes to the
Saints at Corinth, and to all that call on Christ, theirs and ours, 1 Cor. 1.2.
Some there are in the world (but let not us be of that number) who will rather
make shipwreck of the Gospel, and of Religion, then forgo an Opinion, or
faction, which they violently adhere unto: These will admire or condemn things,
not as they are true or erroneous, but as they are asserted and maintained by
their own party, or that which is opposite.

The Pharisees perceiving that Paul was of their judgment, in opposition to
the Sadduces, though before they had condemned him for a blasphemer, yet now
they were ready to say that he was taught by a good Angel, Acts 23.6. It Is an
excellent thing to have our light and faith in matters of Religion, only in
Christ, and not in man. Such as have their eyes in other men's heads, cannot see
their way clear before them at noon day, and therefore are impetuously carried
on more by faction, then by Christian Judgment and consideration.

VIII. Entangle not thy self with unprofitable disputes, and things that tend
to division, and to the breach of peace and love. Some will be such Scepticks,
as that they will question every thing (delighting themselves in a spirit of
contradiction and opposition) and so come to be settled in nothing. There are
Principles in D. vinity which are to be taken for granted, rather then to be
disputed. He that will for disputation sake frequently question every truth,
will not constantly adhere to any truth. Since we disputed so much (though
blessed be God light has broken forth, the Lord working one contrary by
another, yet) there is a great decay of spiritual heat, and of the practical
part of Religion. The Apostle speaks 1 Timothy 4.6. (...).
of doting about Questions, which signifies to be sick and languishing;
intimating that unprofitable disputes do but weaken and consume the vitalls of
Christianity: insomuch that a Papist was wont to say, Swarez.
That he prized that little time which he constantly set apart every day for
the examination of his conscience, far more then all the other part of the day,
which he spent in his voluminous Controversies.

IX. Mind therefore the things which tend to peace, love, union, edification;
this (I confess) is easily said, but it is not so easily practiced. A perverse
spirit is mingled among us, Isa. 19.14. Peace, love, and brotherly forbearance
are in a manner departed from us. For the divisions of Reuben there are great
thoughts of heart. Sad impressions upon the spirits of watchful Christians,
Judge. 5.15. The great house is smitten with clifts, and the little house with
breaches. Amos 6.11. Divisions, yea subdivisions in Church and Commonwealth,
among all forts of men, and the Lord knows whereunto these things may come in
our time. Our God seems to hide his face from us, and to cast a veil upon all
the attempts and endeavors of his poor servants, after peace, and union, and
reformation. The prejudices, exasperations, and animosities of several parties
are grown to such a height, that nothing can allay them but some powerful
extraordinary appearance and operation of God to and upon men's spirits. Howbeit
(Dear brethren) though peace and love and union seem to depart from us, even so
far, that they are not like to be overtaken by us of this Generation, yet it is
our duty to pursue after them, if that we may overtake them, Romans 14.19. We
have an absolute indispensable Command to be at peace and unity with all the
people of God, Mark 9.50. 2 Cor. 13.11. Ephesians. 4.3. and to silence and hush all
animosities and differences. The Apostle writing to the Corinthians, enquires
not into the cause of their divisions, but enjoynes them whatever the cause be,
to be quiet, and to cease from contention, 1 Cor. 1.11. 1 Cor. 3.3. And so when
there (...) strife among the Phillippians, he states not the controversy as to
Opinions, but gives Rules against prid^ and vainglorious affectation, Phil.
2.3, 4. Constanti^ that good Emperor, when the Christian Bishops ha^ written
letters to him of bitter complaints one again^ another, he would not vouchsafe
to read them, b^^ threw them into the fire.

We cannot but hope that ere long the Lord (...) make some visible provision
against the seandall (...) divisions among Christians, that the world may b^
convinced that the Saints are one in Christ, who^^ glory is herein much
concerned, John 17.23.

Many sweet Rules are propounded in the Scripture, and enlarged upon in the
Writings of godly men, for uniting the Saints, and compounding the^
differences; as namely, That they should love on^ another, and exercise
brotherly patience and for b^^rance: That they should strive to be of one min^
and judgment, and endeavor after more holiness and purity in worship and in
conversation: That they should walk humbly, and think better of other^ then
themselves, and look not only on their owne^ things, but also upon the things
of others: Tha^ they should come to brotherly and friendly Collations, and
handle the points in difference, rather by way of case then controversy,
rather in a way of amicable and friendly discourse, then Scholasti^^
disputation, in which commonly men strive more for victory, and to gain
applause, then for truth. In a word, all of us in our several places should
study uniting Principles, and uniting practices.

These Christian Rules and exhortations are sweet and seasonable, but when we
have said all that we can, we must look beyond our selves, and all our
endeavors, by the eye of faith, to Jesus Christ the universal everlasting
Peacemaker, and reconciler, who when he offered up himself on the Cross to
God the father, all the Saints notwithstanding their manifold differences were
represented in and by him as one entire body, Ephesians. 2.16. Nor did he only remove
that enmity which was in us against God, and so reconcile ^s unto God, but also
that enmity which should be (...) us one against another, carrying up with him
to the Cross all our enmities, sends, and discords, and bu^ying them in his
blood. See Mr. Tho. Goodwins Sermon. on Ephesians. 2.16.
The general peace and ^econciliation of all the Saints, even among them
^elves, is already effected and concluded in Christ their head and
Representative, and it shall in due ^ime be wrought in and among themselves by
the Spirit of love and peace. Christ is engaged hereunto, and as a pledge
thereof he made peace between Jews and Gentiles (in the primitive Church) who
were at as great variance as ever two sorts of people were. All the Saints
though now they keep at a distance, and will not come together, yet they all
meet together as one Body or Army in Christ, when he suffered upon the Cross,
and also in his Resurrection and Ascension into Glory, who although he died,
rose ^gain, ascended, and does intercede for every Saint ^ingly, yet he did and
does also perform these acts for all the Saints jointly and collectively
considered ^s one body; and the Lords Supper, which is a feast ^f Peace, Love,
and Unity (following the Oblation ^f the Sacrifice on the Cross) seals up
visibly and ^pparently this general peace and union among all Saints, and
engages them all hereunto. We are all made to drink into one Spirit. This is
a feast of Amity and Concord, though alas the people of God cannot ^gree
about it, nor about the other Sacrament, which nevertheless seals up their
union in one body, 1 Cor. 12.13.

What shall I further say?

1 Christ has purchased this peace and union. 2 He has also prayed and still
prays for it, John ^.7. 3 He is given for a Covenant of Peace, not only to
make peace between God and us, but among our selves. 4 God has promised it as
a New Covenant blessing, that we shall have one heart, and one way, Jer. 33.39.
Ezekiel. 19.11. Let us improve these considerations by faith, and go to the God
of Peace Peace, who loves, works, and gives peace ways, 2 Thessalonians. 3.16.
X. Learn (and the Lord teach he by the Spi^ of wisdom and revelation,
Ephesians. 1.17.) to b^ wise and discreet Christian. Spiritual wisdom (whi^^ is
a rich blessing) is much wanting in many Sai^ who have strong affections. Zeal
is good, but yet i^ be not tempered with wisdom and knowledge, (...) will
prove like fire in the midst of the house, dangerous and destructive, I bear
them record (says (...) Apostle) that they have a zeal of God, but not
accord^^ to knowledge, Romans 10.2. A Christian that exercise^ spiritual
wisdom, does not only propose to hims^^ a right end, but also suitable means
and instrumen^ and the fittest time and season for accomplishing the end. We
are not only to abound in love, but (...) abound in it in all knowledge and
judgment, Phil. 1.^. Never had we more need of spiritual wisdom, the now,
to know how to order our conversation arigh^ in these perilous times; to be as
innocent as Dove and yet as wise as Serpents. If we beg of God the wisdom
which is pure and peaceable, he will give us without upbraiding, James 1.5.
yea, he will fill (...) with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom an^
spiritual understanding, Col. 1.11. We have a gracious Promise (which the Lord
has set upon (...) heart) That the rash shall understand knowledge, Isa. 3^.4.
And the way of holiness shall be so plain, that foo^ shall not err therein,
Isa 35.8. Wisdom, counse^ and understanding are with the Lord.

XI. Be much in secret prayer and meditation. Wh^^ a man is really, he is
alone, when none but the all seeing God beholds him. Extrinsecall motives in
public Assemblies may raise and elevate the affections and carry a man far in
the performance of Religious services, and yet his Principles and ends may be
carnal and selfish. Spiritual meditation (I fear) is much neglected by
Christians, and that many (I can speak something from experience) who frequent
Church meetings (which yet ought to be frequented) and ^e forward to speak of
the things they know (if not (...) the things they know not) are remiss in
this hea^^nly exercise of Meditation. If they can but with ^^lubility of
expression, and enlargednesse of affecti^^s, manage a duty so as to be approved
by those ^^om they judge to be spiritual, they are ready to ^esse themselves,
and take up their rest here. Are ^^ere not some at this day who formerly
expressed ^^emselves like Angels in the Assemblies of the Saints, ^^t now
having (with the crafty Cardinal) catched ^^e Fish, they throw away the Net as
of no further ^^e? A Christian may be forward in frequenting ^^eetings, and
speaking to the edification of others, ^^et he himself will make but little
progress in Christianity, if he be not frequent in secret prayer, reading ^he
word, meditation, and comparing spiritual things ^ith spiritual.

O let us be much in prayer; Pray for the peace of Jerusalem all ye that love
her, Psalm. 122.6. Ye that make ^ention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give
him no rest ^ill he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isa. 62.6, 7. Let us
now in good earnest go to God by faith, and by prayer; we have gone too long
to Ashur for help, ^aine is the help of man. Arise O Lord, vindicate ^hine own
name, and deliver thy people. As blessed Perkins Non sunt ista litigandi
tempora sed orandi.
said of his, so much more may we say of our times, Prayers are fitter for us
then disputes. Let us (as Luther was advised by his friend) go and cry Lord
have mercy upon these Nations, and thy people therein. Things seem to be past
help in respect of second causes, but the Lord can help us. By terrible things
in righteousness with thou answer us, O God of our salvation, who art the
confidence of the ends of the earth, Psalm. 65.5. The Lord will be terrible out
of his holy places, out of his Church he will show himself a dreadful God to
them that fear him not, but especially to the sinners in Sion, who shall be
afraid, and to the Hypocrites whom fearfullnesse shall surprise, Psalm. 68.35.
Isa. 33.14.

Bear with me (Gentle Reader) for insisting (...) largely on these things;
truly they are much upon my heart, and I look on them as very seasonable (...)
be spoken; they are not sudden, but premeditat^ thoughts and considerations,
which perhaps m^ come into the hands of diverse of my Christian ^^quaintance in
several parts of these Nations. If (...) should write no more whilst I abide
in this Tabern^cle, my last words to my fellow Christians should b^ (by the
Lords assistance) to this purpose.

I will and but one word more touching this boo^ namely, That I have
endeavored therein (according to my poor skill) to be plain and methodical^
not willingly in the least misinterpreting any part (...) this excellent
Marriage Song. Many Texts I have quoted, and not recited the words, least the
Boo^ should swell to a great bulk, and so be burdensome (...) the Reader, to
whom I would not willingly be tedious, as knowing that edification lies not in
a multitude of words. God is in Heaven, we are upon Earth therefore our words
should be few, Eccl. 5.2.

There is (Christian Reader) a Spirit, a Myster^ in the Scriptures (as we read
of a Spirit in the whee^ of Providence, Ezekiel. 1.20.) and this Spirit is chiefly
to be regarded in reading the Scriptures and Commentaries thereupon, without
eying this Spirit, tho^ may read much and often, and yet profit little o^
nothing.

I had thoughts once of publishing a Treatise of the Nature and Operations of
the Spiritual Man, from 1 Cor. 2.15. And also a Discourse of Gods
unchangeablenesse, and the Mystery of Divine Providence from Ezekiel. 1.16. But I
shall further consult the Lord, and take direction from him, before I publish
those Treatises.

And now Christian Reader, the Lord be thy Teacher, and make this Book a
Blessing to thee; for except the Lord build the House, our labor will be in
vain, Psalm. 127.1.

Salisbury, Feb. 12. 1656/7
The Candid Reader is desired t^ pass by, or to Correct with hi^ pen, these
following Errata's which have escaped the Press by reason of the Author's
absence.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. herein subjoyne, for here subjoyne. p. 11. ^^ked, for talked. Before
trial, for for trial. etc. (...) and. p. 15. cole, for coal. p. 41. Saints,
for souls. (...) 47. the high God, for the most high God. p. 60. is (...) for
in one. p. 145. competion, for competition. p. 15^. prese, for present. p. 170.
the world, for the word. p. 17^. them, for then. p. 184. the Lord will make,
for the L^^^ make. p. 225. Hellulim, for Hillulim. p. 234. Oecolampadin, for
Oecolampadius. p. 235. mavietum, for inquitum. at, for ad. p. 240. hand, for
land. p. 243. from (...) from, for from of. p. 268. and heaven, for in heaven.

An EXPOSITION on the 45. Psalm: The INTRODUCTION.
THis Psalm does in an Allegory, excellently describe the mystical marriage
between Christ and his Church, under the type of King Solomon, and his Queen:
the glory, and magnificence of whose marriage, and Court, did but shadow forth
this; and therefore though we may take notice by the way, of Solomon and his
Queen, yet Christ mystical is chiefly aimed at in this Psalm: many things
herein being only applicable to him.

It is much like the Canticles, which is also an Allegory, borrowed, from the
fellowship between husband and wife, to signify the Intercourse and communion
which (...) between Christ and his Church. The Book of Daniel, and the
Apocalypse, with the History of Abraham's family, mentioned, Gal. 4.24. are
likewise Allegorical; with ^ther passages in Scripture.

In an Allegory, a further thing is meant then is plainly expressed in words:
yet nevertheless we must avoid the ^xtreams of Papists and other Monkish men,
who under ^otence of Allegories and mysteries, make of the Scriptures a nose of
wax, and turn the whole History of the Bible, Christ, sin, death, heaven, hell,
and all into an^ Allegory; some tell us that the whole letter of the Scripture
holds forth only a Covenant of works; and so reduce all, to a Spirit and light
within them: evacuating and laying aside Christ Crucified, his Blood, merits,
offices, word, Caro concupiscit adversus Spiritum, id est Historia and
Scripturae Carneus seu literalis intellectus, Contra allegoriam and Spiritualem
Doctrinam repugnat. Literatis Scripturae intelligentia arceat a regno dei,
allegorici Sensus Coelum aperiant etc.

I Consid. There is but one true sense of Scripture.


Institutions, as Types and shadows of tha^ Glory which is revealed in them.

Some of the ancients did miserably pervert the Scriptures by bringing in vain
and groundless Allegories: Phil^ Judaeus, Expounds Paradise, to be the Soul;
Man to be the mind; the woman to be the sense; the Serpen^ to be delight; the
Tree of knowledge of good and evil to be wisdom; and the rest of the Trees to
be the virtues and endowments of the mind: whither will no^ the wanton wit of
man (otherwise sober) mislead him?

Origin one of the Fathers was a great admirer of Allegories; writing on the
words of the Apostle, The fles^ lusts against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. That is
(says he) the Historical or Literal Sense, fights against the Spiritual
or Allegorical sense of Scripture; and again, the Literal Sense, which is
Carnal, keeps men from, Bu^ the Allegorical Sense, opens the Kingdom of
Heaven to them. But see and admire the wisdom of God! whereas this man
expounded almost all other Scriptures Allegorically, he applied Math. 19.12.
Literally, and so gelded himself.

Now because Allegories have been and are still much abused, I shall propound 3
or 4 Considerations, which may minister some light to the Reader therein.

First, whereas Papists and others make several Sense of Scripture, a Literal
and a Spiritual sense; and the Spiritual they divide into Allegorical,
Tropologicall, and Anagogicall; we must know that there is but one full true,
and entire sense of Scripture, intended by the holy Ghost, and that is the
Literal sense; which is sometimes expressed by the Spirit of God in proper, and
sometimes i^ borrowed and figurative terms: a man may as well brin^ in a hundred
several senses, as two or three varying one from another. The Literal and
Spiritual are no^ several senses, but several Illustrations, applications or
uses of Scripture, or a Compound sense (as some Phra^^ it) whereof there are
two parts, literal, and figurative, which make up one entire Sense, which is
fulfilled two manner of ways, i.e. in the type, and literally in the thing
signified. It Is not denied but that there is a vast difference between the
Natural man and the Spiritual man's knowledge of the word of God, as there is
between a natural, and a spiritual light and principle: But then this
difference is in the person or subject knowing, not in the Scriptures or object
known.

Secondly, Allegories are not to be admitted, 2 Consid. Allegories are to be
Cautiously admitted.
but where the Scripture it self does warrant them; and Commonly where an
Allegory is propounded, there it is also expounded, as in Gal. 4.24. Which
things are an allegory (or, by which things another thing is meant) for these
are the two Testaments: nor has this history of Abraham's family two several
Senses; the one proper and literal, the other figurative and mystical; But
they are two parts or Branches of one full entire sense, and so intended by the
holy Ghost: for not only the bare History, but also that which is thereby
signified, is the full sense of the holy Ghost.

Thirdly, The learned Papists themselves confess, 3 Consid. Allegories are not
argumentative Theologia Symbolica, non est argumentativa, Tho. Aqui.
that no convincing demonstrative argument can be taken from the Allegorical
sense, either to Confute, or to Confirm any point of Doctrine; and therefore
much less from that which they call Tropologicall, or Anagogicall. Allegories
may serve to illustrate the Truth, but we are not to build our faith upon them.

Fourthly, As it is dangerous to bring in allegories where the Scripture does
not warrant them, and to take those words Figuratively which should be taken
properly; So on the other hand, it is no less dangerous, 4 Consid. It Is also
dangerous to take that literally, which ought to be taken figuratively.
to take those Texts properly, which should be taken figuratively: as Joh.
10.1. Joh. 15.1. 1 Cor. 11.24. Matt. 17.12. Matt. 16.6. Joh. 3.3. Matt. 3.11.
The Papists by expounding those words, This is my Body, literally, which should
be taken figuratively, have brought in that monstrous Idol of
Transubstantiation. And whereas John speaks, Matt. 3.11. of being Baptized
with Fire, The Abysseni taking the words Literally, instead of Baptizing their
Children with water, they mark them with a hot- Iron.

Quaer. -- But when ought we to leave the proper and literal, In what Cases
allegories are to be admitted.
and adhere to the figurative sense?

Ans. 1. When the proper sense is against common Reason, or 2. against the rule
of Faith, or 3. against good Manners; then are we to depart therefrom, and
adhere to the Figurative; comparing such Texts with other clear Scriptures,
where the Truth at least in fundamental is plainly laid down in the letter.
Concerning this (that I may not be too tedious) I refer the Studious Reader to
Weems Christ. Synagog. Lib. 2. Cap. 1. p. 216. etc. Pareu^ on Gal. 4.24.
Perkins on Gal. 4.24. Mr White on the Scriptures, p. 167.

An EXPOSITION on the 45. Psalm:
[The Inscription] To the Chief Musician on Shoshaunim, for the Sons of Corah:
Maschil. A Song of Loves.
THe Inscription it self demonstrates the Spiritual excellency of this Psalm:
Reasons why we should diligently study this Psalm.
that it is of great weight, and Concernment, and therefore ought to be
diligently studied by us, and that upon these Grounds.

First, Because it is Directed to the public Minister of Gods worship, to be
used in the Solemn public praises of God; a Song to the Chief Musician on
Shoshannim, etc.

Secondly, In regard of the Title Maschil, a Song appointed to minister
Knowledge and Instruction to the Church of Christ in all ages; and that, 1.
Concerning the Grace, Beauty, Majesty, and glory of the Kingdom of Christ. 2.
The Spiritual privileges and Benefits which redound to his Church. 3.
Touching the obligations which lie on the Church, and the duties which she
should perform to Christ her husband: Great duties and services are required,
where great dignities and privileges are bestowed.

Thirdly, Because it is directly and Immediately applied by the holy Ghost, as
the Speech of the Father to Christ: So that the mystery of the Trinity, the
Father, in and to the Son, by the Spirit, is opened in this marriage- Song;
Christ the Son being the person chiefly aimed at.

Song of Loves, In the plural number, intimating the Transcendent excellency of
the Love of Christ, or Gods Love to us in Christ (above all other loves;) In
whom there is the perfection of all Loves, Instructions drawn from the
Inscription.
heighths, depths, lengths, Breadths, Glorious Dimensions which we cannot fully
comprehend, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.

Hence we may draw some Instructions.

Christ alone, who has the perfection and fullness of all Loves, of all
excellencies in him: why will thou, O my Soul, run a sharking after Creatures?
why will thou feed on husks and things that profit not? Isai. 55.2. Behold,
here is Meat enough for thee in thy Fathers house, Luke 15.17. To decline the
love of God, and to live on Creature perishing love, what is it else, but to
forsake the Fountain of living water, and Digg broken Cisternes that will hold
no water? Jer. 2.13. Divine love and goodness is that only which must satisfy
the Soul. Others desire wine, corn, and oil, But Lord do thou lift up the
light of thy Countenance upon me. Psalm. 4.6.

Secondly, The Lord would have us (though never so vile in our selves) to be
fully persuaded of his Love: As the husband bids his wife cast away Jealousies,
and be confident of his Love; so deals Christ with us. Him that Comes to me,
I will not, I will not in any wise cast out, Joh. 6.37. How did he condescend
to Thomas, notwithstanding his peremptoriness in unbelief? Reach hither thy
hand, and thrust it in my side, and be not faithless but believing, Joh. 20.27.
Me thinks I hear him speak in this or the like language: Be not Jealous, but
entertain good thoughts of me; I am not a hard Master; I am not an unkind
husband; I put not new wine into old Bottles, Matt. 9.17. I lay not heavy
Burdens upon my people. How ingenuously does he deal with his Disciples, and
with us in them? Joh. 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you; In my Fathers
house there are many Mansions: were it not so, I would have told you. I love
you so well, that I would not have Concealed it from you.

This Song which displays the Love of Christ in its Colors, is called a Song
of Loves; his love being a great Love, yea the greatest Love. Compare we John
15.13. with Romans 5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. He Loved his Church, and gave himself for
it, Ephesians. 5.25. he Loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. Yea he Loved
us out of or from the pit of Corruption: his Love was so strong, so powerful,
that it pulled us out of the deep pit and mire, wherein otherwise we had been
overwhelmed, Isai. 38.19. Zac. 9.11.

Lastly, Learn hence, that the more we are acquainted with the Love of God,
and dwell and abide in Love; the more we Resemble him who is Love it self: 1 John 4.16, 17. If he so loved us, how should we love one another, yea our
enemies? though not with a love of Complacency, yet with a love of pity; The
Lord having in love and pity reconciled us when we were enemies.

So much for the Inscription.
Verse. 1. My heart is inditing a good matter: I speak of the things which I
have made touching the King: my tongue is the pen of a Ready Writer.
This Epithalamion or marriage-Song may be divided unto two general parts. In
the Nine first verses, Christ the Bridegroom, and his Glorious excellencies
are Commended: and in the verses following, the dignities and honors of the
Church, the Bride, or Lambs wife, are described; and she withal Instructed in
her duty to her husband. Now though the Kingdom of Christ spoken of ^n this
Psalm, Bears date from his death; yet it will ^ppeare more Glorious in this
world, before it be given up to the Father, and God be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28.

The First verse contains an Encomium, or Commendation, by way of preface,
which the Spirit of God ^scribes to this excellent song in four respects, as
1. It ^s a Good Matter. 2. It was penned by divine Inspiration; the Spirit of
God filling the heart and inflaming ^he affections in the penning of it. 3. It
treats of Christ ^he King, who is exalted by the Spirit, Joh. 16.13, 14, 4. It
tends to the comfort and edification of the Church in a^ ages.

The Conjugall love of Christ is a good matter. Reasons hereof.
[It is a good matter] Hence learn,

That the Grace and love of Christ toward poor sinne^ his espousing and taking
them into communion with himself (whereas by nature we are all strangers and
enemies t^ him) is a sweet subject to insist upon; glad Tidings; y^ the best
tidings that ever came to the sons of men; an^ therefore may well be called a
good matter.

matter that most concerns Gods honor; (...) matter wherein the Glory of his
mercy, wisdom, power Justice, Truth and faithfulness does eminently shine
forth herein he has abounded toward us in wisdom and prudence, Ephesians. 1.8.
Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and peace have kissed each
other, Psalm. 85.10, 1^. Romans 3.25, 26. Joh. 3.16. 1 Timothy 1.15. Joh. 1.18. 2
Cor. 4.^. Romans 1.16. Nor can we rightly and to purpose honor the Lord in our
generation, unless we have a Spiritual knowledge of this excellent matter.

Secondly, as it concerns Gods Glory, So the souls eve^^ lasting felicity:
which two the Lord has linked together in his infinite eternal wisdom and
council. As for the soul of man, it is a spiritual, Immaterial, Immortal
substance, capable of Eternal Bliss or woe. What will (...) profit a man, to
gain the whole world, and lose his soul (...) Mark. 8.36. Now therefore that
which enricheth the so^^ to eternity, must needs be an excellent matter. Such
(...) matter is the subject of this song, Luke 2.10, 11. Ma^^ 16.16. 2 Timothy
1.10. Yea it is that field, wherein the ric^ Pearl lies hid. Matt. 13.44, 46.

First, Then let this excellent matter be welcome t^ thee: for it is worthy of
all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15. Entertain it therefore with suitable affection: Oh
what low an^ Carnal thoughts have we of the Gospel and things o^ Christ! as if
they were slight and trivial matters! Th^^ is no small sin: how will they
escape, that neglect so great Salvation, Heb. 2.3. Not only they that openly
oppose but they that neglect and undervalue it, shall perish: eve^ the feet of
such as bring these glad tidings, should b^ beautiful and acceptable, Romans
10.15. as The Paranymp^ or friends of the Bridegroom, are well esteemed of by
the Bride, for their relation to the Bridegroom.

Secondly, Be diligent in searching out this matter in ^he use of means, as
prayer, reading, hearing, confe^ence, meditation, and above all, in the
Constant exercise of faith and dependence on Christ in his prophetic office,
for his effectual Teachings; he being the great Prophet of his Church, whose
teachings do infinitely extell all the teachings of men. As Solomon speaks
concerning civil affairs, It Is the honor of a King to search out a matter,
Prove. 25.2. so it is much more the honor of a Christian, to search out the
depth of this matter, by how much spiritual things do excel humane matters.

Thirdly, It blames the present generation of Professors, ^or minding and
talking much of worldly matters; one man's time is wholly drunk up with
inquiring after State-matters; Another spends his whole time in his Trade; nay
perhaps he thrusts himself into three or four several Trades, that he may get
gain, and grow great ^n the world; Thus men plunge themselves over head and
ears in earthly things; their hearts, tongues, and Time being wholly taken up
therewith; So that in many days together they scarce have a serious thought or
word of this excellent matter. The primitive Christians were otherwise minded,
who discoursed so much of the Kingdom of heaven, and their Spirits were so
much raised and ennobled therewith, that the Princes of the world were afraid
that they would take their Kingdoms and glory from them.

Fourthly, The Ministers of Christ especially should exceedingly delight, yea
it should be their meat and drink to open and declare this good matter to the
people: A Necessity is laid upon me; yea woe be to me if I preach not the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. i.e. if I speak not of this good matter. Let Ministers
but read over their commission, Mark 16.15. Ephesians. 3.8. and they will find it
their duty to preach the simplicity of the Cross of Christ, and not to entangle
themselves or others with Scholastic quirks, and quiddities, and with
unprofitable disputes: Nor is it to read the people a lecture of morality, But
to set before them the emptiness and nothingness of the Creature, and the
riches of the grace of Christ, and union and fellowship with him: This is a
good matter; an excellent knowledge. Phil. 3.8. I determined to know nothing,
but Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. and, God forbid I should glory in any
thing save in this, Gal. 6.14.

Again [my heart inditeth] that is, it Boileth Ebullivit Cor meum verbum bonum.
or bubl^ up, or is inflamed, with this good matter. Hence serve,

That a Spiritual heart is so full of good matter, 2 Obser. A Spiritual he
art cannot fully express what is within.
and inflamed with the Love of Christ, that (though it would v^ it self, yet)
it cannot fully express with the Tongue what conceives within.

I shall here (...) subjoyne three Corollaries.

First, as the Spiritual man has more good matter wi^^ in then he can
express, being filled with the Spirit, E^^ 5.18. the holy Ghost being as a
well of water spring (...) up in him to Eternal life, Joh. 4.14. Joh. 7.38. so
the Carnal heart is fuller of corrupt matter then can be (...) pressed. The
heart of the wicked is little worth, Prove. 10.^. One would not give a penny for
it: It Is so overcharge with filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, that it
neith^^ can nor will with meekness receive the ingrafted wor^ Jam. 1.21. The
very thoughts of the wicked are an ^^mination to the Lord, Prove. 15.26. Romans
3.9, 11, 12.

Secondly, By this a true Saint is distinguished from Hypocrite. The most
refined Hypocrite that is, speaks (...) more Spiritual good then he has or
enjoys: he (...) outspeake all his comforts and enjoyments; But the tr^^
believer has that peace which passes understanding, Phi^ 4.7. and that joy
which is unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pe^ 1.8. That which eye has not seen,
ear has not heard, (...) has it entered into the natural heart to conceive,
1 Cor. 2.^

Thirdly, When we have to do with Spiritual things specially that part of
divine worship which concerned our blessing and praising God for Christ, and
for the hope of Glory which we have through him; we should more regard
Spiritual affections, and a thankful admiring frame of heart, then words and
expressions: The did the Psalmist; Oh give thanks to God for his Goodness Oh
that men would praise the Lord, Psalm. 107.1.8. Oh ho^ great are thy works, and
thy thoughts are very deep, Psalm. 92.5. What is Man that thou art mindful of
him, or the son of man that thou regardest him! Psalm. 8.4. Oh the depth of the
riches of his grace, wisdom and knowledge how unsearchable are his ways!
says the Apostle, Romans 11.33. The Disciples said one to another, Did not our
^^rts burn within us, whilst he talked with us? Luke 24.

My heart burned, and was not thy heart also in^^ned with that good matter
which he taked of?

[Which I have made touching the King;]

Touching what King? even the Lord Jesus the King (...) of Saints, he is the
subject of this Song. Hence Learn, 3 Obser. a gracious heart specially eyes
Christ in thanksgiving: the reasons hereof.
(...)

That a Gracious heart in praising the Lord, has a special (...) on Christ's
person, as clothed with his regal office and au^^rity, for subduing the
churches enemies Inward and out^^rd, and working out deliverance and salvation
for her. ^^ch a heart longs to see the King in his Beauty and ^^ory, riding in
Triumph; and though it bless the ^^rd for all mercies, yet chiefly for the
person of Christ: ^^ssed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
(...).

Christ, and for his sake; having given us (...) Son, he will withhold no good
thing from us, Romans 8.32. ^^rist being ours, all things are ours, 1 Cor. 3.21,
22. ^^alth, liberty, life, relations, preservations, deliverances, all passages
of divine providence, are rendered Spiritual Blessings to us by Christ.

Christ himself; not ^^ly nor chiefly to the graces and benefits, But to the
^^^son of Christ. As the living Father sent him, and he lives (...) the Father;
so we believing on him, shall Live by him, ^^^h. 6.57. He is the Bread of God
that came down from Heaven to give life to the world, his flesh is meat indeed;
^^d his Blood is Drink indeed, Joh. 6.51, 55. Not that ^^is is a personal but
a mystical union: we are not ^^de one person, but one spirit with him, 1 Cor.
6.19.

spiritual; But how ^^t with you? are ye not more affected with the gifts then
^^e giver? with the benefits and advantages that come (...) Christ, then with
Christ himself? gifts, parts, inlarge^^ents, graces, Duties, are not Christ
himself, These were (...) Crucified for us, 1 Cor. 1.13. If it be thus with
you, It Is ^^t a true entire affection: The true spouse Loves the person of her
husband more then the benefits that (...) by him.

It follows [ My Tongue is the pen of a ready with or thus, My mouth is open
to show forth the P^^ of Christ the King and Bridegroom. Hence note, (...)

That such as have Spiritual affections to Christ, 4 Obser. The true Christian
will speak of and for Christ.
will (...) speak of and for him. The Tongue will speak of that what the heart
conceives and is affected with. Out of th^^ bundance of the heart the mouth
speaks; A good (...) out of the good Treasure of the heart, brings for good
things; and an evil man out of the evil Treasure his heart, brings forth evil
things, Matt. 12.34, 35. T^^ Tongue of the wicked is a World of Iniquity, The
Reas. of this. 1 Reas.
Jam. 3.5, Men discover what they are, by their ordinary language.

The first Reason of this point is taken from Christ's p^^ chase; who not only
purchased our Souls and the (...) culties thereof, but also our Bodies and the
member thereof, to praise and worship him: Ye are bought with price: therefore
Glorify God in your Body and in your Spi^^ which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.20. Indeed
he chiefly require the heart: My son, give me thy heart, Prove. 3.1. Prove. 4.^.
But yet he will have the Tongue also to worship him, (...) 57.7, 8, 9.

Reason, is taken from Gods promise, The he will give us a pure language, Zeph.
3.9. Not mixed, (...) that of Ashdod, Neh. 13, 23, 24. But pure and spiritual
even the language of Canaan, Isai. 19.18. The tongue^ the dumb shall speak and
sing this language, Isai. 35.^. The Law makes the hand clean, but not the
heart; B^^ the Gospell-promise purifieth both heart, and hand, a^^ tongue, and
makes them Isntrumental for God.

Thirdly, Because the Tongue praising the Lord, is a Christians Glory: Awake my
Glory, I Will praise thee O Lord among the people, Psalm. 57.8. Psalm. 108.1, 2, 3.
In the L^^ of him that has understanding, wisdom is found, Pro^. 10.13. The
tongue is the Glory of a man, if well; But (...) shame and reproach, if ill
Employed.

Reason, is taken from that Constrayning virtue which is in Love: If Christ's
love be shed abroad in the heart, 2 Cor. 5.14. Romans 5.5. it will constain the
Tongue to speak of him and for him; where true Zeal for Christ is, there will
also be words for him. Croesus Son ha^^ng never spoken before, yet seeing his
Father in dan^^r to be killed, Cried out, Kill not King Croesus. Back^^rdness
in good speech, argues want of Love; love opens ^^e heart wide, and the heart
the tongue: men will often ^^ake of the things they delight in: Mariners of
their ^^yages, Soldiers of their victories, etc. And should ^^t Christians
declare what Christ has done for them?

assistance of the Spirit of God: when the A^^stles were filled with the holy
Ghost, they began to ^^eak as the Spirit gave them utterance, Acts. 2.4. The
^^ly Ghost as he supplyeth us with suitable affections, so ^^th suitable words
and expressions, both for prayer, ^^d praises: Which things we speak not in
the words ^^ich man's wisdom teaches, But which the Holy Ghost ^^acheth, 1 Cor.
2.13. I am full of matter (says Elihu) ^^e Spirit within me constrains me;
my belly is as wine which wants vent; it is ready to burst like new bottles, Job
^^.18, 19, 26.

Reason is taken from that difference which the ^^ripture puts between the
communication of the Godly, ^^d the language of the wicked; The wicked Talk of
^^nity, Psalm. 12.2. They that are of the World speak of ^^e World, 1 John 4.5.
Their Tongues are set on fire of hell, ^^m. 3.6. Their Communication is rotten,
Ephesians. 4.29. On ^^e Contrary, the high Praises of the Lord are in the ^^outhes of
the Godly, Psa. 149.6. They declare his wonderful works, Exo. 18.8, 9. Act.
14.27. Their speech is gra^^us, seasoned with Salt, Tending to edification,
Col. 4.^^ Ephesians. 4.29. The Tongue of the just is as Choice Silver, ^^d the lips
of the Righteous feed many, Prove. 10.20, 21. ^^ov. 12.13, 14, 18. The tongue of
the wise uses knowledge aright, But the mouth of fools pours forth
^^olishness: A wholesome Tongue, is a tree of life: but ^^rversness therein is
a breach in the Spirit, Prove. 15.2, 4. (...) Fountain (says James) sends not
forth at the same ^^ace sweet water and bitter, Jam. 3.11. Death and life ^^e
in the power of the tongue, Prove. 18.21. By thy words ^^ou shall be Justified,
and by thy words thou shall be ^^ndemned, Matt. 12.37.

It reproves two Sorts.

Devil and sin, and yet (...) tend to more spiritualness then others; as if the
Soul sh^^^ go to heaven, But the Body to hell: a desperate D^^^sion, for a man
to imagine that he can keep his spirit (...) and holy, and yet in his outward
man, go to Ma^^ worship an Idol, and conform to the lusts of the w^^ and the
flesh. It Is true, that bodily worship profiteth^^ thing without inward
obedience, 1 Timothy 4.8. But wh^^ the one is, there the other will be. Romans 6.13,
19.

2. This blames another sort, who have tongue eno^^^ for themselves and in
their own quarrel; But not a w^^ in Christ's cause, when his Glory lies at
stake: They Will (...) spare to speak for their own worldly Interest and hon^^^
But are tongue-tyed, when they should speak for Ch^^^ and his interest: It
seems the faith and love of Ch^^^ is not in them: we believe, and therefore we
speak, 2 Co^^^ 13. Love is as fire in the bosom; a man cannot refra^^ Jer.
20.9. My heart was hot within me, says David, wh^^ I was musing the fire
Burned: then spoke I with (...) tongue, Psalm. 39.3. Indeed we should be swift
to hear, a^^ slow to speak, specially before our betters, Jam. 1.1^. man may
easily offend with his Tongue: There is a time^^ Speak, and a time to be
silent, Eccl. 3.7. And it is wisdom^^ observe the fittest season; words spoken
in season are (...) apples of Gold in pictures of Silver, Prove. 15.23. Prove.
^^.11. But yet the weakest, being called thereunto by Pr^^^dence, ought to
speak out their experiences of the goodness of God, and contend not only in
spirit but in wo^^^ for the Truth of Christ. Come, and I will tell you what
(...) Lord has done for my soul. The Manifestation of the Sp^^^ is given to
every one to profit withal, see Psa. 26.^^. 1 Cor. 12.7. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.

Secondly, We should earnestly beg of the Lord that (...) may have a ready
Tongue and Pen, to set forth the prai^^^ of Christ: My tongue is the Pen of a
ready Write^^ many have a ready tongue and pen for Satan and Antichri^^ and Oh
that we should be so backward, Dull, Tongu^^ typed, when we should speak and
write for Christ, and ^^^ndicate his concernments! how empty are we, till the
^^^rd fill us? How dull, till he quicken us? How are our ^^outhes shut till he
open them? How do we Stammer, ^^l he touch our tongue with a Cole from the
Altar? ^^nd therefore we should earnestly desire the Lord, that (...) he opened
the mouth and loosed the tongue of Za^^arias, Luke 1.64. so he would do with
ours, that we may ^^eak and praise the Lord: That he would open to us a ^^de
door of utterance, Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.3. That as it is ^^d of the spouse, Cant.
4.11. Honey and Milk may be un^^r our tongue, and our lips may drop as the
Hony-combe; that he would also guide our pens, that we may not vent ^^^r own
passions, and write down our own Inventions, but his teachings and
discoveries; neither that ^^^r pens may be mingled with error, gall, and
worm^ood, But that we may hold forth truth with a spirit of ^^^ve and meekness.

Verse.2. Thou art fairer then the Children of men: Grace is poured into thy
lips, therefore God has blessed thee for ever.
Thou art fairer, or fuller of beauty. Some apply this (...) the beauty, wisdom
and magnificence of Solomon: But (...) was but the Type, The Lord Jesus is the
Antitype and ^^bstance; These words therefore, with the following ^^rses, do
excellently describe the Beauty and glorious ^^rfection of Christ the Son of
God. The word, as Ainsworth ^^^tes, is of a Double form, signifying Double,
excellent, In^^mparable beauty; not so much of Body as of mind; not (...) much
outward as inward beauty, consisting in his most excellent, Transcendent
wisdom, meekness, love, holiness, etc. Thou art fairer, O King Christ, then
the Children of ^^en. Hence Observe,

That there is no beauty among the Sons of men (though ^^odly and Spiritual)
Comparable to the beauty of Christ, 1 Obser. Christ is incomparably fair.
(...) is altogether lovely, and carries the banner above ten ^^^usand, Cant.
5.10, 16.

He is Incomparably fair, in diverse respects.

First, 1 In his Natures: 1 As God.
in respect of his Natures, divine and humane: 1. (...) God Blessed for ever;
In whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells substantially, Col. 2.9. Who is the
Brightness the Fathers Glory, the express Image of his person, (...) 1.3. he
is beauty, Wisdom, Truth, Power, Love it self. We beheld his Glory, the Glory
as of the only Begotten^ the Father, full of grace and Truth. Joh. 1.14.

2. 2 As man.
In his humane nature he is Incomparably fair, being miraculously conceived in
the Virgins womb by t^^ Holy Ghost, and Borne without sin, Matt. 1.18. Heb.
4.15. (...) man, he has the pre-eminence above all other men, Col. ^.18. the
humane nature in him being assumed into person (...) union with the divine.

He is incomparably Fair,

3 As he is Mediator between God and man. 3 As Godman.
The Bran^^ of the Lord shall be Beauty and Glory, Isai. 4.2. In bo^^ natures
he Transacts our Business as Mediator; Both in (...) spect of merit and
efficacy; having satisfied divine Justice for us, and applying his merit unto
us, 2 Cor 5.19. 1 C^^. 2.8. Joh. 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 Timothy 2.5. Heb. 9.14. Joh.
17.2^, 21, 24.

Secondly, 2 In his Offices. 1 Prophetical.
He is incomparably fair and full of beauty in his Offices; prophetical,
Priestly, and Regal.

1. As a Prophet he instructs his people in heavenly a^^ divine mysteries, not
only morally propounding Tru^^ to the understanding in the Ministry of the
word, B^^ inwardly and effectually enlightening the soul by the Spirit of
wisdom and revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. See Deuteronomy. 1.15. Act. 3.22. Matt. 23.7. Heb.
3.1. Mal. 3.1. Col. 2.3. Jo. 14.^^. Joh. 16.7, 8, 13.

2. As a Priest,

1. He has wholly purged away our sins, 2 Sacerdotall.
and reconciled us unto God, 1 John 1.7. Col. 1.20, 22. 2 Cor. 5.19. Heb. ^.28.
Heb. 10.11, 12, 18. Romans 5.10.

2. As a Priest, he prays and Intercedeth for us^^ and so will save us to the
uttermost, Joh. 17. Heb. 7. 2^. Zac. 3.1, 2.

3. He does effectually Bless us, Luke 24.5^. John 14.27. Heb. 7.1, 2. Acts
3.26. (...) 3. In his regal office, 3 Regal.
whereby (...) us, subduing our enemies, inward and outward. ^^al. 2.6. Dan.
2.44. Luke 1.36. Ephesians. 1.21, 22. Isai. 9.6. ^^b. 7.2. Joh. 5.21, 22, 23, 27. 2
Cor. 10.4, 5.

Now these three Offices of Christ are full of beauty, ^^wer and virtue, and
they answer to our threefold misery (...) nature, namely, our ignorance of God,
alienation from ^^od, and our Inability to return to God. 1. Our ignorance is
healed by his prophetical office. 2. Our enmity, (...) his priestly: and 3. Our
inability, by his Regal of^^e.

Thirdly, 3 In his relations.
Christ is exceeding fair and beautiful in his ^^lations to us. (1). As he is
our Father, Isai. 8.18. Isai. ^^6. Heb. 2.13, 14. (2). Our elder brother, Cant.
5.16. Romans ^^29. Heb. 2.11. (3). Our head, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Col. 1.18. Col. ^^19.
Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Cant. 5.11. (4). Our husband, Isa. 54.^^ 2 Cor. 11.2. Hos.
2.7.19. Jer. 3.14. Cant. 2.16. (5). Our ^riend, Isai. 41.8. Joh. 15.14, 15. He
is real and faithful (...) performing what belongs to these or any other
Relation.

Fourthly, 4 In his word and ordinances.
He is incomparably fair in his word and ordinances: here we see the King in
his beauty, Isai. 33.17. ^sal. 19.10. Psalm. 29.2. Psalm. 84.1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm.
95.1, 26. ^sal. 100. Isai. 52.7.

Fifthly, In his administrations and works of providence; 5 In his providence.
^^ough we cannot find them out, from the beginning to ^^e end, Eccl. 3.11. he
is full of beauty to a Spiritual eye, (...) his corrective Dispensations.
Though ye have lain among the potts, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove,
^^vered with Silver, and her feathers with yellow Gold, ^sal. 68.13.

In his Members: the spouse is altogether fair, 6 In his members.
Song. 4. ^. Isai. 52.1. But it is with a beauty derived from her husband, Col.
2.10. Ezekiel. 16.12, 13.

Object. from Isai. 53.2. He has no form nor comeliness, no beauty that we
should desire him.

form of a ^^rvant, Isai. 42.1. Phil. 2.7. Clothed with our shame and ^^proach,
made sin and a curse for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. (...) Triumphed over his
and our enem^^ and (...) Gods right hand in Glory. Luke 24.^^. Ephesians. 4.8. (...)
2.15. Joh. 3.14. Phil. 2.9. By way of man^ station only, in respect of the
divine Nature; and by (...) of real participation, in respect of the humane
Nature.

2. It Is but to a Carnal eye that Christ appears th^^ without Beauty in his
humiliation; the natural man Ju^geth according to outward appearance, and
knowe^^ Christ only after the flesh, 2 Cor. 6.16. But to a believing Spiritual
eye, Christ is Incomparably fair and beauti^^ in his Cross and agony: such an
one beholds righteou^ness in sin; the blessing in the Curse; life in death;
a^^ glory in the shame and ignominy of the Cross: and o^^ Spiritually describe
the beauty of Christ from top to to^ Cant. 5.10, 11, 12, 13. etc.

enamored, yea ravished with him: his hea^^ (he says,) is ravished with the
beauty of the spou^^ Cant. 4.9, 10. And well may our hearts be ravished w^^
him, who is fairer then the children of men: a beautiful Soul-ravishing object
indeed: for, 1. He is a present good though absent in body, yet present in
Spirit, Matt. 28.2^ Joh. 14.18, 23. 2. He is not an ordinary good, but a
p^^tious pearl, a most excellent treasure, Matt. 13.44, 4^. Ephesians. 3.8. 1 Pet.
2.7. 3. A complete, full, sufficient goo^ answering all estates and conditions,
Ephesians. 4.10. Col. 1.1^ 4. A most pure glorious object, without the least mixture
of corruption, 1 Pet. 1.19. 1 Pet. 2, 22. Heb. 7.26. 5. In Chr^^ there is a
variety of all spiritual excellencies, 1 Cor. 1.3^ Ephesians. 3.10. Col. 2.3. 6. He
is a conquering victorious goo^ Luke 11.22. Joh. 12.31. 2 Timothy 1.10. Joh.
16.33. Col. 2.1^ 7. He is the peculiar proper good of his own people Cant.
6.3. Jer. 23.6.

Dote not therefore, on Creature- Beauty, which is b^^ perishing: The fashion of
this world passes away. Fa^^^ is deceitful, and beauty is a vain thing, Prove.
31.30. S^^mon, one of the wisest men that ever lived, had experien^ of the
vanity of it; therefore take his advise: Lust not after woman's beauty in thine
heart, neither let her take thee wi^^ her eyelids. Pro. 6.25.

beautiful unspotted coversation: The blackness and deformities which are in
^he lives of professors, do^ cast a blot on the precious Truths of Christ, and
cause his name to be blasphemed, Romans 2.24. Oh let us be careful to beautify
our profession, with a suitable conversation, such as becomes the Gospel, Phil.
1.27. That so we may give occasion to ^one to be offended with our beautiful
amiable Lord and husband.

Again: [Grace is poured into thy lips]

These words are applied to Christ the Bridegroom, ^ho is the best spoken of
any: he abounds in gracious ^ords, and his doctrine is full of light, life, and
sweetness: His Lips are like lilies, dropping sweet- smelling Myrrh, Cant.
5.13. The people wondered at the gracious ^ords which came from him, Luke 4.22.
for he taught them ^s one having authority, and not as the Scribes, Matt. 7.^8,
29.

Grace is poured into Christ's lips, or the word of grace (...) in his mouth; he
abounds in grace; he is full of grace; ^^at he might convey and communicate
grace to us, Joh. 1.^6. Thus we may understand these words; and thence Observe,

That Christ by his gracious Doctrine, II Observe. That Christ does effectually
give grace by the Gospel.
or the word of his ^^ace, does not only discover to men their sin and misery,
and ^e way of peace and Salvation; but he does also Minister ^^ace and power to
them, to accept of pardon and Reconcilation.

Herein Christ excels Moses; and the Gospel, the Law: ^. Cor. 3. the Law came
by Moses, but grace and truth by christ, Joh. 1.17. abundance of grace; he
came, that we ^ight have life; yea, that we might have it abundantly. ^h. 10.10.

The Law commands, But gives not strength to per^^rm; kills, but makes not
alive; shows us our disease, ^^t does not apply the remedy; Is a Schoolmasters
to In^^ruct us, Gal. 3.24. This Doctrine is confirmed by reasons.
but puts not a Spiritual capacity into (...); no: this is performed only by
the Spirit of Christ, in ^^e ministry of the Gospel: The Gospel only is the
Doctrine and word of grace: The Instrument of conveying ^^ace to poor sinners.
The Reasons whereof are these that ^^dow.

First, Because that in this Ministry only Christ Crucified is displayed, Zach.
12.10. Joh. 12.32. Gal. 3.1.

Secondly, Because as grace is supernatural, so (...) conveyed in a way and by
an Instrument supernatural and that is the Gospel: there are some footsteps of
the Law or old covenant, but nothing of the Gospel in the heart of a Natural
man. A Christian is like Isaak, a child of promise, begotten by grace, beyond
nature, Romans ^.19. Gal. 4.28.

Titles which are attributed to the Gospel, beyond the Law; It Is expressly
called the Ministration of the Spirit, life, and Glory, 2 Cor. 3.8, ^. Gal.
3.2. 1 Pet. 1.3, 22, 23, 25. Act. 10.44. The good wor^^ Heb. 6.5. a faithful
saying, 1 Timothy 1.15. a good doctrine 1 Timothy 4.6. the word of life, Phil. 2.16.
of Reconciliation 2 Cor. 5.19. the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 2.17. Ephesians. 6.15. The
Gospel of Salvation, and the word of Truth, Ephesians. 1.1^. Col. 1.15. The arm of
God, Isa. 53.1. The savor of life (...) life, 2 Cor. 2.16.

Spirit of God convinces of sin, Joh. 16.^. and this is in the Ministry of the
Law.

convinced of sin; yea to be ou^^ wardly sanctified and reformed; Heb. 10.29.
Another thing to be inwardly converted, and effectually called There can be no
true faith, love, humility, mortification without a Spiritual conviction, and
discovery of Christ Righteousness, as well as a sense of sin: now this
Righteousness is not revealed in the Law, but in the Gospel Romans 3.21. Romans
10.6.

2. The Spirit of God in the Ministry of the Law, wo^^^ as a Spirit of Bondage;
but in the Gospel only as a Spi^^ of adoption; Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.6, 7.
revealing to us God fatherly love in Christ, and so changing and turning o^^
hearts to him: Jer. 31.19. Ezekiel. 16.63. yet to the el^^^ the Lord blesses and
sanctifies the terrors of the La^^ following the same with the manifestations
of his gra^^ in the Gospel; and so in that respect legal conviction^ may be
said to be a preparative to their conversion; (...) as for others,
notwithstanding their legal sorrows a^^ terrors, yet they are far from true
conversion.

Fourthly, Because the Gospel is the new covenant, one ^ranch or promise
whereof is, that God will write his Law (...) our hearts, Heb. 8.10. namely,
the Law of faith, Romans ^.27, whereby we come to be the Epistle of Christ: This
^riting of the Law in the heart being opposed to the ^riting of it in tables of
stone, 2 Cor. 3.3. The Gospel is (...) Transforming glass, 2 Cor. 3.18. So is
not the Law: in ^he Gospel, the grace that brings Salvation, Tit. 2.12. and the
righteousness of Christ from faith to faith, is revealed, Romans 1.16, 17. and by
the promises of the Gospel ^ur hearts are purified, and we made partakers of
the ^ivine nature; 2 Cor. 7.16. 1 Pet. 1.22, 25. 2 Pet. 1.4. Joh. ^7.17.

First, Does Christ by his Gracious doctrine communicate grace to sinners? Oh
then, thou graceless Soul, look ^p to him in the word and promise of Grace; he
is full of Grace, grace is poured into his lips, that he might pour ^t out upon
us, who by Nature are enemies to grace: he has erected a throne of grace for
sinners; whereon we may find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16. he
received Spiritual gifts, even for the Rebellious, that the Lord God might
dwell with them, Psa. 68.18. And when we our selves find an unspirituall
ungratious frame of heart, as we often do; let us have recourse to God upon
this Throne of grace.

Secondly, It may Encourage and support the faithful preachers of the Gospel.
They cannot persuade the people to accept the Offer of grace, But Christ can:
In the day of his power, when he lifts up a standard by his Spirit, They shall
be willing, Psa. 110.3. The Gentiles shall Trust in him, Romans 15.12. he is a
quickening life-giving head and principle, 1 Cor. 15.45. Col. 2.19. and he gives
grace in and by this despised Ministry. Let not the most powerful Spiritual
preacher imagine that he can work effectually upon his hearers, by the
Spiritual vigor and inlargedness of his affections; he himself may have
intimate Communion with the Lord, when it is not so with those that hear him:
he cannot communicate grace to them, as Christ can; and yet he ought to imitate
Christ, in declaring the word of grace with much spiritual vigor and zeal, and
not in a cold, formal manner. Christ is able to work upon the most stubborn
graceless heart, and he ordinarily does it by the ministry of weak men; that
our Faith might not stand in the wisdom of men, but i^ the power of God, 1 Cor.
2.5. We have this Treasure i^ earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power
might be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7.

It follows in the last place [Therfore God has blessing thee for ever.]

Upon this design the Father sent his Son, and for this very end, he has
blessed and exalted him, that he might enrich us with grace, and with
Spiritual blessings Observe therefore,

That Christ in our nature is exalted by God, III Obser. Christ is furnished
with power to do us good.
and furnished abundantly, with grace and power, and authority to do our Souls
good.

He has power enough in his hands to make his word effectual, and to give
life to them that are dead in sin, Joh. 17.2. Because he lives, we shall live
also, Joh. 14.19. God has blessed our Head Christ, that we who are his members
might through him be blessed and made happy Ephesians. 1.3. God has made that same
Jesus that was Crucified, both Lord and Christ: who being exalted at his
right hand, sheddeth abroad the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.33, 36. and gives
repentance and remission of sins, Act. 5.31. Being the Author and finisher of
Faith; the Captain o^ our Salvation, Heb. 12.2. Head over all things for the
Church his body, Ephesians. 1.22.

mind Gods design and end in anointing Christ, and pouring out grace upon
him; it was not for himself, but for us, Luke 4.18, 43. that of his fulnes^ we
might receive grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. that the water of Spiritual life and
Consolation might flow unto us from him, as from a fountain or wellspring,
Joh. 4.14. O therefore why should thou be barren, dead, hearted, unfruitful?
Why should thou starve in a Cooks shop? Ho every one that thirsts, come ye
to the waters, and he that has no money; come ye, buy and eat, yea come buy
wine and milk without money and without price, Isa. 55.1. Eat Oh friends, Drink,
yea drink abundantly; be drunken with loves, as the word is, Cant. 5.1. He that
believes on Christ, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water, Joh.
7.37, 38, 39. In the wilderness, shall waters break out, and streams in the
^esert. In the thirsty Land shall be Springs of water, Isa. 35.6, 7.

love of God in sending Christ, and furni^^ing him with Treasures of grace and
with all Spiritual ^erfections, for the comfort and salvation of our souls. In
his was manifested the love of God toward us, Joh. 3.16. ^ Joh. 4.9, 10.
Behold, what manner of love the Lord has ^estowed upon us! we are poor, but
Christ was rich for ^s; we are empty and naked, but he was filled and clothed
^ith riches of Glory for us; and he freely Emptied himself, and laid afide his
glorious robes for a while, Phil. 2.^. and became poor, that he might make us
rich, 2 Cor. ^.9.

Verse. 3. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty: with thy Glory and thy
majesty.
In this verse, Christ (whose Kingdom was typified by David's) appears as an
undaunted, victorious Captain, ^r prince, having his sword girt by his side
ready for battle, as being assured of victory, Exodus 32.27. 1 Samuel 25.13. He is
also described, Isai. 63.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. as a Warrior red in his apparel,
Travailing in the greatness of his strength: ^e Trampleth upon his enemies, and
their blood is sprin^led upon his garments; being clothed with a vesture ^lipt
in blood: out of his mouth goes a sharp Sword, with which he smites the
Nations, and rules them with a ^od of Iron, Rev. 19.13, 14, 15, 16.

Sword of Christ girt on his thigh:

word, wherewith he sub^ueth his enemies, and brings down the mighty ones:
This is called the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. which comes out of his
mouth, Rev. 1.16. Hence we may observe, I Obser. None can withstand the sharp
Sword of Christ.


That Christ's sword, with which he fights his battles, is so sharp, and keen,
that (though the minister be but weak,) yet ^f Christ himself draw out and
brandish this Sword in the greatness of his strength, none can withstand, but
every (...) shall fall under it, either for life or death, salvation or (...)
demnation. 2 Cor. 2.15, 16.

The stoutest man will languish and sink, when (...) power of this sharp sword
falls on him: he may be down the words of a man like himself, but there is
(...) standing before the sword of the Almighty. Matthew. 21.^. If the Lord Jesus
back the white horse, he shall go for conquering, and to conquer, Rev. 6.2. The
Lord shall se^ the rod of thy strength out of Sion: Rule thou in the mi^ of
thine enemies. The Lord at thy right hand shall str^^ through Kings in the day
of his wrath, Psalm. 110.2, 5, Our weapons are mighty through God, for pulling
do^ strongholds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. The Word is quick and powerful, sharper then
any two-edged sword, etc. Heb. 4.12.

First then, this informs us that the Scripture or Wo^^ of Christ is not a dead
letter, but a sharp sword: If (...) make not alive, it will kill: now that
which is dead it sel^ cannot kill another. As the rain does accomplish that
(...) which it is sent; so shall my Word, (says the Lord) Isai. ^.10, 11. Nor
is this Word in it self to be abstractively comdered, as separated from the
Spirit; for then it should b^ humane, not a divine testimony; a weak, not a
powerful Word: but it is powerful, Heb. 4.12. whether we ha^^ spiritual
experience of the power of it or no. The Sun^^ full of light, though a blind
man cannot see it. A sha^^ sword is of a cutting nature, though the dead man be
i^^ sensible of it. So it is here.

Secondly, Pray that God would gird his sword by h^^ side, and send forth his
Word with power, that it ma^^ pierce, ransack, and wound the rotten hearts and
consciences of men, and discover to them that core of Corruption which lies at
the bottom; the heart being deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
Jer. 17.9. Oh that this sword of the Spirit, this sharp and powerful sword
might (whilst you read or hear this Word) meet wi^^ your secret corruption,
pride and hypocrisy, and discover and anatomize your hearts to you, that you
man loath your selves, whom you have loved too much. (...) the Lord whet and
sharpen this sword, it shall do (...) Repent, or else I will come to thee
quickly, and will fight against thee with the sword of my mouth, (says the
Lord to Pergamos) Rev. 2.16.

Thirdly, Since Christ has such a sharp victorious lord, we may be confident
that he will be too hard for (...) enemies in the end, yea the most potent of
them, ^ough he bear with them long. God and man are an ^equal match. If this
sharp sword cut not off the lusts (...) men, it will rise up in judgment
against their souls. ^^ose mine enemies that would not that I should reign ^er
them, bring hither, and slay them before my face, ^^ke 19.27. he shall smite
the earth with the rod of his ^outh, and with the breath of his lips shall he
slay the ^cked, Isa. 11.4. The Lord will come with a flaming lord, in flaming
fire to take vengeance on them that ^ow him not, and that obey not the Gospel.
2 Thessalonians. 1.8. ^^e Joh. 3.19. Heb. 2.2, 3. Heb. 12.25.

It follows, [O most mighty] or, O mighty One; or, Champion: this is one of
Christ's titles, Isa. 9.6. Hence note,

That Christ is the mighty One, II Observe. Christ is the mighty One, able to
perform his Word.
who is sufficiently able to do ^d execute whatsoever he promises or
threatens. He is ^ehovah, that gives a being to his Word: compare Genesis 6.13.
Genesis 18.1. Genesis 32.1. Hos. 12.6. Exodus 3.5. Josh. ^.2. Zech. 2.12. Zech. 3.1, 2.

If he speak the word, it shall be done: help is laid upon one that is mighty,
Psalm. 89.19. he speaks in righteousness, and is mighty to save, Isa. 63.1.
mighty in deed and in lord, before God and all the people, Luke 24.19. Reas.
why was necesary that Chr. should be the mighty One.


It was necessary he should be the mighty Champion, for these Reasons:

First, That he might fully compensate, and satisfy the ^^stice of the mighty
God, for sin; which a mere creature ^ould not do, but only his Blood who was
the mighty God, Acts 20.28.

Secondly, That he might be supported, and not sink under his unparalled
sufferings and agonies; having ^one on earth to assist him; his countrymen,
disciples, and relations, either deserting, or being not able to help him. Isa.
63.5.

Thirdly, Because he was to overcome and conquer ^trong and mighty enemies, the
World, Sin, Satan, Death, and all the powers of hell and darkness. Joh. 16.33.
Heb. 2.14. Col. 2.15. 1 John 3.8. This argues him to be mighty, the Almighty
One.

Fourthly, Because he was to impetrate and procure us great and glorious
blessings; which none could but the mighty God. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. Ephesians. 1.3, 14.
Heb. 19, 20.

mighty One, that d^ out his sharp sword against his and our enemies? Let then
learn to imitate him, in maintaining a continual (...) against the devil and
his party, till they be utterly (...) dued, and brought under our feet; which
is promi^^ Romans 16.20. And that we may fight it out victoriously us put on the
whole Armor of God; for we wrestle against flesh and blood, but against
principalities powers, Ephesians. 6.11, 12. All true believers are souldie^^ Christ's
camp: they all hold swords, being expert in (...) every man has his sword upon
his thigh, Cant. 3.8. (...) lowing their victorious captain, Heb. 12.2, 3.

Secondly, Christ being the mighty One, we should the sense of our own weakness
and inability, have (...) course to him, before whom all our enemies shall be
^^tered as dust before the wind, Psalm. 18.42. and in wh^ we are more then
conquerors, Romans 8.37. When we (...) with strong and mighty corruptions, which
like the (...) of Zeruiah are too strong for us; and with great and (...)
ficult duties and sufferings, which we cannot perform (...) undergo, by
inherent strength: let us be strong in (...) Lord, and remember that his mighty
power is engag^ for us, Ephesians. 6.10. and that when we are weak in (...) selves,
then are we strong in him, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. (...) works mightily and
effectually in us, Col. 1.29. Ephesians. 1.^^ 2 Cor. 13.3. Gal. 2.8. I can do all
things (says the Apostle) through Christ which strengthens me, Phil. 4.13.

Again, [With thy glory and thy majestie] or, with thy glorious majesty.
Christ is the King or Lord of Glory, P^^ 24.7, 10. Joh. 17.5. 1 Cor. 2.8. who
is decked with maje^^ and excellency, and arrayed with glory and beauty, (...)
40.10. Psalm. 104.1. the whole earth is full of his glo^^ Number. 14.21.

Observe hence, III Observe. The spiritual Christian beholds Chr. Divinity for
his salvation.


^at those persons to whom Christ is spiritually revealed, ^hold the power, and
majesty, and glory of his Godhead, ^eir salvation.

christ shows himself in magnificent and stately e^age, as a mighty glorious
Monarch: The spiritual ^stian eyes him, not only in a state of humiliation,
that is not to be neglected, or laid aside in the exerof our faith) but also in
his Majesty and glorious ^raignty. Through the veil of the humanity or flesh
christ, he beholds the glory of the Divinity, Heb. 10. We beheld his glory, as
the glory of the only Begotof the Father. No man has seen God at any time,
only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, ^ revealed him. Joh.
1.14, 18. 2 Cor. 4.6. Five Inferences drawn from this doctrine


Hence we may draw four or five practical Inferences:

First, That we ought not to terminate our faith and ^^e in and upon the humane
nature of Christ. This ^^e to know him after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. nor will
(...) foundation support the weight of the building, but ^^re to ascend higher,
and cast our anchor upon that ^^ch is within the veil, that it may be sure and
steadfast, (...). 6.19. God was in Christ reconciling us, 2 Cor. 5.19. (...)
offered up himself in the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. ^^s was that which
dignified his Cross and Sufferings: (...) was put to death in weakness, but
raised in power. ^^^im we believe in God, who raised him up, and gave (...)
glory, that our faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet. ^.1. Our life is hid
with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.

Secondly, We may infer that there are riches of glory ^he mystery of Christ.
Without controversy, great is (...) mystery of godliness, God manifested in
the flesh, ^im. 3.16. The Lord makes known to his Saints what ^he riches of
the glory of this Mystery, which is Christ ^ou the hope of glory, Col. 1.27.
These riches of glo^^ should make us contemn and set at naught the riches (...)
glory of the world. The more we live upon the one, (...) less we shall mind
the other.

Thirdly, That it is our duty to eye Christ in the glory (...) majesty of his
ascension from his state of abasement on earth. David's going up with the Ark
from the (...) of Obed-Edom, to Sion, with joy and shouting, a (...) did but
shadow forth Christ's glorious ascension: he (...) descended to take our
nature, is now ascended, and e^^ed in glory and majesty above his and our
enemies. (...) 4.10. Psalm. 68.18. and we sit together with him in heavenly
places, Ephesians. 2.6.

Fourthly, Hence those Christians may draw com^^^ who have not the riches and
glory of this world, but (...) poor and despicable. What then? you have a Head
(...) Husband who is decked with majesty and glory: an^^ David said in another
case, Seems it a small ma^^ unto you, to be the Spouse of such a glorious
Husband Oh do not repine, for your lot is fallen in pleasant ^^^ces, you have a
goodly heritage, Psalm. 16.6. and let (...) take heed how they despise those
whom the Lord of (...) has owned, be they never so mean and obscure in (...)
world.

Lastly, The majesty and glory of Christ should (...) forth brightly in our
conversation, so as to dazzle (...) convince the world, Matthew. 5.16. Phil. 2.15,
16. T^^ is much majesty in holiness: were we more holy, wa^^ful, heavenly
minded, our conversation would dart f^^^ more majesty and glory. Communion
with the Lor^^ glory, puts a luster upon the spirit and conversation (...) man:
but alas, this is much wanting. The time was, (...) a profane wretch could not
stand before a godly man, ^^ving much of the Spirit of glory resting upon him,
1 (...) 4.14. but now, there is such a slight, self-seeking, an^^tious, carnal,
worldly spirit among us, that there se^^ to be little or no difference between
the Saints and (...) men of the world. Where there is most holiness, th^^ is
most majesty. They are put together, Dan. 8.24. (...) mighty and the holy
people.

Verse 4. And in thy majesty ride prosperously, because of truth, and meekness,
and righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.
The Allegory is here further carried on; the Spirit of (...) alluding to a
Prince riding triumphantly in his Cha^^^, as it was the manner of the Romans
and other Na^^^s: by which the Scripture illustrates the Victories (...)
Triumphs of Christ, who led Captivity captive, Psalm. ^^18. Ephesians. 4.8.

1. Christ is the Prince that rides in this Chariot.

2. The Spirit and Word of God, are the guides to (...) Chariot.

3. The horses are four: 1. Majesty, 2. Truth, 3. Meekness, 4. Righteousness.

Christ riding in his triumphant chariot, is not attended ^^^h worldly vain
pomp and gallantry; but with Truth, ^^^ekness, and Righteousness.

[In thy Majesty ride prosperously] Or, Prosper thou be^^^se of truth.
Ainsworth reads it, In thy comely honor ^^^sper, ride on, Word of truth.

The Gospel, or Word of truth, as it is called, Ephesians. 1.13. (...). 1.4. Joh.
17.17. is the white horse, on which Christ (...) prosperously and successfully,
Rev. 6.2. Rev. 19.11. I Observe. Christ rides in Majesty, truth, meekness, and
Righteousness.


Hence observe,

That the wheels of Christ's chariot, in which he rides when (...) goes forth to
conquer his enemies, are majesty, truth, meek^^^s, and righteousness. These
are displayed in the ^^eaching of the Gospel, as the attendants of our
victo^^us Champion.

First, Majesty attends him. The Lord reigns, 1 Majesty.
and (...) clothed with majesty, Psalm. 93.1. When the beauty and ^^ory of the
person and offices of Christ are held forth (...) the language of the holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 2.13. Oh what majesty is there in such a Ministry! Honor and
Ma^^stie are laid on Christ, whose type King David was, Psalm. ^.5. The voice of
the Lord in his word and works, is ^^werful, and full of Majesty, Psalm. 29.4.
and he makes known to the sons of men the glorious majesty of his Kingdom,
Psalm. 145.10, 11, 12, 13.

Secondly, 2 Truth.
Truth waits on him. The Lord is true (...) his sayings, and in all his works.
There is 1. The (...) of his Essence. 2. The truth of his Word. 3. The (...) of
his Operations. He is Truth it self, the knowl^^^ whereof makes us free, Joh.
8.32. His Gospel is emphatically the word of Truth, Col. 1.5. 1 Timothy 1.15. His
^^rit is the Spirit of Truth, Joh. 14.17. And all the preses are true, yea and
amen in him, 2 Cor. 1.20.

Thirdly, 3 Meekness
Meckness accompanies him. Though (...) King be full of majesty, being the
Lion of the Tribe Judah, Rev. 5.5. yet withal, he is full of Meekness, meek as
a Lamb: Isa. 53.7. Behold, thy King comen^^ thee meek, riding on an ass, Matthew.
21.5. His Word (...) be taught with meckness, 2 Timothy 2.25. and to be recei^^^
with meekness, Jam. 3.21. And we are to learn of (...) who is meek and lowly,
Matthew. 11.31. His meekness gentleness appears, in his offering mercy, pardon
(...) peace to the greatest rebels, who have stood it out (...) against him.
You will say, He is a meek and ge^^^^ Prince indeed, who inviteth and receives
to mercy (...) most desperate rebelt. Such a Prince is Christ.

Fourthly, 4 Justice.
Christ rides in Justice, or in meekness Justice; Justice being meekly
administered in his kingdom which consists in righteousness, etc. Romans 14.17.
and whe^^ Justice and mercy meet, and kiss each other, Psalm. 85.^^ Christ is
King of Justice, and King of peace, Heb. 7.^^ And in his Gospel, the justice of
God without the La^ revealed through a Mediator, for the pardon and
justification of sinners, Romans 3.21. So that here is meekness justice, or
justice tempered with mercy.

chariot, attended with truth and meekness of justice, for our peace and
salvation. Prince that comes riding in his chariot meekly, and graciously, to
visit his poor subjects, how does it engage th^^ hearts to him? Oh what will
not they do for such Prince? If Christ find not entertainment in this equipage
with you, he will come to you in unspeakable ^^rour; as it follows: Thy right
hand shall teach (...) ^^^ble things. Now he comes in majesty and justice,
ac^^^^ panied with meekness: but he will shortly appear in ^^^^estie and
justice, accompanied with wrath and vengeance: Matthew. 3.7. Romans 2.5. 2 Thessalonians.
1.8. Jude 7. when ^^^y will say to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and
(...) us from the face of him that sits on the throne, (...) from the wrath
of the Lamb: for the great day of (...) wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand? Rev. 6.(...) 17.

Secondly, It Is for our comfort and support, that however the Rulers of the
world are or may be false, unjust, ^^el, tyrannical toward their subjects; yet
Christ, who King of Nations and Saints, rides in his chariot, attended with
meekness, truth, and justice. Let us look ^^his King more: as for men, they are
but a lie and va^^, Psalm. 62.9. He that is now attended with meekness (...)
justice, will put forth his Majesty in the nations of (...) world, and dash
the wicked powers thereof in pieces, (...) will advance his own Kingdom,
whereof there shall no end, Dan. 2.44. The people of God may well ex^^^ a more
righteous Government then is in the ^^^ld.

Thirdly, It may inform us, that the happiness and prosperity of a Nation
consists not in a multitude of horses, ^^^s, etc. Psalm. 33.16, 17. Nor does
outward pomp and (...) at Titles put a true majesty upon Governors; but ^^^ir
ruling in the fear of the Lord, 2 Samuel 23.3. and governing the people with
truth, meekness, and justice, (as ^^^rist does:) this is that which will render
their Government truly majestical and glorious. They that ride meekness, truth
and justice, ride prosperously: but as others, that ride in cruelty, rigor,
and injustice, they ^^ll not prosper.

[In thy majesty ride prosperously:] Or, as it is varyed (...) in the margin,
Ride thou, prosper thou.

Hence note,

That whenever Christ rides, II Observe. Christ prospers in his undertakings.
he rides a prosperous jour^^^. He does not beat the air, or labor in vain;
but ^^^h fully execute and perform the work for which he ^^ne, and which the
Father gave him to do, Joh. 17.4. (...) that the Father gave him, shall come to
him, Job. 6.37. We often take journeys and do works to little ^^pose: but it is
not so with Christ, who orders hi^^ fairs in wisdom, and manageth them with
power; w^^^ wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, Isa. 2^^. His word
shall prosper in the thing whereto the send^^ Isa. 55.11. In that Dialogue
between the Father and Son, Isai. 49.4. Christ says he has labored in vain,
spent his strength for naught: yet the Father tells that he shall be for a
light to the Gentiles, and for ^^vation unto the ends of the earth, verse. 6. He
shall his seed, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in hand. He shall
see of the travel of his soul, and shall satisfied. Isa. 53.10, 11.

Hence there will arise two Corollaries:

First, That Christ's work, both in the Church, and the world, shall go on, be
the Instruments never so (...) or inconsiderable. Not by might, nor by power,
but my Spirit, (says the Lord of hosts) Zech. 4.6. If the be but twelve poor
disciples, fishermen and mechanic (as they are called) yet if Christ go along
with th^^ they shall conquer nations, and do great things, Rev^^^ Therefore let
us not despise the day of small things, those weak ones whom the Lord employs
in his w^^^ Weak things shall confound the strong; things that not, shall
confound things that are, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. W^^ ever they be that Christ
employeth in his Army, whe^^ Rational, Sensitive, or Inanimate creatures; yet
(...) be their Captain and Leader, they shall prevail.

Secondly, There is no counsel against the Lord, P^^^ 21.30. If men and devils
associate, they shall be bro^^^ in pieces, Isai. 8.9, 10. The counsel of the
Lord (...) stand, Acts 5.39. No weapon formed against him and Church shall
prosper, Isa. 54.17. Christ rides prosper^^ and therefore they that ride and
act against him, (...) needs miscarry; or if they seem to prosper for a whi^^ a
wicked course, as sometimes they do, Jer. 12.1. Jer. 5.^. Eccl. 8.14. Eccl.
9.3. yet it is in greater judgment to th^^ and their end (if they persist)
will be destruction.

We may further observe,

That though Christ can bring about his designs, II. Observe. Though Christ can
immediately bring about his design, yet he will have his people pray.
without our deavours; yet he will have his people pray to him.

The words are set down prayer-wise; Ride thou, pro^^er thou: Let thy kingdom
come, etc. It Is true, God ^^ll do great things for his people in the last days;
but ^^t he will be sought unto by them, Ezck. 36.37. This is ^^t their burden,
but their privilege.

To induce us hereunto, let us improve these three Motives:

First, This has been usually God's way and method (...) dispensing his mercy;
and accordingly, the Saints ^^th in the Old and New Testament have sought unto
^^^m. When Daniel understood that the time of the churches deliverance drew
near, it was so far from taking ^^m off, that it engaged his heart to be more
earnest with ^^od in prayer, Dan. 9.2. As God had decreed their deliverance, so
he had decreed that they should pray to ^^^m. Other Instances might be given.

Secondly, It Is a symptom of approaching glory to the church, when God raises
up in his people a mighty spi^^^ of faith and prayer; when they will not let
him alone, (...) he speaks to Moses, Exodus 32.10. but by faith command him,
(a word which he himself is pleased to use) Isai. 45.11. hanging continually on
their Fathers bosom, (...) that they will take no denial from him, Luke 18.5.
(...) woman, great is thy faith; be it unto thee as thou ^^lt, Matthew. 15.28.

Thirdly, The more importunate we have been for mer^^s, the more love we shall
see, and the more sweetness (...) shall taste in them, or rather, in the God
and Foun^^n of them, when they come to us. We prize those ^^^ings most, which
we have long prayed and waited for; ^^^d in the sense thereof, our hearts are
enlarged toward ^^^d in thankfulness. I love the Lord, because he has ^^^ard
my prayer, Psalm. 116.1, 2. Call on me in the day of trouble, I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. ^^.16.

sluggishness and backwardness, and the ^^mality and coldness of our prayers.
We should be earnest, fervent, and importunate with the Lord at the throne of
grace, that his Kingdom may come in majesty and glory; That the remainder of
the Vials of his wrath may be poured out: That he would subdue inward a^^
outward enemies: That he would put down all power and authority which is
contrary to him, 1 Cor. 15.24, (...) and take the sole dominion both external
and internal to himself. We should never hold our peace day no^ night, nor
should we give him rest, till he establish and make Jerusalem a praise in the
earth, Isa. 62.6, 7. Pra^^ for the peace of Jerusalem, all ye that love her,
Psalm. 122.6. and observe Gods answers to your prayers.

Secondly, By way of caution; let us not think that (...) can change God, or
draw him down to us by our prayers: no, no; the change is in the creature, not
in God our hearts are drawn up to him, but his heart is no^ drawn or engaged to
us, by any temporary acts or performances of ours. The shore is not brought to
the Bo^^ but the Boat to the Shore: God wills a change in us but there is no
change in his will.

Again, [ And thy right hand shall teach thee; or, let (...) teach thee,
terrible things.

Hence observe,

That Christ, III. Obser. That the Lord will do terrible things in advancing
his kingdom
when he rides triumphantly in advancing his Kingdom upon the stage of this
world, will do terrible things by the power of his Godhead, (the right hand
being the emblem of strength and authority, Psalm. 110.1. 2 Kings 2.19 Exodus
15.6.) such things as will make his enemies tremble and his friends admire and
adore him.

The day of the Lord shall be upon every one that (...) proud and lofty, and
upon every one that is lifted up and he shall be brought low: and the wicked
shall hid^ themselves in holes and caves, for fear of the Lord, and for the
glory of his majesty, when he arises to sha^^ terribly the earth: Isai. 2.11,
12, 19. The right hand o^ the Lord does valiantly, and will be exalted, Psalm.
118.15, 16.

first Reason is, because the judgments or plague of God upon the second
Beast, or man of sin, with his adherents, who by specious pretenses do what
they can to rob Christ of his kingdom and glory, will be the sharpest and most
dreadful of any that have yet been. ^he Lord did terribly shake the earth, when
he judged ^^e first Beast, and shattered the Roman Empire to pie^^s; but in
judging the second Beast, and breaking in ^^ces the Papal Empire, he will be
more terrible: and ^^ose Vials which yet remain to be poured out, will have
^^ost of the wrath of God in them. Behold, the terrible day of God comes,
which shall burn as an oven; ^^d all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly,
shall be (...) stubble before him, Mal. 4.1. When God avengeth ^^e blood of his
Saints and Martyrs, (the voice of whose ^^od and prayers cries mightily to him,
Rev. 5.8. Rev. 6.10. Rev. 8.4, 5, 6.) and when the vengeance of the ^^mple is
declared in Sion, Jer. 50.15, 28. then will the ^^rd strike through the sides of
Princes, Psalm. 110.5. and ^^ak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
dis^^asure, Psalm. 2.5. The providence of God have been ^^pendious and terrible
in our days: but they will yet (...) more terrible, as the Lord goes on to
destroy the kingdom of the Beast.

Secondly, Christ will do terrible things, in shaking and ^^aking the Kingdoms
of this world, that he may bring (...) and settle his own Kingdom, which cannot
be shaken. (...) will shake heaven and earth, and the nations thereof, ^^at he
may be the desire of the nations, Hag. 2.6. Heb. ^.26, 27. and acknowledged
their governor, Psalm. 22.^^. There is so much dross and corruption both in
Ci^^^ and Religious administrations, Isa. 1.25. that in ^^king out this
corruption, and introducing pure and ^^^hteous administrations, the Lord will
do terrible ^^^ngs. Thus he does also, when he shakes and converts (...) heart
of a particular sinner.

Christians stumble or be offended with the dispensations of the Lord, though
they be terrible and ^^adful to the world, and to flesh and blood. Blessed
(...) they (says Christ) that are not offended with me, ^^tth. 7.6. Neither
with my word, nor with my works. ^^s his right hand that teaches these
terrible things; (...) therefore they must needs be just and righteous,
^^^wever man's Reason judge of them) for his right ^^^d is full of
righteousness, Psalm. 48.10. Would you not have the works and administrations of
Christ terrible to you? Oh then, submit meekly to his Scepter: conform your
wills to his, and separate from the Whore a^ all her pollutions, lest you
partake with her of her plag^ Rev. 18.4. Oh that we may be found doing the will
the Lord when he appears! Blessed is that faithful sevant which shall be
found so doing, Matthew. 25.46.

Verse. 5. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart the Kings enemies; whereby the
people founder thee.
In this verse, the powerful success and effects of Christ kingdom are further
represented, and he described a^ Warrior or Archer, having his Bow and arrows
rea^ bent and prepared to shoot at his enemies. This m^ refer to the last
times, when he will execute his fi^^ wrath upon the Antichristian party, who
are the great enemies to his Kingly office and prerogative. But thou he meet
with strong opposition in setting up his Kingdom and that from several parties
and Interests, all con^tring in opposing his Interest; yet shall he prevail.
The people shall fall under him. Yet for all this, and in desp^^^ of them all,
have I set my King upon my holy hill of S^^ Psalm. 2.6.

In the first place, we may no^e, I. Observe. Christ and his people meet with
great opposition.


That Christ and his instruments, who endeavor to propagate and advance his
Kingdom, will meet with great enemies, and much opposition.

Who art thou, O great mountain, before Zeru^ba^^ Zech. 4.7. Christ has two
sorts of enemies.
Temple-work is not carried on, but with m^ difficulty and opposition. Our King
Christ has his enemies, and they are of two sorts.

First, 1. Open,
His open enemies, that will even dare him to face; whose malice and cruelty
against him and his (...) Lambs, appear in their very foreheads. Such were
^^tiochus Epiphanes, and many of the Roman Emperor who were the first bloody
Beast mentioned Rev. 13.^. whom the devil raised up against Christ and his Sain.

Secondly, 2. Seecret enemies.
Christ has his secret underhand- enemies. who whilst they profess love and
subjection to him, do what they can in a subtle manner to supplant his People,
Truth and Interest. This is the nature of the second Beast which comes out of
the earth, and has two horns like a Lamb, Rev. 13 11. who with his adherents
pretend to be of a Lamb-like disposition, humble, meek, innocent, and mortified
souls; and to do what they do, for the glory of Christ, for holy Church, for
Uniformity, and against Error, Schism, etc. Now these secret subtle enemies,
are the most dangerous. Such be those among us, who have fine smoothe language,
but yet they will not have Christ to reign in righteousness, lest their Diana
or worldly interest go down. Oh, this self-interest makes ^nen to be at enmity
with the glorious design of Christ.

Hence let us draw two Corollaries.

First, The Lords faithful ones, who are employed in his work, should not
despond, though they meet with many Tobiahs and Sanballats, crafty and subtle,
and withal strong and potent enemies, who would cause the work to cease: They
are not so much our enemies, as the enemies of our King; and the greater, and
stronger, and more subtle they be, the more it makes for the glory of Christ
to disappoint them: as when Caesar overcame Pompey, that great and prudent
Captain, it did exceedingly increase his fame and honor in the world. The work
of the Temple must and shall be finished, to the terror of our enemies, Nehem.
6.16. For it is the work of God, and not of man.

Secondly, This discovers the corruption and malice of the heart of man. Well
might the Apostle say, that the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, Romans
8.7. If Christ set but up his Kingdom, and reign in truth and righteousness,
then Heathens, Papists, Turks, Gog and Magog, Formal Protestants, loose
Opinionists, self-seeking Christians, all of them will join with Satan, and the
powers of darkness, in opposing this blessed Kingdom. Herod and Pilate will
shake hands and be friends, against the holy Child Jesus, Luke 23.12. Acts
4.27.

Again, whereas they are said to be the Kings Enemies;

Observe,

That to be an enemy to Christ in his kingly office and dignity, II. Observe.
It Is a great evil to oppose Christ's Kingly Office.
does exceedingly provoke the Lord to wrath.

inhabitants of these Nation who will not have the Lord to reign over them, and
govern them by his Laws? Nay, are there not many th^^ pretend to much
acquaintance with Christ, who yet (...) far enough from submitting to him in
his Kingly Office so as to let him wholly dispose of their outward honor
dignities, and concernments for his glory? they seem trust him with their
souls; but alas, in the management of outward and civil things and employments,
they ha^ recourse chiefly to their own wit, policy, invention, as the kingdom
of Christ had nothing to do therewith.

Let us go on: [Thine arrows are sharp:] (That is) the Word of thy Kingdom,
which is sharper then any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder soul and spirit, Heb. 4.12. The words and judgment of God are his
Arrows: so Psalm. 64.4. Deuteronomy. 32.1 whereby he wounds and destroys the
kingdom Sin, Satan, and Antichrist; and subdueth the nation of the world to
himself. See Rev. 19.15.

Observe therefore,

That Christ, the King of kings, III. Obser. Christ is a most excellent archer.
and Lord of lords, ( as is styled, Rev. 17.14. Rev. 19.16.) is a most
excellent arc^^ who hits the mark whenever he shoots, Rev. 6.2, 3.

There is no standing before him, if he bend his bow^ and shoot the arrows of
his wrath: The people shall fa^^ under him. The ten horns which are ten Kings,
Rev. 1.14. shall make war against the Lamb; but he shall over come them, though
there be but a few faithful and chose ones with him: and for the implacable
enemies of the Church, they shall be slain with the sword of him the sits upon
the horse; which sword proceeds out of (...) mouth, Rev. 19.21.

Again, [Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the King^^^ enemies] Other
Archers can only wound the bo^^ but Christ, who is King of Spirits, Numb.
16.22. pierces the heart with his arrows.

Hence observe,

That such as draw not near to Christ with their hearts and spirits, IV. Obser.
Christ shoots the keen arrows of his wrath into the conscience.
he both can and will send the sharp and keen arrows of his wrath into their
consciences: So that they shall be forced to fall under him, and bow down
before him, Psalm. 2.9. The arrows of the Lord are like the swords of Saul and
Jonathan, which did execution, and returned not empty, 2 Samuel 1.22. His bow of
steel shall strike his enemies through: The glistring sword comes out of their
gall, and terrors are upon them, Job 20.24, 25.

The civil Magistrate commands only the outward man, and the things relating
thereto. But Christ being God as well as man, searches the hearts, and
weighs the spirits of men, Joh. 2.25. Prove. 16.2. Christ ou^ spirit. King
specially regards the spirits of men.
He is the great King, the supreme Magistrate, before whom the hearts and
inward parts of men are anatomized and cut up: yea, all things are naked and
opened unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.12, 13. This King
does specially regard the spirits of men, as is demonstrated in the following
particulars.

First, He chiefly requires heart-worship, 1. He requires spirit worship.
and spirit-service and obedience; without which, bodily worship profits not,
1 Timothy 4.8. he will be worshipped in spirit, Joh. 4.24. Phil. 3.3. Not after
the oldness of the letter, but after the newness of the spirit, Romans 7.6.

Secondly, By and from him, 2. By him we have spiritual blessings.
we have spiritual and soul-blessings, which are the choicest blessings, Ephesians.
1.3. The heart is comforted, Hos. 2.14. and the inward man strengthened, by and
through him, Ephesians. 3.16, 7. he has communion especially with the spirits of his
people, 2 Timothy 4.22. None can speak peace to the broken heart, but he: Isa.
61.1. nor will the wounded soul be at rest, till he creale the fruit of the
lips peace, peace, Isa. 57.19. 3. He furni^ shethus with spiritual weapons.


Thirdly, He exercises his subjects in a spiritual warfare, and furnishes
them with spiritual weapons and armor, to guard and fortify their spirits,
Ephesians. 6.11, etc.

Fourthly, Spirit-defilements, and heart-pollutions, 4. Spirit-pollutions are
most odiou^ to him.
as secret atheism, pride, self-love, heresy, idolatry, unbelief, hypocrisy,
vain thoughts, and contemplative wickedness, are most abominable and loathsome
to this spiritual King, as appears in the dreadful fall of the evil Ange^ (...)
who are not corporal, but spiritual wickednesses, Ephesians. 6.1^ There is not only
the filthiness of the flesh, but also (...) filthiness of the spirit, 2 Cor.
7.1.

Fifthly, 5. He gives up the obstinate sinner to spiritual delusions, as the
most dreadful.
He gives up obstinate sinners to spiritual judgments and delusions, Isa.
6.9. Romans 1.24. as namely, hardness of heart, blindness of mind, searedness
(...) conscience, 1 Timothy 4.2.

If men imprison the light, and hold the truth in u^^^ righteousness, Romans
1.18. and receive not the Gospel (...) love, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. the Lord will
send forth an ev^^^ spirit, which shall possess them, 1 King. 22.21, 22, 23.
The Law of God, which is holy and spiritual, Rom 7.12, (...) (and which is not
abolished, but established in and (...) Christ, Romans 3.31.) does, 1. Not only
condemn outward gross acts, but inward lust and concupiscenc^. 2. It requires
not only outward, but also (and th^^ chiefly) inward, heart-righteousness and
holiness. And 3. It inflicts not only torments upon the body, b^^ scourges
and lasheth the spirit and inward man, and the sometimes of the elect
themselves, at least to their s^^^^ and feeling; the sharp arrows of the Lord
stick fast (...) them, Job 6.4. Psalm. 38.2, 3. If the Lord pour but a d^^^^ of
wrath into the conscience, it will cause more angui^^ and horror then all
outward afflictions; witness po^^^^ Spira, and others. If thy wrath (O Lord) be
but kindle a little, blessed are they that put their trust in thee, Psalm. 2.12.

First, then, Let this be a warning to the hypocrite, wh^^^ brings before the
Lord only a lip-worship, when (...) heart is far from him. Assure thy self, O
hypocrite, that the Lord will find thee out, and unmask thee: even th^^ Lord,
whose arrows are sharp in the hearts of his enemie^ will come as refiners fire,
and will search Jerusalem as with candles, Zeph. 1.12. Out of Sion, a fire
shall devour before him, Psalm. 50.2, 3. Woe to the hypocrite in that day; h^^
great hope and confidence shall perish, Job 8.13, 14. he shall not be able to
stand before God, Job 13.16. When th^^ Master of the feast came, the guest that
wanted the wedding garment had not a word to say for himself, but was
^^echless, Matthew. 22.12. Oh let us look after sincerity (...) heart, and truth
in the inward parts. We may de^^ve the most discerning Christians; but there is
no dal^^^ing with him, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, Rev. 1.14. ^^d who
pryes into the secret corners of the heart. The ^^umphing of the wicked is
short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment, though his excellency
mount (...) to the heavens, yet he shall vanish away as a dream, ^^b 20.5, 6,
7, 8.

Secondly, It may inform us, that those keen arrows of ^^od which pierce the
heart and soul, are the sharpest and ^^ost dreadful of any; none like them. The
spirit of a ^^^n will bear his infirmity; but if the spirit and conscience be
wounded, who can bear it? Prove. 18.14. Heart^^ agues are the greatest: all the
other plagues and judgments which fell on Pharaoh and his people, came far ^ort
of that plague which was upon their hearts. Thus is also with the poor Jews at
this day; the destruction their City and Temple, all the judgments and
terrible ^^ings which have befallen that Nation, by sword, fa^^ine, pestilence,
are not near so sad and dreadful, as their soul-plagues and delusions; when
notwithstanding (...) the judgments of the Lord, yet the hearts of men are ^ut
up in blindness and obstinate impenitencie and un^^lief: or when men prosper in
a wicked course, and their ^^arts are lifted up, and they bless themselves, and
put ^ay the evil day far from them, Amos 6.3. According their pasture, so are
they filled, and their heart is exalt^^; therefore they forget the Lord, Hos.
13.6.

Lastly, Will the Lord send his sharp arrows into the ^^arts of his enemies?
Then search and look into your ^^arts betimes. Will you still stand it out
stubbornly against Christ? Ah poor S^^^^s! The time will come, that the ^^arts
of the stoutest among you, shall fail, and even sink thin you, through
unspeakable horror and despair. ^here is no contending with the Almighty, Job
40.2. With ^^m is terrible majesty, Job 37.22. Out of Christ, he is a ^^suming
fire, Heb. 12.29. The Lord sends his plagues ^^on the heart, Exodus 9.14.
threatenings, curses, terrors, soul-plagues, one upon the neck of another,
Deuteronomy. 28.^^, 17, etc. So that there is no remedy, but you must ^^eld the
Bucklers: and let me tell you in the name of the Lord, that if you do not now
reflect, and lay^^ hands upon your hearts, crying out, O miserable that I am,
what have I done? yet the time will (...) that you shall do it, when alas it
will be too late. (...) 1.24, 25, 26. Oh what dismal thoughts, what dre^^
self-reflections, what unspeakable horrors will (...) thy soul, when it
departs out of the body! Thy shall have pain, and thy soul within thee shall
mo^^ Job 14.22. And thou shall say, How have I hated in^^ction, and my heart
despised reproof; and have not ob^^ the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine
ear to (...) that instructed me? Prove. 5.11, 12, 13. Let us there take heed in
time to our spirits, whilst it is called to and before the evil day come upon
us.

Verse. 6. Thy throne, O God, is for ever an^^ver; the scepter of thy kingdom is
a^^ scepter.
These words (which are quoted Heb. 1.8.) are sp^^^^ by the Church, of and to
Christ; describing his di^^^^ and superexcellencie above Angels and Men in his
^^^^nal Godhead; and the properties of his kingdom, (...) are two: 1.
Everlastingness, and 2. Righteousness.

Christ is here said to have a Throne, and a Scepter; which are badges or
emblemes of Royal dignity and ^^thority.

The perpetuity of Christ's kingdom is described in (...) words: Thy throne, O
God, is for ever and ever. O Kingdoms have their periods; but this Kingdom
(...) the God of heaven sets up, shall break in pieces and co^^^^ all other
kingdoms, and shall stand for ever, Dan. (...) Dan. 7.14. Isal. 9.7.

Christ has a twofold Kingdom: Christ has a twofold Kingdom.
1. An absolute ^^^nal Kingdom, (as he is God, and essentially one with Father)
which is not subject to the least change. (...) has also a Lordship or Kingdom
given him by God (...) all creatures, elect and reprobate Angels and (...)
Matthew. 28.18. Phil. 2.10. 1 Timothy 5.21. Ephesians. 1.21, 22. ^^ 10. 1 Cor. 15.27. Heb.
1.2. This is his mediatory kingdom which is not absolutely eternal, without
beginning ^^d; but respectively, in comparison of other Kingdoms ^^d Powers,
which this Kingdom shall put an end unto. ^^d though this Kingdom shall be
given up to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. and so be changed in respect of the
administrations thereof; yet the same shall be of everlasting efficacy to the
Saints, when glorified; as his Priesthood shall also be, Heb. 7.17, 25.

Grotius with others apply this Psalm to Solomon and (...) Queen, as if it were
properly meant of them; herein ^^lowing the Jews, those great enemies of the
Son of ^^od. But this verse, with the following verses, make it ^^ident, that
this Psalm is not properly applicable to a ^^eer man. As for Solomon's Scepter,
it continued but ^^urty years, 2 Chronicles. 9.30. nor was the administration ^ereof
so righteous as is intimated in the text, though companied with peace and
quietness; and therefore imports not so well with the third verse of this
Psalm, here the Spouse desires her Husband to gird his Sword (...) his thigh,
and to ride in majesty and righteousness. ^^e Apostle quoting these passages,
Heb. 1. (where he ^^arly evinceth the Godhead of Christ, and his dignity ^^^er
all creatures, by his titles, and by his works) puts it (...) of doubt, that
this Psalm principally respects Christ ^^^d his Kingdom. Some have thought,
that it should ^^t be so much as typically applied to Solomon: but that all not
follow neither. The typical consideration of Solomon and his Queen here, will
no whit derogate from ^^e glory of Christ and his Church.

[Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever.]

It Is objected by the Socinians, (who deny Christ to be ^^e eternal most high
God, and ascribe to him only a imporal outward kingdom) That the name Elohim
(here tributed to Christ) is also given to Angels and Men, ^od. 22.8, 9. Psalm.
8.5. Psalm. 82.1. and by this means they should have Christ only to be a
creature, or made ^^od. But it is answered, that this name Elohim is never the
plural number absolutely and without restriction tributed to a mere creature,
as it is here to Christ. ^^oses was made Elohim, or God, not absolutely, but
^^th restriction to Pharaoh, Exodus 7 1. Nor do we find ^^at ever an eternal
throne is properly and absolutely ascribed to a creature: If we find such
words spoken David's or Solomon's throne, it is with reference to Kingdom of
Christ, as their throne was a type of his.

That person who is here called Elohim, is the (...) Lord, the same Jehovah,
that laid the foundations of earth. Compare we Psalm. 102.25. with Heb. 1.10.

We find then in this text, the Church acknowledge and adoring the eternal
Godhead of Christ, and his ^^rious throne, and that under the dark veiled
administion of the Old Testament. Thy throne, O God, is for (...) and ever.

Whence observe,

That Christ, I. Observe. The Godhead of Chr. was revealed to Israel of old.
the second person in the glorious Trinity, (...) revealed to Israel of old, to
be the true Jehovah, the ete^^ God: that so, their faith in the promised, as
well as (...) in the exhibited Messiah, might be in God, and so have sure
foundation to rest upon: 1 Pet. 1.21. Isai. 28.^^ 1 Cor. 3.11.

This was that El-Shaddai, God all-sufficient, with wh^^ Jacob wrestled by
faith, Genesis 35.9, 10, 11. Hos. 12.4. (...) was the King of glory, mentioned
Psalm. 24.10. who (...) so there called, The strong and mighty, the Lord of
(...) mighty in battle; Jehovah our righteousness, Jer. 2^^ The everlasting
Father, The mighty God, The Prince peace, Isa. 9.6. who was with and in the
Father, and delight of the Father from eternity: Prove. 8.22, ^^ Joh. 1.1, 2.

The Tabernacle among the Jews shadowed forth (...) eternal Deity, which dwelt
in Christ bodily, Joh. 1.14. (...) 2.9. The Ark of God also (which was covered
over (...) gold) represented the Divine nature, or eternal Sp^^^^ in which
Christ offered up himself an acceptable sac^^^ to God, and thereby satisfied
divine justice for our (...) and merited life eternal for us. Acts 20.28. Heb.
9.4, ^^.

From this doctrine we may draw some useful ^^^rences.

First, That the eternal Deity of Christ, and salv^^^ by him, is no new
Doctrine; but the good old way, (...) all men should enquire after, Jer. 6.16.
and whe^^ only we shall find true peace and rest to our souls, (...) 11.28.
Joh. 16.33. Ephesians. 2.14. Jesus Christ the same, (...), yesterday, and for ever,
Heb. 13.8. There is no other ^^^^me under heaven given among men, whereby we
can (...) saved, Acts 4.12. It Is only by the blood of the Covenant, that the
poor prisoners have hope, Zech. 9.11. This (...) Jacobs ladder, whereby God
comes down to us, and we (...) up to him, Genesis 28.12. 1 Timothy 2.5.

Secondly, We may hence infer, that it is but a carnal ^^tion, to hold that the
fathers before Christ's incarnation ^^ere only under a typical carnal Covenant,
and tempo^^l promises. The contrary is plainly laid down in the scripture,
namely, That they were under a real spiritual covenant and promises, whereby
saving grace was ^^nveyed unto them. 2 Samuel 23.5. Luke 1.68, 72. Gal. 4.4, 15,
16, 17. Romans 4.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13. Which Covenant was primarily made with
and to Christ, the Surety and Mediator thereof, Heb. 8.6. 2 Cor. 1.20. As for
No^^h, Phineas, David, with whom this Covenant was made and renewed, they did
in their foederal relation represent Christ and his elect; the Head primarily,
and the members secondarily, and in subordination to the Head, Gal. 3.6.19.

Indeed this Covenant, and the promises, privileges and blessings thereof,
before the death of Christ, were not so absolutely and unconditionally
propounded, nor (...) clearly and fully dispensed, as they are now. The
Levitical Priesthood, Land of Canaan, long life, Psalm. 105.^^, 9, 10, 11. did
but darkly shadow out those Gospel-pri^iledges, the glory whereof is now
unveiled, 2 Cor. 3. For (...), the winter is past, the flowers appear on the
earth, the time (...) singing of birds is come, Cant. 2.11, 12. The Prophets
prophesied of that grace and glory which was not then exhibited, but should be
revealed unto us, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. But yet Gods Covenant to and with the
spiritual seed of ^^braham, and that before the coming of Christ, was a
Covenant of saving grace; though the carnal seed, and ^elf-justiciaries, did
pervert and turn it, as they do now, unto a Covenant of Works, Gal. 4.22, 23,
etc.

Thirdly, Their sin is exceedingly aggravated, who in this clear sunshine day
of the Gospel, do either question or deny the eternal Godhead of Christ: which
Fundamental truth, though it be clearly held forth in the Old, yet it is much
more clearly asserted in the New Testament. John having upon this occasion
written his most excellence glorious Gospel against Ebion and Cerinthus,
wherein ^^^plainly, and with much majesty and perspicuity, vindicates the
Divinity of Christ's person, especially Cap. 1. a^ also in his Epistle, 1 Job.
5.7, 20. There are three glo^^rious Persons (and but one God) that bear witness
to (...) Deity of Christ, and salvation by him.

1. The Father testifies it, Matthew. 3.17. Joh. 6.30, 31, 3^, 36, 37. 2 Pet.
1.17, 18.

2. Christ the second person bears witness to himself, (...) his glorious
works, Joh. 5.36. Joh. 8.14, 17, 18. Joh. ^^.37, 38. Joh. 17.36.

3. The holy Ghost, by descending on Christ in the likeness of a dove, Joh.
1.32. by convincing men of sin, because they believe not on him, Joh. 16.9. and
by sealing up this truth to the conscience. If then we receive the witness of
men, the witness of God is greater, 1 John ^^.9, 10. See Isai. 9.6. Joh. 1.1,
2. Phil. 2.6. Tit. 2.13. Joh. ^^.58. Rev. 1.11. where the Lord gives testimony
to th^^ truth. And therefore how inexcusable are the obstina^^ Jews, Arrians,
Socinians, at this day, who will not (...) hold this glorious light shining in
the Scriptures, (...) desperately oppose and malign the same, saying; that
Christ is but a mere man, and that he had no existence before his incarnation,
or at most, before the creation. Woe be to them that strive with their Maker.
There (...) no contending with the Almighty: he will be justified (...) his
sayings, and will overcome when he is judged, Romans 3.4.

For the better Information of the Reader, I shall here, 1. Lay down some
proofs or demonstrations of the eternal Godhead of Christ, That he is not only
God by office, but by nature God. 2. Show that it was necessary that Christ
should be God, both in respect of God and us. 3. Answer some Objections that
are made against this Fundamental truth. 4. Propound some Rules or
Considerations, for the better understanding of those Scriptures which refer to
the mystery of Christ.


Quer. How do ye prove that Christ is the eternal most (...) God? Several
demonstrations of Christ's eternal Godhead.


Answ. His eternal Deity, coequality and consubstan^ity with the Father is
demonstrated,

First, From his divine Names and Titles. From his divine names.
He to ^^^m the Incommunicable titles of the high God are at^^uted, is the most
high God: But the Incommunica^^titles of the most high God are attributed to
Christ. ^^e nominal, real, and relative attributes of God are ^^en to him.

(...). 1 Jehovah.
Jehovah is one of the Incommunicable names of (...), which signifies his
eternal essence, Exodus 15.3. Genesis (...). a name so full of divine mysteries,
that the Jews hold unlawful to pronounce it. It signifies, 1. That God (...)
eternal independent being of himself. 2. That he ^^es being to all creatures,
Acts 17.28. 3. That he (...) and will fully execute and perform his word and
^^mises. God tells Moses, Exodus 6.32. that he was not own to Abraham, etc. by
this name: not but that they (...) know this to be the incommunicable name of
the (...) high God, but they lived not to see the accomplishment of Gods
promise touching the deliverance of their ^^^erity out of Egypt, and their
possessing of the promise land.

Now this glorious name Jehovah, so full of mysteries, (...) scribed to Christ,
Zech. 2.12, 13. Genesis 32.30. Genesis 48.16. ^^^l. 102.26, 27. Heb. 1.8, 9, 10, 11.
He is Jehovah our righteousness, Jer. 23.5, 6. Jehovah rained fire and
brim^^^ne from Jehovah out of heaven, Genesis 19.24. that is, (...) a created
Angel, but Jehovah the Son of God, the ^^^reated Angel that stayed with
Abraham, Cap. 18. rain^^^ fire and brimstone from Jehovah the Father.

Object. But this title Jehovah is appropriated to the lurch, Jer. 33.16.

Answ. 1. It is with reference to Jehovah the Son of ^^^d, as she bears his
name, and is justified by his righteousness: and so this title is given to
Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 48.^^ and to the Altar erected by Moses, Exodus 17.15. not
solutely, but respectively, in regard of the presence Jehovah there.

(...) Montanus, with others of prime note, render the text word for word thus:
He that shall call her, is Jehovah Tzidkenu: and Vide Engl. Annot. in loc.
some, thus: This is the name wherewith every one shall call him, Jehovah our
righteousness. Now according to this reading, the name is attributed. Christ
her husband, and not to her. But if it be applied to the Church, (as that
Interpretation is thought be the most genuine) then it is not properly and
absolutely, but respectively ascribed to her, with reference Christ her
Husband, of whom it is properly meant.

2 Obsect. But there is no such mystery in the word Jehovah, touching the
Godhead of Christ: for if so, it wo^^ then have been made use of in the New
Testament; wh^^ it is not.

Answ. The Greeks could not by one word in the language emphatically express
the mystery and signicancie of this name Jehovah; and therefore the force it is
opened in diverse words by the Apostle John in New Testament, and that with
respect to the Divinity Christ. See Rev 4.8. Rev. 1.4, 8. Rev. 11.17. So (...)
for the name Jehovah.

II. 2 Eheich.
Another Name or Title which denotes the effect of God, is Ehcieh; I am that I
am, or I will be that I^^ be, Exodus 3.14. It has the same root with Jehovah,
(...) signifies that God is an eternal unchangeable Being. (...) Name is given
to Christ; who is Alpha and Omega, (...) Beginning and the Ending; which Is,
which Was, (...) which is To come, the Almighty, Rev. 1.8. who says himself,
Before Abraham was, I am, Joh. 8.58.

III. 3. Elohim.
Elohim, which signifies the Persons in the effect It Is a name of the plural
number, expressing the Tri^^ of Persons in the Unity of Essence: and therefore
(...) observed by the Learned, that the holy Ghost beginning the story of the
Creation with this plural name of G^^ joined with a verb of the singular
number. The m^^^ty Gods, or all the three Persons in the Godhead, ^^^ted, Genesis
1.1. And Jehovah Elohim said, Man is bec^^^ as one of us, Genesis 3.22. And again,
None says, (...) is God my Makers? Job 35.10. This name is also a^^buted to
Christ, Psalm. 45.6. Heb. 1.8. one of the th^^ persons in the Divine effence,
but is never absolutely ^^ven to any creature.

IV. 4. El Gibber
Another Title is El Gibbor, the strong and mi^^^ God. This is also attributed
to Christ, Isa. 9.6.

V. 5. El Shaddai.
Another of the incommunicable Titles of God is ^^^l-Shaddai, God Omnipotent or
All-sufficient, Genesis 17.1. which is given to Christ: compare we Genesis 35.6, 9,
10, 11. with Hos. 12.4. That Angel that appeared to Jacob, was Christ the Angel
of the Covenant. Neither the Father ^or the holy Ghost is ever called an Angel
in Scripture: ^or was this a created Angel; for then Jacob would not have made
supplication to him: but he was an uncreated Angel, even the Lord of hosts, the
Almighty God, who ^pake with Jacob in Bethel; the ame Angel that conducted the
Israelites in the wilderness, and fought their battles, Exodus 3.2. Acts 7.30. 1
Cor. 10.4, 5, 9. even Christ ^he Almighty, Rev. 1.8. Rev. 4.8. As for these two
last Titles, they signify God in his essential works.

VI. Adonai, or Lord: 6. Adonai.
though it be given analogical^^ to creatures, yet properly it belongs to God
alone. This is also used in the plural number, to denote the mystery of the
Trinity. If I be Adonim, Lords, where is my ^^ear? It is given to Christ, Psalm.
110.1. Dan. 9.16. Mat. ^2.44. Heb. 1.13.

Christ is called God, Joh. 1.1. the true God, or very God, 1 John 5.20, the
great God, Tit. 2.15. God above ^^ll, blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. The
Wonderful, Counsel^r, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of
peace, Isa. 9.6. a text uniserably perverted, and misapplied to Hezckiah, by
the later Jews and some others, (...) if they were resolved to put out their
eyes, lest the ^^ght should shine into them.

The second proof of the eternal Godhead of Christ, 2 Demonst. is taken from
his divine properties.
is taken from his divine Properties and Attributes. He to whom the
incommunicable Properties of the most high God are attributed, is the most high
God: But the ^ccommunicable Properties of the most high God are attributed to
Christ: As, 1. Eternity, Joh.8.58. Isai. 9.6. Rev. 1.8, 17. Rev. 22.13. ^eb.
7.3. Christ was before all creatures, when there as nothing but eternity, Prove.
8.22, 23, 30. Joh. 1.1. Joh. 7.5. Mica. 5.2. 1 John 1.1, 2. 2. Omniscience: he
knows all things, Ioh. 2.24, 25. ^ev. 2.8, 9, 23. Matthew. 9.4. Matthew. 12.25.
Ioh. 10.15. Ioh. 16.^^. Ioh. 21.17. Col. 2.3. 3. Omnipresence: he fills all
things, Matthew. 18.20. Matthew. 28.20. Ioh. 3.13. Ioh. 14 23. Ephesians. 4.10. 4.
Omnipotency: he can do all things, Ioh. 5.19, 21^ Heb. 1.3. Phil. 3.21. Rev.
4.8. Rev. 17.14. 5. Equality with the Father, and that without robbery^ Phil.
2.6. (...), subsisting in the sor^ of God, he thought it no unjust prey to be
equal with God. He who is in the form of God, and without prejudice to the
Father equal to him, must needs be God by nature, an independent God, the most
high God.


Another Demonstration of the eternal Godhead o^ Christ,Consid. 3 Demonst. from
his divine works.
is taken from his divine works. He to whom those actions are ascribed, which
are proper to the mo^^ high God, is the most high God: But such actions o^
works are ascribed to Christ.

1. Works of power: As, 1. Creation, Heb. 1.2. Col. 1.16. Joh. 1.3. Psalm.
102.25. Heb. 1.10. Ephesians. 3.9. 2. Universal Conservation of all things, Heb. 1.3.
Joh 5.17. 3. Miracles, Joh. 14.11. Matthew. 8.16, 28, 29. Mar. 9.6, 33.


2. Works of grace: As, 1. Election, Joh. 13.18. Joh. 15.16, 19. 2. Redemption,
Gal. 3.13. Gal. 4.4, 5. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. None but the most high God could save
and deliver us from the curse of the Law, Sin, Satan, Death, Hell, and the
wrath to come: these were too pote^ enemies for a mere creature to buckle with
and to overcome.


3. The pouring out of the holy Ghost upon us, Ioh. 4.10. Ioh. 6.27. Ioh. 7.38,
39. Ioh. 16.7. John baptized only with water, but Christ with the holy Ghost
and with fire, Joh. 1.33.

4. Giving us eternal life, Joh. 10.28. 1 John 5.12, 13. Joh. 11.25, 26.

Fourthly, 4 Demonst. from the divine worship ascribed to him.
The Godhead of Christ is evinced and demonstrated, from his divine honor and
worship. The Apostle shows, Gal. 4.8. that religious worship ought to be
performed to none but to him that is God by nature; and that they are ignorant
of the true God, who religiously worship them that are not Gods by nature (...)
and therefore if Christ were not God by nature, and consubstantial with the
Father, we ought not to perform religious worship to him. So then, he to whom
religious worship is truly exhibited, is the most high God: But religious
worship is truly exhibited unto Christ. Phil. 2.10. Joh. 5.23. As, 1. Prayer,
and calling upon his Name, Acts 7.57. Rev. 1.5. Joh. 16.24. Romans 10.13, 14. 2.
Baptism is to be administered in his Name, Matthew. 28.19. 3. We are to believe on
him, Joh. 1.12. Joh. 3.16. Ioh. 6.47. Ioh. 14.1.


The last Demonstration of Christ's eternal Godhead is taken from Ioh. 10.30. 1
Ioh. 5.7. 5 Demonst. is taken from Christ's oneness with the Father.
Christ is one in essence and nature with the Father, and therefore he is the
most high God. In verse. 8. of 1 Ioh. 5. it is, They agree in one, (that is)
they consent in their testimony: but in this verse. 7. we find that they are
one, (that is) one in nature, co-essential and consubstantial; therefore they
agree in their testimony. The Apostle, in verse. 9. distinguishes the testimony
of the Father, Word and Spirit, (as being the testimony of the eternal God)
from the testimony of man.

Thus much for the proof of the Godhead of Christ.

Quaer. But was it necessary that Christ (who assumed our nature) should be the
eternal God?

Answ. Yes, it was necessary that it should be so, It was necessary that Chr.
should be the eternal God, for several Reasons.
both in respect of God and us.

I. The majesty of God required it, who is so holy, pure and just, that none
could interpose, but he that was God essentially one with the Father, Ioh.
10.30. Ioh. 14.9, 10, 11. The Angels could not: for though they be glorious
creatures, yet being compared with the sacred Majesty of God, they are
unclean, Job 15.55. Isa. 6.2. much less could man reconcile himself to God,
there being none that does good, no not one, Romans 3.10.

II. It was necessary in respect of man.

1. The evils to be removed, and the enemies to be subdued, were exceeding
potent; Sin, and the consequents thereof: as, the wrath of God, the curse of
the Law, the power of Satan, death temporal and eternal.

2. The good things to be procured, were exceed^^ rich and glorious: as,
perfect righteousness, adoption union with God, the indwelling of the holy
Ghost a^^ his gifts, everlasting bliss and glory. Who could remo^^ these evils,
and procure these blessings, but only God himself?

3. To fortify us against fears and doubts, when Satan tempts us to question
our reconciliation to, and union with God, (as too high a privilege for us) we
should call to mind, that he who was crucified, and wrough^ out this glorious
redemption for us, is the Lord of glory Jehovah the most high God, Acts 20.28.
1 Cor. 2.8. (...) Satan tempt us to doubt of the truth and reality of God
spel-promises, and to conclude that the comforts there^^ held forth, are too
good and precious for us; we should then remember, that all the promises are
yea and amen^^ Christ, who is the glorious eternal God, 1 Cor. 1.20.

4. To comfort us in respect of perseverance; seeing we are elected in Christ,
Ephesians. 1.4. and our life is hid wi^^ him who is God, Col. 3.3. therefore it is
sure: None shall pluck them out of my hand, (says Christ.) My Father which
gave them me, is greater then all: and, I and my Father are one; one in nature,
will, operation, Ioh. 10.28, 29, 30. They that believe on Christ, have eternal
life^ and shall not come into condemnation, Joh. 5.24.

I shall now (by God's help) answer the most material Objections that are made
against the Godhead o^ Christ.

1 Object. Christ is distinguished in Scripture from the eternal God,
Objections against the Godhead of Christ.
and therefore he is not the eternal God.

Answ. Christ, as he is the Son of God, is not substantially or essentially
distinguished from God. The divine essence it self, neither is, nor can be
divided nor distinguished: But the Persons in the divine essence may and ought
to be distinguished. We confess, that in the unity of the Godhead there is a
plurality, which is not accidental; for God is a most pure act, that admits of
no accidents: nor is it essential, for God is one essence only: But it is
personal. Christ then is not distinguished from God in respect of essence, but
in respect of the manner of being: for in the Divine essence, the diverse
manner of being is to be considered; and this shall be more fully spoken to
hereafter.

2 Object. Christ receives life from the Father, Joh. 6.57. and is the gift of
the Father: and therefore is not the eternal God equal with the Father.

Answ. 1. Christ the Son of God has an essential life and glory communicated
to him from the Father by necessity of nature, and that from eternity; the
self-same essence and life, and in the same perfection with the Father, who, as
he has life in himself, so he has given to the Son to have life in himself,
Ioh. 5.26. As the Father has it eternally in himself, so the Son has it
eternally in himself. It is not a life given of grace, but by way of necessary
communication, both in respect of the Father and the Son. He that has seen me,
(says Christ) has seen the Father: I am in the Father, and the Father in me,
Ioh. 14.9, 10, 11. there being such an intrinsecal essential union between the
Father and the Son, that the Son cannot choose but live the same individual life
in and with the Father, and do the very same works which the Father does, Ioh.
5.19.

2. There are some gifts of God to Christ by way of voluntary dispensation, as
Christ is Mediator; which do not add a new glory to him as he is the Son of
God, but are declarative of that glory which was in him from eternity. By the
resurrection from the dead, and his other works and miracles, he was declared
to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness. Romans 1.4.

3. Christ, as man, received his life from God in the fullness of time, Gal.
4.4. As every creature lives, and moves, and has its being in and from God; so
Christ, in respect of his Manhood, consisting of soul and body, had his being,
life, and motion from God. This does not prejudice his essential life and glory
which he had with the Father before the world was. Joh. 17.5.

3 Object. Yea, but Christ confesses that his Father is greater then he, Ioh.
14.28.

Answ. The Scripture also says, that he thought it no unjust prey to be equal
with God, Phil. 2.6. What, to be equal with, and yet inferior to God? This
seems to be a contradiction. Now therefore, to salve this, we must distinguish
between Christ considered in his eternal Godhead, wherein he is equal with the
Father; and Christ considered in his humane nature: or between Christ
considered in his eternal essence, wherein he is God by nature; and Christ
considered in his Office and condition of Mediator, which he voluntarily
assumed: for though the Father gave him, yet he gave himself, Ioh. 10.18.
Inequality in respect of Office, may well consist with equality in respect of
essence Inaequalitas officii, non tollit aequalitatem naturae.
.

4 Object. But Christ is often called the Son of God, and that seems to imply
his inferiority to God.

Answ. Whereas we are the sons of God by grace and adoption, Christ is the Son
of God by nature; his proper Son, his only begotten Son, Romans 8.3, 32. Ioh.
5.17, 18. Ioh. 1.14, 18. Unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Heb. 1.5. The Jews in Christ's time,
when he was upon earth, had so much understanding, as to discern that these two
Titles, ( God, and the Son of God) as applied to Christ, were Synonyma's, or
terms convertible: Ioh. 5.17, 18, 19. And Christ himself puts it out of doubt,
Ioh. 10.33, 36. and so does Nathanael, Joh. 1.49. Nay, the Tempter himself so
understood this title, [The Son of God] when he said, If thou be the Son of
God, command that these stones be made bread, Matthew. 4.3.

5 Object. But that which begets, does exist before that which is begotten.

Answ. 1. Christ is begotten of the Father by unspeakable unconceivable
generation from eternity, and therefore we must not measure this glorious
mystery with the measure of a man: God's thoughts and ways are not as ours: Who
can declare his generation? what is his name, or what is his Sons name, who can
tell? Prove. 30.4. This generation differs much from that which is among men:
for, 1. There the Father is in time before the Son; not so here. 2. There, the
Father is forth of his Son; but here, the Father is in the Son, and the Son in
the Father. 3. There, the Son is from his Father by propagation; but here, the
Son is not from the Father by propagation, but by communication of substance,
yea, the whole substance or essence, which no earthly Father does or can
communicate. 4. There, the Father does of his own accord freely beget his Son
in time; but here, the Father begets his Son necessarily, and from intrinsecal
perfection. The Father is in him, and he in the Father, not only (...), but by
a co-essential indwelling and oneness of nature, and that from eternity. Psalm.
2.7. Mica. 5.2.

2. Though in transient acts, which are wrought in time, and pass into the
subject, that which begets exists before that which is begotten; yet it is not
so in an immanent action, which is from eternity ever abiding in God, and the
same with Gods essence. Christ is the brightness of the Fathers glory, Heb.
1.3. one that shines from him, as the beam from the Sun. The light of the Sun
is from the Sun, the heat from the fire; and were it possible these things
could be from everlasting, then the light and heat should be from everlasting.
Though we cannot in all things so fitly compare the eternal generation of the
Son of God with that which is created in time; yet that which begets, and that
which is begotten, both of them to be always together, and to be perfect, has
some resemblance in the soul of man, which does always within it self, and of
it self produce Reason and Understanding: and here, that which is simple and
perfect, does also beget that which is simple and perfect in its kind.

Some learned Divines do thus express this Mystery: The Father is God
understanding himself; the divine nature acting firstly in a way of
understanding upon it self, does beget: and hence is the name Father; and that
acting upon it self by a reflex act of the understanding, is the Son or Word of
God, which is God understood of himself, one with himself.

6 Object. This is a strange thing! how is it possible that God should be
generated of God?

Answ. It is not properly said, that the Godhead was generated of the Father,
or that the essence did beget the essence: but the Son was generated of the
Father: For though there be no distinction between God, and the essence of God;
yet the Son of God may be distinguished from essence: for the Son denotes the
Person; and Person and Essence are modally distinguished. The Person is the
essence, with a certain modification, or distinct manner of subsistence: they
differ, not as a thing and a thing, as if they were two several things; but as
a thing, and the manner of its being and subsistence. The Father is not the
Son, nor the Son the Father: but they have their distinct, personal,
incommunicable properties: The Father begets, and the Son is begotten. Now
though the Son in respect of his person be of the Father, God of God; yet in
respect of his Godhead, he is of none: for the Godhead of the Son is no more
begotten, then the Godhead of the Father.

7 Object. But the Son of God, the second Person, being sent by the Father, and
humbling himself to take upon him the nature of man, and the curse due to
sinners, must needs be inferior to God that sent him.

Answ. That will not follow: for Christ was sent into the world, and assumed
the nature of man, by the mutual consent of all the three Persons, the Father,
Son and Spirit; as man was also created by their common consent, Genesis 1.26. Job
35.10. As the Father gave Christ, so Christ gave himself: and as the Father
anointed, sanctified, and set him apart; so Christ anointed and set apart
himself for the work of redemption, Ioh. 10.18. Tit. 2.14. Phil. 2.6, 7. Heb.
2.11. Ioh. 17.19. Nor does one man's sending another upon a message, always
argue superiority in respect of power: for equals may by common consent send
one another. Three Virgins that are equal in power, age, and estate, may by
consent weave and make a garment, and but one of them wear it; and yet that one
no whit inferior to the other two. So it is in this case: All the three
persons agreed, that Christ the second Person should come into the world, and
take our nature, and die for our sins; though (for order sake) the Father is
said to send him: not because the Father partakes more of the Godhead then the
Son, but because he is the first in order among the divine Persons.

8 Object. Whereas you mention the words Consubstantial, Coessential Persons,
i. e. that Christ is one in substance and essence with the Father, and yet a
distinct Person from the Father: we do not find these express words in
Scripture.

Answ. 1. We stand not tenaciously upon words, so the thing it self be granted:
but commonly, those that reject the words, are also unsound in the doctrine
which the words hold forth. Calv. Inst. lib. 1. cap. 13. S. 3, 4, 5
Arius himself being put to it, did acknowledge that Christ was God, and that
he was the Son of God; but then he meant, that he was a created God, and had
his beginning in time: and therefore when it was urged, that Christ was the
eternal Son of God, and consubstantial with the Father, this bewrayed the
subtilty of the man; for he could not endure the word (...). Nay, the Socinians
at this day will confess, that Christ in a sense is the natural Son of God; but
their meaning is not, that he was eternally begotten of the essence of God, but
that he was miraculously conceived and brought forth in time by God, and
anointed and exalted above all creatures.

2. For the word Persona, which was made use of in the Latin, as Hypostasis
was in the Greek Church; though it cannot be denied, but that godly learned
men, in speaking of the mystery of the Trinity, have varied in words and
phrases; (yea, herein there was no small strife between the East and Western
Churches, before they rightly understood one another:) yet the words Trinity of
persons, were not taken up without good cause. Sabellius and his followers did
confess, that there was in the Godhead three distinct Attributes, and that the
Father was God, and the Son God, and the holy Ghost God: but then he meant no
otherwise, then if he had said that God was strong, just, and wise. And
therefore when it was alleged, that there was in the Godhead a Trinity of
persons or subsistences distinguished one from another by incommunicable
properties, he could not hold, but vented his poison against this precious
truth.

3. Though we find not in Scripture these very express words, ( i.e. That
Christ is consubstantial with the Father, and that there are three persons in
the Godhead) yet there are words equivalent thereunto, which hold forth that
Christ is equal with the Father, and that the three are distinguished one from
another by incommunicable properties. See Phil. 2.6. Joh. 1.1, 2. Joh. 5.18,
19. Joh. 10.33. Joh. 14.9, 16. Gal. 4.8. Heb. 1.3. Genesis 19.24. 1 John 5.7. Gal.
4.4, 6. If any man shall ingenuously and reverently acknowledge that the Lord
Jesus is the eternal most high uncreated God, equal and one with the Father;
(for we are sure, that there can be but one eternal most high God:) and again,
that the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father; and that the holy Ghost
is neither the Father nor the Son; but that they a^^ three distinct
subsistences, or three diverse manners^ Being of one and the same individual
essence: this being acknowledged, I know no sober peaceable Christian th^^ will
quarrel about words.

And now, Rules or Considerations for the better understanding of the mystery
of the Son of God.
for the better understanding of this glorious Mystery of the Son of God, I
shall here subjoy several Rules or Considerations, grounded upon the Word of
God.

Son ascribes his glorious works to himself. As the Father raises up and
quickens the dead, so the Son quickneth whom he will, Joh. 5.1^, 19, 21.) yet
this does no way impeach the Godhead (...) Christ: for such passages are to be
referred to his Mediatory Office, whereunto he was designed by the Father And
in honoring the Father, he honors himself: (...) the Father and he are one,
Joh. 10.30. Joh. 5.23.

essence; as, where (...) says, Before Abraham was, I am: and, The Word was
(...) the beginning with God, and all things were made by hi^ Joh. 8.58. Joh.
1.1, 2, 3, 10. Some things do properly belong to his Manhood; as, where he is
called the Lord servant, Isai. 42.1. Isai. 53.11. and is said to have incre^sed
in knowledge and favor with God and men, Luke 2.5^ to be hungry, thirsty,
sorrowful to the death, Matthew. 4.^^ Matthew. 26.38. and that he came not to do
his own (...) but the will of the Father, Joh. 5.30. Joh. 6.38. Matthew. 26.39.
And some things are applicable to him in respect of his office of Mediator,
which he performed a God-man; as, where he is said to receive power from God to
forgive sin, to raise the dead, and to give righteousness, peace and salvation
to the elect, whom the Father gave to him; and to exercise dominion over a^^
things for their good, Joh. 1.29. Joh. 5.24. Joh. 8.12. Joh. 9.5. Joh. 10.9.
Ephesians. 1.22, 23.

two Natures in Christ are not, (...) should not be confounded; yet the
personal union is high and glorious, that there is a communication of
Properties, (which must be duly considered, for the right understanding of many
Scriptures which refer to Christ.) The properties of one nature are sometimes
attributed to the whole Person; as, Christ is said to be born of a woman, and
to be dead; which is proper to the humanity: and to have been with the Father
before the Creation; which is proper to the divine nature. Sometimes, the
properties of one nature are attributed to the other nature, in regard of the
personal union; as, when God is said to be crucified, to purchase the Church
with is blood, and to be taken up into glory. 1 Cor. 2.8. Acts 20.^8. 1 Timothy
2.16. which properly belongs not to the di^ine, but to the humane nature. And
sometimes those things which properly belong to the whole person, and ^o both
natures, are attributed to one nature; as, where ^he man Christ is called the
Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. which ^ertains not to Christ as he is man only, but as
he is God-man, or God manifested in the flesh.

nature and person must be carefully distinguished. Nature is a substance
common to all the three, Father, Son, and Spirit: but a Person is that which
sub^steth of it self, and has a proper manner of being; as, ^he Father
begets, the Son is begotten, the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and
the Son. The acts of God essentially considered, are common to all the persons;
^s, to create, etc. but the acts of God personally considered, are proper to
each person; as, to beget, etc. Neither let any say, that this is a groundless
distinction: We find, the Word was with God; there God is to be taken
personally; the Son was with the Father, distinct from the Father. Again, the
Word was God; there God (...) taken essentially, Joh. 1.1. the Son, as well as
the Father, having the whole essence of God.

Order. The beginning of the Godhead is in ^he Father; who begetting the Son,
must in order be before the Son begotten; and the Father and the Son, before
the holy Ghost, which proceeds from them: But for nature, they are
consubstantial; for dignity, coequal; and for time, coeternal: there being
among them neither (...) nor last, superiority nor inferiority. The whole
divine essence is in each Person; only it was incarnate^ in the second Person,
the Word, who is also called the So^ of God, not in respect of his miraculous
conception, unction, resurrection, exaltation, (for he was the Son o^ God
before any of these, only hereby his power and glory was manifested) but in
respect of his oneness (...) essence with the Father.

Mysteries of the eternal Godhead of Christ, the^ Trinity of Persons in the
unity of Essence, the union (...) two Natures in one Person; though we cannot
comprehend, much less express how these things should be^ Shall we think to
empty the vast Ocean into a Muscle shell? Are there not many mysteries in
nature, which the wisest Philosopher cannot sound the depth of? Wh^^ can
distinctly and perfectly tell how the child is formed in the womb, how the
soul and body are knit together^ Who can declare the several beings and
operations o^ the creatures? Who can clearly make out that mystical^ oneness
which is between Christ and the Saints? which yet is not of so high a nature,
as the essential union o^ three persons (...) one divine essence; no, nor as
the hypo^^^tical union of two natures in one person. Shall we doubt of or deny
every thing which we cannot rationally conceive of and comprehend? then farewell
divine faith, and the ground thereof, i. e. divine and supernatur^^ revelation.
The very Angels cover their faces at the brightness of Gods majesty; thereby
signifying, that this glorious mystery cannot be comprehended by the most
excellent creature; and shall we quarrel with it, and dispute against it,
because we cannot with all our wit and reason comprehend it? Who is this that
darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge? Where wast thou (says the Lord)
when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou have understanding.
Job 38.2, 4.

I cannot (says Nazianzene) think of one, but by and by I am compassed about
with the brightness and glory of three; nor can I consider three, but I am
presently brought back again to one.

The Unity in Trinity (says Justin Martyr) and the Trinity in Unity, is
understood to be so; but how it is, neither will I advise others curiously to
search, nor can I satisfy myself.

Whatsoever thou say of that God (says Tertullian) who is one in essence,
and three in persons; thou do rather declare some one force and virtue of
his, then Himself: for, what beseeming him can thou either think or say of
him, who is infinitely beyond whatsoever thou can think or say?

I have been the larger on this Subject, because it is the foundation of a
Christians faith, hope, peace, and consolation; and because there are many at
this day, of able parts, smoothe language, and unspotted conversations, who
deny the eternal Deity of the Son of God, and his consubstantiality with the
Father: In which error if they live and die, poor creatures! they are lost for
ever; forasmuch as there is no coming to, nor reconciliation with God, but by
him who is God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5.

Our dear Lord Jesus will one day plead his own cause with a witness, when the
greatest Disputers of this world shall not be able to open their mouths
against him. In the mean while, I thought it my duty to speak something for the
honor of my Lord and Savior, who has done and suffered great things for my
soul. I have contracted as much as well I could, in a little room. Those that
desire to look into more large and learned Tracts on this subject, may do well
to peruse M. Owen's Vindiciae Evangelicae, against Biddle; and Nicolaus
Arnoldus Religio Socin. Refuta. lately published.

Thus much of the first Doctrine.

Let us now proceed further in the opening of this Verse.

[Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever.]

The Spirit of God describes the Kingdom of Christ by two properties: one of
them is perpetuity, or everlastingness. Of the perpetuity of Christ's Throne.
[Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever.] A throne signifies Princely,
Judicial Majesty, Power and Sovereignty. In a Kingdom there are four things: A
King, Subjects, Laws, and Authority. The Throne is an emblem of the last. So
here.

The Jews and Arrians (that they might every way oppose the Godhead of Christ)
would have the words read thus: God is thy throne, or seat, O Christ, for ever
and ever: As if this word God should be read in the Nominative, and not in the
Vocative Case. But this is but ameer evasion: for both the Septuagint (whom the
Apostle follows) render it in the Vocative (...), as applying it to the
Messiah; And besides, the former reading (...) quite contrary to the use of
Scripture: for though w^^ find that heaven, earth and angels are said to be
the Throne or seat of God, yet God is never said to be the throne or seat of
man.

Christ may be considered either as the Lord of glory, o^ as a glorified man:
In which respects, he has a twofold Throne ascribed to him. (1.) One, as he is
God, Dan. 7.9, 10. Rev. 5.1. Rev. 20.11. Rev. 22.1. (2.) Another, a^ he is man
exalted and glorified. No mere creature (...) with Christ on the former, but
the Saints shall sit with him on the latter. Know ye not that the Saints shall
judge the world? 1 Cor. 6.2. To them that overcome, will I give to sit with me
on my throne, even as I overcome, and am^^^ down with my Father on his throne.
Rev. 2.26, 27. Rev. 3.21. This is that which the Lord will bring forth, as the
issue and result of those shakings and revolutions which ar^ and shall be in
the nations of the world. Dan. 7.22, 26.

From the words we may observe,

Christ's Kingdom is everlasting.


The words translated [for ever] do not in Scripture so precisely import
absolute eternity, but that sometime they are taken periodically, for an age,
or a long time; as till the year of Jubilee, or till the coming of Christ in
the flesh. But it is observed, that in the text there are two words; Gnolam,
and Gnad: and this latter word, Gna^, being added Hebr. in aeternum and ultra:
qua phrasi significari solet aeternitas interminabilis and absoluta.
, signifies in Scripture absolute eternity, Psalm. 10.16. which the Greeks
express thus: (...).

Though David and Solomon's Throne was not everlasting in the letter and Type;
yet in the Antitype, or thing signified, it was. The Lord has promised that
David posterity shall endure as long as the Sun and Moon endures, Psalm. 89.29.
This is verified in Christ, whose Kingdom and Throne is both universal and
eternal. The Lord has sworn to David, to make him King of Israel, and to set
of his issue on his throne for ever, 2 Samuel 3.9. Psalm. 132.11. this is also
fulfilled in Christ, who was David's son according to the flesh, and his Lord
and Father according to the spirit. Of the increase of his government there
shall be no end, Isa. 9.6. His Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, a Kingdom
thorowout all ages, Psalm. 145.13. a Kingdom that shall overtop all other
kingdoms. Isai. 2.2, 11. Dan. 2.45. Mic. 4.2. He shall reign over the house of
Jacob, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1.33. Hence the mercies
of this Kingdom are called the sure mercies of David; and the Covenant made
with the house of David, a sure, well-ordered, everlasting Covenant. ^sai.
55.3, 4. 2 Samuel 23.5.

As for the four great Monarchies of the world, especially the fourth or Roman
Monarchy, Dan. 2.42. with the toes and branches thereof, viz. those Kings and
Countries now under the Turkish and Papal power; they have indeed, and do still
with much cruelty act their parts against Christ and his Lambs: but the little
Stone shall ^^^ite and break them in pieces; and this little Stone, namely, the
Kingdom of Christ, (which is so much despised at this day) shall become a great
mountain, and cover the face of the earth.

Papists and other Persecutors, who make deep and long furrows on the backs of
the Saints, Psalm. 129.3. as if they were still in hope to swallow up this
Interest, notwithstanding the late glorious appearances of God in vindication
thereof. Poor-souls! they do but delude themselves; their Kingdom and Power is
giving up the ghost: Christ and his interest will eat up all other interests.
This King will be last on the Stage, and will reign till all his enemies be
made his footstool, 1 Cor. 15.25.

shaken, yea, broken and overturned one after another, look and long after this
Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. The mutability and uncertainty of
all outward Forms, should make us highly prize the immutability and perpetuity
of Christ's Kingdom: no true rest, till we come to this.

wait in Gods own way, for the spreading and growth of this Kingdom^ which
though at first it be but like a grain of mustard seed, scarce discernable; yet
afterward it becomes ^ great tree, Matthew. 13.31. This Kingdom will grow
great^^ and greater, till it become a huge mountain. Nor is (...) only inward
in the heart, (and so peculiar to Gods elect in whose hearts he sets up his
spiritual Kingdom) but (...) is also outward in the world. The Kingdoms of th^^
world, in their outward and Civil administrations, shall be governed by Christ,
Rev. 11.15. In the days of the fourth Kingdom, says Daniel, Chap. 2.44. the
God (...) heaven will set up his Kingdom: this is the little Stone (...) out
without hands; which shall at length, when the toe^ or last part of the Image
is destroyed, cover the whole earth.

Quaer. How then are we to consider the Kingdom o^ the Stone?

Answ. A twofold state of Chr. Kingdom in this world.
There is a twofold state or consideration o^ this Kingdom?

1. It is a Stone cut out of a mountain without hands scarce visible, as yet
the fourth Monarchy standing on his feet, or at least on his toes. Those that
are with and (...) Christ, are but a very little remnant, a few faithful chose^
ones. Ephraim compasses God about with lies, and Isru^ with deceit: but Judah
rules with God, and is faithful among the Saints, Hos. 11.12.

2. The other state of Christ's Kingdom (which we wa^ for) shall be, when the
Stone (having smote the Image (...) his feet and toes, and so utterly destroyed
him) grows u^ to be a great Mountain, and fills the whole earth. The former is
called (by a learned man) Regnum Lapidis, Mede Diat. par. 4. page 361, 393.
the Kingdom of the Stone, which is yet the state of Christ Kingdom; the later,
Regnum Montis, or the Kingdom (...) the Mountain. The Interval between these
two, from the first hewing out of the Stone, until it become a great^ Mountain,
is the subject matter of the Apocalyptical ^^^sions.

Thus much of the first property of Christ's Kingdom The second follows, i. e.
Righteousness, or ^^quity.

[ The Scepter of thy kingdom is a right, or, a strait scepter.] Or thus: It is
a just and equitable Scepter or Government, a Scepter of righteousness, as the
Apostle expresses it, Heb. 1.8. (which some render (...), the rod of
righteousness.) The Scepter is an Ensign of Power and Majesty of government,
Amos 1.5. and the rod or staff was anciently used, to signify the same. This
declares the nature and quality of the Government and administrations of
Christ's Kingdom, which is the habitation of justice and equity, the mountain of
holiness, Jer. 3^.21. The Scepter whereby this King does gather and govern his
subjects, is the Word or Gospel of the Kingdom, which is a Rod of Equity.

The Jews refer this only to Solomon's Scepter: nay, Graece, Virga
rectitudinis; id est, justitiae de Virga Regia Sermo est, quae Sceptrum vocat,
and Regiae. potestalis est Insigne.
there are some that apply it to Ahasuerus, but very absurdly. Doubtless there
is no government in the world so justly and rightly administered, but that it is
accompanied with much injustice. Solomon's Scepter was not righteous in all
things, nor his fathers before him: but Christ's Scepter is a perfect Scepter
of righteousness: Justice and judgment are the habitation of his throne, Psalm.
89.14. Psalm. 97.2. He puts on righteousness as a brestplate: Righteousness is
the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins, Isai. 59.17.
Isai. 11.5.

Hence we may observe, III Observe Christ's government is righteous and equitable.


That however the Princes of this world do or may oppress their subjects, and
lay heavy yokes and burdens upon them; yet Christ's Government is a just and
equitable government; and all the administrations of his Kingdom are righteous.

Consider Christ in all his Relations, and he is just in them all; righteous in
whatsoever he undertaketh.

1 He is a just King, 1. Christ is a righteous King.
administering all things in his kingdom righteously: Behold, a King shall reign
in righteousness, Isai. 32.1. His Scepter shall not nor cannot be wrested to
the fulfilling men's of men's lusts and humors, as other Scepters are; which at
length proves the ruin of them.

2 Christ is a just Judge, who accepts no man's person, 2. A righteous Judge.
but is impartial in administering justice: He shall not judge after the sight
of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears; but with
righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of
the earth, Isai. 11.3, 4. Be wise, O ye Judges, and learn of Christ to be
impartial in, and to hasten the administration of justice: for so does he,
Isai. 16.5.

3 He is a righteous Lord, 3. A righteous Lord.
who in his Sovereignty dispenses his gifts rightly, without doing wrong to
any; and where there is no wrong done, there is no injustice. Shall not the
Judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 18.25. To whom does this Lord owe any
thing? and he will pay it: or, who has first given to him? and it shall be
recompensed to him again, Romans 11.35. The nature and will of this Lord, is the
rule of all righteousness: and he can do that justly, which if a mere man
should do, would be unjust: for he is not tied to Laws, or under a superior to
command him, as man is. My he not do with his own what he pleases? has not he
an absolute Sovereignty over all things? who should control him? Romans 9.20, 21.

4 He is a righteous Husband, 4. A righteous Husband.
just and faithful in his whole carriage to his Spouse, from first to last: she
can set to her seal, that he is true and righteous, Joh. 3.33. The wife is the
weaker vessel, and should be tenderly and kindly used. Other husbands are
churlish, and sail in performing their relative duties to their yoke-fellows:
but Christ is and ever will be loving and faithful to his sp^use, and will lay
no more upon her then he will enable her to bear.

5 Christ is a righteous Advocate, 5. A righteous Advocate.
1 John 2.1. who can carry the Suit for us by a righteous Plea in a Court of
justice, without the least deceit or underhand-dealing; having fully satisfied
divine justice, and paid the utmost price of our redemption: The righteousness
and equity of Chr. Kingdom further demonstrated.
it is now just with God to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.9. and to put us in
possession of life eternal.

Quer. But how and wherein is the equity and righteousness of the scepter of
Christ further demonstrated?

Answ. 1 First, from his personal righteousness; he being the Lord that loves
righteousness, Psalm. 11.7. the sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. the true
Melchizedek, or King of righteousness, Heb. 7.2. Righteousness and peace meet
in him, Psalm. 85.10. Righteousness is his nature, and therefore he cannot do an
unrighteous act. When he was incarnate, then did righteousness look down from
heaven, Psalm. 85.11. Christ being God, his righteousness may be considered two
ways: 1. His universal righteousness, which is the purity of his nature and
essence absolutely considered, Psalm. 5.4. 1 John 1.5. 2. His particular
righteousness, considered in his relations to, and dealings with the creature.
In both respects, his scepter is a righteous scepter.


Secondly, Another Demonstration is taken from the righteousness which Christ
communicates to his people, being the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23.6.

1. Whereas none of us are righteous by nature, 1. Christ communicates
righteousness to us, for our justification
no not one, Romans 3.10. Christ by his righteousness has presented us perfectly
righteous before God his Father, Romans 5.19. Col. 1.22. We are complete, and
without spot, in him, who is made righteousness unto us, Col. 2.10. 1 Cor.
1.30. And that we might be made righteous, he was voluntarily made sin, and a
curse for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13 such was the great love which he had to
righteousness. Whether the righteous Lord punishes sin by necessity of nature,
or might not in his absolute sovereignty have remitted sin without
satisfaction; we need not now dispute, since it is revealed in the Scriptures,
that he will not pardon the least sin without satisfaction; having already
constituted this Rule, for the vindication of his relative justice, and the
salvation of his elect.

Again, 2. For sanctification.
Christ frames his people by his Spirit to a righteous and holy disposition and
conversation: this naturally flows from imputed righteousness, which is not an
empty imaginary thing, but real and operative: for if the tree be good, the
fruit will also be good, Mat. 7.17. The Saints are made conformable to Christ,
there being a resemblance between them, as between head and members: As he
works righteousness, so do they, though not in the same measure: He that is
born of God, and does righteousness, is righteous, as he is righteous, 1 John
3.7. The Lord leads his people in paths of righteousness, Psalm. 23.3. both
inwardly inclining their hearts, and also conforming their outward actions to
his rules and precepts. Through faith, the Saints wrought righteousness, Heb.
11.33.

3. 3. Christ governs his people by righteous laws.
He governs his people by righteous Laws, which the Isles shall wait for, Isa.
42.4. The Law of truth (for herein Phinehas was but his type) is in his mouth,
and iniquity is not sound in his lips, Mal. 2.5, 6. It is a Royal Law, a Law of
liberty to his people, Jam. 1.25. Jam. 2.8. because the Lord puts it into them,
and transforms and moulds their hearts into it, Heb. 8.10. 2 Cor. 3.18.

4. He gives his people faith to lay hold on his righteousness, Phil. 1.29.
Heb. 12.2. whereby they obtain witness that they are righteous as he is
righteous, Heb. 11.4. and so their consciences are made good, pure and
peaceable, Heb. 9.14. Christ being first King of righteousness, and then King
of peace, Heb. 7.2. Well may that righteousness satisfy conscience, which has
fully satisfied divine justice. If our hearts condemn or acquit us, God is
greater then our hearts, 1 Ioh. 3.20.

Thirdly, Christ is righteous in all his administrations both toward the world
and his Church, even in those providence that are most contrary to humane
Reason and wisdom: as namely, that the Gospel (both in respect of outward
Dispensation, and inward effectual Operation) should be sent unto a people more
wicked, and be with held from a people more moral and ingenuous, who make a
better improvement of their natures: That evil men should prosper in a wicked
course, and the godly be oppressed in doing righteous things, Eccl. 8.14. yet
still the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm.
145.17. Rev. 15.3. Though we poor creatures are so short-sighted, that we
cannot see from the beginning to the end thereof, Eccl. 3.11. This King judges
and makes war in righteousness, having no quarrel but what is just: he will in
righteousness judge the Whore, and avenge the blood of his Saints, Rev. 16.5,
6, 17. Rev. 19.11. Psalm. 72.2.

Fourthly, His righteousness appears in keeping his word, and performing all
his promises and engagements, Isai 30.18. Christ who was preached among you by
me, (says the Apostle) was not yea and nay, but in him was yea: for all the
promises of God in him are yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.19, 20. To speak properly,
the Lord is not a debtor to us; yet having freely and of his own accord made us
a promise, he stands obliged to himself, in regard of his justice, truth, and
faithfulness, Heb. 6.18. and therefore must and will perform what he has
promised Debitorem se fecit Deus non accipiendo, sed promittendo
.

Fifthly, Christ is righteous in distributing rewards both to the Godly, (whom
he rules with a golden Scepter) and to the wicked, (whom he subdueth with an
iron Mace.) This King will not nor cannot abuse his power, to do wrong to any;
but he will do right to all: Genesis 18.25. 2 Timothy 4.8. Romans 2.6, 7, 8, etc. Heb.
6.10. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. The Lord declares his justice, not only in the just
condemnation of the wicked, but also in the justification of the godly, and
rewarding them with eternal life, Romans 3.8, 26. 1 John 1.9. Psalm. 85.10. Not
that there is a true commutative justice between God and the Saints, as if
heaven were properly a reward of, and due in strict justice to their obedience:
no humble Christian dares challenge heaven upon this account; but in regard of
Gods promise, and Christ's satisfaction. It is just with God to reward the
Saints with life eternal; and he will do it: otherwise he should not be
faithful to himself.

In a word, Christ is righteous in his Natures, Offices, Relations, and in all
his Operations, for, in, and by his people: therefore well may it be said, That
his Scepter is a Scepter of righteousness or equity; for he administers justice
with equity and mercy, not dealing with his people according to the rigor of
the Law. If thou, Lord, should mark what is amiss, who could stand before
thee? But there is mercy and propitiation with thee, that thou may be feared,
Psalm. 130.3, 4. In some cases, that saying is true: Summum jus, summa injuria:
The rigor and extremity of the Law, is the greatest injury: But here is a King
that is propitious, and administers judgment with equity, and tempers justice
with mercy.

Scepter a righteous and equitable Scepter? O then lay down thine arms, and
come in, thou rebellious sinner. As the Persian Monarch held out his Scepter to
Esther, upon which she drew near, Esth. 5.2. so Christ does yet hold forth his
golden Scepter in the ministry of the Gospel. Draw near therefore, thou poor
sinner, and come under this Scepter, which is a gracious Scepter, a Scepter of
righteousness. Justice indeed seems to be a harsh word to a wounded soul; and
so Luther himself in his agony did apprehend it: O but it is a most comfortable
word, in that sense wherein it is alleged by the Apostle, Romans 3.25. and
therefore (as Com. loc. cap. de justit. Dei.
Musculus observes) that word which signifies goodness, is rendered by the
Septuagint justice or righteousness. The Lord Jesus will send forth judgment
unto victory.

silent then, O flesh, before the Lord, Zech. 2.13. under the sharpest and
saddest dispensations, whether toward the Church in general, or our selves in
particular. When the Lord seems to write bitter things against his people, and
his providence seem to cross his promises and prophecies; in this case, we are
to hold our peace, Lev. 10.3. The ways of the Lord are unsearchable, and past
finding out, Romans 11.33. As for our parts, we are so shallow and unskilful,
that we cannot lay together the several pieces and passages of Divine
Providence: which if we could do, they would appear to be exceeding beautiful
and harmonious. Here is a wheel in the midst of a wheel, Ezekiel. 1.16. If we look
on a Watch or Clock when it is taken asunder, there seems to be much disorder
and confusion in it: but let the Artist put the several pieces together in
order, and it is full of beauty. That which we cannot comprehend of God, we are
to admire. 'Twas an excellent saying of one: Qui in factis Dei rationem non
invenit, in infirmitate sua invenit cur rationem non inveniat.
He that in Gods works cannot find a reason of them, may easily find in his
own weakness, a reason why he cannot find a reason.

Isa. 32.15, 16, 17. Till then, one party will successively supplant and pull
down another, that they may set up themselves. Till then, the land will mourn
for want of justice, and iniquity will abound: pride, covetousness, ambition,
oppression, self-love, and the like corruptions, will bear sway, and that under
several Forms, till the Lord give a spirit of justice and self-denial, and
exalt his own Kingdom; Then shall we discern between the righteous and the
wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not, Mal. 3.18.

Verse. 7. Thou love righteousness and hate wickedness: Therefore God thy
God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
These words are exegetically added to the former, as also in Heb. 1.8, 9. for
therefore Christ's Scepter is a righteous Scepter, because he does faithfully
administer Justice in his Kingdom, in protecting the righteous, and destroying
the wicked, and that in love to righteousness and hatred of iniquity. The Lord
preserves the faithful, and plentifully rewards the proud doer, Psalm. 31.23.

Justice and wickedness (which are here put in the abstract, some interpret in
the concrete for just and wicked men: it being the property of a just King to
defend the one, to punish the other; to love the one, and to hate the other:
But there is more emphasis in the words, as they are here rendered in the
abstract, Intimating that Christ is both righteous in himself, and the Author
and giver of righteousness to others Non carere videtur mysterio quod abstracta
posuit non concreta: peculiare enim illud. Christo regi est, it a diligere
justitiam, ut nobis etiam ipsius justitiae Author atque largitur sit; and ita
odiss. iniquitatem, ut nos merito ac virtute sua ab omni iniquitate manducos
sanctificet.
. Christ's Scepter is a right Scepter, because he is a righteous King:
Righteousness it self, loving righteousness, and abhorring all iniquity: which
two are necessarily joined together.

We see then that the words contain both the positive and negative part of
sanctification.

1. A cordial love of, and adherence to righteousness and holiness.

commensurable to the rule of righteousness, It is natural to Christ to love
righteousness and hate sin.
and who is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13.

Hence observe,

That righteousness and holiness are so natural and essential to Christ, that
he cannot but love righteousness and hate iniquity.

Wickedness cannot dwell with him, neither shall iniquity come nigh his throne,
Psalm. 94.20. Christ is that just and holy one, Act. 3.14. Act. 22.14. of whom
Pilates Wife was warned in a dream, Math. 27.29. and concerning whom the World
shall be one day convinced, that He is holy and righteous, Joh. 16.8. and that

1. In his conception and Birth, being born without sin, a Lamb without spote
or blemish, shaddowed forth under the Law: such a high Priest became us, Heb.
7.26, 27.

2. In the whole course of his life and actions, he fulfilled all
righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. Heb. 4.15. Joh. 14.30. No guile was found in his
mouth: and it was necessary it should be so, That he might communicate
righteousness unto us, and work righteousness in us: had he been blemished in
the least, he could not have presented us holy and unblameable before God, Col.
1.22.

Object. Yea, but seeing Christ was made of a Woman, Gal. 4.4. he must needs
descend from the first Adam, and therefore could not be perfectly righteous and
without sin.

Ans. Doubtless all those that come of Adam by natural generation, are Sinners;
being generated of the nature of man, they receive the sin and corruption of
that nature: and so indeed should Christ have done, if he had descended from
Adam by natural generation: But the humanity of Christ was framed without
natural generation, by the extraordinary operation of the Holy Ghost.

For, though the flesh of Christ was made of the substance of the Woman, yet he
was not begotten by man, and therefore did not receive the corruption of the
nature of man, the womb of the blessed Virgin being above nature sanctified,
Christ is a just person, according ^o a fourfold definition of Justice. Arist.
Eth. ^b. 5. cap. 7.
and overshaddowed by the Holy Ghost.

However men shall define Justice or righteousness, it will plainly appear that
Christ is a just person, a lover of Justice, and hater of iniquity.

1. If we do with the Philosopher, derive the word Justice from (...), which
signifies the dividing of a thing into two equal parts or portions, for so a
righteous man does, giving to each their due and just portion; which is called
distributive Justice; Surely this belongs unto Christ, who gives to every man
his due portion; to Caesar what is due to him; to the Pharisees what is due to
them; and to his own Children what is their due by promise.

2. If with the Latins, we derive the word Justice from Jus signifying Law or
Right, and so repute him a just man, who observes the precepts of a just Law,
or who commands them to be observed; We may well conclude that Christ is
just, and a lover of Justice: for who is so conformable to the holy Law of God,
as he? Who has more right to us and over us? Who has more authority to
command us then he? Who commands things more just and equal then he, who is the
just Lawgiver and Law-fulfiller?

3. If we take justice in that sense that some take it, as signifying a
confluence of all virtues and excellencies, every virtue being contained in
justice, as every sin is contained in injustice; who can lay a better claim to
this Universal justice, and confluence of all virtues, then Christ can? Is not
he perfectly good, Universally good and just in himself, and communicative of
goodness and justice to others? all virtues, all excellencies do concentre in
him.

4. If we take righteousness for truth and fidelity, in the performance of
promises, as he is said to be just man, who is as good as his word Fundamentum
justitiae est fides, i. e. dictorum conventorumque constantia and veritas.
Tully.
; and we find in Scripture, that truth or fidelity is usually joined with
justice, Psalm. 85.10, 11. and God is said to be just and faithful in forgiving
sin, 1 Ioh. 1.9. We may well apply justice ^o Christ in this sense, which
performs whatsoever he has spoken, not one Iota of his word shall fail,
till ^ll be fulfilled, Rev. 15.31. Let God be true, and every man a liar.
Though men violate their promises, yet Christ will not.

Thus it appears that Christ loves righteousness, and ^ateth iniquity: yea
he loves righteousness, for righteousness sake; he loves all persons and
things that are righteous: himself being the righteous God, as well as a
just-man.

1. Quest. Wherein does it appear, that Christ loves righteous and holy
persons?

Answ. 1. The Scripture tells us, that righteous persons are the object of the
Lords delight, and complacency, 1 John 1.6, 7. He knows the ways of the
righteous, so as to approve thereof, Psalm. 1.6. his eye is always upon them for
good, and not for evil, Psalm. 34.15. 1 Pet. 1.12.

2. He manifests himself unto them: the secret of the Lord is with the
righteous, and they shall know his Counsels: the things which other eyes have
not seen, nor other ears have not heard, are revealed unto them, Prove. 3.32. 1
Cor. 2.9, 10.

3. He levels and makes their way plain, and easy unto them, Isai. 26.7. Prove.
15.19. They have light whilst others in darkness. Light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11, 12. Hence it is
that the righteous are as bold as a lion, Prove. 28.1.

4. Such are peculiarly owned, and protected by the Lord, 2 Pet. 2.8. Prove.
11.8. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, Prove. 12.26. and
therefore the wicked are given as a ransom, that the righteous may be
preserved, Prove. 21.18. Isai. 41.2.

5. The Lord extends his blessing to their posterity, Prove. 11.22. He
blesses the habitation of the just ones; Salvation is in their Tabernacles,
Prove. 33.3. Psalm. 118.15.

6. It shall go well with the righteous in the last day, Isai. 3.10. Eccl.
8.12. Isai. 24.16. Matthew. 13.43. Matthew. 25.46. The Lord Jesus will gather them,
as a shepherd gathers his flock, or as a Jeweller gathers his Jewels,
whereof he will not lose the least dust, Mal. 3.17. He that walks uprightly,
and works righteousness, shall abide in thy Tabernacle, and dwell in thy holy
Hill, Psalm. 15.2, 3.

2. Quaest. How does it appear that Christ hates iniquity, yea all iniquity?

Answ. In 5. particulars.

1. It Is that only, which the Lord (as a just judge) will punish to eternity:
nothing properly is the object of his hatred, but sin and wickedness.

2. Though Christ assumed the nature of man, yet it was without the sin of man,
Heb. 4.15.

3. That he might abolish the sins of the elect, he himself endured the pains
of Hell for them: Crying out, ^^y God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Matthew. 27.46. and upon this account was made sin, and a curse for us, ^co.
5.21. Gal. 3.13.

4. Christ will not have Communion with us, till our ^ns be non-imputed, and
his righteousness imputed to ^s: Justification by God, precedeth Communion with
God: Sanctification flows as an effect from imputed righteousness.

5. He will never leave, till he have wholly purged ^ut of his own people, the
remainders of sin and corruption, and made them perfectly holy as he is holy.

Object. Yea, but Christ was reckoned among Transgressors, Isai. 53.6. and
Luther was bold to say, that he was the greatest sinner in the World.

Answ. The meaning is not, that Christ was inherently a sinner; for then he
could not have delivered us from sin; But our sins were imputed to him, as our
surety. The Lord made to meet on him the iniquities of us all, Isai. 53.6. and
herein the Scapegoat (which did bear the sins of the people, Levit. 16.21,
22.) was a lively type of Christ; all our iniquities being laid upon his
score, he was arrested by God, as the debtor, and shut up in prison, and we for
whom he undertook, are set at liberty: yet so, as we must still acknowledge,
that he was without the least Tincture of sin in his own person, and we have
still the remainders of the old man in us.

Army and followers of the Lamb, Rev. 19.19. should by his appointment dash the
Brats of Babylon against the Walls, Psa. 139.19. and wade up to the Horses
Bridles in the Blood of the Antichristian party, (for so they shall do at the
destruction of Rome, Rev. 14.20.) yet still it is our duty to sing the song of
the Lamb, saying; Great and marveilous are thy works, Lord God Almighty: just
and true are thy ways thou King of Saints, Rev. 15.3. Well may we question our
own apprehensions, (which are subject to errors and mistakes,) But for the
works and administrations of Christ, there is not the least cruelty o^
injustice in them; nothing can flow from this pure fountain, but pure streams.
Thou love righteousness, and hate^ iniquity.

Magistrates especially, ought to love righteousness and administer Justice, in
love t^ Justice: for whatsoever is not done for righteousness sake (though
materially good) but for faction, applause and other carnal ends, is not true
Justice; and as Magistrates should love righteousness, so they should hate
iniquity with a deadly hatred, and fly from the very appearance of oppression,
ambition, partiality, injustice bribery, etc. Let them learn of Christ, who
delayeth not but hasteneth Justice, Isai. 16.5. Why should there be any
complaining in our streets, for the want and delay o^ Justice? When the
oppressed Woman petitioned the Roman Emperor for Justice, and he answered her,
that he was not at leisure; she replied excellently, That then he should cease
to be Emperor.

Magistrates and Judges are called Gods in Scripture, Psalm. 82.6. Joh. 10.34,
35. as (1) In regard of their simplicity, (God being a pure, unmixed essence)
and (2) Their mercyfulness and Clemency, Prove. 20.28. and (3) Their knowledge
and wisdom: so (4) In regard of their love of righteousness and Justice, and
their hatred of iniquity, whereby the throne and Majesty of Government is
established, Isai. 9.7. Prove. 16.12.

It was said of two Roman heathens Cate Fabritius.
, that it was as easy to remove the Sun out of the Firmament, as to remove
them from Justice and equity; and what! is there not more power in grace, then
in moral Philosophy? shall heathens excel Christians in justice? O let
Magistrates and Governors especially delight in righteousness; he that rules
over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23.3. Holiness gives
God his due, and righteousness gives man his due, yea every man without
exception; The judgment of truth will teach the Magistrate to do justice to men
as men: to the wicked as well as to the Godly; and to the Godly as well as to
the wicked: to them that are of a different Religion, as well as to them that
are of the same judgment with him.

righteous, as Christ is righteous, 1 John 3.7. It is not enough negatively not
to be wicked, not to do unjust things: But Christians should work
righteousness, in love to righteousness, Isai. 64.5. David had respect to all
Gods Commands, Psalm. 119.6, 128. The true Virgin Saints follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, Rev. 14.4. Grace teaches us both to avoid sin, and to
abound in righteous and holy actions, Luke 1.74, 75. Tit. 2.12. To hate that
which is evil, even as Hell it self, (as the word signifies) to be as
unwilling to sin, as to be tormented in Hell: and to cleave fast, or to be
glued to that which is good, Romans 12.9. to depart from evil and to do good,
Psa. 34.14. It is but a popish slander, That the Protestants hold that no
persons are righteous, with an inherent justice; but only with that which is
extrinsecal and imputed: for though that which is inherent in us, is imperfect,
and therefore cannot justify us at Gods tribunal; yet it is in its kind a true
personal inward righteousness, Luke 1.6. Of all men, the Saints are most
righteous, both inwardly and outwardly, in heart and conversation: The love of
righteousness, and hatred of wickedness, is ingrafted in them, and as it were
connaturalized to them by the Spirit of God, 2 Pet. 1.4. Ephesians. 2.10. Ephesians. 4.24.
and herein they are made conformable to Christ, in whose heart the Law of
righteousness and holiness is written, with an indelible character.

Quest. What are those Duties, which this Doctrine requires of us?

Answ. 1. Duty, Is to bewail before God, that deluge of unrighteousness which
is in the Land. Yet they seek me daily (says the Lord) and delight to know my
ways, as a Nation that did righteousness; But O! that men would at length loose
the bands of wickedness, and let the oppressed go free, and break off every
yoke: this would be pleasing unto the Lord, Isai. 58.2, 6.

He has showed thee (O man) what is good, and what does the Lord require of
thee; but, to do justly, and to love mercy; and to walk humbly with thy God?
Mic. 6.8. Alas, none calls for justice, none pleads for Truth: judgment is
far from us; neither does justice overtake us: We wait for light, but behold
obscurity; for brightness but we walk in darkness. Judgment is turned away
backward, and justice stands a far off: truth is fallen in the street, and
equity cannot enter, Isa. 54.4, 9, 14, 15. And is not here matter of great
lamentation, and of seeking to the Lord, that his own Arm may bring salvation,
and his Righteousness break forth in these Nations? God is engaged in point of
honor to appear against the crying sins and evils of the times; especially
seeing there have been such high pretenses for a Through Reformation both in the
Church and Civil State. Shall we now ^^ down, and feather our own nests, and
neglect the great work of the Lord? Surely the Lord will visit for this. O let
us be zealous, and repent, and ^o our first works.

Duty in our places to follow after righteousness. Such as pursue after
righteousness, (i. e.) as seek righteousness by faith in Christ, Romans 9.31, 32.
and continue in the constant practice of righteousness and holiness, Prove.
21.21. shall have comfort and support in the evil day, Isai. 51.1. Hearken to
me, ye that follow after righteousness. It Is a metaphor taken from the men of
the world, who pursue eagerly after earthly things, as if they could never have
enough: or from Hunts-men that pursue the Stag: or Soldiers, that vigorously
follow after their enemies: So should we pursue after righteousness.

adhere unto, and join with those in the Land, that are righteous, and delight
most in ways of righteousness, without partiality or faction. The Lord will
spare such as are righteous in the Land, and will not destroy them with the
wicked, Genesis 18.25, 32. They shall be hid in his secret chambers, till his
wrath have utterly consumed his enemies. If there be but ten righteous persons
in a Land, men that appear for impartial justice, let them be our companions,
now that the Lord is about to visit the nations for their unrighteousness.

unrighteousness, (as there is none of us that perfectly loves righteousness
and hates iniquity) we should then rely upon, and take comfort in the
righteousness of Christ: though we be not perfectly righteous, yet Christ is:
though we were conceived in sin, and do daily sin against God; yet Christ was
born, and lived, and died, without sin. Our righteousness is found in him; when
this is declared unto us (as Elihu speaks) by an interpreter one of a thousand,
then our drooping spirits are revived and comforted, Job 33.23, 24, 25.

It follows, [Therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee.]

The sense is by some rendered thus: Thou love righteousness, and hate
wickedness, ( i.e. all thy doctrine and practice have tendencie thereunto)
because God has anointed thee: as if this were the Cause, and the other the
Effect. And so they refer it to the time of Christ's incarnation, when the
Divinity assumed the Humanity: and it is true, that for this end Christ
received the spiritual unction as he was man, that he might love righteousness,
etc. Isa. 61.1, 2. Others refer this unction of Christ to his Baptism, when the
Spirit of the Lord came upon him. Others, to his Exaltation, after his passion,
when he arose from the dead, and ascended into glory; whereby he was declared
to be Lord and King of heaven and earth. And this seems to agree best with the
scope of this Nuptial Psalm, which treats of the Kingly Office and Dominion of
Christ; and with that of the Apostle, Phil. 2, where after he had spoken of the
humiliation and obedience of Christ, verse 6, he subjoyns these words, verse 9:
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above all
names: which is parallel to this text.

And therefore, though it be true, that Christ, in and by the conjunction of
the two Natures, received the spiritual unction, that he might love
righteousness, etc. yet here this unction seems rather to be given him by way
of reward; and so consequently, to refer to his solemn Inauguration into, and
Investiture with his Regal dignity, after his sufferings: and thus it may be
interpreted, That because Christ loves righteousness, and hates wickedness;
therefore, for a reward, God has dignified him above Angels and men, and
anointed him above his fellows. Not that Christ did properly merit, or was
anointed for himself, but for us; his righteousness and obedience being the
meritorious cause of our spiritual anointing, joy, and glory.

I shall briefly Analize the words, and so come to the Observation.

[God thy God] God was the God of Christ, as he was our Surety, and undertook
for us in our nature.

[Hath anointed thee] (that is) not with material or corporal, but with
spiritual oil; oil being taken Synecdochically for ointment: And in regard of
this anointing, the Lord Jesus is called in Heb. Messiah, and in Greek (...)
the anointed one of God.

[Above thy fellows] (that is) above all the Elect of God, who share in the
spiritual anointing, 1 John 2.27. Christ has the pre-eminence above them all.

[Therefore God thy God] hence Note;

That God was the God of Christ in Covenant, as he was our Surety, God was the
God of Christ in the work of Redemption. The gracious ends that God had toward
us, in being the God of Christ.
and did undertake for us. Or thus: Christ a^ man in the work of Redemption,
was confederate with the eternal God.

Quest. Why was God the God of Christ? and what was his gracious ends therein
toward us?

Answ. 1. God was the God of Christ, that so he might be honorably brought off
from the stage, and discharged from that debt which lay upon him as our Surety:
The divine omnipotent power appeared in raising Christ from the grave, Ephesians.
1.19, 20. he was declared thereby to be the Son of God with power, Romans 1.4.
Being put to death in weakness, but raised in power, 1 Pet. 3.18. Our Surety at
his resurrection was delivered out of preson, and received an honorable
discharge and acquittance from all our sins, and shall appear the second time
without sin, Heb. 9.18. hence he is said to rise again for our Justification,
Romans 4.25. and if he were not risen, we should be yet in our sins, 1 Cor.
15.17. But now none can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, because
Christ is risen, Romans 8.34.

2. God was the God of Christ in Covenant, that he might be our God in
Covenant: for in his Transactions, whole Christ, head and members are to be
considered, Gal. 3.16. 1 Cor. 12.12. the Covenant being first transacted with
the head, (who is given for a Covenant to us, Isai. 42.6.) and then with the
members: with him in reference to us and for us. As God did not fail our
surety, out supported him in his great conflict, when out of the depths he
called unto him; so neither will he fail us in ^me of need, Heb. 4.16. Heb.
13.5, 6.

3. That our faith might be confirmed, touching the resurrection of our bodies:
for as the mighty power of the Divine nature was exerted, and put forth in
raising ^p Christ from the Grave, so in due time it shall be put ^orth in
raising us; every one in his order: first the head, and then the members.
Christ that was Crucified in weakness, lives now by the power of God, and we
that are weak shall live with him by the power of God, 2 Cor. 13 4, 5. The
spirit of him that raised up Christ from the dead dwelling in us, shall also
raise us, Romans 8.11.

Object. But here Christ (who is called God in this Psalm) is said to be
anointed by God: which argues that he is inferior to him that anointed him; and
that though he be God, yet he is but an anointed God.

Answ. This with other Texts of the like nature, respects not properly the
Godhead, but the manhood of Christ: Yet in regard of the personal Union, that
which ^s proper to one of the natures, is attributed to the person. Christ who
was God, purchased the Church with (...) blood, Acts 20.28. yet the Godhead is
not capable of ^hodding blood. As that which properly belongs to one pa^^,
(i.e.) the body, is often in Scripture applied to the So^l, the other part of
the Compositum; or to the whole person, Psalm. 16.10. Jos. 10.32. So, it is here;
Christ in his being anointed, is not to be considered only or merely as he is
God, but as he is (...), God-man: and it may safely be said that Christ as
Mediator, was anointed by God; for though Christ be God by nature, yet there is
in him a subordination to God, in respect of his office as Mediator.

spiritual blessings; and accordingly, we should bless and praise him; he has
blessed us actively as the God and Father of Christ, and we should bless him
passively in this relation, Ephesians. 1.3, 17. hence it is that he becomes our God
and Father in covenant: I ascend to my God, and your God: to my Father, and to
your Father, Joh. 10.17. If God had not been the God of Christ in our behalf,
and covered our head in the day of battle, he had miscarried in the great work
of our Redemption, and we had been for ever miserable; But the Lord made his
strong for himself, Psalm. 80.17. and laid help on one that was mighty to save,
Psalm. 89.19. Isai. 63.2.

victorious Faith in God in his greatest agony, Matthew. 27.46. These were his
words: He is near that Justifies me; who will contend with me? Isai. 50.8. If
he trusted God, when all the sins of the elect were at once charged upon him,
Isai. 53.6. Why should not we trust him in the hour of Temptation, since all
our sins are translated from us upon our surety? And here let us not content
our selves with a general dead faith, But improve that special Interest which
we have in God, as the God and Father of Christ, and as our God and Father
through him.

To proceed further [God has anointed thee with the oil of Gladness.]

Here the Spirit of the Lord, (who is the Comforter, Joh. 14.16.) is called the
oil of Gladness from the fruit or effect, because he produces joy or
Gladness, Gal. 5.22.

In the legal Typical Sacrifices; sweet oil was much used, to signify the
anointing of the Spirit: see Psalm. 133.2. Isai. 61.1. 1 John 2.20, 27. Luke
4.18. 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Rev. 3.18.

Among the Jews also, oil was much used at their festivals: Therefore after
preparing of a table, it follows, thou anoyntest my head with oil, Psalm.
23.5. and again, Wine makes glad the heart, Bread strengthens a man, and
oil makes the countenance cheerful: hence some learned men are of opinion,
that the oil of Gladness spoken of here, and Heb. 1.9. referrs to that which
was used at feasts, Christ being more royally treated by his Father, and having
more abundance of the oil of the Spirit powered out upon him, then any other of
the guests, nay then all of them put together.

Quest. But wherein does the Spirit of God, How the Spirit resembles oil.
and the fruits thereof resemble oil?

Answ. 1. As Oil casts forth a sweet and fragrant smell, Exodus 30.23, 25. so
does the Spirit of God (and his fruits) in those in whom he dwells, Cant. 1.3.
2 Cor. 2.14. Cant. 4.10.

2. As Oil sets a luster on the face, and makes it to shine, Psalm. 104.15. so
the holy unction of the Spirit sets a spiritual luster upon the heart, life,
and countenance of a Christian. Communion with God through the Spirit, makes
the face to shine as Moseses did, when he had talked with God, Exodus 34.29. 2
Cor. 3.9, 18.

3. As Oil supples, mollifies, heals, Isa. 1.6. Luke 10.34. so the Spirit of
God mollifies the hard and Brawny heart, and heals the wounded conscience, by
applying Christ's blood.

4. As Oil refreshes the body, and makes the joints nimble, so the Spirit
refreshes and quickneth the soul, making it nimble in the work of God.

5. As Oil cleanses the stomach from corruption, which annoyeth it, so the
Spirit through faith in Christ's blood, purges corruption out of the heart,
Romans 8.13. Heb. 9.14.

6. As Oil was used in consecrating, and designing men to the Kingly,
Priestly, and Prophetical office; so by the Spirit of God (anointing the
elect, and bringing them into fellowship with Christ) they are made Priests to
offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God through Christ: Prophets to
whom the secrets of the Lord are revealed; and Kings to reign over sin, Satan,
and to subdue the Nations of the World, 1 Pet. 2.5. Psalm. 25.14. Matthew. 13.11.
Psalm. 105.15. Rev. 1.5, 6. Rev. 2.26. 1 Cor. 6.2. Rev. 3.21.

God has anointed Christ above his fellows.

Hence Observe,

That Christ (in our stead, and for our good) received the unction of the holy
Ghost without measure, Joh. 3.34. Christ as man received the unction of the
Spirit.
and above all his fellows and Confederates in Covenant.

The Kings, Priests, and Prophets among the Jews, (who were anointed, 1 Samuel
13.10, 11. Exodus 29.7. 1 King. 19.16.) were in their unction but Types of
Christ, who is the great King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church, anointed
above them all, yea and above all the Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets,
Teachers, Believers, under the new Testament ministration, (which yet is far
more spiritual and glorious, then that of the old, 2 Cor. 3.) and therefore by
way of Emphasis, he is called the anointed one of God, Joh. 12.15. Luke 1.32,
33. Acts 3.22, 23.

Christ received Grace out of measure. 1. Grace is to be found in him, as in
its proper subject, as light is in the Sun; the humanity of Christ is the
Receptacle of grace. 2. In Christ there is all kind of grace, and it is in him
in the highest and utmost degree. 3. He has power and ability, as our head, to
derive Grace unto us.

Reasons why Christ received the unction of the Spirit.

1. Two Reasons or gounds hereof.
Reas. That he might be enabled to manage the office and work which God called
him unto, specially that of his Kingdom, in truth and righteousness. God has
filled him with his Spirit, that he might bring forth judgment unto the
Gentiles; yea judgment unto victory Isai. 42.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Isai. 49.1,
2, 3. Matthew. 12.20. the Lord anointed him to preach glad tidings to the meek,
etc. Isai. 61.1, 2, 3.

2. Reas. That from him, as from a Common person, spiritual Root, or principle,
the Holy Ghost with his gift might be Communicated to us. He received gifts so
men, yea even for the Rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell with them,
Psalm. 68.18. Ephesians. 4.8. Of his fullness, w^ receive grace for grace, Joh. 1.16.
The first Adam was living Soul, but the second Adam is a quickening Spirit, 1
Cor. 15.45. As the stomach concocts meat, the Liver make blood, and the head is
the seat of the senses and spirit for the whole body; so is Christ in a
spiritual consideration; For our sakes he sanctified himself, Joh. 17.19.

informs us that Christ as man has the pre-eminence Col. 1.18. Heb. 2.8. his
humane nature being filled with the Spirit of God, yea raised up to a personal
Union with the Godhead; and therefore though believers have a high Spiritual
Union with God through Christ; yet is not so high as the man Christ has with
God: N^ only the essential, but also the personal Union is of higher nature,
then that mystical Union which is between Christ and his Church.

humane nature of Christ our elder Brother, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our
bone, Ephesians. 5.30. both grace and glory might be dispensed to us. By Christ our
anointed Savior, the Holy Ghost comes upon us. By the blood of Jesus, we have
boldness to enter into the holiest by a new and living way, which he has
Consecrated for us, through the vail, that it to say his flesh, Heb. 10.19, 20.
In the man Christ Jesus, there is a Treasury and fullness, of grace and glory
for us: He is the Lord Keeper of all our graces, the Lord Treasurer of all our
spiritual riches: We lost our old stock by the fall of the first Adam, and God
will not trust us any more, lest we fail him; But has put a new stock of
grace and glory for us into the hands of Christ, who is a substantial
Responsible person, in whom are hid all the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
Col. 2.3.

precious Oil was powered out, and ran down upon his heard to the skirts of his
Garment, Psalm. 133.2. Thus it is with the spiritual unction, which Christ as
our head received for us; he is the Fountain of Gladness, which sends forth his
Springs to refresh our barren hearts, Cant. 4.15. Joh. 4.14. Joh. 7.37. All our
springs are in him, Psa. 87.7. Make use of him therefore (O my Soul:) do
thou want righteousness, wisdom, strength, peace, joy? Go to him, who (...)
anointed with the Oil of gladness above his fellows. This heavenly Elisha does
not pour his Oil but into empty vessels, 2 Kings 4.4. Thou art not so empty as
he (...) full. O draw out this fullness. Suck out the milk which is in these
spiritual Breasts, Isai. 66.11. Thou have ^o cause to complain of him; give him
no cause to complain of thy backwardness. You will not complain to me, ^^at ye
may have life, Joh. 5.40. Let us not rob Christ ^f the glory of his fullness, by
aggravating the fullness of ^ur sin and misery, more then the fullness of his
grace and mercy: sin abounds, but grace superabounds, Romans 5.20.

fullness of grace? strive then to be like him, and to abound in all spiritual
fruits; especially in love, humility, and meekness: Learn of him, for he is
meek and lowly, Matthew. 11.29. When he was full of the thoughts of his own glory
and exaltation, he washed his disciples feet, thereby giving us an example,
Joh. 13.15 O that there were more of this spirit among us! Gifts and knowledge
increase; but alas, love decays: the love of many waxes cold, Matthew. 24.12 We
should indeed desire gifts, that we may edify one another; but love it a more
excellent way, 1 Cor. 12.31 1 Cor. 13 Knowledge puffs up, but love edifieth,
1 Cor. 8.1 O that we were filled with the spirit of love! Ephesians. 5.18 O that we
were rooted and grounded in love, and could comprehend more fully the love of
Christ which passes knowledge; that we might be filled with all the fullness of
God, Ephesians. 3 17, 18, 19 Let those that have received the spiritual anointing,
freely communicate and lay out the same for the glory of Christ: this is the
way to increase their store, as in temporals, Eccl. 11.1, 2, 3: so in
spirituals; as in the Parable, they that employed their talents most, had most,
Matthew. 25 The most active communicative Christians, are the most receptive
growing Christians. God does abundantly communicate to them, who do abundantly
communicate to others. Take heed (O my soul) lest thou should want this
spiritual oil in thy Lamp, when the Bridegroom appears: Christ will own none
but his anointed ones: He that has not the Spirit of Christ, it none of his,
Romans 8.9.

Quer. But if Christ be so full of the Spirit, why is it that we are so barren
and empty?

Answ. 1. Christians often grow insensibly in spirituals; they are so sensible
of their behindments, that they consider not their seize: the more
spiritual light they have, the more ignorance and corruption they see in
themselves. Light discovers darkness. The increase of the spiritual Anointing,
is a great mystery. This gold lies hid under much oar, Col. 3.3. nor does it
consist so much in the increase of gifts and abilities for prayer, discourse,
etc. nor in raising and enlarging the affections, as in that secret downward
growth in humility, self-denial, love, etc. which although it be not obvious to
sense, yet it is to be preferred before the other.

2 Christ's fullness is not improved as it should be. If a man have a good
stock, and do not improve it, he will not grow rich. If the thirsty man come
not to the fountain, and drink of it, (though it be near him) his thirst will
not be quenched: Isai. 55.1, 2. Matthew. 11.28. Rev. 22.17. It is one thing to
thirst and hunger after salvation, and another thing spiritually to eat and
drink the flesh and blood of Christ; which if a man do not, he has no life in
him, Joh. 6.53. See Mr. Bridge on Joh. 1.16
Christ is an universal cause, which does not ordinarily produce effects
without the concurrence of particular causes. He can indeed work without our
faith; nay, he first reveals himself to us, before we believe; and is found of
them that seek not after him, Isa. 65.1, 2. but yet he ordinarily works in
the believer, by drawing out and exercising his faith upon himself as the
object thereof.

3. Christ communicates of his fullness to us according to our necessity. If our
afflictions and trials grow greater, (for as yet we have not resisted unto
blood, Heb. 12.4.) the Lord will pour out more of the spiritual unction upon
us. As our afflictions abound, so our consolations shall much more abound, 2
Cor. 1.5. His grace is sufficient for us; and his strength is made perfect in
our weakness, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9.

4 As in the natural body, the members have their several stations and offices,
some are higher and more excellent then others: so it is in the body mystical:
1 Cor. 12.14, 15, 16, etc. To every one of us is given grace, according to the
measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7. There is a fullness in the mystical
Body (the Church) which is the fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians.
1.22. But every member has not the same fullness.

5. We shall be empty and barren in a great measure, whilst our sanctification
remains imperfect; that in the sense thereof we may be abased, and glory only
in Christ's fullness. 1 Cor. 1.30. Gal. 6.14. Jer. 9.23, 24. If a man thinks
himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives himself, Gal. 6.3. God
will hide pride from us, Job 33.17. We must be beholden to grace for all; not
that which is inherent in us, but that which is in Christ for us. By the grace
of God (says the Apostle) I am what I am. I labored more abundantly then all
the Apostles, yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. I
live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. We must be at a loss in
our selves, that we may be found in Christ, Phil. 3.8. Hence it was, that a
blessed man Mr. Fox.
said, That he gained more by his infirmities, then by his graces and
inlargements; and the Apostle would rather glory in his infirmities, then in
his raptures, 2 Cor. 12.9.

It remains now that I should speak a little to the last words of this verse,
[above thy fellows,] (that is) above all the Elect, which are his Brethren,
Heb. 2.11, 12.

Christ being the firstborn, or eldest Brother in the family; on whom the
greatest blessing and portion is conferred, Romans 8.29. Col. 1.15. And yet the
Saints share with him in the spiritual unction: Whence Observe,

That all true believers are Christ's fellows.

fellow in respect of the Divine nature: Awake O sword, The Saints are Christ's
fellows.
against him that is my fellow (says the Lord of Hosts,) Zach. 13.7. Phil.
2.6. and the Saints are his fellows as he is man: Members of his body, Ephesians.
5.30. heirs, yea joint heirs with him, Romans 8.17. being anointed with the same
spirit (though not in the same measure) having the sameness of Union and glory
with Christ as man, for quality, though not for quantity. The Glory which the
Father gave him, he has given them, that they may be one, as the Father and he
are one, Joh. 17.21, 22, 23. As he is, so are we in this World, 1 John 4.17. he
as the head, and we as the members, making up one Body or Christ mystical, 1
Cor. 12.12. He as the Vine, we as the Branches, Joh. 15.5. making up one
spiritual Tree; He as the foundation, we as the building, 1 Cor. 3.9, 10, 11.
making up one spiritual House or Temple to the Lord, Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22.

offend the anointed ones of the Lord; the fellows of Christ. Touch them not
(so as to grieve them) you had better let them alone, Psalm. 105.14, 15. he that
offends one of those little ones, it were better for him that a millstone were
hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the midst of the Sea, Matthew.
18.6.

admire the love that God has bestowed on his people, 1 John 3.1. that they
should be the fellows of Christ, Copartners with him in spiritual privileges.
The World knows them not, as it did not know him, when he was in the World, 1
Cor. 2.8. Great and glorious are the Saints privileges. Truly (says the
Apostle) our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3. God dwells in them, and they dwell in God, 1 John 4.15, 16. They have
fellowship with Christ in his Unction, Death, Resurrection, Ascension,
Victories, Glory; being Crucified with him, they shall also be Glorified with
him, Romans 8.17. If they suffer with him, they shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy
2.12. Being anointed with his spirit here, They shall also be filled with his
glory hereafter.

anointed ones of God, as those that have fellowship with him. Princes fellows
live at a higher rate then other men; so should the Saints do: I speak of
living spiritually, for in worldly respects Professors generally live at too
high a rate, and stand too much upon their carnal outward Titles and
privileges (which they have condemned in others:) what are all these outward
things, but loss and dung, being compared with Christ, and the privileges we
have by him? As he is the anointed of God, so are the Saints: as the humanity
of Christ is the habitation of God, so are the Saints, 2 Cor. 1.20. 1 Cor.
6.17, 19. Ephesians. 2.20, 21.

The righteousness by which we are now justified, and the Union which we have
with the Lord, is of a far higher and more transcendent nature, then that which
Adam had; Of our Union with God.
our nature is now joined to God by the indissolvable tie of the hypostatical
Union in the second person: and we in our persons are joined to God by the
mystical indissolvable bond of the Spirit the third person. Our Union with the
Lord is so near, and so glorious, that it makes us one spirit with him. In the
hypostatical union, the properties of the Divine nature are predicated of, and
attributed to the humane nature; and in his mystical Union, there is such a
Communication of properties, as that which is proper to Christ the head, is
attributed and communicated to his members, 2 Cor. 12.12. Jer. 33.16.

In this Union, the Saints are not only joined to the graces and benefits which
flow from Christ, but to the person of Christ, to Christ himself, who is first
given for us and to us, and then with him all other spiritual blessings, Romans
8.32. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. as the man first gives himself to the woman in
marriage, and then endows her with his estate. We are blessed with all
spiritual blessings in Christ, the anointed one of God, Ephesians. 1.3. Who is not
first given to us, because we believe, love, etc. But therefore we perform
these spiritual acts, because Christ is first given to us by the Father, and
does unite himself with us by his Spirit: And this spirit or holy anointing of
God, dwells and abides in the Saints, 1 John 2.27. not only the gifts,
graces and fruits of the spirit, but the Spirit himself.

Quest. It Is proved, that not only the gifts of the Spirit, but the Spirit
himself dwells in the Saints.
But how does it appear, that not only the gifts or fruits of the Spirit of
God, but the person of the Spirit, or the Holy Ghost himself, dwells and
abides in every true Believer?

Answ. It may easily be proved out of Scripture, that the Holy Ghost himself
(as well as his gifts) dwells in the Saints, and that by diverse reasons or
Arguments.

1. Reas. The Comforter, which proceeds from the Father and the Son is the
person of the Spirit, or the Holy Ghost himself, (for when we say that the
Spirit himself dwells in us, it is all one as if we should say, that the person
of the Holy Ghost dwells in us; for he or himself is a personal appellation
or denomination:) Now the Scripture puts it out of doubt, that this Comforter,
which is sent from the Father and the Son, dwells and abides in the Saints,
Joh. 14.16, 17, 26. Joh. 15.26.

2. He that preserves the good gifts of grace, dwells in us, 2 Timothy 1.14.
this must needs be meant of the Holy Ghost himself, as distinguished from his
gifts; for it would be very absurd to say, that the good things or spiritual
gifts, which are communicated to us, are preserved by those spiritual gifts
which dwell in us: The one denotes the root or principle, the other the effects
or fruits flowing therefrom.

3. The same spirit that raised Christ from the Grave, dwells in us, Romans 8.11.
Now it was not the gifts or fruits of the Spirit, But the Holy Ghost himself
that raised up Christ from the Grave.

4. God has promised in the new Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.29. (which promise is
absolute and unconditional) that he will put his Spirit into the hearts of the
Elect, and this Spirit shall effectually teach them, and cause them to know the
Lord: Which the Spirit himself, or the person of the Spirit only can do. We
have received the Spirit (says the Apostle) that we might know the things that
are freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. Not the fruits of the Spirit (or
Created gifts) but the Spirit himself does properly teach the elect, and
reveal the mysteries of Salvation to them, Ephesians. 1.17. And this Spirit God has
put into their hearts.

5. Again, God has given his people the Spirit of grace and adoption to dwell
in them, which enables them to cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.15. To cry
Abba Father, or to pray faithfully to God, is a fruit of and flows from the
Spirit himself: Now this same Spirit is sent into our hearts, and sheddeth
abroad the love of God in us, Romans 5.5.

6. The person of the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit himself, bears witness with our
Spirits, Romans 8.16. Here is a double Testimony. (1) The Testimony of the Spirit
himself. (2) The Testimony of our own renewed hearts and consciences: Now, we
have not only the latter, as an effect or fruit of the Spirit; but also the
former, as the cause, and principle of the latter dwelling in us, and
witnessing our adoption unto us. We have not only the Testimony of Blood and
Water, i. e. Justification and sanctification, but of the Spirit himself,
distinguished from (though consenting with) the Testimony of Water and Blood, 1 John 5.8.

7. The Spirit of God himself being the efficient cause of faith, love, and
other Christian virtues, must needs be first given to us, and dwell in us,
before these virtues or Graces can be wrought in us. The root is in the Earth
before the fruit be produced. The Holy Ghost himself is the spiritual root or
principle, and faith, love, etc. are the fruits or products of the Spirit, Gal.
5.22. and the fruits are distinguished from the root, both root and fruit being
in the Saints. Whether love and other Graces, be in the soul as soon as faith,
we need not question: Sure we are, that none of these fruits can be produced or
acted, till the Spirit of God (which is the root of them) be sent into our
hearts; the new Creature is not formed, till the Creator himself come, and
dwell in us.

8. The Scripture abounds in the proof of this, (if we had but light and love,
and humility to receive the truth.) The Spirit (says Christ) shall be in you,
and abide with you, Joh. 14.16, 17. When (He) the Spirit of truth is come, He
will guide you into all truth, Joh. 16.13. The Saints are the Temple of the
Holy Ghost, wherein he dwells, 1 Cor. 3.16. cap. 6.19. the habitation of God
through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. he that loves, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16.

Nor is this an old Error (newly revived) favoring of Montanism or Familism,
(as some do uncharitably brand it;) But a precious comfortable truth of God,
asserted by diverse eminent Godly learned men, both Lutherans and Calvinists; as
Luther himself, Chemnitius, Gerard, Zanchy, Perkins, Sibs, Bayne, Cotton, Owen,
Bridge, with others, whose writings being published, are not unknown to the
studious judicious Reader.

Thus then it appears, that the Union which we have with God by the
indwelling of the Spirit himself in us, is of a higher nature, then that which
Adam had in the state of innocence, or then any hypocrite has; hypocrites may
have a kind of Union with God (at least with his Ordinances and Graces,
partaking of some Common remote operations of the Spirit,) but they are not one
Spirit with the Lord, as every true Believer is; Nor does the heavenly
anointing, or the Spirit himself dwell in them (as it does in the Saints) and
therefore they wither and come to nothing.

O let us have many serious admiring thoughts of this glorious privilege, and
cherish the motions of that Spirit, which is the bond of this blassed Union.

Now to prevent mistakes concerning this great mystery, Cautious touching the
inbeing of the Spirit himself in the Saints.
I think it is my duty to subjoyne some considerations by way of caution.

1. Caut. The Holy Ghost, (being Jehovah the eternal God) does in respect of
his omnipresence, and the immensity of his nature and essence, fill all places
and things: Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from
thy presence? Psalm, 139.7. In him all Creatures live, and move, and have their
being; and thus he dwells no more in the Saints, then in the wicked; the
essence of God is no more in the one then in the other. The Spirit of the Lord
comprehends all Creatures, in respect of the infiniteness of his essence, but
is comprehended of none; and therefore the inbeing or indwelling of the Spirit
in the Saints, is of another nature, and in a more peculiar way. They are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, and he vouchsafes his gracious presence with them.

2. Caut. The Spirit does not so dwell in us, as to make us one person with
himself, or to communicate his personal propriety with us. It will not follow,
that because the Spirit himself dwells in us, that therefore we are one person
with the Spirit, or are swallowed up in the personality of the Spirit. Christ's
humane nature indeed, was not a person before it was united to the Divine
nature (though he assumed the nature of man, yet not the person of man;) But
all his members were persons before their Union, and remain so after their
Union. The Spirit himself, though he dwell in the Saints, yet he may Unite
himself as far as he pleases: for this Union is not a natural or necessary,
but a voluntary act: and therefore it cannot be truly said, that a Believer is
Christ or the Holy Ghost; or that Christ, or the Holy Ghost is the Believer.
The Soul is in every part of the Body; yet the body is not the soul, nor the
soul the body. Our Union with the Spirit, is not by way of mixture or
composition, as water and wine are mingled together: This is gross and
material, our Union is spiritual and mystical: and though it be very near and
glorious; yet the Spirit and the Believer are two distinct persons: and
therefore to say, that a Believer loses his proper life or personality, and is
taken up into the nature and person of the Spirit of God, or of the Son of God;
This were to deisy the Creature, and make him equal with God: and hence indeed
would follow those blasphemous Consequences, (which are unjustly charged on the
Doctrine of some sober godly men) namely, That a Believer is perfect and
without sin: that he lives the uncreated eternal life of God, and that he
should be worshipped, prayed unto, etc.

3. Caut. That notwithstanding the Saints have a very high Union with God, and
the same Spirit and anointing in them that Christ has, Joh. 17. 1 John 2.20.
yet the fullness of the Godhead does not dwell in them, as it does in Christ;
Nor is the same worship, honor, throne, glory due to them, which are due to
Christ. This were to divide and rent the Godhead in pieces. It Is true, the
Saints dwell in God, and God in them: But they are not in the Father as Christ
is in the Father: For the Father, Son, and Spirit, have but one and the same
infinite essence, but it cannot be said so of God and the Saints. All the
fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily, i.e. really, and substantially,
Col. 2.9. But it dwells not so in the Saints. Let the Lord Jesus be for ever
exalted above the Creature. It Is true, the Saints shall sit with Christ on his
Throne, Rev. 3.21. But Christ sits with his Father on his Fathers Throne. We
shall sit with Christ on his Throne, as he is a glorified man; But he only as
he is the Lord of Glory (God by nature) sits on his Fathers Throne.

4. Caut. The Holy Ghost does not so dwell and act in the Saints, as to work
immediately in them without them: It Is not the Holy Ghost himself that properly
and formally believes, repents, prays, etc. But John, Thomas, etc. though
power to perform these spiritual acts aright, be efficiently from the Holy
Ghost, yet they are the proper formal acts of the Creature. To hold that the
spirit does immediately act in us, without any concurrence of ours; that we are
wholly passive, and the Spirit does all, This is in effect to charge the sins
and imperfections of Believers upon the Spirit of God; for who should be
charged and blamed, but he that is the sole agent? Let such blasphemy be far
from us.

It was the opinion of Lombard, (which is taken up at this day,) That that love
which is in us, is God himself; because God is called love, 1 John 4.16, 17. A
great mistake: We must distinguish between God the Creator and his Created
gifts, or those holy dispositions which he works in us: faith, love, etc. are
Created gifts or fruits of the Spirit: see 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. Gal. 5.22, 23.
Col. 2.12. Psalm. 51.10. 2 Timothy 1.7. 2 Cor. 4.13. Isai. 11.2.

That there are such Created gifts, and holy dispositions wrought in the soul,
That there are Created gifts or qualifications in the Saints, proved
may be evinced by several Reasons.

1. Because the Scripture puts an express difference between the Holy Ghost
and his gifts in us, 2 Timothy 1.5, 6. from verse. 5. It Is plain he speaks not
only of ministerial extraordinary gifts, but of those gifts that accompany
salvation.

2. If there were not Created gifts, but the Spirit should altogether work
immediately in us, then Christ should be united to the natural and not to the
spiritual man, to the old and not to the new man; for without spiritual
dispositions there is nothing in us, but natural principles.

3. Another reason is taken from the nature of Regeneration: In which the
substance of the soul is not Created anew, nor is the Holy Ghost Created anew;
But there is a spiritual renovation of the faculties of the soul; the will,
understanding, affections are renewed, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Psalm. 51.10, 11. Ephesians.
4.23, 24. Ephesians. 1.18.

4. If there were no Created gifts in the Saints, then they should live the
uncreated life of God. This would destroy the mortality of the soul, and the
resurrection of the body. Soul and Body, and all, should be swallowed up in the
essence of God, and then God only should be gloryfied, and not man.

5. Caut. Although the Holy Ghost himself dwell in all the Saints, yet being a
free voluntary agent, and not working by necessity of nature, one Believer may
be said to be more spiritual then another. The Spirit may and does work in us,
when, how, and in what measure he pleases. As the Sun shines, and the wind
blows where it lists, so does the spirit, Joh. 3.8. yet so, as that the
feed of God still remains in the weakest Saint, 1 John 3.9. whereby he is
preserved from total and final Apostasy. In some Believers, the Spirit of God
works more powerfully and constantly then in others, and more in the same
persons at one time then at another. There are diversities of gifts and
operations, but it is the same Spirit that works all in all, and divides to
every man severally as be pleases, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, 11. The indwelling of
the Spirit himself in all the Saints, hinders not, but that one Saint may
excel another in spiritual acts and operations.

6. Lastly, Though a Christian cannot distinctly declare, how and after what
manner the Spirit dwells and operateth in him, yet he should not be offended
with this truth, seeing God has told him in his word that it is so. The
indwelling notions and operations of the Holy Ghost are exceeding mysterious.
Who can distinctly tell how the Child is formed, grows up, and is nourished in
the womb? yet the mother knows that it is there, for she feels it stir and
move. Who can declare, how the body is organized and fitted to receive an
immortal soul, or at what window the soul comes in, and how, and after what
manner it operateth? yet we are certain, that we have a living working soul in
us. Great are the mysteries of nature and the old Creation; but greater are the
mysteries of grace and the new Creation. Shall we question a truth whether it
be so or no, when we know not how it comes to be so? As thou know not the
way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the womb: even so thou know
not the works of God who makes all, Eccl. 11.5. Let us thankfully acknowledge
what God has revealed to us, though we cannot comprehend what is hid from us.

Object. Joh. 17.21, 22. opened.
Whereas you say that the Saints have not the same fullness, nor such a high
Union with God as Christ has; Does not this Contradict the words of Christ,
John 17.5, 21, 22. where he seems to pray, that the same fullness and Glory
which he has, might be given to the Saints; that they may be one with him, as
he and the Father are one?

Answ. 1. If the words be taken in that sense for which they are urged, yet
being laid down prayer-wise; (as also the Apostles words, Ephesians. 3.19. where he
prays that the Ephesians might comprehend the heighths, depths, lengths,
bredths, of the love of Christ, and might be filled with all the fullness of
God) it will not follow, that the Saints have already attained to this fullness
and perfection of Glory, or that it is attainable here in this life, But rather
that the same is reserved for the life to come.

2. Diverse Godly men understand this passage in Christ's prayer, not of the
Saints Union with God, but of their Union among themselves, that they may keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: and truly the latter part of
verse. 21. and 23. seems to favor this interpretation, the World taking no
small advantage against the Saints from their disunion and divisions.

3. If those words, verse. 21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in
me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, should be interpreted of
the Saints oneness with God; yet it will not thence follow, that this Union is
as high, as that Union which is between the Father and the Son.

For 1. This word [As] does not always denote an equality; but often the Truth
of a thing in its kind, or that similitude or Conformity which is therein, to
the pattern or example proposed. Be you Holy as your Heavenly Father is Holy
(that is) in truth and sincerity, and by way of resemblance and similitude,
though not in equality. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the
Father, says Christ; So he that believes on me, shall live by me, Joh. 6.57.
(i.e.) he shall truly and really live a spiritual life, though not in the same
degree and equality with Christ.

2. It cannot be meant in respect of equality, for then it might be said, that
it is no robbery (or unjust prey) for a believer to be equal with God; and it
would follow that as God is, so a believer may be truly worshipped.

3. If it should be interpreted in the very same sense and degree that Christ
is one with the Father; Then Christ should have prayed for that which is
impossible, namely, that a Believer should be essentially one with God from all
eternity, for so Christ was: and thereupon he desires, that the glory which he
had with the Father before the World was, might be manifested; And therefore,

4. These words (as the Father and I are one) must be understood of similitude,
that as Christ is one with the Father in a way proportionable, and suitable to
him; (being the eternal Son of God) so Believers may be one with Christ their
head, in a way suitable to them: for Christ not only as God, but as man has the
pre-eminence; therefore he is said to be anointed above his fellows.

Verse. 8. All thy Garments smell of Myrrh, and Aloes, and Cassia: Out of the
Ivory palaces: whereby they have made thee Glad.
The Kings and Priests under the Law, were not only anointed with bare Oil, but
with an excellent precious ointment consisting of several ingredients, Myrrh,
Cassia, etc. the fragrancy and smell whereof, did exceedingly refresh the
spirits and senses: hereby Christ and his graces are shaddowed forth. All thy
Garments smell of Myrrh, etc.

Two things are here to be opened.

1. What is meant by Garments. 2. What by Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia.
This Psalm being mostly carried on in an Allegory, we should not be too
peremptory and confident in the Application of each word or phrase: for
probably, some words may admit of another interpretation. I shall pitch on that
which I conceive to be safe, and tending to edification.

1. By Garments here, may be meant the spiritual gracious influences of Christ
the Bridegroom, in his Word and Ordinances: though it is true, the Garments of
Christ elsewhere do signify his glorious righteousness, wherewith the Saints
are clothed.

2. For these spices, Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia: and 1. for Myrrh: It is the
Gum of a Tree, bitter in taste, but in smell sweet and odoriferous, and
preservative from putrefaction, and therefore it was put in the precious
ointment of the high Priest, who typified Christ, Exodus 30.23. With Myrrh and
Aloes, the dead Body of our Savior was embalmed, John 19.39. and this was one
of those gifts which the wisemen offered unto him, Matthew. 2.11. see Cant.
1.13. Cant. 5.13.

(2) Aloes is a sweet wood, with which perfumes were also made, Prove. 7.17. It
was counted one of the Chiefest Spices, Cant. 4.14. herewith also Nicodemus
perfumed the body of Christ, Joh. 19.39. but it is somewhat dubious and
uncertain which is the right Aloes at this day.

(3) Cassia we find mentioned, Exodus 30.24, 25, 26, etc. This was also put into
the holy Oil, wherewith the Tabernacle, the Arc of the Testimony, the Altar
of Incense, the Table, Candle-sticks and the vessels thereof, were anointed: We
read of Cassia also, Ezekiel. 27.19. many take it for a kind of Cinnamon; But
Cassia and Cinnamon are two several spices, as appears, in Exodus 30.23, 24.
Ainsworth thinks it to be the Bark of that sweet shrub Cassia, mentioned by
Pliny in his natural History, lib. 12. cap. 20.

Garments of Christ are said to smell of these sweet Spices: As the rich
Garments of a Prince send forth an odoriferous fragrant smell, which perfumeth
his attendants, and the rooms wherein he walks; So the Garments of Christ, (i.
e.) his spiritual Breathings, and influences in his Ordinances, do spiritually
persume his attendants; The Holy Ghost condescends to us, in illustrating
spiritually things by temporal.
so that they send forth a sweet Savor, and the smell of their ointments is
much better then all spices, yea, it is like the smell of Lebanon, Cant. 4.10,
11, 13, 14. Hos. 14.5, 6, 7.

We may note in the first place,

That the Holy Ghost (in illustrating spiritual and Heavenly delights, by
Temporal and Earthly things,) does graciously condescend to our weak capacities.

comprehend spiritual excellencies in their native Original beauty and glory.
Christ's spiritual presence, is incomparably sweeter then the swe etest of
Creatures.
If I have told you earthly things (says our Savior,) and ye believe not; how
shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things, Joh. 3.12.

Secondly, that Christ's spiritual presence, or the smell of his Garments in his
Ordinances, is incomparably sweeter and more excellent, then the sweetest
perfumes, and most odoriferous spices.

The ointments of Christ, have a most excellent relish to a spiritual appetite:
His name (being opened by the Spirit of God) is as a Box of sweet ointment
powered forth, Cant. 1.3. his spiritual presence causes the spouse to smell a
sweet Savor, and to abound in Spiritual fruits: when he blows upon his Garden,
then shall the Spices thereof flow out, Cant. 4.13, 14, 15, 16. Cant. 5.5.

Mary anointed Christ's feet with sweet ointments, Matthew. 26.7. But he anointed
her Soul with sweeter persumes; The most sweet and precious things in the
World, are not worthy to be compared with the spiritual perfumes and odors of
Christ, which glad and refresh the heart and Spirits, and preserve the inward
man from corruption and putrefaction, Cant. 3.6.

Those delights and sweetnesses which are in the Creatures, are but dark
shaddows and resemblances of that spiritual fragrancy and delightsomeness which
is in Christ, Cant. 5.10, 11, 12, etc.

relish the sweetness of the Creature, and smell those spices, fruits, and
flowers, which are most odoriferous and fragrant; O then! Let your Souls
spiritually contemplate, and feed upon the sweet and precious presence and
perfumes of Christ: If there be so much sweetness in these outward and
perishing things, what is there (O my Soul) in that spiritual Communion that we
have with Christ? (It Is now the fashion for men, yea men that will speak much of
Christ) to powder their hair, and perfume their bodies and clothes with sweet
odors: but alas, they are but rotten painted sepulchers, if their hearts be not
purified by faith, Acts 15.9. and their Souls perfumed with the spiritual
presence and ointments of Christ.

Secondly. Be you exhorted chiefly to mind and eye the spiritual presence and
operations of Christ the King and Bridegroom in his Ordinances; that you may
smell the Savor of his sweet Garments and ointments; While the King sits at
his Table, our spikenard sends forth the smell thereof, Cant. 1.12. Cant. 7.13.
Ministers are but the friends of the Bridegroom, Joh. 3.29. the Word and
Ordinances are but external means and instruments, which cannot of themselves
bring off the heart to God. Let us therefore hear what the Lord speaks, 1 Samuel
3.10. Act. 10.33. let us mind the voice of the Bridegroom, and endeavor to
have our senses spiritually exercised, Heb. 5.14. that we may hear, see, smell,
touch, taste, and feel the precious garments and ointments of Christ, i.e. his
spiritual influences in his ordinances; and be able to say experimentally with
the Apostle, that we have heard, and seen, and handled the Word of life, 1 John
1.1. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, (says the Spouse) and
his fruit was sweet unto my taste, Cant. 2.3.

All thy garments smell of, etc.] Observe further, They that are nearest
Christ, are most refreshed by him.
That they who are nearest to Christ, are most perfumed with his spiritual
ointments, graces, influences, and consolations; as those are most perfumed,
that come nearest the Bridegroom.

The most holy, spiritual, close-walking Christians, are most refreshed and
comforted by Christ, the spiritual Bridegroom. Some are more intimate with them
then others, (though both may be faithful in the main:) there are some
believers that are more dandled upon his knee, and have more frequent visits
and kisses from him, leaning on his bosom with the beloved disciple, Joh.
21.20. and with the Spouse, (as she is described, Cant. 8.5.) lodging all night
between his breasts, Cant. 1.13. eating of the hidden manna, and having the
white stone, with a new name written upon it, which no man knows but he that
receives it, Rev. 2.17. Though all the children in the family have the same
filial relation to their father, yet one child may be more familiar and better
acquainted with him then another.

nearer communion with thy spiritual husband, to be kissed more with the kisses
of his mouth, whose love is better then wine, Cant. 1.2. Content not thy self
to be at a distance from him: let there be no strangeness on thy part: the
bolder and more familiar thou art, the more welcome thou will be to him. Draw
not back, (O my soul) but press nearer to Christ, and thou shall have more
intimate embraces from him.

nigh ones, his darlings, whom he has often taken into his wine-cellar, and
refreshed with his flagons, Cant. 2.4. be exhorted, in a special high manner,
to reverence and sanctify the Name of the Lord, and to behave themselves before
him as the Kings special favorites ought to do. The Lord is holy, and will be
sanctified in them that draw near to him, Lev. 10.3. and such as draw near in
faith, and with a true ^eart, will sanctify him, Heb. 10.22. Let us flee from
whatsoever may hinder our intimate converse with Christ, and abhor the garment
spotted with the flesh, Jud. 23. They that smell of this garment, cannot smell
the sweet garments of Christ, 1 John 1.6, 7. He feeds among the lilies, Cant.
2.16. (i. e.) among those that are pure, holy, and watchful. Such are the
Saints, who are as lilies among thorns, Cant. 2.2. The pleasures of sin will be
bitter to them who have tasted how sweet Christ is. Let us proceed further:

[ All thy garments smell, etc. out of the ivory palaces] Or, our of the
palaces of elephants tooth: for, the royal palaces of kings were sometimes made
of ivory or tooth, 2 King. 22.39. Cant. 7.4.

The Spirit of God here may allude either to those edifice^ or palaces out of
which usually the King came; or to those ivory coffers or wardrobes in which
the Kings garments were kept, and out of which they were taken.

These palaces are interpreted by some to be the glorious mansions of heaven:
but I rather close with them who apply the same to the assemblies of the Saints
in their militan^ estate here. The Psalmist says that his soul longed, yea
even fainted for the courts of the Lord, etc. Psalm. 84.2, 10. Some translate
the word, For the palaces of the Lord.

We may hence learn this lesson:

That though Christ has reserved the perfect glorious manifestation of himself
for the Church triumphant, Christ manifests himself graciously in the
assemblies of his Saints
yet even in this lif^ he reveals himself graciously and sweetly to or in the
Churches (...) assemblies of his people.

He stands behind our wall, looking forth at the window, showing himself
through the lattice, Cant. 2.9. His going out in the Sanctuary, as they are
dreadful and terrible to the wicked, Psalm. 68.35. so they are sweet and
comfortable to the godly. Here he feeds, and makes his flock to rest at noon
Cant. 1.7, 8. here he displayeth the banner of his love, Cant. 2.4. Here we see
his countenance, which is comely; and hear his voice, which is sweet. In a
word, here he shows himself and unveileth the glory of his grace to a
spiritual eye, as ou^ of glorious and stately palaces.

The Reasons are these: The Reasons of this doctrine.


First, Because the assemblies of the Saints (I speak of a^^ the Saints that
are at this day under various dispensations are taken into fellowship with God
himself: they are the temple, 1 Cor. 6.19. and habitation of God, Ephesians. 2.19,
2^. his sanctuary, wherein he dwells, Exodus 25.8. the golden candlesticks, in
the midst whereof he walks, Rev. 1.13, 20.

Secondly, One Saint is of more worth and value with God, then all the world
besides, much more, a great number of Saints being gathered into one, Ephesians.
1.10. Of these the world is not worthy, Heb. 11.38. Glorious things are spoken
of thee, thou city of God. The Lord loves the gates of Sion more then all the
dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87.2, 3. And therefore David chose rather to be a
doorkeeper in the house of his God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness,
Psalm. 84.10.

Thirdly, In the assemblies of the Saints, the Lord is truly worshipped and
acknowledged, and nowhere else. Were it not for the Saints, God would have no
true spiritual worship in the world: for the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John ^.19. and worship they know not what, as Christ said to the woman of
Samaria, Joh. 4.22.

Fourthly, Here is the beauty of holiness, Psalm. 29.2. Psalm. 16.9. Psalm. 110.3.
not in regard of outward situation, tim^er, stone, and external glory, Joh.
4.20, 21. no, there was more of that under the Old Testament administration,
then here is now: but in regard of that spiritual beauty and glory which Christ
has put upon his Saints, Ordinances, and Worship. No marvel, therefore, if
here he send forth the ^ell of his sweet ointments and garments, as a Prince
does in ^is stately and glorious palace.

Lords people, 1 John 1.3. yea, of those ^aints that are most spiritual, and
have smelled most of Christ's ^arments; that we may with them see the spiritual
outgoings ^f God in his ivory palaces. And O that the Saints were ^ore
spiritual in their converse one with another; that the ^eature might be
nothing, and God might be all; that self ^^d flesh might be abafed, and the
Spirit of the Lord exalted. ^ow amiable are thy tabernacles, O God! Psalm. 84.1.
Many ^^at on outward Palaces, and the Garments and Courts of ^inces: by
smelling much of these, they lose in a great measure the sweet smell of Christ's
garments: the outward courts ^^d glories of the world, choke their delights in
the inward ^urt and glory of Christ. O let us watch and take heed this hour of
temptation, which is come to try us, that we ^^e not the sweet smell of Christ's
garments: let us be watch^^, and strengthen the things that remain, which are
ready to (...), Rev. 3.2.

[Whereby they have made thee glad:] or thus More then they that make thee
glad. The Bridegroom smells sweeter then the friends of the Bridegroom.


Hence learn,

That though the garments of the Saints (who are Christ's fellows) smell sweet,
and have a good savor, (the Spouse being perfumed with Myrrh, and
Frankincense, and with all powders of the Merchant, Cant. 3.6. and the smell of
her ointments being better then the smell of all spices, Cant. 4.10.) yet the
garments of Christ are incomparably more sweet and odo^ferous, Cant. 1.3.

The Bridegroom is to be preferred far before the friend of the Bridegroom,
Joh. 3.29, 31. Christ carries the banne above ten thousand, Cant. 5.10, 16.
having offered up himself for us to God a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
Ephesians. 5.2.

Again, [More then they that have made thee joyful.] This is spoken of Christ's
joy. And therefore observe,

That it glads the heart of Christ the head, It rejoices Christ when his
people are comforted.
when his member are spiritually refreshed and comforted with the sweet smell
his garments in his ordinances. All his delights are (...) them; yea, he
rejoices over them with singing, Cant. 7.6. Psalm. 16.3. Zeph. 3.17. Their joy
is his joy, and their fullness (...) his fullness. The joy of Christ mystical
will not be full and complete, till the joy of the Saints be perfected, Ephesians.
1.13. As the loving husband delights to see his wife, and the father to see his
child prosper, and walk cheerfully: so do^^^ Christ, etc.

Doctrine may encourage the Saints, (if not for th^^ own sakes, yet) for
Christ's sake, (that his joy may be full to cast away their sad, drooping, and
melancholy thought^ and to walk joyfully before the Lord. A cheerful spirit
an^^ conversation, is a great ornament to the profession of the Gospel; and the
contrary is a great disparagement the^ unto. As the Saints by their afflictions
fill up the suffering Col. 1.24. so by their spiritual rejoycings they fill up
the (...) of Christ. Rejoice therefore (O ye Saints) in the Lord and I say
again, Rejoice, Phil. 3.3. Phil. 4.4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. Make a joyful noise to the
Lord; serve him with glad^^ and come before his presence with singing, Psalm.
100.1, for it is comely for the Saints so to do, Psalm. 31.1. Ps^. 147.1.

VERSE. 9. Kings Daughters were among thy honorable Women: upon thy Right hand
did stand the Queen in gold of Ophir.
THese words are somewhat difficu't to open; Kings Daughters here are rendered
by some Countries of Kingdoms, hereby intimating that the most famous Cities
and Countries shall yield obedience to Christ's Scepter, and be added to his
Church, namely, the Church Universal. Though his Kingdom at first be but
little, like a grain of mustard seed, Matt. 13.32. yet afterward it spreads
into many Kingdoms and Countries.

For my part, I conceive with some godly modern Expositors, that these Kings
Daughters mentioned in the Text are no other then the particular Churches of
Christ in the times of the New Testament, represented by the companions of the
Bridegroom and Bride. Whence we may learn:

That though the Catholic Church of Christ be but one, Particular Churches of
visible Saints are the Kings Daughters.
the only one, Cant. 6.9. Gal. 4.26. (all the Saints that have been, are, or
shall be, making up but one Army, Family, Body, Sheepfod, Kingdom, Spouse, to
Jesus Christ, according to Ephesians. 3.15. Ephesians. 4.4. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. John 10.16.
Cant. 6.10) yet this one great Body admits of several distributions, and is
divided (for the better edification of the members thereof) into several
distinct Congregations, and societies.

These are Virgins that attend upon the Bridegroom and the Bride.

In a great army, though it be under the conduct of one Captain General, yet
for the better regulation thereof it is divided into several Brigades,
Regiments, and companies, under several Captains, and Officers. And so a great
flock of sheep, (who have one and the same mark; and belong to one and the same
man) is divi^ed into several lesser flocks, under several shepherds that they
may be the better fed, and that there may be ^he more di^igent inspection over
them: so it is ^^ere.

We read of the Churches in Judea, Gal. 1.2. of the seven Churches of Asia,
Rev. 1.4. and many other particular Churches in Scripture: These are Christ's
golden Cand esticks: these are the Kings Daughters, and as Ladies of Honor
(represented by those Women that waited on Solomon Queen,) they do attend the
prosperity and welfare of the Queen, or Spouse of Christ, namely, the Catholic
Church, or general assembly of the Saints, being serviceable thereunto.
Whatsoever spiritual gifts, graces, excellencies, any particular Church or
member of Christ have received, they are or should be employed (by way of
subserviency) for the good of the whole Body, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 12.26.
1 Cor. 3.22, 23.

Nevertheless this Doctrine which hints at particular Churches directs us to a
twofold duty.

First, we ought so to consider the Universal Church, o^ whole body of Saints,
as not to deny or abridge the rights and privileges of particular Churches and
congregations consisting of visible Saints; so to regard the Queen, as not
wholly to neglect the Kings Daughter that wait upon her. Besides, we have more
opportunity of converse, in respect of cohabitation; and perhaps our love and
service, and the exercise of our Talents will be more acceptable to some
christians, then to others: In which respect there willie upon us a stronger
obligation, to employ our time, strength, and gifts among them.

The Saints convening together for the Worship of God, Acts 2.42, 46, Upon the
account of their having spiritual communion with Christ, 1 John 1.3. (thoug^
they vary in other disputable things) are the King Daughters, begotten and
raised up by him, and accordingly they should be owned by us; still remembering
that the primary relation which a Believer stands in, is not as he is a member
of such a particular congregation; but as he is one of the Lords people and
flock, united to Christ the head, and having his Image and superscription upon
him.

Secondly, It Is our Duty to pray and endeavor in our places that these Kings
Daughters may not clash, and quarrel one with another; would it not be an
uncomely thing for the Ladies of Honor, or for the Kings Daughters to quarrel
in his presence? As particular Congregations and christians, do profess to be
subject to the King, and serviceable to the Queen; so they should all join
together as one, to oppose the Kings enemies, to promote his interest, and make
his name great and glorious throughout the world. That the Saints shall be one
among themselves, is prophesied, and promised in the word of God, and
purchased, and prayed for by Christ; See Zach: 14.9. Zeph. 3.9. Ephesians. 1.10. Ephesians
2 14, 15, 16. John 17.21, 23. Therefore we may well pray for and expect this
union; and in the mean time let us study uniting principles, and uniting
practices, putting both the Queen and the Kings Daughters in their right
places, and walking in faith and order, Col. 2.5.

It follows [Among thy honorable Women] or thus, Kings Daughters are among thy
precious ones, or in thy pretiousnesses. Ainsworth reads it, In thy precious
honorable ornaments, or Palaces.

However we may draw this useful Note from the words.

That the people of the Lord, and the things of his worship are very precious
and honorable. The Saints, and worship of Christ are precious and honorable.
I have loved the place (says the Psalmist) where thy honor dwells, Psalm
26.8. God has an honorable esteem of the Church; the Saints are the excellent
ones on earth, Psalm 16.3. The righteous man is more excellent then his
neighbor, Prove: 12.26. Psalm 76.4. Since thou wast precious in my sight (says
the Lord) thou bast been honorable, and I have loved thee: therefore will I
give men for thee, and people for thy life, Isa: 43 4.

The Saints are precious to God whilst they live, The Reasons why the Saint;
are precious.
and they are precious in their death, Psalm. 116.15. Rev. 14.13. To them Christ
is advantage both in life and death, Phllip. 1.20, 21.

The Reasons are;

First, because they are justified, purged, and besprinkled with the precious
blood of the Son of God; as of a lamb without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet:
1.19.

Secondly, they are semented and united unto that living stone which is chosen
of God, and precious; by whom they are made lively stones, and built up a
spiritual house to God, 1 P^t. 2.4, 5.

Thirdly, in regard of their precious and honorable birth, being born of God,
John 1.13. John. 3.6. and coming down from Heaven, Rev. 3.12 Rev. 21.2. as they
that are of the first Adam or earthy man are earthy, so they that are of the
second Adam. or Lord from Heaven are heavenly, 1 Cor. 15, 47, 48.

Fourthly, in regard of their precious and excellent n dowments and
qualifications. For 1 Their Faith in Christ is precious, 2 Pet. 1.1. 2 They
have interest in precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. 3 They love that word which is
precious, 1 Samuel 3.4. 4 They have a meek and quiet spirit, which before God is
precious, 1 Pet. 3.4. Caleb was (...) man of a precious excellent spirit; so
was D^niel, cha. 5.12. and so is every Saint less o^ more, every man is
precious or base according to his spirit and principles.


world is much mistaken in the Saints, God has preeious thoughts, and a high
estee^ of them, Psalm 139 17. But the world accounts the^ vile, yea the
offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.1^ howbeit they are the truly honorable
ones whom Go^ esteems so: Great men if they be not good are vile an^
abominable. Antiochus the Great (who was called the Illustrious,) God accounts
him but a vile person, Da^. 11.21. The Saints that are now in the wilderness o^
pressed by their enemies, shall have an honorable deverance; The Lord will get
them a precious name whe^^ they have been put to shame, Zepb. 3.20. Jerusal^^
shall be the praise of the whole earth, Isai. 62 7. though she be black, yet she
is comely, Cant. 1.5. and ^ough she have lien long among the pots, yet she shall
(...) as the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her ^^thers with yellow
gold, Psalm 68.13.

Again, [Vpon thy right hand did stand the Queen]

Here the married Queen, or Kings Wife, Nehem. 2.6. ^^placed at the Kings right
hand, in the most honorable ^^at, and highest dignity, according to the custom
of ^^e Jews, 1 Kings 2.19. As by the Kings Daughters, ^^ticular Churches are
represented to us, so by the Queen sitting at the Kings right hand is meant the
^^hole Universal Church, consisting of all Saints, who ^^e married and knit to
Christ by the bond of his spi^^t, 1 Cor: 6 17. 1 Cor: 12, 13. and to one
another by ^^e bond of Love, Col: 2: 2. Col: 3.14. Ephesians. 4.4, 16. ^^hich of all
bonds are the strongest and most ob^^ging.

observe, Though particular Churches be precious, yet the Universal Church has
the greatest dignity.


That though every particular Church and Saint of Christ (...) precious, and
honorable yet the whole Universal Church (...) the Queen, that has he highest
dignity and prehemi ^^^nce; Upon thy right hand did stand the Queen;

The whole is more then a part; as for particular ^hurches and Believers, they
are but parts or members of the whole, Rom 12.4, 5. 1 Cor. 12.12.

To speak properly, the Church of Christ is but One, (...) as man's body is but
one, though it has several parts ^^nd members. Christ has not several Bodies
(I speak (...) his body mystical) All visible particular Churches ^^nd Saints,
wheresoever they be dispersed, make up but ^^e Body, I say not that this is a
political governing body, ^^at may or can in an ordinary way meet
authorata^vely in her Representatives to make canons and con^itutions which
shall Juridically bind the whole, and very part; And yet truly, it cannot well
be denied ^^ut that General councels are a great blessing to the Church of
Christ, if they would but meet together and act in the spirit of love and
humility, (as peradventure they shall do when the vail is taken off from the
Jews, 2 Cor. 3.16.) But hitherto it has seldom or never so fallen out, by
reason of those woeful factions and divisions which have been among good men;
hence it was that some of the Fathers complained o^ the ill success of
councels: Nevertheless we know^ that Granmer appealed to a general council, and
so did Luther, when they were oppressed by some that called themselves the
church of Christ: as for that convention at Trent, it was far from being a
General council; the Pope with his Bishops being both parties and Judges.

But to pass by this, doubtless there are great privileges which belong to
christians, as they are members of the Universal church, and stand in that
general relation.

I shall humbly tender what I do at present apprehend, Privileges belonging to
the universal Church. 1 Prop.
in three or four Propositions, without reflecting upon those godly worthy
Brethren that shall differ from me in this point.

That the first right which any man has to Gospel ordinances, Sacraments,
Privileges, he has it as he stands in this relation, Christ being his, all
things are his, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. His being under the covenant of grace,
that general covenant which belongs to all Believers, invests him with a right
to, and interest i^ the sea's and privileges thereof; and (if no matter o^
scandal lie against him) he may lawfully wherever he comes, claims the same as
his portion, being one o^ the children of the Lords family. Upon this ground
the Eunuch and the Jailour, etc. were baptized, Act. 8.37, 38. Act, 16.33. and
so ought every Believer and his seed, 1 Cor. 7.14. Acts 2.39. Baptism and the
Lords supper primarily sealing up our membership of the Universal church, and
fellowship with all Saints, ^s plainly appears from 1 Cor. 12, 13.

Secondly, all Spiritual Ecclesiastical Officers, Offices, gifts and
administrations, 2 Prop.
are given to, and should be employed chiefly for the gathering, edifying, and
Persecting of this great body, as there is opportunity, Ephesians. 4.12. 1 cor.
12.28. In this respect Paul, and Apollo, and Cephas, etc. do belong to each
member of this body, 1 Cor. ^.22. Though it is true, these Offices and gifts
(for as much, as no man can be present in all places) are ordinarily exercised
among those christians with whom the persons do cohabit, and by whom they were
chosen; yet so as that a Minister may occasionally and caratatively exert and
put forth public ministerial acts out of that particular congregation where he
ordinarily presides.

Therefore Thirdly, 3 Prop.
all parrticular Churches and christians should constantly act, as parts and
members of, and for the good of the universal church; their relation to a
particular church does not in the least disoblige them from performing their
duties to the whole body; no more then a subjects being a member of a civil
corporation does dis-ingage him from promoting the good of the Commonwealth,
where of that particular corporation is but a part.

Fourthly, 4 Prop.
that all visible Believers manifesting says in Christ, and love to the
Saints, whether combined in particular Churches or not, ought to be respected
as members of this great body, and accordingly we should own them as our
brethren, and fellow Saints, wherever we meet with them, since the Lord has
owned them, and stamped his image upon them. This I humbly conceive was the
practice of the primitive christians; where ever they met with any Disciples,
they did freely converse and communicate with them in gospel privileges; And
yet let christians be careful that they neglect not to join with some
particular Church, or other (as they shall have opportunity:) No Ordinance of
Christ should be neglected.

Queen preferred here by the Spirit of God before the Kings Daughters; the
church Universal before particular Churches; then let us also prefer her in our
thoughts, and affections, and expressions; indeed we should not so respect the
Universal church, as to slight and neglect particular societies (which are an
Ordinance of Christ;) And much less should we so regard particular Churches,
whether under this or that form or denomination, as to neglect the Universal
Church, or General assembly of the Saints, which is the Queen that sits at
Christ's Right hand; Far be it from any humble soul to unchurch and un-Saint
godly persons which come not up to that form of Church Government which
himself adheres to; all the people of God, under what forms soever they walk,
are owned by him as his Spouse and Queen, and accordingly should be
acknowledged by us.

Secondly, Be exhorted more and more to abound in love to all Saints (as
Saints) though at this day under various administrations: We know that variety
of Flowers and colors in a Garden puts the greater Iustre and beauty upon it.
In the Lords Garden there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit;
differences of administrations, but the same Lord; diversities of operations,
but the same God that works all in all, 1 Cor. 12.4 5, 6: Alas, our spirits
are too narrow and selfish; we want a public heroic enlarged heart toward
God and his people, especially those of them that concur not with us in every
opinion. As in the Body natural, and civil, those members are the noblest that
are most useful and helpful to the whole Body, so it is in the body of Christ;
those christians that abound in love to all Saints, pray for all, indulge all,
do good to all, as they have opportunity, and love those most that are most
spiritual (though they differ in opinion) endeavoring to join all the people
of the Lord together, and to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
Ephesians: 4 3. Such are the most noble, and excellent members, whatever their
judgments be in some speculative controversies.

Lastly, This Doctrine may inform us, that it is the greatest schism to make a
rent in our affections from this Queen that sits at Christ's right hand, 1 Cor.
12.25. We can never rightly love the Kings Daughters unless we first love the
Queen; To separate from one of the Kings Daughters upon slight grounds is a
very great sin; but to be divorced in our affections and practices from the
Queen is a greater: The general interest of the Saints, the Lambs followers
throughout the world, should be much dearer to us then any particular relations
whatsoever; he is a schismatic that abates in his love to, and zeal for the
promoting of this glorious Interest. See Mr: Marshals seasonable pactficatory
Sermon on Romans 12.4.5.


There remains one Branch more of the Text to be spoken to; [She stands in gold
of Ophir,]

The Gold of Ophir was the most rich, fine, pure, resplendent gold, Job 22.24.
Job 3.24 Job 28.16, 19 Ophir here is thought to be India, or some country in
India, called the land of Ophir, from Ophir the son of Joktan, the son of
Heber, Genesis 10.26, 29.

From this country fine gold was brought to Judea, 1 Kings 9.28. chap: 10, 11.
chap: 22.48. 1 Chronicles: 29 4. And here perhaps might be the golden, chersonesus
so often mentioned by the Heathen Poets; and at this day there are rich golden
Mines in that Country.

This is a commodity which many gape after, especially the Spaniards, (who to
load themselves with this thick clay) have waded through an Ocean of innocent
blood in America, where there were Mines of earthly gold, but no true spiritual
riches; a sign that this kind of gold is not the greatest excellency.

[The Queen stands in gold of Ophir] Hence note

That though there be in the Church (whilst she remains in a militant
condition) much inherent dross and corruption yet before the Lord she is as the
god of Ophir, The Church is as the finest gold before the Lord.
as the finest gold.

Gods thoughts and ways are not as ours, Isai. 55.8. he does not judicially
charge upon his people the imperfections of their sanctification, though they
charge themselves therewith, Romans 8.1, 33. Christ's Spouse is all fair, there is
no spot in her, Cant. 4.7. she is whiter then snow, Psalm 51.7.

If you ask how this comes to pass? It Is only by and through Christ, whose head
is of fine gold, Cant. 5.11. and who is girt about the paps with a golden
girdle, Rev. 1.13. Christ takes away the ragged filthy garments of a sinner,
and puts upon him a clothing of fine gold, Zach. 3.4. Ezekiel. 16.8.

The Lord speaking of the Church under the Gospel, promises that for brass he
will bring gold to her Isai. 60.17. and Christ counsels his Church to buy of
him gold tried in the fire, Rev. 3.17.18. But the truth is, he brings it first
to her, and bestows it upon her; this will be further spoken of, when we come to
Verse. 13.

christians who are as fine spiritual gold before the Lord, greedily covet and
desire the earthly gold of Ophir, or of any Land whatsoever, why should est
thou make thy self a slave to thy servant? he that is a servant to earthly
transitory things, does not possess them, but is possessed by them. The
earthly gold will not feed, clothe, or comfort a man in distress: when the
Indians had taken some of the Spaniaras who made gold their god, they filled
their mouths with it, and so choked them; were they ever a whit the better for
all their gold? Those poor Heathens could see the vanity of it, and shall not
christians much more? O let us be crucified to the gold of this world, and
earnestly covet after the spiritual Riches, and golden privileges of Sion; let
us love the word of God which is finer then gold Psalm 19.10. Psalm 119, 127.
and prize holiness and communion with Christ, more then all the gold, and
silver, and gaudy attire of this world; our adorning let it not be that outward
adorning of plating the hair, and of wearing of gold, etc. but let it be the
hidden man of the heart in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of
a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price, 1 Pet.
3.4.

Take two considerations to induce you hereunto.

First, Earthly go^d is of a perishing nature, but the Heavenly gold is
durable, and everlasting, Mat: 6.19, 20. the former is possessed by Christ's
enemies, the latter only by his friends.

Secondly, earthly gold debaseth the soul of man, which is incomparably more
excellent then these outward perishing things; the Soul was created for
eternity; how is it possible that that which is but temporal, corporeal,
material, should enrich and satisfy that which is spiritual and immaterial?
no, no; the Soul of man (being a spiritual substance) does so comprehend
corporeal and material things, that it cannot be distended and filled by any
Quantity; thou may fill thy pockets, or thy coffers with gold, but not thy
Soul. But now the Heavenly spiritual gold does enrich and dignisle the Soul,
which is noble or ignoble; happy or miserable, according to those objects which
it constantly fixes upon, whether they be earthly, or Heavenly, carnal, or
spiritual; they do assymulate the Soul to, and as it were transform it into
their own nature:

Thus much of the former part of this Psalm, which describes the Beauty and
Dignity of Christ the Bridegroom, and the Church his Bride.

I shall now (by the Lords assistance) handle the latter part of the Psalm,
according to my former method.

Verse. 10. Hearken O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear: Forget
also thine own people, and thy Fathers house.
Verse. 11. So shall the King greatly desire thy Beauty: for he is thy Lord, and
worship thou him.
THe Spirit of God having partly described the digties of the Church in the
foregoing part (the description whereof is further amplified in some of the
following verses) he does in these two verses call upon the Church for
subjection and obedience to her spiritual husband. The latter part of the
Marriage Song opened.
Great Dignities require great duties; spiritual privileges call for christian
and answerable performances.

The Church, or Lambs Bride, Rev: 21.9, 10, is here called the Daughter of the
Lord, as also verse 13. and Believers are called his Sons and Daughters, Whence
it is that Believers are styled the Lords Daughters.
Jer: 31.1. 2 Cor. 6.18. for these Reasons.

1 Because as Christ is a Husband and Bridegroom to his people, so he is their
everlasting Father, Isai. 9.6.

2 He has begotten them to himself by the immortal seed of his word, and
spirit, 1 Pet. 1.23.

3 He trains them up in his house, and family, Ephesians. 2.19. Ephesians: 3.15. takes care
of them gives them their meat in due season, and bestows a good portion upon
them, himself being their everlasting portion, Psalm 73.26.

[Hearken O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear]

It is a metaphor taken from those that either bow down, or turn the head to
the one side, that they might give the better ear.

From this good Counsel which the Lord gives his Church, Observe,

That Christians ought diligently to hearken, attend, Christians should
diligently consider what the Lord speaks to them,
and consider the Word and Message of Christ, and give up their hearts wholly
thereunto, so as to yield the obedience of Faith, Acts 6.7. Romans 16.26. This is
the most acceptable obedience, Heb. 11.5, 6.

We are not only to vouchsafe the speaking or hearing of the Word and revealed
will of Christ, but so to speak, and so to hear, as seriously to consider and
improve the same, and to conform our spirits and practices thereunto; Hear and
your souls shall live, Isai. 55.3. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee
wisdom, see 2 Timothy 2.7. Heb: 10.24. Isaiah 44.19 Heb. 7.4. Spiritual
consideration lies not only, nor chiefly, in a naked contemplation, or assent
of the mind, but also in the obedience and conformity of the will to the truths
of Christ, and the sutableness of the affections thereunto.

Some of the Jews apply this Text (as they do most other Scriptures) to the Law
of Moses; But though we are to hearken to the Law, and improve the same in a
way of subserviency and subordination to the Gospel, yet the Law is not
properly the voice or word of Christ, John 1.15, but the Gospel which by way of
Emphasis, and in a peculiar manner is styled the word of truth, Col. 1.5: and a
faithful saying, 1 Timothy 1.5.

The Law speaks not a word nor syllable of good news; no, it is a thundering
terrible voice, and dispensation to poor sinners, Heb. 12.18, 19, 20. But the
Gospel or word of Christ is good uews, and glad tidings, Luke 2.10, 11.
bringing righteousness, peace, life, and salvation freely to sinners, and
giving them grace, and ability to obey and serve the Lord acceptably through
Christ.

Christians should diligently hearken and attend to what the Lord Jesus speaks
and holds forth in his Word and Ordinances, upon these grounds. Reasons why we
should diligently attend the word of Christ.


First, because the Lord is a Spirit, who will be seriously and spiritually
worshipped. John 4.24. Levit. 10.3. To be only a hearer, or talker, and not a
doer of Gods word, is but a mock-Worship; Such a man deceives himself. James
1.22, 23, 24. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, John 8.31.
John 13.17.

Secondly, the Lord looks chiefly at thy heart, when thou do attend his
Worship; all the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes, but the Lord
weighs the spirits, Prove. 16.2. though he be in Heaven, and thou on Earth,
yet he beholds all the secret corners, turnings and windings of thy heart; all
things are naked before him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13.

Thirdly, If you consider not what the Lord speaks, you do exceedingly slight
and undervalue him; as, if a Prince or noble man speak to you by way of advice,
and you turn away from him, not regarding his words, he may well think you
slight him.

Fourthly, It argues that thou art but an unsound christian, if thou do not
consider the voice of Christ; as those Beasts under the Law which chewed not
the cud were reckoned unclean, and not to be eaten, Lev. 11.2, 26, So that man
or Woman that does not spiritually chew the cud, consider and digest the Word
of Christ, is reckoned unclean by the Lord.

Fifthly, Because spiritual consideration, or meditation, is by Gods blessing a
great help and inducement to the exercise of faith, charity, hope, prayer,
thanksgiving: these afford help to meditation, and meditation to them
interchangeably. Besides, christian consideration is an antidote against sin;
and a means to prevent rash anger, folly, and passion, which otherwise will
break forth to the dishonor of God; It Is promised that the heart of the rash
shall consider, and understand knowledge, Isai. 32.4. The Lord perform this
promise to us.

Lastly, You should diligently attend, and consider, etc. because the word is
mighty through God to pull down strong holds, and bring into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. it will have its powerful
effect one way or other, either to be a savor of death unto death, or a savor
of life unto life, 2 Cor 2.16. If you be not softened by grace under the
dispensation of the Word, you will be hardened through your own corruption; wax
is softened, but clay is hardened under the influence of the sun.

refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not who refused him that
spoke on earth, much less shall we escape if we turn away from him that speaks
from Heaven, Heb. 12.25. Heb: 2.2, 3. Heb. 10.28, 29. Take heed how you hear,
and have to do with God; keep your heart with all diligence, (or as it is
varied in the margin, Proverbs 4.23) above all keepings keep your heart, for
out of it are the issues of life. Take the Wise man's counsel in another place;
When thou go into the house of God, take heed to thy foot, Eccles. 5.1, 2.
It Is used as a metonymy for taking heed to our ways, Psalm 39.1. Psalm 119.15.
and imports that we should diligently consider our ways, and attend the
worship of God in a serious and holy manner.

Again, this Doctrine shows us, the excellency of man above the sensitive
creatures; these do not, nor cannot consider their ways, and reflect upon
their actions, saying, what have I done; how have I departed from the Lord; at
man does or ought to do; for, alas since the fall, man is become brutish, and
vain in his imaginations, Genesis 6.5. Prove. 12.1. Isaiah 19.11. in some respects
more brutish then the Ox, and the Ass, Isai. 1.2, 3. yea (says a godly man,
Prove: 30 2.) Surely I am more brutish then any man, and have not the
understanding of a man in me; These self-reflexive acts are those noble
operations which are peculiar to a rational immortal soul, and which the
sensitive creatures cannot reach unto.

[Forget also thine own people, and thy Fathers house.]

True self-denial, and forsaking all for Christ, is that good effect that flows
from a serious harkening to, and considering the voice of Christ: if a man do
not spiritually eye and consider with Mose, Heb. 11.26, 27. the fullness and
all sufficiency of God, and the emptiness and nothingness of the Creature, he
will not heartily cleave to the one, nor forsake the other; But he will rather
forsake the fountain of living water, and dig to himself broken cisterns that
will hold no water, Jer: 2.13.

There is a twofold Censideration of things. There is a twofold consideration
of thing 1 Natural,


First, that which is natural or rational, when a man looks on, and ponders
things with a natural eye and judgment; this is rather a hinderance then a
furtherance to faith, which though it does not utterly destroy natural reason,
yet it raises up the soul above it. Abraham being strong in says censidered
not his own old age, nor the barrenness of Sarahs womb, Rom: 4.19. Matthew
being at the receipt of custom, and the other Apostles employed in their
Callings, when they heard Christ's voice inviting them to follow him, did not
consider and cast about what would become of their Callings, and relations but
without further dispute yielded obedience: so Paul was not disobedient to the
heavenly voice, and vision, Acts 26.19. Nor did he consult with flesh and blood
when once Christ was revealed in him, Gal. 1.16 or ever I was aware (says the
Spouse) my soul made me as the Chariots of Aminadib Cant. 6.12.

Secondly, 2 Spiritual and supernatura,
there is a spiritual supernatural consideration of things wrought in the heart
by the Holy Ghost, who searches the deep things of God, and enables the soul
to consider and compare spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.10, 13. and
to reason and argue after a spiritual manner; This is to be spiritually minded,
and herein especially the spiritual man is contra-distinguished from the
natural man, Rom: 8.5. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16. the one argues and reasons
carnally, the other spiritually.

From this Spiritual Reasoning or consideration it is that a man denies
himself, and his own will forsakes the world, and all natural relations for
Christ; no man that warreth (says the Apostle, 2 Timothy: 2.4.) intangleth himself
with the affairs of this life; a soldier will carry no more with him then needs
he must; Now every christian is a soldier exercised in a spiritual warfare:
when Christ his Captain calls him forth, he must throw away his luggage, lest it
entangle him; he must bid adieu to all his friends and relations in the flesh;
This was shadowed forth in Gods calling Abraham away from his own Land,
Kindred, and Fathers house, to another Country which the Lord showed him, Genesis
12.1.

[Forget also thine own people, etc.]

The Inditer of this Psalm does here allode to the new married Spouse who
leaves all other Relations for her husband, and cleaves to him alone, as
Pharaohs Daughter did, who was a Type or the Church of the Gentiles, see Genesis
4.24. Genesis 31.14. Ephesians. 5 28, 31.

Hence learn this Lesson

That the Church should more and more forsake the lusts of the flesh and world,
The Church should forsake all natural Relations for Christ.
and all natural Relations for Christ's sake, and in love to him.

Yea she should be crucified to her own will, wisdom, righteousness and works
counting them but as dung, Phil. 3.8. and as a menstruous cloth for Christ,
Isai. 64.6.

If Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, or the nearest friends or dearest
relations which we have in the flesh come in competition with Christ our
spiritual husband, we are to shake them off (with that Noble Merquess of Vicum)
though in a natural way our bowels cannot but yearn toward them. He that
loves Father or Mother (says Christ) more then me, is not wort by of me,
Matthew 10.37. Luke 14.26. For this cause (says the Apostle speaking of
marriage) shall a man leave his Father and mother, and shall be joined unto his
Wife, and they two shall be one flesh. Ephesians; 5.31, 32. So the spiritual
Christian forsaking all for Christ, and cleaving to him alone, they two become
one spirit, 1 Cor: 6.17.

I shall subjoyn two Reasons of this Doctrine.

First, Two Reasons of this point.
Because Christ is a a jealous Husband that will endure no corrival in his bed
o^ love, he will have all or none; a heart, and a heart, a double heart is an
abomination to him; no man can serve two masters, etc. Luke 6 13. If a man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2 15. There can be no^
true christianity without self-denial: a man cannot truly love Christ unless he
hate himself; he that will be Christ's Disciple let him deny himself, Mat. 6.24.
This must reach a threefold self; profane civil, and religious self. Paul
counted that loss which before Christ was revealed in him, he esteemed gain;
the wise Merchan when he had once found the pearl o^ great price went and sold
all that he had, Mat. 13.45, 46. nay, we find that Christ denied himself for
ou^ sakes, Phil. 2.7. and well may we deny our selves for him.

Secondly, because all other relations and wants are supplied and made up in
the enjoyment of Christ himself; hence the Apostle determines to know nothing,
1 Cor. 2.2. to glory in nothing save in Christ evucified, Gal. 6.14. Do thou
forsake Father, Mother Husband, Children, etc. for Christ? he will be a Father,
a Husband a friend to thee; he will be instead (...) all Relations; Do thou
forsake the riches, honour^ pleasures of the world for him; thou shall have
true pleasure, riches, and honor in him; Do thou sacrifice thy Isaak, and
deny thine own will, wisdom, an^ righteousness for him; Thou shall have thy
will upon a better account, in resigning it up to his will, which is the best
will: and he will be righteousness and ^^dome to thee, 1 Cor. 1.30.

lesson of self-denial above all Lessons: it is a good old Doctrine, which
though it be talked of by many, yet few practice it; O that we were more lost
in our selves, that we might ^^e more found in Christ; unless the grain of
whear be cast into the earth and dye, it brings not forth fruit, John 12.24.
so unless we dye to the inordinate love of our selves and the creature, we
cannot bring forth fruit unto God, Hosea 10.1 Rom: 7.4, 6. Gal: 2.20.

Never was there more need of pressing the Dostrine of self-denial then now;
how many hopeful instruments are at this day even choked with self-love, and an
inordinate desire of the riches and honors of, this world? Is it not too
evident that they have or^aken their former love and zeal, and are running back
as fast as they can to Egypt, to feed on the garrick and Onions there! Not long
since they seemed to have quire forgotten their Fathers house and cordial^y to
cleave to Christ, and to a pure spiritua interest: But alas they are entangled
again with wordly intetests, and relations, 2 Peter 2.20. and build up that
which they formerly destroyed: This is an evil which cannot sufficiently be
lamented, for it does exceedingly provoke the Lord in such a time as this; we
may with tears in our eyes, and sorrow in our hearts, take up that sad
complaint of the Apostle, That all seek their own: none the things that are
Christ's, Phil. 2.21. The Lord teach us this lesson of self-denia, though it
shoud be by sharp afflictions: ah how few are there among us that ove the Lord
Jesus for himself.

Secondly, This may admonish the professors of ^he Gospel not to trifle and
dally, but to be in good ^arnest with Religion, and reckon before- hand what
(...) will cost them, that they may not repent of the ^^gain, nor look back
again having once put their ^ands to the plough; Let us remember Lots wife No
^an (says our Savior) builds a house, or goes to swar, but he counts the
cost before hand, etc. who^oever forsakes not all that he has cannot be my
Disciple, Luke 14.28, 31, 33. If you will be Christ's Spouse you must not expect
to be the worlds faverite; you are not Christ's true friend if you be a slave to
any lust; as for outward things, we are to use them as if we used them not. 1
Cor: 7.30, 31: an inordinate desire and use of things indifferent and lawful in
their own nature, as meat, drink, apparel, sleep, recreation trading, buying,
selling etc does exceedingly retard, the work of mortification, and hinder the
souls communion with Christ. Al things are awful unto me (says the Apostle)
but al things are not expedient; all things are lawful for me, but I will not be
brought under (...) power of any, 1 Cor; 6.12.

Verse. 11. So shall the King greatly desire thy Beauty: For he is thy Lord, and
worship thou him.
THese words are added as an argument or motive to invite and stir up the
Spouse to the exercise of mortification, self denial, and holiness, for as much
as the same is desirable, amiable, and well pleasing to the King he^ husband,
Col: 1.10. Nor shall she be a loser, though she forsake all for Christ: if the
world reject her a^^ cast her off, yet Christ himself will delight in her, ta^^
care of and provide for her. Every one that has f^^ saken houser, or Brethren,
or Sisters, or Father, or Mother^ or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for his names
sake shall receive a hundred fold here, and life everlasting in th^^ world to
come, Mat. 19.29. There is more true comfort in one hours communion with Christ
(though i^ the midst of affliction) then in many years enjoyment of
creature-relations.

[So shall the King greatly defire (or covet) thy beauty] (i. e) he will de^^ght
himself in thy fairnes; some read it, in thy Sanctity or holiness; and truly
there is a wonderful beauty in true holiness.

Observe. Holiness in the Church is amiable to the Lord.
That holiness in the Church is a desirable thing, and wel-pleasing to the
Lord, who gave himself for her, that he might sanctify and cleanse her with
the washing of water; by the Word; that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that she
should be holy, and without blemish, Ephesians: 5.26, 27.

This point may be further enlarged in the following Particulars. This is
enlarged in four particulars.


First, Holiness becomes the house of God, Psalm 93.5. Psalm. 48.1. and the
people of God, Tit: 2.13, 14 who hereupon are called Saints, and holy Brethren,
Deuteronomy: 33.3. 1 Cor. 1.2. Heb. 3.1. Psalm 10.3. Dan: 7.18, 21, 22, 25. 1 Pet: 2.9.

Again, the more holy we are the more like to God; for (1) he is holiness it
self; holiness is his nature and essence, Isai. 6.3 Psalm 99.3, 5, 9. Rev. 4.8.
Isai 5.16. Isai. 63 15 And (2) he is the author and worker of boliness in the
creature, Levit: 20.8. John 17.17. Jude 1.1 Sam: 2 2. Levit: 21.32. 1 Thessalonians:
5.23.

Thirdly, Christ our head to whom we should be conformable is the great Saint,
the holy one of Israel, Isai. 43.5. Isaiah 53.9. John 8.46. 1 Pet: 2: 22. Acts
3.14. Rev: 2.2. Isaiah 54.5. Psalm 106.16: On his breast plate holiness to the
Lord is written, that he might take away the iniquity that cleaves to our holy
things, Exodus: 28.36. Such a high priest becane us who is holy, and separate
from sinners, Heb: 7.20. by whom we might be presented holy and without spot,
Ephesians. 5.26.

Fourthly, the Spirit of God whereby the Saints are sealed is the spirit of
holiness, the Holy Ghost, Psalm 51.11. Isai. 63.10. Ephesians. 4.30. 1 These 4.8. The
Angel also, and the glorified soul of Believers are ho^ Deuteronomy. 33.2. Acts 7.53.
Jud^ ^^. Mat 18.^0 Iseh. 12.23. and we should be like unto them, for they and
we make up but one Church, only with this difference; they are translated into
a state of glory, and we remain in a state militant. Though we are accepted
with God only for the Righteousness sake of Christ, and our inherent holiness
does not in the least contribute to the matter of our justification, yet the
Lord loves and delights to have his people holy, both in their nature and
actions; and it is prophesied that holiness shall abound in the times of the new
Testament, insomuch that there shall be upon the be's of the horses holiness to
the Lord, Zach. 14.20. And O that Ministers and Churches were more holy.

But let us take the words as they are here laid down, [So shall the King
greatly desire thy beauty, or thy fairness.]

This is directed to the Spouse for her encouragement; As she desires and
delights in the beauty of Christ her husband who is altogether lovely, the
chiefest of ten thousand; so he desires and delights i^ her beancy,
wherewith he himself has adorned her, and which flows from him. Out of his
side there issued forth water and blood John 19.34. John 5.6. whereby the
Church is cleansed and rendered fair and full of beauty; and the rib taken out
of Adams side, whereof Eve was made, was a Type of this.

explained will afford us this Observation: The Church is to dery her own will,
righteousness etc. for Christ per spiritual Husband.


That it is an amiable thing in Christ's eye for the Church to deny her own
will, wisdom, and righteousness, and (...) renounce all other Lovers for his
sake.

There is a beauty in Justification, and a beauty i^ ^^actification; So shall
the King greatly desire thy Beauty.

Niw if we look upon the Church as being enabled ^poactise this lesson of
self-denial, by the grace and Spirit of Christ; So this beauty of hers (which
is thus desirable) may well be said to be put upon her by Christ, and to be his
beauty; so that in conclusion Christ desires and delights in his own beauty.

All the spiritual beauty and Glory which the Saints have or shall have, is
derived to them from Christ their husband, who infinitely excels all other
husbands.

The excellency of this husband above other husbands may be demenstrated in
three things, Three thing propoundeds wherein Christ excels all other husbands.
among many other particulars which might be mentioned.

First, other husbands will have a considerable portion with their spouses
before they marry them; beauty, or money, or noble descent, makes up the match;
but Christ finds us not fair and well qualified when he first marries us to
himself, but polluted in our blood, naked, and loathsome, Ezekiel: 16.4, 5, 6, 7,
8. Then it is that he spreads his skirt over us, covers our nakedness,
clotheth us with broidered work, and decketh us with his Ornaments; and thus
his heart comes to be ravished with his own Beauty, Cant. 4.9. To the
confounding of the wisdom of the world, and flesh, ^he justifies the ungodly
Rom: 4.5. When we were Enemies we were reconciled to God, Romans 5.10, when dead
in trespasses and sins, he quickened us, Ephesians. 2.5. when we were filthy he
cleansed us; when deformed, vile and wretched in our selves, he entered into
Covenant with us, communicated his Righteousness to us; poured out his spirit
upon us, united himself to us by the same Spirit, and enabled us to lay hold on
him by says so that all comes from his free Love.

Secondly, Other husbands if their spouses be not beautiful, suitable, meek,
obedient, they cannot make them so; but Christ puts a new Spirit, a divine
nature nto his Spouse, whereby she does freely and cheerusly obey him. In the
day of his power his people shall be willing, Psalm 110.3. of Lions they shall
be made Lambs, Isai 11.7. Isai. 65.25. Though he find u filthy and deformed,
yet he does not leave us so, but make us amiable and holy.

Thirdly, The temporal husband though his affections be much toward his Wife
when he marries her, yet for the most part it so falls out, that after
miscarriages (especially if they be gross ones) do alienate his heart, if not
cause an utter divorce from her; But Christ having once set his love upon his
Spouse, and knowing from eternity how she would prove, and what unkindness she
would manifest, does notwithstanding continue his love and kindness to her for
ever; see Jer. 3.1, 14. Jer: 31.3. Hosea 2.14, 19. Hosea 14.4.

Is it an amiable thing for the Church thus to deny her self, and forsake all
for Christ; this then informs us, that though a man do many good things as
Herod did upon John's preaching, -- yet if he be under the power of any lust,
whether pride, self love, covetousness, uncleanness, or any other; If he do not
deny himself, and all the lusts of the flesh and the world, and that in love to
Christ he is spiritually deformed and without Beauty: neither is there any true
comeliness or amiableness in his actions: wheresoever the Lord Jesus is
graciously present by the power of his Spirit, he will not suffer his
irreconcilable enemies, the Devil, Sin, and the World to rule in his house,
and freely without control to lodge in his bed; If he enter into the strong
man's house he will bind the strong man, and make spoil of his goods, Mat:
12.28, 29. They that are not with Christ are against him; They that bawke the
Cross of Christ for any outward Relations or advantages have no true Beauty,
nor are they desirable: and what though now they pretend to follow him, by
making a fair profession, and abounding in some external services (which are in
credit at this day) yet their hypocrisy will shortly appear: upon the parting
of two Gentlemen whom a serving man has long followed, it will be seen to
whether of them he yeates; so it will be in this case, when Christ and the world
part.

Secondly, Let christians often remember the admirable gratio us condescension
of Christ, who first puts a beauty upon them, and then desires and delights
in his own beauty: as the Spouse describes and highly commends his personal
beauty, Cant: 5.10. So he describes and highly commends her beauty, Can.
4.1, 2, 3, etc. he first blows upon his Garden, making the sp^^es thereof to
flow forth, and then eats his pleasant fruits: all is from him and to him,
Cant. 4.16. Cant: 5.1. O wonderful condescension! O admirable love! thus the
King freely and of his own accord is held in the Rafters or Galleries, Cant.
7.5. being tied to the Church by the bands of love: her heart (to allude to
that saying concerning the strange Woman, Eccles: 7.26) is as snares and nets,
and her hands as bands; the Lord Jesus is exceedingly taken with her; he
allures her with his beauty, Hosea 2.14, 19. Isai: 62.4. Hosea 11.4. and she
allures him with her Doves eyes, Cant: 1.15. and so their spiritual allurements
and delights are mutual and reciprocal, these things are to be spiritually
considered and improved.

It follows [For he is thy Lord, and worship thou him.]

The dominion or Lordship of Christ is here subjoyned as a reason or ground why
the Church should obey and worship him: Is it not a meet and comely thing for
the subject to obey his Prince, and the servant his Lord and Master? Christ
has put a beauty upon his Church, pardoned her sins, delivered her from the
curse, and ser her at liberty, not that she should live carnally, but obey him
spiritually: Being dead to the Law by the body of Christ that she should be
married to another even to him that is raised from the dead, that she should
bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7.44

Hence Observe.

That we should not only look at Christ as our high Priest and Savior, That we
should eye Christ as our Lord so as to obey him.
to procure for us pardon and Reconciliation, and to free us from wrath and
hell; But also as our Lord and King, to serve and obey him.

By virtue of his Priestly office he has satisfied and made an atonement for
our sins, Exodus 30.10. Lev. 5 18. Rom^ 5.11.1 John 2.2. and by virtue of his
Kingly office he rules in us: our faith is to be directed to him for pardon in
the former relation, and for power and ability to obey him in the latter: and
indeed that man who cordially closes with Christ in his priestly office, will
also how down before him, and worship him as his Lord; he that hearrily
embraces Christ in one Office, does heartily embrace him in all.

Now the Lordship of Christ may be considered two ways. Christ has a twofold
Lordship.


First, 1 Absolute and genera
Christ has an absolute providential independent Lordship or sovereignty over
all things in Heaven, and earth, and hell, as he is the most high and mighty
God, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, essentially one with the Father, the Lord of
glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. Acts 10.36. Heb. 1.10. Ephesians. 4.5. There is but one Lord
Jesus, by whom are all things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.6.

Secondly. 2 Relative and peculiar.
Christ has a peculiar relative Lordship, as he is mediator and head of his
Church, which is his body, for whose good and welfare all things are put into
his hands by the Father. John 5 22. John 13.3. John 17.2. Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22,
23. the King is head and ruler over all his subjects within his dominions; but
he rules his Queen in a more peculiar intimate manner.

The former is an uncreated, but the latter is a created Lordship; Reasons we
should obey the Lord Jesus.
God has made that same Jesus whom ye crucified both Lord and Christ, Acts 2
36.

There are strong Reasons why we should Worship and obey Christ as our Lord,

1 Because we are his, and belong to him all manner of ways; As, First, By
creation, Co^. 1.16, 17. 1 Reas: We are his every way,
John 1.3. Heb. 1.2. 1 By Creation,


Secondly, By the eternal donation of the Father, which donation was
reciprocal; we were given to Christ, 2 By eternal donation.
and Christ to us, John 17.2, 6, 24. Isa. 42.6, 7, etc.

Thirdly, By purchase and acquisition, Christ paid dear for us, even the price
of his own blood, (i. e.) the blood of God, Acts 20.28. Be you holy as God is
holy, 3 By pure chase,
and pass the time of your so ourning here in fear, for as much as ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation, but with the pretio us blood of Christ, etc. 1 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18,
19.

We are his, and belong to him soul and body; all that we have, and all that we
can do is too little for him, who gave himself for us that he might redeem us
from all iniquity and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. Tit: 2.14. ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your
body, and in your spirit, which is Gods, 1 Cor: 6.10. he dyed, that they which
live should not henceforth live to themselves, but unto him which dyed for
them, and rose again, 2 Cor: 5.15.

Fourthly, by spiritual union and implantation; he is the vine, we are the
branches; 4 By spiritual union
he and we are one spirit, one Christ mystical, John 15.5. 1 Cor: 6.17. 1 Cor:
12.12. God having transplanted us out of the old vine the first Adam, and
crucified us to the old Covenant, and ingrafted us into the new Vine the second
Adam, that we might be found in him, and that our fruit might be found in him,
and to him, Phil. 3.8. Hos: 14.8. Rom 7.4. In a word, that we might live from
and by Christ as our principle, for him and to him as our end, John 15.1, 2.
John 17.21, 22, 23 Gal: 2.19, 20. 1 Cor. 15.45. Phis. 1.11.

Fifthly, we are the Lords by Covenant and stipulation, 5 By Covenant
God in Christ has entered into Covenant with us, and promised to be o^^ god
and Father, Jer: 31.33. Heb. 8.10. and we have accepted the grace of the
Covenant, and do avouch our selves to be the Lords people, Hos. 2.23.

Sixthly, 6 By Conquest,
By Conquest; Christ has not only vanquished his peoples enemies by the power
of his eternal Godhead, upon the cross, and at his Resurrection, Col. 2.15.
Heb: 2.14. Rom: 8.34. But he does also subdue their hearts to himself by the
power of his grace, and cause them to triumph by Faith in his victories, Romans
8.37,

Reason may be taken from the obedience of the blessed Anges, Because we are to
be like the Angels in obedience. How Christ will be worshipped,
whose nature is superior to, and far more excellent then ours, yet they do
cheerfully worship and obey Christ, when the Lord brings his first begotten
into the world he says, Let all the Angels of God worship him Heb. 1.6. Luke
2.13, 14, and we pray let thy will be done on earth as it is in Heaven.

Quae: But how will this Lord be worshipped by us?

Ans. In Spirit and Truth John 4.24. Inwardly and outwardly in Soul and body,
with cheerfulness and alacrity, Pseln 100.1, 2. In Righteousness and holiness
without fear all the days of our life, Luke 1.74, 75, honoring and
reverencing him in our hearts, drawing nigh to him in his word and ordinances,
with uprightness and fiacerity in the inward parts, Genesis 17.1, being
circumcised in Spirit, putting no confidence in the flesh, having not the
praise of men but of God, Rom: 21 23. Phil. 3.3; who weighs the spirit of men
in the balance of the Sanctuary, Proverbs 16.2. and knows perfectly from what
principle, upon what motives and grounds, and for what ends we come before him,
and worship him.

Lord and King? This then reproves most people (that are called christiens) who
vainly boast that Christ and Heaven is theirs, that they have believed ever
since they were born and doubt not of the pardon of their sins and the
salvation of their Souls; yet in the mean while they are far from yiedling
sincere obedience to Christ, as their Lord; or giving him the honor of his
regal office; they have other gods and Lords whom they serve, Exodus: 32.4. 1
Cor. 8.5. Satan is their Lord, Covetousness is their Lord, ambition is their
Lord, Lust is their Lord; and therefore when they come to dye, God may well bid
them go for peace and comfort to the gods and Lords whom they have served; Let
them deliver them if they can, Judge. 10.13.14. But alas, there will be neither
voice, nor any to answer or regard them in that day, 1 Kings 18.29. It Is a mere
Satanical delusion when men brag of an interest in Christ, and of peace and
pardon by him, and yet know not what it is spiritually to worship the Lord;
whilst they acknowledge him in words, they deny him in works, Tit. 1.16. If I
be a Father, where is mine honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear
(says the Lord?) Mal: 1.6. We should obey this Lord universally, both in
respect of the object, having a regard to all his commands; and in respect of
the subject, with all the powers of our souls, sincerely, cheerfully,
constantly.

Secondly, Considering what our Lord did and suffered for us, how he was
obedient to the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. we ought not to shun the meanest
work or office that tends to his glory, and the profit of our neighbor: The
Lord of glory abased himself for us, and shall not we condescend one to
another; let us remember that grave exhortation of the Apostle, Romans 12 10, 16.
Be kindly affectioned one to another with Brotherly love, in honor preferring
one another; Mind not high things, but condescend to men of ^ow degree; and
let us never forget the example of our Lord, who (knowing that the Father had
given all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to
God) washed his Disciples feet and wiped them with a Towel; if then our Lord
and master washed his Disciples feet, we also ought to wash one another feet,
John 13.3, 4, 5, 13, 14, 15. If he did thus when he was full of the thoughts of
his own glory, well may we do so being compassed about with many weaknesses, and
our selves subject to the like infirmities with our Brethren.

Verse. 12. And the Daughter of Tire shall be there with a Gift, even the rich
among the people shall entreat thy favor.
IN these words we have a prophecy of the flourishing state of the Church,
even in this life, which though it was partly fulfilled to the primitive
Church, when Constantine and other Princes submitted themselves to the scepter
of Christ, and cast down their Crowns at his feet) yet this, with other
Prophecies of the like nature do yet remain in a great measure to be
accomplished. And though it will not be denied, but inward spiritual privileges
were shadowed forth by external good things in the prophecy of Isaiah, and
other scriptures of the Old Testament, yet it would be intolerable, (nor can it
be done without bringing in needless and groundless Allegories) to expound all
the prophetic scriptures which speak of the outward prosperity and flourishing
condition of the Church in this life so as to exclude that which is external,
and apply the same only to internal and spiritual privileges; especially
considering what was revealed since Christ's ascension in the Apocalyptical
visions, Rev: 11.15, 17, 18. Rev: 16.6.7, 19. Rev: 17.14, 16.

But of this I shall speak further, and more particularly, when I have opened
the Text.

By the Daughter of Tyre] we may understand the people and Commonwealth of
Tire, which flourished in Solomon's time, 2 Chronicles: 2.3. and under which the
Spirit of God here comprehends other flourishing Nations and Kingdoms.

Tire was sometimes one of the chiefest Cities for Traffic in the world, Tire
once a glorious City,
as appears Ezekiel: 17 chap: the crowning City, whose Merchants were Princes, and
her Traffiquers the honorable ones of the earth, Isa. 23.8. she heaped up
silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the street, Zach: 9.3.

We find that many Inhabitants about Tire and Sidon flock dafter the Ministry
of Christ, Mark 3.8. Mark 9.24. Insomuch that he upbraids the unbeleeving Jews
with the forwardness of these Mat^ 11.20, 21. and afterward Christ had
Disciples in this City. Acts 21.3, 4, 5. according to that prophecy; Behold it
shall be said that this or that man was born there, Psalm 87.4, 5, 6.

These were the first fruit^, but the full harvest is to come; when the fullness
of the Gentiles shall be brought in, and God shall turn away iniquity from Jacob,
then shall all Israel be saved, Romans 11.21, 26, 27. 2 Cor: 3.15, 16.

[The Daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift,] Where shall she be? even
among the True and spiritual Worshippers of Christ, John 4.23.24. who obey him
as their Lord, and give him the honor of his Kingly Office and dignity; There
shall the Daughter of Tire be with a gift; hence Observe

That Christ will put honor upon his sincere Worshippers and servants, even in
the view of the world. Christ will honor is sincere worshippers.


God will honor them that honor him, and they that despise him shall be lightly
esteemed, 1 Samuel: 2.30. This was evident in the case of Mordecai and Haman.
Ester 8. True riches and honor are with Christ, who is the true wisdom, Prove:
8.18.

Hence we may draw three Corrolaries,

honor and renown is to honor and exalt the Lord Jesus as King of Nations and
Saints; which is specially required of us in these times. If any man serve me
(says Christ) him will my Father honor, John 12.26. True honor is not
attained by self seeking, and advancing a personal worldly interest of our own;
it comes not by holding correspondence and compliance with wicked men, nor by
consulting the rules of Machiavellian carnal policy. Woe to them that seek deep
to hide their counsel from the Lord; surely your turning of things upside down
shall be esteemed but as the potters clay Isai. 29.19, 20. Woe to them that are
drunk with ambition and carnal policy themselves (for so may those words Hab:
2.15, 16. be figuratively taken) and put their bottle to their neighbors that
they may also intoxicate them with the same principles, surely such men in the
end shall have shame instead of glory.

Do we not know that Pharaoh, Siqon, and other wicked Kings refusing to let the
arn^y of the Israelites pass, grounded their practice upon maxims of
State Policy, and yet for all that the Lord laid their honor in the dust?
would we therefore arrive at true honor, let us then honor Christ as our Lord
and King; let us be obedient to his word and Ordinances; let us conform our
selves to Gospel rules and precepts; let his design be our design, and his
interest our interest As Ruth said to Naomi, so should we say to Christ,
whither thou go I will go, and where thou lodgest will lodge; thy people shall
be my people, and thy God my God, Ru^h: 1.16. Thus we are to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, in foul weather as well as fair, in rugged ways as well
as plain paths; nor should we seek the honor of men, but the honor that
comes from God only.

Secondly, since this is the way to true honor, those in great places
especially should be careful to worship the Lord sincerely, and to let him
reign in their hearts, and rule in all their counsels and determinations, else
truly they will at one time or other be laid aside with disgrace and contempt;
The Lord will pour contempt on the honorable ones of the earth, and will raise
up other instruments whom he will honor, and by whom he will be honored; when
King Saul was not faithful to him and his interest, he laid him and his family
aside, and raised up the house of David: so Jehu that forward man, though he
had expressed much seeming zeal against idolatry and false Worship, 2 Kings 10.
yet aiming more at the Kingdom then at the glory of God in destroying the house
of Ahab, Ahab, God avenged the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu; whose
base self ends brought down vengeance upon his posterity.

He that follows after righteousness (even when it is departing from a
Nation) shall find life and true honor, Prove. 21.21. When Nebuchadnezzar
honored the King of Heaven (who is able to abase those that walk in pride,
then had he his honor, and his reason, and the glory of his Kingdom restored
unto him, Dan. 4.37. the Lord abaseth the proud, but exalts the humble and
lowly.

dirt on the Saints, so the Lord will put honor upon them, walking as Saints;
(for otherwise they may bring dishonor upon themselves and their profession:)
herein the Lord outvies the world; if he will honor and lift up his servants
who can pull them down? In their greatest sufferings though they appear black to
the world, yea and to themselves too, yet they are comely to God: We approve
our selves (says the Apostle, 2 Cor 6.8.) the Ministers of God by honor and
dishonor; Though the Saints walk through dishonor in the account of the
world, yet they are honorable in the account of God, Isai. 43.4. who pours
contempt upon Princes, and sets the poor on high from affliction: the
righteous shall see it and rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth, Psalm
107.40, 41, 42. Let the Saints therefore be joyful in glory: let the high
praises of God be in their mouth, and a two- edged sword in their hand, to
execute vengeance upon the Heathen, to bind their Kings in chains, and their
Nobles with fetters of iron: This honor have all his Saints, Psalm 149.5, 6 7,
8, 9. The Daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift.

It follows [Even the rich among the people sha^ entreat thy favor,] or shall
seek thy face, or earnestly beseech thy favor.

This is a further description or amplification of the prosperous state of the
Church in this world: The rich or fat ones among the people shall make humble
and importunate suit to the Church, whom the Lord will make an eternal
excellency, the joy of many Generations, Isai, 60.15. Hence we may Observe,

That the time will come that the rich, The rich and Noble ones shall highly
esteem the Church.
and noble, and potent ones of the Nations shall highly esteem the Church of
Christ and her privileges, and shall desire communion with her.

At the first preaching of the Gospel, not many rich, not many noble were
called, 1 Cor. 1.27. those that generally adhered to Christ and his Apostles
were the poor contemptible ones of the world, Mat. 11.5, Luke 1^.20. James 2.5.
But here it is prophesied and promised that the rich and honorable among the
people shall entreat the Churches favor, and bow down before her; And again,
all the kinreds of the Nations shall worship before thee, and they that be fat
on the earth shall eat and worship, Psalm 22.27, 29.

We meet with many prophecies and promises to this purpose, which were never
yet fully accomplished, but shall be before Christ deliver up the Kingdom to the
Father, 1 Cor. 15.24.

It Is promised to the Church, that Kings shall be her nursing Fathers, and
Queens her nursing Mothers; they shall bow down to her, and lick up the dust of
her feet, Isai. 49.23. She shall ride on the high places of the earth; the sons
of strangers shall build her walls, and Kings shall minister to her; and the
Nations and Kingdoms that will not serve her shall perish, Isaiah 58.14. Isaiah
60.1, 3, 5, 10, 11. The ten Kings that gave their power to the Beast shall be
overcome, and shall join with the Church, and help to destroy the beast, Rev.
7.14; 16.

Among many other Scriptures that might be alleged for the confirmation of
this point, Prophetical scriptures concerning the advancement of the Kingdom of
Christ in the world,
I shall refer the Reader to Psalm 2.8. Psalm 8.6. Psalm 22.27, 28, 29. Psalm
86.9. Heb. 2.8, 9. Isaiah 2.1, 2, 3. Isaiah 65.14, 17. Isaiah 66. Jer. 30.3,
etc Ezekiel 28, 24, 25, 26. Ezekiel. 34.11. Mic: 4.1, 2, 4, 5 Zach: 2.11, 12. Zach,
6.12, 13, 14. Zach: 12, 6, 7, 8. Acts 1, 6, 7. Romans 11.25, 26, 27, Rev. 21.24,
26.

But let him specially consider these three scriptures, (viz.) Dan. 2, from
verse 31 to 45, Dan: 7.4, 18, 27. Rev: 11.15, 17, 18,

Touching that remarkable Vision mentioned in Daniel, chap. 2. from 31 to 45
Verse, The glory of Christ's Kingdom in this world evinced from Daniel 2.41. etc.
Relating to the kingdom of the Stone, and the spreading there of (which is
generally expected at this day as the great truth of this Generation) Though
some late learned Writers Mr: Mede, Mr. Hewet, Mr. Parker on Dan: 2, and Dan: 7.
have largely treated on this subject, and answered the objections of the
contrary minded: yet being now upon a suitable Text, I shall take the holdness
to propound my thoughts concerning the same.

And this I shall do in giving a brief answer to several Quaeries.

Quae. What is meant by the legs and toes of iron in this Vision, Dan. 2.33,
etc? 1 Quaer: What is meant by the legs, etc. of iron?


I Ans.

First Negatively, It cannot be meant (as some interpret it) of the Syrian and
Egyptian branches, the successors of Alexander in the Groecian Monarchy, -- For
these Reasons;

Vision extends it self to the last days, Reasons why it cannot be meant of
Alexanders successors.
verse 28. but the legs and feet which are the last part of the image, (if
applied to the Seleucidae, and other successors of Alexander,) did extire
before Christ's Incarnation; for the Kingdom of Syria was by the Romans reduced
to a province 60, and the Egyptian 30 years before the birth of Christ; whereas
we read here, Dan. 2.44. that in the days of these Kings (that is) when the
two legs are divided into ten Kingdoms, the God of Heaven will set up a
Kingdom, etc.

Secondly, because every metal in the vision signifies a distinct complete
Monarchy from the be ginning to the end; As the Brazen belly and thighs make up
the whole Grecian Empire, consisting of Alexander with his successors, the
Seleucidae and others (and thus the Grecian Monarchy is described, Dan. 8.21,
22) so likewise the legs and feet of iron do constitute another Empire or
Monarchy distinct from the former.

Thirdly, because this Beast which has iron legs is more dreadful and
terrible then the former; as iron it bruiseth all other Kingdoms, and devoureth
the whole earth, Dan: 7.7. which cannot be truly applied to the Syrian and
Egyptian branches, who never had that strength and success which their Captain
Alexander had, Dan: 8, 21, 22.

Affirmatively, by the iron legs, feet, and toes, we must understand the Roman
Monarchy which was far stronger, and more terrible then the three former.

There are two divisions of this great beast.

1 Into two legs, (viz.) the Eastern and Western Empire; which were strong as
Iron, and subdued the Nations.

2 Into feet and toes, the Eastern Empire being possessed by the great Turk,
and the Western Empire being divided into ten several Kingdoms: Great
endeavors have been used to unite these Ten Kingdoms into one entire body or
Monarchy, especially by the Spaniard; but they shall remain distinct Kingdoms,
and shall not be mixed no more then Iron can be mixed with clay. Reasons why the
Roman Monarchy must needs be signified by the iron legs, etc.


That these iron legs, feet, and toes, are the Roman Monarchy, and branches
thereof under the Eastern and Western Antichrist, may be proved by these
Reasons.

First, because it is represented by a distinct metal next succeeding the
brazen belly and thighs, or Grecian Empire; therefore it must needs be the
fourth, or Roman Monarchy; for we read of no other entire worldly Monarchy that
succeeded.

Secondly, because this metal is stronger then all the other, and breaks
them in pieces, Dan: 2.40. which is true only of the Roman Monarchy: for this
beast had great Iron teeth of war, such as Scipio, Caesar, Mark Anthony,
Pompey, and nails of brass (i.e.) Senators and Magistrates to hold fast what
the other had Conquered. The iron legs and feet are parallel with the iron
teeth of the fourth beast, Dan. 7.7.

Thirdly, Whereas the ten Kings or Kingdoms are represented by the ten toes,
this also is a character of the Roman Empire, as being divided into several
distinct Kingdoms, see Rev. 12.3. Rev. 13.1. Rev. 17.12.

Fourthly, This metal must be dashed in pieces in the end of time by the
kingdom of Christ ruling in the Saints; and therefore is applicable to the
Roman Empire continuing in the branches thereof to this day.

Quae: 2 Quae: What is meant by the little stone?
What is meant by the stone that smote the Image upon his feet of iron and
clay, and brake them to pieces?

Ans. It was not properly Christ at his first coming, I Answ: Negat: Not the
kingdom of Christ at his first coming.
and his kingdom immediately following thereupon, (though I shall not contend
with those godly men who say that the foundation of the Fifth Monarchy was then
laid,) but it cannot properly be applied to the spiritual kingdom of Christ at
his first coming, for these three Reasons.

First, because this kingdom of the stone is of that nature that it breaks in
pieces all other kingdoms, so that they being destroyed this only stands, verse.
44 but Christ did not so at his first coming; See Mr: Parker on Dan: 2,
neither does his kingdom considered merely as spiritual dash in pieces the
powers of the world, but commands passive obedience to them though wicked.

Secondly, It Is such a kingdom as shall be continued to the Saints of the most
high (in the number whereof the Jews at their restoration are included) without
alteration, Dan. 7.18. for, it shall not be given to another people; but at the
first coming of Christ the Gospel of the Kingdom was preached to the Jews, and
then taken from them, and brought to the Gentiles, Mat. 22.

Thirdly, It suits not the scope of the Vision to interpret it of the spiritual
kingdom of Christ at his first coming; for what advancement had it been to
Christ's kingdom to beat down the successors of Alexander in the Grecian
Empire, seeing Christ's Church shall be longer oppressed by a far more terrible
succeeding Beast, namely the Empire of Rome both united in one body, and
divided into several branches.

affirmatively, By the little stone is meant the Kingdom of the Saints at the
fall of Antichrist.
the stone that smites this Image is the Kingdom of the Saints, which in the
glorious administration thereof shall be established at the fall of Antichrist,
Dan: 2.44, 45. Da: 7.26, 27. Rev. 11.15, 17, 18.

First, this Kingdom must beat down all opposite powers and Kingdoms of the
world that have adheared to the Beast.

Secondly. The Image being broken, the little stone becomes a great mountain,
and fills the whole earth, Dan. 2.35.

Thirdly, This Kingdom rises up about the time that the seventh Trumpet
sounds, which is the time that Babylon shall fall, Rev 11.15, 16, 17. Then and
not til then shall all Kingdoms be subject to it; And therefore it is no other
but the Kingdom of the Saints of the most high, Jews and Gentiles which shall
flourish in the world at the fall of Antichrist; Christ reigning as King of
Saints by dispensation from the Father, over all the Kingdoms of this world.

Quae: 3 Quae: Whether the Kingdom of the stone be a spiritual Kingdom.
How and whether the Kingdom of the Stone may be considered as a spiritual
Kingdom?

Ans: It may be considered as a spiritual Kingdom in these Respects following.

First, As this Kingdom is erected and advanced not by carnal wisdom and
policy, and such like weapons of the flesh; 1 Answ: Affirmat: In three respects
it may be said to be spiritual,
but by the wisdom and power of the Spirit of God, who though he use
instruments, yet he does all in them and by them, Zach. 4.6. Isai. 9.5. The
stone that smites the Image is cut out without hands.

Secondly, As this Kingdom is accompanied with a wonderful increase of spiritua
blessings, light, love and unity among the Saints.

Thirdly, As the Saints (who are Deputed by God to rule the Nations of the
world) do act from the spirit of the Lord as their principle, ruling in the
fear of the Lord, 2 Samuel: 23.3. Thus it may be said to be spiritual.

But in other respects it is not properly a spiritual, 2 Answ: Negat: But in
other respects it is not properly a spiritual, but a temporal Monarchy.
but a temporal outward Monarchy; as appears by these following
Considerations.

spiritual Kingdom in and among his Saints before and after his passion, when
the Church was under the sharpest persecution, and the Image flourished most;
this could not with hold the spiritual Kingdom of Christ; but the Kingdom which
Daniel speaks of begins to flourish at the time of the battering down of the
Image; I might add, that Christ's spiritual Kingdom does not overthrow, but
rather set up civil governments.

Secondly, It is such a dominion as Gods people the Jews were deprived of, and
was taken from them by the Babylonian captivity, etc. God by this Vision, Dan.
2. intending the comfort of the Jews who had lost their outward Kingdom and
liberty; and showing that after many changes it should return to them again;
and therefore it is a temporal Kingdom, and an outward dominion.

Thirdly, To interpret it only of a spiritual Kingdom would not suit Daniels
scope in interpreting the Kings dream, whose thoughts were busied about the
issue of his temporal monarchy.

Fourthly, If it were only a spiritual Kingdom consisting in the preaching of
the word, etc. why should the stone rather smite the feet then any other part
of the Image? does not the spiritual kingdom of Christ strike at the other
metals as well as this.

Fifthly, It is such a kingdom as does execute temporal judgments by the
material sword upon the kingdom of the beast, see Isai. 34.7, 8. Isai 63.4.
Rev. 16.6, 7. Rev. 17.14, 16. Rev. 18 6, 7. Rev. 19.18, 19, 20. In a word, it
may be said to be a mixed Kingdom; partly inward and spiritual, (and so it comes
without observation, Luke 17.20, 21.) partly external and civil, consisting in
the purity of Gospel Ordinances, and justice and equity in civil
administrations.

Quae: 4 Quae: What are the privileges that relate to the Kingdom of the stone?
What are those privileges that shall accompany the Kingdom of the stone when
it has smote the Image, and is advanced?

Ans: I shall but briefly hint them because they are largely spoken of by
others. We shall have more comfort in the enjoyment then in the writing of them.

First, 1 A new Heaven and a new earth,
There shall be (as it were) a new Heaven, and a new Earth: a new face, luster,
and glory upon all things, Isa. 65.17, 18. Isai. 66.22. 2 Pet: 3.13. Rev. 21.1,
4, 5, 6. old corrupt forms, customs, and constitutions both in the Church and
Civil State shall pass away and be abolished. Behold all things shall be new.

Secondly, 2 A glorious accomplishment of prophecies,
There shall be a glorious accomplishment of predictions and Prophecies; then
shall the sealed Book be opened, Rev: 5.4. Dan: 12.9, 12: The advancing of this
kingdom will be the best and clearest comentary upon the Apocalyptical Visions;
we shall then be able experimentally to say, that nothing has failed of all
the good that the Lord has spoken.

Thirdly, 3 An abundant pouring out of the Spirit.
a large and abundant pouring out of the Spirit of God, the earth shall be
filled with the spiritual knowledge of Christ, as waters cover the sea; and the
light of one day shall be as the light of seven, Joel 2.28, Isai. 11: 29. Isai.
30.26.

Fourthly, 4 Purity in Ordinances and worship,
a wonderful convincing purity, beauty and Majesty upon the Ordinances and
worship of Christ honor shall be given throughout the world to the people and
things of God, Rev. 11.1, 2. Isai. 65.25. Isa: 60 13. Ezekiel. 43. Rev 21.24, 25,
26, 27.

Fifthly, a blessed sweet harmony and union among all the Saints, Jews and
Gentiles; 5 Union among the Saints
the envy of Ephraim shall depart; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah vex
Ephraim any more I^ai. 11.13. Zach: 14.9. Zeph. 3.9. This day will put an end to
all those wrangling fleshly disputes and quarrels that are among christians,
some in one way, some in another.

Sixthly, Peace shall be in our borders, 6 Peaceable and religious
administrations,
the people shall beat their swords into Plowshares, etc. Nation shall not rise
up against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more; Justice also shall be
impartially administered; the Church shall be the habitation of Justice, the
mountain of holiness, see Isai. 1^.9. Isai. 2.4. Isai. 54, 14. Isai. 60.18, 19,
etc: Jer. 31.23. Isai. 61.11.

Seventhly, to shut up all, there shall be a glorious return of prayers to the
Saints; whilst they call, 7 Rich returns of prayer.
God will answer; and whilst they are yet speaking he will ^ear, Isai. 65.24.

Quae: What may we think of the Disputes and contendings that are at this day
about the Fifth Monarchy? V Quae: How to judge of the disputes touching the
fifth Monarchy,


Answ: Truly it is to be feared that there is much va^ity and corruption in the
managing of these Dis^^tes by both parties.

Fifth Monarchy as an odd frantic notion, tending to judaisme ^^d popery, and
destructive to all order and government; and therefore would have them
persecuted that ^^ld it.

2 Those christians whose spirits, time, and pens are ^holly taken up with the
opinion of the Fifth Mo^^chy, neglecting in the mean time other substantial
^^etious truths, such as Justification, union, self-^^rching, the life of
Faith, etc. which specially concern the peace and comfort of their souls, and
their walking with God in their places; and rigidly imposing upon others what
they themselves conceive touching the time and place of the killing of the
Witnesses, the personal reign of Christ, and the very month or year when, and
the instruments, ways, and means whereby the fifth Monarchy shall be
introduced, and erected. Who is it that gives light in things controversal?
who is it that renteth the vail which is upon the hearts of men to this day?
The wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God James 1.20. be that
believes makes not haste, Isai. 28.16, Every thing is beautiful in that
season that God brings it forth. The Lord seems to delay the performance of his
promises, in exposing his people to sufferings, that so he may discover who are
the lofty and unsound, and who are the truly humble and righteous. An ambitious
murmuring unbeleeving spirit is odious to the Lord. The Vision is yet for an
appointed time; but at the end it shall speak, and not lie; Though it tarry,
wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry: Behold his soul
which is lifted up is not upright in him: but the just shall live by faith, Hab.
2.3, 4. Let us (dear christians) exercise faith, hope, and patience, and pray
incessantly til the Lord batter down the remainders of the image, and come with
glory into his Temple, Hab: 2.3, 4. James 1.4. Heb. 10.36 Rev. 1.9. Rev: 2.9.
Rev. 3, 10.11.

Secondly, we may well hope (notwithstanding the apostasy and rashness of many)
that there are a competent number of humble watchful Saints scattered up and
down in the Nations at this day who wait for the deliverance of Sion, and who
have a mighty spirit of faith and prayer in order thereunto, keeping their
garments pure and unspotted in this hour of temptation, which is both on the
right hand and on the left.

Thirdly, though we are not to limit the holy one of Israel, Psalm 78.41. In
whose hands the times and seasons are, Acts 1.7. yet we may well conclude that
the time for the flourishing of Christ's kingdom drawn near, if we compare the
world and works of Gods The several accounts of godly men who have made it
their design to search into the prophecies of the scripture; The hopes of the
Saints under various administrations, and the general expectation of a great
change which is at this day among Jews, Turks, Papists, etc. (some upon one
account, and some upon another) as is observed by Travailers and learned men,
with other symptoms and prognostics of the approach of this Fifth kingdom;
These things being duly considered, we cannot but hope that the day of the Lord
is near, even at the doors; and who knows whether this generation shall pass
away before the Lord appear? Luke 21.30, 31, 32.

Having thus propounded my thoughts in answer to these V Quaeries touching the
Kingdom of Christ, I shall now briefly lay down some Grounds of the former
Doctrine, namely, That the Rich, Grounds of the Doctrine (viz:) that the Rich
and Noble, etc. shall honor the Church.
Noble, etc shall highly honor and esteem the Church.

First, it shall be so in regard of Gods truth and saithfulness, who will perform
what he has promised and prophesied: Thus he did before the coming of Christ;
and thus he will also do with the Prophecies which relate to the times since
the coming of Christ, they must and shall be fulfilled.

Secondly, Because the Lord will answer the voice and cry of the prayers, hopes,
and bloodshed of his Saints and Martyrs, There is a seed sown by the Spirit of
God in the Saints through many Generations which shall spring up in due time
(it may be many years) after they be laid in the dust: The Lord will in answer
to the voice of the prayers and blood of his people (which cry mightily to him)
shake and turn the Nations upside down, and make the Kings and rulers thereof
bow before his people: not only the sins of the wicked, but also the prayers of
the Saints make way for great changes and revolutions in the world, sec Isai.
45.11. Rev: 5.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Rev: 8.3, 4, 5:

Thirdly, because Christ himself will be the last actor upon the stage of this
world: the Antichristian powers having played their parts i^ persecuting the
Church must now give Christ leave to play his part; nay, will they, nil they,
they shall be turned off the stage and the Lord in spite of them all will play
his part in raising and comforting his afflicted Church, and make the great and
Noble ones bow before her, and cast down their Crowns at her feet, Isai. 54.10,
11.

people of God therefore possess their souls in patience, Luke 21.19. The time
is coming that the rich among the people shall entreat their favor: As yet we
see not all things put under the feet of Christ, Heb: 2.8. But rather the
people of God in most Nations are trampled upon by wicked men; but all things
shall be put under the feet of Christ and the Saints; he that has promised to
come will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37. Isai. 60.22. Let us not
anticipate the Lord, his time is the best; a hasty rash heart is not fit for
the work of God; such a heart being for the most part full of unbelief, slavish
fear, and carnal considence; the Israelites could not enter into rest because
of unbelief.

Secondly, shall the Daughter of Tire and the rich among the people bow down
before Christ and his Church; be wise then ye Kings and Rulers, be instructed
ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling;
kiss the son lest he be angry, Psalm 2.10, 11 Now that the Lord is visiting the
Nations and powers round about you, It will be safest for you to prostrate your
selves at his feet, and to take up your Crowns, powers and Dignities upon the
account of the great interest of Christ, and to rule for his honor, and in
subordination to him as King and Mediator he will make the Princes of the world
know that he rules in the midst of them, and is above them all.

Lastly, This may be for our in our agement; though at present as to outward
appearance there is but little probability that the rich and Noble ones of the
Nations shall entreat the Churches favor: considering how many vast countries
and deminions in the world, as America, China, Tartaria, with their Kings and
Nobles, lie in gross ignorance and darkness, we are ready to say, how is it
possible that these things should come to pass? can the Lord bring water out of
the Rock? can he prepare a Table in the Wilderness? will he send his Gospel into
all these Nations to subdue them? Beloved, let us not prescribe God a way to
bring his Word to pass, let us not limit the holy one of Israel; he can in a
moment destroy in this mountain the face of the Covering cast over all pe^^k,
and the vail that is spread over all Nations, Isaiah (...), 7.

And so much for the 12 Verse.

VERSE. 13. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of
wrought Gold.
THe Church is here again called the Kings Daughter, as she is elsewhere
called his Spouse, and his ^ister, Cant. 5.1. he being related to her all
manner of ways, as her Father, elder Brother, Husband; and performing really
and faithfully the duties of all Relitions, which no mere man does, nor can do.

God seems to obviate and prevent an Objection which might occur: having
Prophesied verse. 12. that the daughter of Tire, and the ^ich among the people
shall entreat the Churches savor, it might be objected, that we see no such
outward glory accruing to the Church; but rather she is ^ossed with the
tempests of affliction, Isai. 54.11. no body regards her; the Daughter of Tire,
and the Kings of the earth generally are so far from honoring her, that they
think her not worthy to have the least ^ooting in their Dominions.

answer in the Text thus, that although the outward deliverance prosperity and
glory of the Church be in a great measure yet to come, and she for the most
part afflicted and persecuted, yet notwithstanding she is at present glorious,
yea she is all glorious within, and ado^^ed with the finest gold. Glorious
things are spoken of thee thou City of God, Psalm 87.3 and upon all his glory
(that is his Church) shall be a defense, Isai. 4.5. he will make the place of his
feet glorious; Isai. 60:13: she is a glorious bride, she is spiritually
glorious.

I will branch this into two particulars, and accordingly raise Observations
from it.

First, the Churches glory is internal [within] a^ being opposite to that which
is merely external and without, as the pomp and glory of the world is;
otherwise the Church (as has been demonstrated from many plain scriptures)
shall also have an external beauty and apparent excellency, even in this life^
and if we take Glory in general, it is nothing else bu^ an apparent excellency:
now the Church has a divine excellency, and this her excellency shall be made
apparent.

Secondly, the glory of the Church in this Text may be comsidered as a real
substantial permanent glor^ opposite to that vain glory which is but shaddowis^
flitting, and transitory.

Whereas the Churches glory is internal in the Inner man [she is all glorious
within.] Hence Note: The spiritual excellency of the Church is not discerned by
the natural man.


That the true spiritual excellency of the Saints is (...) discerned by the
natural man: It Is a glory within, an^ not obvious to the outward senses The
world kno^ not how to judge of the true glory of the Church (...) Christ.

first Reason is taken from the nature, soperation comforts, privileges,
obedience, services, and victories (...) the true members of the Church, which
are most (...) inward and spiritual; the kingdom of God is within (...), Luke
17.21. They are strengthened with might (...) the spirit in the inner man, Ephesians.
3.16. and are re^^^wed in the spirit of their minds, Ephesians: 4.23. He is a ^^^e
christian which is one inwardly, whose heart and ^^^it is circumcised, Rom:
2.29. herein the spiritual (...) excels the formalist; he is glorious within;
but (...) formalist makes only a glorious show without. (...) was for the
natural man he looks only at the sur^^^e and outside of things, and does not
penetrate ^^^o spiritual inward privileges: he looks not into (...) which is
within the vail, Heb. 6 19. neither does (...) discern the things of the Spirit
of God, nor can he, (...) they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. his
(...) is dazzled with outward pomp and glory, he stum^^^ at the Cross of
Christ, and is offended with the ^^^plicity of his Gospel Worship and people, 1
Cor. (...) 19, 20, 21, 23, 26, 27, 28. This is the bitter fruit of (...)
natural pravity and corruption.

Secondly, because the Church of Christ is a mystery (...) mysteries must be
known by Revelation. Babylon (...) false Church is a mystery in respect of her
spiri^^^l delusions, Rev: 17.5. and Jerusalem the true ^^^rch which is from
above, Gal. 4.26, is also a myste^^^ respect of her spiritual enjoyments; this
is a (...) mystery; I speak concerning Christ and the Church, (...) 25.32.
Christ personal is a mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16, and (...) Christ in his members;
therefore the Church is ^^^ed his mystical body; as we cannot rightly judge of
(...) one, so neither of the other, without a spiritual (...) Christ in the
Saints the hope of glory is a glorious ^^^ery Co. 1.26, 27. I am crucified with
Christ (says (...) Apostle) I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, (...)
2.20. The outward covering of the Tabernacle was (...) of Badgers skins, a mean
outside, but within it (...) glorious, having in it the ark of the Testimony,
^^^ty seat, etc. Exodus 26.14. Thus it is with belee^^^ that beanty and glory
which was in the Tabernacle, and Temple did but shadow forth, the spirit (...)
mystical Glory which is in Christ, and the Saints, w^^^ are Gods Tabernacle,
Rev: 21.3. his Temple, 1 Cor: (...) 17, 19. the habitation of God through the
spirit, E^^^. 2.19, 20, 21, 22.

Ainsworth notes that some of the Jewish Writ^^ compare the heart or inward man
of the Saints ^^^ing renewed by the Holy Ghost to the most ho^^^ place wherein
was the Ark of the Covenant, Mer^^ seat, and Cherubims; so that not only
propitiation a^^ pardon of sin by the blood of Christ, but also our u^^ on
with, and spiritual indwelling in God, 1 John 4. (...) was thereby prefigured.

Wonder not therefore to see men who are ignora^^^ of spiritual mysteryes,
(though having a form of go^^ness, and a fair outside of religion) door on
car^^^ worldly excellencies and glories, and set light by (...) inward
spiritual privileges of the Saints; Alas, Chr^^^ and his gospel, and his
members, are all a mystery a^^^ riddle to them. We speak the wisdom of God i^^^
mystery, even the hidden wisdom of God; which if (...) Princes of the world had
known, they would not have c^^cified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor: 2.6, 7. The rich
Cabi^^^ must first be opened and lookd into before we (...) know what Treasure
is in it; now the Spirit alone w^^^^ searches the deep things of God is that
Key whi^^ unlocks the rich Cabinet of gospel mysteryes, whe^^ by we look and
(as it were) peep into them, 1 Pet. (...) 12. Though the sun shine brightly,
yet the blindem^^ cannot discern it. So neither can we spiritually d^^cern the
mysteryes of Christ, and his Church, unle^^^ we be anointed with the eye salve
of the Spirit, R^^^ 3:18.

Secondly, Hence we may be informed why it is th^^^ Saints themselves are no
more sensible of their o^^^ spiritual privileges; though God has derived mu^^
spiritual glory upon them, yet alas they are still i^^^ great measure under the
vail, there is a world of ignorance and darkness in them: we have a spiritual
glorious life, but this life is hid with Christ; when he appears it shall
appear, Col: 3, 4. It Is altogether hid from the world, and in a great measure
from the Saints themselves, and it is hid with Christ in God; safe enough,
though sometimes it do not appear; As the life of the Plant in winter is hid in
the root, so it is with Christians who have their winter as well as summer
seasons: The Bird does not always sing in the bosom: sometimes we are in
darkness and see no light, Isai. 50.10, but our God makes darkness his secret
pavilion, Psalm 18.11. light and darkness are both alike to him, Psalm 139.11,
with whom there is no change, Mal. 3.6. A man that is in a swooning fit has a
principle of life in him, though the outward actions and motions thereof be at
present suspended; so it is here, I sleep (says the Spouse) but my heart
waketh, Cant. 5.2.

Again, whereas the Church is here described to be all glorious within, if we
consider this Glory as indeed it is, a real substantial permanent glory
opposite to that which is vanishing and transitory,

We may then Observe,

That all the glistering pomp and glory of this world is but a mere shadow, The
glory of this world is but a mere shadow.
a vapor in which there is no substance or reality.

All the glory of this world, if it be compared with that of the Saints who are
really glorious is but a fancy, a dream; All that glistering pomp that attended
Agrippa and Bernice was no better then a fancy or shadow, Acts 21.23.
Demonstrated in three considerations.


This Doctrine may be further enlarged and proved by these three following
Considerations.

First, That the pomp and glory of this world is but for a little while; the
time is but short, very short, 1 Cor. 7.29. It is folding up apace as a sail or
curtain into a very narrow room: God is winding up, and putting a period to the
glories of the Kingdoms of this world (as they are now constituted:) the
fashion of these things will shortly pass away.

A Pageant makes a fair show for a while, but it presently vanishes: The
wicked flourish like a green Bay Tree, but are presently cut down, Psalm 37.35.
In great pomp and bravery they act their parts upon the stage of this world,
but within a little while they are turned off. What is become of many great
Galants who within these few months ruffled it in their silks and sattins,
gold and silver? are they not gone to their place, and do not their Carcasses
lie stinking in the grave? What is become of the splendour and glory of the most
amous Cities, Babylon, Nineveh, Tire, Carthage, old Rome, yea Jerusalem it self
the City of God? are they not as if they had never been? Are not the Four great
Monarchies of the world in a manner moldered to dust, with their four great
Princes, Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Alexander, Caesar. Thus one Generation passes,
and another comes, Eccles: 1.4. and he that was yesterday is not to day. I
have seen an end of all perfection (says the Psalmist) but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad, Psalm 119.96.

Secondly, The riches and Glory of this world are the portion of the vilest
men, Dan: 11.21. a poor pittance the Lord knows^ let not my soul be numbered
among such as have their portion in this life, Psalm 17.14. Remember (says
Abraham to Dives) that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and
Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted and thou art tormented Luke 16.25.
The Soul was created by God and redeemed by Christ, that it might enjoy higher
things then these. Luther used to say that the glory and riches of the vast
Empire of the Turks was but a poor Crust which the great Lord and Master of the
Family cast to his dogs; and for his own part he would not be put off with
such poor and low things as these.

Thirdly, All outward things will not give a man true content: the eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing; the soul of man is more worthy
then all outward things, and desires that infinite good in which is all good,
whereas creatures are but finite: come to a man afflicted in conscience, though
he have the honors of the world, suitable relations, and prosperity in his
outward estate, yet all these enjoyments are so far from comforting him that
they add to his sorrow: The creature of it self can neither make us happy nor
miserable: Outward prosperity cannot truly comfort, nor adversity deject the
heart of man uness the favor or anger of God be minged therewith: A poor man
(if contented) with roots and cold water is more happy even in this world then
the greatest Prince (if discontented:) nor does contentment lie in abundance.
Outward things reach not the soul; they are without us, and cannot make a man
truly happy What a man is indeed, he is within, he is between God and his own
soul; the Church is all glorious within. Solon
A Heathen advised that we should call no man happy (though great and rich in
the world) before death; that does truly enrich a man which remains with him
after death: all worldly things will shortly leave us, and what shall we cleave
unto them? let not him therefore boast that puts on his armor as he that puts
it off, 1 Kings 20.11. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong
man in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches; but he that glories let
him glory in the Lord, Jer. 9.23, ^4.

Gallants of our times who greedily gape after the glory and honors of this
world do but feed on wind and chafe, which though it may go down (the Devil
sugering the pil, and putting a fair gloss upon it) as a sweet and pleasant
morsel, yet it will prove bitterness in the end. Ephraim feeds on wind, and
daily increases lies, Hos: 12.1.

looks on them, and represents them in his word, yea and in his works too,
specially of late, God having broken down that which was built, and plucked up
that which was planted. Is it now a time for men, for good men to seek great
things for themselves? Jer. 45.4, 5. O that we would learn at length to look on
things with a right eye as God looks upon them, on spiritual things as real and
substantial, Faith being the evidence of things not seen, and the substance of
things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. and on earthly things as shadowish and Temporal:
we look not at the things which are seen (says the Apostle) but at the things
which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 41.8. O that the Lord would realize the
glory of Heaven to us; This is our great error; We look on things present as
certain, and at that which is to come as uncertain. It Is hard to live on God in
a naked promise: we are apt to conclude (according to the Proverb) that a Bird
in the hand is better then two in the bush; hence it is (even from this bitter
root of unbelief) that we depart from God, and adhere to the Creature, Heb:
3.12; hence it is that men have such a high esteem of the shadowish honors and
aerie Titles of this world; a sign that they are carnal, and do not rightly
consider the Lords design, who has purposed to stain the pride of all glory,
and to bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth, that his glory may
be exalted, Isai: 2.11. Isai: 23.9.

Let us now proceed to the latter part of the Verse, where the beauty of the
Kings Daughter is further illustrated and described.

[Her clothing is of wrought Gold.]

Some read it, purled works, or closures of Gold, enameld gold, such as
precious stones were set in, which were exceeding splendid and glorious; such
were the clothes of service in the Tabernacle, and the garments and robes of
the High Priest which shaddowed forth Christ's Righteousness, Exodus: 28.11, 14.
Exodus: 39.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.

This clothing of wrought gold mentioned in the Text is no other but the
glorious Robes of Christ's righteousness, and the garments of salvation, Rev.
6.11. Isai. 61.10. In this excellent clothing we are presented to God without
spot and blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. Col 1.22. altogether fair, Cant. 4.7. By reason of
this clothing of wrought gold, the Lord will see no iniquity in Jacob, nor
perverseness in Israel, Numb. 23.21. It Is true, the Church is glorious within,
she has a glory in respect of the indwelling of the Holy Ghost, who himself as
well as his gifts dwell in her as in a spiritual Temple, Ephesians. 2, 21. Romans 8.9,
11. But she is much more glorious and perfect in respect of her justification
by the glorious righteousness of Christ represented by this clothing of wrought
Gold.

Observe therefore,

That although the Saints have in them gracious and spiritual dispositions and
qualifications, The Saints need the righteousness of Christ notwithstanding
their gracious dipositions. Reasons hereof.
yet they need the glorious garment of Christ's righteousness, (this garment of
wrought gold) to cover all their imperfections, and to render them perfectly
beautiful and glorious in the sight of God.

The Reasons hereof are two.

First, Because the great Jehovah is of purer eyes then to look on iniquity
with approbation, Hab. 1.13. the righteous God will not delight in that person
who is not perjectly righteous. The sinner cannot dwell with that God who is
purity and holiness it self; nor can we plead with him, nor stand before his
righteous Tribunal in our inherent graces, or spiritual actings which are but
imperfect.

Reason is taken from the Holy Ghost, being a free arbitrary agent: though he
dwell in the Saints, yet he is pleased to work in them gradually; to breathe and
blow upon them, and to perfect sanctification in them by degrees, as the light
shines forth more and more to the perfect day, see Jo: 3.8. 2 Cor. 7.1. Cant.
4.16. 1 These. 3.10. and therefore we still stand in need of this clothing of
wrought gold, which though it be bought without money, and without price, and
cost us nothing, Isa: 55.1. Rev: The excellency of this clothing, 1 It Is of Gods
contriving.
22.17. yet it is exceeding rich and glorious, Rev, 3.18. For

First, It is a garment and clothing of Gods own make and contrivance; he found
it out and wrought it himself without the help of men or Angels. Isai. 63.5.
Heb: 1.3. Righteousness looked down from Heaven, Psalm 85.11. he brought in
everlasting righteousness, Dan: 9.24, he is called the Lord our righteousness,
Jer. 23.6. and this righteousness the righteousness of God. Rom: 3.21, 22; and
we are made the righteousness of God through Christ, 2 Cor: 5. last verse.

Secondly, It is of such a high and excellent nature that the faith, love, 2
Our faith, love, etc. is no part of it.
joy of the Saints in their most spiritual refined acts are not any part or
piece of this garment of wrought gold, not so much as a stitch or thread in it;
all and every part thereof is only of God in Christ, 2 Cor: 5.18, 19. no part
of it in us; In deed faith is said to be imputed for righteousness, Rom: 4 5,
9. But then it is to be objectively and relatively considered as relating to
him that justifies the ungodly, whom faith does apprehend: It is not properly
the palsy hand that enricheth a man, but the gold which the hand receives. 3
The Lord himself clothes us with this garment.


Thirdly, the Lord himself clothes us, and puts this garment upon us; he
commands that our silthy Garments should be taken off, and that we should be
clothed with this, Zach: 3.4. Isai 61.12. Ezekiel. 16.8. It is the Lord that
justifies the sinner, and imputes his righteousness to him; the sinner does
not justify himself: We read that as many as are Baptized into Christ have put
on Christ, Gal. 3.27. But if the Lord himself did not put this garment upon us,
and clothe us with it, we should never have benefit by it.

Fourthly, 4 God himself cannot find the least fault with it.
It is such a beautiful rich garment that God himself cannot find the least
sault with it though he look upon it with the eye of strict Justice; but does
fully accept thereof in behalf of the greatest sinners, for whom the same is
provided: God accepts it for them, and they are accepted for it, Mat. 3.17.
Ephesians. 1.6.

Fifthly, In the assurance of our interest in this clothing of wrought gold
(the Lord by his Spirit revealing, applying, and sealing the same to our hearts
and consciences in the promise of grace Rom: 1.17. Ephesians. 1.13. Ephesians. 4.30.) we
have peace that passes understanding, and joy unspeakable and full of glory,
Romans 14.17: Romans 15; 13. 1 Pet: 1.18. Heb. 7.2. Psalm 85.10. And therefore it
is an excellent rich clothing. 5 In the assurance hereof we have true peace and
joy.


Do the Saints need this clothing of wrought gold notwithstanding their
inherent graces and holiness; Then let them highly prize this clothing: how
many in our days are affected with rich attire for the body? they cannot have
their garments fine, and fashionable enough; O what vanity is therein apparel,
what conformity to vain fashions. even in the most eminent professors! But
(beloved) here is a garment of a higher nature, a Garment that will never vvear
out, nor wax old; a garment for every day, for every place and condition; a
garment for every Sex and age, a garment for the poor as well as the rich; a
garment that will clothe, and beautify, and keep thee warm from top to toe,
Rev. 6.11. Rev 7.9, 14. Surely they that mind other garments much ^o mind
this but a little O be thou crucified to thy silken garments, thy gold and
silver lace, thy vain fashions: Take no thought for raiment: let not thy heart
run our after apparel for the body, Mat. 6.28, 29, 30. Considering what a rich
clothing of wrought gold the Lord has prepared for thy soul; here is a
complete garment that needs no mending, piecing, patching, whereas it may be
said of our best righteousness that the bed is shorter then that a man can
stretch himself on it, and the covering narrower then that he can weap himself
in it, Isai. 28.20.

Secondly, Let the hearts of the poor afflicted Saints rejoice and be comforted
in the thoughts of this Rich clothing. What though you be poor in this world,
and your outward raiment vile and ragged, (whereas the wicked have their gold
rings, and goodly apparel,) yet remember that you have a more excellent
Garment, a clothing of wrought gold. God has chosen the poor of this world
rich in Faith, and Heirs of his Kingdom, James 2.2, 5. Christ made himself poor
to make you rich, 2 Cor. 8.9, he is the richest man that makes most use of this
spiritual clothing: ye may well say with Mephibosheth, let the wicked take all
the world, I have enough seeing Christ is mine; The King has set his love on
me, and clothed me with the garments of salvation, Isai. 61.10. Did but
Christians more improve this clothing, they would not be so much upon the
fashions, complements, pomp and glory of this world. Take a poor Saint in his
lowest estate, and he would not change his condition with a wicked man in
his greatest prosperity: perhaps the guest at the Feast had finer clothes, more
money in his purse, and greater parts then many of the other guests; Oh but he
wanted the wedding Garment of Christ's righteousness, and therefore was but a
poor miserable man, Mat. 22.11, 12. and so the Merchant (notwithstanding all
his rich commodities) was but a poor man til he had found the pearl of great
price, in the possession whereof he was truly rich (though he parted with all
his other commodities) because he was so esteemed by God, who judges
righteously, Mat: 13.45, 46.

Thirdly, Do the Saints themselves notwithstanding their gracious dispositions
(flowing from the indwelling of the Holy Ghost) stand in need of this clothing
of wrought gold, without which they cannot stand before God; Paul himself
desires to be found in Christ, and not in his own righteousness, Phil. 3.8.
how then should this make sinners look about them, who have no gracious
dispositions or qualifications at all; not a dram of true holiness; The Lord
convince thee that there is an absolute necessity of putting on this garment of
wrought gold: It is the Office of the Spirit of God to convince of sin and
righteousness, John 16.8. how do thou think (poor sinful soul) to appear
before the just and holy God! The Lord is King of peace to none but those to
whom he is first King of Righteousness: Art thou poor, blind, miserable, and
naked? the Lord (...) make thee truly sensible thereof: have thou no
righteousness of thine own, nothing to cover thy nakedness? I offer thee here
freely a Garment of wrought Gold, not surreptitiously taken as Achan took away
the goodly Babylonish garment, Joshua 7 21. But procured for sinners upon very
honorable terms by Christ our surety who performed as much as the Law
required. Accept therefore of this Garment which will cover the shame of thy
nakedness, Rev: 3.18. and will defend thee against all storm and tempests which
may arise from the Law of God, from Satan, the world, or thine own heart. This
garment will be a shadow from the heat, a place of Refuge, and a covert from
storm and rain, Isa: 4.6.

If the Malefactor who is condemned to dye could but produce a pardon, it would
be matter of exceeding joy to him; but to the true christian a pardon is not
only granted, and the attainder of high Treason taken off, but the perfect
righteousness of Christ is also communicated to him, and he raised to greater
honors and dignities then he should have had if Adam had stood.

sufficient that Christ has satisfied for us by his death, and that our sins
are not imputed Psalm 32.1, 2. unless the active Justice of Christ be also
imputed to us?

free us from sin and guilt, but also clothe us with the Robes of his
righteousness, that therein we may appear before him (as Jacob in the garments
of his Elder Brother Esau) and so obtain the blessing, let us rather thankfully
acknowledge and improve this great favor, then subtly dispute our selves and
others out of it: Now this ( I conceive) is plainly held forth in the words of
the Text, That we are justiified by Christ's active righteousness, proved by
five Conclusion,
her clothing is of wrought gold. This truth will further appear in these
following Conclusions.

God without a perfect Righteousness, every way commensurable to Gods holy Law
which is the Rule of righteousness; do this and thou shall live: nor can we
have communion with the righteous God who loves Righteousness, psalm 11.7. til
we be thus perfectly righteous; and to speak properly, true Justice consists in
actual iobedience, Deuteronomy. 6.25.

Secondly, In Justification there is not only an amotion of evil, but a
collation of good upon the person justified. It is one thing to describe
eternal life privatively, and another thing to describe it positively. God
having delivered us from sin and guilt might have chose whether he would have
invested us with a Right to eternal life: he might have pardoned our sins, and
yet not have given us Righteousness: though remission of sins and imputation of
Righteousness be inseparable in respect of the subject, or person justified,
yet they are two distinct benefits, and so to be considered.

moral Law is not abrogated, no nor dispensed with as to obedience, Rom, 10.3.
Gal. 3.10. for though the works of the Law as performed by us be excluded from
Justification, yet not as performed by Christ for us: either Christ performed
actual obedience for himself, or in our stead and behalf; but it was not for
himself but for us that he suffered and obeyed: whatsoever he did in the whole
course of his Obedience, he did it as our surety, and in our stead. As we
maintain against the Socinians, that the God of Justice would not dispense with
the penalty of the Law without full satisfaction; so it is as true that he would
not dispense with the command of the Law without perfect obedience.

actions and sufferings of Christ make but up one entire and perfect obedience
to the whole Law; nor had he been a complete and perfect Savior if he had not
performed what the precept required, as well as suffered the penalty which the
Law inflicted: nay the sufferings of Christ had not been properly obedience, if
they had not been in some sort active; for in suffering Christ obeyed, and in
obeying he suffered: and these two benefits answer to our twofold misery,
namely, the guilt of sin and damnation, and the deject of Justice.

confirm this truth that we are justified by the active righteousness of Christ
as well as his sufferings, else how can these Texts be answered; he is the Lord
our righteousness. As by the disobedience of one many were made sinners, so by
the obedience of one many shall be made righteous: We are complete in Christ.
He was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
He has spread his skirt over us, and clothed us with the garments of
salvation, Jer: 23.6. Rom: 5.19. Col: 2.10. 2 Cor: 5.21. Ezekiel: 16.8, 10. Isai.
61.10. He has not only privatively made an end of sin, but positively he has
brought in an everlasting Righteousness, and clothed us therewith, Dan: 9.24.
having ab^ishe^ death, and brought life and immortality unto us 2 Timothy: 1.10.

This active Justice of Christ was shadowed out by the glorious Robes and
apparel of the High Priest, Exodus: 39. That attire in which the High Priest
appeared before God, what was was it else but a ^^pe (...) this clothing of
wrought Gold? The filthy Garments of J^shua, (wh^^ represented the Church) were
not only taken off from him, thereby signifying the removal of our sins, but
also a new fair ^arment wa^ put upon him to signify our being clothed with the
Wedding Garment of Christ's righteousness, Zach: 3.4, 5.

Objection.

wrought gold, then his sufferings were in vain?

Answer.

Not so, for though our salvation was the common end both of his active
obedience and sufferings, yet there was something proper to each: the peculiar
end of his sufferings was our freedom from e^il; but the peculiar end of his
active Justice was the ^^vesting us with a right to, and giving us possession
of Heaven.

Objection.

Christ did perfectly obey and fulfill the Law for us, and in our stead, then we
our selves need not yield obedience to it.

Answer.

Objection is made by the Socinians against Christ's passive obedience. If (say
they) Christ suffered and dyed for us, and in our stead as our surety, ^hen it
will follow that we should not suffer at all.

But Secondy, there is one end of Christ's obedience, and another of ours: the
end of his was to merit and impetrate life and salvation for us; but the end of
ours is to manifest our gratitude for our deliverance and redemption already
wrought: Christ obeyed and fulfilled the Law for us as a Covenant of works; but
we are dead to the Law as a Covenant, Gal: 2.19. and made conformable to the
matter of the Law by the Spirit of Grace writing the Law in our inward parts,
and constraining us to obedience by the sense of the love of Christ, 2 Cor.
5.14.

To conclude, if we grant not that the Saints are clothed with Christ's active
righteousness (since they must have a positive righteousness for their
Justification before God) we shall unavoidably fall upon the act of believing,
or some other work of the creature, and ascribe thereunto that honor which
only belongs to this clothing of wrought gold; and upon this rock many split
themselves, affecting a singular way of their own in the handling of this great
Doctrine of Justification; surely it must needs be the safest way to take in
the whole obedience of Christ from first to last.

VERSE. 14. She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle work: The
Virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee.
VERSE. 15. With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter
into the Kings Palace.
IN the foregoing Verse the state of the Church in this life was represented
both as to Justification and Sanctification: Christ comes both by water and by
blood. 1 John 5.6. And now in these Verse we have a description of the state of
the Church triumphant in glory.

She shall be brought to the King in raiment of needle^^^k,] or in
embroyderies, namely, with embroydered or ^^^dle-wrought garments; such
garments being usual^^ worn in those Eastern Countries by Princes and ^^^ble
persons, Ezekiel. 26.16.24. Some understand ^^^^eby the embroydery of the Spirit
of God, and the ^^^^ty of his gifts, according to Ezekiel. 16.10. 1 Cor: (...).4.
But the indwelling and work of Gods Spirit ^^^^g aimed at in the former part of
Verse 13. I hum^^^ conceive that this with the following Verse ^^^ld be
interpreted of the state of glory, and that ^^^ment of perfect bliss and
happiness which Christ (...) glorious Bridegroom will put upon his Bride who
(...) be glorified with him, Col. 3.4. Rom 8.17, 18. ^^^n 3.2.

The Lord has put a great excellency upon Man, ^^so that we may well say with
the Psa mist, Lord (...) what is man that thou art mindful of him, Psalm
(...).4.

Man by the wise contrivance of God is a little world, Man is like a curious
piece of embroydery. 1 In respect of his body,
^^^rious piece of embroydery, an excellent piece of workmanship. and that in
several respects.

First, in respect of the frame and constitution of his (...), and the parts
and members thereof, which are ^^^sly wrought and put together by God; the
form^^ and composing the body of man of so many ^^^es, veins, arteries, sinews,
is a curious piece of ^^^kmanship. We might the Psalmist admire, and (...) out,
I am fearfully and wonderfully made; my sub^^^ce was not hid from thee (O Lord)
when I was made in ^^^et, and curiously wrought (i. e. like a piece of
embroydery) in the lowest parts of the earth, Psalm 139.13, (...) 15 16.

Secondly, In regard of his rational immortal soul, 2 His rational soul.
^^^^hose two noble faculties, the Understanding, and (...) Will, wherein man
far excels all the sensitive crea^^^^s. The soul is the better part of man,
more worth (...) all the world besides, Mark 8.36, 37. The body ^^^hout the
soul is but a dead Trunk, an empty case; (...) soul is the Jewel; the Creation,
Infusion, and opera^^^ whereof are like a curious piece of embroydery, (...)
excellent wrought garment wel-becoming the author and creator thereof, who is a
simple, immaterial, Immortal Spirit, and the God and Father of Spirits, Numb.
16.22. the Lord breathed into man the breath of life, and man became a living
soul, Genes^^ 2.7.

Thirdly, 3 In respect of his justification.
In respect of his free Justification by Christ and those glorious Robes of
Righteousness wherewith the justified person is invested, being clothed with
the Sun, and having the Moon under his feet, Rev. 12, (...) This was largely
spoken of from Verse. 13. As there (...) much variety in a garment of
needle work, so in the great work of man's Redemption and Justification b^
Christ there is much excellent spiritual variety, multifarious wisdom, Ephesians:
3.10 herein the Lord abounde^ both in mercy, and Justice, and prudence, Psalm 8
(...) 10. Ephesians: 1.8.

Fourthly, 4 In respect of his spiritual union with Christ.
By reason of his union with God through Christ, and the new or spiritual
Creation, or Divi^^ nature, 2 Pet: 1.4. which a godly man partakes o^ Christ
being in him the hope of Glory, Col: 1.27. M^^ by the fall is become brutish,
Psalm 92.6. having lo^^ the Image of God through his own default; but being
born again of the Spirit, John 1.13. John 3.5, (...) Christ being formed in
him, Ga. 4.19. and he transformed into the Image of Christ from glory to glor^^
2 Cor. 3 18. Rom: 12.2. Hence it comes to pass, th^^ he is like a piece of
embroydery, or curiously wrought garment; Ezekiel. 16.13. bearing the Portraiture,
Imag^^ and superscription of the Lord from Heaven, 1 C^^^ 15.47, 48.

Fifthly, 5 His glorification.
Man will be a curious excellent piece (...) deed when he is perfectly
glorified. The Body of ma^^ the rational soul, the renewed sanctified soul
beari^^ the Image of Christ, our free Justification by the righteousness of
Christ; all and every one of these are li^^ a piece of curious embroydery. And
if so how then w^^ it be with thee (O my soul) when thou art perfect clothed
upon with garments of glory, 2 Cor. 5 2, (...) Then shall the Spouse be brought
into the Kings presence in raiment of needle work; then shall the glorio^^
beauty of the Spouse which now lies hid fully (...) (...), Col. 3.3. 1 John
3.2. Princes used to be clothed with long white garments at their Festivals and
Triumphs; The Saints shall have a festival day, a day of Triumph, in the view of
Men and Angels, on which ^hey shall be clothed with long white Robes, and have
^alms in their hands, Rev. 7.9. Though there be ^uch Beauty and excellency upon
her in regard of ^^er Justification, and spiritual renovation, yet this
excellency of hers is as yet veiled; she seems black though she be comely; but
her comeliness and glory ^^al be made manifest. This is that which is promised
(...) the Text. Then shall she be brought to the King in rai^ent of needle work.

Hence Observe,

That though there be a Marriage-Relation and mu^^^l embraces between Christ
and his Spouse, and the ^^ouse now and then admitted unto intimate converse and
^^miliarity with him. The marriage between Christ and his Spouse is not so
fully and gloriously solemnized as it shall be.
John 14, 21. Re^ 3.20 yet the Marriage is not so completely and gloriously
solemnized as (...) shall be.

Believers now are perfectly glorious in the person (...) Christ their Head,
being risen and ascended in him ^^ed sitting together with him in heavenly
places, Ephesians. (...) 6. But they have not as yet a constant un-interrupted
communion with him, they are not yet so glorious in their own persons at they
shall be; for they must ^^rst be unclothed that they may be clothed upon, 2 ^or:
5.2. This fullness of glory as it relates to the person of a Believer is
reserved for the general day of Resurrection, and reunion of soul and body.

The Soul indeed when separated from the body (...) brought into the glorious
presence of the King, and ^^oth behold his face; yea the Lambs followers in
^his life (when the remainder of the Vials shall (...) poured out, the Jews
converted, Antichrist ^estroyed, the Spirit of God more abundantly
^ommunicated, and Christ shall take possession (...) the Kingdoms of this
world;) shall be ^^ked with far more spiritual glory then at present they have
attained, as appears from Rev^ 17.7, 8, 9. Rev: 21.22. yet the full and
perfect manifestation of the Sons of God shall not be til the so^^ and body be
reunited in glory, then shall she be brought to the King in raiment of
Needle Work.

Our present knowledge and enjoyments of God are nothing to what they shall be.
The imperfection of our present knowledge, 1 We see but darkly in a glass.


And first touching our knowledge of God, it is exceeding dark, low, and
imperfect. We see him bu^ darkly as in a glass, riddle, or allegory, 1 Cor.
13.12. an^ there is a vast difference between seeing an object directly
immediately, and in its proper colors, and b^^ holding it through a mirror or
glass: For 1 The sight of an object through a glass is but wea^^ rather the
shape and resemblance of the thing (...) seen by us then the thing it self. 2
As it is weak and imperfect, so it is vanishing an^ transient, it soon passes
away, and is not durab^^ and permanent. 3 Its a remote and far-fetched way of
knowledge, (...) light springing into the understanding but through^ the window
of the senses, which first take in the species; one direct view of the Lord of
glory will i^ finitely transcend this low way of Knowledge.


Secondly, 2 Our knowledge of God now is rather negative then positive.
Our knowledge of God now is rather Negative then positive; we know not so well
what Go^ is, as what he is not, by removing imperfection from him; thus we say,
God is not a man, that he should li^^ with him is no shadow of change; he is
without beginning and end of days, etc. This is negative, a^^ it is observed
Ex puris negativis nihil concluditur.
that from pure negatives there (...) be no certain conclusion made.

Thirdly, We know God here but by way of eminency; as namely, 3 By way of
eminency.
those perfections which are scatter^^ among the creatures do eminently and
transcenden^^ center and meet in God.

Fourthly, 4 By way of Causality.
By way of causality, as God is the founta^^ and supreme cause of all beings
with their motion and operations; In him we live, move, and have our ^^ing. (1)
By the motions of the Creatures we gath^^ that there must be a primum mobile or
first mov^^ (2.) From the degrees of entity, truth, goodness, love, justice,
which are in the Creatures, we infer that there must be one chief being, Truth,
good, etc. Thus reasoning from the lesser to the greater, if there be so much
sweetness and comfort in the streams that flow from God, and in his
communications to us in his Creatures and Ordinances, there is much more in the
perfect enjoyment of God himself.

Now this way of knowledge (though we are to bless God for it, yet it) is but
low and imperfect if it be compared with that which is to come.

Again Secondly, as our knowledge of God, Our enjoyment of God imperfect.
so our love to God, delight in him, communion with and enjoyment of him, are
weak and imperfect: for how should we perfectly love and delight in that object
which we do but imperfectly know according to the measure of our knowledge if it
be experimental) so is the measure of our love: still there remains much
darkness in our minds, enmity in our wills, carnality in our affections to be
purged out: having such precious promises, and hopes of glory and immortality,
we should cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 1 Cor. 7.1. 1 John 3.3.

secretly or openly boast of our spiritual gifts, knowledge, seize, and
enjoyments If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet
as he ought to know, 1 Cor: 8.2. and again, if a man think himself to be
something when he is nothing, he deceives himself, Gal: 6.3. alas, the most
spiritual quick-sighted Christians that live on the face of the earth know and
enjoy but little or nothing to what they shall know and enjoy in Heaven, nay,
to what they may know and enjoy here; which when it comes they will be ashamed
of the imperfections of their present knowledge and enjoyments; We are but yet
in the withdrawing-room; the time is coming that we shall be brought into the
Presence Chamber of the King of glory.

Again, the Glory of the Spouse in the Beatifical Vision and fruition of God is
here illustrated by a similitude taken from an artificial excellent wrought
garment, wherein there is also an allusion to the Queens being brought into the
Kings presence in her most glistering and glorious attire upon the day of
Nuptials, having a Canopie of state carried over her head, as the Jewish
custom was.

Observe, That the Saints who groan under a body of sin, The Saints who groan
under a body of sin shall be perfectly clothed upon with glory.
Rom: 7.24. shall be perfectly clothed upon with the Garments of Glory prepared
wrought and contrived for them by God himself. We cannot fully describe what
the Saints shall see and enjoy; and to speak of the state of Glory so fully as
the same may be represented out of the Scriptures would require a long dise
course.

I shall briefly hint 4 or 5 particulars in reference thereunto,

First, 1 The Saints shall perfectly see God,
The Saints shall perfectly and intuitively see God himself as the chiefest and
highest Truth, the sountain of all Truth, the Cause of Causes: They shall see
him as he is; they shall see him as they are seen, and know as they are known
of him, 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2. Rev. 22.4. and what that knowledge or sight is
truly I know not; but this I know, that the Understanding of a man will not
fully acquiesce til it perfectly know and see him who is the highest and
chiefest Truth. This Vision of God shall be clear and perfect, so far as a
creature or fin ite being is capable, Visio clara^non comprehensiva.
though it shall not be fully comprehensive; for that which is finite cannot
fully comprehend that which is infinite; but we shall see him as he is; we shall
see him so as to be made like him, so as to be satisfied and blessed in him and
with him for evermore.

2 The Saints shall have a perfect transforming sight of the glorious person of
Christ, 2 They shall see the person of Christ.
and the mystery of the personal union, Rev. 22.4. John 17.24. It is defirable
to see Christ in the flesh: So Augustine,
Sir, we desire to see Jesus, John 12.21. and again to see him spiritually in
his Ordinances, walking in his Garden, and in the midst of his golden
Candlesticks, Cant. 5.1. Rev. 1.13, 20. is exceeding aimiable. But O what will
it be to see the Lord of glory in the fullness of his glory; to behold the
Father in the Son by the light of the Spirit perfectly immediately and
uninterruptedly to all eternity. In this Beatifica Vision the Saints (who are
illiterate, and weak its their knowledge now) shall perfectly know and see all
mysteries of nature, Grace, and Glory, which are wrapped up in the Scriptures, or
in any humane Creature or Science. Here we see God in the creature, the
fountain in the streams, the Cause in the effects; but then we shall see all
effects, products, streams in the original first cause and fountain of them;
and this shall be immediately upon the souls departure out of the body, Eccles:
12.7. Luke 23.43, 46. Acts 7.59. Phil: 1.23. Rev: 7.14, 15.

3 As there will be a glorious Vision of God as the chiefest Truth, which will
perfect the Understanding, 3 The Will sha enjoy God as the chiefest good.
so likewise there shall be a perfect constant fruition of him as the chiefest
good, which will perfect the Will: and now both the Understanding and the Will
being elevated to the highest and most enlarged capacity (to take in the
glorious Vision and fruition of God) that a created being can be raised up
unto, we shall need no more, we shall crave no more; this will be true happiness
and glory indeed; and til we arrive at this we are not perfectly happy, our
rest is not glorious.

4 We shall have a perfect ravishing knowledge of and communion with the blessed
Angels, 4 We shall have a glorious commun^^on with A^^^ge^s and Saints.
and with all the Saints in the Church Triumphant: whereas now we know but a
little (whatsoever some pretend) of the nature, offices, operations, influences
of those pure Angelical Spirits being far above us, and very mysterious, we
shall then know them perfectly and fully. And for our communion with the Saints
at present, alas, much of it is selfish, dull, low, and carnal; we know them
much after the flesh, and but little after the Spirit; we converse rather with
men's gifts and private opinions, admiring some persons, and contemning others,
then with God and Christ in them; Besides, there are such sad and lamentable
jealousies, divisions, evil surmizings, self-exaltings, strife and contention
among the Saints at this day (arising from the remainders of pride, unbelief,
and corruption) that their communi^n one with another is rendered very
uncomfortable. But all these evils shall be done away and swallowed up in glory,
where the joy and excellency of one Saint shall be the joy and excellency of
another.

5. Then lastly, for the body (which is now subject to many weaknesses, 5 Glory
shall be put upon the body.
pains, and distempers, and so a clogg and hindrance to the spiritual actings
of the soul,) it shall be at the Resurrection impassible, full of strength,
activity, light, and glory; It shall rise a spiritual immortal body, 1 Cor.
15.42, 43. In a word, it shall be like to the Glorious Body of Christ, Phil.
3.21. Heaven will cure us of all our distempers.

Glory. many gape after the dignities of this world, and delight to be brought
into the presence of earthly Princes; but here is a heavenly King ready to
entertain you, and to bestow a heavenly inheritance freely upon you: Remember
what you ioose if you gain not Christ; ye lose a Kingdom, a Crown of glory, the
everlasting Vision of the God of Glory; you lose your own immortal soul, a lose
which no other gain can countervail, Mark 8.36, 37. Come in therefore and
accept of the Grace and pardon of the Prince (as a poor condemned Rebel) and he
will receive thee into his Glorious palace.

Objection.

But I cannot imagine that there should be such (...) Glory prepared for me who
am a vile wretch It Is too good news to be true; and beside we see none return
from the dead to tell us of it.

Ans: It is prepared for Christ's flock, Luke 12.32. for all that shall believe
on him; Believe and it is thine; nay the redeemed ones of the Lord have a right
to it by virtue of his death before they believe, Rom 5.10 2 Cor: 5 19. Gal.
4.6. but they cannot know and rightly improve it til they believe.

receive, (considering thine own demerit) yet they are not too great for the
glorious God to give; as Alexander said to one of his favorites, It becomes me
who am a great King to bestew on thee this rich gift, though thou think thy
self unworthy of it. Great persons delight to communicate great Gifts.

Obj. Again, Whereas ye say that none return from the dead to acquaint you with
this glory, I Answer, An Answer to that Obj. that none return from the dead.
Object: Answ:
I If you will not believe Moses and the Prophet (nay I may add, Christ and his
Apostles) neither would ye be persuaded if one should come from the dead, Luke
16.30, 31.

2 We must in this case live by Faith, and not by sense, 2 Cor: 5 7.

3 Some souls have returned again to their bodies, as Lazarus, John 1 44.
Jairus daughter, Luke 8.55. and those Saints that appeared to many in the holy
City, at Christ's Resurrection, Mat. 27, 52, 53. But as concerning any relation
they made of their enjoyments when their souls were separated from their bodies
the Scripture is silent, that we might not make any curiou Inquiry, (to which
man's nature is prone and inclinable:) secret things belong to God, revealed
things to us, and to our children, Deuteronomy: 29.29.

Christ himself came down from Heaven, Prove. 8.30, 3^. John 1.42. Ephesians. 4.10.
and he rels us something in his Sermons of this glorious Inheritance, and so
does Paul who was wrapped up into the third Heaven; though he tells us not all,
for he saw and heard things that were unutterable, 2 Cor: 12.4.

5 The separated glorified Spirits have other work to do then to come down
again into this prison: they are so happy, so taken up and ravished with the
Vision and fruition of God that they are exalted far above the persons and
things of this lower visible world. That man who is delivered out of prison and
brought into a glorious Palace will not willingly go to that dungeon where he
was formerly in captivity. The Devils and wicked spirits may (by Gods
permission) frequently assume bodies, and walk and converse here below (as
perhaps they do at this day.) But for the blessed departed Spirits they are in
a better and higher capacity, and have other work to do then to come again into
this prison.

This Doctrine may be further applied.

garment prepared by God for us; Then let the people of God be hence exhorted
to a holy Heavenly becoming conversation, seeing we shall be brought before the
King in raiment of Needle work. O what manner of persons ought we to be, 2 Pet:
3.11. how should we endeavor that we may be found meet for the glorious
inheritance of the Saints in light? Co: 1.12. The more holy men are the fitter
they are for Heaven which is a holy habitation, into which no unclean thing
shall enter, Rev. 21 27. Let us therefore shake off all worldliness, drossiness,
bitterness of spirit, and seeking the great things of the world for our selves,
and learn (in good earnest) to be heavenly minded, and to set our affections on
heavenly things, Col. 3.1, 2.

admire the love of God who has provided such a garment of glory, and given
his Son to purchase it for us, John 3.16. Ephesians. 1.13. And in the sense hereof we
should not a little prize the Lord Jesus and his merits, by virtue of which we
are made Heirs of this glory, Romans 8.17. It must needs be a very precious
blood, the shedding whereof produces such a glorious effect. If we do but
consider what a vast disproportion there is between the glory of Heaven and our
imperfect obedience, we shall renounce our own righteousness as a poor Low empty
thing, and never expect this glory as a reward of our works, but accept the
same as the free gift of God, Rom: 6.23. and the reward of Christ's obedience.
When the servant comes home from his labor, the Master says not to him by and
by, come and sit down to meat; much less does he bid him go and possess his
best house, movables, and Jewels as a reward of his dares labor. When we have
done all that we can we are unprofitable servants, and fall short of our duty,
much more of obtaining this glory as a reward of our obedieace, Luke 17.7, 8,
etc. neither our doings nor sufferings are worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in the Saints.

Garment which shall be put upon the Saints should fortify them against the
fear of death; who would not be contented to go through a streit and narrow
gate to the presence chamber to converse with the King and be his favorite? who
would not endure a little struggling with a spoiled enemy, being in the direct
way to enjoy a Crown? Though the Saints may meet with a sharp breakfast, yet
they shall have a joyful dinner; though a sharp storm rise upon them whisest yet
they are at sea, yet they shall shortly be in the harbor of rest out of the
reach of all their enemies. Let us be willing and ready to loose anchor, and to
be dissolved, that we may ever be with Christ, which is best of all, Phil.
1.23. and in the mean time patiently wait for the Lords appearance: It will not
be long before our General come and set us at liberty, and carry us along with
him. There is but a paper-wal between us and the Kings Palace: though it will
be some trouble to the flesh to have this rotten wall knocked down, yet the
very next room that we shall afterward enter into will be the Palace-Royal,
where we shall ever be with the Lord, 1 These 4.17. and with his Angels, and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, David, Peter and Paul, and the
general Assembly of the Saints, to our unspeakable joy and comfort.

Thus much of the former part of Verse. 14.

The latter part remains to be spoken of.

[The Virgi is her Companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee:]

In these words there is an amplification of the Fathers promise to Christ; the
former part of the Verse relating to the whole Church or mystical Body of
Christ to general, and this latter part to each true Saint and Member of Christ
in particular. The Virgins that follow the Queen shall be brought to the King in
raiment of Need work.

Hence we may learn two or three Lessons.

First, Each true Saint at tends on the Church Universal.
That each true Christian attends on the Church-Vniversal as the Hand maid
attends on her Mistress, and the daughter on her Mother, Ga. 4.26, 27.

The true Believe or spiritual soldier follows the great Army or general
Assembly of the Saints, Heb. 12.23. having spiritual invisible communion with
the whole Family, Ephesians, 3.15. whether triumphant in Heaven, or militant on
earth; (imitating their faith, love, patience, and other christian-vertue) even
from Adam to faithful Abraham, and from Abraham to the Saints that last
departed, or that live on the earth at this day, Rom: 4.16, 23, 14 Heb. 11.
Heb. 13.7.

From this we may draw one or two Corrol aries.

toe or singer, does yet contribute to the advantage and completing of the
whole body, so that he cannot well be wanting, 1 Cor. 12.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21,
22. The highest and most excellent Christian, cannot say I have no need of
thee: The Queen will not be without any of her true companions: As it is in the
body natural, so it is in the Church of Christ, or body mystical; all the
members being fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint
supplieth according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the body to the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4, 16.
Col. 2.19.

Church, or not, joined to any particular Church, should seriously remember and
improve their relation to the great and general Society of the people of God,
no particular relation whatsoever should hinder the Virgin^ from waiting upon
the Queen, and performing their duty to her. But this was formerly urged from
Verse. 9. and therefore I pass it over.

Again we may further Observe,

That such as are true companions with the Church here, Such as are real
companions with the Church here, shall be companions with her in glory.
and follow here in her faith, patience, etc. shall be also companions with her
in Glory.

The Virgins her companions that follow her shall also be brought to the King.

Not every member that holds visible communion with the Church in Ordinances,
and partakes of some spiritual sapp and influence, whereby he is enabled to
perform duties for the edifying of the body (which a Hypocrite or Temporary may
do, John 15.2. Mat. 13.20, 21. Heb: 6: 4, 5, 6.) But they that have real
communion by grace with Christ and his members, and are spiritually ingrafted
into Christ as their root, though they be but weak, and follow the Lamb slowly,
yet being in the number of the wise Virgins they shall be brought to the King in
raiment of needle work.

Whether there shall be degrees of glory in Heaven is a dispute amongst many;
but it matters not much. Of degrees of glory.
Dan. 12.3. with other Scriptures are alleged for it, but Mat: 13.43. with
other Texts are alleged against it; howbeit if we grant that there shall be
degrees of glory, yet let us take these two cautions along with us.

First, Two Cautions.
That the degrees of glory are not grounded upon the good works (as the degrees
of hel-torments are upon the evil works) of men, but only upon Gods mere Grace
and good pleasure, who as he is pleased to give more faith and love, so he may
as freely impart more glory to one Saint then to another.

Secondly, The glory of one will be the Glory of another; so that there shall
be no cause of complaint, envy or strife among them; every vessel shall be as
full as it can hold.

Again, the Churches companions are here described to be Virgins, and this Song
is called the Song of the well-beloved Virgins; alluding to those Virgins that
used to attend on, and sing to the Bridegroom and Bride.

Hence Note,

That all true Christians (who wait on the spiritual Bridegroom and Bride) are
Virgins for their spiritual chastity. True Christians are chaste Virgins,
Virgins without number wait upon them, Cant: 8.6. every one has a Virgin-like
disposition.

Indeed we find in the parable, Mat. 25. that there are two sorts of Virgins
in the visible Church, the wise ones and the foolish; these as well as the other
have Lamps, (i: e.) Gospel- light in their Understandings, and are purged from
gross defilements, waiting also for the coming of the Bridegroom; so that there
seems to be no difference between them til the Bridegroom come, no more then
between the guests at the feast, Mat. 22.11, 12. But the appearance of the Lord
and Master will discover and uncase the most subtle refined Hypocrite that is,
Mat: 3.2.

Quae: Quae:
How and wherein does it appear that the Churches true Companions are chaste
Virgins?

Ans: 1 They are such as are single-hearted, not having a heart and a heart, 1
They have a single heart.
not parting stakes between Christ and the world, Christ and a lust.

2 They are chaste in their desires after and affections to Christ the
spiritual Bridegroom, John 3.28, 29, 30. 2 They are chaste in their affections.
whose name is as Ointment poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love him,
Cant: 1.3. they desire none, they love none in comparison of him.

3 They are chaste in their Principles and judgments; 3 Chaste in their
principles.
having the spirit of a sound mind and judgment as well as love, 2 Timothy: 1.7.
Phil. 1.9. They keep close to the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ (which is
adulterated by others, 2 Cor: 11.2.) both in Justification and sanctification;
so that they will not suffer any creature to lodge with Christ as his Corrival.

4 They are chaste and Virgin-like in their practice and conversation; 4 In
their practices.
those that stand with the Lamb on Mount Sion and follow him do not defile
themselves with Women (i: e.) with corrupt worldly antichristian Doctrines,
practices, Interests, for they are Virgins, Rev. 14.4.

Lastly, Chste in their ends and aims, 5 In their ends.
therefore the Spouse is described as having Doves eyes, Cant. 1.15. and 1.4.
and 4.1. (to wit) a single eye and respect to the glory of Christ; the foolish
Virgins though they have some spiritual gifts and assistance from Christ, yet
their ends rise no higher then self in their most glorious performances, Israel
is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit to himself, Hos: 10.1. When you
fasted and mourned, did you at all fast and mourn unto me, even unto me (says
the Lord) Zach: 7.5, 6? but the chaste wise Virgins as they bring forth fruit
by and from Christ as their spiritual Husband, root, and principle, so for him
and to him as their end, see John 15.2, 4, 5. Phil: 1.11. Romans 7.4. Gal. 2.20,
1 Cor: 15.10. 2 Cor. 12.2. Phil. 4.13. Col. 3.17.

To apply this,

seriously look to it that we (who profess our selves to be the Churches
companions) be found wise and chaste Virgins, having not only Lamps (i: e.)
spiritual light, knowledge, ^gifts and parts, but oil in our Lamps, oil enough,
vessel oil, fountain oil, true faith working by love to Christ and his Saints,
Gal. 5:6. The King or Bridegroom is coming, be will shortly lay the Ax to the
root of the Tree, and discover them that say they are Christians and are not,
Rev: 2.9: he will try us to purpose whether we be Virgins in deed and in truth,
or only in word and pretense; and O what a dreadful terrible cry will there be
at midnight among the foolish Virgins, Mat: 25.6.

Secondly, Watch, watch, (ye that are the people of the Lord,) I say again
watch and pray; there is an hour of blackness and darkness and Temptation come
upon this Generation; The Devil is at work, and rages exceedingly (though we
see him not) because his time is but short. Rev 12.12 and his great design is
to des^^ur the Virgins, to draw their hearts from Christ, and his despised
Truth, Cause, and Interest, and to make them commit folly (even at midda when
the sun shines) with the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, which are not of God put of the world, 1 John 2.16. Therefore we
had all need watch and pray that we may not fall into Temptation; many who
seemed stronger then we have committed spiritua Whoredom, and are ensnared with
the evils of the times. O (my dear Brethren) let us endeavor to keep our
Virgin garments pure and unspotted til the coming of the Bridegroom, who will
hasten his appearance

VERSE. XV. With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter
into the Kings Palace.
THis Verse coheres with the former, and is a continued speech of the glory and
happiness of the Spouse of Christ, which on all hands shall be accompanied with
exceeding gladness and rejoicing, represented here by the entertainment of the
Bride, who on the day of marriage was received with great joy, Great joy among
the Jews at their Marriages.
especially by the Bridegroom and his friends or companions; as the custom was
among the Hebrews (to which this refers) who did exceedingly rejoice on the day
of marriage, when the Bride was brought to the Bridegroom, as appears by
three things. See Weems Synagog. Cap. 6. para. 11. Diatr. 2. p. 190, 191.


1 They had their Marriage feast, which ordinarily lasted seven days, Judges
14.17.

2 The house of Marriage was called Bethhillula, the house of praise and
rejoicing; and

3 Their Marriage Song Hillulim, Goodwin Moys. and Aaron, lib. 6. cap. 4. p.
285.
the Song of praise, which was sung by the Bridegrooms intimate friends and
Companions, who are called the Children of the Bride Chamber, Mat. 9.13, 15. In
which Song they had these words, Let there be the voice of joy and gladness,
the voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride. The voice of exultation in the
Bride-chamber is sweeter then any Feast. See Jer. 33.11.

Thus we see the Bride on the day of marriage among the Jews was received with
great joy by the Bridegroom and his friends, John 3.29. But especially the
Kings Bride or Wife, for this of all marriages was accompanied with most joy
and exulation; and hereby the Holy Ghost does illustrate the mutual joy of the
spiritual Bridegroom and Bride. Hence Observe.

That when all the people of God that have lived from the beginning to the end
of the world, are gathered together, That there will be unspeakable joy when
the Saints are received into the Kings Palace.
and received into glorious mansions, there will be unspeakable joy and
gladness.

This will be as the joy of Harvest, this will be a feast of fat things indeed.
Here we expect more then yet we enjoy, here we groan under many distempers, but
then all tears shall be wiped away, Isa. 25.8. Rev. 7.17. Sorrow and sighing
shall for ever cease, Isa. 35.10. There shall be no more cause of mourning or
complaining.

[ With joy and gladness shall they be brought, etc.]

The whole Company, God and Christ, the blessed Angels and Saints, will all
rejoice, there will be a general joy as at a Marriage feast.

First, 1 God himself will be glad of their company.
God himself will infinitely rejoice in and over his people whom he made for
himself. He might well have been without us (being perfectly blessed happy and
glorious in and of himself) before we had a being he rejoiced infinitely in
himself, and if we had never been born he would have been as perfectly blessed
as now he is. Saints and Angels, nay the humane nature of Christ add nothing to
his perfection; but now having set his love upon us, and taken us into
fellowship with himself, he delights in us, and rejoices over us, and that
with singing, even in this life, Isa. 65.19. Zeph 3.17. And if it be so now,
how will it be when his Jerusalem is fully translated into Heaven, and has
nothing in her but what is lovely and matter of rejoicing. The Saints shall be
as Jewels made up, Mal. ^ 17. A Jewel must be pollished and set in gold hat it
may shine forth brightly; now the Saints are Jewels, but rough and unpollished;
God will make up these Jewels, and set them in gold, and put a luster upon them.

Secondly. 2 Christ will infinitely rejoice in the Saints.
Christ (who is clothed with our Nature flesh and blood) will also rejoice over
his Bride with exceeding joy in beholding the blessed fruit of the travail of
his soul, Isa. 53.11. The glorious issue of his Incarnation, Sufferings,
Resurrection, Intercession, Victories, having sweat great drops and clods of
blood, and endured unspeakable agonies in his soul, that he might bring many
Sons to glory, Mat. 26.38. Mat 27.46. Heb 5.7. Heb. 2.10. O what a merry
meeting, what intercourse of ravishing joys and heavenly unmixed delights,
will there be between Christ and his Spouse! A woman does greatly rejoice
(notwithstanding her painful travail) when she has brought forth a
Man-child, John 16.21. yea, the more painful her travail has been, the more
joyful and acceptable will her issue be to her.

Every one delights in the prosperous issue of his labors. Moses (that man
of God) having travailed long, and undergone many dangers with and for the
Israelites; and the Apostle Paul having been in spiritual travail once and
again with the Galathians, Chap 4.19. did rejoice exceedingly to see the fruit
of their labors; and so (no doubt) it is with other faithful men.

But Christ much more will rejoice to see the blessed fruit of his labors and
sufferings. Christ loves his own with an infinite love, and therefore he will
rejoice in them with an infinite joy: Come ^ee blessed of my Father, O come and
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, Mat. 26.34. The joy (as also the
sufferings) of Christ personal, are complete already, but the sufferings and
happiness of his Members do contribute to the filling up of the sufferings and
joy of Christ Mystical (the Church being his body, the fulness of him that
fills all in all) Col. 1.24. Ephesians. 2.23.

Thirdly, 3 The Angels will exceedingly rejoice in the Saints.
The Angels of God who are appointed to gather the Elect from the four
Quarters of the world, Mat. 24.31. will entertain the Saints with unspeakable
rejoicing. Angels are strong, excellent, sweet, wise, loving, amiable,
heavenly, delightful spirits, they are chief Princes above all the Princes of
the earth, 2 Samuel 14.20. Psalm. 103.20. Dan. 10.13. Col. 1.16. and there is an
innumerable company of them, Heb. 12.22. Dan. 7.10. They now delight to pry
into the mystery of man's redemption by Christ, 1 Pet. 1.12. To them is made
known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God in this Mystery, Ephesians. 3.10.
And though Christ who took not on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of
Abraham, Heb. 2.16. did not by his death satisfy for the elect Angels (who had
no sin to be expiated) yet by him they are confirmed in their blessed estate
(he being head of Angels as well as of men Col. 2.10.) If now the blessed
Angels sto^^ down with delight to look into the mystery of our Redemption, they
will surely rejoice exceedingly when the Redeemed ones of the Lord are brought
to everlasting glory.

It Is their business now to preserve the Saints from the rage of evil Angels,
and wicked men; to direct and comfort them, and to watch over their souls and
bodies, Deuteronomy. 33.3. Zach. 14.4. Mark 1.13. Rev. 5.11. Heb. 1.14. Psalm. 91.1,
11. Mat. 18.10. As the embroydered Cherubims did environ the Tabernacle, so do
these heavenly spirits Guard the Saints here, Exodus 26.1. Dan. 4.14. Psalm.
34.7. 2 Kings 6.17. Genesis 32.1, 2 Dan. 10.20. Psalm. 35.1, 5, 6. Mat. 6.10. and
carry their souls, when they depart out of the^ bodies, into Abraham's bosom,
Luke 16.22.

If they rejoice now when a poor sinner is converted, Luke 15.10. then much
more when the converted sinner is glorified; yea, when the general Assembly of
all the Saints shall meet together in Heaven, and be glorified for ever both in
soul and body. Then shall they be brought with gladness and rejoicing.

Fourthly, As God and Christ will infinitely, 4 The Saints will exceedingly
rejoice in communion with God and Christ, and the Angels.
and the Angels exceedingly rejoice in the company of the Saints Triumphant, so
the Saints will greatly rejoice in their glorious communion with God, and
Christ, and the blessed Angels, as the Bridegroom will rejoice in his Bride, so
the Bride will rejoice in the Bridegroom. The Lord in this life will create
Jerusalem a rejoicing, and his people a Joy, Isa 65.18. she shall greatly
rejoice in the Lord who has clothed her with the Garments of salvation, as a
Bridegroom decketh himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self
with Jewels, Isa. 61.10. Christ the Bridegroom would have his people greatly
rejoice in him, whilst they abide here, John 15.11. John 16.27. John 17.13. 1
John 1.4. But then the Joy of the Lord shall persectly abide in them, and their
Joy shall be full. I will see you again (says Christ) and your hearts shall
rejoice, and your joy no man shall take from you, John 16.23. And O what
unspeakable mutual rejoicing will there be at that day between Paster and
people, between the faithful Preachers of the Gospel, and those souls who
were converted by the blessing of God upon their labors; these are their joy
and Crown now, Phil. 2.2. Phil. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20. 3 Ep: John 4. but much
more then.

FIrst then, this may serve to Comfort and suppore the Saints, who now mourn in
Sion: Their sorrow shall be turned into Joy, God will give them beauty for
ashes, the Oil of joy for mourning, and the Garment of praise for the spirit
of heaviness, Isa. 61.3. He that sows in tears, shall reap in joy; he that
goes forth and weepeth bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him, Psalm. 126.5, 6. Mat. 5.4. It may be
before this Generation pass away, the Church shall be made the joy and praise
of the whole earth; however the soul shall surely be filled with the fulness
of joy when it is brought by Angels into the Kings presence, and therefore we
should call and cry incessantly, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Rev. 22.17.

SEcondly, The thoughts of this general concourse and meeting of all the
Saints in Joy and gladness should mitigate the present affliction that lies
upon us by reason of our divisions, scatterings, envyings, strange and
unbrotherly carriage one toward another. All the scattered divided ones of
Christ (notwithstanding their odd foolish humors and passions) shall be
gathered together into one place; Heaven will hold us all, by what names or
Titles soever we be now distinguished, we shall meet with joy and gladness in
our sathers House. Though now the Saints are so strange and shy one of another,
that they will scarce meet to pray or speak together, yet they shall be better
acquainted when they come to Heaven.

As it follows.

[They shall enter into the Kings Tallace.]

The Psalmist here in the Type alludes to the Princess being brought in great
pomp and magnificence into the Palace Royal, where the King with his Royal
Attendants stand ready to receive her.

By the Kings Palace is meant the third heave 2 Cor 12.2. that which is called
Coelum Emy^^um, which is the Throne of God, the place and habitation of the
blessed Saints. 2 Observe. God has created a glorious Palace for his Saints.


We may hence Note.

That the Lord has erected a glorious Palace ^^ his Saints to be brought
unto, and to abide in.

There are two rich Palaces mentioned in this Psalm.

1 The one an Ivory Palace, verse. 8. whereby is signified the Assemblies of
the Saints, and Ordinances of Divine worship, in which the Lord manifests
himself graciously. Here the presence of the Lord is sweet and amiable, Cant.
1.8. Psalm. 84.

2 The other Palace is mentioned in this 15 Verse, and it is a Palace of
glory, a Palace more bright and splendid then the finest gold, glorious
Mansions, John 14.2.

Now this Palace may well be said to be erected by God himself, and to be
exceeding glorious, for these Reasons.

First, Because the Lord has prepared it, 1 This Palace is prepared by God.
Mat. 15.34. 1 Cor. 2.9. Heb. 11.16. John 14.3.

Secondly, It is bought with Gods own money, 2 Purchased by his blood.
purchased with his blood, Ephesians. 1.14. Acts 20.28. Heb. 9.14.

Thirdly, 3 Christ has possessed it for us.
The Lord Jesus as our head and forerunner has taken possession for us, and in
our stead, Ephesians. 2.6. John 14.3, 4. Heb. 6.20.

Fourthly, 4 Has given us the pledge of it.
God has given us the pledge seal and earnest of it, by his Spirit dwelling
and working in us, Gal. 4.6. Ephesians. 1.13. Ephesians. 4.30. Romans 8.16. So that we
have already the first fruits of glory.

Fifthly, 5 God will put us shortly in possession of it.
The Lord will shortly give us the full possession of this glorious Palace in
our own persons, Luke 12.32. John 17.24.

Sixthly, 6 The glorious presence of God is the beauty of this Palace.
God himself is the beauty and glory of this Palace, Rev. 21.22, 23. Rev.
22.5. Where the King is, there is the Court; the presence of God makes Heaven
to be Heaven indeed.

I had rather (says Luther) were it possible, be with Christ in Hell, then in
Heaven without him.

This glorious Palace which the most Eagleeyed Philosophers were ignorant of,
is frequently mentioned in Scripture, The Excellency of this Palace is further
set forth by three things.
2 Cor. 5.1. Heb 11.10. Heb. 13.14. Heb. 12.22. Luke 23.43. 1 Kings 8.27.

The excellency thereof appears in three things.

1 It is far above the visible Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10. Ephesians. 1.3. Heb. 7.25.
being the third heaven, or heaven of heaven. The Region of the air to the Moon
is the first Heaven; from the Moon to the highest Stars is the second Heaven;
and the Heaven above the highest Stars is the habitation of God (whom yet the
Heaven and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, 1 Kings 8.27.) and of the
glorified Saints, and this we call the third Heaven. Into this the Apostle Paul
was rapt up in a spiritual ecstasy, 2 Cor. 12.2. Into this Enock was
translated, Heb. 11.5. and Elias taken up in a fiery Chariot, 2 Kings 2.11. The
natural eye cannot behold this glorious Palace, it must be known by Divine
Revelation.

2 This third Heaven was immediately created by God himself, without any
preexistent matter or principle, and therefore is incorruptible, undefiled, and
fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.4. 2 Cor. 5.1. though in comparison of the pure
Essence of God, the very Heavens and Angels have no purity in them.

3. It is bright, shining and transparent. All the beauty of the visible
Heavens (which yet far excells the most beautiful things on Earth) all the
resplendency of the very quintessence of Gemms, Metals, Pearls, precious
stones, are not comparable to the beauty of this Palace. The Grand Seigniors
Seraglio, the Palace of the Roman Emperor (when Rome flourished) was but a
Dungeon to this; yea the inward part of Solomon's Temple, which was of the
finest gold, was but a shadow of this glorious Palace; it is large and
spacious, here is room enough for millions of Saints John 14.2. Rev. 21.16. It
is also pleasant and delightful, free from all evil, full of all good,
Norton. Orth. Eva. page 344.
a proportionable object (as one well observes) to a glorified eye, a suitable
habitation for a glorified body. Let me for ever behold and abide in this
Palace, and then it matters not if I never see those rich glorious Palaces of
the Princes of this world, which some Travelers speak of.

meditations of this glorious Palace, which is far above the visible Heavens,
and therefore must be contemplated with a spiritual eye. And

First, For such as abound in the things of this world, as pleasant Houses,
Lands, Gardens, Orchards, and other delights, alas what are all these thy
enjoyments being compared with the whole earth, so far as it is known (for a
great part of it is not yet discovered) let the rich man see his Lands and
Houses in the Map of the world if he can; and yet the whole Earth is but as a
little pins point to the second Heaven, and that but as a little point to the
third Heaven; why therefore will thou set thy heart upon such a poor trifle as
a little Earth, or clay, which shall shortly be consumed? When we walk in
pleasant Pastures, and Gardens, or in the Courts or Palaces of Princes, we
should seriously meditate on this heavenly glorious Palace, that we may not
dote on these earthly things. We are but strangers here below, our house, our
home is above the visible Heavens. There is much beauty in the Sun, and in the
Firmament when it is bright and clear, and bespangled with the Stars of Heaven;
but there is a Heaven above these Heavens, which we must ascend up unto.

Secondly, Let not the poor Christian be discouraged; perhaps thou have not in
this world a mansion or house to put thy head in; thus it was with thy Lord and
Master; The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests, but the Son
of man has not where to lay his head, Mat. 8.20. What then? thou have a house
in Heaven, a glorious Palace, which thou shall shortly enter into. Who would
think much to abide a little while in a poor Cottage, or in the open field,
without a house, being assured that ere long he shall possess a Royal
Palace? We faint not whilst we do not look at the things that are seen, but
at the things that are not seen, 2 Cor. 4. last. Were we more assured of our
interest in this Palace, we should less desire an interest in the Palaces
and Courts of the Princes of this world.

Again, This Doctrine may help to fortify us against a strong Delusion, namely
that Heaven does not at all admit of a local consideration. Some will boldly
tell us that there is no Heaven not Hell but what is within them (the same men
cast away the Offices, word, and Ordinances of Christ as empty shadows) This
is a great delusion; indeed were it possible to live in the Palace of heaven,
and to have no spiritual light within, it would be uncomfortable.

Oec^lampadi^^ a little before his death, being asked whether he would have a
light, clapped his hand on his breast, and said, Here it a light within. But this
may very well consist with the local consideration of heaven; and that there
is such a place as the third heaven, no man will dare to deny, that makes
conscience of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures.

I shall shut up this Discourse of the glory of heaven, A twofold Meditation.
from the 14 and 15 Verses, with a twofold Meditation. The one of our true
spiritual Rest, and the other of the beatificall vision of God.

I. A Meditation of the true Rest of the soul, and the vanity of all other
Rests. 1 Medita. Of the souls Rest.

Why art thou cast down (O my soul) why art thou disquieted within me; Trust
and rest in his love who is love it self. God himself rests in his love to
thee, Zeph. 3.17. and therefore well may his love be thy rest. The term of all
motion is rest, every thing moves to its Center; God in Christ is the Center of
a gracious sonle.

The Jews See Mr. Bur. Moys. Choy. cap. 47. page 614. This Name is first
mentiond Genesis 2.4. when God had finished all his works and rested. It
consists only of letters of rest (as the Hebrews call them) to show that
there is no rest till we come to Jehovah, and that in him we may securely rest.
Leigh. Crit. Sac. p. 56.
have a note from the name Jehovah, that the letters of this name are Literae
quiescentes, in which there is a Mystery, because all our Rest is in God. They
that seek for satisfaction in sensitive delights, go out from God, as Rivers
from the Fountain, and so as the Prophet speaks, forget their resting place,
Jer. 50.6.

The soul of man is more worthy then all outward things, and therefore cannot
find rest in them, as being far below her; nay, the more she seeks for rest in
these things, the suller of trouble and anxiety she is: These are but finite
and transitory, but the soul is an immortal substance, and desires an
infinite good.

Why should thou (O my soul) seek the living among the dead? The riches of
this world are without us; pleasures belong only to this life, honor is a
vain uncertain thing (especially in our times) That which must satisfy the
soul which was created for eternity, must be a spiritual, durable,
everlasting good, and that is only God himself. Return therefore to thy rest O
my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee, Psalm. 116.7. The Lord
has made the soul for himself, and it will not be quiet till it return to
him. Domine fecis ^i not pro te and mqvietum est cor nostrum donec veniat a^^
^^. August.


Every Creature moves to its place and Center; the vegetative and the
sensitive, and the rational Creatures move to those objects which are suitable
to their natures. Thus it is with an enlightened renewed soul; man came from
God, but does not return to God till he partake of a new Divine nature; he runs
up and down as it were in a Circle, and has no regular direct motion to God as
his resting place.

The poor soul is like Noah's Dove, which cannot rest till it come into the
Ark. No true rest in our own righteousness.
He that believes enters into rest, Heb. 4.3. Many seek rest in their own
Righteousness and performances, but it is not Moses but Joshua, not the Law,
but Christ in the Gospel, that gives rest. Come unto me all ye that labor,
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. There must not only
be a thirsting after, but a coming to the water of life. The soul is filled
with peace and rest in believing, Christ is an adequate object for a poor
troubled soul to rest upon. In his righteousness she rests against sin, in
his wounds (hiding her self in the clefts of this Rock, Cant 2.14. Isa. 2.10.)
she rests against the wrath of God, in his satisfaction she rests against the
terrors of the Law; in his victories she rests against the accusations of
Satan, and the misgivings of conscience; in his Resurrection and intercession
she rests against the fear of death and mortality, in him she is more then a
Conqueror over sin, Satan, death and Hell.

We are not yet entered into perfect Rest, because we do not enjoy the Lord
fully. Perfect fruition of the object beloved, will bring to the soul perfect
Rest. The will desires more, longs after more then yet it enjoys. We are not
fully happy, because we do not fully possess what we love. Be^^us non est qui
non fruitur quod amat.
Love affects the nearest union with, and carries the lover (as it were) out of
himself, to the object beloved. The union that arises out of love, produces a
mutual similitude and conformity, and also a mutual fruition and propriety.
God loved man in the first Creation, and made man like himself: God loved man
in the second Creation, and made himself like man, Reynolds on Pass. cap. 10,
11. page 82, 83.
and when the soul is fully gathered up into Divine love, it shall be at
perfect Rest.

A Christian here finds a restlesnesse in all Creatures, in all conditions; the
best Creature is but a snare; man at his best estate is vanity, every thing is
full of anxiety, the active power of the will how soon is it wasted and
weakened? A restlesness in all Creatures and conditiions here below.
we spend our spirits, and are presently weary; all is vanity and vexation of
spirit; we our selves are full of vanity, and the things which we use are empty
and vain, and full of vexation to them that seek for rest in them; they are
empty, and do deceive, mortal and do decay, mutable and inconstant, and do
disappoint us; they are but as broken Reeds, which do not only fail, but
wound and pierce us; but as for God, the more we know him, the better we shall
love him, and like him; he only can fill up the va^uities of the soul; in him
is fulness to make the soul perfectly happy, with him is immortality, to
make the soul perpetually happy.

There remains a Rest for the people of God, We shall enter into an everlasting
Sabbath.
Heb. 4.9. an everlasting Sabbatisme, whereof this Sabbath is but a Type: In
the heavenly and glorious Sabbath (O my soul) thou shall be for ever exercised
in the highest and most spiritual acts; thou shall be always up, and never
down; now alas! the poor soul attempts to fly up heaven ward, with the wings
of faith and Diviue contemplation, Anselme.
but (like a Bird that has a stone tied to its leg) she is presently pulled
down with the weight of corruption. O miserable man that I am, who will deliver
me from this body of death? How acceptable is Rest to the poor laboring man?
Think often of thy Rest (O my soul) that thou may not faint in this irksome
Wilderness.

II. A Meditation of the Beatificall Vision of God.
In the sight of the God of glory (O my soul) consists the Essential Glory
of the Saints; II. Medita. Of the Vision of God.
I will (says Christ) that they may behold my glory, John 17.14. Rest and
Glory seldom meet in this world; commonly they that have the honors of the
world, have but little rest; but in heaven we shall have both; God will be all
in all to the soul; he will be perfect light to the understanding, perfect
peace and rest to the will, and everlasting satisfaction to the memory. The
mind shall so clearly, so fully contemplate and behold the Divine Essence, that
it shall not need the help of faith, (which is the evidence of things not seen)
all mediums shall be removed, all glasses shall be broken, but only the glass
of the Trinity.

The Beatificall Vision is such a glory, that some have thought that the sole
happiness of the Saints shall consist in it; but there will be not only
vision, but fruition. Now we live by faith, when we hear of three in one, and
one in three, of two Natures in one person, of the resurrection, etc. we
believe the same, grounding our faith on the word of God. But in the
Beatificall Vision, we shall perfectly see and know the Mystery of the Father,
Son, and Spirit; all doubts shall be fully resolved, all knotty controversies
decided; the Mysteries now sealed up, shall be clearly opened and revealed. The
least Saint in heaven shall know more then all the learned Doctors of this
world.

In this frail condition none can see God and live; Whilst we are in the body,
we cannot perfectly see God and live.
the appearance of God or an Angel, is a terror to man; but in heaven the soul
shall be so elevated, that it shall be able to behold the blessed Trinity
without end, to love God without loathing, to praise and delight in him without
being weary. O what a joy will this be? a joy surpassing all joys; here joy
enters into us, but there we shall enter into the fulness of joy; if the joy
of the Saints be now unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. what will it be
then? if the seed time be so glorious, what will the harvest be?

The soul shall not only see the Attributes of God, his Mercy, Justice, Truth,
Wisdom, but the very simple pure Essence of God (and yet the Attributes of
God are not really distinguished from his essence, for whatsoever is in God, is
God; we shall behold the essence with the manner of subsistence, which now is
an unconceiveable Mystery.

If the sight of Joseph, who was thought to be dead, was such a comfort to his
good old father, what will it be to us to behold our blessed father and
Savior? If the sight of Angels and Saints, and of the glorified body of
Christ, will be exceeding glorious and ravishing, what will it be then to see
the Divine face of God? that most bright and glorious face, that most excellent
beauty, which comprehends all beauty? what will it be (O my soul) to behold
that Essence which is so pure, so simple, so wonderful, so incommunicable, We
shall perfectly behold the mystery of the Trinity.
and with one view to behold therein the Mystery of the most blessed Trinity,
the glory of the Father, the wisdom of the Son, and the goodness and love of
the Holy Ghost?

We shall see God, and in God we shall perfectly see and know our selves and
all things. As he that looks on himself in a Glass, sees the Glass and
himself in the Glass, and all other things that are before the Glass. So when
we have the beatificall Vision of the Divine Essence, we shall see God and our
selves, and all things in God; then shall the Creature be seen in God in a far
more excellent manner then in it self. If we could but see the building in the
perfect conception of the Artificer, it would appear far more excellent then in
the building it self.

In thy light (O my God) I shall see light, Of the light of glory.
Psalm. 36.9. I shall see thee in thy self in the brightness of thy countenance,
in the beauty of thy glory.

To make us see the glorious things that shall be seen in Heaven, there shall
need no outward mediums or helps, no Preaching, Sacraments, Norton. Orths.
Evan. cap. 15. page 33.
bodily apparitions, but only the light of glory, Col. 1.12. There shall be a
glorious supernatural influence, which will enable the glorified understanding
to see God, and all things in God.

Stephen having his understanding gloriously illuminated and elevated, did
behold the glory of Christ at the right hand of his father. In corporeal
Vision the eye is united to the Object by the help of sensible species; in
intellectual vision, the understanding is united to the object by
intellectual species; but in the beatificall vision, the Divine Essence it
self, and the light and glory thereof shall supply the place of intellegible
species.

Lift up thy self in the mean while (O my soul) and consider what a glory is
prepared for thee. If to see King Solomon in his glory, was so desirable a
thing, Blessed are they (said the Queen of Sheba) that stand before thy
presence, and behold thy wisdom, 1 Kings 10. Oh what will it be to behold and
contemplate perfectly and everlastingly the glorious ravishing face of God. Man
naturally desires to see God himself, as the cause of causes; the effects
being once found, we desire to see the cause and Original of those effects.
Lift up thy self (O my soul) for thou shall behold that universal good in
whom is all good, without whom there is no good; thou shall see that great
invisible world which contains all worlds; thou shall see him who being one,
is all things, and being but one simple indivisible Essence, comprehends in
himself the perfection of all things: Herein thy mind shall have perfect rest,
and shall desire to know no more. Issachar saw that the rest was good, and the
Land was best, Genesis 49.15. The rest and glory of the Saints is good, O but the
hand that brings it forth, even the Eternal love of God, is best.

And now since the mind shall be so taken up and employed in the Contemplation
of the Divine Essence to eternity, why should thou (O my soul) be taken up
with the poor empty things of the world? why should thou dote on these
things which do but debase the mind of man; Learn to look beyond them (O my
soul) and six upon those objects which perfect the understanding. Others
desire Wine, and Corn, and Oil, but Lord do thou lift up the light of thy
countenance upon me, and when I awake let me be satisfied with thy likeness.

VERSE. XVI. In stead of thy Fathers shall be thy Children, whom thou may
make Princes in all the Earth.
THe word here (as some Expositors observe English Annot. Ainsworth. Dixon in
loc.
) is of the Masculine Gender, and so applyable to Christ the King, yet
sometimes it is applied to the female sex, Numb. 27.7. 1 Kings 22.17. 2 Chronicles.
18.16. and so it may be referred either to the Bride, or to the Bridegroom;
either to the Church, or to Christ, and accordingly it affords several
Instructions.

Instead of thy Fathers shall be thy Children.

If we apply these words to the Church or Bride, then we may Note.

That the Church of Christ has no cause to glory in her Progenitors after the
flesh, The Church has no cause to boast of her natural Progenitors, but
rather of her spiritual Children.
but rather in those spiritual Children which she travelleth with, and
brings forth to Christ by the Ministry of the Gospel, Gal. 4.19. Isa. 66.8, 9.

Spiritual Jerusalem is called the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. which bears
and brings forth Children that shall enter into the Kings Palace, and have
the Beatificall Vision of the face of God. I held him, and would not let him
go (says the Spouse) till I had brought him into my mothers house, and into
the Chamber of her that conceived me, Cant. 3.4.

This Jerusalem which is the mother of us all, was figured by Sarah, the free
woman; the Chamber in which she conceives her Children, is outwardly the Ivory
Palla^es, or Assemblies of the Saints, and inwardly it is the heart and
conscience, in which Christ is formed, and faith dwells, Romans 10.10. Ephesians.
3.16, 17. Gal. 4.6. Nor is this Jerusalem a particular Church, but the
universal Church of Christ, Heb. 12.22.

Neither Jews nor Gentiles have cause to boast of their Progenitors according
to the flesh; Neither Jews nor Gentiles should boast of fleshly privileges.
Henceforth (says the Apostle) know we no man after the flesh, etc. 2 Corinthians.
5.16, 17.

First, Not the Jews, for God did not choose this people because they were a
greater or better people then others (for naturally they were the most
stubborn, self-willed, inconsiderable people upon the face of the earth) but
because the Lord loved them, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. It was spoken to the Church of the
Jews (as well as the Gentiles) Thy birth and thy Nativity is of the Land of
Canaan, thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite, etc. Ezekiel. 16.3,
4, 5, 6. Let not the Jews boast that they are Abraham's seed, for God is able
of the very stones to raise up Children to Abraham, Mat. 3.9. He is not a Jew
that is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the
flesh, but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, Romans 2.28, 29. They are not all
Children, because they are the seed of Abraham, but in Isaac shall thy seed be
called. They that are the Children of the flesh, are not the Children of God;
but the Children of the Promise are counted for the seed, Genesis 21.12. Romans 9.7,
8. Gal. 4.29. John 8.37. compared with v. 44. In the Kingdom of Christ there
is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian,
bond nor free, but Christ is all and in all, Col. 3.11.

And again, when the Jews are converted, Of the restoration of the Jews.
and the veil taken from off from that Nation, they shall have no cause to
boast of any privilege in the flesh, the Spirit of the Lord shall rent the
veil, and turn their hearts to God, 2 Cor. 3.15. There shall come out of Sion
the deliverer, and he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, Romans 11.26. It
shall be beyond their expectation, yea they will be as in a dream when the
Lordworketh their deliverance. Thus it was with them in the Type, when they
were delivered from the Babylonish Captivity, and thus it will be with them
when they are delivered out of their present Captivity. Before s^e travelleth,
she shall bring forth: who has heard (...) seen such a thing? shall the earth
be made to bring forth in one day? shall a Nation be born at once? Isa. 66.7,
8. It shall come to pass that before they call God will answer, Isa. 65.24.

Secondly, As the Jews have not, so much less have the Gentiles cause to
boast of natural privileges, and of their Progenitors after the flesh: Boast
not against the branches, but if thou boast, thou bear not the root, but the
root thee, Romans 11.18. The Gentiles in comparison of the Jews are said to be
barren, unfruitful, desolate, Isa. 54.1. Gal. ^.27. God will call them a
people that were not ^^ people, and her beloved that was not beleved, Isa.
^5.5. Romans 9.25, 26, 30. 1 Pet. 2.2.10. We were that wild Olive which was
graffed into the good Olive Tree contrary to nature, Romans 11.17, ^4. Dogs, Mat.
15.24. Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, Strangers from the Covenant of
Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. What were
our Progenitors ^^ this and other Nations in former times? were they not
brutish and gross Idolaters, and worshippers of Devils, stocks, and stones,
having not so much as the face of civility, much less of Religions. And what
are we (their Children) but monuments of Gods free grace and mercy?

Reprove those Christians that stand so much upon their pedigree and descent
(a^ springing from such a Noble stock and family) and hereupon carry their
Crests high, and insult ove^ their poor Brethren. This indeed may have some
place in civil, but none in Religious concernments, James 2.1, 2. And truly it
argues n^ small ignorance, pride, and want of mortification thus to glory in a
fleshly privilege. Alas! wha^ do the best and noblest among men receive by
natural descent from their Progenitors, but sin an^ guilt and matter of
condemnation? Romans 5.12, 14, 15, 16, 17. King David acknowledges tha^ he was
conceived in sin, and brought forth in in^quity, Psalm. 51.5. That which is born
of the flesh is flesh, John 3.6. Those are the truly Noble one who have the
Spirit of glory in them, and perform Noble acts, who are new men, spiritual
men, bor^ again of the word and Spirit of Christ, by which they are made
Princes throughout the world (^ it follows in the latter part of this Verse.)

That was brave resolution and carriage of the Noble Martyr, who would not have
his persecutor spare him for his Noble descent, for it was not the blood of his
Ancestors, but the blood of Christ tha^ made him truly glorious. And the good
Empero^ who rejoiced more that he was a true Member ^^ the Christian Church,
then that he was Emper^^ of the world.

If any have received more spiritual light an^ privileges then others, let
flesh be silent, and ^^ that glories let him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.3^
Jer. 9.23.

glory in o^ Ancestors after the flesh, but rather in those spirit^^ Children
which the Church brings forth to Christ by the Ministry of the Gospel. Let
Parents, and every Christian in his place, but especially the Preachers of the
Gospel, endeavor the conversion of sinners to God, that he may have many
Children, not altogether respecting the edification of those within, but also
having a tender regard to the conversion of those without.

And O! that God would bless the labors of his Servants for this end, that
they may see the fruit thereof in a multitude of Converts. That in the beauties
of holiness Christ may have the dew of his youth, more then the womb of the
morning, as it is promised, Psalm. 110.3. They that turn many to Righteousness,
shall shine as Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. Always remembering, that
though Paul plant, and Apollo water, yet it is the Lord only that gives the
increase, 1 Cor. 3.6. And it is from the Lord that our fruit is found, Heb.
14.8.

Quaer. But have the Children of believing Parents no more privilege then the
Children of unbelievers, since none have cause to glory in their Progenitors
after the flesh?

Answ. 1. In respect of natural Generation, The Children of the faithful have
more privilege then others, not by natural generation, but by Gods Covenant.
the Children of the godly as well as others, are the Children of wrath, Ephesians.
2.2. Romans 9.8. John ^.5, 6. Romans 3.9.

But secondly, By the gracious Covenant and Promise of God, the Children of the
faithful are more privileged then others; God has taken our little ones into
Covenant, and promised to be the God of our seed, and to circumcise their
hearts, so that they shall love the Lord, Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. ^9.10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15. Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Promise belongs to them, they are holy, and must be
brought to Christ, because of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. See Acts 2.39. 1
Cor. 7.14. ^ark 10.14.

The Covenant blessing which was upon the believing Jews and their Children,
is come upon the believing Gentiles, and their Children; and when the Jews are
called (though they have no cause to boast of natural privileges, yet) their
Conversion shall be by virtue of the Covenant of grace made with their
Ancestors, and their children shall be as before; see Gal. 3.14. Romans 11.17,
25, 26. Ier. 30.20. Luke 1.72.

Gods gracious Promise is that portion which enricheth us and our Children,
without which we have no visible ground of hope concerning them. But though we
and our samilies be not so steadfast with God as we should be, yet the Lord will
remember his everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and sure; this is all
our desire and salvation, 2 Samuel 23.5. Luke 1.78. And truly, if we could but
improve the Covenant more by says for our selves and little ones, we should
have more comfort concerning them, and dispute less about the seal of the
Covenant, whether it belongs to them, or no. A faithful and spiritual
improvement of the Covenant of grace, is the best way to silence and put an end
to controversies of this nature; and this we shall find after all our tedious
and quarrelling disputes (which for the most part arise from unbelief.)

Again.

[Instead of thy Fathers shall be thy Children.]

The Church might Object, That if she deny her self in her natural kindred and
relations (as indeed we should forsake father, and mother, and all for Christ)
she would then be in a most desolate forlorn condition, as that woman is, who
forsakes her fathers house when she is married, no, but she shall not be
desolate, for, instead of her fathers, shall be her Children. Hence Observe.

That what loss soever the Church sustaineth by forsaking the world, Christ
makes up the loss of natural friends abundantly in himself.
and narurall Relations for Christ, it is abundantly (and that upon the best
account) supplied unto her by Christ.

Though the Church deny her self in her natural Relations, yet she shall have
spiritual friends, relations and Children which will counterballance the other
loss, yea, which will be more for her comfort.

This Prophecy (if applied to the Church) may have special reference to the
Church of the Gentiles, to whom the Lord has made many rich and precious
promises that she shall flourish and abound in spiritual branches, and fruits.
One shall say I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of
Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and Surname
himself by the name of Israel, Isa. 44.5. yea, they shall flock as Doves to the
windows; see Psa. 22.27, 29. Isa. 35.1, 2. Isa. 49.6. Isa. 65. God is the
father which begets, and the Church is the mother that brings forth
spiritual fruit to Christ by the seed of the word and Spirit.

It follows.

[Whom thou may make Princes in all the Earth.]

The Spouse shall be no looser by Christ, though she incur the displeasure of
natural friends and relations (and those great and rich and honorable in the
world) for, her Children shall be raised to a higher dignity then her great
Progenitors after the flesh.

Hence we may Note.

That the true Children of the Church are Princes indeed. Believers are Princes.


The Saints are the excellent ones in the earth, Psa. 16.3. As for the great,
and rich, and honorable ones of the world (if they be wicked) they are but
vile and ignoble, not fit to be mentioned the same day with the Saints. Jacob
as a Prince had power with God and men, and prevailed, Genesis 32.28. The Lord
has promised that Kings of people shall come of Sarah the free woman (who was
a Type of the Church under the New Testament, Genesis 17.16. Gal. 4.23.) and that
Kings and Queens shall be nursing fathers and mothers to her, Isa. 49.23.

I shall not further apply this Verse to the Church, ^or it is conceived (and
not without ground) that both this and the latter Verse may be more congruously
applied to Christ the Bridegroom, whose honor and exaltation is chiefly aimed
at in this Song of ^oves, and whose name ought to be comemorated above all
other names, Phil. 2.9.

[Instead of thy Fathers shall be thy Children.]

If we refer this to Christ personal, then Observe.

That though Christ had but a mean outside, Though Christ was obscure in
respect of his natural kindred, yet he is glorious in his spiritual Allies and
Relations.
and was obscure in respect of his kindred and parentage after the fiesh (there
was no beauty nor comeliness in him that he should be desired, Isa. 63.2, 3.)
yet what was wanting herein, is abundantly made up in the Majesty and glory of
his Divinity; and not only so, but also in that Divine nature, spiritual
beauty and riches which he communicates to his Children.

Christ derived no excellency from his Progenitors after the flesh, but he
communicates a Divine excellency to his seed after the spirit; therefore if
hitherto we have known Christ only after the flesh, yet henceforth let us know
him so no more. He that is in Christ is a new Creature; old things are past
away, behold all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. Again.

[ Whom thou (to wit, Christ) may make Princes in all the Earth.]

Observe. It is only from Christ and not from themselves, that the Saints are
Princes.


That it is only by and from Christ (and not from themselves, or any acts of
theirs) that the Saints are made Princes, and of the seed and blood Royal.

This great dignity is derived to us from Michael the great Prince, who
appears for the Children of the Church, Dan. 12.1. and pleads their cause.

Now that the Saints are Princes by and through Christ, is domonstrated. They
are Princes. 1 By their redemption.


1 Demo. From their Redemption by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 1.7. who has loved
and washed his people from their sins in his own blood, and made them Kings and
Priests to God the father, and they shall reign on earth, Rev. 1.5. Rev. 5.10.
Rev. 20.6. By Christ we are made a Royal Priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable of God through him, 1 Pet. 2.5, 9.

2 The birth and Original of the Saints is Princely and noble; every true
believer is of the blood Royal, 2 By their spiritual birth.
heaven born, John 1.13. Jerusalem is from above, and comes down from Heaven,
Gal. 4.26. Rev. 21.2. The Saints are a Royal seed, the seed of God, Mal. 2.15.

3 They are endowed with a Royal Princely disposition, a noble heroic spirit,
3 They have a royal Spirit.
God having put his own Spirit into them, Heb. 8.10. whereby they are raised
above the Principles of corrupt Nature.

It Is a wretched slander of Machiavell, That Religion emasculates the spirit of
a man, and makes him mopish; whereas there is nothing that does truly enoble
the spirit of a man, but grace. David prayed that God would uphold him with his
free spirit, Psa. 51.12. Some Translators tender it, Thy Princely ruling
Spirit; this Spirit (and not outward honors and dignities) was that which
rendered David truly Royal. Such as are made free and willing in the day of
Christ's power by this Princely ruling Spirit, are a Princely people. The
Princes of the people (or as it is varied in the margent, The Volunteers of the
people) are gathered unto the people of the God of Abraham, Psa. 47.9. Psa.
110.3.

4 They are made conformable by Christ, 4 They are conformed to a Royal Law.
both in heart and practice, to a Royal Law, James 2.8.

5 They are clothed with Royal Apparel, of which have spoken from v. 13. As
Queen Esther when she went into the Kings presence, 5 Clothed with Royal
Apparel.
was arrayed with Royal Apparel, so shall the Saints appear before the Lord in
their Royal Robes. Thus it shall be with every man and woman whom the King
delights to honor, Isa. 5.1. Isa. 6.9.

6 The Lord affords his people Princely fare, 6 Fed with Princely fare.
royal dainties, Genesis 49.20. Manna from Heaven, the bread of God, his own
flesh, which is meat indeed, and his own blood, which is drink indeed, John
6.27, 33. 51, 53, 54, 55. They sit at his Table, and eat of his dainties, Cant.
1.12. Luke 22.30. Cant. 5.1. They are brought into the Kings Wine-seller, and
refreshed with his flagons, Cant. 2.4, 5. for them is provided a feast of fat
things, of wine on the lees, Isa. 25.6.

7 They have Princely Company; 7 They have Princely Company.
God himself the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, having communion with them. We
write these things to you (says the Apostle) that ye may have fellowship with
us, and truly our fellowship is with the father, and the Son, and the holy
Ghost, 1 John 1.3. 2 Cor. 13.14. And is not here good company? Christ comes in
to his people, and sups with them, and they with him, Rev. 3.20. He will
manifest himself, and not leave them comfortless, but will come to them, John
14.18, 21. They have also the Company of the glorious Angels, who are Princes,
Dan. 10.13. And of the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. Behold all
that are of this company are Kings and Queens, a Senate of Kings, as it was
said of the Roman Council.

8 They are Citizens of a Princely Royal City. 8 They are Citizens of a
Princely City.
Rabbah is called the City Royal, 2 Samuel 12.26. because the King did ordinarily
reside, and keep his Court in it. The Saints belong to the Royal City and
Palace of Heaven; Our conversation (says the Apostle) is in Heaven, we are
free Denizens of that Royal City, (...).
Phil. 3.20.

9 Christ entitleth them to Princely and Royal Victories, 9 Entitled to
Princely Victories.
having overcome and vanquished for them sin, 1 John 3.8. Satan, Col. 2.15.
Heb. 2.14. Death, Hos. 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.57. and the world, John 16.33. and
enabling them (by faith) to overcome and triumph: So that thorough him they are
more then Conquerors, Romans 8.37. As Josuahs Captains trod upon the neeks of
the five conquered Kings, Josh. 10.24. So the Saints through Christ do tread
upon the necks of their enemies, corporal and spiritual

10 Lastly, 10 A Royal Crown is laid up for them.
Christ has provided for his people a Princely Crown, and Royal Diadem, as a
glorious emblem of their victory. The twenty four Elders were clothed with
white Robes, and had on their heads Crowns of gold, Rev. 4.4, 10. Rev. 2.10. 2 Timothy 4.8. And it is promised, that the Saints shall be a Crown of glory, and a
Royal Diadem in the hand of the Lord, Isa. 62.3.

Quae. Wherein should the Saints show forth the nobleness and Princelinesse of
their spirits? In five things especially the Saints should manifest the
Princelines of their spirits.


Answ. I will only mention five particulars.

I. The Saints should act freely for God, and have their spirits enlarged, and
at liberty for and in his service, Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. A free voluntary spirit is a Princely spirit; God loves a
freewill offering. David blessed the Lord for giving him, his Princes and
people, 1 In acting freely for God.
a heart to offer up so freely and willingly toward the building of the
Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29.6, 14. Exodus 35.21. The Saints should work for God
willingly and freely, from a spirit of love and adoption, not in a servile way,
expecting wages for their work, not indenting and playing the hucksters with
God (as hypocrites do) A man of a gallant and Princely spirit will do noble
and heroic acts in love to virtue, without expecting a Reward.

II. We should show forth the true nobleness and Princelinesse of our spirits,
2 In following the Lord fully.
in following the Lord fully, though the way wherein he walks, be full of
briars and thorns, full of hazards and troubles to the outward man. Agrippa was
persuaded (almost) to be a Christian, Acts 26, 28. but he came not off sully
and altogether. Thus it was also with the young man in the Gospel, Mat. 19.21.
But on the contrary, Joshua and Caleb followed the Lord fully (throughout the
wilderness) being men of excellent Princely heroic spirits, Numb. 32.12. They
did not look back to the flesh pots of Egypt, nor were they cowardly and
unbelieving, like the rest of the Israelites, who were men of low and sordid
spirits. That is a true heroic spirit which follows the Lord fully, and in
this regard Daniel and Nehemiah were men of excellent choice spirits.

III. We should manifest the Princelinesse of our spirits in utterly refusing
to be in bondage to the Enemies of God and his people; 3 In denying the lusts
of the flesh and the world.
I mean Satan, the flesh, and the world, as others are, 2 Pet. 2.19. We should
bid defiance to every lust, and to every base sinful course and compliance.
Thus will a true Christian do; the Son having made him free, he is free
indeed, John 8.36. Romans 8.23. and will come no more into bondage; he scorns to
be a slave to sin, which he counts the greatest slavery: And for the riches and
honors of the world, he contemnes and tramples upon them as infinitely below
Christ (when they come in competition to him. So did the Martyrs, and this
argues a true nobleness and Princelines of spirit.

IV. 4 In suffering joyfully for Christ.
In bearing reproaches and afflictions for Christ and his cause, not only
patiently and meekly, but courageously and joyfully. For a man to count it all
joy when he falls into manifold Tribulations, James 1.2. showing forth both
excellent wisdom and undanted courage in the midst of afflicters. Such a man
has the spirit of glory resting upon him, 1 Pet. 4.14. even that spirit which
rested upon Christ in his sufferings; whereas on the contrary, if a man faint
in the day of adversity, it is because his strength is but small, Prove. 24.10.

V. Lastly, 5 In overcoming evil with good.
The Saints should manifest the Princelinesse of their spirits, in loving and
doing good to their enemies, passing by injuries and abuses, and overcoming
them with kindness. This may be judged by the men of the world to be
pusilanimity, and cowardice. But it is an Argument of a truly noble and brave
spirit, to do good for evil. It Is the honor of a man to pass by an offense.
We find that Philip of Macedon, Julius Caesar, Augustus, and other Princes,
were as famous for passing by injuries, and heaping favors upon their enemies,
as for their victories in the field. In the former they showed as much, nay
more true valor in the latter; it was only a moral virtue in them, but in the
Saints it is a Christian virtue, a fruit of the Spirit of grace dwelling in
them. None but they can pass by injuries, and do good in a Gospel way;
therefore none are of such a Princely Spirit as they, being herein conformable
to their head, loving as Christ loved, and forgiving as he forgave them, Ephesians.
5.1, 2. All the virtues and excellencies of the most famous Heathens and
exactest Moralists, were but shadows of virtue if compared with the Christian
virtues of the Saints, who are made Princes by Christ.

VERSE. XVII. I will make thy name to be remembered in all Generations; therefore
shall the people praise thee for ever and ever.
[I will make thy name to be remembered.]

OR thus, I will mention thy name that it may be remembered. The Inditer of this
Psalm speaks these words to Christ concerning his Kingdom and glory. There
is a connection between this and the Verse going before, both aiming at the
honor and renown of Christ the Bridegroom, whose name and truth (maugre all
opposition and attempts to the contrary) shall be remembered throughout all
Generations. But as for the names of his and his peoples implacable enemies,
they shall rot and even stink above ground; and thus it is with the names of
Antiochus, Julian, Gelsus, Porphyrie, etc. at this day. The name of Christ is,
and ever shall be precious, and the high praises thereof shall be celebrated
from one Generation to another.

Quae. But who will cause this name to be remembered and celebrated?

Answ. Even the Spirit of the Lord (who inspired the Psalmist in composing this
good matter) the Psalmist was but the Amanvensis of the Spirit; though we are
not utterly to exclude instruments, and second causes by whom the Spirit of God
works (for it may be truly said that the Church or Spouse does instrumentally
cause the name of the Lord to be remembered) yet the Spirit of God is the only
efficient cause.

Hence therefore Observe. Observe. The Spirit of God chooses the name of Christ
to be remembered.


That the Holy Ghost (by whose inspiration this Psalm was indicted) will cause
the name of Christ to be remembered and honored from age to age, whilst the
world endures.

The Enemies of Christ have endeavored from time to time, by power and
policy, to bury his name in ignominy and oblivion. Some of them rendering him
in his own person a deceiver, a blasphemer; others reviling him in his members,
but the Spirit shall convince the world that Christ is righteous, and that his
people are righteous, and holy, however they have been represented by the
world, John 16.10.

This is promised here in the Text, I will make memory of thy name (so some
render the words) or cause thy name to be remembered.

Three things are to be explained and opened.

I. What is meant by the name of Christ? II. What it is to remember his name?
III. How the Spirit of God causes the name of Christ to be remembered?
1 Quae. What do you mean by the name of Christ?

Answ. The name of Christ has various significations in Scripture, where it is
often mentioned, John 5.43. What is meant by the name of Christ.
John 10.25. Acts 2.38. Acts 3.6. Acts 5.28, 40. Col. 3.17. 1 Pet. 4.14.

1 Sometimes it signifies the power and Authority of Christ; At the name of
Jesus shall every knee bow, Phil. 2.10.

2 Sometimes it is taken for the worship of Christ, Micah 4.5. Zech. 14.9. Now
the Saints are called by a reproachful name, but they shall be known by
another name. The Spirit of the Lord will cause the name of Christ only to be
remembered among the Saints. Under the name of Christ here is comprehended his
Gospel, or the word of his Kingdom, Mat. 4.23. wherein the name, natures,
offices, works, sufferings, victories, excellencies of Christ are displayed.
God has promised that this name from the rising of the Sun, to the going down
thereof, shall be great among the Gentiles, Mal. 1.11. his way shall be known
upon earth, and his saving truth among all Nations, Psa. 67.2, 3, 4, 5. The
Heathen shall be his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth his
possession; his name shall be great and glorious from Sea to Sea, and from one
end of the world to another. All the ends of the world shall remember and turn
to the Lord, and all the kindreds of the Nations shall worship before him, Psa.
2.8. Psa. 22.27. Isa. 59.19.

Quae. But you will say, The name of Christ is sweet and excellent.
is the name of Christ so excellent?

Answ. Yea it is most excellent, Heb. 1.4. Act. 4.12. For

First, In knowing and remembering the name of Christ, we come to the saving
knowledge of God, whose name is in Christ, Exodus 23.21. Now what is the name of
the Lord (as himself proclaims it to Moses) but his mercy, truth, power,
goodness, wisdom, long-suffering, for our our Salvation, Exodus 34.6, 7. This
name Christ declares to his Brethren, Heb. 2.12. And has made familiar unto
us, (God being manifested in our nature) they shall call his name Emanuel,
which (being interpreted) is God with us, Mat. 1.23.

Secondly, The name of God in Christ is our strong Tower, and refuge, whereunto
we may have recourse in all our trialls and dangers, and be safe, Pro. 18.10.
When sin and Satan, and our own consciences accuse us, we must run to this
strong hold. His name shall be Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
sins, Mat. 1.21. And this is his name whereby he shall be called the Lord our
righteousness, Jer. 23.6. This name is our stay and support when we have not
that comfortable sense of Divine love which we formerly had. He that walks in
darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, Isa.
50.10. And hereof we should make mention continually (as the Psalmist says) I
will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only, Psa. 71.16.

II. Quaer. What is it to remember the name of Christ?

Answ. There is a twofold remembrance of his name. What is it to remember the
name of Christ. A twofold remembrance. 1 A notionall.


I. A mere speculative notionall remembrance of it. Thus thousands (who will
not have Christ to Reign over them) do literally and notionally commemorate
his name, Gospel, and Kingdom, and make repetition thereof with the tongue
(perhaps far more readily then many sincere Christians who have not such a
strong natural memory and faculty of expression to discourse of the things of
Christ which they read and hear.) Not every one that says Lord, Lord (i.e.)
that mentions the name Gospel and Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, shall be saved.
Many will say in that day Lord Lord have we not Prophesied, cast out Devils,
and done wonderful works in thy name? but the Lord will say he never knew
them, Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. Men may perform some duties in the name and strength
of Christ, and be raised above their natural and acquired abilities, by some
influences and gifts of the Spirit of God, and yet the Lord will not own them
for his true Remembrancers.

sanctified spiritual practical Remembrance of the name of Christ; 2 A
practical remembrance of the name of Christ.
so to remember him as to believe on him, do his will, love him, and delight
in him (in the sense of his love to us) We will remember thy love (says the
Spouse) more then Wine, Cant. 1.4. The name or love of Christ is sweet and
precious to a spiritual experienced Christian. Austin after he had experimented
the virtue and excellency of the name of Christ, How the Spirit causes us to
remember Christ's name.
did disrelish Cicero's eloquent Writings, because he found not this name in
them. When the Spirit of the Lord opens the name of Christ to a soul, it is
like a Box of sweet Ointment, casting forth a most fragrant and odoriferous
smell. Thy name is as Ointment powered forth, therefore do the Virgins love
thee, Cant. 1.3.

Now to the third Quaery, Negat. Not ordinarily, by immediate suggestion and
revelation.
How and by what means the Spirit of God causes the name of Christ to be
Remembered?

Answer, first ( negatively) the Spirit does not now ordinarily cause Christ's
name to be remembered by immediate suggestion and Revelation, as he did before
the word of God was written; then indeed the Spirit of the Lord did more
immediately suggest the name and will of Christ to the Patriarchs, yea, and
after some part of the word was written, to the Prophets and Apostles; but now
we are under a better and surer administration. God who at sundry times, and in
diverse manners (by peace meal, now a little, and then a little (...)
) spoke in time past to the fathers, has in these last days spoken to us by
his Son once for all, Heb. 1.1, 2. We have a more sure word of Prophecy,
whereunto we may do well to take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19. The Lord has commanded us
to hear the voice of his Son in his word and Ordinances, and every soul that
will not hear shall be cut off, Deuteronomy. 18.18. Acts 3.22. Acts 7.37.

Yet nevertheless there is an immediate Testimony of the Sp.
And yet it will not be denied but that there is an immediate Testimony of the
Spirit (without any syllogisticall reasoning) saying particularly to the soul,
Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. The Holy Ghost does not always
evidence to a man's conscience his good estate by force of Argument taken taken
from the fruits of Sanctification, but sometimes immediately by way of
presence; as the fight of a friend comforts a man without help of discourse;
and thus much is granted by many eminent practical Divines, Dr. Preston Chur.
Mar. p. 9. Of effect. faith. p. 245 Dr. Sibbs Seal of Spi. p. 166. Mr. Tho.
Goodwin Ret. of prayers. p. 109.269. Mr. Sym. Des. soul. M. Rutherford. M.
Cotton.
who allege Romans 8.16.1 John 5.6, 8. Rev. 2.17. for it, and no donbt but many
spiritual Christians (who are far from Emhusiasmes) have experience thereof.
Concerning which, Cautions about the immediate Testimony of the Sp.
these Cautions are to be observed.

First, That this immediate Testimony is not ordinarily communicated to every
believer, but only to some Christians.

Secondly, It follows deep and serious self-abasement and Humiliation.

Thirdly, It comes after great and extraordinary afflictions, desertions,
conflicts, Rev. 2.17. As Wine is given to them that are of heavy hearts, Prove.
31.6. or else it is to prepare a Christian for great afflictions and
Martyrdom. The Apostles were present with Christ at his Transfiguration, Mat
17.1. and beheld his glory that they might be fitted to suffer for him. Blessed
Glover having been in a disconsolate condition, cries out a little before his
Martyrdom, He is come, he is come.

Fourthly, This immediate whispering or suggestion is so far from making a
Christian abandon and cast off the Ordinances and appointments of Christ, that
it quickens and stirs him up to be more frequent, zealous and spiritual in the
things of Gods worship. The Spirit of God enters into us when the Lord speaks
to us in and by his word, Ezekiel. 2.1, 2.

secondly, Affirmat. The Spirit causes Christ's name to be remembered ordinarily
in the use of means. The Spirit causes the name of Christ to be remembered. 1
By enabling men to preach the Gospel.
The Holy Ghost does ordinarily comemorate and cause the name of Christ to be
remembered in and by the use of means and second causes, which though they be
but passive in themselves, and so cannot produce any powerful effect without
the invincible concurrence and operation of the Spirit of God, yet the Spirit
does ordinarily work thereby: Nor does he bring to our remembrance contrary
things, but the very same things which are contained in the word, John 14.26.

Let me now declare more particularly how and after what manner the Spirit of
God causes the name of Christ to be remembered.

First therefore he anointeth and furnishes men with spiritual gifts and
abilities, Ephesians. 3.8. Ephesians. 4.8. for declaring and making known to the world
a naked crucified Christ as the object of true faith, and the sum, substance,
and quintessence of all the Scriptures, Promises, Sacraments, Ordinances,
graces, comforts, 1 Cor. 2.2. Gal. 6.14. 2 Cor. 1.20. Col. 2.10. Col. 3.11.
There being no other name given under Heaven whereby we can be saved, but the
name of Christ, Acts 4.12. No other foundation can my man lay, then that which
is laid, 1 Cor. 3.11.

Secondly, 2 By stirring up in the Saints a mighty Spirit of prayer.
He stirs up in his people a mighty spirit of Prayer, to implore and besiege
the Throne of grace incessantly (maugre all discouragements) One thing have I
desired of the Lord (says the Psalmist) that will I seek after, Psalm. 27.4.
The Spirit of God makes them restless and importunate, so that they will take
no denial; Lord thou have promised that thou will advance thy Name and thy
Kingdom, and spread thy truth throughout the world, and that all impediments
and hindrances shall be removed; now Lord I plead thy Promise, and do
earnestly beg the fulfilling of it, that so thou may have more honor in the
world then thou have at this day. Though God does not effect great things for
our prayers, yet he does ordinarily stir up in his people a spirit of prayer,
before he bring them to pass. The same Spirit that causes the name of Christ
to be remembered, in the Nations of the world, does direct his people to pray
for those very things which God intends to accomplish. As in a way of Prophecy,
the Spirit in the Prophets did signify the glory that should follow, 1 Pet.
1.11. So here in a way of prayer.

Thirdly, 2 Byrevealing Christ to thesouls of men.
The Spirit of God does powerfully and convincingly reveal the name of Christ
to the souls of men. He shall glorify me (says Christ) for he shall take of
mine, and show it unto you, John 16.14. He shall exalt that name which is
exalted above all names, Ephesians. 1.21. Phil. 2.9. We read of the demonstration of
the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.3. Now a demonstration is the most convincing, and
clearest kind of proof, which bears down all before it, and silenceth all
objections to the contrary. For this end the Ministry of the Gospel is mighty
and powerful, but then it is through the Spirit of God, 2 Cor. 10.4. without
which all the teachings of men will not make the name of Christ to be remembered
to purpose; but where this spiritual demonstration comes, it answers all
cavills, and outs the Devil of his strong hold.

Fourthly, 4 In order hereunto, the Spirit puts a Divine light into their
hearts.
In order hereunto the Spirit of the Lord puts a Divine light into the blind
hearts of men. What though the Sun shine brightly, yet if a man be blind he
cannot see it. Now we are all spiritually blind by nature, 2 Cor. 3.14. 2 Cor.
4.4. Acts 26.18. Ephesians. 5.8. and therefore there is an absolute necessity not
only that the object should be revealed, but also that a Divine spiritual
light and capacity should be put into the subject, which being done by the
Spirit of wisdom and Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. shining into men's hearts, and
giving them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. The name word and works of Christ are exceeding mysterious,
the little book (which is in the right hand of him that sits on the Throne) is
clasped and sealed, Rev. 5.1. till the Spirit unclasp and open it to us, and
give us a spiritual understanding of the things which are written in it. There
is a Spirit in the word, a Spirit in the wheels, or providentiall revolutions
and changes, Ezekiel 1.1. which opens the mysteries of the word and works of
Christ, and so declares his name unto us.

Fifthly, 5 He renews in them the remembrance of spiritual things.
Whereas the best of us (notwithstanding our former experiences) are exceeding
apt to forget the name of the Lord Jesus (which is our resting place) and so
are disquieted in our spirits, and become exceeding dull and unfruitful in our
places (so that God has little honor by us) the Spirit in this case whispers
us in the ear, awakens us, and brings the name of Christ to our remembrance,
John 14.26. yea some truths which perhaps we have read or heard many years
ago, and which have been long out of our remembrance, the Spirit sets afresh
upon our hearts, and that when we are in a loose and unspiritual frame that so
the free gracious operation and impression of the Holy Ghost may be the more
magnified by us. As for vain and unprofitable things, we can remember them with
much facility, but for spiritual things which coucern the glory of God, the
crucifying of the flesh, and the lusts thereof, and the peace and comfort of
our own souls, we do as easily forget, till the Spirit of God by over-powring
our hearts, cause us to remember the same: He it is that does particularly
apply the promises unto us, he it is that helps our infirmities, Romans 8.26.
He is our Remembrancer and comforter, our teacher and our councellor; in
difficult cases he leads us into all truth, John 16.13. and guides us into
those ways which make for the honor and exaltation of the name of Christ.
When you turn to the right hand, or to the left, you shall hear a word behind
you, saying, this is the way, walk in it, Isa. 30.21.

Sixthly, 6 He helps Christians in their places to speak out their experiences
of his goodness.
As the holy Ghost raises up and comfort the hearts of declining Christians
themselves, by minding them seriously of the name of Christ, and causing them
to remember from whence they are fallen, Rev. 2.5. and that it was much better
with them before, then now it is, Hos. 2.7. So he opens their mouths wide
(being by nature spiritually dumb, and averse to the language of Canaan) to
declare and set forth the name and praises of Christ where they come, and to
speak of his goodness to others. With the tongue men confess the name of the
Lord, Romans 10.10. and the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one to
profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. and till the Spirit of God enlarge our hearts, and
open our mouths, we cannot hold forth the truth in love and meekness nor
faithfully communicate to others our experiences of the virtue and efficacy of
the name, natures, offices, and relations of Christ: we cannot in a Christian
manner declare the same to our Children, that they may make them known to their
children, and so from one Generation to another.

Seventhly, 7 He makes them walk holily and convincingly.
The Spirit of God (being a Spirit of holiness and of glory) causes the name
of Christ to be remembered by working up the hearts and lives of the Saints to
much holiness and purity; men are led more by example then by precept. When
Christians have a conversation becoming the Gospel, and walk as Christ walked,
Phil. 1.27. Phil. 2.5. O this convinces gainsayers, adorneth the name of
Christ, and causes men to fall in love therewith; as on the contrary, the
pride, selfishnesse, worldliness, and divisions of Christians do exceedingly
harden the wicked, and cause the name of the Lord to be blasphemed, Romans 2.24.
O therefore let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity,
2 Timothy 2.14. They that are taught by the holy Spirit of God will do so.

Eighthly, 8 By the sufferings of the Saints, he advances the name of Christ.
The Lord makes his name to be remembered, not only by the active, but also by
the passive obedience of his people. The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of
the Church; they that suffer for the name of Christ, with the mind of Christ,
namely, with patience, meekness, humility, wisdom, love and pity to their
enemies, are the best and most powerful Preachers of Christ's name and Gospel.
As the Spirit of God made the name of Christ famous by the preaching, so by the
sufferings of the Apostles; as they labored much for Christ, so they suffered
great things for his name, Acts 9.16. Acts 5.41. and it is given to the Saints
not only to believe, but to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1.29. Many have been
converted, and have embraced the name of Christ, by beholding the heavenly
carriage and deportment of the Martyrs in their sufferings, the same darting
forth not a little spiritual glory and Majesty. Satan (and not the Spirit of
God) does sometimes, put men upon Religious duties.


Obj. But (you will say, that) Satan does sometimes put men upon Religious
duties, and suggest the name and things of Christ to them, and cause them to
remember, and to mention the same.

Answ. This is very true, Satan can and does transform himself into an Angel of
light, 2 Cor. 11.14. (especially in our days) Oh the sad and dreadful
delusions that are abroad in the world! Oh the subtle devices turnings and
windings of this wily Serpent! how many Stars has this Dragons tail cast down
to the earth? Rev. 12.4.

Satan has several ways and methods to infinuate into poor souls, and to
delude them, and I wish with all my soul we may not be ignorant of his
Devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. He will seem to exalt Christ and redemption by his blood,
the teachings of his Spirit, the perfection and glory of his righteousness and
satisfaction to the poor wounded soul. See the Quakers shaken, in the Narrat.
of 10. Gilpin. Demon. Meridian. p. 81. by M. Fowler.
And will cause such visions, apparitions, representations to the fancy and
senses of a man, as will at present wonderfully raise and elevate him, as if he
were in the third Heaven. 5 Things wherein Satan differs from the Spirit of God
in putting men upon Religious duties.


But let these five distinguishing Notes be considered by the Reader, and they
will (by Gods blessing) minister some light unto him.

First then, Satan puts a man upon Religious exercises at unseasonable times,
when he should be employed in his Calling; God loves mercy and not sacrifice.
Indeed there is a great temptation on the other hand when Christians neglect
prayer, meditation, and hearing the word, under pretense of multiplicity of
other business, and employments. But the Spirit of God is Regular, and
seasonable in his motions to Religious duties, and does not make a man neglect
the duties either of his general or particular Calling.

Secondly, Satan when he puts a man upon prayer, or any other Religious
service, he comes upon the conscience in a rough, violent, imperious manner, not
humbling, preparing, and enlarging the heart in order to the duty, as the
Spirit of the Lord does, who directs the Saints both as to the matter manner
and other circumstances of prayer. The Spirit of adoption comes not in the
rough, but in the still voice, it is a Dove like, not a boisterous Spirit.

Thirdly, Satan by his suggestions about spiritual things, makes men the more
flashy, inconstant, fantastical, proud and vain; but the holy Ghost the more
he operates upon, and suggests the name of Christ to the soul, the more
serious, sober, constant, humble, wise and grave, such a soul will be.

Fourthly, Satan endeavors to shuffle out one duty by another, as prayer or
hearing, by reading, etc. It Is his design to exclude public administrations
by private communion, or private communion by public administrations: But the
Spirit of the Lord is uniform, and by his motions causes the soul to have
respect to the whole will of Christ, and to remember his name in all the
Ordinances of his worship, as there is opportunity.

Lastly, Though Satan may sometimes, and in some cases, pretend to the exalting
of the blood of Christ, and the teachings of the Spirit of Christ, yet it is
that himself may have the more advantage: He reduces all to that light, or
rather those Principles of darkness which are within a man, and so in effect
puts him upon a mere Covenant of works, and the worst ^^nd of Popery and
Socinianisme (as we have many sad examples thereof at this day) vilifying and
excluding the written word, Ministry, and Ordinances of Christ, as mere
shadows, and beggarly Rudiments, and bringing in a multitude of senflesse
Allegories, and foolish speculations, which eat out and destroy the very marrow
and favor of the Scriptures. But as for the Spirit of God, he does ordinarily
convert, teach, comfort, and stablish the soul, by applying the blood,
benefits, and Promises of Christ, as the same are propounded and held forth in
the written word, and the faithful dispensation thereof by his Ministers; he
does ordinarily speak in, with, and by, and always according to the written
word (rightly understood) nor does the Spirit of the Lord cause a Christian to
slight and contemn his brother, as being not under such high seize as
himself. Much more might be said on this subject, but it is a large common
place upon which many good men have written, and therefore I shall insist no
further upon it.

From what has been delivered in the Explication of this Doctrine, we may draw
three or four useful Corrolaries.

First then, They do but labor in vain, and strive against their Maker, who
attempt directly or indirectly, to cause the name of Christ either personal or
mystical to be quite forgotten. The enemies consulted against Gods hidden
ones, that the name of Israel might be no more in remembrance, Psalm. 83.4.
Herod would have killed Christ as soon as he was born, Mat. 2.16. And there be
many that would destroy Christ as soon as he is spiritually formed in the
soul, Gal. 4.19. When Gospel light breaks forth, these (like the Dog in the
manger) not only reject it themselves, but would hinder others from receiving
it, being afraid of the light, lest their works of darkness should be
discovered. Thus it was with the Pharisees, John 3.20, 21. But (will they, nill
they) the light shall shine forth more and more, till it have fully discovered
the Impostures of Satan and Antichrist, and made the name and truths of Christ
glorious throughout the world, the Spirit of glory and Revelation will do it.
Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit (says the Lord of Hosts) Zech.
4.6. The Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard, Isa. 59.19. This Battle
shall be by burning and fuel of fire, Isa. 9.5.

Secondly, Forasmuch as the Lord has promised that he will cause his name to
be remembered, we that have often made mention of his name, and see but little
fruit of our labors, should nevertheless take courage, and not dispond in our
spirits, considering what the Lord has promised (though we be vile and
unworthy) that the Gentiles shall know and trust in his name, Romans 15.12, 21.
The Lord will write his Law in the hearts of the people, and they shall know
the truth, and the truth shall make them free, Jer. 31.33. John 8.32. The Lord
will destroy in this mountain, the face of the covering cast over all people,
and the veil which is spread over all Nations, Isa. 25.7. Many shall run too
and fro, and knowledge shall be increased, Dan. 12.4. Living waters shall go
out from Jerusalem, and the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the
Lord, Zech. 14.8. yea, the Lord will be to the people as a dew falling on the
tender grass, and they shall bring forth fruit in season, and their fruit
shall abide, Psalm. 92. Hos. 14.15. Psalm. 110.3. Mic. 5.7. Isa. 55.10. Gal.
4.27. John 15.16.

We know from sad experience that our poor Children and relations, yea
generally all our Auditors do forget the name of Christ, though we often
mention it to them, here a little, and there a little, line upon line, and
precept upon precept, Isa. 28.10. But when the Spirit of the Lord writes the
name of Christ upon their hearts, they shall remember it, and shall be
manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, written not with ink, but with
the Spirit of the living God, 2 Cor. 3.2, 3.

Thirdly, It concerns us therefore to honor and exalt the Spirit of the Lord
who indicted this Psalm, and in the light, wisdom, and strength of that Spirit
(with all humility and reverence) to hallow and make mention of the name of
Christ, whereover we are cast by providence; but especially to our Children and
Relations, that they may make the same known to their Children; and in so
doing, we shall leave a sweet favor behind us, and be a blessed example to the
next succeeding Generation, whom (I doubt not) the Lord will honor in the
carrying on of his work (though we of this present age should be laid aside as
unfit for it.)

Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, Masters of Families, every one in his place,
should declare to the people, especially to the younger sort (that they may
declare the same to the next Generation.)

1 The glorious works of Creation and Providence, and the wonderful out goings
and appearances of God in the deliverance of his people, Exodus 12.25. Psalm.
77.11, 12.

2 The admirable things of Gods holy Law, which we should whet upon our
Children, Psalm. 119.129. Deuteronomy. 4.9. Deuteronomy. 6.7. Psalm. 78.5, 6, 7. Mal. 4.4. Yea,
we should keep a Record of the Judgments and terrible dispensations of God,
Joel 1.3. But

3 We ought especially to commemorate and transmit to our posterity, the sweet
and precious name of Christ (to wit) the gracious complot and Covenant between
the Father and the Son, for our redemption and salvation, Prove. 8.23, 30, 31.
Heb. 10.7. Isa. 49.3, 4, etc. Isa. 53.12. And the heavenly intercourse and
transactions between Christ and his Church, which are the subject matter of
this Song; herein we ought chiefly to instruct our Children, that the same may
not depart out of their mouth, nor out of the mouth of their seed, nor out of
the mouths of their seeds seed, Isa. 59.21. The living, the living, he shall
praise thee, The father to the Children shall make known thy truth, Isa. 38.19.

An aniversary memorial of, and thanksgiving for outward deliverances, is not
sufficient, much less for soul mercies, the praises whereof should be
continually celebrated by us. Tell your Children, and let your Children tell
their Children, and their Children another Generation, Joel 1.3. what the Lord
Christ has done for poor sinners.

Lastly, Seeing the Spirit of God in and by the Church causes the name of
Christ to be remembered, Let us therefore earnestly beg and wait for the
abundant pouring out of this Spirit, Isa. 44.3. Isa. 35.7. Joel 2.28. That the
Gospel may run, and may be glorified, and that the precious name of Christ
(which is as a box of sweet persume) may be powered into the hearts, memories,
mouths, and lives of the people, and that all Nations may bless the Lord for
Christ, as the great defite and delight thereof, Hag. 2.7. and for his Church,
which shall be the joy of many Generations, Isa. 60.15. that with gladness and
rejoicing they may make mention of that spiritual intercourse which is between
the Bridegroom and Bride here, and the glorious communion which shall be
between them (...) Heaven, and which is and shall be matter of high praises to
Eternity, as the Psalmist concludes, Therefore shall the people praise thee for
ever and ever.

Make have, and come away my Beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young
Heart upon the mountains of Spices,

Gant. 8.14. Let the Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that hears
say come; and let him that is athirst come. He which testifies these things,
says, surely I come quickly, Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus,

Rev. 22.17, 20.
FINIS.
A TABLE OR Summary of the Chief Heads of Doctrine propounded in this
EXPOSITION.
In the Introduction.
FOUR Considerations touching Allegories, and the Allegorical sense of
Scripture.

In what cases Allegories are to be admitted.

From the Title or Inscription.
Four Reasons why we should diligently study this Marriage Song.

Three useful Instructions drawn from the Inscription.

From Verse 1.
1 Observe. That the conjugall love of Christ to his Spouse is a good matter.

2 Observe. That a spiritual Christian cannot fully express what is within his
heart.

3 Observe. That a gracious soul especially eyes Christ's person in Thanksgiving.

4 Observe. That such a soul having experience of Christ's power, will speak of
him, and for him.

From Verse 2.
1 Observe. That Christ is incomparably fair and full of beauty.

1 In his Natures. 2 Offices. 3 Relations. 4 Word and Ordinances. 5
Providence. 6 Members.
2 Observe. That Christ does effectually give Grace by the Ministry of the
Gospel.

This Doctrine is confirmed by four Arguments, and an Objection answered.

3 Observe. That Christ is furnished with power and spiritual gifts to do poor
sinners good.

From Verse 3.
1 Observe. That none are able to withstand the sharp sword of Christ.

2 Observe. That Christ is the mighty one who can perform whatsoever he
promises or threatens.

Four Reasons why it was necessary that Christ should be the Mighty One.

3 Observe. That the true believer spiritually eyes the Divinity in the humanity
of Christ, for his salvation.

Five Inferences drawn from this Doctrine.

From Verse 4.
1 Observe. That Christ rides in Majesty, truth, meekness, and righteousness.

2 Observe. That he prospers in his journey and undertakings.

3 Observe. That though the Lord can immediately bring about his glorious
designs, yet he will have his people pray to him.

Three Motives hereunto.

4 Observe. That the Lord Jesus in advancing his Kingdom, will do terrible
things in righteousness.

From Verse 5.
1 Observe. That Christ and his people will meet with much opposition in a good
work.

Christ bath two sorts of Enemies. 1 Open. 2 Secret.

2 Observe. That it is a great evil and provocation to oppose the Lord Jesus in
his Kingly Office.

3 Observe. That Christ is an excellent Archer, and hits the mark whenever he
shoots.

4 Observe. That the Lord shoots the keen Arrows of his wrath into the hearts
and consciences of men.

This King is the King of hearts, and has to do chiefly with the heart and
spirit. For 1 He chiefly requires spirit worship. 2 He bestows spiritual
blessings. 3 He furnishes his people with spiritual weapons. 4 He abhors
spirit destlements. 5 He gives up obstinate sinners to spirit delusions.


From Verse 6.
1 Observe. That the Eternal Godhead of Christ was revealed to the Lords people
under the Old Testament.

The Father, Son, and Spirit, do all witness to this great truth.

Three Inferences drawn from this Doctrine.

The Eternal Godhead of Christ is further evinced by five Demonstrations.

1 From his Divine Names and Titles. 2 From his Divine Properties. 3 From his
glorious Works. 4 From that Religious worship which is ascribed to him. 5 From
his Oneness with the Father.
An Answer to that Objection (viz) That the Title Jehovah, and other Tules of
God, are communicated to Creatures.

It was requisite that Christ the second person should be God.

1 In respect of God himself. 2 In respect of man.
Eight of the most material Objections against the Godhead of Christ, answered.

What we are to think of the words [Consubstantiall, Persons, Trinity.]

Six special Rules or Considerations propounded for the better understanding
of those Scriptures that refer to the mystery of the Son of God.

2 Observe. That Christ's Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom.

A twofold state of Christ's Kingdom here on earth.

That Christ has a twofold Throne.

1 One as he is the Lord of glory. 2 Another as he is a glorified man.
3 Observe. That Christ's Government is a righteous and equitable Government.

1 He is a Righteous King. 2 A Righteous Judge. 3 A Righteous Lord. 4 A
Righteous Husband. 5 A Righteous Advocate.
The Righteousness and equity of Christ's Kingdom is further demonstrated in
several particulars.

From Verse 7.
1 Observe. That it is natural and effentiall to Christ to love righteousness,
and hate iniquity.

Christ is a just person, according to a fourfold definition of Justice.

Quaer. 1 Wherein Christ's love of righteousness appears.

2 Wherein his hatred of iniquity appears.

Four Duties mentioned, which we are to learn from this Doctrine.

2 Observe. That God was the God of Christ in the work of our Redemption.

Of Gods graoious Ends therein toward us.

An Answer to that Objection (viz.) Christ is not God, because he was anointed
by God.

In six particulars the holy Ghost resembles Oil.

3 Observe. That Christ as man received the Unction of the Spirit.

Two Reasons or Grounds hereof.

Quae. If Christ be so full of the Spirit for us, why are we so empty, answered
in five things.

4 Observe. That all true believers are Christ's fellows.

Here it is showed, that the Saints now have a higher righteousness and union
then Adam had, the Spirit himself dwelling in them.

In eight particulars it is evineed, that not only the gifts of the Spirit,
but the person of the Spirit, or the Spirit himself dwells in the Saints.

Six Cautions touching the in being and indwelling of the Spirit himself in the
Saints, to prevent mistakes.

By four Arguments it is proved that there are created gifts or babits in
believe's.

An Explication of John 17.21, 22. Which Text is alleged (by some) to prove
that the very same union and fulness that is in Christ, is also in the Saints.

It is showed what is meant by those words (viz.) That they may be one in us,
as thou father art in me, and I in thee, etc.

From Verse 8.
1 Observe. That the holy Ghost condiscends to us in illustrating spiritual
things by temporal.

2 Observe. The spiritual presence and influence of Christ is incomparably
sweeter then the sweetest of Creatures.

3 Observe. That such as are nearest Christ, are most refreshed with his
spiritual Ointments.

4 Observe. That Christ manifests himself graciously in the Assemblies of his
people, as out of Iv^ry Pa. lace.

Four Reasons of this Doctrine.

5 Observe. That the Garments of Christ the Bridegroom smell sweeter then the
friends of the Bridegroom.

6 Observe. That it greatly rejoices Christ when his people are comforted.

From Verse 9.
1 Observe. That particular Churches of visible Saints are the Kings Daughters.

2 Observe. That the Saints and worship of Christ are exceeding precious and
honorable.

Four Reasons why the Saints are precious and honorable.

3 Observe. Though particular Churches be precious, yet the universal Church is
the Queen that has the greatest dignity.

Great privileges belong to the universal Church.

Four Propositions concerning the samc.

4 Observe. The spiritual Church is as the finest Gold before God.

From Verse 10.
1 Observe. That Christians should diligently consider the word and message of
the Lord.

Six Reasons of this Doctrine.

There is a twofold consideration of things.

1 One Natural. 2 Another Spiritual.
2 Observe. That the Church should willingly forsake all her natural Relations,
for Christ her spiritual husband and Bridegroom.

From Verse 11.
1 Observe. Holiness in the Church is amiable to the Lord.

This is farther enlarged in four particulars.

2 Observe. That Believers should deny their own righteousness, will,
wisdom, in love to Christ, and for him.

Three things mentioned, wherein Christ goes beyond all other husbands.

3 Observe. That Christians should eye and obey Christ as their Lord.

The Lordship of Christ considered two ways.

1 His providentiall universal Lordship. 2 His special gracious Lordship.
We are to obey this Lord because we belong to him every way. As

1 By Creation. 2 By Eternal Donation. 3 By purchase and impetration. 4 By
union and implantation. 5 By Covenant and stipulation. 6 By Conquest.
From Verse 12.
1 Observe. Christ will put honor upon his sincere worshippers.

2 Observe. The Rich and Noble ones shall highly esteem the Church.

Of the Prophetic Scriptures concerning the advancement and flourishing state
of Christ's Kingdom in this world.

Dan. 2.31, etc. Opened in several Quaeries.

1 Quae. What is meant by the Legs and Toes of Iron, etc.

1 Ans. Neg. Not Alexanders Successors in the Grecian Empire. 2 Ans. Affir.
The Roman Monarchy is thereby represented. Proved by diverse Reasons.
2 Quae. What is meant by the stone that smote the Image on his feet, etc.

This is also answered neg. and affir.

3 Quae. Whether the Kingdom of the stone may be considered as a spiritual
Kingdom.

Ans. In three respects it may be said to be a spiritual Kingdom.

In five respects it is a temporal Monarchy.

4 Quae. What are the privileges that relate to the

Kingdom of the stone?

Ans. Seven things are mentioned.

1 A new Heaven and a new Earth. 2 A glorious accomplishment of Prophecies. 3
An abundant affusion of the Spirit of glory. 4 Purity in Ordinances and
worship. 5 Union among the Saints. 6 Peaceable and righteous Administrations. 7
Rich and wonderful returns of prayer.
5 Quae. How to judge of the Disputes of this present Age, touching the fifth
Monarchy.

Ans. Here three things are humbly offered.

From Verse 13.
1 Observe. That the spiritual excellency of the Saints (being internal) is
not discerned by the natural man.

2 Observe. That the outward pomp and glory of this world is but a mere shadow.

This is demonstrated in three partioulars.

3 Observe. That the Saints (notwithstanding inherent graces) need the clothing
of wrought gold (namely) the righteousness of Christ to cover their nakedness.

Two Reasons of this point.

The excellency of this Clothing demonstrated 1 It is a Garment of Gods weaving
and contrivance. 2 Our faith, love, spiritual actings, are no part of it. 3
The Lord himself clothes us with it. 4 It is so perfect that he cannot find the
least fault with it. 5 In the assurance thereof we have peace and joy
unspeakable and glorious.


Quae. Whether Christ's active righteousness be this clothing of wrought gold,
and imputed to us for our justification?

Ans. In five Conclusions it is evinced, that the sinner is justified by
Christ's active obedience.

Some Objections to the contrary, answered.

From Verse 14.
Man is like a piece of Embrodery, or curious wrought Garment, and that in five
espects (viz.)

1 In respect of the lineamonts and parts of his body, Psalm. 139.13, 14, 15,
16. 2 The faculties of his rational immortal soul. 3 His free justification
by the beautiful Garment of Christ's righteousness. 4 His spiritual union and
renovation. 5 His glorification, when he shall be clothed upon with glory.
1 Observe. That the Marriage between Christ and his Spouse is not so gloriously
solemnized and consummated as it shall be.

1 Here our knowledge of God is imperfect, low, and dark to what it shall be.
For 1 It is rather negative then positive. 2 It Is by way of Eminency. 3 By way
of causality, If there be so much good in the effect, there is much more in the
cause.
2 As our knowledge, so our enjoyment of God here is imperfect.
2 Observe. The Saints (that now groan under the body of sin) shall be perfectly
clothed upon with Garments of glory.

This excellent glory is briefly, spoken of in five things.

1 The Saints shall perfectly see the Essence of God. 2 They shall behold the
glorious person of Christ, and the mystery of the Hypostaticall union. 3 The
will shall fully enjoy God as the chiefest good. 4 There will be a most
ravishing communion with the blessed Angels and Saints. 5 The bodies of the
Saints shall be made like the glorious body of Christ.
An Answer to that Object. (viz.) That no separated souls return to tell us of
this glory.

This is answered in five things.

3 Observe. That every true Saint attends on the Church universal, as the
daughter on her mother.

4 Observe. That such as are the Churches true companions here, shall be
companions with her in glory.

Two Cautions concerning degrees of glory.

5 Observe. That true Christians are chaste virgins.

1 They have a single heart. 2 They are chaste in their affections. 3 In their
Principles. 4 In their practices. 5 In their ends.
From Verse 15.
1 Observe. That there will be unspeakable joy on all hands when the Saints are
received into the Kings Palace.

1 God will be glad of their company. 2 Christ will rejoice over them. 3 The
Angels will exceedingly rejoice in their society. 4 The Saints themselves will
rejoice with unspeakable joy.
2 Observe. That God has erected a glorious Palace for his people.

1 It is prepared by God himself. 2 Bought with Gods money, and purchased with
his blood. 3 Christ has possessed it for us. 4 Given us the earnest of it. 5
The Lord will shortly put us in possession of it. 6 The glorious presence of
God himself is the beauty of this Palace.
The excellency of this Royal Palace is further demonstrated in three things.

This precious Doctrine is shut up with a twofold Medita.

1 Concerning the true Rest and repose of the wearied soul. 2 Of the
Beatificall Vision of the Lord of Glory.
From Verse 16.
If we apply this Text to the Church, or Bride, then

1 Observe. That the Church has no cause to boast of her natural progenitors,
but rather of her spiritual Children.

Quae. Whether the Children of Believers are privileged more then others?

Ans. They are not by natural Generation, but by Gods free gracious Covenant
they are.

2 Observe. That Christ does abundantly supply the loss of natural Allies, by
affording the Church spiritual relations.

3 Observe. That believers are Princes.

If we apply this Text (as it may be more fitly applied) to Christ himself,
then

4 Observe. That though Christ was obscure in respect of his natural kindred,
yet he is glorious in his spiritual Allies.

5 Observe. That the Saints are made Princes by and from Christ, and not from
themselves.

The Saints are Princes.

1 By their Redemption. 2 By their spiritual birth. 3 They are endowed with a
Princely spirit. 4 They are conformable to a Royal Law. 5 Clothed with Royal
Apparel. 6 Fed with Princely dainties. 7 They have Princely company. 8 They
belong to a Princely City. 9 They are entitled to Princely victories. 10 A
Royal Crown is laid up for them.
The Saints should manifest the Princelinesse of their spirits specially in
five things.

From Verse 17.
Observe. That the Holy Ghost (who endited this Psalm) will cause the name of
Christ to be remembered from age to age.

Three Quaeries are here propounded.

Quae. What is meant by the name of Christ, and what virtue is in this name.

Ans. It Is showed in two things that Christ's name is excellent.

2 Quae. What it is to remember Christ's name.

Ans. There is a twofold remembrance.

1 A speculative or notionall. 2 A sanctified practical remembrance of Christ's
name.
Quae. How the Spirit causes the name of Christ to be remembered.

Ans 1. Neg. Not ordinarily by immediate suggestion.

Yet there is an immediate testimony of the Spirit.

Four Cautions concerning this.

Ans. 2. Affir. The Spirit ordinarily makes Christ's name to be remembered in
the use of means.

In reference hereunto, eight things are propounded.

Lastly, It is showed that Satan sometimes puts man upon Religious exercises,
and suggesteth the name and word of Christ to them.

Five distinguishing Notes between Satan's suggestions, and the motions of the
Spirit of God.

Four Corrolaries drawn from this Doctrine.

FINIS.

