Londons Triumphs CELEBRATED The 29th. of October, 1664.

IN HONOR To the truly Deserver of HONOR

Sir John Lawrence KNIGHT, LORD MAYOR of the Honorable City of LONDON: AND
Performed at the Costs and Charges of the Worshipful COMPANY of HABERDASHERS.

William Justice Esquire Master.

Wardens.
John King Phillip Owen Anthony Dowse John Mascall
Written by JOHN TATHAM Gent.

Land. Printed by W. G. for H. Brom at the Gun in Ivylane. 1664.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN LAWRENCE Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON.
MY LORD,
IN the Progress of this Days Tryumphs, You may clearly Trace the inestimable
Love of your Company, who have omitted no Costs that might Illustrate your Fame
and Honor, though your Merits in themselves are glorious: In this great
Service we ought to commend to your Lordship the especial care of the Committee
appointed for carrying it on: who have shown themselves not only Worthy
Brethren of your Company, but true Servants to your Honor. They hope your
Acceptance, and I your Pardon, if any Errata's in Fancy are discovered;
Begging your Lordships License to Subscribe my self

Your Honors devoted Servant JOHN TATHAM.

To the worthily honored the Company of HABERDASHERS.
Gentlemen,
YOU have been (amongst other the Worshipful Companies) my Patrons for some
years past; and it is now my happiness that you are entirely mine, and that
you have Entitled Me your Servant; How much Honor I reap from thence, let
others judge; I shall not be too lavish in the Expressions, since I know you
are (in one) as great an Enemy to Ostentation, as I am to Flattery (though it
has been always a Blot in the Poets Escutcheon) I am no Boaster of my own
Abilities, nor detract from other Men's; I have used my Endeavors to serve you,
and if your Acceptance give them Merit, the Honor will redound to your
Selves, (the Donero,) and a happiness to Me, that I am

( Gentlemen)

The humblest of your Servants John Tatham.

LONDONS TRIUMPH.
The Business of the Day is thus Ordered:
THE Pentioners meet at Four of the Clock in the Morning. The Batchellors at
Six. The Livery at Seven.
The number of Persons thought necessary to attend the Service, are

1. The Master, Wardens, and Assistants in their Livery Gowns faced with Foyns,
and their Hoods, in number 32. 2. The Livery (in number 168) faced with Budge,
and their Hoods. 3. The Batchellors in number 120, part whereof are in Livery
Gowns faced with Foynes, and the other part in Gowns faced with Budge; All of
them in Crimson Satin Hoods. 4. The Gentlemen Ushers in number 40, in Plush
Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about his Shoulder, and a white Staff in
his hand. 5. Nine Gentlemen for carrying of His Majesty's, and other Banners,
and the Companies Colors; Eight in Plush Coats, one in a Buff Coat, each of
them Watchet Scarfs over their Shoulders. 6. His Majesty's Sergeant Trumpet
with a Watchet Scarf about his Shoulder, and one other Scarf of his Lordships
favor, with a Leading Staff in his hand: Also his Majesty's 16 Trumpets, and
Kettle-Drum, and 20 other Trumpets. 7. His Majesty's Drum-Major, with a Watchet
Scarf about his Shoulder, his Staff in his hand; His Majesty's four other Drums
and Fife, Seven other Drums, and Three Fifes. 8. The Foot-Marshal with a
Watchet Scarf about his Shoulder, has 8 Attendants in Buff-coloured-Dublets,
and white Hats. 9. The three Masters of Defense or Quarter masters, each of
them a Watchet Scarf about his Wast, and 20 Attendants in their several
Equipage. 10. The Pentioners, and other poor people (in number a 100.) are
habited in Blew Gowns, Flat Caps, and Crimson Fustian Sleeves, each of them
bearing a Target in one hand, and a Javelin in the other. 11. Forty other
Pentioners in Blew Coats and Copped Caps, appointed for carrying of the
Standards of St. George, St. Katharine, the Lord Mayor and Cities, with other
Silk-works. 11. Five Pages in Watchet colored habits, trimmed with white, and
white Stockings, blew Garters, white Caps, blew Cap-bands, with a Truncheon in
the one hand, and a Target in the other, wherein is painted the Coats of Arms
of the present Master and Wardens.
The said persons being thus accoutred, are by the Care of the Foot-Marshal and
his Men ranked out two by two. And between each Distinction places Gentlemen
Ushers, Banners, and Military Music (except in the Van of the Pentioners, who
have no Gentlemen Ushers*) And thus march,

1. The Pentioners bearing the Standards and Silkworks, in the head whereof is
placed one carrying a Banner of the Companies Arms and two Drums and one Fife.
2. The Pentioners in Gowns are divided into three parts, and in the head of
each part is placed one carrying a Pavis of the Companies, one Ensign, Six
Drums, three Fifes. 3. Budge Batchellors, in the head of them is placed the
Foot-Marshal, and Master of Defense, eight Ushers, two Ensigns, six Trumpets.
4. Foyns Batchellors, and in the head of them is placed one Conductor, and also
the Yeomandry in the Rear, and ten Ushers, two Ensigns, six Trumpets. 5. The
Livery, in the head whereof is placed one Conductor, twelve Ushers, two
Ensigns, eight Trumpets. 6. The Assistants, in the head of them is placed one
Conductor, and ten Ushers, two Ensigns, Drum-major, His Majesty's four Drums,
and one Fife* 7. The Master and Wardens, in the head of whom are placed 5
Pages, Sergeant Trumpet, and His Majesty's 16 Trumpets, and Kettle Drum.
Being thus Ranked, the whole Body move toward his Lordships house in St.
Elens, beginning with the Pentioners, so that the Master and Wardens bring up
the Rear, till joining with his Lordships Attendants, Sergeant Trumpet, and his
Majesty's 16 Trumpets, and Kettle Drum, quit their Division* fall into his
Lordships, marching in the head of the four Attourneys of the Mayors Court.

Which done, the whole Body move through Cornwall, and down the Old Jury,
toward Guildhall, where taking in the Lord Mayor and his Attendants, they
pass up St. Laurence-lane; and Soaper-lane, and so to Three-Crane-Wharf. At
the west end whereof the Lord Majors take Barge, and at the East End the
Company of Haberdashers, Sergeant Trumpet, and 8 of His Majesty's 16 Trumpets,
and Kettle Drum, do pass into his Lordships Barge, and the rest into the
Companies, as their only Music: But the Wardens of the Yeomandry, Batchellors,
and Ushers, in their Divisions, do pass to their several places of
Refreshment. The said Barges, and all other the Companies (appointed for that
Service) with their Music and Trophies being on Float, all convenient speed is
made to Westminster, and by the way his Lordship is saluted from the Bank-side,
by a Peal of 30. Pieces Ordnance.

Being come to Westminster, The Companies make a Gallery or Guard from
Westminster-bridge and Westminster Hall, through which the Worshipful Drapers,
Grocers, and Mercers Companies (together with the Gentlemen of the
Haberdashers) in their several Distinctions, with their Music ordered as
before do pass; but the Lord Mayor and his Attendants, do all pass from thence
up to the Exchequer-Bar in order to his being Sworn into the Office of Lord
Mayor.

Being Sworn, his Lordship (between the old Lord Mayor and Recorder does pass
down to the Common Pleas, and Chancery-Bar, and in those Courts performs the
accustomed Duty. And from thence all of them have to their several Barges, and
convenient speed is made to Baynards-Castle, and by the way his Lordship (as
before) is entertained from the Bank-side with another Peal of Thirty Piece of
Ordnance. And being landed at Baynards-Castle,

The Gentlemen of the Artillery are there ready to receive him, Commanded by
the right Worshipful and much deserving Sir Robert Peak Knight, Vice President
of the Artillery ground. The Foot-Marshal having set the Batchellors, the
Pentioners, their Trophies, and Music in Order as in the Morning, the whole
body move up Paul's Wharf-hill, beginning with the Worshipful the Drapers,
Grocers, and Mercers Companies; after them the Artillery, after them the
Pentioners, Music, Trophies, and Gentlemen-Ushers, Batchellors, Liveries,
Assistants, Master and Wardens, his Lordships Attendants, both Lord Majors, and
Aldermen.

His Lordship being come into Pauls-Church-yard near the School,

Is entertained with a Scene, the Angles of one part whereof is adorned with
small Shelters in the manner of Arbours, under which are discovered some
persons knitting Caps, others spinning, others making Brushes, and such like
parts of the Haberdashers-Trade. In one part of the Stage is a Table, and
thereat several persons making Hats, and other dependences thereon. This Scene
is represented as the Hierogliphick of Humility; on the head whereof sits a
grave person, as Master or Overseer of those persons, seeming to smile on their
labor and Industry; he is habited like a grave Citizen, according to the
ancient manner, in Trunk-hose, Stockings tied cross above and below the knee, a
Satin Doublet, close Coat gathered at the Wast, a Set Ruff about his Neck,
ruff Cuffs about his Wrists, a broad brim'd Hat, a large Cypress Hatband, gold
Girdle and Gloves hung thereon, Rings on his Fingers, and a Seal Ring on his
Thumb, a blew Linsey Wolsey Apron wrapped about his middle.

His male Servants, as Hatters, Brush-makers, etc. are habited in Half Shirts,
and blew Breeches, with Caps on their Heads ornamented with Ribboning, etc.

His Female Servants in blew Bodies, blew Petticoats, linen about their heads
after the ancient manner, and Aprons.

As the body moves, they are in continual Action, working and Singing at their
Work, and sometimes wantonly tumbling.

On the four Trees, and other parts of the Scene, is set the Motto of the
Companies Arms, SERVE and OBEY.

His Lordship drawing near, The said Master or Overseer, entertains his
Lordship thus;

SPEECH.
VVElcome (My Lord) the Glory of this day,
Thanks which your Merits call for, now we pay;
Instructed by your Company, whose love
Is the Main Wheel by which these Triumphs move.
Here are the Branches of that ancient Tree
Which Time can scarce reduce to Memory:
An Ancient numerous Loyal Brotherhood
Whence Men have sprung who have bin great and good
And though their Rooms have bin debauched, you know
Their Company has hated to be so,
But has brave Members in all times brought forth,
Conspicuous both for Virtue and for Worth;
Witness their Schools and Hospitals, which must
Remain till Time turns all things into Dust;
Such a Congenial Mystery, that one
Would think they are made all others to atone;
For by their Arts and Industry they are
Makers or Sellers of all sorts of Ware.
And the Ingenious Motto that they give
Teaches Men how to labor and to live,
SERVE and OBEY; By one Men come to know,
And by the other they wise Rulers grow.
Birth may advance, or may not, but We see
Labor and Art raise Men to Dignity.
The Root of Honor Prudent men conclude
To be Humility and Gratitude:
Nor can They choose but noble Actions do,
Having this Patron, and this Pattern You.
Who being sublimed above all vulgar reach
Do both by Precept and Example teach
How Men of Fortune Birth and Honor should
Lay out Themselves for their dear Countries good.
Blessed is that Commonwealth where Goodmen sway,
And People not for fear, but love, Obey.
The Speech ended, the whole Body move toward Cheapside and in the Rear of
this Scene, and between Foster-Lane and Gutter-Lane, is entertained by another
Scene made in manner of an Imperial Crown Garnished with Festoones and Flowers;
under which (elevated three Ascents) sits a living figure Representing St.
Katharine Patroness of the Company, her hair light brown dishelv'd, her
Temples circled with a Coronet of Gold adorned with precious Stones, her Robe
of Crimson Sarsenet, a loose Skye-coloured Scarf about her Shoulder with Gold
and Silver fringe; on one side of her a Broken Wheel and an Axe, on which she
lays one hand, and in the other she bears the Banner of St. George.

Her Attendants are Patience, Chastity, Constancy, and Fidelity, who fill the
Four Angles of the Stage, habited in White Sarsenet, betokening Innocence, with
a Crimson Girdle betokening Martyrdom, Sky-colored Scarves about their
Shoulders, Wreaths of Flowers of several Colors on their heads, in one hand
they hold the Banner of St. George with this Inscription Victoria: In the other
a Shield.

At her Foot sits Scientia (aluding to St. Katharine her knowledge in Arts)
habited in Sky-colored Sarsenet; on her head a Crown made in manner of a
Celestial Globe, in one hand a Book, in the other the Banner of St. George with
the former Motto Victoria.

This Scene is presented as the Hyroglyphick of Integrity.

And is flanked with two Goats, the Supporters of the Companies Arms, backed
with two Boys, each holding in one hand a Banner, in the other a Shield with
the Cities and Companies Arms.

The Angles are filled with eight persons, representing Shepherds and
Shepherdesses, with Hooks, Scrips, etc. and habited answerable.

The SPEECH to the KING.
PArdon not Praise, great Monarch! we implore,
For showing you no better Sights, nor more:
The Greek and Roman Wits (we must confess)
Showed greater Fancy, but their Theams were less;
For we more excellence in You behold
Than they in all their Emperors of old.
We hope Your Majesty will not suppose
You're with your Johnsons and your Inigoes;
And though you make a Court, you are in the City,
Whose vein is to be humble, though not witty.
To help us You are opportunely come
In The Wedding day of your Emporium.
This day You show as well as see, for You
Are both our Triumph and Spectator too.
Oh what a Glorious sight it is to behold
Your City in her Loyal Arms enfold!
This Spowse whom You to give her have thought fit,
And to his Rule (that is Yours) meekly submit.
To Your Indulgence we this Blessing owe,
Who to your Subjects peace and joy bestow,
May we Your Royal favors still improve,
First to Obey, and next rejoice, and love.
To the QUEEN.
MADAM,
THe Brotherhood to whom we Owe
The occasion and Expense of all this Show,
Reaps no small favor from her laying claim
Unto that Saint who bore your Sacred name;
Under whose Umbrage they have greatly thriven,
And Testimonies of their Bounty given:
And it is their happiness that they relate
To this great Cities Princely Magistrate;
A Branch sprung out of this undying Stem,
And is a Glory to himself and Them.
This seems to be a Prophesy of you,
And of that happiness which will accrue
To this Fraternity, if you would bless
Them with your Smiles, and be their Patroness;
'Twill be their Glory while the World endures,
When it is Recorded that you made them yours.
To His LORDSHIP.
SIR,
When the Heathen Persecution struck
At all that at Religion seemed to look,
Kath'rine to seal it with her Royal blood
In Opposition to their Torments stood.
Twice with undaunted courage she appeared
To Combat death, and her Faiths Standard Reared;
When the Wheel would not do, the Axe was brought,
And she with eager haste to meet it sought:
Then took her flight above their Fury's reach,
And left her Converts the dull World to teach.
This is the Saint which is related to
Your honored Company, and so to you
Whose Patronage knits your Fraternity
In such firm Peace and Love it never shall dye.
Taught by the Example of this pious Guide,
Uphold that Faith for which she boldly died,
Against Faction and Profaneness; By the one
She is Defaced, by the other Overthrown.
Root out those spreading and pernicious Weeds
Which Clemency in stead of Killing breeds:
If you defend this, this will you defend,
And make your Name live when your life shall end.
Saint Katharine was born in Alexandria of the Blood Royal, she was Learned in
all the Sciences, and (before her death) by her learned disputations, she
confuted many ^hilosophers; at whose instigation she was Imprisoned and
punished; and being visited in Prison by Faustina the Empress, she converted
her to the Christian Faith, with Porplurius and 200. of the Emperors
Soldiers: afterward she was tied to a Wheel, but was miraculously delivered
by the breaking thereof* whereupon she was beheaded on the 25. of November, in
the year of our Lord. 310. with the Empress Faustina, in the Reign of
Maxentius and Maximanus.

There is an Hospital that bears her name to this day, which was dedicated to
her by Matilda Wife to King Stephen, and confirmed by Maud the Empress, for
the maintenance of many poor People, by the name of the Brother and
Sister-hood. It had very large Revenues belonging to it, but through corruption
of time and the Governors and Trustees, it is much decayed.

Upon his Lordships motion, This Scene falls into the Rear of the former, and
near the great Conduit his Lordship is entertained with another Scene, the
Hyrogliphick of Honor; the form is made in manner of a Circular Building,
beautified and adorned with Flowers and Fruit; The upper part whereof is
advanced by two Arms, supporting a Laurel, being the Crest of the Companies
Arms, under the Bower (three Ascents) is seated a Beautiful person representing
Honor. Her

Her Hair dishevelled, her head encompassed with a wreath of Stars, in one hand
she holds a Scepter, in the other a Crown of Gold (to Crown Merit) her Robe
purple Satin, a Scarf of Gold about her Shoulders.

Her Attendants are Five, Reason, Judgment, Resolution, Fortituds, and
Munificence.

Reason is habited in Flame colored Robes, on her head a Garland of Flowers,
in one hand a Book open, in the other a Banner. Judgment is habited like a
Senator with sad colored Robes, in one hand holds a Scrole in manner of a
Record; in the other the figure of some Prince, made in manner of a Seal.
Resolution holds a Shield, whereon is painted the heart of a Lion, and the
Teeth of a Wolf, her Robes are Crimson Sarsenet trimmed with white, on her head
a wreath of Laurel. Fortitude has on her a Helmet plain, Robes of Lead color
in manner of Armor, she holds a Shield in one hand, whereon is painted a
Pillar, and in the other a Banner. Munificence habited like a grave Citizen, in
his hand a Gold Purse open.
His Lordship drawing near, Reason accosts him in these words,

SPEECH.
Honor, the aim of all men, but by few
Directly sought, much less attained unto;
Whose Glories are not purchased with Pelf,
But Virtues, such as center in your self;
Where she finds Merit from vainglory free,
A gallant mind mixed with Humillitie;
VVose upright Actions are praise worthy, still
Guided by Reason and not swayed by will:
Hither she is come, not for a day or two,
But to Eternity will wait on You.
Such as through Treason seeks her, them she flies,
She hates all Factions and close Mutinies,
And shines the brightest both in Church and State
When Men love Peace, and a just Magistrate:
You are the Cities Eye, which must not be
Shut, lest you shut out her security;
But pry into all private Corners where
Suspicion points the least Offenders are:
For it is a Rule, Such easily dispense
With greatest sins that have of small no sense.
Your honored Company their wishes send,
That you this year may with such Honor end
That King and People may applaud your care,
Whose Substitute and Steward now you are.
And when you quit this world your memory may
Have a perfume that time cannot decay.
The Speech ended, his Lordship and his Attendants do pass down the Old Jury
through a Gallery of Guard, made by the Foot Marshal of the Haberdashers
Company, in their several Distinctions, the Pentioners in the Rear of them with
their Targets hung on the top of their Javelins; The Banners flying, Trumpets
sounding, and Drums beating until his Lordship and his Attendants be entered
into Guildhall to Dinner, in order not only for the welcoming his and the
Sheriffs Guests, but also for their own refreshment.

Which done, the Company do pass to Haberdashers-Hall, but the Pageants are
conveyed down the Old Jury into Blackwell-Hall.

The Afternoons Business.
The Foot Marshal orders the whole Body as in the Morning only the Pentioners
in stead of Javelins and Targets, each man has two Torches for enlightening the
Streets, through which the whole Body pass, and for conveying the Aldermen and
Members of the Company to their Habitations (if thereto required.)

The Body moves up St. Lawrence-Lane toward Paul's Church* and all the
Pageants are placed on the South Side of Cheapside in these several places, viz.

The Scene of Artificers or Humillity, near Foster-Lane. The Scene representing
Honor, near Woodstreet* The Scene representing St. Katharine or Integrity, and
the Goats, near Bread-street. And the Scene representing Magnanimity, near
Bow-Church. This last Scene is made in manner of a Mountain, on the Top whereof
Magnanimity is mounted on a Lion, holding a Banner of St. George in one hand,
and a Sword in the other. The Lion turning his head to Magnanimity, and close
by him on each side, are feeding Lambs, Goats, Kids, and Beavers; on the side
of the Mountain Bears, Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey, in a snarling posture,
envying the happiness of the Lambs being under the Protection of the Lion.
Magnanimity is habited like a Roman General, on his head a Helmet of Gold with
a Plume of Feathers, a Buff-Doublet with Sleeves of Cloth of Gold, and Scarlet
Breeches richly laced.

This Scene is flanked with two Sea horses, two Trytons mounted on their backs,
playing on retorted Music (as at Sea) because the Mountain represents an
Island surrounded with the Sea, near the foot whereof sits a person seeming to
be Shipwreckt and cast on the Shore, habited like a Sea-Commander.

The four Angles of the Stage are filled with four persons representing Seamen.

His Lordship drawing near, he rouzeth himself, and (as in a Maze) salutes his
Lordship thus,

SPEECH.
COntract thy Mischiefs to a period, Fate,
That I may prove the utmost of thy hate;
But see She smiles, and safely casts me on
The Land of Promise, plenteous Albion;
Where by Instinct I am instructed to
Congratulate the Honor waits on You.
You (Sir) whose innate Virtues did appear
E're your Election in this Hemisphere;
And were Examples of a public good,
Which claim a greater Privilege then Blood:
As you are Merchant and to Traffic tend,
So are you both to Land and Sea a Friend;
A Merchants generous Breeding is allowed
Before those empty vanities, are proud
Only of Titles; Then (Sir) in a word
A virtuous Man sounds better then my Lord:
Your Titles have not changed you, for though thus
You are Translated, you are the same to us:
And where is centered Magnanimity,
There (we conclude) dwells true Nobility;
Wisdom and Magistracy should be One,
An Individual Species, like the Sun.
Your Breast (Sir) is a Fortress to protect
The Innocent, and Nocent to reject;
alluding to the Pageant.
Vultures and Wolves may show their teeth and grin,
But cannot reach their Prey, they are kept in;
The generous Lion does their Fury awe,
Whilst the Lambs feed, and their breaths fearless draw.
May Honor glorify your beloved Name,
Though not as alluding to St. Laurence.
Martyr, yet with equal Fame.
The Speech ended, his Lordship and the whole Body move toward St. Paul's
Wharf, and the several Pageants face about and move toward his Lordships
house, and are placed in manner of a half Moon cross the Street, from
Lymestreet-end to St. Mary Axe; The Speaker in the Triumph alluding to Humility
(placing himself in that of Magnanimity) and that alluding to Integrity with
that of Honor; and those two in the amidst are flanked with the rest; Also
forms sufficient for 33 persons of the Assistants, are set in Front of the said
Scenes, with a Stage conveniently mounted for His Majesty's 16 Trumpets, Drums,
and Kettle Drums; by which time the whole Body are advanced at a convenient
distance from his Lordships house, and then by the Foot-Marshal filed off for a
Guard, each man placing himself to the right of his Leader: The Master and
Wardens placed on the said Front; the eldest Livery under the Degree of an
Assistant terminate at his Lordships Gate; The Colors, Trumpets, Banners and
Files, being placed at a convenient Distance each from other, do all Sound,
Play, and Beat Tryumphantly, till his Lordship and the Aldermen come close to
the Scenes, where suddenly the four Speakers rise together, and entertain his
Lordship as follows.

EUGLOGUE.
Humility. MY Lord --


Integrity. My Lord --


Magnanimity. My Lord --


Honor. My Lord --


Humility. Pray stay,
It Is fit Humility should lead the way,

Integrity. Accompanied with pure Integrity,


Magnanimity. And the Minds Buckler Magnanimity;


Honor. Honor to Crown the end, Merit rewards,


Humil. And in that Sense Humility regards.


Integ. Integrity is Heavens delight,


Magn. And he,
Dares reach at Stars has Magnanimity:

Humil. Nor can his Breast lodge Virtue, that disdains
Humility, or an Ingenious pains:
Labor and Industry enrich the Land,
That Wealth will thrive's got by a painful hand;
A Magistrate should have a careful Eye
To see the Poor have Work, not Starve and Dye.

Integrity. By Patience, Constancy, Fidelity,
(Handmaids to Katharines spotless Loyalty)
A Magistrate is Taught to spend his blood
Against Schism and Faction, for the Churches good.

Honor. Reason, though plain, takes Judgment by the hand,
Leads Courage on, gives Fortitude Command. points to the person sitting.
Princely Munificence whose Mind is free,
And Purse still open to Necessity;
All which relate to You, and You to Them,
They are the Splendor, though You are the Iem.

Magnanim. This shows a Magistrate should never sleep,
But from the Ravenous Wolves his poor Lambs keep;
Still to be Armed against the worst of Fate,
Should Storms arise to shake his settled State.

Honor. There is no Virtue (Sir) Exempt in you,
Receive then what deservedly's your due.

Humility. The Cities wishes,


Integrity. And your Companies.


Honor. May you be ever in your Princes Eyes,
His Favors Crown you.

Magnanimity. And your honored Name
In your Successors Breasts brave Deeds inflame.

Integrity. Your Goodness with your Honors still increase,


Humility. And stifle those that smother would our Peace.


Omnes. Miriades of Blessings (Sir) your Life attend,
Your Fame and Honor live, when that does end.

Which done, The Foot-Marshal takes care of all the Silk-works. And the
Artificer of the Pageants convey them with what speed they can, some to
Haberdashers hall, the rest to the place where they were Built: By which time
most men may imagine (by reason of the great March) the Members concerned
therein will be willing to rest.

SONG.
REpine not, my Children, my Lads nor my Lasses,
For labor is stinted to time, and so passes;
We sweeten it with our Content and our sleep,
And the Wolf from the door of our Masters do keep: Pointing to the Master.

Then cast up your Caps, though Thrummed they be,
We shall be as finical one day as he.
The Snail that you see (of Proportion) not tall
In time does clime up to the top of a wall;
And it is an old Proverb that few Men but know,
That Children must creep before they can go:
Then cast up your Caps, though Thrumed they be,
We shall be as finical one day as he.
For ought we do know there is never a Lad here
But may be a Lord Mayor or something as near,
And his Maioresse may take from this Innocent Rout
And give her a hood in stead of a Clout:
Then cast up your Caps though Thrummed they be,
We shall be as finical one day as he.
To serve and obey is no such hard matter,
When we find a full Jack, and no empty Platter:
Then think of your work in the midst of your play,
And you will find it your own another day.
Then cast up your Caps, though Thrummed they be,
We shall be as finical one day as he.
Reader,
THe Gentleman, Undertaker of this Business, is not ambitious to have his name
known, however his merit may deserve your commendations.

The singular Artists, the Master Painters, and other the Master Workmen (I
humbly conceive) have performed their parts so well, you cannot (in Justice)
but give them your applause. And so Good night.

FINIS.

