A True ACCOUNT OF A FIGHT BETWEEN Captain John Leech, Commander of the Ship
Ann of London, of 14 Guns, and 19 Men, from Iamaica, And a French Privateer of
24 Guns, and some Petteraroes: As it came in a Letter to his Owners from
Plymouth, Dated the Second of this Instant January, 1689.
Licensed January 8th. 1689/90.

THE 29th. of December in the Morning at daylight having not made the Land,
but reckoning our selves very near, the Wind being at West North-West, moderate
clear Weather, I sent a Man up in the top to look about, who immediately cried
out, A Sail on our Starboard Quarter, and I think Land on our Lee Bow;
expecting the Sail to be what she was, I called up all Hands to make a clear
Ship, and sling the Yards, and get the Ship in a fighting Posture, which
required more time than we had then to spend to do it Authentic, being
disordered by much Tempestuous Weather, and a Sea shipped the 18th. of December
at Night, which broke in some of our Stern, and spoiled a great many of our
small Arms, and had put us much out of Fighting Posture, in which we kept
always before, and withal washed away our Wads out of the Garlings, and where
they were hung up, so that we had nothing to make more of left us, but our own
Men with their Ruggs, Blankets, and what Clothes came first to hand, supplied
that want, and stood courageously by me all the time of Fight. He came up with
us with in Gunshot at half an hour past Seven of the Clock in the Morning,
with English Colors abroad, which I perceiving, caused our Colors to be
nailed fast to the Staff. When he came nigher, he struck his English Colors,
and hoysted his French Ensign, ran a Head, and fired a Gun over our Quarter,
Commanding us to Strike; so desiring God to be my Assistance, I fired a Gun off
the Quarter Deck in Defiance; so he came up within half-Pistol shot of us, and
poured in a Volly of small shot of about an hundred Arms, with a whole
Broadside of Round, and Bar, and Patridge, besides Petteraroes, with which my
Second Mate was killed, and no one else Wounded, blessed be God for it. After
this* I thought h^ would have Boarded us, but he received our Broadside, and
sheered off, and loaded aga^^, and came up* and did in the like manner as
before on the Larboard-side, and running ahead, and falling a-stern, gave us
the other fresh Broadside on the Starboard-side; continuing in this posture
running up one side, and backing the Stern on the other side as fast as he
could load and fire with small and great Shot till Twelve of the Clock, at
which time our Main-Mas fell; and he received some Damage from us under Water,
and was forced to bring his Ship upon the C^^ne for the space of three Glasses,
in which time we got our Deck cleared, and the broken Mast and Rigging
overboard, and all in readiness to receive him again. Our Men now were more
Courageous than at the beginning (Glory be to God that gave the Hearts*) After
this, he came up with as much Fury as possibly he could on the Larboard-side,
and fired as fast as he could, laying us a-board on the Bow, but sheered off
again and entered no Men. This manner he continued on our Larboard side, loading
and firing, till half an hour past Five at Night* at which time our Mizen-Mast
came by the board, and some of our Cotton on the Poop took fire, and then he
sheered near us, as though he would have come on Board us, but through God's
Assistance we got both our Mizen-Mast and Rigging all clear from the Ship, and
the fire in the Cotton was put out, and then he brought too, and left us. Our
eight serviceable Guns that we had, did not lie still all the day any more than
his. At Night the Wind vered more Southerly, and we steered with that little
Sail God had left us North, in hopes to make the Land, and in the Morning it
pleased God that we were fair within a League and a half of Ram-head, and
Plymouth Sound opened to us; for which Mercy and Deliverance I desire to return
Thanks to Almighty God.

The Ship will take a long time fitting, for she is a perfect Wreck; the more
we look about her, the more disabled we find her; we have abundance more Shot
in her Hull than I expected, above three hundred. As to the Mizen-Mast, and
Mainmast, with all the Rigging and Sails, they are quite gone; the Foremast
is much wounded, together with the Boltsprit, and cannot be made Serviceable;
the Fore-yard, and Sprit-sail-yard are in twain; the Fore-top-mast and Fore-top
sail only remain sound, but the Rigging and Sails much shattered; both our
Boats are shot in pieces, our fine carved work Galleries and Stairs are very
much defaced and torn away with shot, and one of our Great Guns split* so that
I believe Five Hundred Pounds will not Repair and make her as good as she was.

The Captain and his Men behaving themselves so Bravely, the Merchan'ts are
making a Purse to Present him.
LONDON:

Printed for Sam* Crouch, at the Corner of Popes-Head-Alley in Cornhill. 1690.


