A TRUE ACCOUNT OF A BLOODY FIGHT BETWEEN THE Turks and Christians From The
IMPERIAL CAMP; And From The Spanish Ambassador To the MARQUESS de Grana; With
An Account likewise from Brussels, Declaring the Total Overthrow of the Turkish
Army at Barkan, with the Surrendering of the Fort of Barkan to the Christians.

Dublin Reprinted by Andrew Crook in Skinner-Row. 1683.

A Letter from the Spanish Ambassador to the Marquis De Grana at Lintz Dated
the Thirteenth of October One Thousand six hundred Eighty three, At Midnight
being an account of a second Fight between the Christians and Turks.
THat the Imperial and Polish Armies having repassed the Danube on a Bridge of
Boats at Wiswar near Comorra, the King of Foland resolved to advance with his
Troops to Attack the Fort of Barkan, which covers the Bridge of Gran;
accordingly his Majesty marched on the seventh of this Month, with so great
Diligence, that he got a German mile and a half before the Imperialists. and
being come near the said Fort, he caused his Dragoons to alight, and to attack
it, purposing to take it by assault; The Turks at the first came out in small
Parties from behind their Retrenchments, to draw the Christians on; The Polish
Dragoons behaved themselves very bravely, and the Turks gave ground, but it was
only to amuse the Christians, for in the mean time Five or Six Thousand
Janisaries, passing behind a Hill, Fell upon the Christians, who had not
percieved them, in their Flank, and put them into confusion, the Regiment of
the Grand Marshall Jablounski particularly suffering very much. The Duke of
^rain who marched with his Horse, the Imperial Infantry being six miles. behind,
knew not that the King was advanced so far, till his Majesty sent him word that
he was engaged with the Enemy, and desired him to Advance without any loss of
time; His Highness thereupon Marched with all the speed he was able, but having
a Defile to pass, he could not join the King so soon as otherwise he might have
done. The Duke of Lorrain appearing with the first Squadrons, the Poles
retreated to meet him, to avoid the great disorder which they began to fall
into; and the German Dragoons havving joined the Poles, they returned to charge
the Enemy, who not being now able to maintain their ground, retired with some
loss. That in this action twelve or thirteen hundred Poles were slain, and
among them a Palatin. That the King himself was in great danger. and his Son
Prince Alexander being engaged among the forwardest, had his Horse killed under
him. That on the eighth they expected the Imperial Infantry would come up, and
that on the ninth the King and the Duke of Lorrain, had resolved to attack the
Fort of Barkan, which they believed would occasion a very sharp Engagement.

An Account of a Second Battle between the Turks and Christians in a Letter
from the Imperial Camp near Barkan, of the eighth of October, One Thousand six
hundred Eighty three.
THat Count Lamberg was just arrived there from the Army, being sent by the
Duke of Lorrain, to acquaint the Emperor; That the Christians had on the ninth
been engaged with Ten Thousand Turks, and that after a very sharp Fight, which
lasted several hours, the Turks were totally defeated, and most of them cut in
pieces; That a small number saved themselves over the Bridge of Barkan, which
being afterward broke, the Turks were deprived of the means to escape; Some
threw themselves into the River, and were drowned, and about Eight Hundred were
taken Prisoners, among which was the Bassa of Silestria, and among the killed
were found the new Bassa of Offen, and the Bassa of Aleppo; That Barkan
immediately after Surrendered on Discretion; and that the King of Poland and the
Duke of Lorrain resolved to follow this Great and Happy Success, with the
Attack of Gran.

An Account of the fight between the Christians and Turks with the total
overthrow of the Turks at Barkan, from Brussels October the 22. 1683.
THe Victory obtained against the Turks at Barkan, is the more considerable,
for that it was against the Best and Choicest part of their remaining Army. The
consequences of it are like to be very great, and may occasion the taking of
Gran, Agria, and Newheusel. We are told that in the first days action the King
of Poland was missing for two hours, and believed to be either Killed or Taken;
and that above Thirteen Hundred Poles with many good Officers were slain, and
that their loss would have been greater, had not the Duke of Lorrain hastened
with extraordinary diligence to their Assistance.

FINIS.

