A TRIED METHOD OF Catechizing. BEING An ABSTRACT of the Bishop of CORKE's
Shorter Notes on the Church-Catechism. With the Scripture-Proofs of them as far
as Necessary. And DIRECTIONS for the Use of the Abstract to Advantage.

Feed my Lambs, John XXI. 15. LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took, at the
Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street. School.

The Use of this Abstract is as follows.
LET Children or like Persons, when they are perfect in rehearsing the
Catechism, be set to learn without Book the several Explanatory Propositions,
here drawn out of the Notes on each Question and Answer; as many Propositions
at a time, as may be a Task suitable to their Capacity. When they are able to
repeat such a Portion readily, let them in their Examination at Church, or
elsewhere, after any Question or Answer in the Catechism, have the Question
contained in each Proposition belonging thereto, put to them; and they will
scarce fail to give it the proper Answer: For that each Question is repeated
almost expressly in the Answer. Then let them be asked, How they prove that
Answer? And they will be ready to give the Words of Scripture, set down, which
prove it. By the next Lord's Day, or next Holy Day, let them have another like
Portion of the Propositions ready; and let them then, as before, be examined in
them, together with their Catechism; and so till the whole be dispatched. For
Example.

Quest. What is it to Catechize?

Ans. To Catechize, is to instruct in Religion, by often repeating the first,
certain, and most necessary Points of it.

Quest. How prove you that?

Ans. By Luke 1.3, 4. It seemed good to me to write -- that thou might know
the certainty of those things, wherein thou have been instructed; Greek,
Catechized.

And here will be the chief need for the Catechist to exercise his Skill, in
showing how the proof belongs to, and explains or concludes the Proposition: or
sometimes, to what part of the Proposition such or such a Proof belongs; so
that the Hearers generally may understand the whole Proposition, and that it is
sufficiently proved.

As in the foreinstanced Proof; It is plain from St. Luke, (may the Catechist
say) That in the Primitive Church there were several ways (or kinds) of
Instruction, according to the different Capacities of those who were to receive
Instruction. Now it is said, That Theophilus to whom St. Luke writes, had been
already instructed in some things: And St. Luke writes, and sends to him this
Book, that he might further, and more fully, know the certainty of those things
wherein he had been instructed; or, as in the Original, wherein he had been
Catechized. Therefore Catechizing is to instruct in Religion, by often plain
going over again, or repeating the first and most necessary Points of it.

Thus again, in Prop. VIII. under Answ. 6. without some gloss, it will not at
first sight appear, how the Text cited proves the Proposition; The Proposition
(or Definition) is, To Create, is to make a thing at first out of nothing. The
proof is Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth. Let
it be supposed, (as is usual, both in Scripture, and in the first Article of
our Creeds) by Heaven and Earth, is meant the Sum of all Created Beings,
visible and invisible. Now it is said by the Holy Ghost, In the beginning (that
is, of things and time, when there were yet no Created Beings existent, or
nothing made) God made Heaven and Earth, that is, all things. But there was
then existent no Created Being, out of which he might make them: For then it
could not have been truly said, In the beginning, or at First: For that Matter
(or whatsover we will call it) out of which Heaven and Earth might be pleaded
to be made, must have been, or have a Being, before Heaven and Earth could be
made out of it; And then I say it could not truly have been said, In the
beginning, or at first; forasmuch as there was Matter before that. Therefore it
appears hence, That when God is said to have created Heaven and Earth, he made
them out of nothing, which is the pretended Notion or Meaning of Creation.

This Course is only for the Weaker or Younger Sort, and to begin with. But
when such Persons are a little exercised in this Method, and have gone through
the whole Catechism, let the Notes (either the shorter or the larger) be put
into their Hands, and if they be in any tolerable way industrious, they will be
able to understand, and give a fuller Account, as well of what is contained in
this Abstract, as of what is omitted here, but contained in the Notes;
particularly touching their Christian Name, touching Godfathers and Godmothers,
etc. which things it is not so necessary to trouble them with, till they
understand the Matters which are more Essential to Religion.

But though any should miss of the Notes, if the Propositions, and their
Proofs, be used as is directed, and the Persons so Catechized taught to Read
and turn their Bibles; it may be hoped by these means, through God's Blessing
on a little use, they will understand (by degrees) the Body of Plain
Christianity, and how to prove it out of the Holy Scripture, so as not to be
easily shaken in it afterward.

This is enough to explain the Use of the Abstract. And so God bless my poor
Endeavors, and together all who use them.

E. Cork Rosse.

A Paraphrase on the Apostles Creed.


Jesus Christ, (an anointed Savior, a Prophet, Priest, and King,) and in that
quality for the good of Mankind, receive all Power in Heaven and in Earth,

Mary; which together with a Soul, such as ours, but without Sin, he took upon
him, and became truly Man, being born as an Infant into the World.

Jews; then solemnly arraigned and condemned by a Roman Governor, called
Pontius Pilate; most abominably mocked and abused by the Rabble, and Roman
Soldiers; scourged, crowned with Thorns; and in the end nailed to a Cross, and
set up hanging thereon, till his Soul really departed from his Body. And after
some time, he was laid in a Grave, as the manner of the Jews was, and continued
under the state of a dead and buried Person.





Christ Jesus come again; not as first he came, but with Power and great Glory,
accompanied by numberless Holy Angels and Saints, to judge all that shall be
then alive, and all who have deceased, from first to last.



(for Church originally signifies an Assembly, or Multitude, called out; and
Catholic signifies, out of all the World.) These faithful People are all of
them united to Christ their Head, and to one another, in one Covenant by
Baptism; and being so united do partake of the Benefits procured by one and the
same Savior, of the Influences of one and the same Spirit, and reap Advantages
by each others Prayers, Love and good Offices: By which means they are truly
all but one Body.







All this I steadfastly believe, that is, I am persuaded it is true, and I
resolve to live as one who is so persuaded.

A Paraphrase on the Lord's Prayer.
The Invocation, or Adoration.
O Most merciful and bounteous, yet Almighty, most Glorious and All-seeing Lord
God; who have made, redeemed, and evermore providest for me and all Mankind.













Glorification.
For thou alone, O Heavenly Father, both art, ever have been, and ever shall be,
King and Lord most high over all, Almighty and Sufficient. From thee comes
every good, and every perfect Gift; and to thee be the Glory of all to all
Eternity. With all my heart I desire it.

An ABSTRACT of the Bishop of CORK's Shorter Notes on the Church-Catechism,
with the Scripture Proofs of them, as far as necessary.
On the Title.
Catechize is to instruct in Religion, by often repeating the first, certain,
and most necessary Points of it. Luke 1.3, 4. It seemed good to me -- to write
all in order -- that thou might know the certainty of those things wherein
thou have been instructed: In the Original, Catechized.

Religion is the Worship or Service of God. Jam. 1.27. Pure Religion;
Originally, pure Worship.



Heb. 6.1. Leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection, not laying again the foundation.

Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that he is. Another, That God
has revealed himself in Holy Scripture, ready to receive Sinners to
Repentance. and enter into Covenant with them. Luke 24, 47. It behoved -- that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in the name of Jesus among
all nations.

On Answ. 2.
Jer. 31.33. This is the Covenant -- I will be their God, and they shall be my
people.



1. Grace (by being made Members of Christ our Head) Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness
have we all received, and grace for grace. 2. Pardon of Sin, and God's favor
(being made Children of God) Acts 22.16. Be baptized, and wash away thy sins.
3. A Right and Title to Everlasting Happiness (being made Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven.) Romans 8.17. And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and
joint heirs with Christ -- that we may be also glorified together.

Ephesians. 5.30. Members of his body, which is the Church. And v. 23. Christ is
the head of the Church.

Cor. 12.13. We are baptized into one body by one spirit: Namely ( Romans 8.15.)
The spirit of adoption, by which we cry, Abba, Father; that is, truly call God
Father, and may come to him as a Father, with humble boldness. Ephesians. 2.18. and
3.12.

That they may have a right to enter in through the gates into the city.

Pet. 1.4. An inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for you.

We shall appear with him in glory. Romans 8.17. Be glorified together.

On Answ. 3.
Psalm. 132.2. He swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob.

renouncing the Devil, and all his works, the Pomps, etc.] 2. Faith, in
believing all the Articles of the Christian Faith. 3. Obedience, growth, and
continuance therein; in keeping God's holy Will and Commandments, and walking,
etc. proved by the form of Baptism.



an Estate of most malicious Sinning, and most dreadful Torments. Jude 6. The
Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he
has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the
great day.

Psalm. 103.20. Ye Angels that excel in strength, that do his commandments,
hearkening unto the voice of his word.

John 3.8. He that commits sin, is of the Devil; for the Devil sins from
the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he may
destroy the works of the Devil. But especially seeking to the Devil, or to
those who are believed to deal with him. Levit. 20.27. A man or woman that has
a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death: they
shall stone them with stones. 1 Chronicles. 10.13. Saul died for his transgression
which he committed against the Lord; and also for asking counsel of one that
had a familiar spirit, to enquire of it. As also all Pride, Envy, Malice,
Murder, Lying, False accusing, Temping others, and Falling off from God.

Pride, which is commonly believed one of the Sins by which Angels fell to be
Devils. Isa. 14.12, 13, 14. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, etc.?

Envy or Malice; Jam. 3.14, 15. If ye have bitter envyings or strife in your
hearts -- this wisdom -- is earthly, sensual, devilish.

Lying, and Murder; John 8.44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts
of your father ye will do: He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not
in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he
speaks of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.

False Accusing: Revel. 12.10. The accuser of our brethren -- which accused
them before God day and night.

Corrupting or temping others to sin. 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. The tempter has tempted
you.

Apostasy, or falling from God. Jude 6. The Angels which left their first
estate.



Lewd Shows and Sights provoking Lust. Ezekiel. 23.14, 15, 16. She increased in
her whoredoms; for when she saw men pourtrayed on the walls -- exceeding in
dyed (or party-colored) attire on their heads -- after the manner of the
Babylonians -- she doted on them. 1 John 2.16. All that is in the world, the
lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but of the
world.

Remains of Heathenish Customs. 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. The things which the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God; and I would not that ye
should have fellowship with Devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and
the cup of Devils: Ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table
of Devils.

Customs contrary to Christ's Law. Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this world:
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is
that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God.

Making a sport of Sin. Prove. 14.9. Fools make a mock at sin.

Wild Revelling and Riot, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. We command you, brethren, in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother
that walks disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us.

Habit above our Quality. 1 Pet. 3.3. Whose adorning, let it not be that
outward, of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of
apparel.



Gal. 5.19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness.

Cor. 10.6. We should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted. Or of
the unseasonable or immoderate use of things allowed. Such was the Israelites
lusting after Flesh in the Wilderness. Psalm. 78.20, 29, 30.



selves to the performance of our duty. Acts 24.14. Believing all things which
are written in the Law and the Prophets. Gal. 5.6. Faith works by love.

Pet. 3. Eschew evil, and do good. Isa. 1.16, 17. Cease to do evil, Learn to do
well.

To serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.



On Qu. and Answer 4.
choose life or death. Read Deuteronomy. 30.15. to the end.

James 4.15. Ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we will live, and do this, or
that. John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing.

These. 1. last. Delivered from the wrath to come.

Matt. 25.46. The wicked go into everlasting punishment. Luke 16.28. -- they
come into this place of torment.

Acts 2. v. last. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.
For those who are in the Church are in a fair way to Salvation, as having the
means to obtain it. Deuteronomy. 30.15. See, I have set before thee this day life and
good. That is, Good as the way to Life.

Gal. 3.27, 28, 29. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put
on Christ -- are all one in Christ -- and heirs according to promise.

Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee. Phil. 4.13. I can do all things
through Christ which strengthens me.

[The Explication of the Creed is omitted here any farther than the Catechism
explains it.]

On Answ. 6.
Chron. 20.20. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established;
believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper.



Heb. 7.3. Having neither beginning of days, nor end of life. Psalm. 90.2. From
everlasting to everlasting.

Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the
spirit return unto God who gave it.

Genesis 2.7. The Lord God formed man [that is, his lifeless Body] out of the dust
of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils [or into the Body now formed] the
breath of life: And man became a living soul. Matthew. 15.19. Out of the heart
[or Soul] proceed evil thoughts, etc.

Infinitely perfect is that, to which nothing

[Proofs of the IId Proposition in all its Parts.]
God is a spirit, John 4.24.

Eternal. Isa. 40.28. The everlasting God.

Infinitely Perfect, Romans 11.35. Who has first given to him?

Is of himself, and cannot but be. Exodus 3. I am that I am [or I will be what I
will be] -- Thou shall say to the children of Israel, I am [or I will be] has
sent me.

Has made and upholds all things and Persons. Isa. 40.28, 29. The Lord
[JEHOVAH] the Creator of the ends of the earth -- He gives power to the faint;
and to them that have no might, he increases strength.

He rules all. Psalm. 135.5, 6. The Lord is great, and above all gods.
Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the seas,
and in all deep places.

Has a right to all Things and Persons. 1 Chronicles. 29.14, 16. All things came of
thee, and of thine own we give thee -- All is thine own.

Cor. 8.6. The Father, of whom are all things.

Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.



(1.) There is an only begotten Son of God. John 3.8. He that believes not, is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God. (2.) Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his name Jesus. And v.
1. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ. (3.) Romans 9.5. Of whom, as
concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. (4.)
Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are one. (5.) Joh. 1.14. The word was made flesh.
Gal. 4.4. In the fullness of time -- God sent forth his Son made of a woman.



Deuteronomy. 13.5. The Lord has redeemed you out of the house of bondage. 1 Pet.
18.19. Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold -- but
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, and without
spot.



(1.) Romans 6.17. Ye were the servants of sin, such Servants as wanted to be
made free, ( v. 18.) that is, slaves. See both the proof and explication of
this Slavery, v. 16.

(2.) 2 Timothy 2.26. If God will give them repentance, that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the devil; -- taken captive by him at his will.

(3.) Romans 5.12. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

Matthew. 20.28. The son of man came -- to give his life a ransom for many. Gal.
3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us.

Tim. 2.6. Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all men. Heb. 2.9. He tasted
death for every man. 2 Pet. 2.1. Denying the Lord that bought them, they bring
upon themselves swift destruction.

Heb. 5.9. Christ being made perfect, became the author of eternal salvation
unto all them that obey him.





secretly work] holiness in us; which work we call sanctifying us. (1.) Genesis
1.2. The spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. 1 Cor. 2.11. The
things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God. (2.) Romans 15.16. Being
sanctified by the Holy Ghost.

The Elect People of God, are the Saints, or Sanctified; the Church, the choice
and peculiar People of God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. God has chosen you to salvation
through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth. Psalm. 105.43. He
brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness.

On Answ. 8.
Joh. 8.34, 36. Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin. If the Son
therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

The Ten Commandments Paraphrased. That is, The Sense shortly givon in other
words.


I. Command. Sense.
Thou shall own me, Jehovah, as the alone Maker, Lord, and Governor of all
things; and thou shall not believe, love, regard, trust to, or obey any Person
or thing, so heartily or entirely, as thou do me. (Or shorter yet) Thou shall
have me, Jehovah, for thy God and Happiness; and none other, either with me, or
in my stead.

Levit. 26.1. Ye shall MAKE YOU no Idol, or graven Image, neither rear you up a
standing Image, neither shall ye set up any Image of stone in your land, TO BOW
down unto it: for I am the Lord your God.

II. Command. Sense.
Thou shall not make to thy self any bodily Image of me, who dwell in Heaven;
neither shall thou have by thee to worship any such Image of me, or of any
thing else (whether of any thing really being, or imagined to be) either in the
Heaven, Air, Earth, Water, or in Hell; nor shall thou so much as bow thy self
thereto. But to me thou shall bow down and worship. Psalm. 95.6. O come let us
worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker.



To take (or lift up, Heb.) the Name of God,

than we speak. Judge. 11.10. The Lord be witness between us, if we do not so.

Not to hold guiltless, is surely and severely to punish.

III. Command. Sense.
Thou shall not either swear falsely, or at thy pleasure. Neither shall thou
irreverently use my Name; as all those do, who Swear and Curse in common
Discourse.

Levit. 28.24, 25. Ye shall have a Sabbath -- Ye shall do no servile work
therein.

Servile work is such as we put Servants to.

keep a day holy, is to spend it to those holy Uses and Employmets to which it
was set apart, (viz.) to God's Service. Romans 14.16. He that regards a day,
regards it to the Lord.

IV. Command. Sense.
Remember that thy whole Life be a rest from Sin, to the Service of God; and in
order thereto, Remember to keep holy, both in public and in private, all such
Days as are by Christian Laws set apart to my Worship; but in a more especial
sort, the Lord's Day, as being the Christian Sabbath.

Inwardly, a high esteem; Outwardly, a respectful and dutiful carriage toward
others, by reason of the good in them, or which we receive by them.

V. Command. Sense.
Thou shall honor (with the degree of honor due to each) thy Parents, thy
King, thy Pastors and Teachers: As also all that are in Authority, or Eminency,
both in Church and State; and even thy Superiors of all sorts.

VI. Command. Sense.
Thou shall not knowingly kill, or even wound, maim, or strike any one, without
lawful Authority: Nay thou shall not to thy power, be causelessly angry with
any; much less bear malice or revenge to, or otherwise provoke, any Person; but
thou shall be careful both of thy own and others Life.

Adultery here signifies any Naughtiness between either unmarried or married
People.

VII. Command. Sense.
Thou shall not defile any either married or unmarried Woman; nor shall any
Woman consent to be defiled: But in thought, word and deed, shall thou
endeavor to keep chaste and pure both thy self and others.

Steal, is to take away from another that which is his without his consent, or
any lawful Authority.

VIII. Command. Sense.
Thou shall neither take away, nor withold any thing from the Owner thereof,
without either the Owner's consent, or due warrant by Law; but thou shall to
thy power, give and preserve to all their own; and be thy self both diligent in
thy Calling, and thrifty in thy way of living, that neither thou nor thine may
want, but rather be able to help others.

Luke 4.22. All bear him witness.

Luke 10.29, to 38.

IX. Command. Sense.
Thou shall not in any case speak of (or against) any one, what thou do not
know to be true. Nay except in Cases of Justice and Charity, thou shall not
speak of others that evil which thou do know of them; but always have a care
of other Peoples good Name as well as of thine own.

Mark 10.19. Covet not, is rendered, defraud not.

X. Command. Sense.
Thou shall not so desire any thing, which thou see thy Neighbor to have, as
to contrive to come by it unjustly, or without his consent; but thou shall be
contented with thine own Condition, putting away all irksome Cares, and
depending upon God for meet Supplies, by a blessing upon thy honest Labors.

On Answ. 9.
The four first Commandments, which we commonly call the First Table, teach us
our duty to God; the six last, or Second Table, our duty to our Neighbors and
our selves.

On Answ. 11.
Picking, signifies lesser Acts of Thieving, with which Malefactors commonly
begin.

On Qu. 12.
Special Grace, is particular Assistance given to each Person for every good
Act. 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made
perfect in weakness.

On Qu. 12. Proposition.
The Lord's Prayer ought to be used as a Prayer; and not only as a Pattern of
making Prayers by it. Luke 11.2. When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc.

On Ans. 12.
Acts 17.28. In him -- we have our being -- for we are his offspring. Psalm.
68.5. He is a Father of the fatherless; viz. By providing for them. Isa. 63.16.
Thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer.

and Power: Eccles. 5.2. He is in heaven, and thou upon earth.

Psalm. 103.13. Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them
that fear him.

Psalm. 20.1. The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble; the name of the God of
Jacob defend thee.

Pet. 3.15. Sanctify [or hallow] the Lord in your hearts.

Col. 3.15. Let the peace of God rule in your hearts: Which may be explained by
2 Cor. 10.15. When even imaginations [or all Reasonings] and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, is cast down, and every
thought brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ: The other hereafter,
when all such holy Persons shall reign with him in Heaven everlastingly. Revel.
2.5. They shall reign for ever and ever. 2 Pet. 1.11. An entrance shall be
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Psalm. 103.20, 21. Bless the Lord ye his Angels -- that do his commandments,
hearkening to the voice of his word -- ye ministers of his that do his pleasure.

Acts 21.14. The will of the Lord be done.

Prove. 30.8. Give me neither poverty nor riches: feed me with food convenient
for me.

Thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance on their
inventions.

Jam. 1.13. God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man.
Temptation is such being tried, that is, enticed or affrighted, as before.

Psalm. 51.11. Take not thy holy spirit from me.

Matt. 13.38. The children of the wicked [or evil] one.

On Qu. 14. Proposition.
Sacraments, in a very large sense, signifies any holy Rights or Ceremonies to
be used in the Worship of God, to the end of the World.

On Ans. 14.


Romans 4.11. A seal of the righteousness of faith, viz. by virtue of the
Covenant made with Abraham.

Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body -- and have been
all made to drink into one Spirit.

Acts 8.13, 21, 23. Simon [the Sorcerer] was baptized, yet had neither part nor
lot in this matter; for his heart was not right before God; He was in the gall
of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. 1 Cor. 11.29. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself.

On Ans. 16. Proposition.
An inward Spiritual Grace here, is some unseen gift of God, bestowed upon us as
the fruit of the Covenant: Namely, as before has been declared, either Grace,
Pardon or Comfort, in a Right and Title to Heaven.

On Ans. 17. Proposition.
To be Baptized in [or into] the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is by
being baptized, to be given up most entirely, to believe and obey the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 1.13, 14, 15. Were ye baptized in [or into] the
name of Paul?

On Ans. 18.
Romans 6.7. He that is dead, is freed from sin.

Persons. Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6. Know ye not, etc. Read all the four Verses.

Psalm. 51.5. I was shapen [or born] in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me. Ephesians. 2.3. Being by nature children of wrath.

Quest. and Answ. 4.

On Qu. 19. Proposition.
Persons to be baptized, are either of ripe Years, as Jews, Turks, Heathens,
when converted to the Christian Faith, together with all unbaptised Persons,
who have lived in the Church, or else the Infants of Chistian Parents at least
by one side. 1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife,
and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: Else were your children
unclean, but now they are holy.

On Ans. 19.
Ezekiel 18.21. If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed,
and keep all my statutes. See an Example of such Repentance, Judges 10.13, and
16. compared. Ye have forsaken me, and served other gods -- And they put away
the strange gods from amongst them.

Matthew. 26.75. Peter went out, and wept bitterly. John 5.14. Sin no more, lest
a worse thing come unto thee.

Habits (or a use of any Sin) by breaking our selves of that ill Use or Custom,
and of all love and inclination to it. Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.

Jam. 2.17, 18. Faith, if it has not works, is dead, being alone. Show me thy
faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works.

Proved from Heb. 11. the whole Chapter, especially verses 8, 10, 11, 17, 18,
19.

On Ans. 20. Proposition.
Christian Infants are within the Covenant, and therefore may not be denied
Baptism, which is only the first Seal of the Covenant. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. Ye
stand here this day all of you before the Lord -- all ye men of Israel, your
little ones, and your wives -- that you should enter into covenant with the
Lord your God, and into his Oath which he makes with thee this day.

On Ans. 21.
Levit. 1.25. Ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, even of the herd, and
of the flock -- And he, that is, the Priest, shall kill the bullock before the
Lord, etc.

Isa. 53.10. Thou shall make his soul an offering for sin. Heb. 9.26. Now once
in the end of the world has he [Christ] appeared to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself. Ephesians. 2.14. He is our peace.

On Ans. 23.
Matthew. 26.28. This is my blood which is shed -- for the remission of sin.

Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body
of Christ?

On Ans. 24.
Cor. 12.13. We have been all made to drink into one spirit: Namely, into that
Spirit of which our Lord spoke ( John 6.63.) It is the spirit which quickneth:
And which he promised, John 15.26. to send from his Father after his departure.

He has also sealed us, and given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.

On Ans. 25.
(3.) Resolution against them, or steadfast Purposes of a New Life. (1.) Hag.
1.5. Consider your ways. Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet
unto thy testimonies. (2.) Levit. 5.5. When he shall be guilty in one of these
things, he shall confess that he has sinned in that thing. (3.) Hos. 14.8.
Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols? Psalm. 101.2, 3. I
will behave my self wisely in a perfect way -- I will walk with a perfect
heart. I will set no wicked thing before my eyes.

Matt. 5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that
thy brother has ought against thee; Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and
go thy way, first be thou reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer
thy gift.



our thankful remembrance of Christ's death, by endeavoring a constant sense
of his Infinite Love in dying to redeem us, and of the infinite Benefits we
receive thereby: And therefore by giving our selves up to obey him, who has
thus bought us (Soul and Body) to himself. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Ye are not your
own, for ye are bought with a price: Therefore glorify God in your body, and in
your spirit, which are God's.

Matthew. 5.44, 45. Love your enemies; bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that despightfully use you, and persecute you;
that you may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: For he makes
his Sun to rise upon the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the just,
and on the unjust. Levit. 19.18. Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge
against the children of thy people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self: I am the Lord. Luke 10.29. Who is my neighbor? Read on to v. 38.

Of Confirmation.
Heb. 6.12. The doctrine of Baptism, and of laying on of hands, are reckoned
among the foundations and beginnings of the doctrine of Christ, or of our
Christianity.



They are to be presented by some serious Friend as a Witness of their
Confirmation.

[All this is proved out of the Office of Confirmation.]

FINIS.
Postscript.
THE Author confining himself to two Pages in the Directions for the Use of
this his Method, has, by the Brevity occasioned thence, been too obscure. He
therefore desires, (1.) That his Meaning, in the last Paragraph of the first
Page, may be thus more fully taken.

Now this Text, at first sight, proves (to the purpose for which it is brought)
only thus much: That, whereas there were several degrees or ways of Instruction
in use, even in the very first Christian Age, this of Catechizing was the first
and lowest, as being indeed previous or preparatory to Complete and Full
Christianity. It may be therefore sufficient here for the Catechist to say only
something to this Effect. It is plain from St. Luke, that Theophilus was first
Catechized before he was capable of receiving full benefit by the Gospel
written, or by Holy Scripture; and that this Gospel was written, further to
confirm and perfect him in the knowledge of what he had been before more
summarily or briefly taught: This, I say, may suffice as to this Text.

Notwithstanding if more be required, more may be, and very lawfully, inferred
hence. For Catechizing being the first Instructing in Christian Knowledge, must
needs be an Instruction of the first Christian Doctrines. Now in all Sciences
(or Bodies of Knowledge) the first Doctrines (commonly called Principles) are
still the plainest, as preparing to the understanding of all the rest; and most
necessary, as being the Foundations of the whole Body. And then the common
Import of the word [(...)] to Catechize, being to teach by often repeating, it
will unavoidably follow, That to Catechize, when the word is appropriated to
Religion, as here, will be to Instruct in Religion by often plain going over
again, or repeating, the first and most necessary Points of it: which was the
Definition to be proved.

But such Curiosity of Proof needs not to be used in the Ordinary Explanation
of the Catechism; and when the Subject Matter will bear it, the Proofs here set
down out of Scripture, are of themselves plain Enough, nor do they need many
Words to bring them to bear.

And (2.) that by the words, This course is only for the weaker or younger
sort, in the middle of the 2d Page, may be understood as in the two first Lines
of the Directions he has in terms expressed himself, the setting persons to learn
without book so many Explanatory Propositions. For otherwise, the Propositions
and their Proofs are generally of such moment, as that they are worth the
Consideration and Attention of the most grown Christians.

Pardon now this, after trouble of Correcting the

ERRATA.
Page 3. of the Abstract. lin. 17. Read Coloss. 3. 4. p. 4. l. 25. and 5. l. 8.
r. Tempting. p. 7. l. 29. r. we shall. p. 8. l. last, r. parts, as following.
p. 18. l. 27. r. Rites. p. 20. l. 30. r. them, and served the Lord. In the
Paraphrase of the Lord's Prayer, l. 4. from the end, r. All-sufficient.

The Mistakes of Figures will be helped by the words of the Texts.


