THE TRIUMPHS OF JUSTICE OVER Unjust Judges:

EXHIBITING, I. The Names and Crimes of Four and Forty Judges Hanged in one
Year in England, as Murderers for their corrupt Judgments. II. The Case of the
Lord Chief Justice Tresilian, Hanged at Tyburn, and all the rest of the Judges
of England (save one) banished in K. Rich. the 2ds Time. III. The Crimes of
Empson and Dudley, Executed in K. Henry the 8th's Days. IV. The Proceedings of
the Ship-money-Judges in the Reign of K. Charles the First. V. Diverse other
Presidents both Ancient and Modern.
To which is added VI. The Judges OATH, and some Observations thereupon.

Humbly Dedicated to the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs.

Discite Justitiam moniti, and non temnere Leges. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin
Harris, at the Stationers Arms in the Piazza under the Royal Exchange. 1681.

TO Sir William Scroggs Knight. LORD CHIEF JUSTICE Of His Majesty's Court of
KING'S BENCH AT WESTMINTER.
I Know not to whom I could more properly Dedicate a Treatise of this Nature,
than to Your Lordship, who is at Present Lord Chief Justice of England, and
have set such remarkable Copies to inferior Magistrates. What is here offered,
is neither Prophecy nor Plaster, Lampoon, nor Romance; but a clear Mirror
retreiv'd out of the Closet of wise Antiquity, In which future Administrators
of public Justice would do well to Look; For you know, My Lord, Common Law
runs much upon Presidents; And if a Man happen to have none of the best
Physiognomies, there is no reason why he should straight grow angry; and fling
stones to break all the Looking-Glasses he meets with, only because they
represent the true Figure of the Object.

It Is a Privilege we Scribblers that write for Bread, hold by Prescription, to
put any great Bodies name in the front of our Book. Princes have not been able
to exempt themselves or their Favorites from the Persecution of Dedications,
nor is there ( I humbly conceive) any Rule made in Your Lordships Court to
forbid them.

Suffer then, I beseech Your Lordship this Address to remain a Monument to
Posterity of the Sentiments this Age has of Your Lordships Conduct and Merits,
and witness to all the world how much its Author, is

Westminster Hall this 23 of Dec. 1680. Your Lordships most humble Servant
Philo-Dicaios.

THE TRIUMPHS OF JUSTICE OVER Unjust Judges. etc.
UNdoubtedly there may be, because there has been too often in the World; such
a thing, such a sin, such a mischief, as Corruption of Judges, that is, when by
means of Pecuniary, or other Bribes, or (which is all out as bad) Threatenings,
Promises of Reward, Malice, Revenge, hopes of greater, or fears of being turned
out of present Preferments, or any other ill motive; They that are appointed
and Sworn to Administer equal and impartial Right and Justice, are wrapped
aside, or Bias'd to serve a Turn, or Wreck a private Grudge, or to free the
Guilty, or condemn the Innocent; or to lean rather to the one side, than to the
other; or wilfully to declare that to be Law, which they cannot but know is not
so; or to adjudge punishments disproportionate to the Crimes that appear before
them, or any the like base, illegal practices.

How odious this Vice is, to God and Man, as being equally destructive to
Religion, and Humane Society; and how severely it has been heretofore punished,
by both, may appear by The Ensuing Examples.

1. As to God, who is Capitalis Justitiarius Caeli and Terrae, the Grand
never-erring Justitiary of all the World. His Sacred Word prohibits nothing
more positively, nor omplain of any thing louder, or with more repeated
importunities. Thou shall not rest the judgment of the poor in his cause; Thou
shall take no gift, for a gift blinds the eye of the wise, and perverteth the
words of the Righteous, Ex. 23.6 and 8 ver. Thou shall not rest juegment; thou
shall not respect persons, neither take a gift, etc. Deuteronomy. 16.19. Woe unto them
that justify the wicked for reward, and takes away the righteousness of the
righteous from him, Isa. 5.23. A wicked man takes a gift out of the bosom
('it is done you see slyly, and in the dark) to pervert the ways of judgment,
Prove. 17 23. Woe unto ye who turn judgment into wormwood, and leave off
righteousness in the earth, Amos 5.7. The good man is perished out of the
earth, and there is none upwright amongst men; They all lie in wait for blood;
they hunt every man his brother as with a net, that they may do evil with both
hands earnestly. The Prince asks, and the Judge gapeth for a reward; and the
great man utters his mischievous desire, so they wrap it up: the best of them
is as a briar, the most upright is sharper than a thorn-hedg, etc. Mic. 7.2, 3,
and 4 ver. with many of the like Texts.

2, As corrupt Judges are thus obnoxious to the Curse of God, so has his
Divine Providence not seldom Executed it upon them even in this world by the
hands of men. Nor indeed is there any thing that can render Kings (Gods
Vicegerents) more Glorious, or better establish any state, than to keep the
Current of Justice clear and unsullied; and exemplarily to punish their
Subordinate Ministers, and especially Judges that shall presume to impoison
that Sacred Fountain.

Several Heathen Princes are Renowned for this wholesome severity. It Is said of
Alexander Severus the Roman Emperor, that he had such an aversion and
abhorrence of unjust Judges, that at the very sight of them he would vomit
Choler, and was ready with his fingers to pluck out their eyes-Theatrum
Historicum, f. 546.

The Mighty Monarch Cambyses, King of Persia, finding that one Sisamnes his
Chief Justice ( Proeses our Author calls him in Latin) had received a Bribe,
and for the same pronounced an unjust Sentence, forthwith caused him to be
Executed, and curiously flead, and with his skin covered the Common Seat of
Justice, and Constituted Otanes (the said Sisamnes's own Son) Judge in his Room;
That so beholding daily those Relics of his justly-punisht Father; It might
serve as a Memento to him to act more uprightly. Chronicon Carionis l. 2. p. 19.

But not to search so far off, -- our own Nation affords us (perhaps) the most
notable and numerous Examples of Royal Justice in this kind of any in the
world. For we find it Recorded in that Ancient Law-Book, Entitled The Mirror
of Justices (most of which is said to be Compiled before the Conquest, and
Augmented by the Learned Andrew Horn in the Reign of K. Edw. the Is It. and which
is often Cited by the Famous Lord Coke, and to this day continues in good
Repute amongst Lawyers) That King Alfred, a Renowned Saxon-Prince, who Governed
this Realm about the Year of our Lord 900. did in one years space bring to
Condign punishment, no fewer than four and forty of his Justices, (so the Law
Terms those we call Judges; and this was long before, either Justices of the
Peace Established, or the Courts fixed at Westminster: But Justice was in those
days Administered in the Country, in Neighboring Courts, which yet (as appears
by the nature of the offenses alleged against them) had jus vitae and necis,
power of life and death, and so may properly be called Judges) whose Names and
particular Crimes here follow in the words of that worthy Author, p. 296. of
the French, and p. 239 of the English Edition.

It is an abuse that Justices and their Officers who kill People by false
judgment, be not destroyed, which King Alfred caused to be done, who caused
Forty four Justices in one year, to be hanged as Murderers fer their false
judgments.

1. He hanged Darling because he judged Sidulf to death, for the retreat of
Edulf his Son, who afterward; acquitted him of the Fact.

2. He hanged Segnar, who judged Ulf to death after sufficient acquittal.

3. He hanged Cadwine, because that he judged Hachwy to death without the
Consent of all the Jurors; for whereas he had put himself upon a jury of
Twelve-men; and because that three would havesaved him against the Nine:
Cadwine removed the three and put others upon the jury, upon whom Hachwy put
not himself.

4. He hanged Cole, because he judged Ive to death when he was a Madman.

5. He hanged Malme, because he Judged Prat to death upon a false suggestion
that he committed the felony.

6. He hanged Athulf, because he caused Copping to be hanged before the Age of
one and twenty years. [It was against Law then, but now nequitia supplet
Aetatem.]

7. He hanged Marks, because he judged During to death by twelve men that were
not sworn.

8. He hanged Ostline, because he judged Seaman to death by a false Warrant,
grounded upon false suggestion, which supposed Seaman to be a Person in the
warrant, which he was not.

9. He hanged Billing, because he judged Leston to death by fraud: In this
manner, he said to the People, sit all ye here but he who killed the man, and
because that Leston did not sit with the other, he commanded him to be hanged,
and said that he did assist, where he knew he did not assist to kill the Party.

10. He hanged Seafoul, because he judged Ording to death, as not answering.

11. He hanged Thurston, because he judged Thurgner to death by a Verdict of
Inquest, taken ex officio, without Issue joined.

12. He hanged Athelston, because he judged Herbert to death for an offense not
mortal.

13. He hanged Rambold, because he judged Leschild in a Case not notorious,
without Appeal, and without Indictment.

14. He hanged Rolf, because he judged Dunston to dye for an escape out of
prison.

15. He hanged Frebern, because he judged Harpin to dye, whereas the July were
in doubt of their verdict, for in doubtful cases one ough rather to save than
condemn.

16. He hanged Seabright, who judged Athebrus to death, because he had
discharged one that had given a false judgment in a Case Capital.

17. He hanged Hale, because he saved Tristrain the Sherif from death, who took
to the Kings use from another goods against his will, for as much as any such
taking from another against his will, and Robbery has no difference.

18. He hanged Arnold, because he saved Bailifs, who robbed the people by
color of Distresses; some by selling Distresses, such, and others by extortion
of Fines; because between such tortious Acts and Robbery there was no
difference.

19. He hanged Erkinwald, because he hanged Frankling, for naught else, but
because he taught to him who vanquished him by Battle-mortal to say the word
Cravant.

20. He hanged Bermond, because he caused Garbot to be beheaded by his judgment
in England, for that, for which he was outlawed in Ireland.

21. He hanged Alkman, because he saved Cateman by color of Disseisin, who was
Attaited of Burglary.

22. He hanged Saxmond, because he hanged Barold in England where the Kings
Writ runs for a fact which he did in the same Land, where the Kings Writ did
not run.

23. He hanged Alflet, because he judged a Clerk to death over whom he had no
Cognizance.

24. He hanged Piron, because he judged Huntiny to death; because he gave
judgment in Appeal before the forty days pendant; the Appeal by a Writ of false
judgment before the King.

25. He hanged Delani, because he caused Eldons to be hanged, who killed a man
by misfortune.

26. He hanged Oswin, because he judged Fulcher to death out of Court.

27. He hanged Mucdin, because he hanged Helgrave by warrant of Indictment not
special.

He hanged Horn, because he hanged Simin at days forbidden.

29. He hanged Wolmer, because he judged Grant to death by color of a Larceny,
of a thing which he had received by Title of Bailment.

30. He hanged Therberne because he Judged Osgot; to death for a Fact whereof
he was Acquitted before against the same Plaintiff; which Acquittance he
tendered to aver by Oath, and because he would not aver it by Record,
Therbern would not allow of the Acquittal which he tendered him.

31. He hanged Wolston because he adjudged Howbert to death at the suit of the
King, for a fact which Howbert confessed, and of which the King gave him his
Pardon, but he had no Charter thereof; nevertheless he vouched the King to
Warrant it, and further tendered to aver it by Enrollment of the Chancery.

32. He hanged Oskitell because he Judged Cutlinge to death by the Record of
the Coroner, where by Replication allowable, the Plea did not hold; And the
Case was such, Cutling was taken and Tortured so much, as he confessed he had
Mortally offended, only to be quitted of the pain; and Oskitell adjudged him to
death upon such his Confession which he had made to the Coroner, without trial
of the truth of the Torture or the Fact. And further the said King caused the
Coroners and Officers Accessories to be apprehended who hanged the people, and
all those that might have hindered the false Judgment, and did not hinder the
same in all cases: For he hanged all the Judges who had falsely saved any man
guilty of Death; or has falsely hanged any man against Law, or any reasonable
Exception.

He hanged the Suitors of Calevot, because they had adjudged a man to death in
a case not notorious, although he were guilty thereof; for no man can Judge
within the Realm but the King, or his Commissaries, except those Lords in whose
Lordships the Kings Writ does not run.

He hanged the Suitors of Dorcester, because they Judged a man to death by
Jurors in their Liberty for a Felony done out of it, and whereof they had not
the Conusance by reason of forraignty.

He hanged the Suitors of Cirencester, because they kept a man so long in
Prison, that he dyed in prison, who would have acquitted himself by Forraigners
that he offended not Feloniously.

['Tis supposed these Suitors of each place were Four in Number, which
compleats the number of 44. Hanged in all.]

In his time also the Suitors of Doncaster lost their Jurisdiction, besides
other Punishments, because they held Pleas forbidden by the Customs of the
Realm to Ordinary Judges and Suitors to hold.

In this time Colgrin lost his Franchise of Enfangthief, because he would not
send a Thief to the common Jail of the County, who was taken within his
Liberty, and not Bailable.

In this time Buttolph lost his view of Frank-pledges because he charged the
Jurours with other Articles than those which belonged to the View, and Amerced
people in personal Actions where one was not to be amerced by a pecuniary
Punishment: And accordingly he caused punishments of Death to Criminal Judges
for wrongful mortal Judgments, and so he did proportionably for wrongful
Judgments of a lesser nature: As Imprisonment for wrongful Imprisonments, and
and like for like with the other Punishments; for he delivered Thelweld to
Prison, because he Judged men to Prison for Offenses where they ought not to be
Imprisoned.

He Judged Lithing to Prison because he imprisoned Herbote for the Offense of
his Wife.

He Judged Rutwood to Prison because he Imprisoned Old for the Kings Debt.

[Note, In those days people were not to be Imprisoned for Debt, but only their
Goods distrain'd.]

On the other side, he Cut off the Hand of Haulf, because he saved Armorks
Hand, who was Attainted before him, that he had Feloniously wounded Richbold.

He Judged Edulfe to be wounded, because he Judged not Arnold to be wounded,
who had Feloniously wounded Aldens.

In lesser Judgments he did not meddle with the Judgments; but Disinherited the
Justices, and Removed them according to the Points of those Statutes, where he
could understand that they had Transgressed their Jurisdiction, or the Bounds
of their Delegacy or Commission; or had concealed Fines or Amerciaments or
ought that belonged to the King, or had Released or Increased any Punishment
contrary to Law, or procured Pleadings without Warrant, etc.

Thus far Horns Mirror.

Now that this Alfred was one of the Wisest and most Renowned Kings that ever
this Land was happily Governed by, appears, as well by the Eulogies given him
by the Ancients, as those Encomiastick Verses Dedicated to his Memory, by a
present Ingenious Courtier, Sir Winston Churchill, Knight. in his Diri Britannici,
Fol. 140.

Who would not follow him into the Field,
Who cannot choose but Conquer though he yield?
Whose Sword cut deep, yet was his Wit more keen,
Some Fence against that; But this did wound unseen.
To thee is due (Great Elfrid!) double praise;
To thee we bring the Laurel and the Bays.
Master of Arts and Arms, Apollo so
Sometimes did use his Harp, sometimes his Bow,
And from the other Gods got this Renown
To Reconcile the Gauntlet to the Gown.
But who did e're with the same Sword like Thee,
Execute Justice, and the Enemy?
Keep up at once the Law of Arms and Peace,
And from the Camp Issue out Writs of Ease.
The next English Prince of Renown before the Norman Conquest, was King Edgar,
about the year 960. Amongst whose Noble Acts it is recorded as none of the least
memorable, that in his Circuits and Progresses through the Country, he would
take Account of the Demeanor of his Lords, and especially of his Judges, whom
he severely Punished, if he found them Delinquents: Bakers Chron. Fol. 11.

Nor have the best and wisest of our Princes since the Conquest, been less
ready to give up Ill Judges to just Punishment, nor our English Parliaments
wanting to bring them to it.

In the pear 1290. being (says Walsingham, p. 54.) the 17th year of Edw. 1.
Justitiarios fere omnes de falsitate deprehensos a suo Officio deposuit ipsos
juxta merita puniens gravi Mulcta. He finding almost all his Judges guilty of
Corruption, put them out of their places, and Punished them according to their
Demerits with heavy Fines. Which the Lord Cook in the Second part of his
Institutes, Fol. 508. likewise takes notice of, and tells us, That this was
done by a Parliament held after the Feast of St. Hillary, and only two Judges
escaped scot-free. But how severe the Fines of the other Delinquents were,
appears in Bakers Chronicle, fol. 100. Sir Ralph de Hengham (says he) Chief
Justice of the King's Bench, for Corruption was Fined 7000 Marks; Sir John
Lovetot one of the Justices of the Common Pleas 3000 Marks; Sir William
Brompton 6000 Marks; Sir Solomon Rochester 4000 Marks; Sir Richard Boyland 4000
Marks; Sir Walter Hopton 2000 Marks; Sir William Saham in 3000 Marks; Robert
Lithbury Master of the Rolls in 1000 Marks; Roger Leicester in 1000 Marks; Hugh
Bray Escheator and Judge for the Jews, 1000 Marks; But Sir Adam Stratton Chief
Baron of the Exchequer (who it seems had been a notable Bribe-fingerer) four
and thirty Thousand Marks, [ A prodigious Sum almost 400 years ago!] And Sir
Thomas Wayland Chief Justice of the Common Pleas being found the greatest
Offender of all, was Attainted of Felony for taking of Bribes, and his Lands
and Goods Forfeited: as appears in the Pleas of Parliament, 18 Edw. 1. And he
was also Banished the Kingdom, as unworthy to live in that State against which
he had so much Offended.

Sir William Thorp Chief Justice of the King's Bench in K. Edw. the Thirds time,
having of five several persons received five several Bribes, which in all
amounted to 100 l. was for this alone adjudged to be Hanged, and all his Goods
and Lands Forfeited.

The reason of the Judgment is entered in the Roll in these words -- Quia
praedictus Willielmus Thorpe qui Sacramentum Domini Regis erga populum suum
habuit ad Custodiendum, fregit malitiose, false and Rebelliter quantum in ipso
fuit. Because that as much as in him lay, he had broken the Kings Oath made to
the People, which the King had Entrusted him withal.

And so much did the then Collective Wisdom of the Nation respect Judges
herein, that it is expressly entered, that this Judgment should not be drawn into
example against any other Officers who should break their Oaths, but only
against those, Qui predictum Sacramentum fecerunt et fregerunt, et habent Leges
Angliae ad Custodiendum. That is, only to the Judges that violate their Oaths,
having the Laws of England Entrusted unto them.

This Judgment was given 24 Edw. 3 d. The next year in the Parliament 25 Edw.
3. Numero 10. it was debated in Parliament, Whether this Judgment was Legal,
and Nullo Contradicente, unanimously it was declared to be just and according
to the Law, and that the same Judgment may be given in time to come upon the
like occasion. Which Case, I humbly conceive, resolves the Case in Law Point
Blank thus: That it is death for any Judge wittingly to break his Oath in any
part of it. This Oath of Thorp is entered in the Roll, and is the same verbatim,
with the Judges Oath in 18 Edw. 3: The same too (as I humbly conceive) which
our Judges now a days take, and is herein afterward punctually recited.

The Oaths of our Judges of England, as they bind them to the due
Administration of Justice to the Subject, according to the Laws, (which are
every Free-mans Birthright) so also, as they be of the Kings Council, they are
by such their Oaths obliged, lawfully to counsel him, that is, whenever their
opinions are demanded, they are sworn and bound to deliver them according to
the Law. -- Let us see how our Ancestors resented these matters.

In a Parliament held in the 11th year of Richard the 2. there was Judgment of
High Treason given against 18 several Persons, and all, save one of them, of
Eminent Rank; Three Privy Counselors, viz. The Archbishop of York, The Duke of
Ireland, and Earl of Suffolk, the Bishop of Exeter, the Kings Confessor, Five
Knights, of whom some had been Servants to Edw. the 3. and all, but one,
Servants to the then King, and some of them of Noble Descent; but that which I
more particularly observe, there were amongst them Six Judges, and Locton the
Kings Sergeant at Law; Blake of the Kings Council at Law, and Usk the under-
Sheriff of Middlesex.

Of these 18, 8 were Executed, that is, Sir Robert Tresilian, the Lord Chief
Justice was drawn from the Tower, through the midst of London, to Tyburn, and
there Hanged; so likewise were Usk and Blake, and Sir John Salisbury; but the
other 4 Knights had the Favor to be Beheaded.

Three, that is, the Archbishop of York, the Duke of Ireland, and the Earl of
Suffolk, died miserable Fugitives in foreign Parts.

The other seven (whereof five were Judges) with much ado got a Pardon as to
Life, but were banished, and their Lands and Goods all forfeited; and it was
made Felony for any to procure their Recalling home, and themselves forthwith
to be executed as Traitors, if at any time they should presume to return.

And of these eighteen Persons, all save three were impeached by the Commons.

The Offenses which procured these Exemplary Punishments, were briefly these:

King Richard the II. being an unthinking dissolute Prince, by the ill counsel
of some near his Person, there had during his minority happened diverse
miscarriages in the Government: To redress which, in a Parliament holden in the
tenth year of his Reign, and the twentieth of his Age, a Commission was awarded
to Twelve Peers, and others of greatest Wisdom and Ability, impowering them to
inspect the past management of the Household, the Revenue, the Courts of
Justice, and in a word, all things that did concern the Good of the Realm; with
full power finally to determine, and put all things in excution, so as might
most tend to the Honor of the King, Relief of the People, and Safety of the
Land; which Commission was to endure only one year.

Now come five of the Persons abovenamed, viz. the Archbishop, the Duke, the
Earl of Suffolk, the Chief Justice, and Brembre, who seeing themselves like to
be called to Account for their pernicious Counsels and Irregularities, and to
be brought to deserved shame and punishment; to avoid the same, and continue
their Villainies for the future, they insinuated to the King, That this
Commission entrenched upon the Royal Power, and was derogatory to the Crown,
that the procurers thereof had extorted His Royal Assent thereunto in
Parliament; and that this was Treason: for so the Chief Justice and Blake the
Kings Council, who was advised withal in the Writ, declared it to be; whereupon
Blake was commanded to prepare an Indictment of Treason against all the said
Commissioners, and against such others as had been most active in procuring
that Authority: Accordingly he draws the Indictment which stands entered in the
Roll, and is to this effect, That they the said Commissioners, etc. had
Traitorously conspired among themselves to make this Commission by Authority of
Parliament against the Royalty of the King, to his disherison, and in
derogation of the Crown, and that they forced the Kings Consent, and
confederated themselves to maintain one another in so doing.

It was designed that they should be tried upon this Indictment in Middlesex or
London, and therefore (some of the parties to be prosecuted not being Peers)
Usk the Undersheriff of Middlesex was acquainted with the business, (who was
to return a Pack'd-Iury (you see that is a very old Game) that might be sure to
do the business, which he performing accordingly, was therefore hanged.

But further, the five grand Favorites, that the King might the more confide
in their Counsels, (for so are the words of the Record) and that under color
of Law, they might cover their malice from the King and the Kingdom, before the
Trials were to be brought on, advise the King to demand the Opinion of some of
the Judges, that is, of the two Chief Justices and Chief Baron, and the Judges
of the Common Pleas, six in all in number, and of Locton the Kings Sergeant;
Blake, of the Kings Council at Law, was commanded to draw up those Questions,
who did it accordingly, and for drawing the same, and the beforementioned
Indictment, he was himself Drawn and Hanged.

The Questions being prepared in Writing; the Judges were sent for to
Nottingham Castle, where in the Kings own Presence, they were commanded upon
their Allegiance to deliver their Opinions,

1. Whether the Commission was derogatory to the Rights of the Crown? They
answered, It was. 2. Whether the persuading and urging the King to consent
thereunto in Parliament, was Treason? They answered, That it was.
Here were other Questions asked, but these were the Main, and those for which
they were condemned, as appears by the Replication of the Commons to the Judges
Answer, and by the Words of the Judgment -- That they the said Judges knew that
this Commission was awarded in Parliament, etc. that it was for the Public
Good; That they knew of the Traitorous Intent to destroy the Procurers of this
Commission; That they knew the Law, and that it was not Treason, and had
delivered such Opinions thereby, under color of Law, to cover their
Treasonable Intent, and therefore Judgment of High Treason was given against
them, and against Locton the Kings Sergeant, who had Subscribed these False
Opinions with the Judges. And though there be other Articles against the Rest,
yet this alone is adjudged Treason, in the several Judgments against every one
of the Eighteen: And it is observable, That in all these Judgments, they are
adjudged Traitors as well against the Person of the King, as against the
Commonwealth.

And it is there declared upon great Advice taken, That in Treasons which
concern the King and Kingdom, they are not bound to proceed according to the
Rules of the Common Law, but according to the Course of Parliaments, so as may
be for the Common-Good. Nor were these Judgments huddled up in haste, but given
upon long and mature Deliberation, the Work of a Whole Parliament. And it is
declared in the Roll, That they spent long time, and took great pains in
examining the Evidence, the better thereby to satisfy their own Consciences
and the World. Their Proceedings against the five Plotters were begun the 14 of
November. and the Judgments were not given till the 15 of Feb. following, which
is a Quarter of a Year.

It Is also to be observed, That several of these Judges were very unwilling to
give their Corrupt Opinions, but were menaced and violently drawn thereunto by
the Duke of Ireland and others. And at their Trials, they severally Alleged,
That in part Violence had been offered to their Persons, because they had
deferred the delivery of their Opinions. But as Fear or Cowardice is no Plea
for delivering up of the Forts or Bulwarks of the Kingdom, so neither is it for
basely betraying our Rights and Liberties. These Allegations of being threatened
from their Duty, could not excuse them from the Rope: but how much more then do
they deserve it who shall presume to do as bad things or worse, without any
Menaces at all, but wilfully and presumptuously, purely out of their own base
inclinations?

But Tresilian was not the only Judge which our English History, even since
the Conquest, mentions to have been executed for irregular Practices: For in
the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, a Wise but Avaritious Prince, there were
two Gentlemen of the Long Robe, that for private Interest, and to serve the
Kings present Turn, were ready to dispense with their Oaths, and the known
Fundamental Laws. But as they lived hated during his time, so they died
unlamented under his Successor, being given up a necessary Sacrifice to Public
Justice.

Their Names were, Sir Richard Empson Knight, and Edmund Dudley, both (says
Sir Richard Baker, fol. 247.) Lawyers, and both of them Barons of the
Exchequer, and Justices of the Peace throughout England: Dudley of a good
Family, but Empson the Son of a Sieve-maker: So true is that Remark of the
Poet; Mendico asperius nihil est cum surgit ad Altum.

There is no Person in the World more Haughty, or an Apter Tool for Oppression,
than a Beggars Bratt, or some base Mechanic, Butcherly Offspring, when
undeservedly flush't with Preferment.

The King made odd Use of these Two Instruments. They turned (says Baker) Law
into Rapine. And most certain it is, that many ill Things they did: But the
better to color their vile Practices, a Statute was Provided, to Justify their
Invasions on the Liberties and Properties of their Fellow Subjects.

We will give you an Account of this Matter, in the very Words of that Great
Oracle of our Law, Sir Edward Cook. But first, hear how Sir Richard Baker, in
his Chronicle, fol. 247. represents them:

Their Manner was (says he) to cause diverse Subjects to be Indicted of Crimes,
and then presently to Commit them, and not Produce them to their Answer, but
suffer them to Languish long in Prison; and by sundry Artificial Devices and
Terror, extort from them great Fines, which they termed Compositions and
Mitigations. Neither did they (toward the End) observe so much as the
Half-Face of Justice, in Proceeding by Indictment; but sent forth their
Precepts to Attach Men, and Convent them before Themselves, and some Others, at
their private Houses; and there shuffle up a Summary Proceeding by Examination,
Without Trial by Jury; assuming to themselves to deal both in Pleas of the
Crown, and Controversies Civil. Then did they also use to Enthral, and Charge
the Subjects Land with Tenures in Capite, by finding False Offices, refusing
upon diverse Pretexts and Delays, to admit Men to Traverse those False Offices.
Nay, contrary to all Law and Color, they maintained, That the King ought to
have the Half of Men's Lands and Rents, during the Space of full Two Years, for
a Pain, in case of Outlawry. They would likewise Ruffle with Jurors, and
enforce them to Find, as they would Direct: And if they did not, then Convent,
Imprison, and Fine them. These, and many other Courses they had, of Preying
upon the People, and had ever a Rabble of Promoters, and Leading Jurors at
their Command, so as they could have any Thing found, either for Fact, or
Valuation.

Thus far the Historian. Now, take the Relation of the Reverend Judge Cook, in
his ever-valuable Works, Commenting in the Second Part of his Institutes on
that GOLDEN Nine and Twentyeth Chapter of Magna Charta; which being of
Inestimable Value, I take it for granted, no True English Man will any more
grudge the Reading, than I do the Recital of it; and I wish it might every
Market Day, be repeated with a Speaking-Trumpet, in every Town and Corporation
of this Kingdom. The Words run thus: Nullus Liber Homo, etc.

No Freeman shall be Taken, or Imprisoned, or Disseised of his Free-Tenement
or Liberties, or Free-Customs; or be Out-lawed, or Exiled, or in any manner
Destroyed: Nor will we pass upon him, nor send any (to pass) upon him: But by
the Lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. We will Sell to
none, we will Deny to none, nor to any delay Justice or Right.

Discoursing, I say, upon this most Comprehensive Text, the Cornerstone of all
our English Freedoms, my Lord Cook, 2 Instit. fol. 51. thus expresses himself:

Against this Ancient and Fundamental Law, and in the Face thereof, I find an
Act of Parliament made 11 H. 7. Cap. 3. That as well Justices of Assize, as
Justices of the Peace, (without any Finding, or Presentment by the Verdict of
Twelve Men) upon a bare Information for the King, before them made, should have
full Power and Authority, by their Discretions, to Hear and Determine all
Offenses, etc.

And Fourth Part, Instit. fol. 39. he gives a further Account of, and Recites
this Act thus:

There was an Act of Parliament made in the 11 H. 7. which had a Fair,
Flattering Preamble, pretending to avoid diverse Mischiefs, which were, 1. The
High Displeasure of Almighty God. 2. The great Let of the Common Law. And, 3.
The great Let of the Wealth of this Land. And the Purview of that Act tended in
the Execution contrary, Ex Diametro, viz. To the Displeasure of Almighty God,
The great Let, nay, the utter Subversion of the Common Law, and, The great Let
of the Wealth of this Land; Which Act follows in these Words:

THe King our Sovereign Lord, calling to his Remembrance, That many good
Statutes, and Ordinances be made for the Punishment of Riots, and unlawful
Assemblies, Reteinders in giving, and receiving of Liveries, Signs, and Tokens
unlawfully, Extortions, Maintenances, Imbracery, Excessive taking of Wages,
contrary to the Statute of Laborers and Artificers, the Use of unlawful Games,
Inordinate Apparel, etc. to the displeasure of Almighty God, etc.
notwithstanding that generally, by the Justices of the Peace, in every Shire
within this Realm, in the open Sessions, it is given in Charge to inquire of
many Offenses committed, etc. and diverse Inquests thereupon straightly Sworn,
and Charged before the said Justices to inquire of the Premises, and therein
to present the Troth, which they let to be sound by Imbracery, Maintenance,
Corruption, and Favor; by occasion whereof, the said Statutes be not nor
cannot be put in due Execution: For Reformation whereof, for so much that before
this time the said Offenses, Extortions, Contempts, etc. might not, nor as yet
may be conveniently Punished by the due Order of Law, except it were first
found, and presented by the Verdict of Twelve ^^en thereto duly Sworn, who for
the Causes before Recited will not find, nor present the Truth; wherefore be it
by the Advice, and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons
in this present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same Enacted,
Ordained, and Established; That from henceforth, as well the Justices of Assize
as the Justices of the Peace, in every County of the said Realm upon
Information [Note, it was to be without any Presentment, or Indictment found by
any Grand or Petty Jury] for the King, etc. shall have full Power, and
Authority by their Discretion to hear, and determine all Offenses, etc.

Here you see Matters were left to be determined by Judges, and Justices
Without Iuries, in a Summary, Chancery-Method, only according forsooth! to
their Discretion: Yet still there was a Proviso,

THat no such Information should extend to Treason, Murder, or Felony; nor to
any other Offense, for which any Person should lose Life or Member: Nor to lose
by, or upon the same Information, any Lands, Tenements, Goods, or Chatteis, to
the Party making the same Information.

[Which deserves Particular Notice:] Yet observe, how the same Reverend Lord
Coolt, in the Place before-cited, descants on this Act.

By Pretext (says he) of this Law, Empson and Dudley did commit upon the
Subject unsufferable Pressures and Oppressions; and therefore, this Statute was
Justly, soon after the Decease of Henry the Seventh, Repealed by an Act of
Parliament, 1 H. 8. Cap. 8. A good Caveat to Parliaments, to leave all Causes
to be measured by that Golden, and Strait-Mete-Wand of the Law, and not to the
uncertain and crooked Cord of Discretion.

It is not almost Credible, (continues the same Judicious Author) to foresee,
when any Maxim, or Fundamental-Law of this Realm [He means, as to this
particular Case, Trials per Pais, that is, by Juries] is Altered, what
dangerous Inconveniences do follow. Which most expressly appears by this Most
Unjust and Strange Act: For hereby, not only Empson and Dudley themselves; but
such Justices of Peace, Corrupt Men as they caused to be Authorized, Committed
most grievous and heavy Oppressions and Exactions, Grinding of the Faces of
poor Subjects by Penal Laws, be they never so Obsolete, or unfit for the Time,
[Suppose, for a Parallel in our Times, putting the Statutes against Popish
Recusants, in Execution against Protestant Dissenters, at a Juncture when
Popery was just ready to overrun us all] by Information only, without any
Presentment or Trial by Jury, being The Ancient Birthright of the Subject: But
to Hear and Determine the same, by their Discretion. These, and other like
Oppressions and Exactions by, or by Means of Empson and Dudley, and their
Instruments, brought Infinite Treasures to the King's Coffers; whereof the
King, in the End, with great Grief and Compunction, Repented.

This Statute of 11 H. 7 We have Recited, and showed the Inconveniences
thereof; to the end, that the like should never hereafter be attempted in any
Court of Parliament: And that others might avoid the Fearful End of these Two
Time-Servers, Empson and Dudley.

Thus far that Oracle of our English Laws. Wherein be pleased to observe:

First, That he sticks not to call even an Act of Parliament, most Unjust and
Strange: And in the Second Part of his Institutes, fol. 51. Unjust and
Injurious; because it Altered a Fundamental-Law of the Realm, viz. Denied Trial
by Juries, a most Essential Part of English Freedom, and never to be parted
with.

Secondly, Observe what became of these Two Wicked Men, though they had such a
Color of Law to bear them out: They were, in the Beginning of the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth, (first) Indicted for other base Practices, in Finding of
False Offices for the King, to the Damage and Disherison of His Subjects:
Which Indictment ran as follows (see Cook's Instit. Part the Fourth, fol. 198.)

Juratores praesentant quod Richardus Empson nuper de London Miles, etc. In
English thus:
THe Jurors present, That Richard Empson, late of London, Knight, late
Counselor of the most Excellent Prince, Henry the Seventh, late King of
England, on the Tenth Day of May, in the Twentyeth Year of the said late King,
and diverse Times before and after, at London, etc. Not having God before his
Eyes; but as the Son of the Devil, imagining the Honor, Dignity, and
Prosperity of the said late King; and the Prosperity of His Kingdom of England,
not at all to Value or Regard: But to the end, that he might obtain to be a
more Singular Favorite of the said late King, whereby he Himself might be made
a Noble or Great Man, and Govern the whole Kingdom of England at his Pleasure;
Falsely, Deceitfully, and Treasonably Subverting the La^y of England, did
(amongst other Things) the Day and Year aforesaid, at London, in the Parish
and Ward aforesaid, procure, and cause to be found diverse false Inquisitions,
and Offices of Intrusions, and Alienations of diverse Leige-Subject's Manors,
Lands, and Tenements; that they held the Manors, Lands, and Tenements in those
Inquisitions specified of our Lord the King, in Capite, or otherwise; when in
Truth it was not so. And afterward, when the said Leige-Subjects of our Lord,
the late King, would have tendered and alleged Traverses to the said
Inquisitions, in the Court of Him, the said late King, according to the Law of
England; they could not be admitted to those Traverses: But he, the said
Richard Empson, debarred and delayed them from the same, 'till they had agreed
with him, to pay diverse Great and Insupportable Fines and Redemptions; as well
for the Profit of the said late King, as for the proper, private Advantages of
him, the said Richard; to the great Impoverishment of the said Subjects. And
that the said Richard, the Day and Year aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward
aforesaid, and several Times before and after, diverse Leige-Subjects of the
said late King, holding of out said Lord the King, diverse Manors, Lands, and
Tenements, by Knight's-Service, and themselves being (by the Death of their
Ancestors) under Age, and so in the Wardship of the King, by Reason of their
Tenure, when they came to lawful Age, and ought to have had due Livery of their
Manors, Lands, and Tenements, according to the Custom and Law of England, and
would have Prosecuted the same according to the Course of Chancery; did refuse
them so to do, and totally deny and erclude; until they had made with him, the
said Richard, diverse great Fines and Redemptions, more than they could bear; as
well for the Gain of the said late King, as for the private Benefit of him, the
said Richard: Whereby many of the said late King's People were by such
Grievances, and Unjust Extortions many ways vered: Insomuch, that the Subjects
of the said late King, did manifoldly murmur, and bear ill Will against the
said late King; to the great Peril of Him, the said late King, His Kingdom of
England, and the Subversion of the Laws and Customs of this Realm.

It Is true, (says my Lord Cook, Fourth Part of his Institutes, fol. 41.) in
this Indictment [Which, Mutatis mutandis, we are to suppose, was alike against
Dudley] the Word Proditorie, [That is to say, Treasonably] was used but for
Aggravation, and as a Preparative (for a Prosecution) to Greater Offenses. For
they were not to escape with a Charge of Misdemeanor only: But in the same
Year, they were both Indicted of High Treason, both by the Common Law, and Act
of Parliament. And in the Second Year of King Henry the Eighth, they both Lost
their Heads.

Thus, that Profound Judge speaks of them, who 4. Instit. fol. 41. concludes
the Story of these Time-serving, Self-designing Judges, with this most
remarkable Epiphonema: Qui eorum vestigiis insistunt, eorum Exitus
prehorrescant; Those that shall dare tread their Steps, let them dread (or
expect) the like dismal Ends.

Sir Richard Baker, the Best perhaps (for want of a better) of our Modern
English Historians, gives somewhat a more particular Account of the Fate of
these Two Corrupt Hucksters of Law and Justice: Which be pleased to Peruse in
his own Words, fol. 254.

Speaking of King Henry the Eighth's general Pardon, at his first coming to the
Crown, and how he Ordered Restitution to be made, of all Goods unjustly taken
from any. He Adds:

And because the Instruments of such Injustice are Always most Odious; and
nothing gives the People so much Contentment, as to see their Persecutors
Punished. He therefore caused Empson and Dudley, the Two Chief Actors of the
late unjust Proceedings, to be Committed to the Tower, and diverse of their
Inferior Agents, called Promoters [The Raskally Informers, Pensionary
Affidavit-Men, or (if you please) Robin Hogg's of that Age] As Camby, Page,
Derby, Wight, Simpson, and Storckton, to be set on the Pillory in Cornhil, with
Papers on their Heads, and then to Ride through the City with their Faces to
the Horse-Tails, with the shame whereof, in Seven Days after they all Dyed in
Newgate.

Shortly after a Parliament was called; whereof Sir Thomas Ingleby was chosen
Speaker: And therein Empson, and Dudley were Accused of High Treason, and after
Arraigned; Edmund Dudley, in Guild Hall, on the Seventeenth of July; and Sir
Richard Empson at Northampton, in October following. And on the Seventeenth of
August, the Year following, [ Which was Anno Domini, 1510.] they were both of
them Beheaded on the Tower Hill; and their Bodies and Heads Buried, the one at
White-Fryars, the other at the Black.

And also, by an Act of 1 H. 8th. Cap. 6. the before-recited Injurious Statute
of 11 H. 7. was made void, and repealed; and the Reason thereof is yielded, for
that by Force of the said Act it was manifestly known, that many Sinister and
Crafty, Feigned, and Forged Informations, had been pursued against diverse of
the King's Subjects, to their great Damage and wrongful Vexation.

For it is not Credible, (says the Lord Cook, Second Part of his Institutes,
fol. 51.) What horrid Oppressions and Exactions, to the undoing of Infinite
Numbers of People, were Committed by Color of that Act, shaking the
Fundamental-Law of the Land: The ill Success whereof, and the Fearful Ends of
these Two Oppressors, should deter others from Committing the like; and
admonish Parliaments, That instead of this Ordinary and Precious Trial, per
Legem Terrae, they bring not in Absolute and Partial Trials by Discretion.

So much touching Empson and Dudley, those Names of Ignomony and Detestation.
Let us now proceed to the Famous Case of Ship Money, in the Reign of King
Charles the First, and the Extrajudicial and Ilegal Opinions of the Judges
therein Delivered, with the dismal Consequences thereof, as well to themselves,
as to the King, and whole Realm.

KING Charles the First came to the Crown 27 March, 1625. In the Three First
Years of His Reign, he called Three several Parliaments; but none of them
Complying to give so much Money, as was Expected: But rather insisting upon
Complaints against Buckingham, the then Grand Favorite, and to have Public
Grievances Redressed, They were all Dissolved in Discontent; and no more
Parliaments spoken of, till that of the Thirteenth of April, 1640. (which was
likewise suddenly Dissolved.) During this long Interval, or Absence of those
whom the Laws had Entrusted with Keeping the Right Keys of the Public Purse,
there were some that would needs be Tampering to Pick it; I mean, several
little Intrigues were set on Foot, to Supply the Court, and get Money from the
Subjects, without their Common Consent in Parliament; (that good Old Course,
which Never Failed any KING, upon any Just Occasion, or where they knew it
should not be diverted to the KING's Dishonor, and the Nations further
Grievance) Of this kind were, 1. The Privy Seals issued. 2. Benevolence
required. 3. Commissions of Loan. 4. The Business of Knighthood; whereby all
persons Seized of Lands and Rents of Forty Pounds per Annum, or upwards, were
by Proclamation Summoned, either to appear, and take upon them the Degree of
Knighthood, or else were liable to be Fined for Respite of the same. Which
(alone says Baker, fol. 449.) brought an Hundred Thousand Pounds or more, into
the Exchequer.

But all this was still thought too little: These Devices might serve for a
present Shift, once, and no more; but there wanted a Continual Fund, or
Constant Supply, as often as the Court wanted, or thought fit to require Money,
without being beholden to Parliaments. Whereupon, 5ly. By the fatal Advice (as
it is said) of Noy, the then Attorney General, the King was put upon this
Project of raising Money, by Issuing out Writs, Commanding his Subjects to be
Rated, and Assessed in such and such Sums, for Building, and Equipping of
Ships, for the public Defense of the Kingdom: Which the said Attorney
persuaded his Majesty might be Justified by ancient Precedents. In pursuance
hereof, the King in the Nineth Year of his Reign, Issued out certain Writs of
that kind, to the Seaports, and Maritine Parts of the Realm: And finding (for
the most part) a punctual Obedience, and good Advantage thereby; it was in
short time after, advised to Extend the same Charge to all the Counties of this
Realm, though never so remote from the Seas; wherein, meeting with some that
refused to pay, as Conceiving the same Unlawful, the Judges (who by their
Oaths, are the Kings proper Counselors in all difficulties concerning the Law)
were to be Consulted with. So, a Letter was Written to them, from the King in
these Words: [ Baker's Chron. fol. 455.]

To our Trusty, and well-beloved Sir John Bramston, Knight, Chief Justice of
our Bench; Sir John Finch, Knight, Chief Justice of our Court of Common pleas;
Sir Humphrey Davenport, Knight, Chief Baron of our Court of Exchequer; And to
the rest of the Judges of our Court of Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and the
Barons of our Court of Exchequer.
Charles Rex.
TRusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well:
Taking into our Princely Consideration, that the Honor and Safety of this our
Realm of England, (the Preservation whereof, is Only Entrusted to our Care)
was, and is more nearly concerned, than in late or former, times; as well by
diverse Counsels, and Attempts to take from us the Dominion of the Seas; of
which we are sole Lord, and Right Owner, and Proprietor; and the Loss whereof,
would be of greatest Danger and Peril to this Kingdom, and other our Dominions,
and many other ways. We for the avoiding of these, and the like Dangers; well
Weighing with our self, that where the Good, and Safety of the Kingdom in
general is concerned, and the whole Kingdom in Danger, there the Charge, and
Defense ought to be Borne by all the Realm in general, did for the preventing
so public a Mischief, resolve with our self, to have a Royal Navy prepared,
that might be of Force and Power (with Almighty God's Blessing and Assistance)
to Protect, and Defend this our Realm, and our Subjects therein, from all such
Perils and Dangers: And for that purpose, we Issued forth Writs under our great
Seal of England, Directed to all our Sheriffs of our several Counties of
England, and Wales; Commanding thereby all our said Subjects in every City,
Town, and Village, to provide such a Number of Ships well-furnish't, as might
serve for this Royal Purpose; and which might be done with the greatest
Equality that could be. In performance whereof, though generally throughout all
the Counties of this our Realm, we have found in our Subjects, great
Cheerfulness, and Alacrity; which we Graciously Interpret as a Testimony, as
well of their Dutiful Affection to us, and our Service, as of the Respect they
have to the Public, which well becomes every good Subject. Nevertheless,
finding that some few happily out of Ignorance, what the Laws and Customs of
this Realm are, or out of a desire to be eased in their Particulars, how
General soever their Charge be, or ought to be, have not yet Paid, and
Contributed to their several Rates, and Sessments that were set upon them. And
foreseeing in our Princely Wisdom; diverse Suits and Actions, are not unlike to
be Commenced, and Prosecuted in our several Courts at Westminster: We desirous
to avoid such Inconveniences, and out of our Princely Love, and Affection to
all our People, being willing to prevent such Errors as any of our Loving
Subjects may happen to run into; have thought fit, in a Case of this Nature, to
Advise with you our Judges, who we doubt not are well. Studied, and Informed in
the Rights of our Sovereignty; and because the Trials of our several Courts, by
the Formalities in Pleading, will require a long Protraction, We have thought
fit by this Letter directed to you All, to require your Judgments in the Case,
as it is set down in the Enclosed Paper; which will not only gain Time, but
also be of more Authority to overruled any Prejudicate Opinions of others in
the Point. Given under Our Signet, at Our Court of White Hall, the Second of
February, in the Twelfth Year of Our Reign, 1636.


The CASE propounded in the Paper enclosed, was thus worded:

Charles Rex.

WHen the Good and Safety of the Kingdom (in General) is concerned, and the
whole Kingdom in Danger; Whether may not the KING, by Writ under the Great Seal
of England, Command all the Subjects in His Kingdom, at their Charge, to
Provide and Furnish such Number of Ships with Men, Victuals, and Munition, and
for such Time as He shall think fit, for the Defense and Safeguard of the
Kingdom, from such Danger and Peril? And by Law compel the Doing thereof, in
case of Refusal or Refractoriness? And, Whether in such Case, is not the KING
the sole Judge, both of the Danger, and when and how the same is to be
prevented and avoided?


To which, the JVDGES delivered their Opinions as follows:

May it please Your most Excellent Majesty!
WE have, according to Your Majesty's Command, severally, and every Man by
himself, and All of us together, taken into Serious Consideration, the Case and
Questions Signed by Your Majesty, and enclosed in Your Letter. And We are of
Opinion, That when the Good and Safety of the Kingdom (in General) is
Concerned, and the whole Kingdom in Danger, Your Majesty may, by Writ under the
Great Seal of England, Command all the Subjects of This Your Kingdom, at their
Charge, to Provide and Furnish such Number of Ships with Men, Victuals, and
Ammunition; and for such Time, as Your Majesty shall think fit, for the Defense
and Safeguard of the Kingdom, from such Peril and Danger: And that by Law,
Your Majesty may Compel the Doing thereof, in case of Refusal or
Refractoriness. And we are also of Opinion, That in such Case, Your Majesty is
the sole Judge, both of the Danger, and when and how the same is to be
prevented and avoided.

John Bramston, John Finch, Hum. Davenport, John Denham, Richard Hutton,
William Jones, George Crook, Thomas Trevor, George Vernon, Robert Barclay,
Francis Crawley, Richard Weston.



But it is to be noted, That though all the Judges did thus Sign this Answer;
yet it was not according to all their Opinions; for Crook and Hutton
dis-assented, and declared, That such a Charge could not be laid by any such
Writ; but by Parliament. But the Major-Part of the Judges, being absolutely
Resolved upon that Opinion, pressed them to Subscribe likewise with the rest;
for that the Greater Number must involve and conclude the Less; which, they
said, was usual in all Cases of Reference; And that the Lesser Number must
submit to the Opinion of the More, although they varied in Opinion: As in the
Courts of Law; If Three Judges agree in Opinion against One or Two, where there
is Five Judges, Judgment is to be Entered per Curiam, if the Major Part agree,
and the Others are to submit unto it, etc. (These are the very Words of Judge
Crook, excusing himself for having thus Subscribed: See the Arguments on
Hampden's Case, p. 12.)

Having thus got the Business backed with the Subscriptions of all the Judges
of England, the same were Enrolled in all the Courts of Westminster Hall: And
now, they began to Prosecute briskly, all the Defaulters; amongst whom, the
Chiefest was John Hampden of Buckingham-shire, Esquire, who had upon one of
these Ship - Writs directed to the Sheriff of that County, been Assessed Twenty
Shillings for his Lands in Stoke-Mandevil, in that County; which not being
paid, was Certified (amongst others) into the Chancery, upon a Writ of
Certiorari, Dated 9 Martii, Anno 12. Car. by a Schedule thereunto annexed; and
by a Writ of Mittimus, Test 5 Maii, 13 Car. transmitted into the Exchequer;
with a Command there, to do for the Leavying of the Sums so Assessed and
Unpaid; Prout de Jure, and secundum, Legem Regni nostri Angliae suerit
faciendum; So as of Right, and according to the Law of our Kingdom of England
was to be done; whereupon a Scire Facias issued out of the Exchequer, reciting
the said Writs, to warn Mr. Hampden (amongst others) to show Cause, why he
should not be Charged with this Money. Upon this, he being Summoned, Appeared,
and demanded Oyer of those Writs and Schedule; which being Entered, he Demurred
in Law; that is, demanded the Opinion and Judgment of the Court of Exchequer,
Whether this Writ were sufficient in Law, to Force him to pay the said Twenty
Shillings.

This being a Great and General Case, the Barons of the Exchequer, desired the
Assistance of the rest of the Judges, who did Join accordingly. The Case was
argued, first, by Council on both Sides; and next, by the Judges severally; of
whom, Sir Richard Hutton, Knight, one of the Judges of the Common Pleas, and
Sir Richard Crook, Knight, one of the Judges of the King's- Bench, in large and
learned Arguments, (since Printed) did show the Illegality of such Writs, and
gave their Opinion; That the Defendant Hampden, ought not to be Charged: But
the rest of the Judges were resolved to carry the Point for the King; and
accordingly gave their Opinions, That the Defendant ought to be Charged. And
then, it was the Part of the Barons of the Exchequer, to give Judgment; which
was Entered in these Words:

Quod seperalia Brevia predicta, and Retorn' eorundem, ac Schedul' praedict'
eisdem Annex', ac materia in eisdem content' sufficient' in Lege Exist' ad
praefat Johannem Hampdem de predictis viginti solidis super ipsum informa, and
ex causa praedictae Assessae onerand. Ideo consideratum est per eosdem Barons
quod pr^^ctus Johannes Hampden. de eisdem viginti solidis oneretur, and inde
satisfaciat: That the said several Writs and Returns thereof, and the Schedules
thereunto annex't, and the Matter in the same contained, are sufficient in Law
to Charge the said John Hampden with, the Twenty Shillings upon him, in the
Form, and by Virtue of the Assessment aforesaid imposed. Therefore, it is
considered by the said Barons, That the said John Hampden shall be Charged, and
shall satisfy the same.

This Judgment was imposed, as such an Infallible Determination of the Law in
this Case, that no further Dispute would be allowed thereof to any others;
insomuch, that a Person of Honor, having a Case depending in the King's-
Bench, was denied any Argument or Debate, concerning the Right of Ship Money,
for no other Reason, but that it had been by the former Judgment, decided
already in the Exchequer.

It may perhaps be said: This Imposition of Ship Money was small and
inconsiderable; Mr. Hampden, a Gentleman of a fair Fstare, was Assessed but
Twenty Shillings: And, Why should any Body-scruple such a petty Business, when
the King Commanded it? Was not the Remedy far worse than the Disease? Why
should any Subject exspend a great deal of Money in Law, to avoid Payment of so
Trivial a Sum? Or, What Harm could accrue to the Public, by the Judges
allowing the King Power to Impose such an Assessment, when it was for the
Defense of the Realm from Eminent and Imminent Danger, and he exerted that
Power so favorably, etc.

In Answer to such Objections, it must be said; That true it is, it was then
only Mr. Hampden's Case; but the whole Nation, every individual Subject of
England, was concerned in it: nay, so far concerned, that all his Estate and
Liberty was therein given up. The Question was not Quantum, but Quo Jure? If
Public Danger might give the King Title to lay Impositions without a
Parliament, and He alone were Judge of such Danger, When might it not be
alleged? If Twenty Shillings were Assessed on Mr. Hampden that Year, How did
it appear, but Twenty Pounds might be required the next, and Two Thousand
Pounds the Year following? And, What Use, what Occasion would the Court have
had for ever afterward, of a Parliament? But as to the Illegality of these
Ship-Writs, I refer the Reader to Judge Crook's Argument; where the same is
Demonstrated to be against the Common Law, against diverse Statutes, not to be
maintained by any Prerogative, or Power Royal, unwarrantable by any former
Precedents, etc.

Let us see then, what were the Consequences of these Extrajudicial Opinions,
and this Illegal Judgment of the Judges.

First, As to the King: They thereby misled him (as much as in them lay) to
Discompose the Harmony of Government; to Entrench upon the Property of His
Subjects; and (contrary to his Intentions) by Color of Right, to violate the
Laws, which, no doubt, that Good Prince meant to have preserved Inviolable.

Secondly, As to the Subjects: They were not only hereby Injured, but their
Affections Alienated from their Sovereign; which to occasion, is no doubt a
very High (because almost Irreparable) Treason.

The Genuine Sense of these Resolutions, being no less than this; That the King
of England; as often as Himself pleases, may declare the Kingdom to be in
Danger, and that so often, His Majesty, for Prevention of such Dangers, may, by
His Writ under the Great Seal of England, alter the Property of the Subject's
Goods, without their Consent in Parliamen; and that in such Proportions, as His
Majesty shall think fit: And besides, may deprive them of the Liberty of their
Persons, and that in such Manner as Himself shall please.

Thirdly, As to the Judges themselves: It proved deservedly Fatal; For no
sooner was a Parliament Called, but they were called to Account for these their
Illegal Opinions and Judgment.

And after a long Debate, on Monday the Seventh of December, 1640. these Four
several Votes Passed upon them, without so much as One Negative Voice to any of
them, viz.

First, THat the Charge imposed upon the Subjects, for the Providing and
Furnishing of Ships; and the Assessments for Raising of Money for that purpose,
commonly called Ship Money, are against the Laws of the Realm, the Subjects
Right of Property, and contrary to former Resolutions in Parliament, and to the
Petition of Right.

Secondly, That the Extrajudicial Opinions of the Judges, Published in the
Star Chamber, and Enrolled in the Courts at Westminster (before Recited) in the
whole, and in every part of them are against the Laws of the Realm, the Right
of Property, and the Liberty of the Subjects, and contrary to former
Resolutions in Parliament; and to the Petition of Right.

Thirdly, That the Writ to the Sheriff of Bucks (particularly Recited) and the
other Writs, commonly called Ship-Writs; are against the Laws of the Realm, the
Right of Property, and the Liberty of the Subjects, and contrary to former
Resolutions in Parliament, and to the Petition of Right.

Fourthly, That the Judgment in Mr. Hampden's Case (as before Recited) in the
matter and substance thereof; and in that it was conceived that Mr. Hampden was
any way Chargeable, is against the Laws of the Realm, the Right of Property,
the Liberty of the Subjects, and contrary to former Resolutions in Parliament,
and to the Petition of Right.

These Votes being Transmitted by the Commons to the House of Lords; Their
Lordships did Concur therein. And on Friday the 26. of February, 1640. It was
Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in the High Court of Parliament,
Assembled; That the Lord Keeper, or Master of the Rolls, the Two Lord Chief
Justices, and the Lord Chief Baron; and likewise the Chief Clerk of the
Star Chamber, should bring into the Upper House of Parliament, the Records of
the Judgment against Mr. Hampden, concerning Ship Money, in each of those
several Courts, and that a Vacat thereof should be made. And that a Copy of the
Judgment of the Parliament, concerning the Illegality thereof, should be
Delivered to the several Judges of Assize; and that they should be required to
Publish the same in all the Circuits. Which on the 27. of the same February,
was done accordingly: the said Records being Vacated, and the Rolls Crossed
with a Pen in the House of Lords, and Subscribed with the Clerk of the
Parliament's Hand.

And soon after, several of the before-named Judges were Impeached for the same
in Parliament: And not daring to stand the Shock, some of them, as the Lord
Chief Justice Finch, Fled beyond the Seas; and others Absconded. And soon
after, came on the Unnatural Civil-Wars, so Destructive to King and Kingdom;
which, though no way Justifiable, yet it cannot be denied; but they were not a
little Occasioned, and the Animosities of the People, blown into an Untameable
Flame, by these base Traitorous Proceedings of those Sycophant Judges. And Woe
unto those (say Sacred Oracles) by whom Offenses come.

However, after so many dismal Experiences, and fair Warnings, and the
Miraculous Restoration of His present Majesty, our Gracious Sovereign (whom
God long Preserve) a Prince of Incomparable Lenity, and Good-natured beyond
Example; it might be hoped, that none, Preferred to the Public Seats of
Justice, durst to have Acted ^o contrary to His Royal Incimations, as to
violate those Laws, which He Himself has Sworn to Maintain, and Entrusted them
to Administer: Yet so Base and Extravagant are some, as even to abuse the
Favors of the Best of Princes, and puff't up with Preferment, will take no
Admonition from the Falls of their Headstrong Predecessors; but still presume
to sully those Ermins, (the Emblems of Innocence and Integrity) which they
wear, and adventure: on the same Destructive Precipices.

You have heard, how heinously our Prudent Ancestors resented the Violation of
their Liberties, (though by an Act) in Trials of the Freeborn People of
England Without Iuries. Next to which, is the Ruffing, Hectoring, and
Over-awing of Juries: For, What real Difference is there, betwixt allowing no
Juries at all, and Menacing them into a Compliance (contrary to Law, and their
own Consciences) with the Corrupt Humors, and Time - serving Interests of ill
Judges? Of this Crime, the Lord Chief Justice Keeling, about the Year 1666. (a
Time when God's General Judgments on this Sinful Land, might have awakened them
to greater Circumspection and Uprightness) was not only Guilty, but Questioned
for the same, even by That very Parliament, which was never extraordinarily
Celebrated for bringing Public Vermin to Punishment: Yet such a Sense they
had of these ill Practices, that in their Journal, we find the following Votes
on this Occasion.

Die Mecurii 11o Decembris, 1667.
THE House Resuming the Hearing of the rest of the Report, touching the Matter
of Restraint upon Juries; and upon the Examination of diverse Witnesses in
several Cases of Restraints put upon Juries, by the Lord Chief Justice Keeling,

Resolved, as follows;

First, That the Proceedings of the said Lord Chief Justice, in the Cases now
Reported, are Innovations in the Trials of Men for their Lives and Liberties;
and that he has used an Arbitrary, and Illegal Power, which is of dangerous
Consequence to the Lives and Liberties of the People of England, and tends to
the Introducing of an Arbitrary Government.

Secondly, That in the Place of Judicature, the Lord Chief Justice has
Undervalued, Vilified, and Contemned Magna Charta; the great Preserver of our
Lives, Liberties, and Property.

Thirdly, That he be brought to Trial, in Order to Condign Punishment, in such
Manner as the House shall judge most Fit and Requisite.


And again:

Die Veneris 13o Decembris, 1667.
Resolved,
THat the Precedents, and Practice, for Fining or Imprisoning of Jurors for
Giving their Verdicts, is Illegal.


Here you see the ill Practices of that Chief Justice, were Branded in
Parliament, and he was ordered to be Prosecuted; though by reason of the Houses
being Prorogued, and he himself not long after Dying in Discontent, we do not
find there were any further Proceedings made therein.

At the Sessions for London, Sept. 1670. William Penn, and William Mead, (Two
of the People commonly called Quakers) being Indicted: For that they the
Fourteenth of August before, did with others, to the Number of Three Hundred,
in Grace Church Street, Unlawfully and Tumultuously Assemble, etc. by reason
whereof a great Tumult did there happen, in Contempt of the King, great
Disturbance of the Peace, and Terror of the People, etc. And the Jury (after
having been several times sent back, and kept close from the Saturday till the
Monday Morning) bringing them in Not Guilty, Sir John Howel, then Recorder of
London, presumed to Fine the said Jury Forty Marks a Man, and to Lie in Prison
till paid. Being thus in Custody, Edward Bushel, one of the said Jurymen,
brought his Habeas Corpus in the Court of Common Pleas; and upon a long
Argument, it was Adjudged by the whole Court, That the said Fining and
Commitment was Illegal: Whereupon the said Bushel was Discharged, and left to
bring his Action for False Imprisonment, against the said Recorder: Which Case
is Reported by Vaughan, at that time Chief Justice of the said Court, in his
Reports, Licensed and Approved of by the present Lord - Chancellor of England,
Sir William Scroggs, since Lord Chief Justice of the King's - Bench, my Lord
North, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; and all the Judges of England. But as
to the Illegality of any Courts Imposing upon, Menacing, Fineing, or
Imprisoning Juries, see a small Treatise, Entitled, The English-Man's Right,
Printed for R. Janeway, 1680. and another called, The Grand Iury-Man's Oath and
Office Explained, Sold by Langley Curtis, on Ludgate Hill; both well worthy the
Perusal of every True Englishman.

What Proceedings have been since, or rather are at this instant pendent
against Judges, for Hectoring of Juries, and other Illegal Arbitrary
Proceedings, are too fresh in every Bodies Memory, to need a Recital. Instead
of which, I shall rather Insert the Form of the Oath, Taken by Judges at their
first Admittance to that Office; which runs as follows:

The OATH of a JUDGE. In Dorso Claus': de Anno 20. Edw. 31. Part. Prima.
YE shall Swear, That Well and Truly ye shall Serve our Sovereign Lord the
King, and His People, in the Office of Justice: And that ye shall Counsel our
Sovereign Lord the King, in His Needs: And that ye shall not give any Counsel,
or Assent to any thing, the which might turn to Hurt, or Dis-heriting of the
King, by any Way or Color: And that ye shall not know any Hurt, or Disheriting
of the King; but that ye shall make it to Him known, by You, or by some other
Person: And that ye shall do equal Law and Execution of Right, to all the
King's Subjects, Rich and Poor, without having Regard to any Person: And that
ye shall not take by You, or by any other privily, ne apart, any Gift or Reward
of Gold, or of Silver, nor of any other Thing, the which might turn you to
Profit, unless it be Meat or Drink; and that of Little Value, of any Man that
shall have any Plea, or Process, hanging before you, as long as the same before
your self such Pleas and Processes shall be hanging, nor after for that Cause:
And that ye shall take no Fees, as long as ye be Justice, nor Robe of any
Person, great or small, in any Case, but of the King Himself: And that ye shall
not give any Counsel, or Advice to any Person, great or small, in any Ease,
where the King is Party: And in case that any Persons, of what ever Estate they
be of, come before You in Sessions, with Force and Arms, or otherwise, against
the Peace, or against the Form of the Statute thereof made, for to disturb the
Execution of the Common Law, or for to Menace the People, that they may not do
the Law; That ye shall Arrest their Bodies, and put them in Prison; and in case
they be such as ye may not Arrest, that ye shall Certify the King of their
Names, and of their Misdoing hastily; to that End, that he may thereof Ordain
Remedy: and that ye shall not maintain by your self, nor by none other privily
nor openly, any Plea or Quarrel hanging in the King's Courts, or elsewhere in
the Country: And that ye shall not Delay any Person of Common-Right, for the
Letters of the King, or of any other Person, nor for any other Cause: And in
case that any Letters come to you contrary to the Law, that ye shall nothing do
for such Letters, but ye thereof shall Certify the King: And ye shall proceed
to do the Law, the same Letters notwithstanding; and that ye shall do, And
procure the Profit of the King, and his Crown in all Things, where ye them
Reasonably may do. And in case that ye be found in Default here-after, in any
of the Points aforesaid, ye shall be at the King's Will of Bodies, Lands, and
of Honor, to do thereof that that shall please the King.

This well-contrived, necessary Oath, prescribed by the Prudence of our
Forefathers, would bear a large Comment; but we must hasten, and shall only
remarque:

First, That they Swear, Well and Truly (that is, Uprightly, and according to
Law) to Serve the King, and his People.

Secondly, That they shall do Equal Right, and Execution of Law, to all the
King's Subjects, Rich and Poor; (that is, without Partiality, Favor, Malice,
etc.) Justice is Pictured Blind in respect of the Subject, not the Object: She
has a Balance, not to weigh Gold, but the Crime: She has regard to Offenses,
not Persons.

Thirdly, That if any Letters from the King (unduely obtained, for so all such
are supposed to be) shall be brough to them, contrary to Law, they are not to
regard them; much less are they to value any Verbal Commands, or little
Raskally Insinuations of any Court-Favourites, huffing Grandees, or small
Minions of State.

Fourthly, That by this their Oath, Judges are to proceed according to Law;
their Business is Jus Dicere, to Declare and Administer the Laws Established;
not Jus Dare, to Impose their own Whimsical, Arbitrary, Peevish, or
Self-designing Opinions, for Law; or to Usurp a Legislative Power, so as
deliver that to be Law, which in truth is not so. And if they shall presume to
offend herein, they are Exemplarily to be punished: For since it is a known
Maxim of Law, Ignorantia Juris non excusat, That Ignorance of the Law shall
excuse no Man; (The Reason of which, is, because every Man is supposed to be
Privy, and consenting to all our Laws, by his Representatives in Parliament.)
How much less are Judges (whose Profession and Office it is to Understand the
Law; and therefore, must take Notice of it, at their Peril) to be Indulged?
Under what Character will they plead Excuse? Are they Persons of known
Learning, and strong Natural Parts, great Reading, exqusite Eloquence, etc? All
this but aggravates their Fault, that they should abuse such good Gifts, to the
Dishonor of the King that Commissions them, and Prejudice of His People that
expected more exact Dealings from such Eminent Accomplishments. Will they
shelter themselves under the beforementioned Plea of Ignorance? This is
already shown to be an Invalid Allegation; and besides, it is a Reflection on
that Royal Power that Preferred them: And, What infinite Mischiefs (of which
there is no Particular Complaint or Information) may the Subjects suffer in
their Lives, and Fortunes, under such Ignorance, which is always attended with
Equal Presumption? Or, lastly, Suppose it should be offered in their Favor,
That for some time, at first, they were Upright, and have had the Reputation of
Prudence and Integrity, in all Cases, except such and such: for which Now they
are questioned: To this it may be fitly Answered, (as he of Lacedemon said of
the Athenians) If they carried themselves Well, when Time was, and now Ill,
they deserve a Double Punishment; because they are not Good, as they were; and
because they are Evil, as they were not. The Judges, it is true, are declared in
the Parliament-Roll of the 11 R. 2. to be Executors of the Statutes, Judgments,
and Ordinances of Parliament: But they must not make themselves the
Executioners of them too, by endeavoring the Destruction of the Fundamentals
of our Laws and Liberties. The Law is the Temple, the Sanctuary, whither the
Subject is to run for Shelter and Defense: But if the Judges, Sacerdotes
Justiti^e, those Priests of Justice, shall, like those of Delphos, uttter
False, Ambiguous, and Time-Serving Oracles, Where is the Comfort of the Poor
Votaries? Will not this Sanctuary then become Templum sine Numine, like that of
the Roman Emperor, who after he had built it, put no Gods into it? We shall
have the Dead Killing-Letter of the Law, but not the Quickening, Preserving
Sense of it: The Fabric and Formalities of the Temple; but the Goddess
Astraea, and the Dii Tutelares, all that should Conserve our Liberties and
Properties, will be vanished: And instead thereof, we shall have but an Indian
Pa-god, a frightful, terrible Idol of Arbitrary Power, delighting in Humane
Sacrifices, and only Adorable for Averting that Mischief, with which it
threatens us.

But, Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt: Contraries illustrate each
other. We have hitherto Treated the Reader with Dolesome Narratives of Lewd
Judges: Let us now (briefly) Entertain him with an Account of some Good and
Imitable Ones; Memoria Justi in Aetermun.

In the Reign of King H. 4. His Son and Heir apparent (then a Wild Youth, but
afterward as Solid, and Renowned a King, as most that have swayed the English
Scepter) hearing that one of his Companions was Arraigned for Felony before the
Lord Chief Justice of England (I am sorry my narrow Reading has not brought me
acquainted with his Honorable Name) came to the Bar, and offered to take away
the Prisoner by force; but being withstood by the said Chief Justice, stepped
to him, and Struck him over the Face; whereat the Judge nothing daunted, rose
up, and with a Gravity becoming his Dignity, told him, That he did not this
Affront to Him, but to the King his Father, in whose Place he sat; and
therefore, forthwith Committed him to Prison. The Prince Over-awed with the
Majesty of the Sage Judge's Expressions, calmly Suffered himself to be carried
away by an ordinary Tip-Staff; which being told the King, He not a little
Rejoiced, both that he had a Judge of such Courageous Integrity; and a Son of
such Submissive Obedience to his Laws, Vide Baker fol. 163.

The Famous Queen Elizabeth, having required a Charge upon diverse of Her
Subjects, by particular Letters from the Lords of Her Council, of several Sums
of Money, for present Aid toward Her Wars in Ireland; hearing that one of Her
Judges, viz. Mr. Justice Walmesley, being convened before the said Lords, for
Non-Payment thereof, thereby Discouraging others; had Answered, That it was
Contrary to Law that the same should be Imposed, there being an Express Statute
against it; which He being a Judge, was bound by his Oath, to signify to Her
Majesty, he being (as much as in him lay) a Conservator of the Queens Oath in
that behalf; Her Majesty was much Offended, that any such Imposition had been
pretended to, and Commanded that it should be stopped from further Gathering;
and to such as had paid it, their Money, by Her express Order, was Restored.
Judge Crooks Argument in Hampden's Case, p. 57.

In the 29th. of the same Queen, Her Majesty having Erected a New-Office in the
Common Pleas, for making of Supersedeas on Exigents, She Grants it to one
Cavendish Her Servant; sends to have him admitted, but the Judges delay the
doing thereof, On this Reason, because the Prothonotaries, and Philizers
Claimed the making those Writs. The Queen sends a Sharp Letter, and Commands
them forthwith to Admit him: Then She sends a more positive Command, requiring
the Reason of their Contempt and Disobedience. The Judges return the
beforementioned Reason to the Lord Keeper, and Earl of Leicester (no mean Man
in those Days) upon which, the Queen sends a Fourth Peremptory Message for
their Admitting him, with this Reason: That if the others were put out, they
were Rich, and Able Men, and that Her Courts of Justice were Open, where they
might Demand their Right; for this was not to debar them Therefrom, but only to
put them to their Action. The Honest Judges roturned this Answer, That the
Queen had taken Her Oath, for the due Execution of Justice According to Law,
and they did not doubt, but when Her Majesty was Informed it was against the
Law, She would Act therein as became her. For their own parts, they had taken
an Oath to God, to Her, and the Commonwealth; And if they should do it without
Process of Law before them, and only upon Her Command put the others out of
Possession, though the Right remained to them, it were a Breach of their Oath;
and therefore, if the Fear of God were not Sufficient, they told Her the
Punishment, that was Inflicted upon their Predecessors for Breach of their
Oaths (citing Thorpe, etc.) might be a sufficient Warning to them: Whereupon
the Queen hearing these Reasons, was Satisfied; and the said Judges heard no
more of this Business.

To Descend nearer our own Times, we cannot omit that grand Example of
Uprightness, the ever Famous Sir Matthew Hale, late Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench; a Miracle for all other parts of Polite and Serious Learning, as
well as profound Knowledge in the Laws of England. Of whom I shall yet, not
offer any particular Instances, since his whole Life was one continued Thread of
Sincere, and Understanding Justice: For as easily you might have justled the
Sun out of the Ecliptic, as to have warped him from his constant Road of
Integrity. An exact Standard whereby Future Princes may measure the
Qualifications of their Judges; for though he were a most Loyal, and Zealous
Servant to the Crown; yet he was so far from being ever Impeached by the
Representative Body of the Nation, that no one Single Person (no not of those
that were Cast before him) were ever heard to complain of his Conduct.

And if any Latter Judges have been dismissed by false Tales of Sycophant
Whisperers, or for opposing base Illegal Arbitrary Interests; as they have the
Invaluable Satisfaction of a good Conscience for their Comfort; so they may be
assured, they still appear more Glorious in the Eyes of all good Englishmen at
present, and will be Recorded more Venerable to Posterity, than any Robes or
Preferment, sullied with Bribery, Flattery, or Treacherous Compliances, could
renden them.

However, we hope the Various Examples, we have here Enumerated from Authentic
Records and Histories, may be sufficient to Deterr future Judges from Ill
Courses; and satisfy all the World, both in the Justice of the Parliaments
late Proceedings in this Case, and the Reasonableness of their Vote and
intended Bill, That Judges henceforth should hold their Places, and Salaries,
not Ad Placitum; but Quam Diu se been gasserint. Which was the principal Aim of
these Papers. Fiat Justitia.

FINIS.

