A TRIAL OF THE NEVV-CHVRCH WAY IN NEW ENGLAND AND IN OLD. Wherein are
handled these Questions following. 1. Whether a stinted form of Prayer and set
Liturgy be unlawful. 2. Whether it be unlawful to join in Prayer, or
receive the Sacraments where a stinted Liturgy is used. 3. Whether the
children of godly and approved Christians, be not to be baptized till their
parents be set-members of some particular Congregation. 4. Whether the parents
themselves being of approved piety, ought not to be received to the Lords
Supper, until they be first admitted as set-members. 5. Whether the power of
Excommunication, etc. be so in the body of the Church, that what the major part
shall allow, that must be done, though the Pastors and Governors, and part of
the Assembly be of another mind, and peradventure upon more substantial
reasons. 6. Whether those that are admitted as set-members, ought not to depart
or remove, without the consent of that Congregation whereof they are members.
7. Whether a Minister be so a Minister to a particular Congregation, that if
they dislike, or leave him, he utterly cease to be a Minister. 8. Whether a
Minister may not perform ministerial acts to another Congregation then his
own. 9. Whether members of one Congregation, may not communicate in another.


By that learned and godly Minister of CHRIST, JOHN BALL, of Whitmore.

Penned a little before his death, and sent over to the New England Ministers,
Anno 1637. As a reply to an Answer of theirs in justification of the said
Positions. Now published (by occasion mentioned in the Epistle to the Reader
following in the next page) upon the desire of many godly and faithful
Ministers, in and about the City of London, who love and seek the truth. By
WILLIAM RATHBAND and SIMEON ASH.

1 These. 5. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

LONDON: Printed by T. Pain and M. Simmons, for Thomas Underhill in Great
Wood-street, 1644.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
Upon the receipt of the Answer returned unto the Nine Positions, Master Ball
moved by the request of Brethren, drew up this reply, which upon perusal and
joint approbation, was directed unto the reverend Elders of the several
Churches in New England. The Reply sent miscarrying in the hand, to which it
was committed, though both Letters and printed Books trusted in the same hand
were delivered: Hereupon another Copy was from New England desired, and
accordingly prepared in the year following. In the mean time, the Answer
being tendered to the Press, it was judged more meet to keep the Reply in
readiness to attend the publishing of the Answer, then to part with it in the
other way. This intelligence was the last year conveyed into New England,
since which time, there has been an expectation to see that in Print, which
now is sent abroad to open view. By this Relation it is manifest who are
volunteers, and who are pressed to come forth as defendants, in these
Controversies. These differences betwixt the loving Brethren of old England and
New, had not been made thus notorious, if some who cry up the Church way in New
England, as the only way of God, had not been forward, to blow them abroad in
the world. But surely the providence of God is remarkable in bringing these
questions into debate at this time, when the Ministers of the Gospel from all
the Counties in the Kingdom are called together by both houses of Parliament,
to consult about the healing of our breaches, which are very many and
dangerous: The Copy of this Reply being committed to our custody we are
necessitated to appear in the publication of it: yet we shall preface nothing
concerning the Treatise it self, because our known respects to the reverend
and judicious Author will render us partial, and our testimony can add no
credit to his works, which withal indifferent Readers will plead sufficiently
for their own acceptance. If this discourse shall add any discovery of light
unto them, who desire a sound judgment in the controversies here agitated, our
end is obtained, and our prayers answered, who are.

Thy Servants in and for the truth, Simeon Ash, William Rathband.


The Letter of those Ministers in England, who requested to know the judgment
of their Brethren in New England, in Nine positions, wherein the reasons, of
this their request, are truly reported.
(Reverend and beloved Brethren)
WHiles we lived together in the same Kingdom, we professed the same faith,
joined in the same Ordinances, labored in the work of God to gain souls
unto his kingdom, and maintained the purity of worship against corruptions,
both on the right hand and on the left. But since your departure into New
England, we hear (and partly believe it) that diverse have embraced certain
vain opinions, such as you disliked formerly, and we judge to be groundless
and unwarrantable. As that a stinted form of prayer, and set Liturgy is
unlawful; That it is not lawful to join in prayer, or to receive the
Sacrament, where a stinted Liturgy is used. 3. That the children of godly and
approved Christians are not to be Baptized, until their parents be set
members of some particular congregation. 4. that the Parents themselves, though
of approved piety are not to be received to the Lords Supper, until they be
admitted as set members. 5. That the power of Excommunication* etc. is so in
the body of the Church that what the major part shall allow, that must be done,
though the Pastors and Governors, and part of the assembly be of another mind,
and peradventure, upon more substantial reasons. 6. That none are to be
admitted as set members, but they must promise, not to depart, or remove unless
the Congregation will give leave. 7. That a Minister is so a Minister to a
particular Congregation, that if they dislike him unjustly, or leave him, he
cease to be a Minister. 8. That a Minister cannot perform any ministerial
act in another Cogregation. 9. That members of one Congregation may not
communicate in another.

These and other such like (which we omit to reckon up) are written and
reported to be the common Tenants in New England, which are received with great
applause, maintained with great confidence, and applauded as the only Church
way wherein the Lord is to be worshipped. And letters from New England have so
taken with diverse in many parts of this Kingdom, that they have left our
Assemblies because of a stinted Liturgy, and excommunicated themselves from
the Lords Supper because such as are not debarred from it. And being turned
aside themselves, they labor to ensnare others, to the grief of the godly,
the scandal of Religion, the wounding of their own souls (if they did
advisedly consider the matter) and great advantage of them, that are wily to
espy, and ready to make use of all advantages to prejudice the truth. (Beloved
brethren) if you stood in our places, we are well assured it would be no small
grief unto you, to bear and see the people led aside to the disgrace of the
Gospel, upon weak and groundless imaginations, and in rash end inconsiderate
zeal to deal with that which is of God, as if it were of man. And if it be to
us grief of heart to hear that you have changed from that truth which you did
profess, and embrace that for truth which in former times upon sound grounds
you did condemn as erroneous, we hope you will not be offended. You know how
often it has been objected that Non-conformists in practice are Separatists in
heart, but that they go cross to their own positions, or smother the truth
for sinister ends. They of the Separation boast that they stand upon the
Non-conformists grounds. A vainglorious flourish and slight pretense. But both
these are much countenanced by your sudden change if you be changed, as it is
reported. How shall your brethren be able to stand up in the defense of their
innocence, and the uprightness of their cause, when your example and opinion
shall be cast in their dish? Must they leave you now, with whom they have held
society? Or will you plead for Separation, which you have condemned as rash and
inconsiderate? You know that thy who have run this way, have fallen into
manifold divisions, and may not you justly fear, lest the same befall you?
Some warnings you have had already, and have you not cause to fear every day
more and more? Error is very fruitful and will spread apace. A crack in the
foundation may occasion a wide breach in the building, where there will not be
means, or mind to amend it. Experience every day may tutour us herein. But to
let pass all inconveniences, our request in all meekness and love is, that if
these or any of the forementioned opinions be indeed your Tenants, you would be
pleased to take a second review of your grounds, and send us your strongest
reasons that have swayed you in these matters: and if we shall find them upon
due examination to be such as will carry weight, we shall be ready to give you
the right hand of fellowship; if otherwise you shall receive our just and
modest animadversions in what we conceive you have erred from the truth. You
will not judge, if we cannot apprehend the strength of your grounds it is
because we love not the truth* or be carried with by-spects (though these
conceits prevail too much:) Such rigid and harsh censures, cannot lodge in
meek and humble breasts. Weighty reasons promote the truth not unadvised
judging. You your selves have judged that to be error, which now you take to
be truth when yet you were not blinded with by re-respects, nor hudwinked your
eyes, that you might not see the light. And if you have just warrant from God
to pull down what you have builded, and to build what you have pulled down,
we desire you would lovingly and maturely impart it, for as yet we have seen
none, which we are not ready to prove, and show by the rule of truth to be too
weak to carry any burden.

We adore with you the fullness of the Scripture, and we know the Counsel of
the Lord shall stand: if you can show that you walk in the ways of God, we
shall heartily rejoice to walk with you: but if you have turned aside, we
shall earnestly desire that you would be pleased seriously to consider the
matter, and speedily reform, what is out of order. Thus not doubting of your
favorable interpretation of this our motion, for the preventing of
distraction, maintenance of peace, and searching out of the truth, whereby we
may be directed to live to the praise of God, the good of his people, and
comfort of our souls, beseeching God to lead and guide us into all truth and
holiness, and keep us blameless until his glorous appearance, we rest

Your loving Brethren.

An Epistle written by the Elders of the Churches in NEW ENGLAND, to those
godly Ministers forementioned that sent over the Positions.
Reverend and beloved Brethren:
IN these remote Coasts of the earth, whereunto the good hand of God has
brought us, as we do with much comfort of heart call to mind the many gracious
blessings, which both with you, and from you, we enjoyed in our Christian and
holy communion, (the memory and fruit whereof we hope shall never be blotted
out) so we have also seen cause to look back to our former administrations
there, and to search and try our ways; that wherein soever we have formerly
gone astray, we might judge our selves for it before the Lord: And that seeing
now God has set before us an open door of liberty, we might neither abuse
our liberty in the Gospel, to run out into any groundless unwarrantable
courses, nor neglect the present opportunity to administer (by the help of
Christ) all the holy ordinances of God, according to the pattern set before us
in the Scripture; In our native Country, when we were first called to the
Ministry, many of us took some things to be indifferent and lawful, which in
aftertimes we saw to be sinful, and durst not continue in the practice of
them there; Afterward some things that we bare as burdens, that is, as things
inexpedient though not utterly unlawful; we have no cause to retain and
practice the same things here, which would not have been not only inexpedient,
but unlawful: such things as a man may tolerate when he cannot remove them,
he cannot tolerate without sin, when he may remove them; Besides some
things we practiced there (which we speak to our shame and grief) which we
never took into serious consideration whether they were lawful, and expedient
or no, but took them for granted, and generally received; not only by the most
Reformed Churches, but by the most godly and judicious servants of God amongst
them; which nevertheless when we came to weigh them in the balance of the
Sanctuary, we could not find sufficient warrant in the Word to receive them,
and establish them here: of one of these three kinds will these our present
practices appear to be, which you call our new opinions, or, Innovations here;
except it be some few of them, which though they have been reported to you to
be our Judgments and practices, yet are indeed far from us: The particulars
are too many, and too weighty to give you account of them, and the ground of
our proceedings about them in a Letter. But to give you (if it be the will of
God) the better satisfaction, we have sent you a short Treatise touching each
particular, that according to your desire you might understand from us how
far we do acknowledge any of these tenants, and upon what ground, hoping that
according to your promise, if upon due examination you shall find any weight in
them, you will give us the right hand of fellowship. But if otherwise, you will
send us your just and faithful animadversions, and we do not suspect your
loves to the truth, or your sincere speaking according to your conscience in
the sight of God, Neither tax we you as siding from the truth with
by-respects, whereof you complain, verily we abhor such rash, harsh, and
presumptuous notoriousnesse, we see as much cause to suspect the integrity of
our own hearts, as yours; and so much the more, as being more privy to the
deceitfulness of our own hearts then to yours. And we cannot but with much
thankfulness of heart acknowledge the many rich precious treasures of his
grace, wherewith the Lord has furnished sundry of you above your Brethren,
which causes us with great reverence to accept, and receive what further light
God may be pleased to impart unto us by you; But as we have believed, so have
we hitherto practiced, and so have most of us spoken this our Answer to your
particulars, most of us we may say, because there wants not some Brethren
amongst us who proceed further, even to look at all set forms of Prayer
invented by men of another age or congregation, and prescrib^d to their
Brethren to be read out of a book for the prayers of the Church, as Images, or
Imaginations of men, forbidden in the second Commandment; But as we leave them
to their liberty of their own judgments without prejudice, so do we also
concur with the rest of them, so far as we all go in bearing witness
against any set forms, or the corruptions in them; In dispatching whereof, we
have been the more slow because it behoved us first to inquire into, and to
settle some controversies amongst our selves, before we could well attend to
entertain discourse about foreign questions which do not so nearly concern
our present estate and practice. Besides your Letters being sent to the
Ministers of the Churches, and some of us dwelling far a sunder, it was not
an easy thing for all of us often to meet together to consider of these
Questions, much less to resolve upon one just answer. But having at length (by
the assistance of God) brought our Answers to this issue, we commend it to the
blessing of the Lord, and in him to your Christian, and judicious
consideration; where if all things be found safe, and duly warranted from
Scripture grounds; do you also as seems vigilant Watchmen of the Lords flock,
and faithful witnesses to God; If any thing seem doubtfall to you, consider
and weigh it very well before you reject it: If any thing appear to be
unfound, and dissnant from the Word (which we for our parts cannot disterne) we
shall willingly attend to what further light God may send unto us by you: In
the mean while we entreat you in the Lord, not to suffer such apprehensions
to lodge in your minds, which you intimate in your Letters; As if we here
justified the ways of riged separation, which sometimes amongst you we have
formerly borne witness against* and so build again the things we have
destroyed; you know they separate from your Congregations, as no Churches; from
the Ordinances dispensed by you as mere Antichristian, and from your selves as
no visible Christians. But we profess unfainedly, we separate from the
corruptions which we conceive to be left in your Churches, and from such
Ordinances administered therein as we fear are not of God, but of men; And for
your selves, we are so far from separating as from no visible Christians, as
that you are under God in our hearts (if the Lord would suffer it) to live and
die together; and we look at sundry of you as men of that eminent growth in
Christianity, that if there be any visible Christians under heaven, amongst
you are the men, which for these many years have been written in your
foreheads (Hoiinesse to the Lord) which we speak not to prejudice any truth
which our selves are here taught and called to profess, but we still believe
though personal Christians may be eminent in their growth of Christianity:
yet Churches had still need to grow from apparent defects to purity; and from
reformation to Reformation, age after age, till the Lord have utterly abolished
Antichrist with the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming to
the full and clear revelation of all his holy Truth; especially touching the
ordering of his house and public worship; as a pledge of this our estimation
of you, and sincere affection to you, we have sent you these Answers to your
demand, and shall be ready, by the help of Christ, to receive back again from
you, wise, and just, and holy Advertisements in the Lord.

Now the Lord God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, your Lord, and ours;
lead us all unto all Truths, purge out all Leaven out of his Churches, and
keep us blameless and harmless in his holy Faith and fear, to his heavenly
kingdom, through him that has loved us; In whom we rest,

Your very loving Brethren, the Elders of the Churches in New England.

Reverend and dearly beloved Brethren,
IT is not to be doubted but while we live here, we shall have just cause to
search and try our ways, look back upon former courses, and call things done to
more strict examination. For being over-clouded with ignorance, compassed about
with infirmities, It is truly observed by Master Davenport out of An. bros.
Offic. l 1. c. 1 Et quantum libet quisque profecerit, (...) est qui doceri non
indige^^ d^m vivit. Appoll. Preface to the Reader.
and beset with many temptations to sin, knowing what we know best, but
darkly and in part, no marvel, if in many things we offend ignorantly, of
frailty for want of due consideration, rashly mistaking Error for Truth,
condemning Truth for Error, suspecting evil without cause, and not suspecting
where is just reason, drawing erroneous conclusions from sound principles, and
maintaining truths upon weak grounds; so that in examination of our ways, and
endeavors of their Reformation we had need to look warily, that we turn not
to the right hand or to the left, for in the one we add to the Word of God, as
well as in the other, and of our selves are apt to strike aside to both. A
loose conscience will be profane, a tender, scrupulous. It stands us therefore
upon to have our selves in suspicion, in as much as experience teaches that
many have swerved from the path of found peace and comfort on each hand.

Wherefore (Beloved Brethren) if since your coming into New England, upon
serious Review of former actions you have discovered any truths heretofore not
taken notice of, we shall be so far from rejecting them because of your former
judgment and practice, that we shall heartily desire to know and embrace the
same with you, and bless God for you as the happy instruments of his glory,
our Instruction and the advancement of the truth. But if the discoveries be of
the like nature with the positions mentioned in the Letter; as before, so
still, we conceive them to be new opinions, and not warranted by Scripture,
which is the true Antiquity.

Opinions we say, not practices, for not changing your opinion, you might
lawfully alter your practice; nay, what you did tolerate formerly as a burden,
in case not free, you might well forgo being at your liberty. Your judgment
being the same, you might use your liberty in forbearance of a set Liturgy,
and yet retain the same judgment of a stinted Liturgy, that you had before;
you might forbear for a time upon special Reason (such as present state and
occasion might suggest) to receive to the Sacrament approved Christians, not
set members of a particular Congregation; as some Brethren do) who yet dare not
think it unlawful to communicate with such in the act of worship, or deem it
just and right altogether to debar them, as having no right nor title to those
privileges of this Church. It is your opinions whereto we had respect not
simply your practice. It never entered into us to persuade you to a set Liturgy,
much less to complain that you had not accepted ours. But that all stinted
Liturgies should be condemned as devised worship, and so condemned as that none
may lawfully be present at, or partake of the Sacraments administered in a
stinted or devised form, this we called a new opinion.

Neither do we mention it because we knew it to be the private opinion of some
Brethren among you, whom we had left to the liberty of their own judgment, so
far as the maintenance of the Truth, and a just call did not engage us: but
because it was cried up, and advanced with all diligence, and endeavor of some
among us standing affected New England-ward, as if a chief point of holiness
consisted in separation. You know how great a fire a little sparkle kindles.
And seeing this Distraction and Rent had its original, growth and continuance
from some Brethren in those parts, or affected to that way, when in loving and
friendly manner we could neither receive grounds at home for our conviction,
nor procure just satisfaction to the contrary; what could we do less then
call upon you jointly to know your judgment, and either by sound proof to be by
you convinced (if happily you should approve their separation (which we esteem
groundless, rash, unlawful, and prejudicial to outward peace) or being
backed by a testimony of its dislike from you, we might the better be both
encouraged, and furnished to endeavor the quenching of that fire which was
kindled but in too many places,

In other perticulars also, we conceive, you go beyond Commission given of
God: granting them authority to whom God has not committed it, debarring
others from the privilege of the Sacraments, who have title thereto by the
Covenant of grace.

Your love in that you were pleased to signify first your kind and respective
acceptance of our Letter, and now also to send us an answer thereto, we
acknowledge it with all thankfulness, and shall endeavor (through the grace of
God) to return like affection in truth of heart, if in measure we fall short.
Of your respect to us in particular, we make no question, your expressions are
beyond that we could expect, as also what we dare own. But we humbly beseech
the Lord to direct, uphold, and guide us, that in some measure we may walk
worthy of our vocation, and approve our selves faithful to your consciences.

It was one end of our writing to be satisfied in this point, whether you
approve the ways of Separation (whereof we complain) and their courses who
labored with all their might, when they conceived hope to be heard to persuade
thereunto. Against which (if we knew your judgment) you testified among us.

You know they that separate are not all of one strain and temper. Some deny
all communion with us public and private, some admit of private, but deny all
public, and some join in Prayer before, and after Sermon, as also preaching
of the Word (because in their esteem, this may be done without communion in a
Church Way) but refuse to partake of the Sacraments. All which Separations we
judge uncharitable, contrary to the Commandment of Christ, and have ever
thought that you (whilst with us) and we were of one mind herein.

If of late we have conceived fears of some of you (dear Brethren) as leaning
too much to what formerly you disliked, we beseech you weigh what urgent and
pressing Reasons forced us thereunto, and we shall most gladly (we heartily
desire you to rest assured) lay hold of every line and syllable, that may tend
to dislodge such apprehensions.

For as we conceive, the dispute to be unreasonably moved, the Rent offensive,
the opinions themselves prejudicial to the cause of God, and the advancers
thereof to have passed the limits prescribed by God; so we shall esteem it an
inestimable blessing, if (now what hinders being removed) we might join with
one heart and soul, in one way of God to promote his glory, and seek the good
of his Church and people.

We trust in the Lord, we should not draw back in any course wherein we may
see the Lord going before us, nor be an offense to any to keep the Lords way;
we seek the truth, and are persuaded it is the cause of God which we defend:
we plead for Communion with the Churches of Christ, no further then they hold
communion with Christ, still desiring to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, with your selves and all others, who walk in the right way of
truth, peace and comfort.

How the Lord may be pleased to deal with us, or dispose of us we know not
(his blessed will be done.) But of this we are resolved, through his grace, not
willingly to raise trouble or dissension among you, if through ignorance or
infirmity we shall not so fall in, as to be of one mind with you in these
matters. And here we desire you to consider that in these particulars you
dissent as much one from another as we dissent from you, and that wherein we
dissent from you (and perhaps from the lesser part of you) you dissent from the
judgment and practice of all Reformed Churches.

This we speak not to prejudice your cause, Were not these men (says Cann
against Robin) superstitiously addicted to their new devise, that beware how to
reject the unanimous judgment and practice of all learned men and true
Churches. Stay against straying. page 47.
but to entreat your serious re-exmination of what you have sent us, and this
trial thereof, by the Touchstone of the Word. I am and shall be always ready
to give all due respect to those good customs of Churches, which are taken
upon good warrant and ground, and long continued among Gods people. I. D. Apol
p. 31.
For if we mistake not, in many things it will not abide the Test.

You have written in great love and tenderness, that your Positions might be
so scanned, and we shall endeavor with such affection to try all things, Good
customs taken up by the Churches upon good grounds should not lightly be
broken or laid down, wherein I do fully agree with the Author of that
elaborate Commentary upon the fourth Chapter of John, I. D. Apol. Sect. 12.
Examina. p. 151.
and hold fast that which is good. And now (beseeching the guidance of the
Spirit) with your leave, we shall endeavor to deal fully and plainly, as the
nature of the cause requires, entreating you impartially to consider the
grounds whereupon we, go and weigh what we shall say in the balance of the
Sanctuary. The Lord of his rich mercy in Jesus Christ, direct us in discerning
what is right and pleasing in his sight, Cast offenses out of the Church, close
up Rents and Divisions, reveal his Truth more and more, set up and mayntain the
purity of his own Ordinances, unite the hearts of his people to the love and
fear of his holy Name, teach us self-denial, and keep us blameless to the
coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

I POSITION.
That a stinted form of Prayer and set Liturgy is unlawful.

Answ.
BEfore we proceed to declare our selves concerning this position: It will be
needful that some things be premised, for the explication of the terms
thereof. We suppose,

1 By a Liturgy and form of Prayer, you mean not a form of private Prayers
composed for the help and direction of weaker Christians: but the System or
body of public Prayers generally used in the English Parishes, complied for
the Churches use by other men not infallibly guided by God, to be said or read
out of a Book by their Ministers as the Churches Prayers. And that this is your
meaning, may appear from your Letter it self, wherein you complain that diverse
in many parts of that Kingdom have left their Assemblies, because of a stinted
Liturgy. Now we know not of any other stinted Liturgy from which the people do
absent themselves, but only that which is in use in the English Churches.

For as for a form of Prayer in general, we conceive your meaning cannot be
of that. For it is evident that many Preachers constantly use one set form of
Prayer of their own making before their Sermons, with whom the people refuse
not to join.

2 By stinted and set, you mean such Prayers, as are so imposed upon the
Churches and Ministers, as that they are limited to that very form of words
expressed in the Book without addition, diminution, or alteration; for that
Liturgy and form among you, is in this sense set and stinted.

3 By unlawful, you mean that we looking at that form, as swerving from the
Rule; neither dare first practice it our selves, not secondly approve the use
of it by others.

This being the true state of the question, so far as it appears to us, from
the letter. We answer, 1 For our own practice, the Churches here do not use
any stinted form of Prayer and set Liturgy, for these and other such Reasons.
1 Because we find no necessity of any stinted Liturgy to be used among us, by
virtue of any divine precept. And seeing the Commission of the Apostles limited
them, to teach men to observe and do only what Christ did command them in
matters of this nature, Math. 28. 20. Who are we and what are our Churches,
that we should presume above this Commission? And, we hope, it will not be
offensively taken by any godly Brethren, That we stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free in this, as well as in all other things.

Secondly, because the lawfulness of set forms and stinted Liturgies is
questioned and doubted of by many faithful servants of God: whereas for
Church Officers to edify the Churches by their own gifts, as well in praying
as in preaching, all sorts without controversy grant it to be lawful. Now
spiritual prudence guides believers, when two ways are set before them, one
doubtful though ventured on by some, the other certainly safe and good, though
neglected by many, to choose that which is safe, declining the other.

Thirdly, Because Primitive paterns of all the Churches of God in their best
times (when as touching this point they kept the rule in their eye) whether
Jewish before Christ, or Christian above a 100 years after Christ, yield not
the least footstep to show us another safe way to walk in, then this which we
have chosen. As for after times toward the end of the second, and beginning of
the third Century, we know how far the Churches were then degenerated and
declined from the first purity; neither do we marvel at it, seeing in the
Apostles time the mystery of iniquity began to work, and it was then foretold,
that the power of godliness would be in aftertimes exchanged for empty forms.
In which respect, we look not at them as our guides neither in this, nor other
particulars not warranted by the Rule, herein following the advice of Cyprian,
who himself saw the corruption of those times, Non est attendendum quid aliquis
ante nos faciendum putaverit, sed quid qui ante omnes est Christus fecerit and
faciendum praeceperit.

To conclude, seeing our Christian liberty freeth us from binding our selves to
any religious observances, whereunto the written word does not bind us. And
seeing spiritual prudence directs us to choose those ways, which on all hands
are confessed to be s^fe, avoiding those that be doubtful and hazardous. And
seeing it will not be safe for us, needlessly to swerve from the constant
practice of all Churches that are recorded in Scripture, and there held forth
as a cloud of Witnesses for us to follow in matters of this nature, we
therefore may not, do not, dare not use set forms of Prayers and stinted
Liturgies in these Churches.

More particularly, in that we do not use that form of Prayer and stinted
Liturgy, which is in use among your selves: these and such other like Reasons
have induced us thereunto. 1 The many and just exceptions whereunto that
Liturgy is liable both for matter and manner; for the proof whereof we
refer you to those faithful servants of God, who have gone before us in
witnessing against the same: Amongst others to Master Cartwright and the
Abridgment.

2 In as much as that Liturgy was never commanded of God, and has been greatly
abused to Idolatry and Superstition, and is not of any necessary use, and
therefore we are afraid to bring it into the Worship of God, as knowing the
jealousy of the Lord, in matters of this nature; Exodus 20. and how strictly
he commands his people, that all monuments and remnants of Idolatry and
Superstition should be abolished from among them, Deuteronomy. 5. 25, 26. Exodus 23.
13. Esaias 30. 2^. 2 Cor. 6. 17. In which respect the holy Ghost has greatly
commended Jacob, David, Iehu, Hezechia and Josiah, for taking away the
remembrance of such things, Genesis 35. 2, 4. Psalm. 16. 4. 2 King 10. 26, 27. and
18. 4. and 23. all the Chapter. And where other Kings of Judah came short of
the like zeal, the Scripture notes it as a blemish in them that the high
places were not taken away, albeit the people did not sacrifice in them to
false gods, but only to the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. and 20. 33. and 33. 17.
Yea, moreover, it appears by the Scripture, that somethings that had a good
Original and use (if they be not still necessary and commanded of God) are
unlawful when once they are known to be defiled by Idolatry, and abused to
it, 2 King. 18. 4. Hos. 2. 16, 17. As the brazen Serpent was at the first an
Institution though but temporary: but when the children of Israel burned
Incense to it. Hezechiah, is commended for breaking it in pieces, and the Lord
witnesses of him that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,
and according to his Commandment, which he commanded Moses, 2 King. 18. 3, 6.
how much more in the like case ought other things to be removed, which never
were commanded of God, but only were devised by men? And that that Liturgy
has been supertitiously abused, may be clear to any that shall consider that
it is the same for substance that was used in the days of Poperty. And
therefore when the Papists in Devonshire and Cornwall, had made a Commotion and
Rebellion upon the change of Religion, in the days of King Edward the Sixth. It
was told them by the King, for the pacifying of them: That it was the self-same
Service in English, which had been before in Latin: and if the Service of the
Church was good in Latin, it remains good in English, for nothing is
altered: Fox Acts and Monuments, Edward 6. And Pope Pius the fifth did see so
little variation in it from the Latin Service, that had been formerly used in
that Kingdom, that he would have ratified it by his authority, if Q. Elizabeth
would have so received it. And many of the people put such holiness in it,
that they think God is not rightly worshipped, nor his Sabbath well observed,
nor the Sacraments sufficiently administered, if there be no reading of that
Service. And others put such holiness and necessity in it, that they prefer
it before Gods holy Ordinance of preaching the Word. This Argument is used by
the Abridgment against conformity to the Ceremonies, and we do not see but it
is as strong against this Liturgy.
In so much as the Ministers are in the danger of being called in question, and
of being censured, if they do not read that Liturgy every Lords day without
omitting any part thereof, either in respect of preaching or otherwise.

3 In regard of the many woeful scandals, and dangerous consequences of using
that Liturgy, of which we suppose you are not ignorant.

To mention but two, Viz. The hardening of Papists who are imboldned to think
better of their own Breviaries, Masse-Books, Portuisses, seeing that Liturgy
has bin extracted out of those books, and rather fetched from them then from
the forms used in any of the reformed Churches.

2 The conntenancing and establishing of an unlearned Idol Ministry, of
not-Preaching curates, Non-residents, Pluralities, etc. in whose skirts is to
be found the blood of so many men's souls living and dying in their sins, while
they ignorantly content themselves with, and harden themselves in some empty
forms of Religion and blind devotion, which are begotten and cherished
chiefly by such prayers and ministers. Neither is there less scandal hereby
(we mean not only taken but given) then by the eating of an Idolathite, in
the Idols Temple condemned by the Apostle 1 Cor. 8. 7 10. For if the eating of
an Idolathite by him that had knowledge, and knew that an Idol was nothing, and
that all meats were lawful, did imbolden others to honor the Idol, and
therefore was a scandal given, so also it is in this case.

4 Seeing that book is so imposed as that the minister in reading of it, is
limited to the very words set down without any diminution, addition, or
alteration; therefore we dare not use it.

For 1 The Lord himself has not limited his people to his own forms and
therefore we see not, how it can be lawful to be limited to other men's forms;
For in thus doing we should subject our selves to the exercise of such an
authority and power of the Prelates, as in this case puts forth a stronger act
of limiting power then Christ himself, who does not limit us to those forms,
which himself has set down in Scripture: For though we acknowledge the Lords
prayer and other forms set down in Scripture, may be lawfully used as prayers
(due cautions being observed) yet there is not a limitation lying upon the
Churches in the use of those prayers. And therefore we do not find that the
Apostles ever used that form taught by Christ in those very words, much less
limited themselves to it, when they prayed, nor did they teach the Churches so
to do.

2 If the Lord would not have us limit our selves in our own forms, whiles we
are exercising our own gifts (which he has specially sanctified to edify his
Church Act. 6. 4. Ephesians. 4. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 7.) least we should quench or at least
straiten his spirit in prayer, 1 These. 5. 19. would he then have us limited to
other men's forms, which have not been in like sort sanctified of God, but will
rather quench or straiten the spirit of God, whiles we are so limited to them?

3 The entertainment of this form has been a manifest snare unto the Churches
who upon the same ground on which they have received this form into the desks
have been limited to others in the pulpit, by means whereof the poor Church
of Christ has bin wholly deprived of the public use of the Ministers gifts in
prayer, and the spirit of prayer in the Ministers in public, has been
greatly restrained.

As for our Judgment concerning the practice of others, who use this Liturgy
in our native Country, we have always been unwilling to express our minds
there against unless we have been necessarily called thereunto, and at this
time we think it not expedient to express our selves any further concerning
this matter, as loath to intermeddle with the affairs of other Churches, but
contenting our selves with, and blessing the Lord for those liberties, which
we, by the mercy of God, do here enjoy, reserving also due reverence to the
judgments of our beloved brethren and dear Countrymen, who may concerning
this matter be otherwise minded.

Reply.
THis position cannot bear that meaning which you give it, if you take it
according, o our minds, and the plain construction of the words. We never
questioned why you made not use of a stinted Liturgy, much less why you did
not wholly and in every part tie your selves unto, and approve of that form in
use amongst us. You might well think we had little to do to put forth such a
demand, viz. whether you think it lawful to approve in others and practice
your selves, what swerveth from the rule, and we think it strange you should
give our words such a meaning.

The thing we craved resolution in was, whether in your judgments all stinted
and set forms of prayer and Liturgies be unlawful. The reason hereof was
because in writings from New England, we had seen all set liturgies, and set
forms of prayer condemned as devised worship which God would not accept, and
partaking in the Sacraments of the Supper in our assemblies, therefore
disallowed, because administered in a stinted Liturgy, which things were
received with such likeing among some brethren with us, and by them imparted
and recommended to others, that they occasioned that rent and distraction
whereof we complain.

It is true, the people among us separate from our form of prayer or liturgy,
but the reason hereof is because it is stinted, not because this or that or
ours in particular.

You confess you want not some brethren among you who look at all set forms
of Prayer invented by one of another age or congregation, and prescribed to
their brethren, to be read out of a book for the prayers of the Church, as
Images and Imaginations of man forbidden in the second Commandment, and that
the lawfulness of Liturgies, and set forms is questioned and doubted of by
many faithful servants of God such also as come over occasionally, who
withdraw themselves from the Sacraments in the congregation, do it on this
pretense, that a stinted Liturgy is a humane invention. And if we examine the
reasons brought against stinted forms and Liturgies, we shall find them to
strike at all forms and Liturgies though devised by men of the same age and
congregation, and to be used but now and then, or but once on set purpose, and
that either in public or in private, as elsewhere we may have occasion to show.

You say it is evident, many Preachers constantly use a set form of Prayer of
their own making before their Sermons, with whom the people refuse not to
join; And you know (we doubt not) that such set forms are disliked also. And
if the grounds be examined (in our understanding) they make as much against the
one as the other. View but the reasons why you admit not a stinted Liturgy and
form of prayer, and see whether the two last will not in the same terms
directly conclude against both. But what ever is to be thought herein, or
whether men's practices agree with their opinions we now dispute not. This is
plain and manifest, that men's opinions are to be judged by their express
words and reasons, not by their practices. The Brownists (as they are commonly
called) can separate from no stinted Liturgy amongst us, but that which is in
use, and for ought we know they may join with their own Pastors, though they
often use the same form of prayer in whole or in part, in thanksgiving before
meat, or in prayer before Sermon, or the like. And yet their opinion is that
all stinted Liturgies and set Forms of prayer be unlawful, humane inventions
forbidden by the second Commandment.

But if any thing had been left doubtful in the Letter, that it might be
strained to another sense, either because we were short in expression, or many
of you not informed in the passages which gave occasion to the question, it is
well known what the words mean in ordinary construction. And we doubt not but
many brethren among you, might and could fully inform you of our meaning that
there need no such straining to find it out.

That which follows in your answer to the position (as you interpret it) we
pass over, because it is not to the matter intended. And we are as unwilling
to trouble you with the affairs of other Churches taking you from your own
weighty occasions, as you are unwilling to be interrupted. Only in regard of
promise, and because plain dealing serves to maintain love, we think good to
advertise you these few things.

1 That your reasons why you accept not of a stinted Lyturgie be ambiguously
propounded, for sometimes you plead only for your liberty herein, and that a
stinted form is not necessary, and sometime you speak so, as they that look
at Stinted Lyturgies, as Images forbidden in the second Commandment will
easily draw your words to their meaning.

2 The reasons you bring against a set form of prayer or Liturgy do hold as
strong against a set form of Catechism confession and profession of faith,
blessing, baptizing and singing of Psalms.

3 We have not called upon you at this time to witness for, or against the
corruptions in the Communion-Booke. This you fall upon by straining the sense
of our demands contrary to the true meaning thereof.

The reasons which you bring against it, we cannot approve them all; The
exceptions which have bin taken both from the matter and manner thereof we
know: But to esteem the whole for some corruptions found therein, a monument
of Idolatry, that we have not learned.

The Argument in the abridgement which is used against conformity to the
Ceremonies did not in their judgment who were authors of the Book hold
against the Lyturgie, of which opinion we are also.

4 If these reasons be intended only to show why you receive not our form of
administration, it is that which (we are persuaded you know) we never required
of you. If to disallow the use of the Book amongst us altogether in things
lawful, good and pertinent, they will not hold weight.

5 You are generally (as you say) loath to meddle with the affairs of other
Churches, unless you have been necessarily called thereunto. But when some
upon the request (as we suppose) of private friends, and others out of their
zeal and forwardness have labored to draw many to separation from the
Sacrament, because ministered in a stinted Lyturgie: we cannot apprehend any
just ground of this apology. The Rent is wide, and some brethren had their
hands deep therein, which made us at this present to crave your judgments,
and the reasons thereof to make up the breach.

6 I. D. objecteth to Master P. that his manner of preaching was disorderly in
carrying that matter, Whereas the publisher of this answer to the six
Positions, refers the reader to Mr. Cottons answer unto Mr. Ball for
satisfaction in this point concerning set forms of prayer. The reader is
earnestly entreated to compare Master Balls Treatise, and Mr. Cottons answer
with seriousness and indifferency, because Mr Ball having received that
answer before the publishing of his Treatise (being much enlarged, whereof Mr,
Cotton was ignorant) was confident, that with addition of some marginall notes
(which in reference thereto he added) his Treatise would sufficiently defend it
self, against all the assaults, which that answer made against it.
he speaks of, to the Classes, before he had declared to the Church the equity
of his refusing the Ministers desired by the Scriptures. And may not we with
like reason object, that this manner of proceeding is disorderly in seeking to
draw men to Separation, because of stinted Liturgy, before you had showed to
us or other brethren (whom it may concern) by Scripture, or reasons drawn
from thence, that a stinted Liturgy was unlawful? but of this we may entreat
more fully elsewhere.

II. POSITION.
That it is not lawful to join in prayer, or receive the Sacraments where a
stinted Liturgy is used, or as we conceive your meaning to be in this, as in
the former question, viz. where, and when that stinted Liturgy is used.

Answer.
IT seems by this your letter, the ground of this Position has been the
separation of diverse from your assemblies, because of a stinted Liturgy: and
we are not ignorant of the rigid separation of diverse people, who withdraw
themselves from an able faithful ministry, as no ministry of Christ, and from
their godly congregations as no Churches of Christ; because of some corruptions
from which (through want of light, not love of the truth) they are not
thoroughly cleansed. Against which practice we have ever witnessed.

As for our Judgment concerning the Position it self, we would promise two
things; First concerning the persons reading this Liturgy, which may be either
an ungodly or unable Minister, or an able and a godly.

Secondly, concerning the Liturgy it self, which may be either of the whole
or some select prayers, which may be conceived to be the least offensive.

Now if the question be of joining in prayer with, and when that whole Liturgy
is used, or where that which is used, is read by an unable and ungodly
Minister, we then see not how it can be lawful to join in prayer in such
cases; For

1 The prayers of the Minister are not his private prayers, but the public
prayers of the whole assembly, whose mouth he is to God. And when the prayers
offered up by the Minister, as a living holy, and acceptable service to God,
are not through humane frailty, but otherwise for matter and manner corrupt,
we see not what warrant any one has to join with such prayers, Mal. 1. 13,
14.

2 When men join therein with an insufficient Ministry, they do not only
countenance them in their place and office, whom the Lord has rejected from
being his Priests. Hos. 4. 6. but also set up those Idols and means of worship
to edify themselves by, which God never appointed in his holy word Ezeck. 11.
17.

But if the question be of joining in some few select prayers read by an able
and painful Minister out of that book as on the one side we are very tender
of imputing sin to the men that so join: so on the other side, we are not
without fear, least that such joining may be found to be unlawful: unless it
may appear that the Ministers with whom the people have communion in reading
those prayers do neither give any scandal by reading of them nor give
unlawful honor to a thing abused to Idolatry, and superstition, nor do
suffer themselves to be sinfully limited in the reading of them.

Reply.
SUfficient has been spoken of the meaning of the position and the grounds
thereof and if we have not mistaken your judgment and practice both, you have
born witness against both that you call the rigid separation, and this more
moderate also; And we humbly wish, the moderate do not degenerate into the
rigid ere long. It is very strange, if they take not great encouragement upon
your grounds. The truth of our ministry, Churches, Ordinances, and calling is
questioned, and where men will stay the Lord knows, and what more common then
that our Liturgy is unlawful, because it is the devise of man; The Author (or
publisher at least) of a letter against our Service book begins with such
like distinction.

Against this Prayer-booke (says he) diverse have pleaded in a different
manner. First some arguments are proper to the Separatists qua tales, viz. that
it is offered in a false Church; 2. By a false minister; 3. In the behalf of
the subjects of the Kingdom of Antichrist. These are properly theirs, being
the grounds whereupon they make a total separation from all the Churches in
this Land, as no Churches of Christ. These I approve not, yet note them that
ye may see upon what different grounds, the same Position is maintained by
several persons, and that ye may be delivered from the prejudice, which
hinders many from receiving those truths, because they fear the reproach of
Brownisme.

Secondly, there are other grounds which are common to all that plead for the
the purity of Christ's ordinances, and which do not necessarily infer such
separation, but only serve to show the unlawfulness of that practice, and our
communicating therein.

Thus the Epistle wherein the same distinction of separation is noted: but how
truly, let the indifferent judge. If none must be counted Separatists, but such
as have pleaded against the book of Common prayer as unlawful, because
offered up in a false Church, etc. then are there none such in the world, that
we have known or heard of: for it is apparent they cast us off as no Churches
of Christ, because our Service is a humane devise, will worship, Idolatry; And
not on the contrary, that our Service is will worship, or Idolatry, because our
Churches are false Churches. Against all Communion with us they plead, because
we are a false Church, but against our stinted Liturgy they argue not in that
manner.

The grounds on which that Author builds (which he says are common to all,
that plead for the purity of Gods ordinances) are one and the same with the
grounds of the Separatists, shafts taken out of the same quiver and peculiar to
them, some few brethren only excepted, who of late have looked toward that
opinion. See how affection will transport. Those reasons shall be common to all
that plead for the purity of Christ's Ordinances, which were never taken to be
sound and true, either by the reformed Churches abroad, or by the godly
Brethren at home, whether now at rest with the Lord, or for the present living,
or yet by the most of the brethren among whom they live, and with whom they
hold society, or by any minister or Society which did hold the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace for the space of this 1400 years and upwards, by
your own confession, unless within these few days, and that by a few only.
If this be not to strengthen the hands of the Separatists, or at least, to lay
blocks of offense in their way, what is? As yet we think most of them that
have separated, are not so far gone, as to condemn all our Assemblies as no
Churches of Christ, but we judge they have proceeded further then Christ the
Lord and Savior of his Church has given them commission or allowance, that
the grounds whereon they build are unsound, and such as make way for further
danger, if the Lord prevent not. And that the reasons mentioned in the letters
are the proper grounds of Separatists, and not common to all them that seek
the purity of religion, for they are not approved by your selves: and if all
this tend not to turn them who halt, out of the right way, we heartily
entreat you to consider.

Your judgment concerning the Position, you deliver in three propositions (for
so many they be for substance) In respect of the persons reading the Liturgy,
or the thing it self that is read. As if any part of the Liturgy be read,
(put case some few selected prayers only, by an unable and ungodly minister:
it is unlawful (say you) for the people to join in that case. But if it be
unlawful for the people to join, when an ungodly minister reads some few
select prayers, it is either in respect of the Minister, We may not Communicate
at all in that ministry, which is exercised by an unlawful person or in an
unlawful. place Robinson against Bern. Counsel debated p 17 Ibid page 79.
or the prayers themselves. Not of the prayers themselves, for they be select
and choice, faultlesse both in respect of matter and manner, as it is taken for
granted, unless this distribution be to no purpose; if in respect of the
Minister, then it is not lawful to join with such a one in any ordinance of
God whatsoever. For if the Minister make it unlawful, then all communion in
any part of Gods worship, with such Ministers is unlawful, and so the Church
in all ages of the world, the Prophets, our Savior Christ, the Apostles, and
the faithful in the primitive Churches sinned, in holding Communion with such,
when the Priests were dumb dogs that could not bark, Esa. 56. 10. Ezech 41.
7, 8. Mic. 3. 11, 12. Ier. 5. 31. Esa. 9. 15, 6. Ioh. 2. 16. Math 5. 20, 21.
and 15. 4, 5. and 23 1 -- 3* 14.
and greedy dogs that could never have enough; when the Prophets prophefied
lies, and the Priests bare rule by their means; when the Priests bought and
sold Doves in the Temple, and took upon them to provide such things for them
that were to offer; when the Pharisees corrupted the Law by false glosses,
taught for doctrines men's precepts, made the commandments of God of none
effect through their traditions, under pretense of long prayer devoured widows
houses, taught the Law, but practiced it not; when they were such, and did such
things, they were ungodly Ministers; But we never find that the Prophets, our
Savior, the Apostles, did either forbear themselves, or warn the faithful
not to communicate with such in the ordinance of worship. Math. 16 6. 12. and
15. 14.
We read our Savior charged his Disciples, to beware of the leaven of the
Scribes and Pharisees, to let them alone, because they were the blind leaders
of the blind, but he never forbade to communicate with them in the ordinance of
God. It is not then for private Christians to withdraw themselves from the
ordinance of worship, See Whitak de pontif. q. 4. f 10. page 557. Phil. 1. 15.
and communion of the Church, because such are permitted to deal in the holy
things of God, whom they judge or know unfit: when men join in the worship of
God with unworthy Ministers, they do not countenance them in their place and
office, but obey the commandment of God, who requires their attendance upon
his highness in that way and means.

To go no further then the text you quote, H^s. 4 6, 7.
Because thou have despised knowledge, I will also reject thee, etc. Properly
the text is spoken of the ten tribes called Israel, and the Priests among them
who worshipped the Calves which Jeroboam had set up, whom the Lord threatens
to reject, because they had rejected knowledge being either wilfully ignorant,
or withholding the truth in unrighteousness. Whether they were for the present
absolutely rejected, or the Lord threatens only to reject them we will not
dispute.

This may suffice that it is not to be found either in this or any other Text
of Scripture, that the people joining in the true Worship of God, with unworthy
Ministers, do countenance them in their place thereby. On the contrary, if you
will extend this Text to all unworthy Ministers of what sort soever, whom the
word of truth does condemn as not approved Ministers of God, the Scripture
teaches evidently not only that the people by joining do not countenance them
in their place and office, but that they must and ought to join with them in
the worship of God, 1 Samuel 2. 12, 13, 14, 17, 24. Ier 8. 8, 9. Mic 3. 11, 12.
Phil. 1. 15.
and in separating from the Ordinance they shall sin against God, much less
then do they in such joining set those Idols and means of worship, which God
never appointed in his Word. For the worship is of God, and the Ministry is of
God, the person unworthily executing his place, is neither set up by some few
private Christians, nor can by them be removed. And warrant to withdraw
themselves from the worship of God, because such as ought not, are suffered to
entermeddle in the holy things of God, they have none from God. Dumb Dogs,
greedy Dogs, Idol-sheepheards, false Prophets, Strangers, are unworthy
Ministers, but they that communicate with such in the ordinance of worship, are
never said to set up Idols or means of worship which God never appointed. The
sheep of Christ will not hear strangers in the Lords sense, but outwardly they
heard those strangers preach (if the Scribes and Pharisees were such) and by
hearing them discovered them to be strangers, i. e. false Prophets; Some
strangers at least, of whom our Savior speaks, were of the true Church, and of
Israel, but brought false doctrine tending to kill the soul, such strangers
none should hear, that is, believe and follow: but as they be tolerated in the
Church, so they may hear them, so long as they bring the truth. Unworthy
Ministers are no Ministers for themselves, but they are Ministers for the
people of God, that is, so long as they be in the place of Ministers, the acts
of their administrations are of force to the faithful, if they observe the
form of administration prescribed by Christ; for Christ's Ordinances have their
efficacy from him, not from them that serve about them, and evil Ministers
minister not in their own name, but in Christ's and by his Commission.

It has evermore bin held for a truth in the Church of God, that although
sometimes the evil have chief authority in the ministration of the Word and
Sacraments, Helv cons. cap. 18 11. and 19. 9, Gal. conf. art. 28. Arg. conf.
Art. 13 Saxon. conf. Art. 12 Zep de Sa^ l. 2. c. 6. Art. of Religion, Hybern.
Art. 70 Carlton praelect de Ecclesia, cap. 20.
yet for as much as they do not the same in their own name but in Christ's, and
minister by his Commission and Authority, we may use their Ministry both in
hearing the Word, and receiving the Sacraments; neither is the effect of
Christ's Ordinance taken away, by their wickedness, nor the grace of Gods gifts
diminished from such as by faith, and rightly do receive the Sacraments
administered to them which are effectual; because of Christ's institution and
promise, although they be ministered by evil men.

The reasons whereby the ancient Churches condemned the Donatists and
Catharists for their voluntary and seditious separation, Beza de Presbyt. et
exco^municat. p. 25 26. Ista vero, quia nonnulli a sacris caetib. and
sacrament. usu propter aliorum vitia ultro abstinent i. e. seipsos
excommunicant magnam reprehensionem merentur.
and the modern Churches condemn the Anabaptists for their unwarrantable
departure from, and so renting of the body of Christ, will hold against
separation from the prayers of the congregation, because they are read by an
ungodly minister.

The second proposition. Where the whole Liturgy is used, though by an able
and godly Minister, it is not lawful to join in prayer in that case. Herein
we cannot be of your judgment; for in the times of the Prophets, and our
Savior Christ, as great abuses, no question, were found in the Church of the
Jews in the administration of holy things of God as can be imagined in our
Liturgy or form of prayer: but the Prophets and our Savior who taught the
people to keep themselves pure and undefiled, never taught them to separate
from the administration of the holy things of God. And if the presence at our
forms of prayer be not lawful by reason of the corruptions alleged, there can
be no visible society named throughout the world since 200. years after Christ
or thereabouts, wherein a Christian might lawfully join in Prayer, reading the
Scripture, hearing the word or participation of the Sacraments. For compare the
doctrines, prayers, rites at those times in use in the Churches with ours, and
in all these, (blessed be the name of the Lord) we are more pure then they.
But no man will be so bold (we hope) as to affirm the state of the Churches
within 200. years after Christ, to be so miserably decayed that the faithful
could not without sin hold communion with them in the aforesaid ordinances. The
prayers of the Minister, whether conceived or stinted in a set form, be not
his private prayers, but the public prayers of the whole assembly, whose mouth
he is to God both in the one and the other. But you will not say, the people
ought not to join with their Pastor in the public assembly, if ought be
amiss in his prayer for matter, or manner, or both. It is all one to the
people in this case, whether the fault be personal (as some distinguish) or
otherwise known beforehand or not known: For if simple presence defile,
whether it was known beforehand or not, all presence is faulty. And if simple
presence defile not, our presence is not condemned, by reason of the
corruptions known, whereof we stand not guilty, whether the corruption, be
through humane frailty or not, it is not in us to enquire, but rather whether
we be called to come, and the faults such as one Christian cannot or must not
tolerate in another without breach of charity. For if the error be such as may
be tolerated, and I am called to be present; by such fault I am not defiled
though known before. If the error be such as in conscience may not be
tolerated, though not known before hand, I am bound, if present some way to
profess against it. This distinction of personal and ministerial faults in
this case until it be cleared by some Text of Scripture or sound reason from
the word, must go for the divise of man.

A Church, a Minister, or a Christian may be stiff in an error (being
misperswaded it is a truth) after many means long used to convince them, with
whom yet we must hold communion in the ordinances of Religion: and the error
may be such as we cannot without hypocrisy or denial of the truth hold
communion, though such means of conviction have not gone before. But the
corruptions alleged against our form of prayer for matter or manner, are
such as one Christian may and must tolerate in another where he has no power
to redress them.

Has not Christian wisdom and experience of humane frailties lessoned you
(dear brethren) to bear one with another in matters of greater consequence
then any have or can be objected truly against the form of prayer in use among
us? And why such corruptions should not be ascribed to humane frailty; we see
not: For if a godly Minister make use of a book in things which he judges
lawful for matter and manner, the corruption in him that uses it according to
his judgment, from what cause can it spring but humane ignorance and frailty?
We rest assured you question not the integrity of many, who make much more use
of the book then only in a few select prayers. From the bottom of our hearts
we desire and pray that God would remove out of his Church and worship
whatsoever offends for matter or manner, and that all things may be so done,
not only that they may be tolerated but that they might be approved in the
conscience of all men. But we are persuaded that not only some few select
prayers but many prayers and other exhortations may lawfully be used, We see no
warrant why for every particular act, that in a larger sense is Idolatrous,
adjoined to Gods true worship, we should forbear our presence at the true
worship it self. Unreason. of separation. answ to 6. argument.
with fruit and edification to Gods people.

To aggravate faults especially when it tends to draw away people from the
Ordinances of God, is no less fault then to excuse them, it may be greater,
and therefore we dare not esteem the prayers read by a godly and faithful
Minister according to the book in use among us, a corrupt sacrifice whether in
such as read them, or them that be present. In them that join according to
Christ's command (and liberty of absence from Christ has not been showed)
notwithstanding the corruptions, we hold the prayers to be an holy and
acceptable sacrifice to God, and pleasing to Jesus Christ. The corrupt
sacrifice is that, which the deceiver brings voluntarily, and out of neglect,
having a male in his flock: but the faithful brings himself and his godly
desires according to the will of God, and as for corruptions, whether
respecting matter or form, they are none of his, they cleave not to his
Sacrifice to stain or pollute it. As for the Text of the Prophet Mal. 1. 13,
14. it is cited by many in this business, and to many purposes applied, but we
cannot find that in the Prophet for which it is here brought, The deceiver is
accursed that offers a corrupt thing to the Lord. This we read and believe,
but that a godly man, being present at this form of prayer among us, read by a
godly and faithful Minister, is the deceiver, who offers a corrupt thing
unto the Lord, that is not proved. No argument can be brought from this place
to the purpose, but by analogy, which is a kind of arguing of all other most
ready at hand, but liable to most exceptions, and apt to draw aside, if great
care be not had, (which in this place we find not) to take the proportion in
every material point just and right. And we desire such as allege this
passage of Scripture against simple presence at the prayers of our Liturgy,
advisedly to consider whether God allow them to make such application of his
truth which we much doubt of, to say no more.

Your third proposition. That as you are very tender of imputing sin to those
men that join in some select prayers read by an able and godly Minister: so on
the other side you are not without fear, least such joining may be found
unlawful, unless it may appear that the Ministers with whom the people have
communion in reading those Prayers, neither give any scandal by reading them,
nor give unlawful honor to a thing abused to Idolatry and Superstition, nor
do suffer themselves to be sinfully limited in the reading of them.

1 We cannot conceive how you should imagine the practice of a godly Minister
in reading some few select prayers to be scandalous or offensive in their
congregations when the people generally, not in their assemblies only, but
throughout the whole land, were persuaded of the lawfulness of that course
till now of late some have been drawn away to separate, who yet by warrant of
Scripture produce nothing of weight to countenance that practice.

2 If the book should be as you take it an idolathite, latent offense does not
oblige. If any man say unto thee, this is sacrificed to Idols, eat it not, so
that if it do not manifestly appear that this practice is scandalous; it is
not lawful for the people to withdraw themselves.

3 The book (we speak of the Liturgy so far as it is sound and good) by your
confession is no Idolathite, neither was it taken out of the Masse-book in such
sense as you object, but rather the mass and other Idolatrous prayers were
added to it, for popery is as a scab or leprosy cleaving to the Church; and
many truths belonging to the Church as her proper legacy were stolen and
heaped together in that den. And why the true man may not challenge his goods
where ever he finds the^, or the thief plead title to the true man's goods by
prescription, we know not? It is no hard task to show that our Service-booke
was reformed in most things according to the purest Liturgies which were in use
in the Church long before the mass was heard of in the world. And if that
could not be showed, yet forms of speech generally taken (we speak not of this
or that special word or phrase) is no more defiled by Idolatry then the light
air, or place where Idolatry is committed. It is not unlawful to pray, Lord
help, or Lord have mercy, or to give thanks, praised be God, because the
Papists say, Lady help, or, praised be God and the Virgin Mary.

Fourthly, Put case the Minister in reading such prayers gives offense, or
attributes unlawful honor to a thing abused to Idolatry and Superstition, or
suffer himself to be sinfully limited in the reading of them, what is that to
the faithful? This can be no just ground of the peoples not joining with them
in the worship of God, for that offense is personal only, and not the sin of
them that be present, they join in prayer only, and not in his reading or
limiting himself. Not to say that every particular person must be herein both
accuser and Judge. If he give offense must they stumble at the stone, and
separate from the ordinance of grace? we should rather think it is their duty
to look unto their feet, that they go not awry. Let it be showed out of the
Word of God, that either the Minister is guilty of giving unlawful honor, or
that the people may lawfully withdraw themselves in case he should do so, and
we will then say as you do, but until that be proved, (being pressed and
called to proffer our judgments) we believe that separation is scandalous and
sinful, never taught of God, nor confirmed by the approved example of the
godly in any age or time of the Church: Compare what Master I. D. has written
in defense or excuse in resorting to the Assemb. of the Separatists, called
Brownists. Apol. Sect. 5. exam. p. 61. and Apol. Sect. 28 exam. page 246.
yea, against the positive Law of God, injurious to the Churches distracting
Christians, bringing contempt upon the Ordinances of God, and defrauding
believers of the spiritual food of their souls, which is indeed to infringe
their Christian liberty, and what ever may be thought of it now, in former
times it has been accounted no small offense.

Fistly, if this and such like scruples make it unlawful to join in the
ordenance of worship, we must hold communion with no society under heaven. For
may not the brethren which hold all stinted, Liturgies, and set forms unlawful
say with like strength of reason, It is unlawful to join in conceived prayer
with others, if either they give too little honor to it, as deeming the other
lawful, or sinfully limiting, or suffering themselves to be limited to one
stinted form, though conceived at first by them selves? And may not the
brethren who hold a stinted form lawful in like manner object? It is
unlawful to join in prayer with them because they attribute too much honor to
conceived prayer, as making their device and method the worship of God? And may
not the Brethren which hold it lawful to use some selected prayers according
to the forms among us, upon the same grounds condemn communion with both
sorts? and all of them one with another, because they either limit themselves
too much, or too little? You say in the exposition of the first position, many
Preachers constantly use a set form of prayer of their own making before their
Sermons, must you not say upon this ground, that it is unlawful to join with
them, because they sinfully stint themselves? In probability a Christian may
presume, that in the public worship of God, there will be through humane
ignorance and infirmity somewhat amiss for matter, or manner, or both, and that
upon this ground, he must join with no society in any part of Gods worshipat
all.

The advancing of every small difference to this height, is that which will
bring all to confusion, if men walk uniforme to their own principles. It is
well observed by Master I. Da. that unless men will yield so much favor each
to other in some difference of opinions, a dissolving not only of Churches,
but of humane societies also must necessarily follow, and not only not two
Ministers, but not two men should live together, which were to put off even
humanity it self.

Sixthly, we have credibly heard that you hold fellowship with professed, rigid
Separatists without any acknowledgment of their error, and receive them as
members, or communicate with them in the privileges of the Church, though you
profess you approve not their opinion or practice. And if in godly wisdom,
you can see grounds to join with them, we marvel you should be so timorous in
this particular.

Seventhly, if you judge the practice of such godly Ministers, scandalous to
them that separate from the ordinance, because it is not administered in this,
or that, but in a stinted form. It is a scandal taken, and not given; and by
forbearing, if to confirm men in error, be to scandalize them, they should
offend them the more: yea, they should prejudice the truth, and it might be an
occasion to beget needless scruples in others, and draw them ignorantly from
the fellowship of the Saints in the holy ordinances of God, and strengthen them
who by your own confession, are run too far into Schism already.

III POSITION.
That the children of godly and approved Christmas, are not to be baptized
until their parents be set members of some particular Congregation

IV POSITION.
That the Parents themselves, though of approved piety, are not to be received
to the Lords Supper, until they be admitted as set Members.

Answ.
THese two Positions may be maintained with one and the same defense, being
somewhat coincident, and therefore we join them as if they were but one.
Therefore to prevent all mistakes, it may please you to take notice that we are
not of their judgment who refuse all religious communion with such as are not
Church Members, nor do we appropriate communion in this privilege of the
seals only to the Members of our own Churches, excluding all other Churches of
Christ from the same, though they may be through error or humane frailty
defective in some matters of order, provided that the liberty of our Churches
be preserved, of receiving such satisfaction as is meet (as well by Letters of
recommendation, or otherwise if it be requisite) concerning those whom we
admit unto fellowship in the seals. For as we account it our duty to keep the
unity of spirit inviolate with any, in whom we discern any fruits of the
spirit, so we hold our selves bound to discharge this duty, according to order.
Spiritual communion in prayers, holy conferences and other religious actions
of like nature we maintain with all godly persons, though they be not in Church
order: But Church communion we hold only with Church members admitting to
fellowship of the seals the known and approved, and orderly recommended members
of any true Church. But into fellowship of the censures, admittance of members
and choice of Officers, only the members of that particular Church whereof
they and we (any of us) stand members. These things being premised, the
considerations whereupon our judgment and practice is swayed for
administration of the Seals only to such as are in order of a true visible
Church are these that follow.

Reply.
What is here premised to prevent all mistakes, does seem more to raise then
to abate scruples if we mistake not your meaning. You refuse not all religious
communion with all that are not Church members, and so much they profess, who
formerly have gone for, and professed themselves Separatists from our
Assemblies. You do not appropriate this privilege of the Seals only to the
members of your own Churches, excluding all other Churches of Christ from the
same; If your meaning be only this, that you deny not the Sacraments
administered in other Churches to be the true Sacraments of Christ for
substance, then you ascribe little more to the Churches of Christ in this, then
to the Synagogue of Satan, the Church of Rome. For you will not deny Baptism
administered among them to be true for substance: If you deny not to have
fellowship with them in the Seals, and to admit them to the Sacrament, and to
communicate with them: then either your judgment is contrary to your practice,
or you exclude the Churches of England from the number of true visible Churches
of Christ, which is to destroy what you formerly builded, and here profess.
All possible care to keep the Ordinances of God from contempt, we allow and
commend, provided you go not beyond the Lords warrant, and deny not the
privileges of the Church to them, to whom they are due by divine appointment,
nor the name and title of Church to those societies, which God has plentifully
blessed with means of grace, have received the Tables and Seals, and have
entered into Covenant with his Highness. Your liberty to receive such
satisfaction as is meet, is not called into question, nor whether you are to
keep the bond of the Spirit inviolate according to order. But whether this be
to keep the bond of the Spirit inviolate (viz) to exclude from the Sacrament
true visible believers, or known recommended Christians, formerly members of
visible Churches among us; and their children; because they are not members (as
you speak) in Church Order. And whether God allows to put this difference
between Church members of your societies and other visible believers walking in
holiness, though not admitted members of any society according to your Church
order, as to receive the one, though members of another society, unto the
Seals, and to debar the other and their children. These are the things to be
considered in these present positions. And first we will examine your Reasons
for your judgment and practice by themselves, and then so far as we judge meet,
try your answers to the objections you make against it.

1 Consideration.
THe Seals Baptism and the Lords Supper are given to the Church, as a
privilege peculiar thereto in ordinary dispensation. Indeed the preaching of
the word is not so, being an ordinance given not only for the edifying of the
Church already gathered, but also for the gathering of men to the Churches that
yet are without: whereas the dispensing of the Seals is Gods Ordinance, given
only for the edifying of the Church being gathered, and not for the gathering
of it: And because there is now, no universal visible Church on earth wherein
the Seals are dispensed, there being no place, nor time, nor Officers, nor
Ordinances appointed in the New Testament by Christ our Lord, for any such
Assemblies as the Jews had under Moses.

It remains that the Christian Churches, whereunto these privileges were
given, are congregationall, consisting only of so many as may and do meet
together ordinarily in one place for the public worshipping of God, and their
own edifying.

Hence it is that we read so much in the New Testament of the Churches in the
plural number, the Churches of Christ, the Churches of God, the Churches of
the Saints: Romans 16 16.
and not only when they were of diverse Nations, 1 Cor. 11 16. and 14. 33.
the Churches of the Gentiles, but also of the same Nation, The Churches of
Judea, Rom 16. 4.
and not only when that Country was of large extent and circuit, Gal ^. 22.
the Churches of Asia, but also of a small part of the Country. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14.
The Churches of Galatia: yea, when congregations in several Cities are spoken
of. 1 Cor 16* 19.
They are called Churches as the Churches of Jerusalem, Gal. 5. 2.
the Churches at Antioch. To wind up all, seeing the Churches in the Gospel
are congregationall, Act 15* 2. and 19 37 and 15. 25. 38.
and that Baptism and the Lords Supper (being Church privileges) belong only
to the Churches, it will follow, that as City privileges belong only to
Citizens and their children: so baptism and the Lords Supper being Church
privileges, belong only to the members of particular Churches, and their
seed. And that seeing sigillum sequitur donum, to apply them to others what is
it but to abuse them? As a seal of a corporation is abused if added to confirm
the grant of privileges which are peculiar to any Town corporate to one that
being no freeman of that corporation is incapable thereof.

Reply.
IF by the Church be understood the Society of men, professing the entire faith
of Christ, the seals are given unto it as a peculiar privilege; but if by the
Church you understand only a congregationall assembly in Church order, the
seals were never appropriated to it. But to examine every thing in order as it
is propounded.

1 The Seals, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, are given to the Church as
privileges peculiar thereunto, not only in ordinary (as you say) but also in
extraordinary dispensation. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5.
True baptism is not without the Church, but within it; an ordinance given to
it, and they that are baptized, must needs be of a Church. The Sacraments are
the seals of the Covenant to the faithful, which is the form of the Church,
and when for substance rightly used, tokens and pledges of our spiritual
admittance and entertainment into the Lords family, Acts 2. 38. 41. Gen 1. 10.
and Symbolls or testimonies whereby the people of God are distinguished from
all other Nations. Math. 28. 14 20.
This is most certain, Robins. against Bern. reas. discus. pa. 77.
as in the ordinary; so in the extraordinary dispensation of the Seals, as is
confirmed by the Texts of Scripture alleged in the Margin. For the Apostles
(as you say) dispensed the seals in an extraordinary way, but the seals
dispensed by the Apostles were Seals of the covenant, privileges peculiar to
the Church, privileges of spiritual admittance and entertainment into the
Lords family.

And when you say the dispencing of the Seals is an Ordinance given only for
the edifying of the Church being gathered, and not for the gathering of it,
must it not be understood in extraordinary, dispensation as well as ordinary: To
what pupose then are those words (in ordinary dispensation) added to the
proposition? if thereby you would intimate that the Sacraments be not the
peculiar privileges of the Church, and Seals of the Covenant in extraordinary
dispensation, it is evidently cross to the Text you cite, and to your selves
afterward. If your meaning be, that in ordinary dispensation the Sacraments do
of right belong to them only, who be set members of a visible congregation,
it is all one with the conclusion, that which is in question and should be
proved, and that which this very Scripture does plentifully disprove; for they
that were baptized were not set members of a particular congregationall Church
whereunto they were baptized, nor in a Church way before baptism (as is
evident and granted by the most of your selves) but by baptism solemnly
admitted into the Church, and then it is not for your purpose, or they were set
members (as some of the brethren seem to contend in answer to the objection
framed against this consideration) and then the words are more then
superfluous. Added, they were to prevent the objection which you foresaw might
be made from the Apostles practice and example but so as they cut asunder the
sinews of the consideration it self, and make it of no force. For as those
beleivers were of the Church: so are approved Christians and their seed among
us: therefore the privileges of the seals belong unto them.

2 And as the seals: so is the word of salvation preached and received a
privilege of the Church. If by the preaching of the word you understand
nothing but the tender of salvation or the publishing of the will of God,
concerning the salvation of man, whether by private or public persons; it is
not proper to the Church but an ordinance given for the gathering of men to the
Church, and not only for the edifying of the Church. For the Apostles first
preached to the Gentiles when Infidels, that they might be converted; And we
doubt not but a Minister or private Christian coming into a country of
Infidells, may as occasion is offered, and as they shall be enabled, instruct
and persuade them to receive the faith of Christ: but if by the preaching of
the word be meant the giving of the word to a people, to abide and continue
with them, and consequently their receiving of it at least in profession then
it is proper to the Church of God.

The word makes disciples to Christ, Lev 2. 13.
and the word given to a people is Gods covenanting with them, Deuteronomy. 29. 12.
and 16. 17. 18.
and the peoples receiving this word and professing their faith in God through
Jesus Christ is the taking of God to be their God. Romans 3. 2 Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Psa.
247 19 20 Neh. 9. 13.
The laws and statutes which God gave to Israel, was the honor and ornament
to that Nation, and a testimony that God had separated them from all other
people, Act. 7. 38. Luke 16. 29 2 Cor 5 19 and 114. Deuteronomy 33. 3. Io. 8. 30
even the Gentiles themselves being Judges. The word of reconciliation is sent
and given to the world reconciled in Jesus Christ, and they that receive the
doctrine, law, or word of God are the Disciples, servants and people of God.

In your second consideration you intimate that there is a two fold preaching,
the one by office and authority, the other in Common charity, or how ever else
it may be called. For thus you write. God has joined to preach (viz by office)
and to baptize together, therefore we may not separate them. Now to preach
unto, that is to instruct or counsel in charity is a duty which may be
performed to an infidel, but to preach by office is proper to them that are
called to that office: Robin against Bern P 15.
and so to be taught and instructed by Officers in the Church is proper to the
Church.

To have pastors who shall feed with knowledge and understanding is a gift of
matrimonial love which God vouchsafes unto his Church. Act. 14 22. Tit. 1 5.
The Apostles first gathered Churches and then ordained elders in every City
or Church; Rob: against Bern.
so that it is proper to the Church to be fed and guided by true spiritual
pastors who teach and bless in the name of the Lord. Act 11 26. la the same
verse the some persons are called the Church disciples, and Christians page
126. 127. 211 etc. Fo page 51
And if the word preached and received be a certain note of the true Church,
they that have intyrely received the word of salvation and have Pastors godly
and faithful to feed and guide them, they and their seed have right and
interest unto the seals in order.

Moreover the true worship of God is an inseparable and infallible mark of the
true Church of God, for where Christ is, there is his Church. This is the
prerogative of the church. The Prince shall be in the midst of them, and he
shall go in when they go in, Ezeck. 46. 10
etc. And Christ says, where 2. or 3. are met together in my name there am I
in the midst among them. See Lavater on Ezekiel Math 18. 20. Ier. 14. 9.
And for certain they are gathered in the name of Christ that being lawfully
called do assemble to worship God and call upon his name in the mediation of
Jesus Christ. In times past, the Church was acknowledged by the fear of God,
Ios. 24. 14
and entyre Service of his Majesty, by the professing of the true faith and
faithful calling upon Gods name. The signs of Apostolic Churches are these.
Romans 10. 14*
The continuance in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, Act 2. 42
and breaking of bread and prayer. And if faith, true and lively (though mixed
with many doubtings and errors) make a man a living member of Jesus Christ, the
entyre profession of true faith joined with holiness of life in some measure
answerable thereunto, makes a man a true member of the visible Church. And if
the seals belong to the Church in right and orderly dispensation, they that
join together in the true worship of God, according to his will, with godly
and faithful pastors, they have right and title to the Sacraments according to
divine institution.

Thirdly, that there is now no visible Catholic Church in your sense will
easily be granted* i. e. there is no universal society consisting of all such
as are accounted or to be esteemed Christians, subjected to one or many
universal Pastors or guides, wherwithall subordinates must communicate in some
sacred things which may make them one Church and which may and can be performed
by that universal and head Church only. Such an universal Christian Church
Christ never ordained, no not in the days of the Apostles, to whom all the
care of all the Churches, was committed. The Churches planted by the Apostles
had all the same substantial laws and customs, the same guides and officers
for kind, the same ordinances of worship and means of Salvation: But one
flock or Society in the fore mentioned acceptance they were not, because they
were but subordinate to one visible head. Christ, with which they were to hold
union and communion in some worship to be performed by them all jointly
assembled at some special solemnity, nor subjected to the government of any
supreme tribunal constantly to be erected and continued among them.

Nevertheless, in some respects of reason, As Christ is that one great Pastor,
so has he generally one fold and flock, John 10. 16. Ezeck. 34 22. 23 which
is his Church, as he says. And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture are men,
Ezekiel. 34. 31. Aynsw. Cant 1. 8. Sure it is that he is none of Christ's sheep
visibly, or in respect of men which is without Christ's sheepfold, for there is
one sheepfold and one shepherd. John 10. 16. Robins against Bern likelihoods,
p. 61.
the visible Church, may be called the Church, sheepfold or flock of Christ;
for if the whole society or body mystical of Christ be one, this Church
militant in like sort is one: the unity of which society consists in that
uniformity, which all several persons thereunto belonging, have by reason of
that one Lord whose servants they all are, and profess themselves, that one
Spirit whereby they are animated as the body by one soul; whereby they believe
in Christ, and which they acknowledge and profess, that one Baptism inward
and outward, whereby they put on Christ, and are initiated.

This society is one in the inward fruition and enjoying of the benefits of
Christ's Death and Resurrection, Hieron. tom. 2. Ep. 85. Nec altera Roma urbis
Ecclesia, altera totius orbis existimanda est, and Gallia, and Britannia, and
Asia, etc. and omnes barbarae Nationes unum Christum adorant, unam observant
regulam veritatis.
and in outward profession of those things which supernaturally appertain to
the very essence of the Church, and are necessarily required in every
Christian, this acceptance of the word is not unusual in Scripture. As God
has set some in the Church. His bodies sake which is the Church. The Church
viz. whereof Paul was made a Minister, and whereunto the rest of the Apostles
were ordained, 1 Cor 12 28.
which was the Catholic visible Church, the society of men professing the
faith of Christ throughout the world, Col. 1. 2^.
divided into many particular Churches whereof some are pure, 1 Cor. 12, 13.
others impure, some more, others less sound. Hereunto it may be added, that
every multitude and society of believers are indefinitely called the Church, I
persecuted the Church of God. The house of God which is the Church of the
living God. 1 Cor. 15 9.
In which sense all the Churches in the world may truly be called one. Gal. 1.
13.
And thus the Apostle Peter writing to many dispersed Churches, Phil. 3. 6.
who could not assemble in one place nor be fed by one Shepherd, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
speaks of them singularly as one flock. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
Feed the flock of God which is among you. But that flock are the strangers
dispersed through Pontus, Galatia, Asia, Cappadocia, and Bythinia, which could
not possibly join together in the Ordinances of Worship, Pastores sunt omnes,
sed grex unus qui ab Apostolis omnibus unanimi consensu pascatur. Cypr. de
unitate Ecclesiae.
or make one distinct congregated assembly. And if the Catholic Militant
Church be one Society; the Seals that are given as a prerogative to the Church
are given unto it, and the true Members of the Catholic Church have right and
title to them in due order, though they be not admitted into the Church
fellowship you speak of.

For as the flock or society is one: so is the Ministry, Et si pastores multi
sumus, unum tamen gregem pascimus, Cypr. l. 3. Epistola 13. Cum sit a Christo
una Ecclesia per totum mundum in multa membra divisa item Episcopatus unus
Episcoporum multorum concordi numero diffusus, etc. Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 7.
Faith, Covenant, and Sacraments, which are given as a communion prerogative
unto the whole Church, and not appropriated to this or that part or member, as
separated from the whole; which is further evidenced hereby, that sometime it
has, and too often it may fall out, that a Christian may be a true member of
the universal visible Church (i. e. he may hold, profess, and maintain that
holy Catholic Faith, pure, and undefiled, without which no man can be saved)
who for the present is no actual member of any particular or visible society
in Church order. As for example, a man may be cut off by Excommunication, from
all commerce with the present visible Church wherein he was bred and born,
John 9. 22. 35. and 12. 42 and 16. 2.
when he is not cut off from the Catholic, Orthodox all Church. He may be
deprived of participation of the Ordinance in every particular society,
Athanasius may be for an example.
when his right and title to them is much better then these who have most
injuriously cast him out, or debarred him of the means of salvation.

The communion of Saints, whether visible or invisible is the effect and
property of the Church Catholic, and agrees to the several parts and members
thereof, as they be members of that body under the head, and if particular
Churches have communion together it must of necessity be, that they be parts
and members of the whole body which is one.

4. Though there be no universal congregation or assembly nor can be imagined,
yet there are and have been many visible assemblies or societies, true
Churches of Christ, to whom the Prerogative of the Seals is given, which have
not been united and knit together, in Church Order into one congregationall
body or society, For every society in covenant with God is the true Church of
God: for what is it to be the flock, people or sheep of God, but to be the
Church of God? And where there is a Covenant, there is the people of God. Genesis
17. 7.
They that are of the faith of Abraham, Lev. 26. 12.
are the children and seed of Abraham, and within the Covenant of Abraham
(though but two or three) and so of the same Church with him by that covenant.
Apo. 1. 11. 13.
Heb. 16. 10.
The communication on and accepting of the tables of covenant is an undoubted
token of a people in convenant or confederate, Rob. against Bern. pa. 127.
but every society professing the true and entire faith, Romans 4. 12. 18.
joining in prayer and thankesgiving, Genesis 12. 3.
receiving the truth of God to dwell among them, Gal. 3 6, 7, 8, 15, 16, 17
and in some measure conforming themselves to the obedience of Gods
Commandments, Rob. against Ber. pa. 222.
is in covenant with God. It is simply necessary to the being of a Church that
it be laid upon Christ the foundation, which being done, the remaining of what
is forbidden, or the want of what is commanded, cannot put the society from the
title or right of a Church. For Christ is the foundation and head corner stone
of the Church, and a people coming unto Christ, united unto him, built upon
him, having communion with him and growing up in him, are the true Church of
God: and if the seals be annexed to the covenant by God himself, as we cannot
deny a people in covenant to be the Church, so we must not deny their right and
title to the Sacraments. If therefore the meaning of the proposition be that
the seals be given to the Church, that is, to true and sound Christians, and
people in covenant with God, as a privilege whether in ordinary or
extraordinary dispensation we accept it as good and sound, but it makes against
your judgment and practice in keeping away such as have right and title to the
ordinances. If you mean the seals are given to the Church, that is, only to
set members of some particular society combined by covenant (as it is among
you) we cannot receive it, because it implies a distinction not taught in
Scripture, and cross to your selves. And for the thing it self the Scripture
has nothing but many things against it as has been showed.

5 If it be granted that the seals are the prerogative of a particular visible
Church, known and approved Christians among us, and their seed are members of
true and visible Churches, and so to be esteemed among you before they be
entered into Church membership as you call it. For every society professing the
entire and true faith, See Mr. I. D. Apol. 11. Sect. exam p. 117.
and joining together in the right use of the Sacraments in matters
substantial is the true Church of God, and every visible believer receiving
the word and professing, the true entire faith, admitted to the right and
lawful participation of the Sacraments is a visible member of the true Church,
if he have neither renounced that society, nor deserved justly to be cast out
by excommunication or Church censure. For the entire profession of the truth,
the dwelling of the truth among men, the right use of the Sacraments (which is
ever joined with truth of Doctrine, and to be esteemed by it) is proper to them
that be in covenant with God. And they that truly partake of the Seals must
needs be of a Church, for the seals are not without but within the Church an
ordinance given unto it, and if they be true members of the true Churches of
Jesus Christ, other Churches, are bound to hold communion with them in the
ordinance of worship as divine providence shall minister occasion.

In answer to the ninth position you say the members of other Churches, well
known and approved by virtue of communion with Churches, do mutually and with
good acceptance communicate each of them at others Churches, even so often as
Gods providence leads them thereunto, and themselves desire it. In your preface
to this consideration, you say you admit to fellowship of the seals, the
known, approved, and orderly recommended members of any true Church, and if
known and approved Christians, members of our Churches coming over into New
England shall desire either to have their children baptized, or to be admitted
themselves to the Lords Supper before they be set members of any society the^e,
we desire to know upon what grounds from God you can deny them, if you
acknowledge our Churches Ministry, and Sacraments, to be true and of God (as
you profess) and the members of the Church be known and approved, orderly
recommended unto you.

It is the privilege of Christians baptized themselves, and walking in the
faith, that their children should have right to baptism in all true Churches
in the world. It is the privilege of Christians lawfully and justly admitted
to the Lords Supper in one visible Church, and walking in covenant with God,
that they have right to this privilege in all Churches professing their entire
faith, and you must show just and sound reasons from God of your judgment and
practice in debarring their seed from baptism, and parents themselves from the
Supper, or else (to use the words of a reverend Elder among you, I. D. Apol. 5.
Sect. ex^m. page 61, and 18.
in a case of less importance, and not concerning so many) you will be found
guilty of adding to the words, and making eleven Commandments, and setting up
humane customs, and selfewill against Gods appointment. For the Sacraments are
given to the Church as a privilege peculiar thereunto, but you deny this
privilege to the true visible members of the Church, (as your selves
confess.) For if the Ministers be the Ministers of Christ, and their
congregations the Churches of Christ, then known and approved Christians are
members of the Church. In your opinion the members of the Jewish Church might
be received unto baptism, upon confession of the Christian faith before they
were entered into Church fellowship, and it is more then strange to us that you
should not think the true visible members of the Churches of Christ to have as
much title and interest to the Seals, as the members of the Jewish Church to
the Sacrament of Baptism.

6 The distinct Churches mentioned in the New Testament, it is not certain that
they were congregationall societies consisting only of so many as might and
did meet together ordinarily in one place at one time for the public worship
of God, and their own edification, and if this were granted it would not carry
the weight that was laid upon it, But because it may make way for the clearing
of some other points pertaining to discipline and Church order, we entreat
leave to set down, and desire you to examine what may be objected against it.
We will not insist upon this that the least circuit wherein there is mention
of Churches, is ample enough to contain some diocesses and the least City,
Bucer. diff. ep. 3. pa. 43. and ep 48. pa. 226.
populous enough to make many numbersome congregations. Nor upon this, that to
meet at one time and one place, as one assembly is a thing merely accidentary
to the unity of the Church and society Ecclesiastical which is still one, when
they are dispersed asunder, and no particular man of that society at first
remaining now alive. The number of believers was so great in some Cities as
they could not conveniently meet in one place as one assembly to worship the
Lord according to his will and for their edifying. That there was a Church
gathered in the City of Samaria by the ministry of Phillip will not be denied,
for they received the word and were baptized, but that the Church in that City
was only a congregationall assembly is more then can probably be concluded out
of Scripture. For the whole City or the greatest part could not ordinarily
assemble in one place to their edification: But the whole City of Samaria, Act.
8. 6. and 15 4.
in a manner, (as it is probable) embraced the faith. As the whole City from
the least to the greatest had given heed to Simon Magus before, Act. 8. 12.
14. and 18. 12.
so to Phillip now when he preached Christ, And the Text says expressly that
Samaria received the Gospel.

The Christian Church at Jerusalem was one and distinct, Acts 2. 41. and 4. 4.
and 5 14. and 6. 1. and 6. 7
but it grew and increased first to 3000. then to 5000. afterward multitudes
of men and women were added, and the multitude of Disciples increased; it is
also noted that a company of the Priests received the faith. The Syriacke has
it of the Jews, (scil.) inhabiting Judea, but the Greek, Arabian, vulgar,
Chrisostoms and Ethiopians approve the former, and the number of the Priests
was not small: Ezra. 2. 36, 37, 38.
there is mention also of millions of believers. And when all the Apostles, or
the greatest part of them remained at Jerusalem for a time continuing in the
ministry of the word and prayer, Act. 6. 2 and 8. 1. 15. 2, 4, 6, 22, 23 and
16. 4. and 21. 18. 18.
and that they might do it the more earnestly and diligently, left the care of
the poor to others: how can we think but that Church did grow exceedingly,
and the number of believers there to be more then could fitly meet ordinarily
in one congregation. Without question the number of believers in Antioch was
not small, of which it is said expressly, that a great number believed, turned
to the Lord and that a great multitude was added to the Lord by the preaching
of Barnabas, and that Paul and Barnabas continued there one whole year
preaching the word of God, Act. 11. 21.
and teaching the multitude, so that the Disciples were first called Christians
at Antioch. Act. 11 24 25
After that this Church was visited by Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13 12 et 14 27
et 15. 30. 34, 35.
who continued there teaching and preaching the Word of God with many others
also, and may we not think that this Church did quickly rise to such bigness
that they could not well assemble in one congregation as now we call them?

It will easily be credited that the number of believers was not small at
Ephesus, if we call to mind that when Paul had been there but two years, all
they that dwelt in Asia had heard the word of the Lord both Jews and Grecians,
Acts 19 10. and 16. 9. and 19. 27.
that a great door and effectual was opened to him at Ephesus, Acts 19. 19.
That the art for making Shrines, and Dianaes Temple was in danger to be set at
naught, and that those that had used curious arts, came and burnt their books
in the sight of all men, which could not be done without great danger unto the
Church, unless a great part of the City had believed. Where a Church did
comprehend a City with its Suburbs and the Country circumjacent, i. e. the
believers who professed the faith within that circuit. It might well be that
the number did so increase through the extraordinary blessing of God, which
accompanied the preaching of the word in those primitive times, and first
planting of the heavenly Kingdom, that they could not well meet ordinarily in
one place, and yet continued one Society. For when a number is gathered in
small Villages, or some added to the number already gatherd, it is not meet
they should be neglected because small, nor divided from the body, because the
number not competent to make an entire and perfect body of it self. The
increase of the Churches does require an increase of Elders, and (if they grow
to bigness more then ordinary) an increase of places for their assembling,
when the essence of the visible Church is not changed, nor one multiplied or
divided into many. And it is more available for the good of the Church, and
further removed from all ambition, if the Society shall assemble occasionally
in diverse places as parts and members of the body, then to constitute a
distinct free Society consisting of a few Believers, not fit to make up an
entire body contrary to the precedent examples of the Apostles. In times of
grievous and hot persecution the Churches of God could not assemble in any
great number in public places, but have been compelled to meet in Woods,
Caves, Dens, and dark corners, as the Lord has offered opportunity, one and
the same Society in sundry places: So that either it is not essential to the
Church to meet together in one place ordinarily, or their Society is broken off
by persecution, when their meeting together in one place is interrupted. It is
said by some where the Church grew greater, Robinson against Bern p. 196.
sometimes by the sudden and extraordinary conversion of more then could well
so assemble, then was there presently a dispersion of the former, and a
multiplication of more particular Assemblies. But in the Scriptures quoted no
such thing does appear, but rather the contrary as has been proved. In
aftertimes when the Church was within the Cities as of Rome, Eusebius hist l. 6.
c. 35.
Ephesus, Alexandria, Carthage, Jerusalem, etc. Lat 43. Graec. 33. Ruff.
the number of Believers did greatly exceed the bigness of a convenient and
fitting assembly which might ordinarily congregate in the place to worship God
according to his appointment when the Church was but one.

Seventhly. Seeing them both the Seals in ordinary and in extraordinary
dispensation belong to the Church, id est, to the faithful, and repentant,
taught made Disciples, who have received the word, believe, and profess the
faith, have received the holy Ghost, and walk in obedience, who are members of
other visible Churches, or to be made members of a visible Church for the time
being, by admittance unto the Sacraments, and not unto set members of
congregationall assemblies only. And seeing the godly and faithful Ministers
among us are the true Ministers of Christ, and their godly congregations, true
Churches, and known, and approved Christians, true members of visible Churches
formerly baptized, and admitted to the Lords Supper. This consideration is of
no weight to justify your opinion and practice in debarring known and approved
Christians, professing the faith, members of the true visible Churches amongst
us from the Lords Supper, or their seed from Baptism, because they be not yet
received as set members of some particular congregation amongst you: And if
such Believers are not to be received to the Seals, we desire you to consider
if ever the Sacraments of the New Testament, were rightly dispensed in the
Church of the New Testament from the first Plantation thereof unto this day.

The Seal does follow the grant, and as the Seal is profaned, if it be put
to a false grant or Charter, so are the faithful wronged if the Seal in a
lawful way desired, be denied to them that have received the grant, i. e. have
right unto Jesus Christ, ^hit de Sacra contr. de bapt. qu 2 and 3. page 237, 238.
and communion with him. But the faithful who have received the word with
gladness, believe, and profess, Atters. of the Sacr: l. 2. c. 6 fol. 211.
be members known and approved by other visible Churches, or such as desire to
be admitted members of that visible Society for the time by communicating in
the ordinance, are already partakers of the grant or charter, have right and
interest in Christ, may lawfully desire the Seals, and may be admitted as
members for the time being of that particular Society. Therefore to debar such,
from the Lords Supper, and their seed from Baptism, is against the Law of
nature, and the positive Law of God, an injury to the faithful and their seed,
a wrong to the Catholic visible Church, that particular society, and the
Pastors themselves that so debar them. They sinned grievously who deferred
Baptism to the end of their life, and the negligence of Pastors and Teachers
who did not instruct the ignorant and reprove the superstitious, was great.
(...) de Presbyt. page 79.
And is not the severity in debarring such as crave and desire to be admitted
to the Seals an injury to be reprehended?

Answ. 2 Confider the ordinary administration of the Seals is limited to the
ministry and the ministry to a particular Church; therefore the seals also
must necessarily be proper to the Church and to the members thereof.

1 That the administration of the seals is limited to their Ministry is
evident from the first institution Math. 28. 19. where God has joined (to
preach) viz. by office, and (to baptize) together, therefore we may not
separate them. For howsoever: any man may by the appointment of the Lord and
Master of the family, signify his mind and deliver his message from him to
the family, yet the dispensing of a fit portion of food to every one of the
household is a branch of the stewards office. Indeed the keys are given to the
whole Church yet the exercise and dispensation of them in this as well as in
other particulars is concredited to the Ministers who are called to be (...),
1 Cor. 4. 1. And no Church office can be orderly performed by any, but one that
is called thereunto nor will God vouchsafe his presence, and blessing (whereupon
all spiritual efficacy depends) in an ordinance dispensed, but when it is
dispensed by those whom he has ordained and appointed thereunto.

2 That the ministry is limited to the Church appears as from evident texts
of Scripture: Act. 14 23. Col. 4. 17 1 Pet 5. 2
so also upon this ground. 1 The office is founded in the relation between the
Church and the officer, Act 20. 28.
wherefore take away the relation, and the office and the work cease.

For where he has not power, he may not do an act of power, and he has not
powerwhere he has not a relation by office. Herein the proportion holds
between an officer of a town corporate, and of a Church that as the power of
the former is only within his own corporation: so the power of the latter is
confined to his own congregation.

Reply.
THe proposition is granted that the dispensation of the Sacraments in the New
Testament both ordinary and extraordinary is limited to the Ministry. But in
that you allege for confirmation, somethings may be noted.

1 The first institution of Baptism is not contained in that passage Math. 28.
19. but confirmed; For the seals of the New Testament were instituted by
Christ before his death, and his disciples had baptized many which they could
not do before the institution of the Sacrament. Ioh. 4. 2. and 23 23.
Secondly we see not how you can apply that text to Preaching by office, which
according to our exposition must be a dispensing of a fit portion of food to
every one of the household. For it is plain the Apostles were sent forth to
preach to every Creature or unto the world, Mark. 9. 15.
to convert men unto God, to make them disciples and not to preach unto
disciples only, Act 17 22 23 32. and 19. 8. 9
or members of the household. The Apostles certainly had authority, and preached
by authority, but they preached not to Infidells and Heathens, as to disciples
or members of the Church, Rob. against Bern. p 151 these Keys in d. etc.
much less did they give a portion to them as to the household which is the
preaching by office, which you acknowledge. Thirdly if under the power of the
keys you comprehend preaching by office, dispensing the seals, casting out,
and receiving again into the bosom of the Church we deny the power of the
keys to belong to the Church or community of the faithful: we cannot find in
Scripture that Christ ever granted such power to the faithful, as faithful
joined together in Covenant in those passages which speak of this power, In
the Corporation (the Church) there is always the whole power of Christ to
residing, which you may call officers for the use of it self, to which it is
sufficient that it can without officers use this power for things simply
necessary; as for receiving in of members by profession of faith and confession
of sins, for edifying of them by exhortation and comforts in the ordinance of
prophesying, and so for excommunication. Rob. against B. page 224.
the execution of this authority is given to them to whom the authority is
committed.

If the power of the keys be given to the whole Church the Apostles themselves
must derive their authority immediately from the Church, and not from Christ,
for the power must be derived from them, unto whom it was give; but their
power, and authority was not from the Church; but from Christ immediately. And
if the dispensation, and exercise of the keys, be concredited to the
Ministers; Does it hold in all things or only in the dispensation of the
Sacraments, and preaching by office? Do they dispense the seals as the
Stewards of Christ, from whom they receive their authority immediately or as
the servants of the Church, from which they derive their authority? If in the
first sense; the power of the keys is not in the community of the faithful. If
in the second, the office of a Minister is not the immediate gift of Christ,
nor the Minister, so much the servant of Christ, as of the Church, from whom he
must receive laws, in whose name he must do his office, and to whom he must
give an account. We could wish you had explained in what sense, you hold the
dispensation, and execution of the power of the keys is concredited to the
Ministers, and by whom. For if the community of the faithful have to do in
all matters concerning the body, See Rob. against Ber. page 130. 131. 132. If
you call it consultation in an assembly wherein all have equal power and voice
in determining things some one going before the rest Idem page 202
to admit members, and cast them out, to make and depose Ministers, to bind and
loose by authority derived from Christ, we cannot see how in your judgment
the dispensation, and execution of the power of the keys is concredited to the
Ministers.

Fourthly That which you add, that God will not vouchsafe his presence and
blessing to an ordinance but when it is dispensed by those, whom he has
ordained and appointed thereunto, must be warily understood, or it may
occasion errors and distractions not a few, You know what corruptions soon
entered into the Church of God, both in respect of Doctrine, Worship, Offices,
and entrance thereunto, and how ready and apt is the conclusion from your
words, Robins. against Bern. Coun. debated, p. 32. ibid. p. 79.
That Christ has not vouchsafed his presence, and blessing in his Ordinances
to his Church? But of this before.

And on the contrary, seeing God has vouchsafed his blessing in his Ordinances
dispensed by your selves, when you stood as visible Ministers in the
congregation, and Churches of old England, you must confess, did approve both
your standings and his Ordinances dispensed by you.

Secondly, as for the Assumption, that Pastors and Teachers are limited to a
particular charge or society; but that flock is not ever one congregationall
assembly meeting in one place, neither the band so straight, whereby they are
tied to that one society, that they may not upon occasion perform some
Ministerial Act or Office in another congregation, or to them that be not set
members of their proper assembly. For first to dispense the Seals of the
covenant is a ministerial act, an act of Office, and not an exercise of gifts
only: But the Pastors of one Assembly may dispense the Sacrament to the set
members of another society upon occasion, as you confess in this and in your
answer to the ninth position.

And if the members of one Church may lawfully upon occasion receive the
Sacrament of the Supper in another society from the Pastor thereof, then may
the Pastor of one congregation perform a Ministerial act to the members of
another, and if to the members of another then in another congregation with
consent, and upon occasion.

Secondly, As the Ministers are exhorted to feed their flock: so is every
Christian and Minister to try and examine himself whether he be in the faith,
but you will not allow this conclusion. 1 Cor. 11 28.
I must examine my self. Ergo, no man is debarred from the Sacrament for his
unworthiness, 2 Cor. 23. 5.
or to be tried or examined by others, to be observed, admonished, and brought
to repentance for notorious sin. Beza de Presbyt. and Excom. page 32
No more can it be rightly gathered from the former passages of Scripture, that
the Minister is not upon occasion to perform any Ministerial act to any other
people or society, Robins. against Bern. page 252.
because ordinarily he is to attend his own flock.

Thirdly, As the Ministers have peculiar relation to their particular flocks,
so the people unto their particular Ministers, unto whom they are tied in
special manner, as to their Overseers, who must give account for theirsouls.
And if this peculiar relation betwixt the people and the Minister does not
hinder the people from receiving the Lords Supper at the hands of another
Minister; nor the minister from performing the Ministerial act to the members
of another congregation. Neither does his peculiar Relation to his own flock
hinder him, from administering unto others upon just occasion being entreated
thereunto. As the combining of the people to their peculiar Minister, does not
quite cut off their communion with other Ministers: so neither does the
restraining of a Minister to a peculiar flock quite cut him off from
administering upon occasion: unto another people. Paul appoints the Ephesian
Elders unto the care and charg only of their own particular flock, Acts. 20 28
The Word of God and Cano is of Councels will have Pastors so to care for their
own flock, that they forbid them not to care for the whole Church, especially
in a time of common combustion. The answer of some Brethren. page 1^.
but so to attend them ordinarily according to the rules of the Scripture; that
as occasion was offered, might perform some Ministerial acts in another
congregation. The taking heed unto their flocks which Paul requires in this
place does comprehend under it the administration of the Word, Publica Dei
invocatio non minima pars communis in una fide consensionis. Beza contra
Erastum, de Presbyt pap. 13.
Prayer, and Sacrament, and if it must be restrained to their own particular
Churches only, it is unlawful for a Pastor to preach or call upon the name of
God in any public Assembly save his own, upon any occasion, as these be duties
prtaining to common confession or profession of faith. Ordinary Pastors and
Teachers it is true, are not Apostles, who are to go from place to place, from
Country to Country, to plant and erect Churches, but they are tied ordinarily
to one flock, as the Text proves, and to which purpose it is commonly cited.
But that a Pastor is so tied to his flock, that he can perform no ministerial
act to any other upon any occasion that it proves not, nor can we find that it
was ever so understood by Divines ancient or modern. Eusebius Hist. 5. c. 26.
Graec.
W. B. tells us, the learned bring these allegations to this purpose.
Chami^^. Panst. ^om 2. l. 10. c. 8.
But the author in alleging the consent of the learned was very careless or
much abused, for there is not one that speaks to the purpose. Sect. 16.
I. D. disclaimeth that position; and for the rest it is a matter notorious,
The Churches Plea, page 44.
they were never thought to be of that opinion; Apol. page 117 and ^98.
and we doubt not if any could be named to free this allegation from suspicion
of Novelty, you would have cited one or more as you have done in that which
follows.

Feed the flock of God (says Peter.) But he speaks of all those dispersed
Churches to whom he writes, which he calls a chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood* a peculiar people: And in some respect of reason, under which we
may apprehend them, are one flock, but not really as combined under the same
Pastor, or meeting in one place. And as these dispersed believers, or societies
make one Flock: so the Ministers attending their flocks or societies, and the
Ministry exercised by them is, or makes one.

4 A Minister chosen and set over one society, is to look unto his people
committed to his charge, and feed the flock over which the Lord has made him
overseer, but he is a Minister in the Church Universal, Orig. in Isa. Hom. 6.
Qui vocatur ad Episcopatum, vocatur ad servitutem totius Ecclesiae. Chrysostom.
in 2 Cor. hom. 18. Vniversae curam gerimus.
for as the Church is one, so is the Ministry one, of which every Minister
(sound or Orthodox) does hold his part, and though he be Minister over that
flock only which he is to attend, yet he is a Minister in the universal
Church. See Cham Panstr. Tom. 2. page 10. cap. 12. Sect. 8, 9, 10. etc. Jun.
Animadv. in Bellar. contro. 5. lib. 1. c. 3. not. 3. and cap. 7 not. 7.
The function or power of exercising that Function in the abstract, must be
distinguished from the power of exercising it, concretely, according to the
diverse circumstances of places. The first belongs to a Minister every where
in the Church, the latter is proper to the place and people where he does
minister. The lawful use of his power is limited to that congregation
ordinarily. The power it self is not so limited and bounded. In Ordination,
Presbyters are not restrained to one or other certain place, as if they were
to be deemed Ministers there only, though they be set over a certain people.
And as the faithful in respect of a community betwixt them, must and ought to
perform the Offices of love one to another, though of different societies, so
the Ministers in respect of their communion, must and ought upon occasion to
perform ministerial Offices toward the faithful of distinct societies.

5 If this be not so, what shall become of the poor flock when the Pastor is
driven away by personal persecution, so that he cannot, if others may not
afford them help and succor: what when the congregation it self is
dispersed, must no sheepherd receive them into fold, when they are driven from
their own, or neglected by him?

6 If the Pastor may be absent from his flock upon necessary, just, and weighty
occasion, respecting his own good, the good of that society, or the common good
of Churches consociate, then may the Pastor, the soaiety, the Churches procure
some man to supply the defect, and do the office of a Pastor, preach the Word,
pray, and as occasion is offered, administer the Sacrament in that Congregation
unto that Assembly until their Shepherd shall return. Shall the people be
left as sheep without a shepherd; because for the good of the Churches their
own shepherd is called from them for a time, that he might return with
greater joy and comfort?

The Pastor is appointed to feed his own flock, and yet for the good of the
whole Church he may be called to leave, if not the care, yet the oversight of
his flock fot a while; and by the same reason a pastor of another flock or
congregation may perform the office, and do the acts of a Minister in his
congregation during absence: Yea if for the good of the Churches he be called
away, do not the Churches stand obliged in conscience to provide that the
flock sustain to hurt by his absence which possibly ye cannot do if one
Minister may not perform a Ministerial act in another Congregation.

7 If the Prophets of one Church may prophesy in another, and apply their
doctrines, exhortations and prayers to any of the occasions of the Churches
where they speak, Act. 13. 15.
whereof they are not set members, what hinders why the Pastor of one
congregation, may not preach and pray, administer the Sacraments in another?
The pastor of one congregation is appointed to his peculiar charge, but he is a
Minister in the universal Church, as well as the Prophets of one Church may
be called Prophets of the universal Church by virtue of that Communion which
all true Churches have one with another. Without consent the Prophet may not
prophecy by exhortation, and with consent the Pastor may administer the
Sacraments.

8 In the Primitive Churches when Elders were ordained in every City, they were
not only to look to their flock but endeavor the conversion of poor
Infidels among whom they lived, Romans 16 3 12.
and the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, Phil. 2. 15, 16. and 4. ^.
for the work of the Lord must be done in its season, and then was the time of
the calling of the Gentiles:

It was not their office proper and essential to travail from Country to
Country as did the Apostles, nor were they pastors of the Infidels, Iam 5. 19,
20. Act. 4. 16. 40 and 9 38. and 10. 5. and 11 19. 21 1 Cor. 14. 23, 24. Esaias
2. 3. Eza 8. 23. Io. 1. 41. 45. and 42. 9. and 12. 20. Revel. 3. 9
but by private instruction and public teaching (if any of them would be
penitent) they were to labor the coming of them to God. And these Infidels
converted to the faith were to be baptized of the Elders ordinarily in those
Cities, though the number might be so great as they could not well meet in
one Congregation, nor be subject to the same Pastor; for either they must be
baptized by the pastors among whom they lived, (being converted to the faith)
or continue unbaptized until they were a number convenient to make a distinct
society, or grow together into one body, and to elect and choose their own
Minister by whom they may be baptized: But that either they must stay so long
without baptism, or that a society of unbaptised men had power in those times
to elect and choose their Minister, by whom they should be baptized is contary
to all presidents in Scripture.

9 And so if a Pastor may not perform a ministerial act to any other person
or people but his own flock only, then a company newly converted from
infidelity, which cannot join themselves as set members to another assembly,
must remain unbaptised till they have chosen their Minister to do that office.
Then must the people thus converted want officers til there be among themselves
able men to pray, preach, exhort in the congregation at the ordination of their
Minister, or (if that may be omitted) till there be fit men among them to
examine the fitness of him that is chosen.

10 If subtle Heretics arise, and seduce, and draw away many from the faith,
and the body of the society be not able to convince them, either they must be
let alone or cast out without conviction, for neighboring Ministers stand in
peculiar relation to their flocks only, and must not meddle beyond their
calling according to your tenent.

11 There is no precept or example in Scripture more to warrant the admitting
of a set member of one congregation unto the Supper in another, What example
have you but grounds for the baptising of infants? or where read you of any
officer excommunicated by any Rob. against Ber. p. 214. we may not expect
examples of any Pastors in scriptures: who did thus. I. D. Apol. 9. Sect. exam.
p. 103.
or the baptising of his child, occasionally in another assembly then there is
for receiving of known and approved Christians, and their seed that are not
set members. The Pastor is no more the pastor of the one then of the other, nor
the one more of his flock then the other, neither of them set members, and both
sorts may be members for the time being, and they most properly who are of
longest abode among them. See I. D. Apol. texts. exam pa. 288.
But as we hear it is frequent among you (as at Dorchester, etc.) to baptize
the children of another Assembly, and usually you admit to the Supper of the
Lord, members of other Churches, and therefore the Minister is not so limited
to his particular Church or flock but he may dispense the seals to others,
which in this consideration is denied.

12 If the want of one Officer in a Congregation for a time, may be supplied by
another, as the want of the Doctor, Ruling Elder, or Deacon, by the Pastor; why
may not the defects of some Congregation or Christians be supplied by Pastors
or Ministers of another Congregation, when they are requested and desired? the
mind herein is godly, and the means lawful, and well pleasing unto God.

13 And if a Synod consisting of sundry members of particular Churches, met
together in the name of Christ about the common and public affairs of the
Churches shall join together in prayer and communion of the Supper, we can see
no ground to question it as unlawful, although that Assembly be no particular
Congregation or Church, has no Pastor over them, make not one Ecclesiastical
body as a particular Congregationall Church, unless it be for the time only.
The Minister therefore may do an act of office to them that be not set members
of his flock as he may stand in Relation to them for the time.

14 Your comparison betwixt an Officer of a Town Corporate, and of a particular
Congregation is not alike, unless you will say that a member of another
Corporation occasionally coming into the Town, is thereby a member of that
Society, and subject to the authority of the Officer. For so you profess that
the members of one Society may occasionally communicate with another, and so be
subject to the Pastor for the time being, which if you grant, it overthrows the
whole strength of this consideration. Howsoever the comparison it self is very
perilous if it be pressed. For if the Officer of a Town Corporate, presume to
do an act of power out of his own Corporation, it is a mere nullity, but if a
Minister of the Gospel dispense the Sacrament of Baptism, or the Lords Supper
to believers of another Society (though done without consent) it was never
deemed or judged a nullity in the Church of God. Let the comparison hold good,
and most Christians have cause to question whether they be truly baptized, or
ever lawfully received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. If it may not be
doubted, whether ever the Sacraments of the New Testament were truly or by
authority dispensed, especially if we consider what follows in the other
considerations. This Argument from comparison is very usual in the Writings of
Brethren against communion with our Churches, but for the most part greatly
mistaken, to say no more.

Answer 3 Consideration.
CIrcumcision and the Passoever were to be administered only to the members of
the Church. Ergo, Baptism and the Lords Supper is so to be administered also.
The consequence is made good by the parity of these Ordinances. For if the
Argument hold strong for the proof of Paedo-Baptisme which is taken from the
circumcision of Infants, why may we not as well infer a necessity of Church
membership to Baptism, from the necessity of it to circumcision. And that
Circumcision was peculiar to the Church members of the Church, may appear in
that persons circumcised, and only they, might eat the Passover, and they
only might enter into the Temple, Exodus 12 48.
which were the privileges of Church members. In our answer to the second
Objection against the first consideration we have showed that Circumcision was
not administered to all that were under the Covenant of Grace (which all
believers were) but only such of them as joined themselves to the Church,
Exodus 44 7.
at first in Abraham's family, whereunto Baptism does so far answer that the
Apostle counts these express equivalent to be circumcised in Christ with
circumcision made without hands, Col 2. 1 1, 12.
and to be buried with Christ in Baptism. Indeed, in somethings they differ as
only the Males were circumcised, whereas with us Females are also baptized.
The Reason is because God has limited Circumcision to the Males, but under the
Gospel, that difference is taken away. Again, Circumcision was administered in
the private family; but Baptism, only in the public Assemblies of the
Church. The Reason of this difference is, because they were bound to circumcise
the Males on the eighth day, but that could not stand with going to the Temple
which was too far off, for the purpose, to bring every child thither from all
parts of Judaea to be Circumcised the eighth day. Nor had they always
opportunity of a solemn convention in the Synagogue on every eighth day; when
some child or other might be to be circumcised. But there is no precise day set
down for Baptism, nor are opportunities of public Assemblies so remote where
Churches are kept in a congregationall frame, but that every first day of the
week Baptism may be administered if it be required. Again, for the Aforesaid
Reason, Circumcision required not a peculiar Minister (for ought we find in
Scripture) but it is not so in Baptism, as was showed in the second
Consideration. But no good Reason can be given, why, in this they should not
both agree viz. that they are both to be dispensed only to members of the
visible Church, as it has been proved in the first Consideration.

Reply.
THis whole Reason as it is propounded makes only against it self; who ever
thought that the Seals of the Covenant were not proper to confederates or the
Church of God? But of old all visible Believers under the Covenant of Grace,
walking in holiness, were of the visible Church, and in Church Order according
to the dispensation of those times, though not joined in external society with
the Family of Abraham. And to exclude Melchisedeck or Job, because they were no
members of the visible Church, when yet they were visible Believers under the
Covenant of Grace, and in Church Order as those times required, is well-nigh a
contradiction, And so it is to debar known and approved Christians members of
our Congregation, and their seed from the Seals, because they be not of the
visible Church, for they are members of the Church, and so to be held and
esteemed all true Churches and members of the Church, The true and proper
meaning of this Consideration, is that as Circumcision and the Passover were
not to be dispensed to all visible Believers under the Covenant of Grace, but
only to such as were joined to Abraham's Family, or to the people of the God of
Abraham, no more may Baptism and the Lords Supper be administered to any
Believers now, unless they be joined to some particular Congregation in Church
Membership, or unless by solemn Covenant, they be set members of some
particular Assemblies.

The strength of this Consideration stands in the parity which is betwixt the
Sacraments of the Old and New Testament, Erast so objects against Bern-Sicut a
Circumcisione ad Baptismum argumentamur ut probemus infantes esse baptizandos,
ita etiam licet ab agno Paschatis ad Coenam Domini, etc. whereto he truly
replyeth. Ego vero, non nego licere etc. at non temere and universaliter. Beza
contra Erast. page 23.
Circumcision and Baptism, for parum par est ratio, but this parity is not
found in every thing (as is manifest by the particulars alleged in the
Consideration it self.) And we must justly require some reason to prove them
like in that particular, but to unfold it more fully, we will consider three
things. First, how far an argument may be drawn soundly from one Sacrament to
another, or wherein the Sacraments agree, and wherein they differ. Secondly,
What we are to think of the proposition it self. Thirdly, whether the Reason
of Circumcision and Baptism be one in that particular.

First the Sacraments of the old Testament and the new agree in their Common
author, nature and end, and therefore what is spoken of one in respect of the
common author, nature and end that does hold true of every one. If
Circumcision be of divine institution a seal of the Righteousness of faith,
and of the Covenant of grace, a Sacrament in general is an ordinance divine, a
seal of the Covenant proper and peculiar to them that be confederates. But
what is peculiar to one Sacrament that agrees not to another. What is proper
to the sacraments of the old Testament, in respect of the manner of
dispensation that agrees not to the new, as if the Sacraments of the old
Testament be with blood, obscure in signification, painful for use, peculiar
to one Nation, and to be abolished, the Sacraments of the new Testament must
be without blood, clear for signification, easy for use, universal to all
Nations, and perpetual to continue in the Church for ever.

Circumcision and Baptism are both Sacraments of divine institution, and so
they agree in the substance of the things signified, the persons to whom they
are to be administered, and the order of administration, if the right
proportion be observed. As circumcision sealed the entrance into the covenant
the righteousness of faith, and circumcision of the heart: so does Baptism
much more clearly: As Abraham and his household, and the infants of beleiving
Jews were to be circumcised, so the faithful, their families, and their seed
are to be baptized. None must eat the passover who was not circumcised,
women excepted, who were circumcised in the males. Nor may a man unbaptized be
admitted to the Lords supper. Circumcision was but once applied by Gods
appointment and the same holds in baptism according to the will and good
pleasure of God: But circumcision and baptism agree not in their special
form, and manner of dispensation appointed of God. And in these things a
reason cannot be drawn from the one to the other affirmatively. The males only
were to be circumcised as only capable of that sign: but males and semales
both ought to be baptized. The infants males were to be circumcised the eighth
day because seven days they were legally unclean. Lev. 12. 2. 3. and 22. 27
Exo. 22. 30,
But the seed of the faithful are not to be reputed unclean. Ergo, no set
time is appointed for baptism. Circumcision as other Ceremonies did
distinguish the Jews from the Gentiles; but Christ now of two has made one.
Ephesians. 2* 15.
Circumcision signified Christ to come, Baptism is the seal of the New
covenant made in Christ already come. And so in the degree of grace given, some
difference may be put: The other differences alleged in the considerations
with the reasons thereof are not so clear and undoubted: for Baptism is not
tied to the first day of the week: and the Jews might gather an Assembly on
the eighth day as occasion required and it might be appropriated to the Priests
and Levites though done in private: But in whatsoever they agree or differ we
must look to the institution and neither stretch it wider, nor draw it
narrower then the Lord has made it. For he is the Institutor of the
Sacraments according to his own good pleasure. And it is our part to learn of
him, both to whom, how, and for what end the Sacraments are to be administered,
how they agree, and wherein they differ. In all which we must affirm nothing
but what God has taught us, and as he has taught us.

Secondly, as for the Proposition it self; certain it is, Circumcision and
the Passover were to be administered only to the visible members of the
Church, e. to men in Covenant, professing the true faith; But that in Abraham's
time none were visible members of the Church, which joined not themselves in
Church orders to the family of Abraham, we have not learned. In the first
Institution of Circumcision, we find that God gave it to Abraham, as the Seal
of the Covenant formerly made with him: But of any Church covenant or order
whereunto Abraham's family should enter before Circumcision we read not.
Melchizedeck, Lot, Job, etc. were not only visible Believers under the
Covenant of grace, but visible members of the Church, according to the order
and dispensation of those times. We read not (you say) that Melchizedeck, Lot
or Job were circumcised, but that is no good reason to infer negatively that
they were not Circumcised. We read not that John the Baptist, or the Apostles,
or the 500. brethren were Baptized, Etiam si daremus nullam legi ab Apostolis
excommunicationem non tamen sequeretur ita esse, quum satis constet non omnium
singularia Apostolorum gesta perscripta fuisse. Bez. de Presb. p. 7. Et si de
Melchizedeck and Iobo quae huc adferuntur non sunt extra controversiam. Nam
foedere cum Abra. inito non excluduntur ij qui ante erant in foedere sed
accensentur foederi. Ita autem se habuit Melchizedeck, etc. omnino enim consors
promissionis divinae fuit ante foedus cum eo initum. Genesis 17. Job vero and
credens fuit promissionibus foederis and de sententia veterum fuit circumcisus
etiam haereditaria circumcisione a paterno maternoque sanguine. Vt eleganter
scribit author libri de vera Circumcisione qui Hieron. ad scribitur. Iun.
animadv. in Bellar. contrav. 4. lib. 3. cha. 16. not. 13.
we must not forthwith conclude, that they were not initiated by that seal.
Moreover, if they were not Circumcised, it may be the Institution of that
Sacrament was not known unto them, or the Author of Circumcision (upon whose
will and pleasure they must depend) did not command it unto them, or require
that they should join themselves in Covenant with Abraham's family: and in that
case if they had Circumcised themselves they had transgressed. But then the
reason why they were not circumcised was not this, that they were not (as you
speak) in Church order: but because Circumcision was appropriated to Abraham's
family by divine Institution in some special and peculiar respects belonging
to the manner of Administration. After the Church of the Jews was constituted
(when we can no more imagine that there was a Church among the Gentiles, then
that there are Christians among the Barbarians at this day) we find none must
be admitted to the Passover that was not first Circumcised, but nothing was
required of a stranger to circumcision, but that he profess the true faith,
and avouch the God of Abraham to be his God, which of necessity must be done
before he could be reputed a visible Believer, or under the Covenant of promise.

Thus a learned and reverend divine, Circumcision was a seal of the covenant,
Io. D. exam of tents p 309.
that God made with Abraham concerning Christ that should come as concerning
the flesh of Isaac and so of Jacob of whom were the 12 tribes who were the
Israelites, etc. Romans 9. 4. 5. So that as in Abraham's time none were bound to
be Circumcised but those that were of his family as being borne there or
bought, and so brought thither which were not of his seed: So afterward none
were bound to be Circumcised which were not borne in the family of Jacob and
Patriarchs, or joined to them. And after their coming out of Egypt none were
bound to be Circumcised but the children of the Jews (then the only Church of
God,) and those that desired to join unto them. The sum is thus much, God
gave circumcision to Abraham as a seal of the Covenant but whether it was
given to other believers in his time it is (at least) a thing uncertain. And
if they were not Circumcised it was by reason of the special Institution of
God, and peculiar manner of administration of the Covenant of promise which in
some respect was proper, to the family of Abraham, and not common to all the
visible members of the Church at that time in Church fellowship and order.
Afterward when there were none in covenant but the seed of Jacob or strangers
professing the faith of Abraham, circumcision was not to be administered to any
man who was not in Covenant nor any man to be admitted to the Passover who
was not circumcised. This is the most that can be said with any probability:
But hence it will not follow by just analogy or proportion, that the seed of
the faithful must not be admitted to Baptism, or visible believers be
received to the Lords Supper unless they be set members of some particular
congregation united in Church order. Thirdly, presupposing therefore that
Melchizedeck, Lot and Job, were not Circumcised, we say there is not the like
reason of Circumcision and Baptism in this particular. For, first if
Circumcision was ever appropriated to the family of Abraham, and might be
communicated to other visible Believers, it was in the first Institution and
administration; but in the first Institution and administration of Baptism, it
was not observed that believers should be first gathered into a political body
or Christian church membership, Mat. 3. 7.
and then baptized. John the Baptist baptized such as came to him confessing
their sins. The Apostles baptized Disciples, Io 4 2.
such as gladly received their doctrine, believed in Jesus Christ, Act. 2 37.
38. 41. and 8 37. and 10. 47. 48.
and received the gifts of the holy Ghost, before they were gathered into
Christian Church order, or made fit members of a Christian congregationall
Assembly.

2 If Circumcision was by special Institution given as a privilege to the
Males of Abraham's Family, Melchizedecke, Job, Lot, and other visible Believers
were not bound to join themselves as members to Abraham's family, or desire
and seek to be circumcised: But they that have received the doctrine of
salvation, believe Christ, and profess the faith, are bound to seek, and
desire the privilege of the seals in an holy manner.

3. Melchizedech, Job, and Lot were not only visible believers, but visible
members of the Church, according to the manner of dispensing in those times:
but the Seals (as you confess) belong to all believers knit together in
Church Covenant.

4. If circumcision be appropriated to the family of Abraham, it is because the
Covenant sealed by circumcision is peculiar to Abraham's posterity, (sc.) that
Christ should come as concerning the flesh, of Isaac. But Baptism is the seal
of the Covenant of grace without any peculiar or special tie or respect.

5. You contend, that Baptism did belong to such believers as were members of
the then Jewish Church, which cannot stand, if Abraham's family did answer to a
Christian society or congregationall Assembly; Just reason therefore may be
given why circumcision was dispensed only to the males of Abraham's family,
when baptism is not to be limited only to the set members of a particular
society; and if this consideration be applied to the purpose, instead of
saying, Circumcision and the Passover were to be administered only to the
members of the Church, you must say Circumcision was to be desired of or
administered unto all the true approved visible members of the Church. And if
there be the same reason of both, then all visible approved members of the
Church must not desire nor be admitted to the seals, but this conclusion you
will not acknowledge.

Answ. 4. Consideration.
THey that are not capable of the Church censures, are not capable of the
Church privileges: but they that are not within Church Covenant are not
capable of Church censures. Ergo. The proposition is evident, The Assumption
may be proved, 1 Corinthians. 5. 12. What have I to do to judge them that are
without. Now to be without is not only the case of Heathens and
Excommunicates, but of some believers also, who though by external union with
Christ they are within the Covenant of grace, yet being not joined externally
to the visible body of Christ (a particular Church) are in regard of visible
Church communion said to be without. To this purpose is this text alleged by
other Divines also, as Dr. Ames Cas. of consci. l. 4. c. 24. q. 1. resp. 5.

Reply.
FIrst, men are capable of Church censures in two respects, either in having
the power of the keys, and authority to dispense them according to God, or as
subject to the censures of the Church. In the first sense, many are capable of
Church privileges that are not capable of Church censures, as the seed of
Christian parents, children and women. You say you admit to the seals the
known and approved, and orderly recommended members of any true Church: but to
fellowship in the censures, admittance of members, and choice of Officers
only, the members of that particular Church whereof they and we (any of us)
stand members. In the second sense also many are capable of Church privileges
who are not subject to Church censures: as the children of Christian parents
are capable of baptism, the known and approved members of any true Church are
capable of the Seals in other Congregations among you who are not subject to
the censures of that other Society. Spiritual communion in public prayer is a
Church privilege, which is not denied to visible believers and godly persons,
though not in Church order, and so not in subjection in your sense to Church
censures.

Secondly, a person baptized is not baptized in that particular congregation
only, but into all Churches, and every particular Church where he comes he
has all the privileges of a baptized person in respect of his baptism, and
is so to be esteemed by them. Now the privilege of a baptized person who is
able to examine himself, and walks in the truth, is to be admitted to the
Lords Supper. All circumcised persons had right thereby to eat the Passover in
any society, in the place which God should choose to put his Name there. Exodus
12. 4. 47. Deuteronomy. 16. 1, 2. So all baptized persons have true and entire right
to the Lords Supper in every true Church where God has set his Name.

Thirdly, there is not the same reason of every Church privilege, for one may
have right to some, who is not to meddle with others. The members of one
society may hear the Word, join in Prayer, and receive the Sacraments in
another, when they are not to meddle in the election and ordination of their
teachers. The Ministers of the Gospel may preach the Word, and administer the
Sacraments in another congregation, and hereto he needs no other calling but
that God offers an opportunity; there is much need of his help, and he is
entreated, or has leave from them in place or office; but he is not to admit
members into the society, or cast them out that be admitted. And if the Pastor
of one Church shall preach or administer the Sacraments in another, contrary to
the liking and approbation of the Society and Governors, though the act be
irregular, it was never esteemed a nullitie; but if he shall presume to
excommunicate the members of another society, without the consent or the
Church, and approbation of Pastors and Teachers, under whose charge and
jurisdiction they live, it has been judged a mere nullity. Therefore the
proposition is not so evident as to be taken without proof, that they have no
power to admit a believer into communion in any Church privilege who have no
power to excommunicate.

Fourthly, that visible believers baptized into a true Church professing the
true faith, and walking in holy obedience, and godly conversation, that they
and their seed should be judged such as are without in the Aposles sense, 1.
Cor. 5. 12.
because they be not externally joined as set members to some particular
congregation in Church Covenant is affirmed, not proved.

1. It has, and may fall out many times through the ignorance, rashness, or
pride of a prevailing faction in the Church, that the true members of the
Catholic Church, and the best members of the orthodox visible flock, or
congregation of Christ may be no members of any distinct visible society. And
shall their posterity be esteemed Aliens and Strangers from the Covenant, and
debarred from the Sacraments, because their parents are unjustly separated from
the inheritance of the Lord? Surely as parents unjustly excommunicated do
continue still not only true members of the invisible body, but visible
members of the flock of Christ: so the right of Baptism does belong to the
Infants of such parents, though not actual and constant members of this or
that present assembly in Church order.

2. If they be without, because no members of a politic body or spiritual
fellowship: then all members which are of one society are without to another:
For they that be not of the body are not capable of Church censures, or
subject to the authority one of another. And so not being under the judgment
of that particular Church to it they are without; whereas in ancient and
modern times distinct Societies did communicate together, admit and receive
each other as brethren, to testify their fellowship in the faith. If the
reason whereupon the Apostle says the Church of Corinth was not to judge them
that were without, was because they were not within the Church of Corinth, and
so not under their censure or judgment: this holds true of them that be of
another society admitted to the Sacrament, as well as of such as be no set
members desiring to be received to the Lords Supper.

3. (The fornicators of this world) do they not explain whom the Apostle
points unto by the title of being without, ver. 10. 11. such as had not
received the covenant of grace.

4. Church order is necessary we deny not; but this order that a man should
be a constant and set member of a particular society by covenant, to make him
a true member of the visible Church, or to give him title or interest to the
public order, this is not taught of God.

5. Paul divides all men into two ranks, the first and greater without; the
last and lesser within: but that believers who have received the holy Ghost,
and have been baptized into Jesus Christ, that they and their children should
be reckoned among them that are without, that we read not in this nor any other
Scripture, 1. Joh. 2. 19.
but in phrase of Scripture heretics themselves are within the Church. 1. Cor.
11. 19.


6. The believers not yet gathered (as the godly learned think) into a certain
distinct body are called believers, brethren, disciples; but that they should
be comprehended under them that are without, it has not been believed in the
Church.

7. Without (faith the Apostle whether alluding to this place or not, let
others judge) are dogs, Rev. 22. 15. (...). 1. Tim. 3. 7. (...), and Script.
ethnici apud patres audiunt. (...). Matthew. 8. 1^. Ephesians. 2. 12. Rob. against
Ber. p. 101.
inchanters, whoremongers, not such as are called faithful and holy, walking
in integrity, believing in and professing Jesus Christ to be their Savior.

8. They that are without in the Apostles sense are Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the covenant of promise, having no hope,
and without God in the world: but we hope you will not pass such rash and
unadvised censure upon your brethren, who be not gathered into your society as
set members.

9. Let the interpretation stand, and he is without, not only who is no set
member of some congregationall Assembly, but he that is not subject to the
censure of the community of that particular combination few or many, with, or
without Officers. And so all the reformed Churches in the world who ascribe the
power of the keys to the Presbitry or Classes, and not to the community, and
some amongst your selves (if not the most) shall be without also.

And therefore we cannot think approved Christians desiring to be received unto
the Sacrament, either to be without, or incapable of Church censures for the
time being if they should offend, though not set members of any particular
congregation: for desiring baptism for their children or themselves to be
admitted to the Lords Supper for the time they put themselves under the
ordinance of Jesus Christ there. And as they are members for the time, so they
might be proceeded against according to the rule prescribed by our Savior, as
they would proceed with an offending member.

10. If upon just and good reason a passage of Scripture can be cleared to
prove that for which it was never alleged by any writer, we are not to except
against any truth of God, because it wants man's testimony. Only if we
desire credit in such cases, our reasons must be weighty and convincing. But
for your exposition of this text of Scripture, as yet we have not observed one
substantial ground, or approved author to be alleged. Doctor Ames showing the
necessity of Christians joining themselves to some particular Church, gives
this reason, Quoniam alias fieri non potest quum conturbentur signa illa quibus
fideles ab infidelibus discerni possunt. 1. Cor. 5. 12. But herein Dr. Ames
manifestly shows that by them that are [without] heathens, and unbeleevers
must be understood, and not believers and godly men though of no particular
settled society for the time, for thus we conceive he argues. The signs and
evidences whereby the faithful are to be discerned from unbeleevers, must not
be confounded: but unless Christians make themselves actual members of a
Society or Church, the signs whereby the faithful are discerned from
unbeleevers, will be obscured and darkened. And if this be his reason how can
that text of Scripture be alleged for confirmation, unless by [men without]
Infidels be understood. Again Doctor Ames in the same book, lib. 4. ca. 27.
speaking of Infants to be received, it is required (he says) that they be in
the covenant of grace in respect of outward profession, and estimation in
respect of their parents, and that there is hope they shall be instructed and
brought up in the same covenant. 2. That Baptism does most properly belong to
those infants whose parents, at least one of them is in the Church, and not
without, because baptism is a sign and seal of the covenant of grace. 3.
That children that are cast forth are in charity to be esteemed the children
of Christian parents, when there is no just cause of presuming the contrary,
that in admitting unto baptism a difference must be put between the Infants
of those who in some sort belong to the Church, but openly break the covenant
of God, and the children of others.

1. Because a distinction must be observed in holy things between the clean
and unclean; seeing else the ordinance of God cannot be preserved from all
pollution. To say nothing of that which he adds touching the baptism of
Infants borne in fornication, excommunication, and Papists, which is more then
sufficient to clear his meaning in the former passage. To this may be added
that he holds it not necessary that Christians should gather themselves into
a particular society, but as opportunity and occasion should offer it self. So
that it was never his mind to censure them who be not gathered into
Church Covenant, because they want means or opportunity as men without in the
Apostles sense.

His judgment is further manifested in his second Manuduction, pa. 33. So many
parish Assemblies of England (says he) as have any competent number of good
Christians in them, united to worship God ordinarily in one Society, so many
have the essence and integrall form of a visible Church, and all they have
entire right to Christ, and to all the means of enjoying him, how ever they
are defective in the purity of their combination, and in the complete free
exercising of their power, whereupon a reverend Mr. Io. D. Apol. Sect. 40.
exam. p. 182.
Elder now among you draws this conclusion, Ergo to dischurch them wholly, and
to separate from them as no Churches of Christ, or to deny baptism to the
Infants of their known members is not warrantable by any rule of Scripture that
I know, nor justified by any assertion or practice.

Answ. 5. Consideration.
WE may add hereunto for a fifth Consideration, the evil and pernicious
consequences of extending communion in Church privileges beyond the bounds of
Church fellowship: for thus, 1. The extraordinary office of the Apostles, and
the ordinary office of Pastors and Teachers will be much confounded, if the
latter be as illimited as the former in the execution of their office beyond
the bounds of their own particular Churches. 2. The distinction of Church
assemblies from the confused multitude is abroagated, if without membership in
a particular Church the parents may communicate with the Churches in the Lords
Supper, and their seed in baptism. 3. The Church shall endanger the profaning
of the seals, and want one special means whereby the grace and piety of men
may be discerned and made known; for if without respect to their Church estate
men of approved piety (as you say) are to be admitted to fellowship in the
seals, how shall their piety be approved to the Church not by their own
report of themselves alone without attestation of such as are approved by the
Church; and how can such bear witness to their approved piety, who against
light refuse to profess subjection to the Gospel of Christ by orderly joining
themselves in fellowship with some approved Church of Christ as members thereof
when they have opportunity thereunto, seeing such fellowship is an action of
piety required of all believers in the second Commandment; and true piety
frames men's spirits to have respect to all Gods Commandments. And we have had
much experience of it, that men of approved piety in the judgment of some
have been found too light, not only in the judgment of others, but even of
their own consciences, when they have come to trial in offering themselves to
be members of Churches, with such a blessing has God followed this order of
taking hold of Church Covenant by public profession of faith and repentance
before men be admitted to the seals; but this means of discovery of men's
piety and sincerity would be utterly lost, if men should be admitted unto the
Lords table without entering in Church Fellowship.

Reply.
IF it be repugnant to Divine Institution to admit of approved Christians
lawfully baptized, walking in the faith, members of the visible Churches, and
partakers of Church privileges among us to the Lords Supper, What though this
inconvenience do arise sometimes through man's corruption it should be
otherwise; and we must ever consider of the nature of Gods ordinances in their
right use, etc. Rob. against Ber. pa. 213.
or their children to baptism, because they be not entered into Church
fellowship according to your order, then it is unlawful though no such evil
consequences are to be feared.

But if by accident some abuse should fall out, the evil is to be prevented by
all lawful means: Respondit caam nullam fuisse cur Io. Bapt. istos accedentes
rejiceret ut qui ad ejus bapt. venirent cum peccatorum agnitione nec ipse
potestatem haberet eos excommunicandi etiamsi fuissent excom. digni. Beza de
Presb. p 23.
but the faithful are not utterly to be debarred of the order of God, whereto
they have right and title by his free grant and gracious invitation. And no
question but the seals of the Covenant may be profaned many times when it is
not in the power of the dispensers to put back or expel such as profane them.
If the Congregation shall admit of, or tolerate an unworthy member, the
Churches privileges are profaned; and yet we conceive you will say the Pastor
is not faulty in receiving him, when the Church does tolerate unworthily, if he
do what pertains to his office to keep the holy things of God from contempt.
But in the case propounded there is no fear or danger of such consequences
necessary to follow: for the question is not of all sorts at randame, Recte
sane quis illos a sacris prohibuerat, etc. etsi sit tam sceleratus quispiam
quam esse existimatur tum si tale judicium sibi quisque sumat quae mox fuerit
Ecclesie facies? sed preterea tenendum est istud in hoc negotio inita cujuspiam
cons. non probabillas rectam alterius consciam. Id. pa. 26. Id in privatorum
arbitrio relinquere ut alibi diximus and periculosum nimis and toti Ecclesiae
valde damnosum fuisset. Id. p. 80.
but of Christians professing the faith entirely, lawfully baptized, known, and
approved to the consciences of the wise and judicious visible members of the
Churches of Christ among us often admitted to the Lords Table, whether these
either sufficiently known unto you, or orderly recommended may upon desire and
suite themselves be admitted to communicate in the Lords Supper, and their
children to be baptized, what fear is there now that the extraordinary office
of the Apostles, and the ordinary office of Pastors and Teachers shall be much
or little confounded? Is this to take as illimited power as the Apostles did in
the execution of their office? How shall this tend to abrogate the distinction
of Church Assemblies from the confused multitude? or how is the profanation of
the seals thereby endangered?

You ask if without respect to their Church estate men of approved piety (as
we say) are to be admitted into fellowship in the seals, how shall their piety
be approved to the Church, not by their own report of themselves alone, etc. Do
not you say the same, That there be many godly persons, and of approved piety
among us, who are not approved by their own report of themselves (unless ye
will take their wisdom, faith, patience, courage, constancy, and holiness
of life for their report) approved, we say by as ample and sufficient
testimony as the Apostles exacted of them whom they received into Church
fellowship, or can be required of members admitted unto the privileges of the
Church, if men will follow the Lords direction, or as you can give to
ordinances members of your societies. You profess high respect of your
brethren in old England, but it seems you judge them insufficient to give
orderly testimony of the sincerity and uprightness of approved Christians,
well known unto them, and living among them, which two cannot well agree. We
speak not of such who against light refuse to profess subjection to the
Gospel of Christ to join themselves orderly in fellowship with some approved
Church: But of such as do with all readiness profess subjection, and walk
accordingly, and heartily desire to join themselves to the most pure and
complete Churches so far as they are taught of God, or have opportunity
thereunto. And if exception be taken against them only, who refuse against
light to submit themselves to the Gospel; by what rule do you proceed when you
judge men to refuse against light, or debar them who do not refuse against
conscience, but for lack of opportunity. No doubt (as you say) but now and
then a man of approved piety in the judgment of some may be found too light,
yea and in the judgment of his own conscience when he has come to trial.
And no question but many have been admitted by the Church, who indeed and truth
are much too light; and some refused who deserved better then they that cast
them off, we will not dispute what errors have been committed, nor what
blessing ye have found upon your proceedings; we heartily beseech the Lord to
keep your congregation pure, make his ordinances more and more effectual, go
before you in the way wherein you should walk, and multiply his mercies upon
you in the same. But this we are persuaded, and therefore we speak, that in
debarring godly Christians from the Lords Supper, and much more the children of
those parents who are in covenant with God, from holy baptism you exceed your
commission you have received from God, and go beyond your due bounds. And
notwithstanding your circumspection more worthy and faithful Christians have
been denied when of less worth, and meaner sufficiencies have passed, and been
by you received.

Answ. 6. Consid.
NOne have power to dispense the Seals but they that are called to the office
of Ministry; and no man can be so called till first there be a Church to call
him, Demonstr. of Disc. ca. 4.
seeing the power of calling Ministers is given by Christ unto the Church; and
thence it follows, that all those that desire to partake of the Seals, are
bound to join themselves in Church state, that so they may call a Minister to
dispense the Seals unto them. And this duty by the appointment of God lies
not only upon some Christians, but equally upon all: ergo no Christian can
expect by the appointment of God to partake in the Seals till he have joined
himself in Church fellowship, and in the call of the Minister. And indeed
seeing a Church, and a Minister called by the Church, is of such necessity for
the dispensing of the seals, it may seem unreasonable that some Christians
should be bound to become a Church, and to call a Minister that so the seals
may be dispensed, and other men (when this is done) have equal liberty to the
seals who refuse to join unto the Church.

Reply.
THis conclusion is not to the question propounded, for we speak of such as
cannot, not of such as refuse to join themselves unto the Church; or if they
do not join, it is not out of contempt or wilful neglect of Gods ordinance,
or desire of carnal liberty, and not to be in subjection to Christ, but for
lack of opportunity, or through their fault that should admit them but do
not. For if in any of your Churches you shall require more of members to be
admitted then Christ the chief Shepherd of the flock does, or press that upon
their consciences which they cannot consent unto, if they shall fit down
quietly for the time and serve God in private, when they cannot enjoy Church
privileges, it is your fault and not theirs. And they may more justly
challenge the Assembly as injurious and tyrannical, then you them as wilful
despisers of Gods ordinance. We accuse not the wisdom and discretion of your
Chuches, but we know the zealous multitude may sometimes be rash; And when a
reason is craved of your judgment, why you do debar the most known and
approved Christians which come over, and their children from the seals of the
covenant, we dislike you should put this note upon them, as if against light
they refused orderly to subject themselves to the Gospel of Jesus Christ: What
warrant you have thus to censure, what use of this manner of dispute we leave
it to your godly wisdom to judge. In the Consideration it self there are many
Propositions couched together, which we must examine severally as they have
reference to the conclusion intended, and then try whether it can be raised
from them.

The first Proposition, That none have power to dispense the Seals, but they
that are called to the office of Ministry, is freely granted.

The second, That no man can be so called till first there be a Church to call
him, needs explication. For by the Church you must understand the community
of the faithful, as they are one body, without officers or guides. And such a
Church there cannot be without a Ministry to call and admit them into
Church Fellowship. The Apostles baptized not themselves, but by the help of
others, and those not called of the people to be baptized, 1 Cor. 1. 17. The
Apostles appointed by election, Elders in every city or Church. And so there
was a Church before Elders were set over it, but this Church was a society of
believers by baptism admitted into Church Fellowship. There can be no Church
to call a Minister to feed the flock, and dispense the seals, till they have
received the doctrine of salvation entirely, and by the seal of initiation be
solemnly received into the society of men professing Christ. A company of men
converted to the faith being unbaptized, may and ought to desire baptism, but
they have not power to elect and choose one among themselves to dispense the
seals unto the rest for ought is to be found in Scripture: Rob. against Bern.
likely veiwed. p. 40.
The Churches constitution into which Christians are to gather themselves must
be Apostolical, and not one day or hour younger in nature and form of it,
thus the first Church of the New Testament. But it can never be showed in
Scripture that any society of unbaptised persons did first choose from among
them a Pastor or Teacher by whom they might be baptized: you cannot produce one
example or other proof in the Scripture, of one man teaching the Gospel
ministerially but he was baptized, and a member of a true Church, or of a
society who made choice of a Pastor and teacher, but they were baptized
persons.

The third Proposition, That the power of calling Ministers is given by Christ
unto the Church, must also be rightly understood: For by the Church must be
meant the society of the faithful, not only ingrafted into Christ, set into
the state of salvation, and made heirs apparent of everlasting blessedness,
but solemnly entered and enrolled into the society of Christ's flock, and
acknowledged members by free admission into the Seals of the Covenant. Again,
by the Church if we speak of ordinary calling, must not be understood of the
faithful alone, but their guides and officers together with them, who are to
go before the rest, and to direct and govern them in their choice. Neither
can we say, that any two or three believers linked together in society do
make such a Church, as to whom the calling of the Minister does belong: but
that right was given by Christ to such Churches as were gathered and
established by the Apostles. The Church has a Ministry of calling one whom
Christ has described, that from Christ he may have power of Office given him
in the vacant place. But the office, gift, and power of the Ministry, is
immediately from Christ and not from the Church. The Church does neither
virtually nor formally give power to her Officers but ministerially only, as
ministering to him who has power and virtue to confer it. And this right of
election is so given to the community and body of the people, that if they
have consented to give away their right, or if it be taken injuriously from
them, the calling of the Minister notwithstanding may be true, and ministerial
acts done by him that is thrust upon the people without their consent may be
effectual to their salvation. A wrong it is altogether to debar the godly of
their consent in the calling of such as must watch for their souls; but it
makes not the calling it self a mere nullitie; for then many Churches in the
world within a few hundred years after Christ should have wanted both
ministry and Sacraments, and they would have been altogether destitute of both
ministry and Sacraments for many hundred years.

The fourth, That all those who desire to partake in the Seals, are bound to
join themselves together in Church State, that so they may call a Minister to
dispense the Seals unto them, will not follow from the former rightly
understood. We deny not but Christians are bound to join themselves together
in holy fellowship, if God give them opportunity: but they must partake in the
Seals before they can join themselves together in Church State. And such as
for lack of means and opportunity cannot join themselves into such an
estate, or be dispersed by persecution, or be destitute of Pastors and
Teachers, may for a time desire and seek to have the seals dispensed unto them
by the Pastors and Teachers of other Societies, with whom they hold communion
in the faith. The people also who are deprived of right and liberty to choose
their Pastor, may desire and seek to have the Seals dispensed unto them by him
who is set over them. If a company of Infidells should be converted to the
faith, they must desire to partake in the ordinances of grace before they could
join together in a Church Way to call a Minister of their own, who might
administer the Sacraments unto them. To make Disciples and baptize are joined
together. And if these Propositions be allowed for current, John 4. 2.
a nation or people plunged into Idolatry or Infidelity, Math. 28. 19.
or otherwise dischurched, cannot by ordinary means recover into a
Church Estate, wherein they may lawfully and according to Gods appointment
desire or expect that the Seals of the Covenant should be dispensed to them.

The fifth Proposition rises beyond measure, that no Christian can expect by
the appointment of God to partake in the Seals till he have joined himself in
Church Fellowship and the calling of the Minister. We conceive you will not
say that children and women have to do in the call of the Minister (for women
they are debarred by their sex as from ordinary Prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35.
so from any other dealing wherein they take authority over the man) If some
part of the Congregation do not consent in the election of Pastors or
Teachers, Tit. 2. 11, 12.
have they not right to expect to have the Seals of the Covenant dispensed to
themselves or their seed? Rob. ag. Ber. pa. 206.
If the people be deprived of that liberty to choose or call their Minister,
must they separate from the ordinances of worship there dispensed, and from the
Congregations as no true Churches? If some persons by the providence of God
live in such places where they cannot join in Church Fellowship and call of
the Minister (as suppose the Christian wife, child, or servant) nor lawfully
remove to any such Society, must they and their children live as strangers and
aliens from the Covenant of grace, wherein they may not expect to partake of
the Seals* In Infidels be converted to the faith, must they not partake in the
Seals, because they cannot join in Church Fellowship and call of the
Minister, before they be admitted to Baptism?

Here you say the people must join together in the call of the Minister,
before they can lawfully desire to be admitted to the Seals. Rob. ag. Bern.
pa. 239.
And another has zealously affirmed (It is a presumptuous sin in any to choose
an Officer not trained up and tried (scil.) in the debating, discussing,
carrying, and contriving of Church-affaires, as also in admonition,
exhortation, and comfort, publicly occasioned and so manifested) Lay these two
together, and let it be considered how long many a poor soul converted to the
faith must be compelled to want the comfort of Gods ordinances. Besides, if a
people be joined together in Church Fellowship, and have called a Pastor to
feed and watch over them, we desire (not words but) proof why the poor
dispersed Christians wanting means or opportunity to join themselves together
into society, ought not to desire, and that others be not bound in conscience
to afford them the comfort of Gods ordinances.

If the Propositions may stand for good, I fear we shall scarce find that
ever in ordinary way, the Sacraments were lawfully dispensed or received in the
Christian Churches of God since the first foundation of them. Now the premises
being liable to so many exceptions, the conclusion to be laid upon them, will
fall of it self. And thereunto we oppose the direct contrary. That Infidels
converted to the faith, or godly Christians, formerly visible believers, known
and approved members of Congregations professing the entire faith, and joining
together in the lawful use of the Sacraments for substance according to the
Institution, may and ought to desire and expect the Seals of the Covenant to
be dispensed to them, and to their seed, though for the present they be not
joined into such Church State and call of Ministers as you require.

Answer 7. Consideration.
THat our practice may not be censured as novell and singular, give us leave to
produce a President of the like care observed and approved by public
countenance of State in the days of Edward 6. of blessed and famous memory,
who in the year 1550. granted Johannes Alasco a learned Noble man of Poland
under the great Seal of England, liberty to gather a Church of strangers in
London, and to order themselves according as they should find to be most
agreeable to the Scriptures. Among other godly orders established in that
Church, that which concerned the Administration of Baptism to prevent the
profanation of it we will repeat in Alascoes own words. Baptism in our
Church (says he) is administered in the public Assembly of the Church after
the public Sermon: for seeing Baptism does so belong to the whole Church
that none ought to be driven thence, which is a member of the Church, nor to be
admitted to it who is not a member of it, truly it is equal that that should
be performed publicly in the Assembly of the whole Church, which belongs to
the whole Church in common. Again, he adds; Now seeing our Churches are by
Gods blessing so established by the Kings Majesty, that they may be as it were
one parish of strangers dispersed throughout the whole City, or one body
corporate (as it is called in the Kings grant) and yet all strangers do not
join themselves to our Church, yea there are those who while they avoyde all
Churches, will pretend to the English Churches that they are joined with us,
and to us that they are joined to the English Churches, and so do abuse both
them and us, lest the English Churches and the Ministers thereof should be
deceived by the impostures of such men (and that under color of our Churches)
we do baptize their Infants alone who have adjoined themselves to our
Churches by public confession of their faith, and observation of
Ecclesiastical discipline. And that our Churches may be certain that the
Infants that are to be baptized are their seed, who have joined themselves
thereto in manner aforesaid, the father of the Infant to be baptized (if
possible he can) or other men and women of notable credit in the Church, do
offer the Infant to Baptism, and do publicly profess that it is the seed
of the Church, yet we suffer no stranger to offer Infants to Baptism in our
Churches, who has not made public profession of his faith, and willingly
submitted himself to the Discipline of the Church, lest otherwise they who
present their children to Baptism, might in time plead that they belong to our
Churches, and so should deceive the English Churches and their Ministers. To
those which presented Infants to Baptism, they propounded three questions, the
first was; Are these Infants which ye offer the seed of this Church, that they
may lawfully be here baptized by our Ministry? etc. Answer, Yea. This Instance
is the more to be regarded, because Alasco affirms in the preface of that
Book, that this liberty was by the King granted to them out of his desire to
settle alike reformation in the English Churches, which in effect you see the
same with out practice in this particular.

Reply.
THe practice of the Church of strangers in London, recorded by John Alasco, is
far different from your judgment and practice, not in some by-circumstances,
but in the maine point in question; for your judgment is that true visible
believers, baptized and partakers of the Lords Supper in other Churches not yet
gathered into Church Estate or fellowship, have no right or interest in the
Seals, (they nor their seed.) But this Church of strangers held no such
opinion as their own words (which you have omitted) do plainly speak. And
Paul testifyeth (say they) that by Christ's Ordinance the Church it self
without exception of any member of it, is to be accounted clean or holy by the
ministry of Baptism. Whence we may easily see, that Baptism does neither
belong to those who are altogether without the Church, nor to be denied to any
member of the Church. Secondly, They held communion with the Church of England
as one and the same with theirs. For so they profess: Yet nevertheless, that
we may openly show that the English Churches and ours are one and the same
Church (though we differ somewhat from them both in language and Ceremonies) We
do not refuse that the English may as public witnesses of the Church offer
the Infants of our members to Baptism in our Churches, if they have both the
use of our language and a certain testimony of their piety. As in like manner
our members are accustomed to offer the Infants of the English to Baptism in
the English Churches. If your judgment be this of the English Churches, your
judgment in acknowledging us members of true Churches, and practice in
debarring visible believers and their seed from the Seals, are opposite the
one to the other. Thirdly, This order was observed by them to prevent the
impostures of some, who whilst they avoided all Churches, pretended to the
English, that they were joined to the strangers, and to the strangers that they
were joined to the English. But you debar known Christians who desire to
join themselves with you, not to prevent impostures of them who avoyde all
Churches: yea, you debar them as men having no right to the Sacraments,
because they be not in Church Fellowship: and herein you can show no president
ancient or modern, either from Scripture or Monuments of the Church: And as
your practice is without example, so without warrant from the word of God. And
this is the maine reason why we cannot consent unto you in this particular
which we thus propound.

1 Reason.
THat sacred order which God has set in his visible Church for all his Saints
to keep and walk by, that is religiously to be observed. But for men to set up
that as a necessary order which God never allowed, approved, or commanded, is
great presumption. Now the Lord has not ordained that a man should be a set
member of a particular Society, or body politic of faithful people joined
together in spiritual Church Fellowship by Covenant, before he be admitted
unto the Lords Supper, or that the parents should be actual visible set
members of some particular distinct body before their children be baptized.
They that believe in Jesus Christ have received the word of promise and walk
therein, they and their children are within the Covenant, and have right and
title to the Seals of the Covenant, but in their order, the infants to
baptism, parents baptized, to the Lords Supper. And if in that state by divine
grant they have interest to the Sacraments, the Church in debarring them
because they be not yet grown into one distinct separate society of mutual
covenant, does exceed the bounds of her commission. For a ministerial power
only is committed to the Church to admit or refuse them who are to be admitted
or refused by authority from God: But the Church if she thrust believing
parents from the Supper of the Lord, and their seed from baptism; she denies
these benefits to them who by the grace and gift of God have lawful right and
title thereto.

1. For first, the baptism of John was true baptism, and truly administered by
him: And they that were baptized by him received the seals of the Covenant,
and were esteemed members of the visible Church: But John never demanded of
them who came to his baptism whether they were entered into spiritual
fellowship by mutual covenant one with another. Matthew. 3. 6, 7.
This was not then known to be a necessary and essential point in the
lawful, due, and orderly administration of the Sacrament. The disciples of our
Savior made and baptized disciples professing the faith, but not combined into
Church State or fellowship. Ioh. 4. 2. and 3. 22.
The Apostles commission was first to teach the Gentiles, Matt. 28. 19. 20.
and then to baptize them having received their doctrine. And this they
carefully observed in the execution of their ministry upon grounds and reasons
common to them and us: for as soon as any man or number of men gladly received
the doctrine of salvation, and gave their names to Jesus Christ, if they
desired to be baptized forthwith they accepted them, never excepting, that they
were no set members of a distinct visible congregation. When the first 3000.
converts, being pricked in their consciences, came to Peter, Act. 2. 37, 38.
and the rest of the Apostles, saying, Men and brethren, what shall we do?
Peter returns this answer, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name
of Jesus, etc. For to you is the promise made, and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, etc. As soon as the Samaritanes believed, Philip who
preached the things that concerned the kingdom of God, Act. 8. 12.
they were baptized both men and women. Act. 8. 47. and 11. 16. 17.
When the Eunuch asked of Philip, See here is water, what does let me to be
baptized? he answers not if thou be first received as a set member into a
visible congregation thou may: Act. 8. 37.
but if thou beleevest with all thy heart, thou may. Can any man forbid
water (says Peter, speaking of the Gentiles upon whom was powered the gift of
the holy Ghost) that these should not be baptized who have received the gift of
the holy Ghost as well as we? At that time it was not held a bar sufficient to
keep them from the Sacrament of baptism, Act. 10. 47. and 11. 16. 17.
because they were not set members of a distinct society, which had it been
essential to the lawful and orderly administration of the Sacraments,
questionless it had been observed in the first Institution and administration
of them. Annanias baptized Paul before he was any set member of a
congregationall Assembly. Lydia and her household, Act. 9. 18.
the Jailer and his house were baptized without regard to their Church Estate.
Act. 16, 14. 33.
For in the same night which he was converted, he was baptized with all his
household. And this was done not by the Apostles only upon special
dispensation, 1. Cor. 1. 17.
but by others upon grounds and reasons common to them, Matthew. 28. 19.
and all ages, viz. because they were disciples, Act. 2. 41. and 8. 12, 13, 37.
believed, gladly received the Word, had received the holy Ghost, were called,
Helv. conf. c. 20. Gallic. Sect. 35. Anglic. and ab eo neminem qui velit
profiteri nomen Christi ne infantes quidem Christianorum hominum, etc. Scot.
conf. c. 23.
and the promise was made to them, and to their seed, even to all them that
were afar off.

Now if the Apostles dispensed the seals to them that were not in
Church Fellowship upon common grounds, Belgic. act. 34 Zengerm. conf. de Bapt.
infant. pro. 44. Argent. conf. ca. 17. Saxon. confess. ca. 14. Palab. conf.
Sect. ad usum vero ipsum, etc.
it is not essential to the lawful dispensation of the seals, that all
partakers should be under such a covenant. If the baptized disciples,
believers, such as gladly received the Word, and had received the gift of the
holy Ghost, then the seals of the Covenant belong unto such, and by the grace
of God they have right and title unto those privileges.

2. As we received the Sacraments from God by divine Institution; so must we
learn from him, how and to whom the same are to be administered, observing what
he has commanded without addition or diminution. But we have learned from
Christ the Author of Baptism, and the constant practice of the Apostles (the
first dispensers of these holy seals who best understood the mind and pleasure
of the Lord herein) that such as be called of God to whom the promise is made,
who have received the gifts of the holy Ghost, believed in the Lord Jesus,
professed their faith in him, and repentance for sins past with purpose of
amendment for the time to come, that such have right unto, and desiring it
ought to be received unto Baptism, and are greatly wronged if they be deprived
of that unspeakable benefit.

3. By a lively faith a man is made a living member of Jesus Christ, and has
internal communion with him by the entire profession of Christian faith joined
with conformity of life in righteousness, and holiness, and fellowship of
love, he is a member of the visible congregation or flock of Christ, though no
set member of a free distinct independent Society. And Baptism is the seal
of our admission into the congregation or flock of Christ; but not evermore of
our receiving into this or that particular society as set members thereof.
This latter is accidental to baptism, not essential. It may fall out to be
so, but it is not ever necessary; nor is the Sacrament to be denied, nor can
we say it is imperfectly administered where it cannot be attained. For the
Catholic Church is one entire body, made up by the collection and agregation
of all the faithful unto the unity thereof; from which union there arises
unto every one of them such a relation to, dependence upon that Church
Catholic as parts use to have in respect of the whole. And this holds true,
not only of sound believers in respect of internal fellowship with Christ
their head, and so one with another; but of all men professing the true and
entire doctrine of faith and salvation in respect of them that hold and
profess the same faith of Christ, and worship God according to his will;
whereupon it follows that neither particular persons, nor particular guides,
nor particular Churches are to work as several divided bodies by themselves,
but are to teach, and be taught; and to do all other duties as parts conjoined
to the whole, and members of the same flock or society in general: And so
believers professing the faith, and walking in holiness, may and ought to be
admitted to the Seals as actual members of the Church of Christ, and sheep of
his pasture, though not set members of one congregationall Church.

4. Not to insist upon this here, that it has and may fall out many times
through ignorance, rashness, or pride, of a prevailing faction in the Church,
that the true members of the Catholic Church, and the best members of the
Orthodox visible flock, or Church of Christ, may be no actual members of any
distinct Society, and shall they for this be accounted men out of Covenant,
and their posterity be esteemed aliens and strangers: but if they be in
Covenant, then are they holy in respect of the Covenant, and their children
holy as pertaining to the Covenant, Rob. against Ber. pa. 92.
and have right to the Sacrament of initiation. Thus Mr. Rob. frames the
argument. The Sacrament of Baptism is to be administered by Christ's
appointment, Matthew. 28. 19.
and the Apostles example only to such as are (externally, Act. 2. 41. and 8.
12 13. 37. and 10. 47. and 2. 39.
and so far as men can judge) taught and made disciples, do receive the Word
gladly, do believe, and so profess, have received the holy Ghost, and to their
seed. 1 Cor. 7. 19.
And thus the Church of God ever since the Apostles days understood the
covenant and promise, and their practice in receiving believers and their seed
to the Seals of the Covenant was answerable, as might be showed at large, if
it was not a thing confessed. Hereunto you answer.

Answer.
Where the holy Ghost is given and received (which was the case of the
Centurion) and where faith is professed according to Gods ordinance (which was
the case of the rest) there none may hinder them from being baptized, viz. by
such as have power to baptize them. In the Instances given baptism was
administered either by Apostles or Evangelists, not ordinary Pastors: the
persons baptized, if they were members of Churches, had a right to baptism in
their state, and the Apostles being Officers of all Churches might dispense the
seals to them where ever they came, which yet will not warrant ordinary
Officers to do the same. Nor is it improbable but that all these were in
Church Order, Aret. on Act. 18. 1. is of opinion, that the Centurion had a
constituted Church in his house; Act. 8. 27.
the Eunuchs coming to Jerusalem to worship, argues him to be a Proselyte,
and member of the Jewish Church not yet dissolved: and therefore upon the
profession of the Christian faith capable of Church privileges at that time.
As for Lydia and the Gaylor it appears that in the beginning of the Gospel
there was a Church at Philippi which communicated with Paul as concerning
giving and receiving: Act. 4. 15.
As he expressly says, before his departure was from Macedonia, which departure
was immediately upon the Gaylors conversion. In which respect what should
hinder that Lydia and the Gaylor should first be joined to the Church, and then
to be baptized though it be not mentioned in that story? As neither there is
mention of a Christian Church, which Paul mentions in his Epistle to the
Philippians. At least it is probable that Lydia was a member of the Jewish
Church, because she is said to be one that worshipped God. But if any man think
they were not members of any Church yet baptized, though we see not how it will
be proved, yet if it were so, the object does no whit weaken the argument,
which speaks of the ordinary dispensation of the seals, and not of what was
done in an extraordinary way. So that suppose that in the cases alleged,
baptism dispensed to some that were not in Church Fellowship, yet the examples
of the Apostles and Evangelists in so doing will not warrant ordinary Pastors
to do the like. The reason of the difference why Apostles and Evangelists might
administer Baptism out of Church Order, whereas Pastors and Teachers may not,
is double. 1. Because their calling gave them illimited power over all men,
especially Christians wheresoever they came. But we do not find that ordinary
Pastors and Teachers can do an act of power, but only over their own Church,
which has called them to watch over them in the Lord. 2. Because they were
assisted with an immediate direction and guidance of the holy Ghost, in the
places of their administration in the cases alleged. But ordinary
Church Officers are to walk according to ordinary rules of the Scripture in
the dispensation of the Seals, and not to expect immediate inspirations and
extraordinary revelations for their help in such cases. This difference
between Apostles and ordinary Church Officers must needs be acknowledged, or
otherwise a man might from their example justify Baptism in private houses.

Reply.
THis Answer stands of many parts, wherein things doubtful are affirmed, and
that which more weakeneth the force of the consideration before alleged, and
the Answer it self, then of the reason whereunto it is applied. For

First, If where the holy Ghost is given and received, and where faith is
professed according to Gods ordinance, there none may hinder them from being
baptized, viz. by such as have power to baptize them: Then either men that have
received the holy Ghost, and profess the faith, be members of the Church, or
Baptism is not a privilege of the Church, then it is not essential to the
first Institution of Baptism, that it should be dispensed to none but such as
were entered into Church Fellowship, or were set members of a congregationall
Assembly. Then the Apostles in dispensing the Seals unto such, or commanding
them to be dispensed, did walk according to the rules of Scripture, and upon
grounds common to them and us, viz. they admitted them unto the Sacraments who
had right and interest to them, according to the mind and pleasure of the
Institutor, not extraordinarily revealed, besides the common rules, or by
special dispensation and prerogative excepted from the common rule, but made
known in the Institution it self. And then the difficulty remaining is only
this, whether a Pastor or Teacher has authority from Christ to dispense the
Seals of the Covenant to one who has right and title to them, and does
orderly desire that benefit because he is not as yet received as a set member
of that particular society which your practice in admitting of set members of
other Congregations unto the Seals does manifestly convince. For if both have
equal interest unto the Seals, the Pastor upon lawful suite and request has
equal authority to receive the one as well as the other.

Secondly, In the particular Instances given, it is not probable that Baptism
was evermore administered by Apostles or Evangelists; For before the death of
Christ, the Disciples baptized when they were properly neither Apostles nor
Evangelists: Joh 4, 2, 3. and 3. 27.
After the death of Christ (not to insist upon conjectures whether any assisted
the Apostles in the baptizing of the first three thousand converted) it is not
certain, whether Peter baptized Cornelius and his family, Act. 10. 48.
or commanded others then present with him to baptize them: Whit. de Sacra. q.
3. de Bap. cap. 2. pa 260.
the words may be read: Et jussit eos baptizari in nomine Domini. Sir. and
Arab. Praecepit eis ut baptizarentur. The Interlineary gloss leaves it
doubtful, Associis suis vel a seipso. Others are of opinion that Peter did
baptize them himself. It cannot be proved that Philip and Ananias were both
Evangelists, Act. 8. 12. and 9. 18.
when the one baptized the Samaritans and the Eunuch, 1 Cor. 1. 17.
the other Paul. Paul himself baptized but a few as he testifies of himself,
and reason to convince that others converted by his preaching were baptized by
Evangelists, we know not any. And if Philip, Ananias, and others might baptize
such as had right and title to the Seals, being as yet no set members of any
particular Congregation: and a Congregation destitute of their proper Pastor,
may desire another to baptize their Infants, and dispense the Sacrament of the
Supper to them in that their necessity. And if the members of one Congregation
may lawfully communicate in another, then may the Pastors of particular
Congregations upon occasion admit to the Seals of the Covenant such known and
approved Christians, as have right and title thereunto, and duly and orderly
require the same; for of all these the reason is like and perpetual.

Thirdly, It is very improbable that the persons baptized, were in Church State
or order. If they were members of the Jewish Church not yet dissolved, this is
not to the purpose; for men have not right to Baptism, because they were
members of the Jewish Church, but because Disciples and (as you say) joined
together in Covenant, and have fellowship and calling of their Minister, who is
to dispense the Seals unto them. And Baptism is the Sacrament of initiation,
not into the Jewish but the Christian Churches. Secondly, when you say, the
Seals in ordinary dispensation are the privileges of the Churches. There are
no Ministers but of particular Churches. Baptism and the Lords Supper are to
be administered only to the members of the Church. No society may lawfully
desire the Seals, unless they have joined in the choice and calling of their
Minister. Believers not yet joined in Church Order are without. Do ye not in
all these understand a Christian society, Against B. pa. 88.
united in a Church Way, etc. which cannot agree to the members of the Jewish
Church, not yet dissolved. Thirdly, The constitution of the Church (says Mr.
Robin.) is the orderly collection and conjunction of the Saints into and in the
Covenant of the New Testament; but the members of Jewish Churches not yet
dissolved, were not in such constitution. If the Eunuch and Centurion were
proselytes and members of the Church of the Jews; The Samaritanes whom Philip
baptized were not so. And that any Gentiles, or the Gailor whom Paul baptized
in the Apostles times, were set members of a Christian Assembly before
baptized, is very strange. If there was a Church at Philippi, yet the Gailor
who was baptized and converted the same night, could not be a set member by
solemn admission before Baptism. It is said the Apostles baptized these
persons in an extraordinary way. But in this practice of the Apostles two
things are to be considered. 1. The circumstance of the action. 2. The quality
or substance of the act. In some circumstances the baptizing of some of these
persons might be extraordinary, but the substance and quality of the action
was grounded upon rules perpetual and common to us with them.

1. That is done in an extraordinary way, which by peculiar privilege of
dispensation is made lawful to some one or few men, which is unlawful to all
others, not having the same dispensation, but where the ground and reason of
the action is common: we must not conceive the thing to be done in an
extraordinary way by special dispensation. What was done by the Apostles upon
special revelation and immediate direction, besides the ordinary and common
rule, in that we are not to immitate or follow them, because we have not their
warrant. But what they did upon reasons and grounds reaching unto us no less
then unto them, in that we have the same liberty, allowance, or commandment
that they did walk by. In one and the same action there may be and often is
something ordinary, something extraordinary or peculiar to special times or
persons. So it was in the Apostles administration of the Seals: but in every
place where they came by illimited power (as you speak) they did baptize
Disciples, if they did baptize; this was proper to them, and could not be
communicated to any others by them; For there is no passage of Scripture which
teaches this, that one Officer may communicate his power to another, or do
that which particularly belongs to his office by a Deputy: But that they
baptized believers professing their faith in the Lord Jesus, and repentance
toward God, such as had gladly embraced the Word, and received the gifts of
the holy Ghost: this was common to them with all Pastors and Teachers, because
they did it, not by power illimited or special dispensation, but upon this
standing perpetual reason, that the promise was made to them and to their
seed, and to as many as the Lord shall call, that they had received the holy
Ghost, and the kingdom of heaven belonged to them. And if the grounds and
reasons of their practice be common reaching to us, no less then unto them,
the practice it self was not extraordinary. To say nothing that this Answer
will not stand with the former; for if the parties baptized were set members of
particular Societies, the Apostles did not baptize them in an extraordinary
way, they did it by the guidance and direction of the Spirit, that is true, but
not by guidance of dispensation, or prerogative, whereby that was made lawful
without such inspiration had been unlawful. But they were infallibly guided to
do that which was according to the word of God, and might stand for our
direction: that in case it be orderly desired a Pastor has authority in his
own Congregation, to receive known and approved Christians to the seals of
the Covenant, has been proved before. If the Apostles dispensed the seals
only to the Church, Disciples, faithful, who received the doctrine of
salvation with gladness of heart, and were partakers of the holy Ghost, then
they dispensed the seals in an ordinary way, for such have title and interest
to the seals by the Institution and appointment of God. And every Pastor by
his Office may and ought to dispense the seals unto such, within the bounds
and limits of his calling: But the Apostles dispensed the seals only to the
Church, Disciples, faithful, etc.

2. An Argument follows necessarily from particular example to a general;
when one particular is proved by another particular, by force of the similitude
common to the whole kind, under which those particulars are contained: But the
practice of the Apostles in baptizing Disciples and faithful, by force of
similitude common to the whole kind, agrees with the practice of Ministers
receiving to Baptism the seed of the faithful, though as yet not set members
of any particular society, In some circumstances there may be difference when
yet the reason is strong, if the difference be not in the very likeness it
self whereupon the reason is grounded. One circumstance that is material to
the point may overthrow the likeness pretended, and twenty different
circumstances, if they be not to the point in hand make no dissimilitude. Now
in this matter we speak of, no circumstance is or can be named why we should
think it lawful for the Apostles to baptize Disciples as yet being no set
members of particular societies, and the same should be unlawful in all cases
for ordinary Pastors in their particular Congregations, though it be desired.

3. What is done by extraordinary dispensation, that is lawful for them only
who have received such dispensation, and by them cannot be communicated to
others. But the Apostles baptized by others seldom by themselves, as has been
showed.

4. We might urge the rule which a reverend Elder among you, gives in another
matter, See J. D. Ap.
(scil.) Those examples which are backed with some divine precept, Sect. 12.
pa. 152, 153, 154.
or which are held forth in the first Institution of an ordinance, being part
of the institution, or which were the constant lawful actions of holy men in
Scripture, not civil but sacred so bind us to imitation, as that not to
conform thereunto is sin. For the Assumption to this Proposition, it is
plain and natural: But the practice of the Apostles in receiving the
faithful, Disciples, etc. is backed with divine precept, held forth in the
first Institution, and was their constant lawful practice, agreeable to the
practice of all others who were employed in that service; Ergo, etc.

5. In the first consideration, you prove the Seals to be the privilege of
the Church in ordinary dispensation, by this passage of Scripture, Then they
that gladly received the Word were baptized: but if Apostles baptize by
extraordinary dispensation in your sense this testimony is insufficient for
that purpose.

2 Reason.
OUr second reason. In due order, the Seals belong to them to whom the grant
is given, viz. Baptism to the seed of the faithful, and the Lords Supper to
believers, able to try and examine themselves: But the grant is vouchsafed to
the faithful and their seed, forgiveness of sins, sanctification, adoption,
and what other good things are promised in the covenant of grace are the grant
or good things sealed in the Sacrament. But those are granted to believers
according to the covenant; and they are so linked together, that under one
promised all are understood; and if one be vouchsafed, none is denied. When God
promises to circumcise the heart, the forgiveness of sins is employed. And
when Circumcision is said to be the Seal of the righteousness of faith, Deuteronomy.
30. 6.
the circumcision of the heart by spiritual regeneration is included. Romans 10.
6, 7, 8, 9.
To whomsoever then the spiritual gift, or inward grace of the covenant is
given and granted, Romans 4. 11.
to them the Seals of that gift and grant does belong in their due order. Genesis
17. 11, 12 and 26. 4.
But the spiritual gift or grace which is the thing signified in the
Sacrament, is freely granted to true believers, who have received the doctrine
of salvation, and walk in the ways of truth and righteousness, therefore the
privileges of the Seals belong unto them. To this you answer.

The scope of the Apostle in the place, Romans 4. 11. is not to define a
Sacrament, nor to show what is the proper and adequate subject of the
Sacrament; but to prove by the example of Abraham that a sinner is justified
before God, not by works but by faith. Thus as Abraham the Father of the
faithful was justified before God, so must his seed be (that is, all believers
whether Jews or Gentiles, circumcised or uncircumcised) for therefore Abraham
received circumcision which belonged to the Jews to confirm the righteousness
which he had before, while he was uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of
both: but lest any one should think his circumcision was needless if he was
justified by faith before circumcision; he adds that his circumcision was of
no use as a seal to confirm to him his faith, and the righteousness which is
by faith: yet as Justification is not the only thing that Circumcision sealed,
but the whole Covenant also made with Abraham and his seed was sealed thereby;
so Abraham is to be considered in using circumcision not simply, or only as a
believer without Church relation, but as a confederate believer, and so in the
state and order of a visible Church. Though the Apostle makes mention of the
righteousness of faith as sealed thereby, which was not that which served for
his purpose.

Now that Circumcision also sealed the Church Covenant, may appear from Genesis
17. 9. 10, 11. where you may find that Abraham and his seed, though believers,
were not circumcised till God called them into Church Covenant; and there is
the same reason and use of Baptism to us which serves to seal our
justification as circumcision did, Act 2. 38.
yet not that alone, but also the whole covenant with all the privileges of
it, Gal. 3. 26. 27.
as Adoption, Sanctification, and fellowship with Christ in affections, Tit. 3.
5.
and the salvation of our souls, Mat. 20. 23.
and the resurrection of our bodies. And not only the covenant of grace which
is common to all believers: 1 Pet. 3. 21.
but Church Covenant also which is peculiar to confederates. 1 Cor. 15. 19.
According to that of the Apostle, By one Spirit we are baptized into one body,
1 Cor. 12. 13. And by one body he means that particular Church of Corinth
whereunto he writes and says, Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in
particular, ver. 27. And ergo Church Membership is required as well to the
orderly partaking of Baptism as it was of Circumcision. Nor do we find that
circumcision was administered to all that were in the Covenant of grace (as all
believers were) but only to such of them as were joined to the people of the
God of Abraham. Melchizedech was under the covenant of grace, so was Lot, so
was Job and his four friends; yet we no where read that they were circumcised,
nor do believe they were. So that if Circumcision was administered to none but
those that were joined together in Abraham's family, and to the Church of God
in his seed, then may not baptism in ordinary course be administered to any
believers now, unless they be joined to the Church of Christ, for parum par
est ratio. But the first is true, Ergo, the second also.

Reply.
THe particulars in this Answer has been examined already, and might have
well been passed over, because it is tedious to repeat the same things again
and again. Two things are affirmed by you.

1. That the scope of the Apostle, Romans 4. 11. was not to define a Sacrament,
nor to show what was the proper and adequate subject of a Sacrament. But this
weakneth no part of the argument, for if the Apostle do not fully define a
Sacrament, nor mention every particular benefit or prerogative sealed in the
Sacrament; yet he shows sufficiently to whom the Sacraments in due order do
appertain, even to the heirs of salvation, to them that are justified by
faith, and walk in the steps of our Father Abraham. And thus we argue from the
text of the Apostle. They that are partakers of the good things sealed in the
Sacrament, to them belong the Seals of the Covenant, according to Gods
Institution. But they that are justified by faith are partakers of the good
things sealed in the Sacrament, to them belong the Seals of the Covenant
according to Gods institution. If Justification be not the only thing that
Circumcision sealed, this is nothing to the point in hand. For the gifts of the
holy Ghost is not the only thing that is sealed in Baptism: But you confess
in your Answer immediately going before, that they have right to baptism who
have received the holy Ghost; and the reason is the same of Justification.
Besides if Justification be not the only thing that is sealed in the
Sacrament, it is one principal thing which does infer the rest. For the
blessings of the covenant of grace in Christ are inseparable; where one is
named, others are employed: and where one is given, no one is absolutely
wanting. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Christ is made of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption: whom God does justify, them he does sanctify, and them he will
glorify.

2. The second thing you affirm is, that not only the covenant of grace which
is common to all believers; but Church Covenant also which is peculiar to
confederates is necessary to the participation of the Seals. This sense your
words must bear, or else they reach not the point in hand: but this is that
which should be proved substantially, and not barely affirmed; and which (as we
conceive) is contrary to the first Institution of the Sacrament, and the
lawful practice of John the Baptist, our Savior Christ, his Apostles, and all
others who are recorded lawfully to administer the Seals. In Genesis 17. we find
the first Institution of circumcision recorded, and that it was the seal of
the Covenant to Abraham and his seed, to them that were borne in his house, or
bought with his money: but we find no mention of any Church Covenant besides
the covenant of promise which God made with Abraham. There is no mention of any
Church Order into which Abraham's family was now gathered more then formerly.
God gave circumcision to Abraham and his seed as a seal of the righteousness
of faith; but that this family was first gathered into Church Order as you
speak we cannot believe, because the Scripture says it not whether Lot, Job,
Melchizedech were circumcised or not, we will not dispute; but if they received
not the seal, we cannot think the reason to be because they were not in
Church Order as those times required, if any such thing had been required, we
cannot think that either they were ignorant of it, or that they walked against
their light: But according to the dispensing of those times we judge as they
were visible believers, so they walked in that Church Fellowship which God
prescribed; and therefore if circumcision had been the seal of such
Church Covenant as you conceive, it should have been given to them no less
then to Abraham's family. But of this sufficient is said before. As for Baptism
it is the seal of the whole Covenant, which the passages quoted prove it to be.
Whether it be the seal of our fellowship which Christ in affliction, and the
resurrection of our bodies, we leave it to your consideration: but that it
should be a Seal of a Church Covenant which is peculiar to confederates, that
to us is very strange. That it is a solemn admission into the Church of
Christ, and that of necessity it must be administered in a particular society
(though in the passage to the Corinthians the mystical body of Christ be
understood) will easily be granted. But that it is the seal of any other
covenant but the covenant of grace we cannot digest.

The Sacraments are of God, and we must learn of God for what end and use they
were ordained. But by the Institution or Baptism recorded in Scripture we have
learned it belongs to the faithful, to disciples, to them that are called of
God: and as for any other covenant necessary to the right participation of the
Seals, there is deep silence of it in the Institution, in the lawful and
approved practice of the first dispensers of these sacred mysteries. Enough
has been said to this matter already, but we will conclude it with the words
of that reverend Author whom we have cited many times before upon occasion.
Afterward (says he) John the Baptist walked in the same steps, and by the
same rule administered baptism in the Church whereof he was a member, Matthew. 3.
6. 7.
required of all that came to his baptism a profession of repentance, Mark 1.
4. 5.
and amendment of life for remission of sins whereof baptism was a seal,
Luke 13. 3 16.
and preached Christ to them. This order our Lord Jesus Christ after his
resurrection established to continue in the Christian Churches, Matthew. 28. 19,
20.
giving a commission to his Disciples to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles,
Mar. 16. 15, 16.
and to gather all such as should believe through the world, as a testimony to
them, that the righteousness of faith did belong to them also, and not to the
Church of the Jews only. Accordingly the Apostles and servants of Christ were
careful to observe this rule in their administering baptism. Thus Peter when
he saw those three thousand souls pricked in their hearts, preached unto them
concerning repentance, Act. 2. 37. 47.
remission of sin, Christ, the promise, baptism, faith, amendment of life,
baptized those that gladly received his word, and testified the same by joining
together in the profession thereof. Act. 8. 12. 14.
The same course Philip took with the Church that was gathered in Samaria,
where many were baptized, but none till they professed their belief of the
Gospel, and their receiving of the Word of God. And therefore it is said
expressly, When they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the
kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and
women. Act 9. 11-17.
When Ananias was commanded to go and baptize Paul, he objected against it at
first, till the Lord assured him that he was one to whom the Seal of the
Covenant belonged, and then he went and did it.

When Peter and those that came with him saw that the holy Ghost fell on
Cornelius, Act. 10. 43-48.
and those that were assembled at that time in his house, whilst he spoke
these words, To him give all the Prophets witness, that through the Name of
Jesus whosoever believes on him shall receive remission of sins. Peter
demanded, Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized, which
have received the holy Ghost as well as we? In this catalogue we see profession
of faith and repentance required in them that were admitted to partake in the
seals; but there is not a word of Church Covenant, either in the Institution or
administration of the Seals before they were admitted to them. That Christians
are solemnly ingrafted into the body of Christ, and into particular Societies
by the Seals, is a truth acknowledged on all sides: but that ever it was
deemed necessary, that a Christian should be a set member of a particular
Congregationall Church before he were admitted to the Seals, or that by divine
institution any such thing is ordained as necessary thereunto, that upon the
grounds before mentioned we deny, and cannot account it less then an addition
to the institution. For if the Sacraments be seals of the Covenant of grace,
and baptism by divine Institution belong to Disciples, faithful, Saints, who
have gladly received the Word of grace, are justified by faith, sanctified by
the Spirit, adopted to be the children of God by grace, and heirs apparent to
the kingdom of heaven; then to debar such from the Seals, and their seed
from Baptism, because they be not in Church Covenant (as you speak) is an
addition to the ordinance of grace, and many ways injurious to the people of
God.

V. POSITION.
That the power of Excommunication is so in the body of the Church, that what
the Major part shall allow must be done, though the Pastors and Governors and
the rest of the Assembly be of another mind, and that peradventure upon more
substantial reasons.

Answer.
IF the Question had been, V^d. Park. Pol. Ecclesiastica. l. 3. c. 1, 2 etc.
Whether the power of Excommunication lies in the body of the Congregation,
consisting of officers and members; our Answer should be Affirmative, and
according hereunto is also our practice, and we hope your judgment and ours
are not different herein: But seeing the Question is, Whether it is so in the
body of the Congregation, that what the Major part does allow that must be
done, though the Pastors and Governors, and the rest of the Assembly, do
dissent upon more substantial reasons. Our Answer is Negative, viz. that the
power of Excommunication is not sealed in the Congregation, neither ought it to
be so in any of the Churches of the Lord Jesus, who ought not to carry matters
by number of votes against God, as this Position implies, but by strength of
rule and reason according to God. The power of the Apostles was not to do
things against the truth but for the truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8 and not for
destruction, but for edification, 2 Cor. 10. 8. And the same may be said
concerning the power which God has given to the Church, and if any Church
among us have swerved from the rule (which is more then we know) we do not
allow them in such a practice, but should be ready as the Lord should help to
convince them of their sin therein.

Reply.
THis Question is much mistaken, for the demand is not whether in the
Congregation matters should be carried by number of votes against God, as you
interpret the Position, but whether the power of Excommunication so lie in the
body of the Congregation as that sentence must proceed in externo foro,
according to the vote and determination of the Major part, and so whether power
of admission of members do so reside in the community, as that they must be
refused whom the Major part refuse, though the Pastors and Governors and part
of the Congregation be of another judgment, and he admitted whom the Major
part does approve. And though the Church has received no power against God,
but for God, yet in the execution of the power no doubt the members of that
Church may be of different judgments and affections, wherein the one side or
other does err, and is deceived. Now the Question hereupon moved is, whether
the power of the keys be so given and committed to the society of the
faithful, as that in external Court that act or sentence must stand and be in
force which the greater part shall determine amongst them which hold the power
of the keys to be given to the Church. Some Fen. Theol. lib. 7. Park. de Pol.
lib. 3. c. 1. J. D. Apol. 27. Sect. exam. pa. 238, 239, 240.
distinguish betwixt the power it self which they give to the Church, and the
execution and exercise of it, which they confine to the Presbytery: Rob.
against Ber. pa. 182. By two or three are meant the meanest communion or
society of Saints, with or without Officers. Rob. against Ber. Certain
observations, p. 4. Only he that is of the true visible Church and furnished
with the power of Christ, the keys of the kingdom for the Censure can
admonish his brother in order, and those degrees which the word prescribes
Mat. 28. 15. 17. Id pa 99. The power as to receive in, so to cut off any member
is given to the whole body together of every Christian Congregation, and not to
any one member apart, or to more members seque^tred from the whole, using the
meetest number for pronouncing the Censures, Id. pa. 124-126.
Others give the power of the keys with the exercise thereof to the whole body
of the Church, or if in the dispensation they attribute any thing to the
Officers, it is but as servants of the Church, from whom they derive their
authority. By Church also some understand the community of the faithful,
together with their officers and guides. And here lies the stone at which they
of the Separation stumble, and which we conceive to be your judgment and
practice, wherein we required your plain answer, with your reasons, but have
received no satisfaction. You refer us to Mr. Parkers reasons to prove the
power of the keys to belong to the whole Church, who are of far different
judgment from Mr. Parker in the point it self. And if your judgment and
practice be according to that of the Separation (which we fear) you dissent
from him, and we cannot but dissent from you upon these considerations.

1. No power agrees to the multitude or community of the faithful, but that
which is given them of the Lord by his positive Law; For the whole spiritual
power for the gathering and government of his Church is given to Christ as
Mediator. And if the power of the keys be derived from, If the brethren have
liberty in the ordinance of Prophesying, they have also liberty in the other
ordinance of Excommunication, for they are both of the same nature; Look to
whom Christ gave the one key of Knowledge, to them he gave the other key of
Discipline, Rob. against B^rn. pa, 238, 239.
and communicated by Christ unto his Church, of necessity it must draw its
original from divine positive Law, and can agree to none but as it is
communicated. But the communicated power of the keys with the execution
thereof, Christ has not given immediately to the whole multitude, but to some
persons and Officers designed and appointed thereunto. Peruse the several
passages of Scripture, wherein power and authority of preaching the Gospel,
administering the Sacraments, binding and loosing is given to the Church: and it
is apparent that distinct several persons are spoken of, and not the whole
community; Go teach all Nations, Mat. 28. 19 28.
and baptize them, etc. Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. Joh.
20. 21, 22. and 21. 15, ^6.
Feed my Lambs, feed my sheep, etc. Were these things spoken to the whole
community, or to special persons?

2. If Christ gave this power to the community, was it from the beginning of
the Church, or took it effect after the Churches were planted and established
by the Apostles. Not the first, for then the Apostles themselves should derive
their power from the community and society of the faithful, Gal. 1. 1.
which they did not, Ioh 21. 22.
but from Christ immediately, both in respect of gifts and graces, Whit. de
pont. q. 8. c. 2. 3.
their calling it self, and the designation of their persons.

It is said the power of the keys given to the Apostles was given to the
Church, In tuitu ejusdem tanquam finis and totius. And it is true the Apostles
were given to the Church, and the power they received was for the good of the
whole; but this is not enough. That power may be said to be received
immediately by the Church, as the first receptacle of it, and from it derived
to others. But this power must be in the community as the first subject, from
whom it comes to the Officers. As the power of seeing is not only given in
tuitu hominis, as the end of it, and the totum to whom it agrees, but is in
homine as the first subject from which it comes to the eyes 1 Cor. 3. 22. and
4. 1.
The Apostles and other Governors were given of Christ for the Church as for
their end, 1 Timothy 3. 15. Authoritas rectorum pro dono quidem ecclesiae a
Christo data est, sed non pro dono absoluto, ut penes totam Ecclesiam resideat
cui datur, sed pro dono conditionali, ut rectoribus ipsis communicetur ad
totius aedificationem, Park. de Polit. lib. 3. cap. 8.
and all their authority was given unto them for the Church as for the whole:
but the authority it self was immediately derived from Christ, and is not in
the Church as the immediate subject, nor derived from the Church, but from
Christ the King of the Church. The authority of Governors is given of Christ
for a gift to the Church, but not for a gift absolute, that it may reside in
the power of the whole Church, to whom it is given, but for a conditional gift
communicated to the Governors themselves for the good of the whole. It is one
thing then to ask for what end or use the keys are given, 1 Cor. 12. 7.
another to whom. To every one is given the declaration of the Spirit for
profit, 1 Cor 3. 12.
i. e. for the good of the Church. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
But was this gift given to the community of the faithful first and
immediately? 1 Cor. 4. 1.
No; By gift and possession it was given ^o some, but for use and profit it was
public.

After the Churches were established it took not effect; for then it must be
showed where Christ committed the power of God, first to the Apostles, and
after to the community of the faithful. But that is no where to be found in
holy scripture. Act. 20. 28.
The Ministers and guides of the Church were immediately of Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
4. 8. 11.
from whom immediately they derive their power and authority, 1 Co. 12. 28, 29
by whom they are set over their charge, in whose Name they must execute their
office, 2 Co 5. 19, 20.
whose Stewards, Legates and Ambassadors they are, Tit. 1. 7.
and unto whom they must give an account. Yea, Pastorship is the gift of Christ
no less then Apostleship, and that the more because it is perpetual in the
Church; every Pastor is not immediately called, but the Office and order of
Pastors, the calling, authority and jurisdiction is immediately from Christ,
Successor habet jurisdictione^ ab eo a quo praedecessor, alioqui non vere
succedit. But Pastors and Teachers are the Successors of the Apostles. Whit. de
pont. q. 8. c. 3.
and not from the Church: The Steward is appointed of the Master of the family
alone, and has all his authority and jurisdiction from him: Every Ambassador
in the cause of his embassage does immediately depend upon him from whom he is
sent. But if the function, order and authority of Pastors and Teachers, be
immediately from Christ, then it is not received from the Church as the
immediate receptacle. Thus Protestant Divines dispute against Papists. Fr:
Victor rel. 2. de potest Ecclesiae q. 2. Alphons. de Castr. li. 2. c. 24. de
insta. haeret. Whit. de pont. q. 8. c. 1.
If Bishops receive their power and authority of exercising immediately from
Christ, by mandate, mission, and commission from him, then they derive it not
from the Pope. And if Presbyters receive their order jurisdiction and power of
execution from Christ by his mandate and Commission, then they receive it not
from the Bishop. And by the same reason, if the power of the keys be the
immediate gift of Christ to his Ministers, then they derive not their power and
authority from the people. It is usually objected that the Church cannot
convey what she never had, but the people may Elect their Pastor. Whereunto the
answer is direct and plain. Nothing can give that which it had not formally or
virtually, unless it give it as an instrument ministering to one who has it,
but so it may give what it never had, nor is capable of. A Steward may give all
the offices in his Masters house, as ministerially executing his Masters
pleasure. Electors have not evermore authority over him whom they elect: but
power and authority only to apply that power to him whom they choose. The
power and authority whereunto a Minister is elected, is not in the people that
elect him, but from Christ the King and head of his Church, who out of power
does confer that office upon him. If we consider what men give, or give (...)
universally, it must be deemed that any men can make Ministers, Cham. panstr.
^om. 2. lib. 11. c. 18. sect. 11.
because they give not the office, gifts, or authority, which are from Christ
^^ene.

3. If Ecclesiastical and spiritual power be in the multitude and community
of the faithful, the Church does not only call, but make Officers out of
power and virtue received into her self, and then should the Church have a
true lordlike power in regard of her Ministers.

In the Church the Officers are the Ministers of the people, whose service the
people is to use for administration and executing their judgments, that is,
pronouncing the judgment of the Church (and of God first) against the
obstinate. Rob. against Ber. p. 136. The Officers in the Church are both
Christ's and the peoples Servants and Ministers. Id. p. 165.

For as he that will derive authority to the Church makes himself Lord of the
Church: so if the Church derive authority to the Ministers of Christ, she
makes herself Lady and Mistress over them in the exercise of that authority
over them. For all men know it is the property of the Lord and Master to impart
authority. Did the Church give power and authority to the Pastors and
Teachers, she might make the Sacraments and preaching which one does in order
no Sacraments, no preaching. For it is the order instituted of God that gives
being and efficacy to these ordinances. And if the power of ruling, feeding,
and dispensing the holy things of God, do reside in the faithful, the Word and
Sacraments in respect of dispensation and efficacy shall depend upon the order
and institution of the Society. If the power of the keys be derived from the
community of the faithful, then are Officers immediately and formally servants
to the Church, and must do every thing in the name of the Church, Rule, feed,
bind, loose, remit and retain sins, preach and administer the Sacraments,
then they must perform their Office according to the direction of the Church
more or less, Ames Bel-enerv. tom. 2. l. 3. c. 1. Ministri Ecclesiastici sunt
Ecclesiae tanquam objecti circa quod versantur ministri sunt Christi tanquam
principalis causae and Domini a quo pendent ministri sed nullo modo episcoporum.
seldom or frequent, remiss or diligent. For from whom are they to receive
direction how to carry themselves in their Office but from him or them from
whom they receive their Office, whose works they do, and from whom they expect
their reward? If their power and office be of God immediately, they must do the
duties of their place according to his designement, and to be accountable unto
God: But if their power and function be from the Church, the Church must give
account unto God, and the Officers unto the Church whom she does take to be her
helpers.

If it be said that God will have the Church to choose Officers to execute the
power committed unto her. The answer is, either God will have her elect
officers of his designement to do his work according to that power which he
shall give them, and by his direction, and then they are Gods servants, and not
the Churches, and receive their charge and function immediately from God, and
not from the people: or he leaves it to the arbitriment of the Church, to
choose according to their pleasure such as must receive charge and authority
from her. And then they must execute their office in her name so as shall seem
good unto the Church, and neither longer nor otherwise. For if the Ministers of
the Church be subject to God and Christ by the intervention of the people
only, they have it from them, and not from God: but they preach or administer
the Sacraments, rule, or feed, and if they depend immediately upon the
faithful, viz. two or three gathered together in covenant, they must draw what
in order they are to preach unto them in the name of the Lord; Omnis legatus in
causa legationis suae immediate pendet ab eo a quo mittitur, and instrumento
mandatorum in corrupto est indelebilis.
For from him must the Ambassador learn his arrand from whom he receives his
Commission. We forbear to press the We deny the order of Elders to be
superior to the order of Saints, since it is not an order of mastership but of
service. Rob. against Bern. pa. 201. It were a strange thing that men could
have no command over their servants, as I have often showed the Church Officers
to be her servants. Id. p. 214. The order of servants is inferior to the order
of them whose servants they are: but the order of Church Officers is an order
of servants, and they by office to serve the people, Id. p. 215. 227.
confessions and reasons of such as maintain this opinion, that the officers
of Christ be both of and for the people, and that in relation as the officers
are called servants, the Church may be called Lord.

4. Moreover if the power of the keys be given first and immediately to the
community of the faithful, what reason can be alleged why in defect of
Officers the Church might not rule, govern, feed, bind, loose, preach and
administer the Sacraments, or if any fail in any office, why she might not
supply that want by her power. For the power of the keys does contain, both
authority and exercise, power being given to this end, that it might be
exercised as it is vouchsafed. But the Church when she is destitute of
Officers, cannot exercise those acts of rule, nor by her power supply the want
of any Officer. Only she has a ministry of calling one whom Christ has
described, that from Christ he may have power of office given him in the vacant
place. For these reasons (not to insist on any more) we judge the multitude or
community of the faithful not to be the immediate receptacle of
Ecclesiastical authority, and so the power of excommunication not to belong
to them. If consent of the Churches of God be asked in this point (to omit
others) the Churches of Scotland speak fully and expressly for us, in the
second book of Disci. cap. 1. The Church as it is taken for them that exercise
spiritual functions in the congregation of them that profess the truth, has
a certain power granted by God according to which, it uses a proper
Jurisdiction and government exercised to the comfort of the whole flock. Power
is an Ecclesiastical authority granted by God the Father through the Mediator
Jesus Christ unto his Kirk, gathered, and having its ground in the word of
God, and to be put in execution by them unto whom the spiritual government of
the Church by lawful calling is committed. The policy of the Kirk flowing
from this power is an order or spiritual form of government which is
exercised by the members appointed thereto by the Word of God, and therefore is
given immediately to the office-bearers by whom it is exercised to the weal of
the whole body.

Vt universam scripturam evolvat D. Erastus, nunquam tamen inventurum verba
Ligandi, and Solvendi aliis quam publico ministerio fungentibus, and quidem
metaphorice, divine videlicet and spiritualis potestatis respectu, tribui. Sunt
enim judi^ialia haec verba. etc. Beza de Presb* p 60. See Helvet. conf. ca. 18.
Sect. Nunc ergo, etc. Belgic. confess. art. 3. Argentinens. conf. art. 13.
Bohem. confess. art. 14.

VI. POSITION.
That none are to be admitted as members but they must promise not to depart or
remove unless the Congregation will give leave.

Answer.
OUr Answer hereto is briefly this. We judge it expedient and most according to
rule, that such brethren as are in covenant with the Church, and ours as
fellow members, and have committed their souls to our charge as Ministers,
should not forsake our fellowship, nor obruptly break away from us when and
whither they please; but first approve themselves therein to their brethrens
consciences, and take their counsel in so weighty a matter. For which we
propound to consider these two reasons following. The former is drawn from the
nature of the Church Covenant, which consists in these four particulars.

1. Every member at his admission does openly profess, and solemnly promise,
that by Christ's help assisting, he will not only in general give up himself
(as to the Lord to be guided by him, so) to the Church according to God to be
directed by it, which is no more then the members of the Church of Macedonia,
did in a parallel case, 2 Cor. 8. 5. but also in particular, that he will
perform all duties of brotherly love and faithfulness to all the members of
the body, as of diligent watchfulness over all his brethren, thereby to
prevent sin, so of faithful admonition after their falls to regaine them to
the Lord, from their sin, the former being enjoined, Hebr. 3. 13. And the
want thereof deeply condemned in Cain, that would not acknowledge that duty of
being his brothers keeper, Genesis 4. 9. the latter given in charge to the
Church Members of Israel by the hand of Moses, Levit. 19. 17. and so by Christ
himself, Matthew. 18 15 And by Paul also to the Galat. c. 6. 1, 2.

Secondly, the engagements are not made only by the members admitted into the
Church, but by the Church back again to the member. So that thereby the whole
Church in general, and every member thereof in particular, stand as well in
conscience bound to perform all duties of love and watchfulness to him, as he
does to them; And this we do according to the golden rule of love and equity
enjoined by our Savior, Matthew. 7. 12. fearing that contrary practice of
Scribes and Pharisees so much condemned by Christ, of laying greater burdens
upon others, then we our selves are willing to undergo. Matthew. 23. 4.

3. These promises thus lawfully and mutually made, that member, as also the
whole Church, are bound not only every one for himself, actively to perform
them, but passively also to suffer his brethren to do those offices upon and
toward himself: If he neglect the former, he shall falsify his covenant so
solemnly before God, Angels, and men made, and so not only break promise to
his brother, contrary to Psalm. 15. 4. but also in some sort commit the sin of
Ananias and Saphira in lying against the holy Ghost, condemned and punished
severely by Gods own hand, Act. 5. 3. 5. 10. If he fail in the latter, he
shall not only be guilty of the same sin of breach of Covenant with God and
man as in the former; but shall also be guilty of this folly of despising
counsel so much condemned, Prove. 12. 15. and 1. 7. and shall also proclaim
this his folly and pride by showing to all the Church that he is wise in his
own eyes, and leanes to his own wisdom both reproved, Prove. 3. 7. and 23. 4.
Seeing need of no further light to be held forth by his brethren, then what he
apprehends himself, which is one of the greatest properties of folly.

4. From all these things premised, it appears that we can do no less (and yet
we do no more) then require a member before he depart according to our covenant
thus lawfully, deliberately, and mutually made, to express to his brethren his
desire of departing, and the place and society to which he tends, whether to a
godly Church where he may be edified; or to some corrupt Assembly where he may
be destroyed. And 2. his grounds and reasons which move him so to do, which if
they hold good being scanned by the Word, he may be not only confirmed in his
way by the consent and advise of many, but counseled also how to manage his
departure for his best comfort. And so after all, solemnly with the whole
Churches prayers, and blessings in the name of Christ dismissed: But if his
grounds either be none at all, or weak and sinful, and that his desire of
departing savours of self-will, inordinate love of gain, rash precipitancie,
or a spirit of schism, more strongly then of sound reason, then what can we do
less without breach of Covenant, then in love and tenderness show him his
weakness, dissuade him from his purpose, and refuse to consent. Yet if after
all this we see his spirit steadfastly and stiffely bent for a departure, then
though we dare not act against our light by consenting or counselling, yet if
his sin be not apparent, and danger eminent, we use rather (through
indulgence in cases of like nature) to suspend our vote against him, as not
willing against his will to detain him, abhorring to make our Churches places
of restraint and imprisonment. But if any should object that this argument
holds firm where this Church Covenant is allowed to be lawful, but with some
it is questioned, and with them it avails not. Ans. Some indeed have questioned
the necessity of our Church Covenant, but none (we hope) of these our reverend
brethren that we write unto do question the lawfulness of such a Covenant
being nothing else for the matter of it, but a promise of doing such Christian
duties as the Gospel of Christ requires of all Saints in Church estate; for we
do not herein promise to perform any new duty to our brethren which was not
before commanded us of the Lord, but only revive and renew our purposes afresh
of performing such duties unto that particular body into which we are then
incorporated as were before enjoined in the Word, as to love each other, and to
watch over each other out of love for their good, to be ready to give counsel
to, and to take counsel from each other, Heb. 13. 1.
to prevent sin in them, or to gain them from sin. Pro. 12. 19. and 1. 7.
23.
All which are plentifully and frequently held forth in the Scriptures; for the
defect of which care and watchfulness, all the body shall be wrapped in the same
guilt and punishment with the member that commits the sin, Gen 4. 4. 9.
as the whole Church of Israel was in Achans sin and punishment. Levit. 19.
17.
Mat. 18. 15.
Gal. 6. 1.


Secondly, Its a thing very reasonable, and a known fundamental rule in all
societies, that he that is incorporate thereto, and so participates of the
privileges thereof, should engage himself to conform to all such lawful
rites and orders as are expedient for the well-being of that society, the
contrary whereto will be a thing injurious in him to offer, and confusion to
themselves to accept.

The second ground is drawn from the necessity that may fall upon the body if
every particular member should depart at his own pleasure. For as every
society, so much more a Church of Saints, both from principles of nature and
Christianity also, not only lawfully may, but in duty are bound to endeavor
the preservation of it self, and Ergo timely to foresee and wisely to prevent
all such things as would bring destruction to it self. Now if any member
might, when, whither, and wherefore he please without consent of the Church
depart away from it, this may by unavoydable consequence dissipate the whole;
for if one man may so depart, why may not another also, though never so useful
in that body, and whose absence might much shake the well-being of it: and if
one why not two, six, ten, twenty as well? For where will ye stop seeing any
may plead the same liberty, and if members may so do why not the Pastor and
Teacher also? Seeing they are tied to him by the same relation that he is to
them, and so the principalls falling, the whole building must down: and if
this may be so in one Church, why not in all, and so Christ should have no
settled Church on earth.

Reply.
IT is one thing abruptly to break away when and whither they please, and
forsake fellowship, another thing not to depart or remove habitation, unless
the Congregation will give leave. Also it is one thing mutually to compound and
agree not to depart from each other without consent and approbation, another to
require a promise of all that be admitted into society, that they shall not
depart without the Churches allowance. If such a promise be required of all
members to be admitted, we cannot discern upon what grounds your practice is
warranted. First, you exclude all such as be not set members from the Sacrament
of the Supper, and their children from Baptism, and yet hinder them from
entrance into Church society, because they cannot promise continuance in the
place where they are resident for the present. Here we desire to be satisfied
from the word of God by what you require it. Did the Apostles ever stipulate
with such as desired to be baptized, that they must abide in particular
society, and not remove thence without approbation from the Church? or did
they deny the seals unto them, because they could not make any such promise?
Was it ever heard of in the Church of God from the beginning thereof unto this
day, that any such thing was propounded unto, or required of, members to be
admitted into Church Fellowship? That Church Covenant which is necessary was
not in use in the Apostles times, but the Covenant they entered into bound no
man to this condition for ought we read. They did not prescribe it, no Church
ever yet covenanted it as necessary to the preservation of the body.

Secondly, It pertaines not to the whole Congregation to take notice of, be
acquainted with, or judge of the cause of every particular members removal.
May not a servant remove from his Master to another Congregation? or the father
bestow his son or daughter in marriage to one of another Congregation, but
the whole Church must be called to counsel in this matter? If the Assembly
once grow to be populous, of necessity they must be negligent in, or weary of
such an heavy task; and for the present, for every one to challenge so much
authority over other is usurpation. Let it be showed that ever by divine right
this power was committed to the Church, and then we will confess it to be
expedient and necessary. But till then we think the Church is over ridged in
exacting such a condition of the members, and the members themselves go beyond
their measure as busi-bodies in other men's matters, and things whereof they are
not well able to judge many times, if they arrogate such power unto themselves
we allow not rashness, or precipitancy, pride or self-conceitednesse, we know
it is meet that weighty matters should be managed by Council, but it is not
necessary to bring every particular thing to the whole Church. In the multitude
of Counselors there is peace, but over many Counselors often causes
distraction, and different apprehensions breed delays. The nature of your
Church Covenant, as you describe it, infers not a necessity of bringing
every such business unto the Church; for you bind your selves mutually to
watch over one another, and in love to admonish one another in the Lord, to
prevent sin and to encourage in well-doing, as it concerns every man within
the limits of his place and calling. But this essentially tyeth not any man to
a perpetual residence in one place, for then even occasional absence should
be a breach of Covenant, unless it be by consent and approbation of the Church.

You say in your Covenant you promise to perform no new duty to your brethren
which was not before commanded of the Lord, but only revive and renew your
purposes afresh of performing such duties to that particular body into which
you are then to be incorporated, as were before enjoined in the Word. But in
the word of truth, it is not commanded either expressly or by consequent, that
no member of a Congregation should remove, or occasionally be absent from the
place of his habitation, before he have acquainted the Church whither he goes,
and upon what occasions, and whether the place be dangerous, where he is likely
to be infected; or safe, where he may be edified. These things are matters of
weight and to be undertaken with advice, but the knowledge thereof belongs
not to every particular member of the society. And the Church shall burden her
self above measure if she take upon her to intermeddle in all such occasions.
Neither is it safe to commit the determination of such matters ever to the vote
of the multitude, or weight of reasons, as they shall apprehend the matter. And
if such business must be determined on the Lords day, and to go before the
administration of the Word, Rob. ag. Bern. pa. 230.
Sacraments, and alms, least the holy things be polluted by notorious
obstinate offenders, we fear the time appointed for the exercise of Religion
shall be profaned with unseasonable disputes. Instances might be alleged, if
it were a matter to be insisted upon.

As for the Covenant it self which you mutually enter into, if therein you
exact nothing but what God requires both for trial and stipulation, far be it
that we should disallow it, but if ye constrain men to meddle with things
that belong not to them, and wind them up higher then God would, and strain
every thing to the pitch that you seem here to do in this branch a godly and
sober mind may well pause before he make such promise. All members of the
Church are not equally necessary to the preservatio^ of the whole body; and if
to the removal of some, it were expedient to have the consent, not only of the
whole society, but of neighboring societies, Ministers especially, it is very
much to draw this to the removal or abode of every particular member. And if
any man shall not intermeddle with every business of this kind, as
questioning whether it does belong to him or no, or not ask the advice of the
whole society, as knowing the most to be unfit to counsel in such a case,
does he break his Covenant therein, and so commit a sin in a sort like the
sin of Ananias and Saphira? Judge your selves if in other cases you would not
censure this to be an high incroachment upon Christian liberty, and a strict
binding of men's consciences by humane constitutions. May you not expect to
hear from your own grounds that herein you have devised an expedient, or
necessary rite or custom to preserve the unity, and prevent the dissolution
of the body, which never came into the mind of the Lord Jesus, the Savior of
the Church, and that in so doing (if your exposition will hold good) you break
the second Commandment. Rites and customs expedient to prevent confusion for
the time, let them be observed as customs expedient, and what God requires in
the examination or admission of members, let that take place according to the
presidents given in the Scriptures, and the constant practice of the universal
Church in the purest times. But to press customs only expedient for the
time, as standing rules necessary at all times, and for all persons, to put
that authority into the hands of men which God never put upon them, to oblige
men to intermeddle further in the affairs of men, then the Word does warrant,
to bind the conscience, and that under so heavy a penalty as the sin of
Ananias and Saphira, where God has not bound it, and to debar known and
approved Christians from the Seals of the Covenant, because they cannot
promise as settled members to abide and stay in the society, unless they shall
obtain leave of the Congregation to depart, and to charge them in the mean
season to be men, who against light refuse subjection to the Gospel; this is
that which we cannot approve, which yet we suspect will follow from your
judgment, and desire to be resolved of in your practice. And here we entreat
leave to put you in mind of that which you have considered already, schil.
That the Church and every member thereof has entered into Covenant, either
expressly or implicitly to take God for their God, and to keep the words of
the Covenant and do them, Exodus 24. 37.
to seek the Lord with all their hearts, Deuteronomy. 2. 14. and 4. 3. 4. and 9. 7.
and to walk before him in truth and uprightness: but we never find that
they were called to give account of the work of grace wrought in their souls,
or that the whole Congregation were appointed to be Judge thereof. Ezekiel. 16. 6.
8.
You stand all of you this day (says Moses) before the Lord your God, Nu^. 23.
48. 50.
etc. that thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 29.
10. 11, 12.
All the people that were borne in the Wilderness Joshua circumcised, but it
is incredible to think that among that great multitude, there was not one who
did not give good testimony of the work of grace in his soul: We read often
times that Israel after some grievous fall and revolt, Josh 24. 1. 14. 23, 24,
25.
renewed their Covenant, to walk with God, to serve him only, and to obey his
voice, Judge. 2. 8. 11. and 3. 9. 15. and 6. 7. and 10. 10-17.
as in the days of Joshua, the Judges, David, Samuel: Also Joash, Josiah, and
Nehemiah, etc. But no particular enquiry was made, what work of grace God had
wrought in the hearts of every singular person. 2 Chr. 15. 12.
But the confession and profession of obedience was taken. 2 Kin. 11. 17. and
23. 3.
When John Baptist began to preach the Gospel, and gather a new people for
Christ, 2 Chr. 34. 31.
he admitted none to Baptism but upon confession of their sins; Heb. 10. 29.
30.
but we read of no question that he put forth unto them to discover the work
of grace in their souls, or repelled any that voluntarily submitted themselves
upon that pretense. Act. 2. 38. and 8. 37. and 19. 17, 18, 19.
It appears many ways that when the Apostles planted Churches, they made a
Covenant between God and the people whom they received. But they received men
upon the profession of faith, and promise of amendment of life, without strict
inquiry what sound work of grace was wrought in the soul. In after ages,
strangers from the covenant were first instructed in the faith, and then
baptized upon the profession of faith, and promise to walk according to the
covenant of grace. Now the profession at first required of all that were
received to baptism was that they believed in the Father, Act. 8. 37.
Son, and holy Ghost. This was the confession of the Eunuch when he was
baptized, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. The Creed is
honored of the ancients with glorious titles, as the rule of faith, the sum
of faith, the body of faith, the persuasions of faith: but by the Creed they
understand that rule of faith, and law of faith, and institution of Christ
which was then given when he was about to ascend into heaven, and commanded his
disciples, saying, Go teach all Nations, etc. It is true, that in after times
as occasion required some other Articles were added as explanations of the
former, to meet with the heresies of the times which began to trouble the
Church. But for substance of matter in things to be believed, the Church never
required other acknowledgement of them that were to be received into the
congregation of Christ's flock, and admitted into her communion. And for things
to be done, or the practical part, she requires of them that were to be
received to baptism an abrenuntiation of the devil, the world, and the flesh,
with all their sinful works and lusts.

The first principles then of the doctrine of Christ being received, and the
foresaid profession being made, the Apostles, and the Church following the
example of the Apostles, never denied baptism unto such as sought or desired
it. If this be the Covenant that members admitted into Church Fellowship do
enter into, and this be all you require of them whom you receive, you have the
practice of the Apostles, and the whole Church in after ages for your
president. But if you proceed further then thus, and put men to declare what
work of grace God has wrought in their soul, in this or that way, which
perhaps is not determined by the word of grace, at least not agreed upon among
your selves, we beseech you consider by what authority you do it, and upon what
grounds you stand. But we will enter no further upon this matter, because it
comes not within the compass of these Positions, and to attribute so much to
private letters, as to make them the ground of another dispute we may not.

VII. POSITION.
That a Minister is so a Minister of a particular Congregation, that if they
dislike him unjustly, or leave him, he cease to be a Minister.

Answer.
OUr Answer to this consists in two branches. 1. In case a Minister be set
aside by the Church merely through his own default. 2. By the Churches default
without any desert of his. In the former case it is evident he cease to be a
Minister to them any longer, as appears in four conclusions.

1. It is clear from the Word, that a Pastor or Teacher in these days has no
Apostolical power over all Churches, but only limited to that one Church
where God has set him. Paul gives not the Elders at Ephesus a general
Commission to go teach all Churches, but to go feed that one flock over which
the holy Ghost has made them overseers. Act. 20. 28. So Peter gives direction
to Elders to feed that flock of God only which was among them, and take the
oversight thereof. 1 Pet. 5. 2.

2. It is as clear that all this power of feeding which the Minister has in
that Church is nextly derived to him from Christ by the Church, who has
solemnly called him to the work, and promised to obey him therein: for if he
have it elsewhere, it must be either from Christ immediately, or from some
other men deputed by Christ to confer it on him, or he must take it up of
himself. Not the first, for that was proper to the Apostles or Apostolical
men, therefore Paul proving his Apostleship, says he was called not of men,
nor by men, but by Jesus Christ himself. Gal. 1. 1. Not the second, for we
never read in Gods Word that any ordinary Officers, or other besides the
Church, that had any Commission given them from Christ to call Ministers unto
Churches. Not the third, for no man takes this honor, viz. of a Priest under
the Law, or of a Minister under the Gospel, but he that is called of God, Hebr.
5. 4. Therefore it must needs be from Christ by the Church.

3. As the Church in the name of Christ gave this power to a Minister to be
what he is, and do what he does amongst them: when such a Minister shall make
and manifest himself apparently, unworthy, and unfit to discharge the place,
which they thus called him unto, so that they may discern that Christ the head
of the Church has refused him, from being a Minister unto him. they may then
upon as good grounds depose him from it, as they called him to it.

4. When a Church has thus in Christ's name put forth this power of shutting,
as before it did of opening to a Minister, then he must cease to be a Minister
unto them any more, for we know no such indelible character imprinted upon a
Minister, that the Ministry ceasing, the Minister cease also.

2. In case the Church shall without cause, or sufficient weighty cause,
rashly or wilfully set him aside whom Christ has set over them, and whom they
so solemnly called, and promised before the Lord to submit unto, and so abuse
their power given them by Christ; it is deubtlesse a very great wrong unto the
Minister, and sin against Christ himself before whom it was done; and not
only Christ himself will take it ill at their hands, for such contempt done to
him in his Ministers according to Christ's speech, Luke 10. 16. He that
rejects you, rejects me. And Gods speech, 1 Samuel 8. 7. They have not cast
off thee but me. But even other Churches also may admonish them. And if they
prove obstinate therein, withdraw the right hand of fellowship from them; and
concerning the Minister himself thus deposed, seeing it is done not by Christ,
but by the Church without Christ, yea against the mind of Christ, we conceive
though he be by them deprived of the execution of his ministry among them, yet
until he accepts of a call to another people, he does yet still remain a
Minister of Christ, in whose account (notwithstanding such deposition) he has
true right of administration among that people.

Reply.
THe question is of Ministers unjustly forsaken, or driven from the Church or
congregation: and your answer is for the most part of Ministers set aside or
deprived through their own default. We never purposed to speak one word for any
unworthy Minister whom Christ has put out of office, and therefore your labor
to prove that such justly rejected by the Church are no longer Ministers might
well have been saved. But setting them aside, we will in few words examine your
conclusions upon which you bind the certainty of that sentence you pass
against them.

First, it is certain and clear from the Word, that a Pastor or Teacher neither
in these days has, nor in any other age of the Church, ought to have
Apostolical power over all Churches. The Apostles had only power to serve the
Church with the personal service of their Apostleship. But pastoral power of
ordinary Ministers or Teachers they never had: and if the Apostles had not the
power of ordinary Ministers, much less can Pastors receive the power of
Apostles, for Christ gave both the one and the other order. But as the Apostles
were not Pastors of that Church to which they preached, and among whom they
continued for some space; no more do Pastors become Apostles if they preach the
Word, or dispense the Sacraments to another flock or people beside their own,
whereof they have the special oversight. But of this matter we have spoken
before, and of the texts of Scripture here alleged, therefore we will not
repeat what has been said already: only it seems somewhat strange, that
you should cited those texts of Scripture, as if the Apostle had said, feed one
flock, or feed that flock of God only. For we find the word (one) or (only)
neither in the text expressly, nor in the sense for which it is here alleged,
viz. as if he might not perform any ministerial act in another Congregation
upon any occasion whatsoever.

Secondly, the power of feeding which the Minister has is neither confined to
one society only, nor nextly derived to him from Christ by the Church. The
office and authority of a Pastor is immediately from Christ. The deputation of
the person which Christ has designed is from the Church ministerially, but
neither virtually nor formally. The consent of the people is requisite in the
election of Pastors and Teachers we grant, the direction of the Elders going
before or along with them; Whit. de pont. q. 1. ca. 1. p. 14.
but the authority, office, and gift of a Pastor is not from the people or
Elders, but from Christ alone. When an Apostle was to be chosen in the place of
Judas, Act. 1. 22, 23. no one had the handling of that business, but Peter
declared unto the brethren present, what an one ought to be taken, and they
present two, whereof one was elected by lot. In this example somethings are
extraordinary, for one only was to be chosen, and that immediately by God
himself: and somethings ordinary for our imitation. For if Peter would do
nothing without consent of the disciples, then may not ordinary elections be
passed without consent and approbation of the Church, but it is not a popular
election, not governed by the fore-direction of Elders, which is concluded from
this passage of Scripture: but a Church election by the free consent, and
judgment of the faithful with the fore-leading of the Presbytery. When
Deacons were to be chosen, Act. 6. 1. 6. in the Church of Jerusalem, it was
done by the consent of the Church. The mutiny of the Hellenists against the
Hebrews occasioned that election, but was no cause why it was made by free
consent. The Apostles show what persons must be chosen, and who ever thought
the Church was left at liberty to choose as she please without direction. But
in this election the people did first choose, the Apostles only directing whom
the people ought to make choice of: when most commonly the Apostles instructed
the people, and went before them in the election, and they consented. Act. 14.
23. The Apostles by consent chose Elders, and so in every matter of great
importance belonging directly to the whole body of the Church, whether
severally in one congregation, or jointly in many, the consent of the faithful
by observation of the Apostles was required. Act. 11. 22. and 15. 22. and 16.
4. 1. Cor. 8. 19. But in the primitive times after the Apostles, one Church
might elect and choose a Pastor for another. As Ignatius exhorts the
Phyladelphians, that they would elect a Pastor for the Church of Antioch. And
so when the East Church was infected with Arrianisme, Basil, epist. 69. 70. 74.
though it a fit means to remove the heresy, if the Bishops of Italy being
sent thither did condemn the heresy, Ep 13. li. 3.
and he imploreth the aid of the Bishops of Italy, France, and all the East.
Cyprian says, all Bishops sunt mutuae concordiae glutine copulati: that if any
hold heresy the rest should help. It would be too long to reckon up examples
which in this case might be produced. If here it be questioned whether your
election of the people be essential to the calling of a Minister: We answer.
1. A thing is essential two ways. First, as absolutely necessary, so that
the thing can have no existence without it. Secondly, as necessary to the
integrity of the thing, so that it is maimed without it.

Again, either the people be few in number, and simple apt to be led aside,
unable to judge of the sufficiency of their Minister, or they be more in
number, increased in wisdom, sound in faith, and able to discern betwixt
things that differ. In the first sense the election of the people is not
necessary or essential; But in the second we cannot say he is no Minister that
is not chosen by the people, but his calling in that respect is maimed. If the
people be few and simple, apt to be deceived, they stand in more need of
guidance and direction, both from their own Elders, and other Churches. If the
people be many in number, full of wisdom and understanding, their liberty to
choose is the greater; and it is the greater wrong to be deprived of it. The
practice of the Apostles and the primitive Churches for many ages will confirm
this; for sometimes men were propounded to the Church to be chosen: Sometimes
the choice was wholly left to them: and was not that for our direction, that
more liberty is given where the danger is less, and more restraint and
caution used where the danger is more apparent, that if they be left to
themselves, either an ill or unfit choice will be made? In reason this is
evident, for the child's consent is required in marriage, but the more able he
is to choose for himself, the more liberty may parents grant, the less able,
the more watchful must they be; and so in this business. Brotherly society
requires that we mutually exhort, admonish, reprove and comfort each other as
occasion requires, and as need requires. It is a duty of Neighbour-Churches to
lend their help to their brethren in the choice and election of their
Minister. Rom 15. 14.
When the Scripture wills that one should admonish another, Heb. 3. 13.
it is not only a command to every singular man toward his fellow, but also
to any whole company too: another society Bellarmine asks, Bell. de Cler. li.
1. c. 7.
quo jure unus populus Episcopum alterius populi elegere potest? Junius
answers; Certe charitatis jure and communione sanctorum. Jun. animad. contr.
5. l. c 7. not. 13.
And Paul when he teaches that all the faithful are members of one mystical
body of Christ, who ought to have a mutual care one of another, Romans 12. 12.
laid the foundation of this policy.

It is a blemish in the calling of a Minister, if either the people be not fit
to choose, or being fit they be shut forth from the choice, but this maime does
not make a nullicie in his calling; for in every true Church where the word is
preached and received, and the Sacraments for substance rightly administered,
there is a true and lawful Ministry, and a true and lawful calling of that
Ministry, though in some things defective. In the Church of God all sound and
saving truth is to be found, for it is the pillar and ground of truth, and
where the true profession of all saving truth, with the right use of the
Sacraments for substance is to be found, there is the Church, which ordinarily
cannot be had, maintained and continued without a lawful Ministry, nor that
without a calling. The saving truth of God and a lawful Ministry, are both
essential to a true Church. Something of this remains in every complete
society that has any thing of the Church; and for essence and substance they
are true in every true, lawful, complete society. The profession of the truth
may be true and sound in all necessary and fundamental points, though mixed
with diverse errors, and the Ministry for truth and substance lawful, though
many ways deficient. In the true Church there is a true Ministry, but the
true Church has continued there by the blessing of God, where the election of
Ministers has been given away by the people, or taken from them. In the
primitive Church, when the people had a voice in the choice of their Pastor,
oftentimes there were factions in the Church, the people stood against their
guides and challenged the whole power of election to themselves. Theod. hist.
l. 4. c. 6. Aug Epist. 110. and 225. Socrat. hist. l 7. c. 34, 35. 39. Zozom.
hist. l. 2. c. 18, 19. Nazian. in Epitaphium patris Evagr. l. 2. c. 5. 8.
Theod. hist. l. 5. c. 23. Jun. animadver in Bell. cont. 5. l. 1. c. 7. not. 16,
17. Cartur. reply 2d. part 1. pa. 211. Illiric. catal. test. li. 2. tit.
Ecclesiae gubern.
Sometimes they were divided among themselves. Sometimes they gave away their
power, at least in part, and sometimes Ministers were set over them without
their council and advice, whose Ministry notwithstanding was not reputed
void and of none effect. If it be objected that many things were amiss in
those primitive elections, what will follow thence, but that the Ministry may
be lawful and good, where there be many wants in the manner of calling. If
this be not granted, what shall be done when the people and their Elders be
divided in the choice of a fit Officer. If the people prevail against their
Elders, he whom they choose is no Minister to them, because not chosen by their
suffrages: if the Elders against the people, he whom they approve is no
Minister unto them, because not chosen by their suffrage; And so if there be
dissension they must separate from, or excommunicate one another, because he is
no Minister to the one whom the other approve. The Orthodox Pastors did
profess, so that the Donatists would return to the true and Apostolical
doctrine, they would not disallow their Bishops, that they might understand
that Catholics did not detest Christian consecration (as Augustine speaks)
by humane error. The high Priesthood was bought and sold for money, and
sometimes made annual, and every year new high Priests created, Sicut isti
praefecti quos singulis annis promutant reges, as Sol: Jarchi says. That as
every man would lay out more or less money, he should get or lose the
Priesthood, which may be seen in the examples of Jason or Menelaus.

Nevertheless, so long as the Jews continued the true Church of God, Jos.
Antiq. l. 20. c. 18. c. 4. See Ambros. de officijs. l. 1. c. 50. Hieron. ad
Ocean and Epist. ad Nepotian. T. C. Reply 1. pa. 41. a Revet. Cathol. orth.
tract. 2. q. 8. Sect. 3. Cartw. Reply 2. par. 1. pa. 273.
the Priesthood was true also. The reformed Churches who have separated from
the abominations of Rome, profess the first reformers among them received
some ordinary calling in the Roman Synagogue. They that think the basest of
Rome, will acknowledge Baptism unduely administered by Priests or Jesuits, to
be for substance the holy Sacrament of Christ. And if the Baptism of God may
be derived from the Ministry, it is no absurdity to think that the first
seekers of reformation derived authority from Christ to preach the Word and
administer the Sacraments by them, as Stewards used of God to set them in that
office: for the seekers of reformation derived their authority from God, and
that which is instituted by Christ, is not made void by the corruptions of men.

The third and fourth consideration we will pass over, because from what has
been spoken, it is easy to understand in what sense they may be admitted, and
in what denied, and we have no desire to trouble you with the examination of
that which falls not into question.

As for the second branch of your Answer, that in case the Church shall without
cause, or without sufficient weighty cause, rashly or wilfully set him aside
whom Christ has set over them, yet he still remains a Minister of Christ
(until he accepts of a call from another people) in whose account,
notwithstanding such Depositions, he has true right of administering among that
people. We know not well your meaning; if this be your mind that a Minister
lawfully called and set over one Congregation, is to be esteemed a Minister in
the usual Church, as the particular Church has unity with, and is part of
the universal or Catholic: and as a party baptized is not baptized into
that particular Congregation only, but into all Churches; and that the
Ministry is one, Cujus a singulis in soliaum pars tenetur, as Cyprian speaks;
and therefore though the Minister be unjustly cast off by one Congregation, yet
he is not to be esteemed as no Minister, we freely consent. But if your meaning
be that he is only by right a Minister of that particular Congregation,
because unjustly deposed, as formerly in the execution of his office he was a
Minister to them only, and to none other society whatsoever, or in what
respect soever; your opinion is contrary to the judgment and practice of the
universal Church, and tends to destroy the unity of the Church, and that
communion which the Churches of God may and ought to have one with another; for
if he be not a Minister in other Churches, then are not the Churches of God
one, nor the Ministers one, nor the flock which they feed one, nor the
Communion one which they have each with other. And if the Pastor derive all his
authority to feed from the Church, when the Church has set him aside, what
right has he to administer among that people. If they err in their
deposition, it is true they sin against Christ. But as they give right to an
unworthy man to administer among them, if they call him unjustly, so they take
right from the worthy if wrongfully they depose him. The Minister is for his
Ministry the office for the execution, and so the Pastor and the flock are
relatives: And therefore if their Election gave him authority among them to
feed, their casting him off has stripped him of the same power which formerly
they gave him. And his ministry ceasing, he should cease to be their Minister,
if he stood as Minister only to that Congregation in every respect.

Whit. de pont. q. 4. Sec. 10. pa. 559. Certe lex naturae and ratio clamitat
cujus est instituere ejus est destruere, sive destituere, ad quem institutio
pertinet ad eundem destitutionem, seu destructionem pertinere. Rob. aga. B. P.
214. If the Congregation may choose and elect their Governors, then they may
refuse and reprobate them.

VIII. POSITION.
That one Minister cannot perform any ministerial act in another Congregation.

Answer.
IF you take ministerial act improperly as sometimes it is taken by some,
only when the Minister of one Church does exercise his gifts of praying and
preaching in another Church, being by themselves so desired. Then we answer, in
this sense a Minister of one Church may do a ministerial act in another, which
he does not perform by virtue of any calling, but only by his gifts; and thus
upon any occasion we mutually perform those acts one in another Churches: But
if you mean by ministerial act, such an act of authority and power in
dispensing of Gods ordinance as a Minister does perform to the Church,
whereunto he is called to be a Minister; then we deny that he can so perform
any ministerial act to any other Church but his own, because his office
extends no further then his call. For that solemn charge, Act. 20. 28. is not
to feed all flocks, but that one flock only, over which the holy Ghost has
made them overseers. If the question were propounded to any Minister so
exercising in an others Church, which was once to our Savior by the chief
Priests and Elders: By what power do thou these things, and who gave thee
this authority? let that Minister whosoever he be, study how to make an answer.

Reply.
THe preaching of the Word, public prayer in the congregation met together
solemnly to worship God, and the administration of the Sacraments, are acts
properly ministerial (if any other) to be performed by power and authority
from Christ, To baptize is a duty of the Pastors pastoriall office. I. D. Apol.
Ser. exam. pa. 287.
as you acknowledge, for the preaching of the Word, and dispensation of the
Seals in your second Consideration. But these acts one Minister may perform
in another Congregation, or toward the members of another Church. You know by
whom your question has been propounded touching one Ministers exercising in
another Ministers Church, and how it has been answered; and if you see more
light and truth then formerly, we would desire you substantially to confute
what answers some of you have returned to that demand. Exam. of texts, pa. 290.
To admit (says Mr. J. D.) those that are known members of another Church to
Communion in the Sacraments upon fitting occasions I hold lawful, and do
profess my readiness to practice accordingly. Apol. exam. of texts. p. 288.
Again, I conceive that (besides my membership else where, and the right which
those Churches give to known passants of being admitted to the Communion for a
short time) both himself and the whole Church acknowledge me for a member with
them for the time of my abode in that service, which they testified by desiring
the help of my public labors, and their cheerful admittance of me to that
ordinance during that time without the least scruple. And if a Minister may
pray, preach, bless the congregation in the name of the Lord, and receive the
Sacrament with them, being thereunto requested; we doubt not but by consent of
the Pastor and the Congregation he may lawfully dispense the Seals amongst them
also as need and occasion requires.

That distinction of preaching by office, and exercising his gifts only, when
it is done by a Minister, and desired of none but Ministers, and that in
solemn, set, constant Church Assemblies, we cannot find warranted in the Word
of truth, and therefore we dare not receive it.


