A True ACCOUNT OF THE ADVANCES of His MAjESTY'S Royal ARMY Toward the Taking
of Limerick: Together with His Majesty's Most Gracious PROCLAMATION.
In a Letter from an Officer the Camp before Limerick, Dated August 19th, 1690.
SIR,
MY last acquainted you of our Progress in the Siege till five last Night, and
that Lieutenant General Douglass was to take charge of the French, but could
not then inform you, what other General-Officers were to join him in that
Charge, now have learnt, that my Lord Sidney, and Brigadier Stewart, were the
Persons who about ten last Night, with seven Battalions of Foot relieved the
Prince of Wirtemburgh, it being exceeding dark; and the main Design being to
gain the Fort, the Enemy have on this side the Town, covering the Counterscarp,
(it had not the success expected) for the Officers being unacquainted with the
Defile, or ways to move in order, and coming late, cannot much be blamed with
the mistake that happened, as follows:

It was agreed to fall on about Twelve, and the several Parties of ours
chancing to mistake their way, met one another, and apprehending each other for
Enemies, fired cruelly on both sides; but God be praised, without much
mischief, which being followed with a great Shout, discovered the mistake, and
with much ado the enraged Soldiers were parted, hardly being persuaded with
the truth by their Officers, and they had hardly got into order, when the Enemy
made a furious Sally with the greatest strength they had in the Garrison, but
were stoutly repulsed, and our Men would have pursued the Enemy, but were
hindered for fear of Ambushes; after which the Men were eager to storm the
Fort; but General Douglass, for some Reasons I know not, would not suffer it;
from twelve till two of the Clock was incessant string; many Officers here
saying, for the time, they never heard the like; and all this, as I am
certainly informed, with the loss on our side, of less than twenty Men, not one
Officer falling: and one of the Surgeons of the Hospital affirmed to me,
this Evening, that there came but three wounded Men into them, since the Action
happened.

This Morning our Guns fired brisly to amuse the Enemy, and every three or four
hours gave them four or five Rounds from a Battery of eight Guns, four of
twelve Pounders, and four of six (and as by this mischance last Night was
lost.) This Morning it was ordered the Trenches should be relieved at four in
the Afternoon: Which was accordingly done. Count Solms commands in chief, Count
Nassau, and Brigadier Hanmore assisting, the Officers being commanded to take
particular Notice of every thing that may direct them to the Fort, as also when
out of their way; so doubt not by the next, to give you a good account of this
Action. I never saw Men march more freely into their Winter Quarters, than ours
did to the Trenches; whether a great Number of Faggets are carried this Night,
as also a great many Packs made up for to shelter the Men from the Enemy's
Shot; a Battery within Carbine-shot of the Town, was this Night finished, for
twelve Guns, six of which were those Sarsfield thought he had spoiled, of
eighteen l. Ball, and six that came from Carrick of 24 l. all which I hope to
hear play to morrow, when our Great Mortars will be up with us, at farthest.
This Morning two Guns, and a good Party of Horse, went out on a Design, I know
not yet: Our Men are courageous and healthy, and I doubt not of a Victory;
which GOD grant.

A PROCLAMATION, By the KING and QUEEN's Most Excellent Majesty's.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas We are informed, That diverse Persons, either through Disaffection to
the Clergy of the Church of Ireland as by Law Established, or from a Design to
take Advantage of the present Disturbances in this Kingdom, do delay or refuse,
to pay their Tithes and other Ecclesiastical Duties, to the aforesaid Clergy,
as by Law they ought to do. We having a Gracious Regard to the distressed
Condition of the Church and Clergy, and being steadfast in Our Resolution, To
preserve the Benefit of the Law to all Our Subjects, in the Due Execution
thereof; Do hereby strictly Command and Require, all Our Loving Subjects, of
what Rank or Condition soever, That they yield, set forth, and pay unto the
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Prebends, Rectors, Parsons, Vicars,
Curates, and all others that have Ecclesiastical Dignities or Cure of Souls;
the Tithes and other Ecclesiastical Duties, that are or shall become due or
payable to them respectively, according to the Laws and Customs of this our
Realm of Ireland,

Given at Our Royal Camp before Limerick, this Fifteenth Day of August, 1690.
In the Second Year of Our Reign.
Lond^n: Printed for Richard B^ldwin, near the Black B^ll in the Old Bailey,
1690.


