POPERY The Grand APOSTASY: Being the Substance of certain SERMONS

Preached on 2 These. 2. v. 1. to 12. On occasion of the discovery of the
desperate Plot of the Papists, against the King, Kingdom and the Protestant
Religion.

By John Troughton Minister of the Gospel.

To which is added a Sermon on Rev. 18.4. preached November 5. 1678.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel. 1680.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
IT was well observed by one, That next to the knowledge of Christ and of the
true way of salvation by him, nothing is more necessary for a Christian, than
the knowledge of Antichrist: for hereby he may be able to distinguish the true
knowledge of Christ, from the corruptions and mixture with which Antichrist
has adulterated and obscured the true Doctrine of the Gospel. That the Pope
with his Adherents is Antichrist has been the general opinion of learned men
for these last 600. Years, ever since Gregory 7. not of Protestants only, Hus,
Wicleff, and the Waldenses, but also of many that lived and dyed in the
communion of the Roman Church. And seeing our Papists generally confess
Antichrist in St. John's epistle to be the same with the man of sin in St. Paul,
and with the mystical Babylon in the Apoc. they do in effect yield that the
Pope is Antichrist, seeing all the marks of the two latter do undeniably agree
to him. For this cause I have waved the particular controversies, betwixt us
and the Papists, which have been so largely and clearly managed by our Writers,
both formerly and of late, as less necessary for this present time; there being
little of reason, conscience, or Scripture to urge any Protestant to embrace
any particular error or corruption of the Papists, endeavoring briefly and
summarily to show that the Church of Rome is, as Wicleff long since called it,
the Synagogue of Satan, mystical Babylon, a state of Apostate Christians that
have joined themselves to the Pope as their Head against Christ, his Gospel and
pure Church; that by this brief consideration of things Christians may be the
more stirred up to detest, and to oppose in their places that body of men which
call themselves the only Catholic Church, that they may be the more zealous
for the truth as it is received in the Reformed Churches; and that they may if
called to it, suffer with the greater comfort what cruelties and violence God
may yet permit that Beast of Rome to exercise upon his Church. I my self, and
many that heard this discourse, have thought it might be seasonable and useful
in these days to plain and private Christians (for the learned have no need of
it) because through long peace and security, the error and tyranny of the
Papists have been much forgotten by the people, and many that hate the name of
Papists scarce know the grounds they stand on, and are Antipapists by a kind of
implicit faith. If any find their judgments informed, their consciences
settled, their zeal and courage excited by these endeavors, in these shaking
times, I have mine end; and may they and the Church of Christ long enjoy that
benefit to the glory of God and their own comfort, to the strengthening of
their brethren and the shame of their implacable and restless adversaries.

Thine in the work of the Gospel, J. T.

2 THESE. 2. v. 1. to 12. Now we beseech you Brethren by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him: v. 2. That you be not
soon shaken in mind or be troubled neither by Spirit, nor by word, nor by
letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. v. 3. Let no man
deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come except there come a
falling away first: and [that] man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition,
etc.


THese words begin a new discourse, and contain an earnest obtestation to the
Thessalonians not to be troubled at the Doctrine of some, that the day of
Christ, viz. his second coming, was at hand: which though in appearance it
tended to holiness and watchfulness, to make men live in preparation for
Christ's coming; yet, seeing his coming was not nigh, and many great things were
to be transacted first both in the world and the Church; this persuasion would
take off Christians from their repective duties, in the several places and
times they should live in; and would give great occasion to Atheistical mockers
to think and say Christ would never come, seeing his coming was so long delaied
beyond expectation of his servants; and consequently that all the Gospel was a
fable, and Religion vain, which also was foretold, 2 Pet. 3. v. 3, 4. In the
last days shall come Scoffers, walking after their own lusts, saying Where is
the promise of his coming? for since the Fathers fell asleep all things
continue as they were. The Apostle therefore beseeches them by the coming of
Christ and our gathering to him, i. e. As sure as they did believe Christ would
come, and his Saints should be gathered to him, so also to believe that his
coming was not nigh; but that great transactions and changes should come before
that day. Or (...) may be well rendered, I beseech you for the sake of the
coming of our Lord, and our gathering to him, i. e. that you may not bring this
Doctrine of Christ's coming into Question when the world shall see you are
mistaken in the time when you looked for it.

That you be not soon shaken, (...), i. e. That you be not unsettled or made to
fluctuate in your minds, (...), nor be perplexed. This is the obtestation.

Next the Apostle signifies the means, how this perplexing Doctrine was
introduced amongst them: viz. By spirit, by word, or by pretense of his
Epistle, v. 2.

Then renewing his obtestation, v. 3. Let no man deceive you by any means,
(...), by any pretense whatsoever; he enters upon the confutation of this
opinion, telling them that Christ would not come, till there had been an
Apostasy in the Church, (...), it is an Ellipsis, wherein something for
brevity sake is omitted: For except there come an Apostasy first, it is to be
supplied from the first v. The day of Christ shall not come.

Afterward he describes the manner and measure of this Apostasy, to v. 12.
Hence we may observe by way of introduction.

Obs. 1. That the Church even in the best ages of it has been infested with
errors and disturbances.

The Church of old under Moses, immediately after their deliverance out of
Egypt, and their receiving the Law from God by an audible voice, did presently
return to the Idolatry of Egypt in the worship of the Golden Calf, Ex. 32.1, 2.
though they had obliged themselves to the Lord by Covenant, a few days before,
chap. 24.3, 6, 7, etc. And all his time he was wearied with their ill carriage.
And in the times of the Prophets, there were usually false Prophets seducing
the people, 2 Pet. 2.1. Our Savior foretold false Christ's and false Prophets
should arise soon after his days, Mat. 24.24. And his Apostles, that there
should be false teachers in the Church, privily bringing in damnable Heresies,
even denying the Lord that bought them, and that many should follow their
pernicious ways, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.

The Primitive times, as they were most happy. in Zeal and affection in the
sound and Orthodox professors; so they were as unhappy in the manifold errors,
Sects, divisions that did disturb them, as any of these latter Ages. Augustine
has given us a Catalogue of 80. Heresies that troubled the Church in those
days; August. Lib. de Haer. ad Quod vult Deus.
and yet he says he omitted many and named but the principal.

It appears by their Epistles, that the Apostles had no sooner planted
Churches, but the weeds of errors and opinions did straight ways spring up
amongst them: and this chiefly by these three means here mentioned.

1. By pretense of the spirit. When God did afford his spirit in extraordinary
gifts and revelations to his Prophets and Apostles, there never wanted men who
pretended to the same spirit, and the like revelations for their own devices;
most of them wilfully feigning, some artificially and some by diabolical means
procuring revelations and Enthusiasms; and some weakly mistaking their own
fancies and strong persuasions for dictates and inspirations of the Holy Ghost.
1 John 4.1, 2. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are
of God: for many false prophets are gone out into the world, such as pretended
to the spirit, and that to the subversion of the greatest truths in the Gospel,
even to deny the person, and coming of Jesus Christ, as Simon Magus and his
followers; therefore he subjoyneth this mark, v. 2, 3. Every spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: and every spirit
that confesses that he is not come, is not of God. The same direction is
given, 1 Cor. 12.2, 3. I give you to understand that no man speaking by the
spirit of God calls Jesus accursed: Such it seems there were, that preten
ding to the spirit the Apostles had, rejected and reviled Jesus Christ.

2. By pretense of a word or oral tradition. They that could not pretend the
spirit speaking in themselves, pretended the judgment and sayings of Christ and
his Apostles when absent, for their own opinions, sometimes forging their
sayings, sometimes mistaking the meaning of them, affixing their own sense to
them. Thus a tradition was received, as coming from the mouth of Christ, that
the beloved Disciple should not die, Joh. 21.22, 23. and is yet believed in the
Greek Church who show a place near Ephesus where they say that Apostle when old
commanded himself to be buried alive; where by some estuation or bubling of the
earth they conclude he still breaths. St. Paul was often troubled by the
Judaizing Christians, who would have kept up the ceremonial law, pretending the
authority and practice of Peter, and other Apostles that lived among the Jews;
which he refuteth at large, Gal. 2. And it appears by almost all Paul's
Epistles that this tradition was importunately urged and scattered through all
the Churches by that sort of men, even when the Apostles and Church of
Jerusalem had declared, that they never commanded such doctrine to be preached,
Acts 25.24.

3. Thirdly, By the pretense of Scripture, [our Epistle in the text.] And this
either by pretense of forged Scripture, or false and forced interpretations of
the true Canonical writings. Of the former sort were the writings of the false
Prophets among the Jews, and those fabulous Legends of Tobit, Judith, Susannah,
etc. which were never received by the Jewish Church. And such were the many
suppositious writings in the primitive times, as the Gospel of Peter, Andrew,
Thomas, Nicodemus, and almost of all the Apostles; the Gospel and Epistle of
Paul to the Laodiceans, the Liturgy of James, and the like, mentioned by
Eusebius and other writers. Of the latter sort the Apostle speaks 2 Pet.
3.15, 16. That there were many unlearned and unstable Christians who did wrest
some hard places in Paul's Epistles and the other Scriptures to their own
destruction; of this kind is this in the text as some suppose, Cartwr. in Locum.
that this opinion of Christ's coming to judgment was rashly collected by some,
from those words in the former Epistle to the These. chapter 4. v. 15. We that are
alive and remain unto the coming of our Lord, shall not prevent those that are
asleep: hence they thought that the Apostle supposed that at least some of them
who were then alive might live to the coming of Christ. Though it seems that
all these three means of pretended revelations, traditions and Scriptures were
used for this doctrine.

These arts have been all along used to disturb the Church and to pervert
souls. The Gnostics, Montanus and Manes pretended their inspired revelations,
Cont. Haer. De praeser.
and many others in latter ages. Irenaeus and Tertullian tell us that many of
the Heretics of their days pretended traditions from one Apostle or other for
their doctrine and practice; as also others had their Apocryphal Scriptures or
Canonical texts misapplied to maintain their errors.

The Papists make great use of all three of these pretenses to establish their
grossest errors. The doctrine of the real presence of Christ in the bread, of
the worship of Saints and of religious Orders, and Images is mainly built upon
Revelations, dreams and apparitions.

Lindanus ingenuously confessed that all those doctrines and practices wherein
the Protestants do oppose them, and dissent from them, are to be proved by
traditions of the Apostles, not from the Scripture. Their doctrines of
Purgatory, invocation of Angels, equivocations and dissemblings are proved by
the book of Tobit, Judith, Susan. etc. The Apostles Canons, increased from 50
to 85, in the last age, do them great services in the matters of their
discipline: and sometimes they wrest Scriptures for their purpose; but they
have been so baffled and shamed out of this since the Bible has been common
and studied by Protestants, that they have forsaken this hold, and the Jesuits
think the poor secular Priests have betrayed their cause by undertaking to
dispute for it out of the Scriptures.

These troubles by errors arise from the weakness of some who have more zeal
than judgment, and usually desire new things, 2 Pet. 3.16. 2 Timothy 4.3.
People unlearned and unstable and that have itching ears; from pride and
conceit in others, who that they may seem wiser than their brethren, will be
wise above or against what is written: some teach perverse things to draw
disciples after them; some for secular interest. There was no other reason why
the Popes of Rome embraced the worship of images, transubstantiation and some
such doctrines, but because the promoters of them did also promote their
authority and strengthen their hands against the Godly and most serious part of
the Church. But the most usual causes of errors are ignorance of the
Scriptures, and of the principles of religion founded on them (which in the
primitive times had a great occasion given it by the prejudicate opinions that
new Converts brought from Judaisme and Paganism, and from the new Testament
not being fully written in a considerable time, and the several books thereof
not gathered into one volume in a long space after) and chiefly corrupt
affections: Men will embrace errors because they love not the truth.

Use 1. This shows the necessity of adhering to the Scripture, and of a
standing Ministry. If we stick not to the Scripture, the pretense of the Spirit
and Traditions will lead us into a wilderness where there is no end. Heathens,
Mahometans, Papists and all Enthusiasts will distract us by their several and
contrary pretensions. And if there be not a standing and learned Ministry,
Apocryphal Scriptures, and false interpretations of Scripture will easily
beguile the unskilful and hinder the edification of the more wise.

2. The Papist's brags of infallibility of the Pope or Church, and the
necessity of it to the foundation of our faith, is as foolish as it is untrue:
The Apostles and Apostolical men were infallible, and yet this will not prevent
errors and Heresies of the highest nature either in their own or in the next
succeeding ages. An infallible head or guide will not secure the Church from
errors and divisions, unless all the people be infallible likewise, certainly
able to discern the truth declared to them, and perfectly free from all evil
affections which may hinder their receiving and submitting to the truth.

3. It is no Wonder to see errors and divisions in these last days of the
Church, since they were in the first. While men are subject to ignorance and
evil affections, there will be both errors and divisions; and if we go to the
Church of Rome to avoid all errors and Schisms (because they boast of such
Unity, which was never promised nor long enjoyed by any Church) we shall but do
like Children that tear many little holes in a garment into one great one that
comprehends them all and more and cannot be repaired.

Obs. 2. It is certainly foretold that there should be an Apostasy in the
Church.

The same Apostle almost in the same words foretells it, 1 Timothy 4.1. The spirit
speaks expressly that some shall depart from the faith.

The first Christians might be apt to expect the coming of Christ, and their
everlasting rest to be at hand, from the love and joy they had conceived upon
their first receiving the Gospel, but they are here told [that] happy time is
not so nigh.

There must come a departure of many from the faith first, and many contests
and persecutions should ensue thence; and therefore they should arm themselves
with patience to a conflict before they must expect the Crown. When God made
the world, he made it wonderful great and large, and stored it with almost
infinite variety of creatures to set forth his own Majesty; he has also
continued it some thousands of years with as great variety of providence in
his governing of it, to show his manifold wisdom, power, mercy, and justice;
and what will be the wonderful transactions of the world to come throughout
eternity to set forth the glory of the ^ernal God, no creature can conceive. In
like manner when our Lord came from Heaven to purchase a Church to serve him,
it was not quickly to expire, but to conflict with the world and the Devil,
with enemies without and within, through many changes and vicissitudes a
considerable time; and at last through faith and patience to inherit the
promises. It was long that the Church continued under the bondage of the Law;
and there were many changes and declinings of it at several times under the
Judges and Kings of Judah: but there was one great Apostasy of the Ten tribes
under Jeroboam, which ended in the ruin of that State and people. Such a
departure was there to be in the Christian Church, signified here by the
indeterminate word, There shall come a departure or Apostasy: for the falling
off of a few particular persons was no strange thing, but happened in every
age. Now such Apostasies are permitted,

1. To punish the ingratitude of men for the Gospel. Because they receive not
the love of the truth: because Christ and his Gospel are not welcome to the
generality of men; but any or no religion would content them as well, if they
might have outward peace and prosperity, therefore Christ suffers them to be
enticed with Errors and Heresies to their own destruction, which at last bring
public calamities and ruin.

2. To punish the Hypocrisy of others. Some pretend great zeal and affection
in the peace of the Church, which is either merely pretended for worldly
interest, or but a light and transient passion (as in the stony ground) who can
never be persuaded to be zealous and rooted Christians; Matthew. 13.20.
therefore when they have been tried a convenient time, opportunities of
backsliding are sufferred to come to discover and shame them.

3. To manifest and honor those that are sound. 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. There must
be heresies among you, that they which be approved may be made manifest among
you. When peace and truth meet together, the sound and best Christians are
unknown, and for the most part less regarded than the Hypocrites, that make
more show and noise; Christ therefore suffers apostasies to come, to discover
and honor his sincere, humble, diligent, and steadfast servants.

4. Errors are also permitted to clear the trut more, and make them that are
sound more steadfast and strong. The truths of the Gospel have in all ages been
prejudiced by the zeal and good affection of some well minded, as well as by
the opposition of enemies, because their affection overrun their judgment and
their care to get a distinct knowledge of the principles of religion: but the
appearance of errors and corruptions makes them more careful to search the
truth, which has been always more cleared and fortified by occasion of the
oppositions against it, and those who are upright have been put upon getting a
clearer knowledge of the grounds of their faith, worship, and practices thereby.

5. And in all this Christ manifests his distinguishing grace to some, and
his righteous judgments upon others, Romans 11.22. Behold therefore the goodness
and severity of God: on them which fell, severity; but toward thee goodness,
if thou continue in his goodness.

6. Hereby all are stirred up to diligence and watchfulness. When there shall
come a falling away of many, all are warned thereby to take care how they stand
lest they also fall. Romans 11.20


Use. Be not therefore suprized at, discouraged or tempted by, the apostasies
of others. Though the Church be fair as the Moon, she has also many dark
spots; though clear as the Sun, she has her clouds and Eclipses. Many will be
carried away with error, superstitions, and carnal policies; yea some of all
sorts; rulers, as well as ruled; learned, as well as unlearned: Those that have
made great show, as well as the common sort: be not troubled nor suspect the
true doctrine and worship; these things are foretold and therefore must be.

We are next to enquire what this departure is, which is here foretold; and who
be guilty of it. Some have understood it of the defection of the world from the
Roman Empire, following the conjecture of some one leader without consideration
(as Calvin observes) And the Rhemists recede from it very unwillingly and under
correction of their Superiors, but the Apostles says, the day of Christ
shallnot come except there come a departure first, viz. a departure from Christ
The word (...), here used for departure or apostasy, is appropriated to
signify a defection in or from religion: so the same Apostle uses it, but with
an explication, 1 Timothy 4.1. (...), some shall depart from the faith. Moreover
the head of this Apostasy is to sit in the Temple, the Church of God, v. 4.
and to bring it about by delusions and lying miracles, seducing those that
loved not the truth that they might be saved, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, v. 10, 11, 12. It must therefore be a departure from the truth
and purity of the Christian religion. It is agreed betwixt Papists and
Protestants that it is the apostasy under Antichrist as the chief head and
leader of it, which is here foretold: but the question is, who is this
Antichrist? Where and when this apostasy may be found? As the Jews did
generally expect the coming of Christ, yet knew him not, believed him not, when
he was among them; so the Papists believe and expect that Antichrist shall
come, and miserably spoil the Church, but cannot or will not see and own him,
though he is and long has been amongst them.

That Nero shall rise again and be the Antichrist, as he was the first
persecuting Emperor, I not worth the refuting.

The Papists generally teach that Antichrist is yet to come, and shall endure
but three years and a half, immediately before the end of the world: that he
shall be a Jew of the tribe of Dan; rebuild Jerusalem and the Temple; abolish
the Christian worship, and almost the name of Christ: but all this without any
colouor proof, except that slender one that he shall sit in the temple of God,
v. 4. Some few are so ingenuous as to confess that Rome is Babylon, Antichrists
seat: but then some say the Heathen persecuting Emperors in the first three
hundred years of the Church, were this Manof sin. Some again, considering that
it is an apostasy of professing Christians here spoken of, conjecture that
some Pope of Rome at the end of the world shall deny Christ, become an Infidel,
and cause himself to be worshipped as God; this should be this man of sin. But
the Text plainly speaks of, a defection of Christians which was secretly
working in the Apostles days, only some thing hindered its prevailing and full
discovery, vi. 6, 7, 8. The mystery of iniquity does already work, and it was
to be a mysterious defection, not an open and total apostasy from Christ: it
was to be brought in by signs, miracles, lying wonders, and all ungodly
deceits, for the just condemnation of them that received not the love of the
truth that they might be saved, though they received the profession of it, v.
9. to 12. And the man of sin the Head of this apostasy was to sit or rule in
the Temple of God, which is his Church, 1 Cor. 3.16. Therefore this apostasy
was to be, not total from the name and profession of Christ ad of his Church,
but a defection in the Church, an apostasy from the purity of the Doctrine,
worship, Discipline and practice of the Gospel, such as should have so many
excuses and specious pretenses for it, that the delusion should be strong, and
such as those that do not heartily love the truth, should not be able to
discern.

Whence we collect this proposition, Proposition.
That the Church of Rome is and for a long time has been the seat of this man
of sin, the mother of this apostasy: or, That Popery is the grand Apostasy of
the Church here foretold. This I shall make good, first by some general
reasons, and then by the particular criteria, or marks laid down in the text.

By the Church of Rome, we mean all those Nations and Churches which as so many
members make up that great body which they call the Roman Catholic Church,
whereof the Pope is the Head, and the Church of the City of Rome the principal
part. By Popery we understand that religion, viz. Doctrines, worship,
Discipline and Government, which is peculiar to them and distinct from all
other Christians, especially from the Protestant Churches; and whereby they are
knit into one body and society, and live in one Communion distinct from and
opposite to the Reformed Churches. Now that this Church is apostatized from
Christ, and this religion is a Doctrine and practice of apostasy, may appear
in the general by comparing the true state of the Church of Christ with the
state and Doctrine of the Roman Church.

1. First, The true Church of Christ acknowledges and worshippeth one only
God; the creator of the world, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is the
foundation of religion, that there is one only infinite Being, the fountain and
author of all things else; and therefore that all worship, fear, trust, and
obedience is due to him alone, 1 Cor. 8.5. Though there be that are called
Gods, whether in heaven or in earth (as there are Gods many and Lords many) But
to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in Him.
But the Papists do acknowledge and worship other Gods besides him, even the
Host or Bread in the Sacrament, and the Virgin Mary.

The Heathens pretend to acknowledge but one supreme God: but the Papists do
acknowledge that which sense, reason and scripture witness to be a bit of
bread, to be the supreme God their maker and Lord; which they usually call the
Host; and that it is to be worshipped cultu Latriae, Conc. Trid. Ses. 13. Cap.
4, 5. ibid. c. 6.
with that worship that is due to God alone: This they keep upon their Altar in
a gilded Box in imitation of the Ark of old, there (they teach) is the special
presence of God, as it was in the Holy of Holies. This they worship, and carry
in triumph, by this they swear, viz. by the Mass, and by the Pix; and this is a
peculiar note and badge of their communion, by which they difference themselves
from others, and destroy all that do not acknowledge and worship this their God
as far as their power reaches. The Host has its Temples, its Holydays, and all
divine honors given to it, also the power of healing diseases, casting out
Devils, and working all manner of miracles ascribed to it. The Virgin Mary has
more temples, offerings, and prayers made to her, than either the Father or the
Son: Her name is most sacred in oaths, and a greater offense it is to speak any
thing derogatory to her honor, Vid. spec. Europ. Sands. Jure matris impera
redempotri.
than to blaspheme the name of God. In her they put their trust, and to her
they ascribe authority over Jesus Christ himself. It is true, in words the
Schoolmen distinguish the worship of the Virgin which they call (...), from
{fo}, the worship of God; yet they confess a higher worship is due to her than
to any creature: and when we can make a medium betwixt the creator and
creature, then may we assign a worship which is not divine, and yet superior
to the civil respect due to creatures.

But the same learned author observes, that whosoever travelleth in Italy will
see in their practice no such distinctions; but that more honor and worship is
given to the Virgin than to God himself. It is known to all, that Papists are
more zealous for the worship of the Host and Virgin (whom they call their Lady)
than for the honor of God; and make the worship of them a greater cognizance
of their religion than any part of the religion of Christ.

2. The Churchof Christ acknowledges and trusts in one only Mediator the
Lord Jesus Christ. None can reconcile sinners to God nor intercede with God for
them, but he that is equal with God, God himself; no creature can approach so
near the infinite Majesty, or have any, much less such authority with him;
therefore the divine honor that is given to Christ the Mediator does not
derogate from the honor of God, nor is any robbery of him, because Christ is
one with himself, 1 Cor. 8.6. There is but one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are
all things, and we by him. But the Papists do own, trust in, and pray to many
Mediators besides Jesus Christ, even all the Angels in heaven, who are
therefore to be honored and worshipped as inferior Magistrates under a King
and Courtiers under their Lord, Catech. Romans in 1. praec. Q 4.
Nostras preces deo offerunt and Lachrymas, They present our prayers and tears
to God. Also the Saints in heaven who, they say, being prayed to, will obtain
for us the remission of our sins, and the favor of God. Si enim gaudium est in
Coelo super uno peccatore poenitentiam agente; Ibid. Q. 5.
nonne etiam coelestes cives poenitentes adjuvabunt? Nonne rogati and
peccatorum veniam impetrabunt and conciliabunt dei gratiam? The invocation and
worship of Saints, as both lawful and necessary, is avouched and decreed by the
Council of Trent. Ses. 25. Decr. 2.
Nor will their evasion excuse them, that they make Saints and Angels only
mediators of intercession to pray to God for us, but not of redemption to
reconcile us to God; intercession depends upon redemption and satisfaction, and
is as proper a part of the priesthood of Christ as the sacrificeof himself was;
even Christ's intercession would not have been prevalent unless he did thereby
present his blood and merits to the Fathers; and as the Saints couldnot
intercede for us unless they had merited for us, so the Church of Rome does
ascribe such merits to them, viz. to their works of supererogation, whereby
they have done more than God required, which merits they say are kept in the
treasury of the Church to be applied to sinners as the Pope feeth fit, and
especially to their Martyrdom, though they die for rebellion to their lawful
Princes, according to that known prayer, Per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te
impendit, fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit, Vid. Tho. Becket of
Cant.
Grant that we may come to Heaven through the blood of Saint Thomas which he
shed for thee. It is the merits and prayers of Saints that must relieve the
souls in Purgatory, Council. Trid. ses. 25. decr. 1. ibid. dec. 22, 23. chapter 1.
yea every Mass-priest, they say, celebrating Mass does offer up Christ to the
Father as real and proper a sacrifice as he offered himself on the Cross, and
hereby makes reconciliation both for the living and dead, viz. that are in
Purgatory. If then Christ was a complete Priest, merited and satisfied for us
in sacrificing himself, then every Popish Priest does merit and satisfy for us,
when he offers the same sacrifice as Christ did to the same intent and
purpose.

3. The Church of Christ is to worship him with spiritual, rational worship.
Christians are to give themselves to God as a living and the only acceptable
sacrifice, which is their reasonable service, Romans 12.1. and to worship Godin
spirit and truth, in opposition both to the superstition of the Heathen, and
the ceremonies, and bodily worship of the Jews, in any place convenient for
that purpose, John 4.22, 23, 24. The outward worship of Christians consists
in prayer and praises with understanding; sometimes adjoining fasting for the
furtherance of repentance and mortification: in hearing Gods word, and the
reverent use of his sacraments which Christ has appointed, which though they
are outward and visible signs, yet they are but few, plain, and familiar, and
the efficacy of them depends upon the rational and spiritual consideration of
the things signified. But the Papists have changed the whole worship of God
into a pompous, carnal, dead service. They have taken away the Scriptures from
the people, and give them dumb images in stead of them, Con. Trid. Ses. 25.
Dec. 3. Cat. Romans in 1. praecep. Q. 14.
to teach them and to excite their devotion. Instead of preaching the word,
most of their preaching is to set out the praises and lying miracles of their
Saints. Their prayers both public and private are in a tongue unknown to the
people and very often to the Priest also, who only reads by roat: and hereby
prayer is made but a bodily exercise. When the Jesuits had published an
English prayer book for our English Papists, the Pope called it in and
prohibited the use of it. There Lords supper they have changed to a sacrifice
(which the Priest offers with many mystical, but ridiulous, ceremonies and
gestures) which they say obtains the pardon of sin and the grace of God for the
people for whom it is offered, though they understand not what is saidor done,
yea though they be absent, following their worldly business, or their lust at
the same time. They darkne the nature and meaning of baptism by conjuring the
water, putting milk and honey into the mouth, spittle into the ears and on the
tongues, anointing the head, using salt and many such things, which being all
in Latin not understood by the people are more like magical mysteries than
Gospel institutions. Their chief worship and devotion lies in building and
adorning Temples, for Masses, not for preaching; in buying Masses, in decking
of images with Gold, Jewels; in offering incense, and wax Candles; in
pilgrimages, and offerings to their Saints; in vows of forced and usually
feigned chastity, and of Hypocritical and lazy poverty, and such like bodily
exercises which profit little, 1 Timothy 4.8.

4. The Church of Christ owneth him only for her head, King, and Lord. God gave
Christ to be head over all things to his Church which is his body, Ephesians. 1.23.
He has all power in Heaven and earth committed to him to rule and order all
things concerning his Church which is his own house, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20.
Whereupon he appointed Apostles to bring all nations to be his Disciples, to
consecrate and engage them to him by Baptism, and to teach them to observe all
as he commanded. Christ as mediator is the only head of the Church, which is
his body, and all Christians members in particular of him, receiving life,
strength, and spirit from him, and being governed by him. But the Papists
acknowledge and adhere to the Pope as the head of their Church, which they say,
could not be one Church unless it be united to the Pope as their visible head.
Catec. Romans de Symb. Art. 9. Q. 11.
De eo, i. e. Pontifice Romano fuit illa omnium Patrum ratio and sententia
consentiens, hoc visibiel caput ad unitatem ecclesiae constituendam and
conservandam necessarium fuisse. They say that Christ and the Pope make but one
complete Head of the Church; That all which is said in the Canticles or
elsewhere concerning Christ's relation to his Church may be truly applied to
the Pope. That he has all power in heaven and earth given to him.

Pope Boniface the 8. declared that it was absolutely necessary to Salvation
for every man to be subject to the Pope of Rome: Definimus, decernimus,
declaramus esse de necessitate salutis omni humanae creaturae esse subditum
Pontifici Romano; accordingly they teach, peccatum pagantiatis incurrit
quisquis Pontifici non est obediens, i. e. Whosoever is not obedient to the
Pope does thereby become an Heathen. They ascribe to the Pope an universal
headship not of order only, but of power and jurisdiction: he is the Rock, the
foundation of the Church, he gives authority to the Scriptures, and without
him authoritas Scripturarum plane nulla est, says one, i. e. the Scriptures
have no authority at all: he can lay aside the Bible if he please, or dispense
with any of the commands of the old or new Testament says their Canon Law, and
he daily does dispense with oaths, vows, and obligations of all sorts, both to
God and man, with unlawful marriages, etc. They say indeed in disputation that
the Pope is a ministerial head, the Deputy, the Vicar of Christ; but a Minister
is only to execute the pleasure of his Lord; a Deputy and Vicar is to see his
Masters laws and commands observed, not to enact laws of his own, not to relax
or abrogate any of his Masters laws, which power the Pope both challenges and
exercises.

5. Christ's Church professes subjection to his law only, Isa. 33.22. The Lord
is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King. Christ is the
only King of his Church; and the power of making Laws is the chief prerogative
of a King. He gave his word to be the standing Law, whereby his people should
be ruled and guided, and by which they must be judged at the last day, John
12.48. But the Papists have another Law, by which they are governed, and the
Pope is their lawgiver who rules them. The Scriptures they own indeed as the
word of God, but not as his whole mind and law, and that no otherwise than as
the Pope interprets and allows them. They join with the Scriptures
unwritten Traditions, which the Council of Tent says are of equal authority.
Traditiones non scriptas pari pietatis affectu and reverentia suscipit and
veneratur. Conc. Trid. Ses. 4. Cat. Romans Pref. Q. 12.
The Canons of Councils, viz. those that the Pope likes and confirms, and the
decretal Epistles of Popes they reckon equal with the Holy Scriptures.
Decretales epistolae merito inter Scripturas canonicas recensentur. The
consciences of men they do subject to the determinations and commands of the
Pope as to Jesus Christ, so that the law of the Church of Rome is composed and
made up of the Scriptures, Traditions, Canons and decretals of Popes, over all
which the Pope superintends as the supreme lawgiver to confirm, relax, add or
alter as he pleases, according to the known Ruleof Cardinal Cusanus, Lex
currit cum praxi etc. Whatsoever is the present allowed practice of the Church
of Rome, that must be taken for the infallible rule or law of Christ. So that
the will of the Pope is the supreme law of conscience to the Papist in this
world.

6. Christ's Church acknowledges only his Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords
supper. The Sacraments of the Gospel are badges of our professed Subjection to
Christ and of our dependence on him for remission of sins, for grace and
eternal life, and it is fit that Christ alone should appoint what should be the
signs, Seals, and conveyances of his grace and the marks of subjection to him,
and the tokens of the Covenant betwixt him and his people. Christ appointed his
Disciples to enter into his Covenant by the sign and Seal of Baptism, Matthew.
28.19. to renew and confirm this Covenant from time to time by the use of his
holy supper, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24. etc. and he appointed no other but these: and
his people must institute and use no other as signs and Covenant seals betwixt
him and them. But the Papists have added five more, which they own and maintain
to be Sacraments, besides many other significant ceremonies to which they
attribute the use and effects of Sacraments, these they make signs of Gods
Covenant, means to convey grace; some of them as universally necessary as those
that Christ appointed, yea without which Christ's Sacraments are not sufficient
to Salvation, viz. the Sacraments of Confirmation and Penance; of the former
they say, a man cannot be a Christian till he be confirmed by the Bishop,
Baptism is not complete without it. De consecra. did. 5. chapter de jejun.
Nemo potest esse Christianus nisi ad Baptismum accesserit unctio episcopalis,
nisi confirmatione chrismatus. Their penance consists of confession of sin to
the Priest, contrition for sin and the Priests absolution; and they teach that
sins cannot be forgiven unless they be particularly confessed to the Priest,
and he absolve them in the name of Christ upon their undergoing or promise to
undergo some outward austerity or penance imposed on them by him. These
Sacraments are badges and means of their subjection to the Priest and to the
Pope their head, not to Christ. The Lords supper is not sufficient to comfort a
dying Christian, but they add their Sacrament of extreme unction to strengthen
them against the flames of Purgatory. Thus they have more Sacraments and for
other ends than Christ appointed.

7. Christ's Church is to be guided and governed only by the officers and
Ministers of his own appointing; and that according to his word. Christ as the
head and Savior of his Church, has appointed that it shall be instructed and
governed by his laws; guided and ruled by his officers in the practice and
execution of his laws and Commands: what they shall be, he has appointed, Ephesians.
4.11, 12, to 16. viz. Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists to convert the world:
and raise his Church at first, Pastors and Teachers to guide and instruct it to
the end of the world, and these he has ordered to teach his people his
Commands, Matthew. 28.20. to preach his word, administer his Sacraments, and to
be examples to the flock of all humility and holiness not for filthy lucre but
out of desire of their good, 1 Pet. 5.1. to 4. But the Papists have quite
altered the nature and use of the Ministry of the Church. Council. Triden.
Sess. 23. chapter 1, 2, 3. Can. 1, 2.
They have added five or six orders of Officers to those that Christ appointed
only for pomp and superstition, viz. Subdeacons, Exorcists, Readers, Singers,
Acolothites, and Porters. Their Priests preach not the word, but are chiefly
ordained to offer the sacrifice of the Mass, which also is most of their
employment. The Pope the Head of their Church is an earthly Monarch above all
Princes and Emperors, living in all the state and pomp of the old Roman
Emperors, challenging the same honor and observance, and more than they did (
viz. the kissing of his feet) except one or two most insolent Tyrants. His
Cardinals are Princes, and the chief Cardinal Bishop takes place of the
Emperors Ambassador, and the next takes place of all other Ambassadors.
Their whole ministry almost consists in hearing confessions, pardoning sins,
enjoining penance, preaching the authority of the Pope, the Canons and
Traditions of their own Church, and in saying Masses and prayers for the absent
and for the dead.

8. The great design of the Gospel is, that men being reconciled to God may
live to him in all holiness and righteousness; and this is the practice of the
Church of Christ. The Church is redeemed and purchased to be a peculiar people
to Christ zealous of good works; therefore is it called out of the world,
inspired with his spirit of grace and holiness; taught by his holy law; and
subjected to his holy discipline; the work of Christians is to be dying to the
world, mortifying their lust, and growing in grace, in hope of and preparation
for Glory, Titus 2.11, 12, 13, 14. But the design of Popery by keeping the
people ignorant of the word and Sacraments is to bring them into subjection to
the Pope and his Clergy.

Their ordinances and worship tend not to purify the conscience, but under a
vain show of a carnal pompous service to cheat them of knowledge and spiritual
edification, and to enthral men to their Church and their own Institutions.
They teach that the bare use of the Sacraments conferreth grace, though a man
neither understand what he does, nor is serious in it: and if perhaps he should
be serious, yet the efficacy of the Sacraments depends on the Priests
intention; so that if he be not serious or understands not what he does, the
Communicant can have no benefit. They tolerate all manner of wickedness. Pope
Nicholas teaches, it is better for their Clergy to live in secret fornication
than to marry, Satius est pluribus occultis implicari, quam in conspectu mundi
cum una ligari. And the people may live how they please so they be obedient to
the orders of the Church, confess, and receive Mass once a year, this will blot
out all sin; and though a man should live in wickedness all his days, yet if he
but die in their communion, with the Priests absolution, which may be easily
had, he shall go to Purgatory but for a time and so to Heaven: and money may
procure Masses and prayers for him when dead, that will hasten his deliverance
thence also; so that they that will not leave their sins while they live, may
buy their pardon and redemption from torment after they are dead: how can there
be a more effectual way to encourage men in sin?

9. Self-denial, contempt of the world, and bearing the Cross are the
profession and badge of Christ's Church. Our Savior declared that his Kingdom
was not of this world: and his Disciples must not expect, nor fight for it
here, John 18.36. He has promised them his spirit and comforts in a greater
measure than formerly, because they were to meet with much tribulation in this
world, John 16.33. and our Savior has given us this universal rule, except a
man deny himself and take up his cross and follow me, he cannot be my Disciple,
Lub. 14.27. Matthew. 16.24. But the Papists make outward prosperity and grandeur
a mark of the true Church; and that the Pope and Bishops are Princes above all
Princes, and that instead of suffering any persecution they are to make War
upon all Princes that displease them, to destroy by open force of battle or
sudden Massacres, and private treacheries all they can reach that are not
obedient to them, or suspected not to be hearty, or but to favor or be mild
toward those they call Heretics.

10. Heaven is proposed as the certain reward of the servants of Christ. The
grace of God that brings Salvation teaches us to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godlily in this world,
looking for the glorious appearance of God our Savior, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. In
this life Christians are to fight, strive and run, but when this life ends,
their course is finished, and there remains nothing but a Crown of life which
the righteous judge shall give to all them that love his appearance, 2 Timothy
4.6, 7. But the Papists teach that all assurance of Salvation is presumption;
Council. Triden. Ses. 6. chapter 12, 13. Can. 15, 16.
the most we must expect is after many afflictions from Gods hand and voluntary
severities upon our selves to satisfy for sin, at last to go to Purgatory for
a long time there to suffer the same torments that the damned do in Hell. It is
reported of Bellarmin that when some about him would have comforted him at his
death with his great merits, and that he should certainly go to heaven; he
answered, It is not so easy a thing to get to heaven, and that he could be
content to suffer the pains of Purgatory many years if he could be sure to come
to heaven at last. Thus though they tell men they may merit Heaven and do works
of supererogation, viz. more than God requires of them, yet they must go
through Purgatory: hereby robbing them of the comfort of the Gospel, and
miserably enthralling their consciences to themselves and their Tradition.

By all this it is evident that the Papists have altered the nature and ends of
Christian religion, which was the doctrine and institution of Jesus Christ to
exalt him as the only mediator of the Church by whom only we should come to
God, and have framed a new platform of a carnal worldly religion, to exalt the
Pope and his Clergy, and to worship the creatures instead of the Creator. Let
us add their doctrine of persecuting and destroying all Heretics (as they call
them, that is, all that will not obey them) The first Lateran Council, Ann.
Dom. 1215. decrees, Sub Innoc. 3. P.
That if any Prince or Lord be a Heretic or favourer of Heretics, or will not
destroy his own subjects being Heretics, he shall be deprived of his dominion,
and it be given to some other Catholic Prince. Accordingly they gave away the
Estates of diverse Earls, Ramund Earl of Toulouse, the Earl of Besieres and
others, because the former favored, the other would not destroy the Albigenses
their Subjects. Vid. Hist. Walden.
The Inquisition gives orders not only to destroy Heretics, but also all such
as favor them or harbor them, or give them any relief in their distress, or
conceal them or any of their goods; Yea that those, who do not discover and
accuse their own relations or friends being Heretics shall themselves be
punished as Heretics. In Council. Constan.
Pope Martin the 5. decreed by a Bull, That Heretics should not be suffered to
buy or sell, or to enjoy the benefit of humane society. This Doctrine and their
practice according to it makes them an Apostatical body or society, maintaining
it self in opposition to the pure Church of Christ, and therefore to take part
with them, to join with or submit to their interest, is to desert Christ and to
side with or become a member of that great Apostasy.

Let us now take notice of the several characters or marks that the Apostle
gives of this Apostasy, which will further prove the Papists to be guilty of
it. The first is v. 3. That the Head of it is the man of sin, the son of
perdition, (...). An Hebraism, where the genitive of the substantive is put for
the adjective, and that by way of eminency, The sinful or wicked man, as he is
afterward called, v. 8. (...), the wicked or lawless man; v. 3. (...), the son
of perdition, this is exegetical of the former, viz. such a wicked man as is
ripe for and appointed to destruction. By this is meant not a particular
person, but a state or government in the hands of one or more persons, though
perhaps some one of those governors may be intended in a special manner as more
singularly wicked and active than others, even as Nebuchadnezzer was said to be
the head of Gold of the great image, Dan. 2.
i. e. in special manner, though the whole series of the Assyrian and
Babylonian Monarchs for 1300. years was represented thereby. Thus the Devil is
expressed singularly when the whole society of those wicked spirits is
intended, and no one particular meant. And the four Monarchies are expressed by
4. Dan. 7.
Beasts though they were possessed not only by many Kings, but the last by the
people of Rome for a long time, consisting of the Senate and Plebeian. The
Papists would infer from these notes of particularity that Antichrist this man
of sin must be but one particular person, Vid. Whit. resp. ad. Sand. Q. 1.
and therefore not the Popes who have been many.

But themselves grant, what is here said, v. 8. He that lets will let till
he be taken out of the way, is meant of the Roman Empire which was in the hand
of many successively, though expressed as one man: and it is common so to
express States or Kingdoms when we speak of their constitutions, prerogatives
or Laws. And when our Savior, Matthew. 16.18, 19. said to Simon, Thou art Peter,
and upon this rock I will build my Church, and I will give thee the Keys of the
Kingdom, etc. they will needs have it meant that this was granted to Peter and
all his successors the Popes, though none but Peter's name is mentioned. Why
then may we not so understand the man of sin here? The Apostles sense is, there
well come an apostasy of the Church, a declining in and from religion, which
will increase till the man of sin be revealed, i.e. till these apostates shall
frame themselves into a body and state of a most wicked government: this is the
Pope and his Clergy, who successively govern and manage that Apostasy. This
will appear if we consider the wickedness of their Persons, Doctrines and
Practices.

1. For their persons. There was a series of Popes for about an hundred years
in the 10. and 11. Centuries who were Magicians, Murderers, open Adulterers and
destroyers of each other; of whom Genebrard the Jesuit says they were
Apostatici potius quam Apostolici, apostates rather than Apostolical men.
Gregory the 7. they report poisoned 6 Popes his Predecessors to obtain the
Papacy, and was himself a known Magician, he threw the host his breaden God
into the fire, because it would not answer him in his Magical charms. Many
others of them have been professed Magicians, some bold Atheists, as Leo the
10. who said to Cardinal Bembus, Behold what great riches we get by that fable
of Christ, Quantas opes nobis tulit ista fabula de Christo. Most Adulterous
Sodomites, Simoniacks, and some have lived in incest with their own Sisters and
daughters: insomuch that one of themselves gives this testimony, Nemo hodie in
Pentificibus Romany virtutem aut pietatem requirit, Invita Pauli tertii.
optimi putantur si vel mediocriter boni sint, vel minus mali quam caeteri
mortalium esse solent. i.e.} No man looks for virtue or godliness nowadays in
the Popes, they are accounted most excellent if they be but indifferently good,
or not quite so bad as other men.

The Cardinals and all their Clergy are like their head and father, being
allowed Sodomy, fornication, and adultery to keep them chaste, i. e. from
marrying. Where shall we find a man of sin if this be not him?

2. Next consider we their wicked doctrines.

1. That of absolute subjection to the Pope, that whatsoever he commands must
be done though never so wicked. Bellarmine says, Etiamsi Papa erraret
prohibendo virtutem and praecipiendo vitium, etc. Though the Pope should forbid
virtue and command vice he must be obeyed; And their law says, si Papa totos
populos secum in insernum traheret, nemo potest ei dicere, Domine cur ita
facis. i. e. Though the Pope should draw whole Nations into Hell with himself,
yet none may say to him why do thou so. This daily experience attesteth.
Murdering of Kings, destroying of Kingdoms, any villainies must be done and that
upon pain of damnation, if the Pope or any inferior governor of their Clergy
commands it. Never any state or government in the world (though many have been
very wicked) challenged this prerogative to command whatsoever they pleased,
right or wrong, and that men are bound in conscience to obey them though
against God and men, but this the Pope does challenge and practice.

2. The Doctrine of the Popes infallibility, whereby they father all their
errors, superstitions, and corruptions upon the spirit of God. It is
blasphemous against God to imagine that he should annex the infallible guidance
of his spirit to a succession of men who defile and destroy his Church, oppose
his son and his Gospel, and themselves are Monsters of men. Innocent the 10. S.
Amore's Journ.
(who suffered himself and his holy Church to be governed by an impudent Harlot
Don Olympia his own Brothers wife) when the people of Rome complained to him of
the unjust exactions of his Officers answered them, You must not find fault
which mine Officers, for I choose them and I am guided by the infallible spirit
of God. What is more wicked than to ascribe wicked actions to the guidance of
Gods spirit? Some Papists indeed acknowledge not the Popes infallibility, but
then they ascribe it to a Council of Bishops most of them as good and as wise
as the Pope.

Some give it to the whole Roman Church, but it will come all to one, if
whatsoever the Church of Rome or the Heads and guides of it do determine, must
be reckoned infallibly true and good, hereby they wholly wave the Scriptures as
the Rule, and Christ as their Lawgiver, and are both Rule and Lawgivers to
themselves.

3. The Papists have reduced the whole body of the Heathenish worship into the
Church: and this is the greatest part of their worship. The Heathens honored
the good Angels with divine honors, as the servants of the supreme God, that
they might be their friends to him, and that they might do them many good
Offices. They deified men and women eminent in any way, especially Princes,
honored them with Temples, Images, Festival days, and Sacrifices, that they
might mediate with God for the good of their Country, family, or friends,
putting themselves and their affairs under their special protection, and this
took up most of their worship. The Papists do ascribe the very same honor and
worship in all particulars to the Angels and Saints, and for the same reasons
every Country, City, yea every person has his Tutelar Saint, and upon these
they call, and to these they pay more devotion by many degrees than they do to
God.

4. Their Casuists allow common swearing and using of the name of God lightly
in common discourse, and contend that the Third Commandment forbideth only
perjury, swearing falsely or to a false thing in the name of God. Hence it is
that Papists almost universally are common and profane swearers.

5. They teach that the Pope in all and the inferior Clergy in ordinary cases
can dispense with Oaths, Vows and the most solemn obligations that can be made
to God or man. The Pope takes himself for head of the Church, therefore
whatsoever vows and engagements men make to God, he can loose them from them;
when it serves his interest he gives license to men and women to marry, who
have vowed single life, and to his Friars to leave off the habit and rules of
their order, though they have vowed never to lay them aside. Also as he is Lord
of all the world he can give away Kingdoms, loose Subjects from their oaths of
Allegiance, yea make it their duty to break their oaths and to rebel, and what
is most abominable, they can give men leave to take Oaths, to make vows and
protestations on purpose to deceive, when they do not intend they shall be
kept, but be used to carry on their own designs the more secretly by deceiving
the credulous. Hist. Albig. Book 1. chapter 5.
Thus the Popes Legate sent a Gentleman to the Earl of Besiers to draw him into
his Camp, commanding him to assure him in his name by what Oaths and
protestations he would desire, that he should return safe home; as soon as the
poor Earl came into his presence he absolved the messenger from all his Oaths,
kept the Earl prisoner and soon after privately murdered him.

6. They make the Sabbath either a Tradition or an institution of their Church,
profane it with sports and plays, and observe their Saints days with much more
strictness and devotion than the Lords day.

7. The Pope and his Clergy can dissolve all bonds and duties betwixt men. They
can command Princes to destroy their Subjects, and absolve them from all their
oaths and promises to them of protection; They can discharge Subjects from
their obedience to their Princes, and make it meritorious of heaven to kill
them, and a sure way to go to heaven immediately to dye in fighting against
them. They can divorce or separate husbands and Wives at their pleasure.
Council. Trid. Ses. 24. Canon. 6. Can. 8.
Alphonsus the present King of Portugal was deposed and imprisoned by the Popes
order, and his wife taken from him and given to his Brother two now rules the
Kingdom. Parents and children, Masters and servants in case of Heresy must
betray each other; and if they will enter into religious houses or give any
thing to the Church, then they are freed from all obligations to, or care of
their relations. Is not this a man of sin that can and daily does dissolve all
bonds of men to God and of men to themselves?

8. They teach that no faith, leagues, promises are to be kept with Heretics,
or any that are not of their Church. Pope Eugenius the 4 made Vladislaus King
of Hungary break his league with the Turk solemnly sworn by him and all his
Nobles, and absolved them by Julian his Legate. The Council of Constance burnt
John Huss, though the Emperor Sigismond had promised him safe conduct to and
from the Council, they telling the Emperor that Oaths and promises to
Heretics must not be observed.

9. They teach Equivocations and mental reservations both in oaths and common
discourses, viz. that a man may take any Oath, make any promise, answer any
Question directly and plainly according to the words proposed, and yet mean no
such thing or the contrary, keeping another sense or intent in their minds.
Garnet and Tresmond two Jesuits that were in the powder Plot being examined
apart, Tresmond said he had not seen or spoke with Garnet for 14. years before,
Garnet confessed that they two walked and discoursed together in Moorefields
London about four months before they were taken: being asked what his fellow
meant to say they had not met so long a time, he answered, I suppose he meant
to equivocate, and this was excuse enough. Thus all bonds of humane Society and
all means of intercourse and confidence in each other may be dissolved when the
Pope or a Priest pleases. If any Papist pretend to disown any of these
doctrines, I demand by what rule he does it? By the Scripture? the Law of
Nations? or the Law of nature? they all maintain the Pope is above these: These
are not a perfect rule neither apart nor together, nor do reach all cases; if
they did, there were no need of an infallible head to direct the Church, nor
any warrant for most of the worship and practices of the Church of Rome. If
then the Pope be above all, and infallible, then a Papist must believe that in
this and that particular case that concerns him he may and must break his
Oaths, deny his promises, murder, lie, or commit any such enormity when
commanded, or else he prefers his own judgment above the Popes and denies his
principles. Whence we may see that no trust is to be reposed in a Papist,
because they are not masters of their own reason and Conscience, of their Oaths
and promises, but the Pope and their Confessors have the disposal of them all,
and make them do as they please: and so long as their Church challenges a
power and jurisdiction over all the world, and is always contending for it, it
is to be supposed their rulers will always put them upon those things that
promote their own interest.

10. Their doctrines that extenuate sin and make forgiveness very easiy, are
nothing else but doctrines of wickedness. They extenuate sin by their doctrine
of venial sins, which they say are praeter, non contra Legem, not commanded by
God nor forbidden of him, and therefore scarce to be called sins.

Such they make all first thoughts, and motions of the mind and affections to
be, when there is not a deliberate assent with them; all wandering thoughts,
distractions in holy duties, the stirrings of the most vile affections with
some titillation or pleasing are all but natural actions and infirmities which
do not deserve Hell or the wrath of God.

They make pardon of sin very easy. Upon confession to the Priest he does
absolve upon some easy penance almost any sin; and those reserved cases, which
the Priest cannot pardon, are forgiven by the Pope for money. There is a
printed book called Taxa poenitentiariae Apostolicae, wherein the prices are
set down for all manner of sins: and in the general all sins against God and
his Law are more easily forgiven than those against the Popes law and
Tradition. What need men fear to commit sin that can be so easily remitted,
especially to them that have money? They have also another device of
transferring their sins upon their friends, viz. a few friends agree together
to take each others sins upon them, so that he who dies first leaves his sins
to be satisfied for by the Survivours; and they again take others into their
number, and so can sin securely, having Executors to pay their debts for them
when they are dead. The Sacrifice of the Mass offered for them by the Priest
alone expiates all sin, so that for 6 pence or 12 pence a Mass, any sins may be
taken away, though they be not present or concerned about it, or be committing
wickedness the mean while.

Lastly, Though a man live all his days in wickedness, if he die in the
communion of the Church of Rome and be absolved by a Priest, which is rarely
denied to any, he must go but to Purgatory and there satisfy for all his sins,
and at last be saved: and if he leave any thing to the Church, or his friends
will buy Masses or prayers for him, his time in Purgatory shall be shortened
and his pains lessned.

3. Thirdly, Their Practice is as wicked as their doctrine, not that only of
particular persons, which is incident to all societies, but the allowed
practice of the Church, and that whereby their State is upheld. To instance in
a few.

1. They persecute and by all means destroy all that submit not to them in
every thing; so that in Rome is found the blood of all the Saints and Martyrs
that have been slain in all the earth, being shed by her command. About the
year 750. the Popes Gregory 2. and 3. begun wars against the Emperors and their
adherents in the defense of Image worship, and afterward renewed them to obtain
the right of investitures or bestowing of all Ecclesiastical preferments, and
to deprive the Emperors of their power of electing the Pope, till they had
brought the Emperors under their feet, and compelled all the Clergy to put
away their Wives. Thus the Popes ruined all Christendom for about 400. years,
till they had got all the power into their hands: and ever since they have shed
blood in abundance to preserve what they had gotten. They began with the
Waldenses about the year 1160. of whom T^uanus says they had slain above two
Millions, and they have added many thousands more of late years of that poor
people. Afterward they destroyed many thousands in Bohemia, in Germany both in
the former and late wars. Virgerius who was the Popes Nuncio tells us that in
the space of 30. years at the first resormation their inquisition in several
parts had secretly made away 150000 persons. The Duke of Alva Governor of the
Neatherlands in a few years is said to cut off 36000. The French Massacre Ann.
1572. in one Month treacherously and barbarously destroyed above 30000. In the
late Irish rebellion Ann. 1641. they destroyed above 300000. of all ages and
conditions: and what they have done and attempted and do still attempt upon
this Land is well known. All these were authorized by the Popes, and had their
benediction and prayers for success; besides the innumerable company of Martyrs
which they have put to death by form of trials in all countries.

2. Their toleration of all uncleanness, besides what they allow in their
Clergy privately. They have public Stews in all Cities of Italy and Spain, and
the Pope has a tribute from them for their Licenses. Pope Sixtus the 4. built
at his own Charge a famous Stew in Rome both for men and women. Paul the 3. had
Catalogues found amongst his Papers after his death, of 45000. Strumpets, who
paid him a monthly imposition.

3. They are allowed Simony, i. e. selling of all Ecclesiastical offices. There
is another book called Taxa cancalleriae apostolicae i. e. of the Popes
Chamber, wherein the prices of all benefices, and promotions are set down: no
places of any value are disposed of without money. A nameless Papist dedicated
a book to King James wherein he acquaints him that all the Popes from Clement
the 7. Called the new man.
to his time had got the Popedom by Simony and other indirect means. This he
was able to prove: but he might truly have said, so did all the rest for many
ages before. In England formerly benefices have been sold to two, three, or
more, sometimes to ten several persons, and then when the incumbent died, the
Pope must be judge who shall have it of all these, which shall certainly be he
that will give most money; Thus they make woeful Merchandise with men's souls.

4. Continual endeavors to stir up wars and imbroil Nations. The Pope pretends
to be Lord of Lords and King of Kings: and therefore he disposes of Kingdoms,
sets up and pulls down Princes as he pleases, and this is a sufficient pretense
for any unjust wars and invasions; and wherever there are any differences among
Princes and their Subjects, he interposeth his authority, usually taking the
unjust part (if like to prevail) that they being beholding to him may requite
him with some addition to his authority or revenue. Pope Zacheriah gave France
to Pipin an aspiring man, deposing Childerick their lawful King as unfit to
govern. Leo the 4. gave the Empire of the Romans to Charles the great, and
another gave England to the French in King John's time, and sent them to Conquer
it: and of late the Pope gave the East Indies to the Portugal, and the West to
the Spaniard, where they murdered the poor natives as wild beasts made to be
destroyed.

These doctrines and practices are not taught and practiced by a few only among
them, but they are the State policies by which they stand, which they never
disown, never endeavor to reform: it is the design of their government to be
universal and to attain it by any means.

Hence we infer that to hold communion with this Church is to conspire against
the Church of Christ, against all that is sacred or moral. Nor may we expect
any reformation from them, they will not they cannot be better; their interest
and government depends upon these methods, and therefore this Man of sin is the
son of perdition appointed to be destroyed, not to be reformed: let us not
deceive our selves with vain hopes; They are and must be the same when they
have opportunity.

The second character of this Apostasy is laid down v. 4. Who opposes
himself, viz. the man of sin the Head of this apostasy. (...), an adversary or
one that sets himsel against Christ. The same title that is given to the Devil,
viz. Satan an enemy or adversary. Now the Devil was an adversary not by denying
the true God; he believes and trembles, James 2.19. nor by causing himself to
be worshipped as the supreme God; for the Idols which the Heathens worshipped,
they worshipped as Mediators and servants to the supreme God; but under this
pretense the Devil took to himself all the worship and service of the world,
and left God but an empty name of Creator and supreme residing in heaven, when
he himself was the God of this world, ordering all things after his own lusts:
this the Devil did so long as Heathenism prevailed, by the several Governors
and Princes of the world, and when he was cast out of Heaven, viz. his worship,
Idolatry and Heathenish superstition abolished by the fail of the Heathen Roman
Empire, Rev. 12. v. 7, 8, 9, 10.
and opposition to the name of Christ was taken away, he cast about, and after
some time delivered his power to the second Beast who used the power and
tyranny of the former Beast; i. e. the Roman Empire opposing Christ and his
worship, setting up himself with all superstition and Idolatry, but under fair
pretenses of Christ's authority, Rev. 13.11, 12, etc. This beast was like a
Lamb, but spoke as the Dragon, and used all the power of the former beast, viz.
the Heathen government. Now that the Pope and his adherents do thus oppose
Christ and not his name but his power and worship, drawing all subjection to
himself and leaving Christ but a bare and empty title, he being as Stapleton
calls him plain supremum in terris numen, i. e. the most high and absolute God
in earth,

It is manifest,

1. The Pope will not suffer Christ to be King and lawmakers in his Church.
Kingly power consists in making laws and ruling according to them; this
belongs to Christ; and he gave his word to be the law of his Church, and his
Mininisters to execute and administer it according to his mind. But the Pope
challenges the sole power and government of the Church on earth to belong to
him; the authority of the Scriptures to belong to him; that he can add to them,
take from them, or dispense with any thing there commanded; that he only must
interpret and give them their sense; that his determinations is the rule of
conscience, for whatsoever he defines or commands is to be believed and
obeyed: and so under the pretense of Christ's Vicar he rules as Christ on earth.

2. The Pope will not allow Christ to appoint the ordinances of his own
worship. It belongs to Christ as King to appoint how and by whom he will be
worshipped, but the Pope will not give him leave. He appoints more orders of
Officers than Christ did; more Sacraments, and alters those of his appointing;
the bread in the supper he makes a God to be worshipped, and yet a Sacrifice
to be offered to God; the cup he takes away from the people, the Council of
Trent most insolently telling us that though our Lord Christ instituted and
gave his supper to his Apostles under both kinds, of bread and wine, yet that
does not oblige all the faithful to receive it under both kinds. Council. Trid.
Ses. 21. chapter 1.
Etsi Christus dominus in ultima coena venerabile hoc Sacramentum in panis and
vini specicbus instituit and Apostlis tradidit: non tamen illa institutio and
traditio ^o tendunt, ut omnes Christi fideles statuto domini ad utramque
speciem accipiendam astringantur? He appoints Saints and Angels and especially
Christ's Mother to be worshipped and honored, yea the very Cross on which he
was murdered, pretending these to be more honor to Christ than the preaching
or hearing his holy word. Almost the whole body of the Papists worship is of
the Popes own institution.

3. The Pope will not suffer Christ to appoint the means of his own grace to
Salvation. Christ as the Savior of his people, as divine and Princely Savior
is to appoint and has appointed by what means and in what duties he will
bestow and increase his grace to eternal life: but the Pope lays these aside at
his pleasure, viz. the reading and hearing the Scripture, the use of the
Sacraments, and prayer in a tongue that can be understood by those that use it,
and appoints more upon which the greatest stress of salvation is laid; as
confession of sin to Priest, without out which there is no forgiveness to the
living; and private Masses both for the quick and dead; anointing of Children
to confirm them in grace, and anointing the dying to strengthen and comfort
them against the terror of death; crosses and holy water to drive away the
devil; and so many of this kind that they have greatly obscured the means of
grace that Christ instituted.

4. The Pope opposes Christ in the main ends of his coming into the world.
Christ came to take away sin, to finish transgression and to bring in
everlasting righteousness by once sacrificing himself to the Father, Dan. 9.24.
Heb. 10.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. But the Pope will have Christ offered for sin in
every Mass, as truly as he was upon the Cross; and that it is as satisfactory
and meritorious; he will have the merits of Saints, our own penance, and
purgatory oster death to satisfy for and take away sin, whereby the
satisfaction of Christ is rendered as still unfulfilled and the pardon of sin
unprocured as it was before his coming into the world. Christ came to give a
greater measure of his spirit to the Church, that his people might have more
freedom of access to God, Ephesians. 3.12. more boldness with him, Heb. 10.19, 20.
and more abundant grace to enable them to pray to and serve God, Romans 8.25.
John 10.10. for having removed the shadows and sacrifices of the Law, and
clearly exhibited himself and his redemption, they were now to come with
greater confidence and freedom through his name to the Father, John 16.23, 24.
but the Pope disappointeth all this by hiding from the people the plain
doctrine of salvation, by teaching them that they must not come to him
immediately but by the mediation of his Mother and all the Saints, and that
these must be engaged by many prayers, Temples and offerings to interceed with
Christ for them, whereby the service of the Gospel is made as uncomfortable and
as chargable as that of the Law; and the people are kept in as much ignorance
as ever the Jews were, and in as much bondage to their Priests and more,
without whose Masses and absolutions they cannot be forgiven: yea by their
doctrines and uncertainty of Salvation, penances, satisfactions, and purgatory,
and the necessity of Christ's being often sacrificed for them, their
consciences are brought into a far greater bondage than ever the Jews were in.
Again Christ by his death, resurrection and ascension has obtained all power,
conquered the Devil, opened a clear way into heaven for his servants, Heb.
2.14. Philip. 2.9, 10. Heb. 6.19, 20, 29. But the Papists keep the people in as
great bondage by fear of the Devil as ever the Heathens were in: except there
be a Cross in the way they are in danger to meet him at every turning, in every
Churchyard, Market, etc. yea every time they go out of doors unless they cross
themselves, or be sprinkled with holy water: if it were not for crosses the
devil would get into their meat, their drink, their books, their beds, and into
their pockets also. And as for Christ's entering into Heaven it is little
comfort to them, seeing they must hope to go thither but after some thousands
of years spent in the pains of Purgatory.

5. Christ abolished the Tyranny and bondage his people were in both to Heathen
Monarchs and the Jewish Polity. Christ appeared in the latter end of the fourth
Monarchy to set up his Kingdom, that his people might be subject to him, and no
longer to the lusts and wills of lawless Tyrants as they had successively been
oppressed and devoured both by Babylonians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans: and
he promised that Kings should be their nursing fathers and Queens nursing
mothers, being subject as well as they to the laws of Christ. But the Pope
interposeth and usurpeth all the domination and prerogatives, and exercises
all the Tyranny of the Roman Emperors, causing all people to submit to Rome
with as great slavery as ever, Rev. 13. v. 15, 16, etc. and makes laws as
absolutely by his own will as ever the Heathens did. Christ also dissolved the
Jewish Polity that his people should no longer be bound to one temple, City or
Land for any part of their worship as the Jews were to Canaan and Jerusalem; or
to any Common wealth of People: but that in all places they might lift up pure
hands to him, and have his presence with them wherever two or three should be
gathered in his name for the intents or purposes of his worship, Matthew. 18.19,
20. But the Pope will have Rome to be the mother of all the Churches, thither
all the world must come to keep their Jubilees every five and twenty years,
thither they must bring their controversies and hard cases; and many sins
cannot be forgiven without coming to him as the high Priest: all Churches
depend upon him, yea are one body whereof he is the Head, and must receive
their laws, their Priests, their benedictions all from him and his power: so
that they are in greater bondage than the Jews were, by how much they are
dispersed abroad in the world, and are more numerous.

A third character of this Apostasy is insolent pride, v. 4. This man of sin
and adversary of Christ exalts himself above all that is worshipped or called
God, (...), or as Calvin in loc. (...), he is lifted up above all that is
called God, (...), or that is any way sacred. We read of some Heathen Princes,
as Romulus, Alexander, etc. that would be accounted the sons of God and be
worshipped, but their own people detested their pride, and yet they
acknowledged a supreme God above them. Caligula would be thought equal with
Jupiter their chief God: but these were impious insolences never established
by laws, or approved by the people, much less defended and practiced by
succeeding generations: but this Popes arrogate to themselves through many ages
successively: this their whole Clergy defend and their whole people practice:
yea it is the very soul and life of the Popedom to be honored and obeyed above
all that is called God.

1. Magistrates are called Gods, being Gods Vicegerents, Psalm 82.6. But the
Pope exalts himself above all these, challenging the dominion of the whole
world to be given to him; and he disposes of it to whom he pleases: He
calls Emperors and Kings his servants and vassals: He sets them up and pulls
them down at his pleasure. Paul the 4. taxed Queen Elizabeth with insolency for
presuming to take the Crown without his leave. The Roman Ceremonial appoints
that when the Pope rides abroad the Emperor or chief King that is present, or
their Ambassadors in their absence should hold his Stirrup, and accordingly
some Emperors have done it, and have been checked for holding the wrong
Stirrup, and if the Pope be disposed to be carried in his Chair, the Emperor,
Kings, and their Ambassadors are to put their shoulders to it.

2. He exalts himself above all the Ministry. Lanis the general of the
Jesuits maintained in a set Lecture at the Council of Trent; that the sole
power of the Church was committed to Peter, and that the other Apostles,
Evangelists, etc. received their Power from him. In like manner the Pope as
Peter's successor has the sole power of the universal Church, and all Bishops,
Priests, etc. receive their power from him. So that all are but his Deputies,
his servants, the disposal of all Bishoprics and benefices (if he please
throughout the world) belongs to him. The power of Excommunication and
absolution, of making and altering all Ecclesiastical laws and injunctions
resides in him, and to him all appeals must be made.

3. The Pope challenges power over the Devils. They have their book of
exorcismes; the office of exorcists, their many mysteries, certain prayers,
forms of words, Holy water, consecrated circles, etc. by which they pretend to
cast out, to raise, to lay, and bind the Devil as they please.

4. They pretend also that the Holy Angels and glorified Saints are at their
Command. Pope Clement 6. the first author of their Jubilees, in his Bull,
wherein he promised great privileges to all that would come to Rome, adds
this, viz. that if any of these holy Pilgrims should chance to die by the way
in their journey, he commands the holy Angels immediately to transport their
souls to heaven. The Keys of heaven are one of the Ensigns of the Popes
dignity: he can unsaint those that are gone to heaven: he can release out of
Purgatory as soon, or detain there as long as he pleases. Yea Pope Gregory the
1. they say by his prayers brought the soul of Trajanus the Emperor out of
Hell, 500. Years after he was dead. They interpret the 8. Psalm v. 4. etc. of
the Pope, viz. he is that son of man that is crowned with glory and dignity,
that has dominion over all the works of God, that has all things put under
his feet, all Sheep and Oxen, i. e. all Christians; all the Beasts of the
field, i. e. all the Infidels; the Fowls of heaven, i e. the Angels and Saints
above; and the fish of the Sea, i. e. the souls in Purgatory.

5. The Pope exalts himself above Christ, he challenges the sole government
of the Church on earth to belong to him, to make and abrogate Laws and to guide
it infallibly: so that Christ now has nothing to do with the Church militant,
he can and daily does interpret and dispense with the Laws of Christ, and has
authority above his word. When the Pope goes out of Town, the host his breaden
God is carried on Horseback amongst his Sumpters and other furnitures a day
beforehand, as one of his utensils, and in the Church the Pope sits above
the Altar and above the Host, and gives it but a small nod as he passes by,
when the people give ten times more reverence to him than they do to the Host,
even according to their own ceremonies.

6. He exalts himself above God. He takes more care to have his own Laws
observed than Gods commands, and punishes the violation of them more severely
than sins against God. To speak against the Pope, the virgin Mary, or any of
their Saints, to work on their Holy Days, to eat flesh on a fast day
(especially in Lent) are greater offenses and harder to be forgiven, than any
sins against God. Yea it is the design of the Papacy to exalt themselves
whatever comes of the honor of God. A man may be of any religion or no
religion, may live as he please so he own the Popes power and hold the
Communion of that Church, and this is all their unity they so much brag of.
Papa potest omnia quae Deus potest, say their Canonists, The Pope can do all
that God can do; yea and more, as they add, potest facere justum ex injusto, he
can make evil good, vice to be virtue, yea every Popish Priest, they say, can
make his God and maker out of a piece of bread. A Friar in a Sermon before the
Spanish Governor at Milan, magnifying the Priests power said, a Priest could
do more than God, For God could only make creatures, but every Priest could
make the infinite God, the maker of all, which God could not do; and yet, says
the Author, this passed without control.

The Apostle amplifieth this pride in the next words, he exalts himself so as
he sits as God in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, i. e.
he rules in the Church of God, and challenges honor from the Church, as if
he were God. The Papists would hence infer that Antichrist or this man of sin
shall be a Leader of the Jews sitting and being worshipped in their Temple at
Jerusalem, to be rebuilt by him; but that Temple shall never be rebuilt: when
the Jews attempted it in Julians time, they were hindered by fire breaking out
of the earth and descending from heaven; and the Jews themselves shall all be
converted to Christ. The Temple of God here is his Church in which the Man of
sin must sit, who must therefore be an apostate Christian only, not the Turk
neither alone, as some Papists would have it, nor in conjunction with the
Poipe, as some Protestants think, Piscator in Loc.
he never was a Christian nor sits in the Church, nor endeavors to alter
or corrupt the worship of it, nor assumeth divine prerogatives to himself, nor
was known to the world for many ages after this was written; neither his
religion, name, or Nation: whereas this mystery of iniquity was working in the
Apostles days; and by him discovered and pointed at to the Church. But that the
Pope does sit in the Church as if he were God, is manifest. It is not amiss to
observe the word here used (...), he sits in the Temple of God, is the term
the Popes use. Kings are said to reign, Popes to sit so many years, and Rome it
self is Seeds Apostolica, the Apostolical See or Seat.

1. The Pope challenges an absolute universal power over the whole world. When
John the Bishop of Constantinople usurped the title of universal Bishop, Pope
Gregory the 1. called him the King of pride, the forerunner of Antichrist; yet
he challenged that title only over the Church; and meant it only of a primacy
of order to be the first and chief Bishop: but Boniface the 3. ten years after
obtained to be head and universal Bishop, and his successors have ever since
used it, exercising an absolute jurisdiction both in Civil and Ecclesiastical
matters. The Pope challenges the disposal of all Kingdoms; if there be any
question about succession, or any controversy among Princes, he interposeth,
and pretends to decide all, as having the absolute power of disposing and
ordering all things; and in the Church the sole authority belongs to him of
binding and loosing, of appointing Bishops and Ministers and degrading them, of
conferring all employments, receiving all appeals, not only in reserved cases,
but in all ordinary cases when he pleases, or the parties please to remove the
case to Rome. This is a power beyond a mortal man, a charge that no creature
can perform, to inspect and order the affairs of the whole world both of this
life and that which is to come.

2. He challenges an absolute power to make laws for the whole Church.
Whatsoever he appoints, though against Scripture and reason, must be
accounted good and be observed. He must with authority interpret Scriptures,
and what he determines must be received as the sense of them. He declares
what is Heresy and Schism, he judges all things and persons, but must himself
be judged of none. Now this is a Divine power and God's prerogative, that the
reason and consciences of men should be subject to him. We are to submit our
reason to God, because he cannot err; and our conscience to him, because he can
command nothing but what is good, yea things are good because he commands them;
therefore the Pope in usurping this power sits as God.

3. He claims a power to dispense with Gods Laws and to appoint new means
whereby men should come to heaven. He does frequently dispense with marriages
in all the forbidden degrees: Council. Trid. Ses.} 24. Can. 3.4.6.
and the Council of Trent curses those that think the Church has not power to
forbid marriage in more degrees than the Scripture prescribes: or to alter
those there set down: and to allow marriage in those cases as it shall see
cause. The Scripture says, marriage is honorable in all, Heb. 13.3. but the
Pope, says it is not only a disgrace but a damning sin for any of the
Ministers of the Gospel to marry. It is Gods law, 1 Cor. 7.2. to avoid
fornication, every man should have his own Wife and every woman her own
Husband: but the Pope says, it is better for Priests to live in fornication
than to marry; yea and for all persons it is meritorious of heaven to vow not to
marry, though they live in all uncleanness: he dispenses with Oaths and vows,
and nothing humane or divine is or can he obliging any further than he allows
it, he being the supreme judge, and determiner of all things. God allows us
the use of all meats fit for food; but the Pope forbids the use of many: yea
annexeth merit and the promise of heaven to the forbearance of certain meats at
certain times, though they gorge and glut themselves with other sorts of
dainties. And here let us observe that the Apostle speaks of an apostasy
from the faith that should be in the latter times, v. 1. and he gives this as
one character of this apostasy, that these apostates should forbid marriage,
and the use of meats in an hypocritical pretense of godliness: which does so
point out the Papists as if they had been named, none but they teaching those
doctrines, especially that of forbidding marriage. The Pope makes it
meritorious of pardon, and great immunitys, to wear the habits to certain Monks
and Friars, to be buried in a Monks cowle, or in the gown of a Capuchin or
Carmelite Friar, but above all to the saying of so many Ave-maries or Pater
Nosters in the 7. chief Churches of Rome, which will procure some hundred
thousand years pardon.

4. He pretends to forgive sin. The Jews could say, Who can forgive sin but God
only? and he that takes upon him to forgive sin, Luke 5.21.
makes himself a God. But with the Papists, every Priest takes upon him to
forgive sin: yea a man cannot be forgiven unless he be first absolved by the
Priest: much more does the Pope claim, a power to forgive all sin, and that not
declarative only, to pronounce the promises of pardon to the penitent; but
authoritative also, to give absolution and heaven to whom he pleases. In his
Jubilees he carries in his hand a golden hammer to break open Paradise for all
the Pilgrims that come to Rome.

They do often publish and sell indulgences for all manner of sins: it was one
special thing that stirred up the spirit of Luther, that Friar Teselius came
into Germany with indulgencies from Leo the 10. publishing in all Markets and
Fairs that he could grant pardon for all manner of sins, even though a man had
laid with the Virgin Mary. The Pope can prevent men's going to Purgatory at all,
or shorten and lengthen their time there as he pleases, though they teach
Purgatory to be a place where men must satisfy for their sins. Part. 3. tit.
22. cap. 5.5.6, 7.
Antoninus makes a grave Quere whether the Pope may empty Purgatory and
release all the souls that be there; and as gravely determines, that out of
the fullness of his power he may without doubt do it, though he thinks it not
expedient he should: and so does the Pope too, for then the private Masses and
prayers for the dead, (which are a great part of their service, and by which
the poor Priests get their livelihood) would cease.

5. The Pope takes to himself the name and titles of God and Christ. Dominus
Deus noster Papa, our Lord God the Pope, is the language of their Canon Law.
Paul the 5. caused a triumphal Arch to be set up at Tolentum, under which he
was to enter the City, with this inscription, Paulo quinto Vice deo, to Paul
the 5. the vice-God. They say the Pope is the rock, the foundation of the
Church, her head and husband, Lord of Lords and King of Kings etc. When some
among themselves were offended at these blasphemous titles; Bishop Beedle
informs while he was in Italy about 70. years since, there was a congregation
appointed at Rome to redress these abuses, Beed. answer to Wodsw.
called congregatio de moderandis titulis; but before they could do any thing
to purpose, the Pope forbid them to proceed, because, he said, there were no
titles given him but what, dignitas and praerogativa Sancti Petri etc. the
dignitys and prerogatives of Peter would well enough bear. Thus this Roman
State is the Beast in whose head are the names of Blasphemy. Rev. 13.1.


Hence it appears, though the Pope call himself the servant of servants and the
Vicar of Christ, yet he does indeed usurp the place of Christ and the honor
and authority of God himself; wherefore he is deservedly accounted the
Antichrist in both senses of the word, Hostis and emulus Christi, both the
opposer of Christ and his competitour that contends with him for honor, and
usurps his place and dignity. The Apostle says, that there were many
Antichrists in the world in his time, 1 John 2.18. and that the spirit of
Antichrist was then entered into the world, 1 John 4.3. and that these
Antichrists were apostates from the Christian Church. They went out from us,
chap. 2.19. but yet that there was one special Antichrist to come, of which the
Church was forewarned, you have heard that Antichrist should come, cap. 2.18.
and surely there has never been a more dangerous enemy of Christ than this
apostate State of Rome. The Heathens had but one way of opposing Christ, viz.
persecution, which tended much to the honor of Christ and his grace by the
sufferings of the faithful: but these both destroy by persecution those that
are most upright, and corrupt and poison the rest by error, superstition and
Idolatry. The Papists plead that Antichrist shall deny both God and Christ his
person and incarnation, 1 John 2.22. cap. 4.3. But this the Pope does not: yet
the does it in effect though not in words, when he uses and exercises the
names, titles, power and office both of the father and the Son, and has set
himself against the pure doctrine, worship, and discipline of the Gospel. The
Papists cannot prove from this or any other place certainly that such an
Antichrist as they describe is to be expected: and we do prove all the
properties of Antichrist to belong to the Pope, even this of denying Christ to
be come in the flesh in effect though not expressly, and yet some of them have
called the Gospel a fable: and have been professed Atheists. If Christ rule not
his Church, if the Pope be head, with absolute power over it, if Christ he
daily made of a bit of bread and daily Sacrificed by the Priest to make
atonement with the Father, as they teach and practice, this is in effect to
say he is not come, nor has made satisfaction to God for the sins of his
people. However we need not contend whether the Pope be: (...) the Antichrist
that what to come, or some other Heretic may be intended; we are sure
Antichrist fits the Pope; and we have little more of him than his name, but
that he is the man of sin, the Son of perdition, the author and maintainer of a
general apostasy; and that Rome is the Whore of Babylon, is clear from this
place and Rev. 17. and this is all the Protestants mean by the name of
Antichrist.

V;se From all this we infer, 1. That pretense of some Papists that they are
of the Church but not of the Court of Rome, i. e. for the Romish religion, but
not for the Popes supremacy, is altogether vain. The Pope as Pope claims the
full power of Christ both over the Church and over the world, and if they
believe him to be infallible, they must believe he has this power also; if he
deceives them in this, he may deceive them in matters of religion likewise.
But they that will refuse the Oaths of Allegiance and supremacy, because those
deny the Popes jurisdiction over our Kings, and can consent to the deposing of
their persons and the giving away their Kindoms to strangers, are certainly for
the Court as well as for the Church of Rome.

2. That the Pope is not to be acknowledged or respected as a temporal Prince.
The power he has is usurped on the pretense of being head of the Church, which
is a power Christ never gave, a magistracy that God never instituted; his
titles and claims are blasphemous; he rules as a God not as Gods vicegerent,
nor does he use his power for the proper ends of government, to maintain the
true religion, justice, honesty, or sobriety among men, and to preserve the
peace of the world, but to subvert religion, justice, and all morality, and to
imbroil all nations for his own interest. As a society of Bandites or Pirates
is no commonwealth, but they are to be reckoned hostis humani generis, enemies
of mankind; so the Pope is to be reckoned hostis Ecclesia, the professed
irreconcilable enemy of Christ: and it is some degree of defection to have any
commerce with or any respect for that Antichristian State.

Ver. 5. The Apostle having spoke thus much of the man of sin, calls the
These. to remembrance of what he had said to them about this matter when
present with them. Remember ye not that when I was yet with you I told you
these things? Moses forewarned Israel of a great apostasy, that would be among
them; even such as would threaten utter destruction, did not God remember his
Covenant; and that even then there was such a leaven working a nongst them. Our
Savior foretold his disciples that false Christ's and false Prophets should
arise, and deceive many; and the Apostles in all their Epistlesforetell that
seducers and defections would come in the Church: all which is done to prevent
the security that men are prone to, and that the Godly might both beware of,
and be less startled at such things when they should see them come to pass.

The Apostle adds, v. 6. and now you know what withholdeth, that he might be
revealed in his time. He had told the Thessalonians, what would delay the power
and revelation of this Man of sin for a time; that he might not prevail till
the appointed time, and then he should discover himself; for he should not get
his power or show his wickedness all at once or apparently till some letts be
removed out of his way, but should secretly insinuate and grow by degrees till
he should come to his full strength.

Ver. 8. For the Mystery of iniquity does already work: only he who now lets
will let, until he be taken out of the way. Ver. 8. And then shall that
wicked be revealed. The Apostle saw that there was even in his days some
beginnings of this Man of sin, some tendency toward the great apostasy; but it
was secret and a mystery of iniquity; this is another character of this
apostasy, viz. that it should be mysterious, and under fair pretenses. Christ
and the true doctrine of Salvation are, (...), the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy
1.16.
and the apostasy from this faith is (...), a mystery of iniquity. The great
Whore, Rev. 17.5. had a name written in her forehead, Mystery, Babylon the
great, the Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the earth. Though she should
be both unclean and wicked her self, and the author of it to all the earth, yet
it should be under fair pretenses in a mystery. Some travelers have observed
amongst other antiquities at Rome, Du Moul. Accom. of proph. Rev. 17.
that there are shown some ancient Miters of former Popes, that have the word
Mysterium in Golden characters upon the front of them; as if she had been
ambitious to have the prophecy verified of her self. The Apostle also, 1 Timothy
4.3. says that the apostasy of the latter times should be brought about by
men, that talk lies in Hypocrisy, forbidding to marry, and to eat certain
meats, etc. This plainly points out the Church of Rome. The Heathens, Jews and
Turks are open and professed enemies of Christ, but the Pope is a secret and
mystical enemy that betrays Christ with a kiss and under the pretext of
friendship. Their pretenses are such as these.

1. That the Popes absolute power is for the honor of Christ; that it was fit
that he that is Lord of Lords and King of Kings, should have a servant or
Deputy on earth, who should have Sovereign power over all persons and causes:
That his Church should not be subject to secular men and temporal Princes, but
to one who is Christ's immediate Vicar. They say it is not fit the Ministers of
Christ should be under the power of men of this world, or that they should
judge of Ecclesiastical causes or dispose of Ecclesiastical employments, but
that all should be managed by a spiritual Court and spiritual person.

2. They pretend the benefit of the Church. It is necessary, they say, that as
the Church is one body on earth, though dispersed in all quarters, so it should
have one visible Head, who should be the fountain of Unity, that he should have
supreme and absolute power to judge all persons, and to determine all cases, to
prevent divisions and to preserve Unity, to maintain the doctrine and worship
of the Gospel, and to prevent or redress errors and corruptions; and that
things may be managed with safety, it is necessary this Head should be
infallible; who may neither be subject to deceive, or be deceived: for what end
shall there be of Questions and controversies in Religion, or in Civil matters?
How shall Heresies, Schisms, Wars and Seditions be prevented, if there be not a
supreme infallible head and judge, whose authority and decision may put an end
to all strife and lead into all truth?

3. They pretend great care of the peoples Salvation. They take away the
Scriptures from them, for fear they should profane them by using them in
common discourse; or fall into error and Heresies by mistaking the meaning of
them; or be puffed up with knowledge, and so be disobedient to their teachers,
and run into Sects and divisions; therefore they give them Images, Crucifixes
etc. which they call Laymens books to stir up their devotion, without danger of
making them heady or highminded; they allow them little preaching, and
celeberate all the worship of God in an unknown tongue, that the people may not
grow slight and profane; and that they may still admire what they understand
not, ignorance being the best mother of devotion; and for the greater security
and ease they teach them implicitly to believe what the Church believes, and
that being infallible they cannot believe amiss, especially when they know not
in particular what she believes, nor can call her faith into Question.

4. They pretend great devotion and zeal to Gods worship; spiritual knowledge,
pious affections, spiritual worship, such as teaching the word, prayer, and use
of plain Sacraments as Christ appointed them, they think are mean things
instead of these they build Temples, adorn Images, adore the bread in the
Eucharist, offer incense, Tapers, and many gifts, as more real devotion. Conc.
Trid. Ses. 25.
The Council of Trent commands that the Priests should carefully teach the
people the right use of Images, which are to mind them of their Saints, their
virtues, and miracles and sufferings, that they may be stirred up thereby to
the imitation of them. Their worship of the Virgin is devotion to her Son; and
their praying to Saints and Angels is honor to God whose servants they are:
and the Pomp and riches of the Pope and his Bishops is to preserve the Gospel
in honor, and religion from contempt.

5. They pretend great mortification. They have frequent fasts at least, from
flesh and some sorts of food to curb keep down the flesh has they pretend.
Their voluntary penance, whippings, pilgrimages to remote places, confessing
all their sins to a Priest, and craving his absolution, and all to show their
sorrow for sin, and to break them off from it more surely than the plain
Spiritual means of the word and prayer. It is thought great selfdenyal to
forsake the world, to live in wildernesses and Monasteries, to vow single life,
and to refrain those comforts and employments which God has both allowed and
commanded.

6. They pretend great humility. It is humility in them to be subject to their
superiors, especially the Pope, against their own reason and conscience, and
to obey all the commands and ordinances of their Church without presuming to
inquire into the reason of them, or to prove them by Scripture. They account it
presumption to pretend to assurance of Salvation, and great humility to live
and dye in doubt; but especially that the best of them must not pretend to go
to Heaven but through long suffering the pains of Purgatory, and the help of
the prayers of the Church on earth, and of the merits of the Church in Heaven.

7. They pretend great care to have the Ministry pure and industrious,
therefore they allow them not to marry, because (said Pope Ciricius) they that
are in the flesh cannot please God: and that being free from the cares of a
family, they may wholly attend upon their Ministry: and lest the service of
Parish Priests should not be sufficient, they have multitudes of Monks and
Friars to help them in private, and whose prayers and private Masses are always
going for the benefit of the Church.

Thus they have plausible pretenses for all their doctrines and practices;
nevertheless it is a mystery of iniquity in every particular.

1. The universal power the Pope claims is only to set up himself and his own
institutions; therefore he takes upon him all the state and grandeur of the
Roman Emperors, even the proudest of them: he gives away Kingdoms when Kings
any way displease him, though they be very religious toward God; and when he
can make any advantage, He sets Christian Kings at war with each other, and
takes the unjustest part, so it be the strongest; yea himself raises War and
drives Princes out of their dominions to increase the riches of the Church, or
to prefer his own Nephews and kindred: This was notorious in Julius 2 and many
of his predecessors; he makes the Emperors swear allegiance to him; and the
Bishops at their consecration use to swear to maintain Regalia sancti Petri,
the royalties of Saint Peter.

2. The pretense of infallibility is only to gain authority to himself, that he
may command and do what he pleases in the world it is used only to draw people
into seditions and massacres, to patronize any unjust actions or claims, when
the Pope gives away the right of a King or other person, when he dissolveth
Lawful marriages, or gives dispensations to contract unlawful Matrimony (as
betwixt Uncle and Niece in Philip 2. of Spain, or betwixt Brother and brothers
Wife as at this day in Portugal, the former husband yet living, and the like
when he forgives all manner of sins, when he makes (as his Canons give him
leave) just things unjust, and sins to be duties, then he makes use of his
pretended infallibility, and never but it such cases: for the Popes never do
nor never will determine or end any controversy in religion, for fear of
losing one part of the contenders. There is a great difference among
themselves, betwixt the Dominicans and Jesuits, about the immaculate
conception of the Virgin Mary; Philip the 2 and 3. of Spain did for many years
together by their Ambassadors earnestly solicit the Popes to use their
Infallibility and decide the controversy, but they could never obtain it. The
Molinists and Jansenists contend as earnestly about free will and effectual
grace; Clement 8. was entreated to decide the controversy; He appointed men to
consider of it, but when they had had fourscore meetings and disputations about
it under Clement 8. and 1 Paul 5. the business was fairly laid aside and no
determination made. Innocent the 10. being desired to determine the matter of
the five propositions, relating to the same doctrine of the Jansenists, first
honestly told them that he never studied Dinity in his life, and he was now too
old to begin; The Jesuits at last having prevailed with him to condemn those
propositions without reason why, or any explication in what manner, or sense,
he condemned them; he afterward told the Jannists that defended these
propositions (as one of themselves) that he had not condemned the doctrine of
St. Augustine which they maintained; Sanct. amor. Journal.
and so left the two parties at as great strife as before, what doctrine it was
which was condemned and which was approved by the Pope.

3. They take away the Scriptures from the people merely to keep them in
ignorance, that they may guide and govern them the better at their own
pleasure. What if some be gluttons and surfeit? Must therefore all men be
deprived of their necessary meat and drink? God gave his Law that men might
know how to fear and serve him; but the Pope pretends they may serve God better
without knowledge. Why do they not try what effect the reading of the
Scriptures will have upon people? Are not their Clergy and Scholars as likely
to abuse the Scriptures, to pervert them, to fall into errors and defend them
by Scripture, as the common people? But they punish it with death in the people
to have the Bible, or any part of it in their own tongue; and teach that
implicit faith is better than explicit, and ignorance than knowledge for the
common people, yea they labor to bring the people into an ill opinion and
suspicion of the Scriptures; telling them they are obscure and cannot be
understood, they have many senses and like a nose of wax may be turned many
ways, therefore they cannot find the right meaning, yea imperfect and cannot
teach them all they are to know and do as necessary to Salvation. Besides the
Council of Trent authorizeth only the vulgar Latin edition of the Bible for
authentic, Ses. 4.
by which all things must be tried, though their own men acknowledge that
Translation to be most corrupt and false, and one of them says, Isio dorus
Clarius.
he in his edition had mended eight thousand faults; so that they would allow
even their Clergy as little knowledge as they can.

4. They give the people images, and the Host to worship, to take them off from
the spiritural knowledge and worship of Jesus Christ, to make them content
without the Bible, to bring them into an admiration of the Saints, that they
only make and canonize, to lead them into all superstition for the gain of the
Pope and his Clergy: for what may they not do with the people, when they have
persuaded them to take a bit of bread for their God, to offer their prayers to
stocks and stones instead of their maker, or to think that he is pleased when
they do so? When people will take their Mediators, and intercessors with God,
of the Popes appointment, and suffer themselves to be cheated of the knowledge
of their Redeemer; when they will content themselves with offering incense,
tapers, Latin prayers and the like, as their sacrifices to God (which He never
commanded and they understand not) and be taken off from hearing Gods word, and
from praying with understanding, when they have brought the people to such a
pass, they may command them what they please: and this is all they aim at to
have them take their religion wholly from the Pope not from the Scriptures,
that so they may be perfectly subject to his will.

5. Their practices of mortification are only to increase the authority of
their Church and Clergy; therefore they must confess to a Priest and have his
absolution, that every one may be obliged to have his confessor, and hereby
the Priests both get money, and also know the tempers, inclinations, and secrets
of all the people; and so can teach and use them, for their own purposes: those
that are devout, they lay great penances on them, that by the show of
strictness and holiness they may allure the simple; if they be vitiously
inclined, they grant them easy pardon, and give them great liberty, lest they
should fright them from their communion, and that they may increase their
hatred against the Protestants that pretend to more strictness. The Priests
from Confessions pick all instruments for their several purposes, some women
for Nuns, and some for Harlots; some men for Scholars, some for a snow of
strictness, some to debauch others, and some to murder Princes, and overturn
Kingdoms; their penances serve only to inslave men to the Priests; their fasts
are but mockeries, seeing men may eat any thing but flesh, and that which comes
immediately of it, as freely as they will; yet this teaches them obedience to
the Church, that they should do as she commands: hence Bellarmin makes two
sorts of fasts, Jejunium virtutis, and Jejunium Ecclesiae, A Fast of devotion,
and a fast of the Church, which is observed only because she prescribes it, and
such are most of theirs. Their pilgrimages bring great gain to those that keep
the Shrines they come to visit; their whippings and austerities are to cheat
their own Consciences, and other men with a show of mortification, when all the
world knows they that make light of fornication, allow slews, dispense with
vows and marriages at pleasure, and can forgive any sins for money, do neither
teach nor practice real mortification.

6. Their humble subjection to their superiors which they call Blind
obedience, Caecam obedientiam, is a manifest trick to bring the people into
absolute subjection to their Clergy, and the Clergy to the Pope: upon this
pretense the Friars and Jesuits daily send their Emissaries to murder Kings,
to divide Nations, to spread Heresies, to take upon them all manner of
disguises, to take any Oaths or protestations to carry on their designs; they
teach men to doubt of their Salvation while they live, that they may still
depend upon the Priest to confess and be absolved, that they may be still under
his command and correction, in appointing new superstitions and penances; and
therefore do they teach Purgatory after their death, that the Pope and his
Priests may still keep them in their power, and get money for Masses, prayers,
and Canonizations.

7. They forbid their Clergy to marry, not from zeal for holiness and purity,
(seeing they allow them fornication) but that having no families to care for,
nor any interest of their own in the world, the Popes interest may become
theirs, and their only care may be to advance and serve him; that thereby they
also may be advanced and domineer in their places; by this means also they are
made unnatural, resolute and cruel, to prosecute the Popes designs, like the
Turks Janissaries, being kept from those relations which sweeten men's tempers
and excite natural affection; also having no wives and children to provide for,
they may more desperately ventuere their lives and their estates for the
service of their Church.

Their Friars make a show of great devotion, renouncing the world, begging alms
of the people, going in mean habit, barefooted some of them, yet they get all
they can from the people for Masses and prayers; their Abbots many are Lords,
live splendidly, in England they had above a third part of the land, and that
the best, as was made appear to King Henry 8th. but these wholly are at the
Popes devotion; of these he can raise Armies, from them he can exact vast sums
of money, he can make strong parties in any Nation against their Prince, he can
turn people which way he pleases; In a word; his unmarried Clergy, and
Regulars, make him a Monarch, they are his Populus virorum, entirely at his
devotion, having no posterity nor personal concerns to care for: For if his
Clergy had wives and children, they must love them, provide for them, dispose
of them in marriage, and so be neighbourly, oblige the people, please their
Princes and Governors, contract affinities, and so they would be concerned in
the safety, peace, prosperity of the Nations and places they live in, and would
not be at the Popes beck, on at his call upon all occasions.

Thus we see the whole design of Popery issues in this; That men should take
their religion from the Pope and his Clergy, that so they may rule, as sole
Lords, both in spirituals and temporals.

We are next to enquire what it was that let or hindered Antichrists
appearing for a time; He that lets will let, etc.

The Apostle says, this mystery of iniquity was working in his time, therefore
it could not be the religion of Mahomet, which was not heard of till about the
year of our Lord 622. Much less Heathenism or Judaism which were then the
established religions of the world; nor yet the general opposition of the body
of the wicked against the godly; which the Rhemists would have understood by
mystical Babylon; Rhem. on Rev. 17.
for this is always manifest; the seed of the serpent does always oppose the
seed of the woman: but the Apostle saw an aspiring spirit in the Bishops and
Church of Rome, which he knew would in time bring the whole Church under their
yoke; this was occasioned by Rome's being the Metropolis of the world, and the
seat of the Empire, which as it drew all civil affairs and supreme Jurisdiction
to that place, so did it insensibly draw the admiration, respect, and causes of
all Churches to the guides of that Church, which the following Bishops
challenged as their due, and so gave occasion for the conception of the Man of
sin. Victor the 14 Bishop of Rome about the year 170. excommunicated all the
Eastern Churches for not keeping Easter on the same day that he did. Soon after
him Cornelius and Stephen successively took upon them with great pride to
determine causes belonging to the Churches of A. frick, while Cyprian was
Bishop of Carthage, of which he complains in his Epistles to them. Pope
Sylvester by his Legates in the Council of Nice an. 325. obtained power over all
those regions called Suburbicariae which were subject to the Prefect of Rome;
and from that time the Bishops of Rome boldly challenged the primacie of all
Churches, and drew all causes and appeals to themselves, though not without
opposition from the Bishops in Augustines time. The Council of Sardica having
made a Canon that all doctrines should be tried by the Bishop of Rome, meaning
it only for that time when Rome was a bulwork against the Arians; several Roman
Bishops, Celestine, Boniface and Innocent the first thrust this Canon into the
Council of Nice, and pretended that by authority of that venerable Council, the
Trial of all doctrines and causes was given to them; and when the Bishops of
Constantinople challenged a parity with the Bishops of Rome, because that City
was made new Rome, and the Seat of the Empire in the East, Pope Leo's Legates
protested against it in the Council of Chalcedon Ann. 450. Thus the ambition of
Rome discovered it self apace, but it could not yet attain its end, because
somewhat still hindered, and this was the Roman Empire, which diverse ancient
Fathers witness to have been the Apostles meaning, by him that lets; saying
that he did not expressly mention the Empire lest he should give offense by
speaking of the fall of that Empire which they presumed should last for ever,
insomuch that Roma aeterna eternal Rome was always written upon the Statue of a
woman that represented that City, and Aeternitas Vestrum, your eternity, was a
presumptuous title of some of the Emperors; they add that the Primitive Church
used to pray for the continuance of the Roman Empire, for this reason amongst
others, that the coming, and persecutions of Antichrist might thereby he
deferred: and Hierome who lived to see the Empire decay apace, and the City
taken by Alarick the Goth, said thereupon, Qui detinet fit de medio, and non
intelligimus Antichristum adesse? He that lets is taken out of the way, and
do we not understand that Antichrist must be at hand? The Rhemists would fain
avoid this interpretation though they make nonsense of the place; In Locum.
but the Papists generally acknowledge the Empire to be that which let the
discovery of Antichrist; and Bellarmine would prove that Antichrist is not yet
come, because there is still a Roman Emperor, viz. the Emperor of Germany who
has the titles of Roman Caesar and Augustus; but he has the empty title only,
and is the Popes Vassal, receiving his Crown from him, swearing fealty to him,
and is by him appointed Defensor Ecclesiae, not to rule the Empire, but defend
the Church of Rome: That the Empire of Rome is here intended is manifest by
this, because that held the supreme dominion, and therefore the Bishops could
not obtain it, till the Empire was abolisht: the Heathen Emperors oppressed
and destroyed the whole Church, and in particular the Bishops and Church of
Rome who were nearest to them, and the Christian Emperors not only kept the
civil power in their own hands, but also called and presided in Councils,
approved and confirmed the elections of all Bishops, and those of Rome more
especially, and removed those Bishops whom they liked not, at their pleasure;
till this jurisdiction was abrogated, the Pope could not get into his hands the
supremacy either in Ecclesiastical or civil matters: The event also expounds
the Text; for by those degrees the Empire declined, the Bishop of Rome ascended
the throne, as it follows in the Text, v. 8. Then shall that wicked be
revealed etc. (...), that wicked or lawless person; when the restraint and laws
of the Emperors were taken off, then was the time for the lawless person to
appear, who professes himself subject to no law, but above all humane and
divine. The removing the imperial seat from Rome to Byzantium by Constantine
the Great gave the first advantage to the aspiring minds of those Bishops, for
then the eyes of all were upon them instead of the Emperors, then they
disdained to come to Councils, and set Ambassadors in their names, two or
three at a time in Princely manner, then they cried up the dignity and primacy
of Peter, and of the Apostolic See, and insinuated themselves into the affairs
of all Churches; again when Rome was sacked by the Goths and Vandals, and the
Emperors power decayed in Italy, the Bishops of Rome assumed more authority to
themselves, and were ready to comply with barbarians and invaders against their
natural and Christian Prince to increase their own power. When Odoacer had
taken Rome and made himself King of Italy, Pope Gelasius joined with him,
called a Council of seventy Bishops at Rome, and presided in it in the presence
of the usurper, Ann. 570. After this when the Imperial race was almost
extinguished in the East by the impious Tyrant Phocas, Boniface 3. readily joins
with him, writes flattering letters to him, and obtained of him the long
desired title of universal Bishop, Ann. 606. And now the Emperors are
beholding to the Bishops of Rome, to hold their dominion in Italy; yet this was
a Clog to them that their election must be approved by the Emperors; when
therefore they had prevailed with Constantine 4. to release them of this
obligation, and to grant, that whom the Senate and people of Rome chose, he
should be received as Pope without asking the Emperors consent, then they had
perfectly shaken off the yoke; and the following Popes, Gregory the 2. and 3.
excommunicated 2. Emperors, Philippicus and Leo, for opposing Image worship,
absolved their Subjects from their Oath of allegiance, and raising war against
them, finally drove them out of Italy about the year 750. Yet the Lombards
troubled the Pope, till he called in Pipin who subdued them, and his Son
Charles the great, who put an end to their Kingdom. And now the Pope was Lord
of Italy, and gives Charles the tile of Roman Emperor, and after about 6
generations he tranferred it to the Germans. And now the Pope had a new and his
last difficulty; these German Emperors challenged the confirmation of the
Popes election and the investing of all Bishops within their dominons, but the
Pope was grown so strong, that by plain force and continual wars he at last
compelled the Emperors to renounce all power over the Popes, and Italy it
self, to resign the investiture of all Bishoprics to the Pope, yea to have his
own election confirmed by the Pope, and to hold his Crown as his gift, which
was principally managed though not finished by Hilderbrand, Pope Gregory 7.
about the year 1077. And now the man of sin was revealed indeed and come to
maturity, and from his time diverse learned men of every nation declared and
proved the Pope to be Antichrist, and ever since the Pope has filled all the
West with wars, Massacres and the private murders of his inquisition, to uphold
the power he had so honestly gotten: he has also made attempts upon the
Eastern Churches, and he gained some power over them while the Latins reigned
in Constantinople, but that fell with them, and the East has been oppressed by
the Turk as the West by the Pope, though not altogether in so terrible a
manner; for he for money grants the Christians their Churches and exercise of
their religion, but the Pope will suffer none to live that will not submit to
him.

It may justly be a wonder how it was possible the Bishops of Rome, many of
them mean and inferior men, and many most flagitious, could possibly attain so
great power and dignity,

It was a mystery, says the Apostle, and it was done insensibly. At first the
Bishops of Rome were eminent for parts, piety, and sufferings, as usually such
men are preferred and employed in great, especially Metropolitical Cities; this
gained them great credit with all Churches, and both Ministers and people had
them in great veneration, and desired their judgment and counsel in weighty
cases; then the Emperors, newly become Christian, thought they could not
bestow honor and power enough upon the Church, especially on the Imperial
seat; they granted them their Courts, their Apparitors, and attendance, with
leave to all Christians to bring their causes to their Courts; this made them
Pettie-Princes; then they challenged the right of appeals from all Churches,
though opposed and shamefully foiled by the Churches of Africa; they would
receive any persons and causes into their patronage, the more unjust, the
better for them; for the criminal persons having no hope of redress in their
own Churches, wholly relied upon the Popes authority, and he to increase his
authority would do his utmost for them; and this was the reason why the Popes
of Rome, who long maintained the true doctrinal worship, at length set up image
worship, Transubstantiation, and all the rest of their superstitions, viz.
because the promoters and defenders of these corruptions fled to the Popes
authority to shelter themselves from the power and censure of the sounder part
of the Church, and the Pope still sided with the worst that thereby he might
oppress those who would not acknowledge his universality and supremacy; at last
the Pope having by these means insinuated into the minds and affections of the
worst, but greater part, he did by force establish his throne above all, and by
force he has kept it: moreover the sloth and ignorance of may in the ministry,
and the pride of others, who sought to advance themselves, by advancing the
Pope, did not a little contribute to his power; also the confusions of the
Empire by the invasions of the Barbarians much helped it forwards, for they
overturned the government, destroyed the more knowing people, in themselves
being both Pagans and void of all learning, received Religion from the Pope and
superstition together, and suffered themselves to be inslaved by him, under the
pretense of obedience to Christ and is chief Apostle St. Peter, and his
successors, and their poor Princes suffered their people to be deceived, and
were deceived themselves by these plausible arts; insomuch that they gave up
their power to that Roman beast, and thought it good service to Christ, when
they could serve his pretended Vicar; it is reported that 30 Kings and Queens of
England have left their Kingdoms and gone to Rome to see St Peter's successor
and to die there. A fair warning to Princes and magistrates to maintain their
own power, and the dignity of their places; and to all Ministers to look to
their own charge; and to the people to be subject to their own pastors, and to
take heed of admiring and harkening after others; if this had been done, the
Pope had never got the Chair.

Hitherto the Apostle has given the description of Antichrist, and soretold
his insolency, and Tyranny over the Church, to teach Christians what to expect,
and to arm themselves with patience and courarge. Now to prevent desponding he
foretells his destruction, v. 8. Whom the Lord shall comsume with the spirit of
his month, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. The destruction
of this man of sin is as certain to be in due time, as his coming was: the Lord
shall consume him etc. (...); as this wicked one is in special manner an enemy
to Christ, so Christ will set himself to destroy him, will consume, utterly
destroy, as Armies lay wast a Country that they invade; the means by which he
will do it, is by the spirit of his month, i. e. his word, accompanied by his
spirit; and we may observe, that no other means have been very successful,
either to hinder the growth, or to hasten the ruin of the man of sin: the
Eastern Emperors with all their power opposed the Gregory's, and in the West
the Othos, Fredericks and Henry's opposed the Popes in their time, but all to
their own destruction; the people being bewitched, and Princes too, by the
enchantments of the Great Whore; but when the appointed time was come, a few
inconsiderable men, Luther and his fellows, only by preaching the word, in the
space of about 40. years rent from the Pope half his Empire, and weakened him in
all the remaining parts also; many in all Countries, receiving the knowledge of
the truth, and both Princes and people that still adhere to him standing in
much less fear of him, and paying him much less homage and subjection than
before: Again since the first reformation, though powerful Princes and many
Nations have embraced the Gospel, and have made some attempts by power and arms
to promote it, and have had some very fair opportunities (as when Hen. the 4.a
Protestant was made King of France, and conquered all his opposers; and in the
late German wars) yet nothing considerable has been done, but as to particular
persons there has rather been a loss in this last age, and a great
indifferency has grown upon the Protestant Churches. The time when this ruin
shall be consummated is here expressed, by the brightness of his coming, {fo}, by
the appearance of his presence; as the man of sin was conceived, born and grew
up by degrees, so he has been, and gradually shall be destroyed.

1. Christ by his word and spirit preserved a select number in all times that
opposed him, and bore Testimony against him both by word and sufferings; some
Princes, some learned, many both of the Clergy and people protested against the
encroachments and impositions of the Popes, whilst they were contending for the
universal Empire of the Church; and when they had gained it and thought all
sure, about Ann. 1160. God raised the Waldenses and Albigenses to bear witness
against them, who spread themselves into France, Italy, Bohemia, Austria,
England, and could never be extinguished, till their doctrine swallowed up a
great part of Popery, as Moses's Rod did those of the Magicians. Thus it was
prophesied, Rev. 14.1-6. v. that there should be one hundred forty four
thousand under the Tyranny of the beast who kept themselves undefiled, Virgins,
who followed the Lamb whithersoever he went, and kept his Fathers name in their
fore head, not submitting to the mark of the beast.

2.A As the fall of this man of sin draws nearer, so the word has greater
success, and turns Nations and rulers to the acknowledgement of it. God
dispenses his grace gradually according to the times he has appointed: from
the flood, for above one thousand years it was restrained mostly to the Jewish
Nation, then our Lord sent his Apostles to teach all Nations, but it was
several hundred years before the Nations became Christian, though there were
many Christians in them, and no sooner had they received the Gospel but it
began to be darkened by the invasion of Pagans, Goths and Vandals, by the fraud
and violence of Mahomet and his followers, and mostly by errors and
superstitions in the Church it self, which bred and brought forth the Pope, and
he at last scaled up the Bible, and quite changed Christian religion into a new
sort of Paganism; then for about 350. years the truth was forced into corners,
but few received and owned it, in comparison of the world that wondered after
the beast; since that time whole Nations have been enlightened.

3. Christ will yet more enlighten by the preaching of his word, till all
Nations shall see the frauds and corruptions of Popery and abhor them: there
will come a time when the Kingdoms of this world shall be the Kingdoms of our
Lord and his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15. Not only
the godly, but the generality of men also shall believe and acknowledge the
cheats of the Pope, the false doctrines and delusions of his Ministers, and
shall no more be enticed by them, and they shall love the godly, and willingly
submit to the pure doctrine, worship and discipline of the Gospel, though they
have been so unwilling to receive it hitherto.

4. Christ will stir up the spirit of Princes to destroy Rome it self and that
wicked Polity, Rev. 17.16. The Kings of the earth shall hate the whore and burn
her flesh with fire: As the Kings for their own interest and private designs
chiesly, though under a pretense of devotion, advanced the Pope, till he was
able to tread upon all their necks; so some for their own interest, and by
reason of provocations from Rome, shall in due time be incensed against her and
utterly destroy her.

5. And by this means the Tyranny, insinuations, and interests of the Pope and
the Princes that joined with him, being removed and dissolved, the Gospel shall
have its free passage, and the Church its full liberty. Many learned men have
interpreted this place of Christ's destroying the man of sin by the brightness
of his coming, of Christ's coming to the last judgment, as if the Pope and his
Tyranny should continue at least in part till then, and be utterly abolisht
only by Christ's personal coming to judgment: but it is usual in scripture to
express great changes in Church or State by the coming and appearance of the
Lord; particularly the destruction of the Jews for rejecting Christ, is expressed
by the Prophets Joel and Malachie in such phrases that have occasioned many to
interpret them of the last judgment; our Savior also, Math. 24, 25. chapter
expresses his judging of that Nation in like phrases, and calls it his coming,
and commands his servants to watch and prepare for it; likewise Rev. 6. the
subduing of the heathen world to Christ by the Emperors receiving the Gospel,
and establishing it for the public religion, is set out as if it were to be
the end of the world, and such a consternation to seize upon men as if the end
of all things were come upon them. The Scriptures foretell in many words and
with many circumstances the fall of Mystical Babylon, which is Rome, and mostly
in the same words that foretold the ruin of old Babylon, as is plain by
comparing the 51. chapter of Jeremiah, with the 18. chap. or Rev. and this is
spoken both to deter men from complying with Rome, and encourage the godly to
patience in their sufferings under her Tyranny; but all this is needless in a
great measure if no more were intended than to tell the world that Rome and her
power should be destroyed when the whole world should end; moreover it is
prophesied, Rev. 17.16. that the ten Kings that gave their power to the beast,
i.e. some of them, shall take the Whore, eat her flesh and burn her with fire:
chap. 18.2. An Angel again foretells that Babylon should be cast down with
violence as a great millstone into the Sea, and never rise again, which were no
wonder if this were not to be till the end of the world. It is also said v. 2,
3. as it was of old Babylon, that all unclean and hateful birds should lodge in
the ruins of Rome: v. 4, 5. Christ commands his people to come out of her that
they may not partake of her plagues: v. 6. they are commanded to be the
executioners of Gods wrath upon her, and to reward her double for all that she
has done to them: v. 8, 9. some of the Kings that still adhered to her with
others of all sorts are described to make great lamentation over her, when they
behold the smoke of her burning; and chap. 19. is a triumphant Song of the
Church for Christ's victory over Babylon, and their deliverance from her: these
things are certain, and show that the Church shall be delivered both from the
seduction and persecution of the Pope, some time before the end of the world;
and it is very probable that the thousand years peace of the Church foretold
chap. 20. is to succeed the fall of Rome: all other conjectures about it are
already confuted by the event; and that it cannot be meant of heaven is evident
from this, that Gog and Magog are to make insurrection against the Church a
little before the thousand years expireth, and the general judgment is
described to follow soon after.

Use 1. This should keep men from embracing and persuade them to forsake the
Romish religion: It is as all other carnal things be, a perishing Religion;
that Church Christ has promised to destroy, and that with a desolation
proportionable to all the magnificence and pomp she has enjoyed, with an
overthrow that shall make a change as if the world were ending.

2. Let the godly strengthen their patience in bearing all her violence and
persecutions; there is an appointed end, Rome shall as certainly fall, and her
power and policy be broken, as old Babylon was ruined, which was once the
terror of the world, and had held the Empire near fourteen hundred years,
longer than Rome shall; the blood and sufferings of the Saints shall be
revenged upon Rome abundantly, Rev. 18.7, 8. and they shall have abundant joy
in her destruction and their own deliverance, even such as Israel had when they
were escaped out of Egypt through the Red Sea, and saw all their enemies dead on
the shore, Rev. 15.2, 3, 4.

3. The godly both ministers and people should be encouraged to oppose and
strive against Popery to the utmost; their labor shall not be in vain: Christ
will consume the man of sin by his word in their mouths, and in time engage the
Princes that now favor her to destroy her; the preaching and writing of godly
ministers, the endeavors and sufferings of godly people are so many
Testimonies against Rome, and do weaken her interest, and shall in time be all
revived and prevail for her ruin, notwithstanding all her arts and force and
cruelties to preserve her self, of which we have a pledge, in that by these
means many Kingdoms and Nations have already forsaken her.

4. Though there be no power and strength to defend the Church and the truth,
though few should be valiant for it, fear not, the word and spirit of Christ
will turn about the hearts of Princes and people to hate the Whore in due time:
the work is Christ's own, he has undertaken it and who can resist his spirit,
when he will turn the hearts of men? It seems that Rome shall have great
probability of prevailing over the Church of Christ, and great confidence of
her own prosperity immediately before her fall, Rev. 18.7, 8. She says in her
heart, I sit as Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow, Therefore
shall her plagues come in one day, etc. even as Pharaoh did most distress
Israel, and was most confident of success the night before his ruin; this very
confidence of Rome and her last rage against the Church will engage God to its
defense, and provoke the world to her destruction.

Ver. 9. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power,
and signs and lying wonders: v. 10. And with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness.

Here are described the arts and methods by which the man of sin should attain
his greatness and deceive the world, partly that we may be the more aware of
him, and partly to set out the power of Christ, and the efficacy of his word,
by whom he shall be destroyed, notwithstanding all his arts and policies to
preserve himself: his coming says the Text, (...) his appearing, and attaining
supremacy in the Church is, (...), according to the effectual working of the
Devil; the Devil never showed so much art and contrivance in the erecting of
any power, or State, as in that of the Popedom; for besides force the usual
methods whereby the four former great Monarchies were raised and preserved,
which also the Pope made use of, here are other peculiar methods suited to the
nature of a religious Monarchy, or Tyranny under pretense of religion; these
are, all power, signs and lying wonders; which are various expressions of
miracles and miraculous operations to gain credit to their Doctrine and
pretenses, (...), with all unrighteous deceits and cheats; as Moses approved
and confirmed his law and institutions by miracles and wonders, and Christ with
his Apostles confirmed the Gospel with signs and wonders and diverse miracles
and gifts of the holy Ghost, Heb. 2.4. so Antichrist endeavored to prove his
power, errors and superstitions by miracles, signs, and wonders; so the words
here used, (...) signify; but the difference is great betwixt them; the
miracles of Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, were real, weighty
and useful things, frequent and innumerable, apparent to all the world, exposed
to the Trial and examination of all, and such as carried an undeniable
evidence, and divine impress with them; but these of Antichrist are lying
wonders, ungodly cheats, many of them ridiculous trifles, of no use,
unbeseeming the finger of God, that are done in a corner, and will bear no
Trial of judicious men, but are fitted only to deceive the ignorant multitude;
it is not to be supposed that Papists could ever work any real sign or miracle
to confirm their falsehoods, for that were to make God himself (who alone is
the author of true miracles) to bear Testimony to a lie, and also to invalidate
the Testimony of miracles, when they are wrought to confirm the truth, seeing
they may be wrought also to prove a lie. A false prophet may indeed give a
sign, foretell some future event by art, and God may suffer that sign to come
to pass, to prove his people whether they will stick to his word, Deuteronomy. 13.1,
2, 3. but he will never interpose his immediate power to work a miracle to
confirm false doctrine, which were to set his own seal to that which is
contrary to his own word; the miracles and signs therefore that Papists pretend
to, some of them are the mere works of nature, only strange to the common
people, some are works of art, Physic, Mathematics, etc. some are mere tricks
of Legerdemain, and some are more lies, without either foundation in the
things, or color of truth, many of them also are wrought by Magic and
assistance of the Devil, as when they cause doleful cries and howlings in the
night, and apparitions of persons deceased, to make the simple believe that the
souls in Purgatory come forth to beg prayers and Masses, which practice was
very frequent in Luthers time: The pretense of signs and miracles is peculiar
to the Papists; the Turks, to whom they would turn this prophecy, profess them
not, but impose and propagate their Religion by force; Christians that own the
Scriptures for the perfect rule of faith and manners, need them not, the matter
of those Scriptures having been abundantly confirmed long since by
unquestionable miracles and Divine attestations; but the Papists who add
unwritten, uncertain traditions, and the decrees of Popes and Councils to the
rule, have need to confirm them by signs and miracles, if they could; and upon
the pretense of these all their chief doctrines are built, as,

1. Transubstantiation and adoration of the Host; for this they pretend
sometimes that the Host has been seen to bleed, sometimes that the hand of a
child has been seen in it; that Wittikin the Saxon King in England seeing
Christians receive the Sacrament in a certain Church, went out and reported,
that he saw the Christians each one put a little smiling boy into their mouths;
some affirmed that they have seen a youth in a glorious shape sitting upon the
Altar at or before the time of celebration; and they commonly tell us of Cows,
Horses, Bees, yea and the Ass of a Jew or a Heretic, adoring the Host, and the
bees building a wax chapel over it when it was casually lost in the field.

2. The worship of Saints; when the invocation of Saints was opposed in its
beginning, and Pope Constantine had called a Council at Rome to consider on it,
Ann. 1012. Edwin a Monk of Gloucester made Oath before the Council that the
Virgin Mary appeared to him in a vision in great glory; commanding him to go to
Rome and tell the Pope that it was the command of God that they should worship
her, pray to her, and erect Temples and Images in honor of her; upon this
acknowledgement the Council established the first decree for the invocation of
her and other Saints: They write whole Legends of Saints, their apparitions,
revelations, miracles, and these they give to the people to read instead of the
Scriptures; they also read the acts and lying wonders of their Saints, upon
their festival days in their Churches, always concluding their fabulous
narrations with such words: Let us then learn to admire such a Saint, let us
pray to such a Saint, etc. Saint Francis and his-Friars, they say, have raised
above a thousand men from the dead; their Saints heal all manner of diseases,
cast out Devils, can bring fire from heaven, as they report, and these are the
proofs of Divine worship due to them.

3. Their worship of Images, and Relics of Saints; to this purpose they
pretend that some Images do speak, though it is the Devil or the Priest that
speaks through them; some Images nod their head; some hold up their hand, as if
they did bless the people that pray to them; Mr. Downame says he saw an Image
of St. Nicholas at Chester, who would lift up his hand, as if he blessed his
petitioners, which was done by a string put through the arm, by which the
Priest draw'd it up. Some Images have bled, they say, when they have been
abused; diseases have been cured and all manner of miracles done, while men
have been praying before Images.

4. Purgatory and prayers for the dead: The only proof of this is the
apparition of persons deceased, that complain of their torments and beg Masses
and prayers of their surviving friends; to this purpose they make great use of
the Vulcans i. e. burning Mountains in Italy, Sicily, and the Isles of the
Aeolides, where are heard frequent noises of diverse kinds, which they tell the
people are the gates of Purgatory, and the noises the cries of the tormented
there. They report of one Birstan Bishop of Winchester, that as he was walking
according to his custom in the Churchyard at midnight, earnestly praying for
the souls in Purgatory, when he came to those words requiescant in pace, let
them rest in peace, he suddenly heard the voices of an innumerable company,
small and great, in the graves say Amen.

5. Their religious orders: St. Benedict, St. Dominick, St. Francis, the
founders of so many Orders of Friars, and Ignatius Loyola, the Father of the
Jesuits, all obtained both the honor of Saints, and of Founders of religious
Orders by many pretended visions, revelations and miracles; and the opinion of
miracles done by Friars, Monks and Nuns, in every generation, is that which
keeps up their authority with the people.

Use. This should warn men to cleave close to Scripture; Revelations and
miracles are the engines of deceit, but written truths are manifest and exposed
to the consideration and Trial of all; and have been already confirmed by the
Prophets, our Savior and his Aposties, by very many and unquestionable signs
and miracles; f men will not be content with this, which God has so abundantly
testified to be his mind and will, it is just with him to suffer them to be
deluded; if there be now any miracles, revelations, or extraordinary
impressions of the holy spirit, they are of private concern, for direction or
encouragement in particular cases, but they are not intended to confirm any
doctrine or part of worship; signs and Tongues, and so other miracles are for
them that believe not, who have not received the Gospel, but not to them that
believe (1 Cor. 14.21, 22.) who have already been convinced of the truth and
fullness of the Scriptures, to which God expects they should yield their full
assent and obedience.

Ver. 10, 11, 12. In them that perish; because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved: and for this cause God shall send them
strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: that they all might be damned
who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

In these words we have the subject of Antichrists delusions, those on whom his
signs and lying wonders should have effect, viz. they that perish; though many
of the godly may have been entangled by Popish superstitions, yet none receive
them thoroughly, or give up themselves to them, but those that are to perish.
Rev. 17.11. They that dwell on the earth wondered after the beast, even they
whose names were not written in the book of life. We have also here the reason
why God suffers so many to be delivered to their own destruction, viz.
because they receive not the love of the truth that they might be saved; and
this is further amplified (...), and for this cause, viz. because they love not
the truth, God shall send them strong delusions, (...), delusions that shall be
effectual to make them believe a lie, who believed not the truth, i. e. obeyed
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, that so they might be
damned.

Gods judgments are suitable to men's sins; those that love not the truth, he
suffers to lose the truth, and they that are willing to receive false
doctrines, and false worship, that they may more quietly practice
unrighteousness, God suffers them to have temptations to it, and to be
prevailed with by those temptations; and this is the case of the Papal world,
because men delight not in the true knowledge of God, to fear him, and be
thankful, therefore he gave them up to worship Images, and to serve the
Creatures more than the Creator; as he dealt with the Heathens before them,
Romans 1.21.25. Men loved not the knowledge of Christ, valued not his love and
death, but loved to boast of their own wills, abilities and performances,
therefore God suffered them to lose the sound doctrine of justification, faith
an assurance, and to make men and Angels their Mediators, and to trust in the
merits of their own works and sufferings; men had no pleasure in holiness, but
in unrighteousness and licentiousness, therefore God suffered them to be
deprived of the Scriptures the mean and rule of holiness, and to spend their
days either in will worship, superstition, and voluntary severities, bodily
exercise, which profits not, 1 Timothy 4.8. or else in all filthiness and
profaneness, and yet to delude themselves with the vain hopes of pardons,
indulgencies, dispensations, penances, and venial sins. Moreover because men
delighted not in spiritual things and heavenly mindedness, they were deprived
of the true knowledge of heaven, and the comfortable hopes of Salvation, to be
taught to live in endless doubts and fears that can never be satisfied, and to
count it a favor to go to Purgatory at last, there to suffer some thousands of
years the torments of hell, and to believe that their deliverance from thence
depends upon the will of Popes and Priests, and is to be bought with money. Men
were weary of the spiritual worship of God, Faith and love, prayer and thanks
giving, hearing the word and receiving the Sacraments with a serious heart and
desire to profit by them, therefore they are given up to be content to be
deprived of Gods word, and to hear little but the lying miracles of feigned
Saints and humane Traditions, and commandments of men, also to have their
prayers and Sacraments in a language they do not understand, and to fool
themselves with a belief that the Opus operatuns, their bare presence at them
and performance of the outward work, is sufficient to save them: Lastly because
men were weary of a pious, profitable and learned ministry, therefore they are
delivered to be enslaved by a generation of men, for the most part, abominably
wicked, ignorant, and superstitious, who deceive the people and are themselves
deceived: briefly, natural conscience will not suffer men to be content without
some religion, and some hope of a better life, and some persons to instruct
them in it; but their unruly lusts and affections make them love and choose a
religion that they may play and trifle with, and such is Popery, where men may
seem very devout and zealous in external worship, and for the Traditions of
their fathers, and yet live in all wickedness, and notwithstanding hope to go
to heaven.

Use 1. This may lessen our wonder that Popery should so much prevail upon the
world, and that men should be so ready to return to it after they have received
the knowledge of the truth, and Popery been discovered to be false and
ridiculous to common reason: it is the righteous judgment of God to suffer
them to be deceived who would be deceived, and to suffer them to take up a
false and absurd religion, who are weary of the true, though most excellent and
most rational: for this reason no means can withdraw men from their
superstitious and Idolatrous practices, and from their brutish obedience to the
Pope and their Priests, because God has given them eyes that cannot see, and
ears that cannot hear, and hearts that cannot perceive and understand, till he
has executed all his wrath upon them.

2. The best means to be preserved from Popery is to maintain in our selves
love to the truth. It was want of this that provoked God to give up the world
to delusions, and still to continue it under the power of them in a great
measure. He that will do the will of him that sent me, he shall know of the
doctrine whether it be of God, says our Savior, John 7.17. Scripture and
reason will not suffer us to receive Popery as a truth, or as any religion; but
as a mere humane device to keep up the power of the Pope and his adherents, and
sense also will confute some of their errors, as Transubstantiation and many of
their miracles; but if we love not the truth, interest or fear may make us
willing to believe a lie and submit to it: unfeigned love of the Gospel, and a
lively sense of spiritual things will prevent this, that we shall not be
willing to let go the truth, and then God will not suffer us to be led into
errors. If we delight in the knowledge of God, he will never suffer us to be
bewitched with Idols, that can neither see, nor hear, nor help.

If Christ be precious to us, the chiefest of ten thousands and altogether
lovely, God will never suffer us to put our confidence in Creatures, as our
Mediators, or in our own works, which would deceive us.

If we have pleasure in drawing night to God; if his word and ordinances be
more to us, than our appointed food, our Heavenly Father will not instead of
it, give us a stone of Popish austerities and bodily service, and
unintelligible ordinances, much less will he give us the Scorpions of their
idolatrous worship.

If we earnestly pursue the lively hope of heaven and assurance of Gods favor,
we shall never receive the tormenting delusion of Purgatory.

And if they that bring the glad tidings of the Gospel are most welcome to us,
God will never suffer us to be deluded into a slavish subjection to and fears
of the Popes Bulls, and an idolatrous Mass-Priest.

Therefore the Apostle concludes this discourse, v. 15. Therefore brethren
stand fast, and hold the Traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word,
or our Epistle: And this would be a ground to expect what he prays for in their
behalf, v. 16, 17. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father,
which has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope
through grace, Comfort your hearts and stablish you in every good word and work.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached November 5. 1678.
Rev. 18.4. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying Come out of her my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.


IN the former Chapter we have a description of Mystical Babylon, and a
prediction of her ruin, in this Chapter; her fall is more at large declared, 1.
from the certainty of it, v. 1, 2, 3. a mighty Angel proclaiming that Babylon
is fallen, is fallen, as if it were done already, and another seconding him
with the Type of a Millstone thrown into the Sea, to show that Babylon should
never rise more, v. 21, 22, 23. 2. From the reason of it, because both the
Kings of the Earth had committed fornication with her and where deluded by her,
v. 4. Thirdly, from a command to Gods people to forsake her, lest they should
be consumed with her, v. 4, 5. Fourthly, From a command to the executioners of
Gods vengeance to be very severe in it, v. 6, 7, 8. Fifthly, from a description
of the Lamentation of her friends for her fall, v. 9, -- 19. Sixthly, From a
call to the Saints in heaven and earth to rejoice in Gods vengeance upon her,
v. 20. which is further exemplified chapter 19. throughout.

The Text is a Command to Gods people to come out of Babylon, lest they partake
with her in her fins, and so receive of her Plagues.

Three things shall be here considered.

1. The person commanding, 2. The matter of the command, Come out etc. 3. The
place from whence, Babylon.
1. The person commanding, is our Lord Jesus Christ.: it was another voice
distinct from the Angels, v. 2. this voice was from heaven, the Angels was on
earth: and this person calls the godly his people, Come out of her my people,
which no creature mioght do.

2. The command is to come out of Babylon; the same words which were spoken to
the Jews, Jer. 51. v. 6, 45. withdraw and Weparate your selves from her, (...),
at all times as to communion to withdraw from their worship and service, (...),
least you communicate in her sins, which they must needs do that join in her
worship, and whenever there is opportunity separate your selves from the place
and persons; this the other part of the reason shows, (...), that ye receive
not of her Plagues, which are to be the sword, fire, and such like wasting
judgment, chapter 17.16. of which they must have their share, that dwell in
Babylon when these things fall upon them: and this was the meaning of the same
command to the Jews, viz. that whilst they lived in Babylon 70. years, they
should keep themselves from her ldolatries, and that they should willingly
depart from her, and return home when God should open a door to them by Cyrus
as he had promised.

3. The place, out of her, viz. Babylon whose fall is foretold, v. 2. What this
place is the former chapter declares past doubt to them that are willing to
receive the truth.

That it is a certain place and not the whole company of the wicked, as the
Rhemists would persuade us, is manifest. In locum.
It is described as a woman, a great Whore, v. 1.-4. under which figures Cities
use to be signified, as Jerusalem and Samaria, Ezech. 23.1.4. and she has a
particular name written in her forehead, v. 5. Mystery, Babylon the great --
She is also called the Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the earth, which
points out some place which should be principal and ringleader in corruptions
and persecutions, v. 5, 6.

That this place is the City of Rome, and not Constantinople, Jerusalem, or any
other City is also evident, because she is said to be seated upon seven
Mountains, and to have had seven sorts of government, five past, one present
and another to come, v. 9, 10, 11. which agree to no City but Rome, and v. 18.
it is added, that The woman is that great City which reigns over the Kings of
the earth, viz. in St. John's time, which was none but Rome. Moreover that this
was not Heathen Rome, but Rome Christian declining both in Doctrine and
worship, appears, in that she is taxed with Whoredom and drawing all the world
to whoredom and fornication by her power and example; by which the Scripture
does not express the Idolatry of Heathens, but the Apostasy of the Church to
Idols, whereby she breaks her Covenant with God her first husband.

She is also called Mystical Babylon, Babylon for Tyranny and Idolatry, both of
which old Babylon was mother to, in the declining world after the flood, and
Mystical because not the same place; nor did she openly bring in Idols, but
under pretense of honoring Christ and his Saints: The Idolatry of Heathen Rome
was no Mystery.

This woman also allureth the world to drink of the wine of her fornications,
and those that were backward she compelled, till she was drunk with the blood
of Saints and Martyrs, insomuch that the inhabitants of the earth generally
wondered after the beast, v. 4, 8, but Heathen Rome was so far from imposing her
religion on other Nations (though she punished the Christians for departing from
her religion) that she left all Nations to their own way of worship, when she
had conquered them, even the Jews who were most different from all the rest;
yea it was her custom to receive the worship and Gods of the conquered Nations
among her own solemnities, that so they might not provoke any Gods against
them, and thus Tertullian says, Tiberius would have had our Savior received
into the number of the Roman gods; the Senate refused it because they said he
would be God alone, and endure no companions with him: which further confirms
that it was Rome Christian and not Pagan which did impose her Idolatrous wrship
upon the world.

Lastly, that it is Rome Papal, as it now is and has been for many ages past,
which is this Babylon, and not Rome when she shall utterly renounce the
Christian faith in the end of the world as some Papists without shadow of
reason fancy, is proved, in that she is arrayed in purple and Scarlet, decked
with gold and precious stones and pearls, which is the garb of the Pope and his
Cardinals: In that she is the Mother of fornications, Idolatries, through the
earth, and that she is drunk with the blood of Saints and Martyrs, Rome Papal
having destroyed far more Christians, than ever Heathen Rome did.

And that the beast that carries this whore, the Roman State, is full of names
of blasphemy, v. 3. the blasphemous titles and power which the Pope usurpeth to
himself and his Roman Church above any heathen that ever was.

And especially in that the ten horns upon the head of the beast that carries
this Whore, which are ten Kingsarising out of the dissolution of the Roman
Empire are said to have received no Kingdom in John's time, but to receive it
one hour with the beast, v. 12. yea to give their power to the beast, to set
him up, and maintain his Empire, and to be deluded by him, till God shall turn
their hearts against him to destroy him, v. 13.-17. The beast himself also was
to be the eighth head of the former great beast, and yet one of the seven, i.
c. a new government in Rome, for the manner of it not much different from the
preceding Emperors; all which are apparently fulfilled in the Pope and his
adherents; For when Augustulus laid down the Empire, Ann. Chr. 476. there
immediately appeared ten small Kingdoms, sometimes more, sometimes fewer, in
this Western part of the world, and then the Pope began to usurp the dominion
of Rome, and both he and they grew up together, and strengthened each other
till they were all inslaved by him, and had enabled him to trample Emperors
under his feet: likewise the declining or wane of Popedom in these too last
ages has been caused by the withdrawing of these very Princes from his
subjection, whose Kingdoms were once provinces of Rome, and whose predecessors
had given their power to the Pope; and when a few more shall follow their
example, the Pope will lofe his triple Crown.

These things thus explained the Observation is clear.

Obs. It is the command of Christ to all his people to withdraw from the
communion of Papal Rome, as they would avoid joining in her sins, and to those
that have opportunity, to forsake the dwellings of Rome as they would escape
her plagues.

When the whole world after the flood apostatized from God and his worship, God
singled out the family of Abraham, and in time increast them to a nation, to
put his name, and to keep up his worship, among them: for this the rest
especially their neighbors in the East, hated, and opposed them, and the heads
of this opposition were Egypt, Niniveh, and at last Babylon in Chaldea, which
swallowed up all her neighbors; Thus there was a long contest betwixt the
Church of the Jews who adhered to God and pure religion, and Babylon which was
become the head of the Pagan Apostasy in the East: In like manner, the Gospel
was no sooner planted and spread throughout the Western world, but there began
a defection to Idolatry in the worship of Saints and Angels, and after some
while Rome became the head of this Apostasy, and for above 1 thousand years
past, there has been a continual contest betwixt a purer part of Christ's
Church scattered through diverse Countries, and this Mystical Babylon; a certain
number specified by one hundred forty four thousand, Rev 14.1. have kept
themselves pure from the whoredoms of Rome, they were Virgins and followed the
Lamb whithersoever he went, and with them the Roman beast has continually made
war, and still seeks to destroy them out of the earth: now all that would be
the faithful servants of Christ must join with this small persecuted company,
and neither comply with, nor submit to Rome, nor connive at her power and
impositions, as they would not be found guilty of her Apostasy, and be swept
away in her destruction.

To prove this, because we speak to them who are already separated from Rome,
it will be sufficient to clear these 2 Questions, which being cleared will also
prove the duty of others to separate from her, who yet either adhere to, or
lean toward her.

1. Question, whether there was a just ground for the Potestants to separate
from the Church of Rome? 2. Whether there can be any reconciliation of
Protestants to Rome.
In which I shall be brief, because a foundation is in a sort laid for it in
the foregoing discourse.

1. Qu. Whether Protestants did upon just and necessary grounds separate from
the communion of the Church of Rome, in her worship and discipline?

Answ. They did, which I thus prove.

1. Because the Church of Rome has altered the rule of the Christian faith.
The Church is a holy Commonwealth under the government of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and he governs it by his laws contained in the holy Scriptures; these
are the rule of their worship and obedience to him, Math. 28.18, 19, 20. He
that alters this rule, alters the fundamental constitution of the Church; But
the Church of Rome has altered this rule; they teach the Scriptures to be a
defective, insufficient rule, and therefore they join to them the Apocryphal
books of the Old Testament and the Traditions of the Church (which also they
receive and reject at their pleasure,) Decrees of Councils, and decretals and
decisions of Popes; all these together are the perfect rule that the Papists
acknowledge and pretend to; I say, pretend, because the Scripture has little
share in it, when it comes to Trial; hereby they have made a new foundation of
the Church, both of faith and practice; For it is not sufficient that we
believe and practice all that is in the Canonical Scriptures, but we must
believe and obey the Apocryphal writings and unwritten Traditions, as of the
same authority with the Bible; thus the Council of Trent has determined, as
was showed before: This alters the very constitution of the Church, and
subjecteth it to men instead of Christ; and this is the root of all apostasy.

2. Because the Papists pretend their Pope or Church to be above the
Scriptures, and to put an authentic authority on them and their sense; Thus
all our faith and obedience is resolved into the determination of men. That the
Papists pretend the Pope, their Council, or Church, to be above the Scriptures,
cannot be denied, they give the authority and authentickness to the Scriptures,
it is from their command that the Bible is received, and if they pleased they
might cause it to be laid aside; it cannot be known (they say) that the
Scriptures are Gods word, but that their Church declares it; nor is any sense
or meaning to be fixed upon, as the certain sense of any Scripture, but what
they determine to be the meaning of the place. Accordingly the Trent. Council
out of their great power have determined the vulgar Latin Translation of the
Bible to be authentic, and equal to the Greek and Hebrew originals, Council of
Trent, Ses. 4
though their own authors acknowledge it to be most false, defective, and in
many things ridiculous: Now then our faith is not ultimately resolved into the
Scriptures, we do not believe and obey, because we know and are sure from
Scripture that this is the mind of God, but because the Pope or Church declare
it to be the mind of God; yea though the words of Scripture plainly condemn
what they teach, or though the Translation of a Scripture be contrary to the
original which was indicted by the spirit of God immediately; yet if they say
this is the meaning of the place and the true translation of it, we must
believe it; The foundation then of all our faith and obedience is the
determination of the Church or Pope.

Obj. But they are infallible they say.

Answ. This they can never prove; but if they were, if I must believe merely
upon their Testimony, and saying they are infallible, my faith is still
resolved into the witness of men: their testimony concerning themselves is but
a humane Testimony, they do not, cannot prove it by any divine, infallible
proof; therefore my faith and obedience must ultimately pesolve into humane
authority. The Apostles were infallible, yet had not they dominion over the
faith of the Church, 2 Cor. 12.24. to command what should be believed and
practiced; but they proved by infallible and divine. Testimony of miracles and
gifts of the Holy Ghost, that what they taught came from God, and so the belief
of the people was built upon the Testimony of God to the Apostles doctrine, 1.
Cor. 2.4, 5. the Apostle says, his preaching was in demonstration of the
spirit and of power. That their faith might not stand in the wisdom of men, but
in the power of God: If their faith had been grounded upon the Apostles own
Testimony of his self that he was infallible, and upon his determination
concerning any Scripture or doctrine out of his own wisdom, though he had
seemed to prove it strangely, their faith had stood upon the authoty and wisdom
of man; but therefore their faith was built on God, because his spirit did
powerfully demonstrate what the Apostle preached to be from God; therefore
unless the Papists can prove their infallibility by miracles, and demonstration
of the spirit, theirs is but a humane Testimony, and so we know it is, and a
false one too: and therefore it is an intolerable abuse to take the Church off
from faith and obedience to Christ as the head commanding and ruling her, and
from the holy Spirit, as inditing and confirming the holy Scriptures, and to
subject her to the authority and determinations of fallible and sometimes most
wicked men: To let pass that the Papists themselves not being agreed who is the
infallible supreme judge, whether the Pope, Council, or the whole Church, no
man of them has any sure foundation, for his Faith: If they say the Scripture
declares who is the supreme infallible Judge; I answer that Judge must again
tell us what is the meaning of that Scripture; The Pope says it means him, the
Council and Church say it means them; here are three pretenders to supreme and
infallible authority, and to interpret the Scripture; which soever a man
adheres to, it is two to one but he is mistaken; however here is no way to
determine who is the infallible Judge, unless there be infallible marks and
Testimonies of it given by God, and then they are of the supreme authority, and
neither Pope, Council, nor Church themselves; but such they can never produce.
Thus the whole matter is but an inconsistent juggle to bring the Church into
subjection to the Pope.

3. Because the Church of Rome takes away the Scriptures from the people, yea
and allows the Clergy themselves the use of the corrupt, vulgar Translation
of the Bible only. Faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word of God, Romans
10.14. How then shall the people get Faith or grow in it, when they must not
have the Scriptures to read themselves, nor have them read to them by their
teachers, but in an unknown tongue, and that Translation so corrupt also, that
if any of them should understand Latin, they would yet have much difficulty to
find the truth. The Scriptures are Christ's Law whereby he governs his Church,
and the peoples Magna Charta, the Charter of all their privileges, and of all
Gods promises spiritual and temporal; to take this from them is to deprive
them, both of the rule of their obedience, and of the foundation of all their
faith and hope in God: This is not to be endured upon any pretense whatsoever.

4. Because they impose the celebration of Gods worship in an unknown tongue
the Papists celebrate their prayers, Sacraments, and singing of Psalms, all in
Latin, which as they know the people understand not, so they would not have
them understand it; by this means the people are deprived of all true worship;
For worship is the reverence and affection of the soul to God, either in
ascribing honor to him, or desiring of him and trusting in him for whatever we
need. This it is impossible man should give to God in and by those words and
expressions which he understands not, which for what he knows may blaspheme
God, or beg a curse instead of a blessing, which as managed by illiterate
Priests oftentimes are nonsense and signify nothing, and sometimes contrary to
sound Doctrine, yea may at all times for what the people know be directed to an
Idol or a Devil instead of God. For preaching of the word the Papists pretend
but little to it: And thus the Roman Church is a Church of Christ, which
acknowledges not him for her head and Governor, nor his word for her rule and
Law, nor his worship for her practice; but sabjecteth her self to a wicked man
under the name of Christ's Vicar, takes his will for her Law, and his
institutions for her worship, without Question and without understanding; This
is an abuse Jot to be tolerated.

5. The Idolary that the Papists impose on the Church; the Apostle is express,
You cannot partake of the Table of the Lord and the Table of Devils, the Cup of
the Lord and the cup of Devils, 1 Cor. worcester-10.20, 21. and these Devils, he
says, are shipped in Idols by Idolaters, with whom therefore we must have no
communion; now the greatest part of the Papists worship consists in the worship
and invocation of Saints, Angels, and the Virgin Mary, and their waser-God,
which they practice upon the very same grounds on which the Heathens worshipped
their Idols, and therefore are Idolaters as well as the Heathens: they say they
do not worship them as God; the Heathens said the same and as truly; but they
do ascribe to them the praise, trust, homage and subjection, fear and
reverence, which is due only to God which is above the condition and desert of
our fellow Creatures, who depend upon God, and the merits of Christ as much as
we; and this does take off the Heart from God, and makes men believe that the
Saints and Angels are nearer to us, more merciful, more ready to help us than
God is, and more concerned for our good than our blessed Lord whose whole work
it is to redeem and interceed for us.

6. Their imposing the belief of Transubstantiation and worship of the bread in
the Sacrament: Most of our Marian Martyrs were put to death upon this point
only, their not believing the real presence (as they Papists call it) of Christ
in the Sacrament, i. e. that the bread was substantially turned into the body
of Christ. If men would impose upon us the belief of the least untruth, though
in natural or civil things, we must not submit to them, much less when they
impose such an untruth as this Tiansubstantiation, which is against the plain
letter of Scripture, which says, that Christ did not only take, which was
before Consecration, but also that he gave bread and wine (to be eaten and
drunk by his disciples) which was after they were consecrated, 1 Cor. 11.22,
23. which is also against our senses; the eye, the smell, the touch and taste,
all witnessing the Elements to be still bread and wine; against Philosophy,
which teaches such a change of one body into another, especially so small a
one as that of a Wafer into so large as the body of Christ, to be absolutely
impossible; yea and against common reason, which knows whence the bread and
wine came, how they were made, how they go into the stomach, are digested,
refresh, and are carried off like other food: should such a Paradox be
admitted, there can be no certainty in any thing; For by the pretense of such a
change or miracle, all evidence may be evaded; and so the Apostles that saw
Christ in the body, heard him, handled him, both before and after his
Resurrection, might (for what we know) be all mistaken; and all the witnesses
of the miracles that confirm both Testaments, might all failin their sense and
judgment of things, and so nothing be certain in Religion, seeing there is
continually in innumerable places such a prodigy as the Host, which is as they
say the glorified body of Christ now in Heaven, and yet sense and reason take
it to be a bit of bread; what may they not persuade and impose on people, that
can prevail with them to believe this? The worshipping of the bread does also
destroy the nature and use of the Sacrament, where instead of a comfortable
remembrance of Christ and his death, to increase faith in him, and love to him,
men are taught only ignorantly to worship a bit of bread, and that with more
solemnity, than Christ himself was honored with on earth.

7. Because they take away the cup from the people in the Sacrament, hereby
they take upon them to alter Christ's institution at their pleasure; they
deprive the people not only of one part of the Sacrament, but in so doing
wholly obscure the meaning of the Sacrament; for seeing they break not the
bread but give it whole, nor pour out the wine, nor suffer the people to see
and drink it; the people have no representation of the death of Christ, neither
of the breaking or bruising of his body, nor shedding his blood; and in this
the Papists are most insolent of any other their Corruptions; for that their
Councils of Sess. 13.
Constance and Sess. 21.
Trent do acknowledge, that Christ gave both Elements to his disciples, and
that the Primitive Church continued the like custom for many ages, and yet they
can presume to alter it upon trivial reasons.

8. The Papists greatly obscure the Doctrine of Justification; the Gospel is
the glad tidings of peace, the word of reconciliation; 2 Cor. 5. chapter 19, 20. v.
that God is in Christ reconciling the world to himself is the chief thing
committed to the Ministers of the Gospel; if therefore this be obscured, the
Gospel is in a great measure rendered ineffectual, and the Ministry useless for
the end it was appointed for. It is the chief enquiry of sinful man, what he
should do to be saved, Act. 16.31. and on this depends all his worship of God;
for till man be reconciled to God, he cannot worship him acceptably, nor can he
trust, love and fear God aright, unless he know upon what grounds, and in what
way God will have this done. If we lose the doctrine of Justification, we lose
the substance of the Gospel and of all Religion: Now this the Papists do
obscure so much, that a man can scarce tell amidst their Doctrines, what Christ
has done for him, and what he must expect from Christ. They say a natural man
improving the gifts of nature, does in some fort merit the grace and spirit of
God, and when he has that grace he does ex condigno properly and of due debt
merit the continuance of Gods favor, and heaven it self; yea, over and above
may merit for other men: and if a man do commit sins after conversion, his
voluntary penances, his patient bearing of Gods corrections in this world, and
Purgatory in the next, together with alms-deeds, fastings and such good works,
do make full satisfaction for all these sins; and he that wants penance and
satisfactions of his own, may be supplied out of the treasury of the Church by
Masses and the Popes indulgences. Now this is not only the doctrine of
Schoolmen, but the chief part of Religion and worship among them, and the chief
things the Priests teach and are employed about.

9. The Popes claim of supremacy is blasphemous, and not to be submitted to by
the Churches: Under the Gospel Christ has appointed no high Priest to whom all
Ministers should be subject, no place of worship to which all Nations should
repair, no Mother Church on which they should depend, none to be his Vicar on
earth: but all this the Pope and Church of Rome claim and usurp, which tends
to bring all the Churches on earth into bondage to them, and to exclude the
conduct of the spirit in the Ministers and Churches, as if it were peculiar to
them only; it is also a power which no Creature is capable of, and derogates
from the honor of Christ, who does by his Godhead, spirit and word, preside
in, govern and guide his whole Church.

10. Because the Papists have wholly changed the discipline of the Gospel into
a pompous, worldly Polity. Christ appointed Pastors and teachers for the
edifying of the Saints, till they all come to the perfect man in Christ, Ephesians.
4.12, 13. but the Papists have changed this into a visible, worldly Monarchy,
though under the pretense of Religion and the name of spiritual, of which the
Pope is the head, his Cardinals Princes, all his Priests and Clergy officers
and Factors for him to hold the Consciences of men in subjection to him, and to
keep Princes and their Kingdoms in homage, and tributary to his Coffers. By all
these things it appears that the Papists have quite altered both the foundation
and superstructure of the Church of God, and the government of his house, and
retained little more than the name of Christ, his Church and Gospel; and
therefore it was necessary they should withdraw from them who had any care of
the honor of God, or their own salvation.

Obj. The Papists Object, that the Protestants acknowledge the Church of Rome
to be a true Church, and therefore not to be separated from.

Answ. 1. Suppose it were a true Church, are not other true Churches also? What
obligation lies upon all Churches to be members of and subject to the Church
of Rome, more than on the Church of Rome it self to be a member of any other
true Church? surely none from the notion of a true Church, seeing all Churches
of Christ that are true, are at least equal with her in this attribute. If they
say that the Church of Rome has the Primacy of all Churches and dominion over
them from Peter the head of the Church, this is but to beg what they can never
prove; that Peter had the headship of the Church committed to him and his
successors, and which is denied of their own Council of Constance, Sess. 15.

2. Because the Church of Rome does retain the profession of Christanity, the
general creeed, and the holy Scriptures, however they deviate from them in
their expositions and practice; therefore the Protestants dare not deny it
absolutely to be a Church of Christ; but that he may be still striving with it
and may have many in it, who may keep themselves from the great corruptions of
it, even as the 7000. in Israel, who had not bowed the knee to Baal, and so she
may continue a Church in this sense, and in this State till her final
rejection and destruction, nevertheless they unanimously agree that she is an
Idolatrous, Apostatical Church, under great and fatal corruptions, though she
has not quite forsaken the name of Christ, or he utterly forsaken her, as the
ten Tribes under Jeroboam became idolatrous and Apostatical, and are said to
have worshipped Devils in worshipping the Calves, though they pretended them to
represent Jehovah, 2 Chronicles. 11.15. and when they were in this state of
backsliding all the people as well as the Priests and Levites, that did set
their hearts to seek the Lord God of their fathers, forsook them and went to
Jerusalem to sacrifice, and joined themselves to Judah, 2 Chronicles. 11.13.17.16.
and in the time of his successors those that were upright and had opportunity
did still resort to Jerusalem to worship; whence the Idolatrous Priests are
complained of for laying wait and Nets for them in Mispah and Tabor: and this
they did notwithstanding that God did still contend with Israel by his
Prophets, and sent many eminent ones to them; as Elijah, Elisha, Hosea, Jonah,
with many others, to call them back again to himself, to continue to warn and
invite them to repentance even until their dispersion and captivity.

2. A 2. Question is whether there may be any reconciliation of Potestants to
or with the Church of Rome. And here I must distinguish betwixt particular
persons, members of that Church, and the body of the Church it self. There are
many particular persons in the Popish Communion, that be wail their corruption,
that complain of their bondage, and are moderate toward Protestants; for these
we may have charity, respect and compassion; but to the Church of Rome, the
general communion and society of Papists under the Pope the ir head, there may
be nocommunion or reconciliation.

1. Because they have redressed none of their errors and corruptions, for which
the Protestants at first forsook them. If our first separation from Rome was
just and necessary, so it is still, for they have not mended, or redressed any
of the grounds of our separation: but on the contrary when they were entreated
and in a sort compelled to call the Council of Trent to compose matters,
besides the many unworthy arts they used to have men chosen to their mind and
of their own party, they did severally confirm every error in doctrine, and
corruption in worship, which the Protestants accused them of, and Anathematized
all that held the doctrine of the Protestants, and as if this were not enough,
their Priests are all to be sworn to maintain this Council, and a Catechism was
ordered to be composed out of it to be the standard of the Doctrine of that
Church, which was done accordingly.

2. As they have not, so they cannot mend, or alter any thing considerable. The
constitution of the Roman Papal Church depends on the corruptions they maintain
and practice. Should their Clergy marry, they would not be at the Popes
command: should they lay aside private Masses, image worship, and Purgatory,
their Priests would lose a great part of their maintenance; and the Pope a
great jewel in his Crown, viz. the power of canonizing Saints and freeing souls
from Purgatory: and if the people should have the Scriptures, and public
service in their own tongue, they would quickly discern the corruptions of
their Church, and impostures of their Pope; above all, should they alter any
thing of moment decreed by the Council of Trent, which was also confirmed by
Pope Pius the 4th. it would shake the foundation of the Church the Popes
infallibility: for either the Council and Pope Pius erred in their decrees, or
that Pope must err who alters any thing of those decrees: hence it was, that
the Pope and Council of Trent would not yield so much as the cup in the Lords
supper to the Laity at any time or in any case though greatly importuned to do
it by the Emperor Ferdinand the 1. and his son Maximilian.

3. The Church of Rome is the body of Antichrist or man of sin, she has made
him her head and has espoused her self to him as her Lord, the whole religion
of Popery is fitted only to exalt the Pope and his Clegy; and cheat the people
both of the knowledge of God, and of their money. To unite with Rome is to join
our selves with a company of Rebels and fugitives from Christ, that have
conspired against him, and set them up another King and Lord.

4. Rome haht of long time and does maintain an opposition against the Churches
of Christ. She contends for the universal headship of the Pope, she decrees
and compasses (as far as she can) the destruction of all Heretics, i. e. of
all that will not submit to her corruptions, for about 900 years together, and
still attempts the same. To join with Rome is to condemn all the Confessors and
Martyrs, that have suffered by them, and to bring the guilt of their blood upon
our selves, as our Savior says, Math. 23.35. all the righteous blood that was
shed upon the earth from Abel to Zacharias should be required of that
generation, because they persisted in the footsteps of their fathers, and were
of the same body and succession with them that shed that blood.

5. Rome is appointed for destruction. That State or Polity, that City and
people are appointed by our Lord Jesus Christ to be utterly destroyed, as in
the 17, 18, 19. of the Rev. at large: and their destruction is not threatened
conditionally in case they repent not, as it is to other Nations; but it is
absolutely foretold, as of a people abhorred of the Lord, forsaken and given
over by him, because they forsook him first. Christ has declared war against
Rome, which he will pursue till he has conquered her, and triumphed over her:
therefore there may not be that desire or attempt of union with her as with
other backsliding Churches. Gods people are called to come out of Babylon upon
pain of their destruction, therefore are not to make peace with her. Who would
join with a perishing Church, with a Party devoted to destruction, and with a
perishing religion? whereas Christ will have a Church pure and triumphant,
which shall survive and triumph over Babylon, Rev. 19.1. etc.

FINIS.

