A Trimmer's Confession of Faith: Or, The True Principles of A Jack of
Both-Sides.
Tune of, Which no Body can deny.
Licensed according to Order.

I.
PRay lend me your Ears, if you have any to spare,
You that love Commonwealth, as you hate Common-Pray'r,
Who can in a Breath Pray, Dissemble and Swear;
Which no Body can deny.
II.
^'m sometimes of the wrong side, and sometimes the right;
To day I Am a Jack, and tomorrow a Mite:
(...) for either King pray, but for neither dare fight;
Which no Body can deny.
III.
I Am sometimes a Rebel, and sometimes a Saint,
I sometimes can Swear, and at other times Cant;
There Is nothing but Grace (I thank God) that I want;
Which no Body can deny.
IV.
Old Babyln's Whore I cannot endure her;
I Am a Sanctified Zealot, there is none can be purer:
For-Swearing I hate, like any Non-Juror;
Which no Body can deny.
V.
Of gracious King William I am a great lover,
Yet I side with a Party that prays for another;
I drink the King's Health, take it one way or the other:
Which no Body can deny.
VI.
Precisely I creep like a Snail to the Meeting;
Where Sighing I meet with such sorrowful Greeting,
Makes me hate a long Prayer, and five hours Prating:
Which no Body can deny.
VII.
And there I sing Psalms, as if never weary;
Yet I must confess, when I Am frolic and merry,
More Music I find in a Boat to the Ferry:
Which no Body can deny.
VIII.
I pledge every Health my Companions drink round;
I can say Heavens bless, or the Devil confound;
I can hold with the Hare, and run with the Hound;
Which no Body can deny.
IX.
I can pray for a Bishop, and curse an Archdeacon;
I can seem very sorry that Charleroy's taken;
I can any thing say, to save my own Bacon;
Which no Body can deny.
X.
Sometimes for a good Commonwealth I am wishing;
O Oliver! Oliver! give us thy Blessing;
For in troubled Waters I vow I love fishing;
Which no Body can deny.
XI.
The Times are so ticklish, I vow and profess,
I know not which Party or Cause to embrace;
I Will be sure to side with those that are least in distress;
Which no Body can deny.
XII.
With the Jacks I rejoice that Savey's defeated;
With the Whigs I seem pleased he is so bravely retreated
Friends and Foes are by me both equally treated,
Which no Body can deny.
XIII.
Each Party, we see, now are full of great hope,
There Is some for the Devil, and some for the Pope;
And I am for any thing, but for a Rope;
Which no Body can deny.
London: Printed for James Thomlinson near East-Smithfield, 1694.


