THE Triumphs of Grace: OR, THE Last Words AND Edifying Death OF THE LADY
Margaret de la Musse, A Noble French LADY, Who Died in May 1681. Aged but
Sixteen Years.

Englished by P. L.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey, over against
the Compter. 1687.

Imprimatur.

Hen. Maurice Rmo Dom. Christ. P. D. Wilhelmo, Archiep. Cant. a Sacris.

Feb. 1. 1686.
TO The most Pious AND Virtuous Gentlewoman MADAM ANN HEWER.
Madam,
ASI was casting in my Mind to present you with something in token of my high
Esteem for your Virtue, I happily met with these LAST HOURS of a young French
Lady; in which I found so many things rare and admirable, useful and edifying,
divinely transporting and inflaming, that I concluded it a Gift most agreeable
and comporting with your Pious and Devout Inclinations; and therefore was soon
determined in my thoughts to Dedicate this Translation to you, as judging it
(setting aside my own Faults) most worthy of your Acceptance. For what can be
imagined more strange and wonderful, than to see so tender an Age, so weak a
Sex, so delicate an Education, not only combating the most formidable of all
things, that King of Terrors, but triumphing over, and trampling on him? What
move Edifying, than to behold the Power of Grace so gloriously enthroned amidst
the Infirmities of Nature, raised to their highest pitch, and making them all
serve as foils to its Divine Luster? What more transporting, than to hear a
Soul wounded with Divine Love, send forth its flaming Desires to the Glorious
and All-Beautiful Object of them? Or what can be thought more engaging and
inciting to Virtue, than to see not only the peaceful, but joyful Latter End
thereof; and what great Triumphs and Exultations attend it, even in the most
difficult and affrighting Circumstances of the Last Scene of Life? In a word,
MADAM, you may see here the miraculous and powerful effects of the RELIGION you
profess, and the GRACE you entertain and have chosen for your Portion and
Ornament; how nothing can stand against it, how every thing must turn to its
advantage, and how all that oppose it, serve only to adorn it with
never-fading Trophies of Glory. I question not, MADAM, but your reading of this
Book will start many more useful and delightful hints, than are here mentioned,
which may afford you Advice and Comfort in this your Pilgrimage through the
Valley of the shadow of Death, to the Land of Bliss and Glory. But I detain you
too long from the Banquet within, where (according to Sampson's Riddle) you will
find the Eater giving Meat, and the strong one sweetness. So commending you to
that Grace whose Triumphs are here so signally exemplifi'd, I remain with all
due Respect,

MADAM, Your most Obedient Humble Servant, P. L.

THE Preface.
IT is so rare a thing to see Persons of Quality, in the flower of their Age,
wholly disengaged and set loose from the World and Vanities thereof, and it is
of so great import to publish such Edifying Examples as these, that we may
suppose the best of all sorts will think themselves obliged by our
communicating to them the Last Words of the Lady Margaret de la Musse, it being
impossible to read them, without being powerfully affected therewith. For
(indeed) we find in this little Piece so many Objects of Wonder, as we are at a
stand where to fix it most. We have here a Lady presented to us, who at the Age
of Sixteen years, when others only begin to enter upon the Stage of the World,
and to relish the vain Pleasures of it, earnestly desires to leave it; and not
minding ought, save those Felicities which never end, affronts Death, and all
its terrifying Concomitants, with so much Constancy, Bravery, and Foy, as if
she were full of Days, and had lived to that utmost most term of Life, which
uses to make Death welcome; who, at those years, when others have scarce
attained some slight Tinctures and Impressions of Piety, and are only
acquainted with the first Rudiments of Christianity, speaks so solidly and
worthily of the Mysteries of Salvation, and the Grounds of her Hope, that one
would think she had spent an Age in the reading and meditation of those Sacred
Records. To be brief, we see a young Virgin, who being dearly beloved of all
her Relations and Friends, might be thought to have strong ties to the Earth,
where she was about to leave them, and yet speaks of nothing but Heaven, and
the Salvation her SAVIOR purchased for her; Who every moment darts her flaming
desires to the All-Glorious and Lovely Cause of them; and who amidst the
extreme Agonies and Pangs she suffers, permits not the least murmur against
Divine Providence to 'scape her lips; but meekly submitting to the will of her
Creator, triumphs by Faith, over all the Weaknesses and Oppositions of Nature.
Finally, we see a Mother, who though she were most sensibly afflicted to find
her self at the point of parting with Her she most tenderly loved, yet has
Courage enough to comfort her Daughter in her last Conflicts, and is not at all
ashamed to learn to die well of Her, whom she had taught to live so. It Is like
there will not be found so exact a Connection in all that this Illustrious
Expirer delivers, as some critical ears may require; but besides, that it is
not strange to find the Discourses of Dying Persons, broken and interrupted,
and that it was not well possible to retain all she spoke, I dare affirm, that
the Reader will meet with so many surprising and affecting Passages in these
Papers, that he will give little heed to their connection, or exactness of
style. In a word, the only aim in publishing This, is to expose to view the
miraculous Effects of Grace, when it works on the Heart, and seizes it for its
own; making the very Mouths of Children the Trumpets of its Praise. GOD, of his
infinite Mercy, grant to us all, That we may die the Death of the Righteous,
and that our latter End may be like theirs.

Advertisement.
THE Translator desire^ the Reader to take notice, That where thi^ Young Lady
repeats the Psalms in Verse, which also (as it is usual for French Protestants
to do) she frequently sang; he has made use of such English Translations, as
best express the sense of the French Meter.

THE Last Words AND Edifying Death OF THE LADY Margaret de la Musse.
THE Lady Margaret de la Musse, whose Last Words are here recorded, was of one
of the Noblest Families in the Province of Britany, she being the Daughter of
Caesar, Lord Marquess de la Musse, and the Lady Vrsulina de Champagne de la
Suse, his Consort; who, together with their Illustrious Ancestors, have held so
considerable a Rank in the Kingdom, that the only naming of them may suffice
to convince the World of it. But it is not for that alone, they deserve the
Esteem of all men, as being far more eminent for their great Piety and
exemplary Virtue, than Nobleness of Blood. Their great and unparalled Zeal
for God's Glory, and unmovable Constancy in the True Religion, cannot
sufficiently be commended and admired; Afflictions and Sufferings, which are
the Lot of the Church-Militant here on Earth, having never been able to make
them renounce the Doctrine our Savior taught, and his Martyrs have sealed with
their Blood: For they all-along made it their chiefest Business, more and more,
to establish the Covenant of God, and knowledge of his Truth in their Family;
and to the end all the Children God had given them, might he Heirs of their
Piety and Virtue, as well as Estate, their greatest concern and care ever was
to afford them, together with a good Education, the powerful Example of an Holy
Life. And though God has some time since deprived this Illustrious Family of
Him who was the Head of it, yet by the Care of his most pious Lady, Godliness
has no less flourished in it, than before; insomuch, that God being honored
and feared, his Holy Name called upon, and his Sacred Word made the subject of
constant Meditation among them, this Wise Mother always had the comfort and
happiness to see her Cares and Desires herein, answered by every one of her
Children; and particularly by this Daughter of hers, whose Dying Words, are
here rehearsed, who in the last moments of her Life, did in a special manner,
show how deep an impression those good Instructions had made on her, which she
had received in her most tender Age.

THIS Pious young Lady, after some days indisposition, which daily grew upon
her, did on the 4th of May 1681. being Sunday, fall into such violent Fits,
that as soon as she was come to her self again, perceiving her Latter End was
near, desired the Lady her Mother should be called, that she might receive her
Blessing, and be comforted by her; who no sooner appeared, but this Dutiful
Daughter, stretching forth her Hands to her, with all the submission
imaginable, spoke thus: My dear Mother, now is the time God will call me to
Himself. Let us put our selves in a condition of coming into his Presence. But
alas! how unworthy am I to present my self before him! How weak is my Faith,
and how disproportionate my Repentance! Pray entreat God for me, that he would
grant me the Pardon of my Sins, and speak Peace to my Soul. Oh, how unhappy am
I, He does not speak at all to my Soul! O beg of Him to have mercy on me!

HOW much soever the Lady her Mother found her self moved at this Discourse,
yet she had so much power over her self, as to return her this Answer: Dear
Child, it is true, Psalm. 143.2.
that in God's sight no man living (but through his mercy) can be justified.
But has not the Savior of the World made an atonement for the greatest
Sinners? Have not the sins of David, Manasses, St. Peter, the penitent Thief,
and abundance of others, been forgiven them? JESUS CHRIST (as you very well
know, my Child) did not come to call the Righteous, Mat. 9.13.
but Sinners to repentance.

IT IS true (replied the young Lady;) but such a repentance I do not find
wrought in me, as God requires of those he calls to him: for alas, he speaks
not to my Soul. My dear Child (answered the Lady her Mother) since your heart
is so sensible of grief for your Sins, it is a sign that your Conscience is not
seared or stupifi'd; there is something that fights within you; And what can
that be but the Holy Ghost? Always put your trust in God's Mercy, and the
Merits of your Redeemer, who has said, Joh. 6 17.
Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out. At the hearing of which
comfortable words, the Patient, with her Eyes lifted up to Heaven, broke out
into these: O Lord, Cant. 1.4.
draw me then, that I may run after thee.

THEN she desired to see their Chaplain Monsieur de Malnoe; who no sooner was
acquainted with it, but he repaired to her Chamber, in company of some
Gentlewomen of the Neighborhood he met at the door, to whom, as they drew near
to her Bedside to see her, she spoke thus: My dear Friends, I beg of you, pray
to God that he would be pleased to have mercy on me. And then turning to the
Minister, she earnestly desired him to assist her with his Prayers and
comfortable Exhortations.

AND some few hours after this, she finding her self uneasy in her Chamber,
desired to be (and was accordingly) removed to another; and she still growing
worse and worse, requested to be recommended to God in the Prayers of the
Church. In the mean time she would hear nothing but Godly Discourses, and
always was talking of the heinousness of her sins. Whereupon being told, that
it was very pleasing to God to see us accuse our selves before him; It Is true
(cried she) Whosoever does confess and forsake his sins, shall have mercy.
Prove. 28.13.


ALL the rest of the day she spent in lamenting and bewailing the weakness and
imperfection of her Piety; and no sooner was fallen into a slumber, but she
awaked and called for the Chaplain; still continuing in Meditation and Prayer,
and frequently calling upon God, as particularly thus: With speed send help,
Psalm. 40.18. Old Transl.
and set me free,
My God, I thee require:
Make have with aid to succor me,
O Lord, at my desire.
Like a lost Sheep I Have gone astray, Psalm. 119.176. Patrick.

But now to thee I come:
Thy Precepts I resolve to obey;
Lord, bring thy Servant home.


O Lord, Psalm. 6.1.
rebuke me not in thine indignation, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.
Psalm 130.3.
If thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss. v. 4.
O Lord, who shall stand? But there is mercy with thee, that thou may be
feared. Psalm. 51.2.
Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sins. v. 3.
For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. v. 9.
Turn thy face from mine iniquities, and put out all my misdeeds. v. 10.
Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

Lord, to my Prayer incline thine ear;
The afflicted hear: Psalm. 55.2. Sandys.

Nor be thou deaf to my Complaint;
For O I faint!
Regard the sighs, the groans, the cries,
Which from my pensive Soul arise.
O wretched Creature that I am, Romans 7.27.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death!

WHICH having said, she remained silent for a little while; and then began to
speak again, saying, Draw near to me, O Lord, and I will draw near to thee; and
purify my heart, that I may appear before thee.

To thee, O Lord, my God, lo I
Do stretch my craving hands: Psalm. 143. v. 6, 7, 8. Old Transl.

My Soul desires after thee,
As do the thirsty Lands.
Hear me with speed, my Spirit does fail,
Hide not thy face me fro:
Else shall I be like them that down
Into the Pit do go.
Have mercy upon me, Psalm. 15.1.
O God, after thy great goodness; according to the multitude of thy merccies,
blot out mine offenses. v. 12.
O restore unto me the comfort of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free
Spirit.

IT cannot be described how great her grief and disquiet was, when she
reflected upon her weaknesses, and the little care she conceived she had taken
in the performance of her Duty to God; and in this doleful condition she cried
out, Lord God of health, Psalm. 88.1, 2, 3. Old Transl.
the hope and stay,
Thou art alone to me:
I call and cry throughout the day,
And all the night to thee.
O let my Prayer soon ascend
Unto thy sight on high:
Incline thine ear, O Lord, attend,
And bearken to my cry.
For why? with woe my heart is filled,
And does in trouble dwell:
My life and breath almost does yield,
And draws nigh to Hell.


O Lord, Jer. 14.7.
though my sins witness against me, yet do thou pardon and put away mine
iniquities, for thy Great Names sake (which I invoke.) For thy wrath endures
but a moment: Psalm. 30.5.
and in thy favor is life.

Behold my troubles, Lord,
How they with baste advance: Psalm 70.1. Patr.

O do not stay, but come as fast
To my deliverance.
Like, Psalm. 42.1.
as the Heart pants after the Water brooks, so longs my Soul after thee, v. 2.
O God! My Soul is athirst for God, yea even for the Living God: When shall I
come and appear before God?

Look dawn to me, and be the same Psalm. 119. v. 132. Woodford.

As thou art used to be to them who love thy Name.
It Is for thy favor that I sue, Psalm. 119.57. Woodf.

And hastening of that promise which thy Word makes due.
ALL the night long she was rehearsing the most pathetical Verses of the
Psalms; and in the morning (being Monday) a Roman Catholic being come to see
her, about nine of the Clock, and expressing his grief upon the score of her
sickness, she answered his Civility, and withal gave him an account of her
Faith, and the Hope that was in her; assuring him, she was resolved to die in
that Religion, which she was brought up in, and always had professed. Some few
days after this, a Divine, by name Monsieur Boursault, being come to visit her,
discoursed her a little while, and then prayed with her; she instancing to him,
after his Prayer was ended, what part of it had most affected her. This whole
day (as the foregoing) she passed in continual sighs and tears; often crying
out, Oh! how much weakness and infirmity, O my God, am I sensible of! Oh! how
unworthy am I to appear before thee! If thou, O Lord, mark my transgressions, I
shall not be able to abide it. But, O my God, I beseech thee speak peace unto
me, and say to my Soul, I am thy Salvation.

Incline thine ear to hear my voice, Psalm. 119.149. Old Transl.

And pity on me take:
As thou wast wont, so help me, Lord,
Lest life should me forsake.
Since my sins do abound, Romans 5.20.
O Lord, so make thy Grace much more abound toward me. Psalm. 69.16.
Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is good: turn unto me according to
the multitude of thy mercies. v. 17.
And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble. O haste thee, and
hear me. Draw nigh unto my Soul, v. 18.
and save it, for thy mercies sake.

WITH these she rehearsed also several admirable Sentences she had learned out
of a Book intitul'd; [Comforts against the Terrors of Death;] which being
slipped out of our mind, are not mentioned here.

SHE having been from the Sunday-morning in continual frights and disquiets,
occasioned by the sense of her sins, and her apprehension of God's Judgments,
found her Spirit calmed, and her mind much composed, about seven of the Clock
in the Evening, when she felt the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, and was filled
with that unspeakable Joy and Glory which God diffuses in their hearts, who are
struck with a lively sorrow for having offended him.

NOW at the time of these happy Inspirations it was, that she hearing them, who
were about her, talk of giving her something to refresh her body, said to them,
All that is done to me, is to no purpose; for from my God I have received the
only Remedy my Soul so much longed for. Psalm. 118.5.
I called upon the Lord in my trouble, and the Lord heard me, at large. I feel
my God is on my side: v. 6.
therefore I will fear no evil. v. 16.
For the right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the Lord brings
mighty things to pass. Psalm. 116.2.
The Lord has inclined his ear unto me: therefore will I call upon him as long
as I breath. v. 3.
The snares of death compassed me about, and the pains of Hell gat hold of me.
v. 4.
I found trouble and heaviness but I will call upon the the Name of the Lord: O
Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my Soul. Gracious is the Lord, v. 5.
and righteous; yea, our God is merciful. v. 6.
The Lord preserves the simple: I was in misery, and he helped me. v. 7.
Turn again then unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee.

HERE she making a stop, they gave her that which was prepared for her; and
some of the Company telling her she should endeavor to take some rest, she
answered, That the Rest and Peace she felt in her Soul, was her sole joy and
happiness. And when it was farther said to her, that she ought to take courage,
there being yet hopes of Recovery. Ah! (replied she) tell me no more of living
here on Earth again, now all my thoughts are fixed upon Heaven. Neither does
death affright me at all: Romans 6.23.
for though I know it is the wages of sin, I know also that the Gift of God is
Eternal Life. Only pray to God for me, that he would be pleased to strengthen
me more and more against the fears, which the sense of my sins may raise in me,
to the end I may be enabled to fight the good fight, 2 Timothy, 4.7.
and so obtain the Crown of Life.

UPON which one saying to her, that the fears occasioned from sin, ought to be
much less in her, than any body else, she having always lived a most pious
retired life; she made this answer: How do you know I would not have loved the
World, if I had been brought up as other people of my Quality are? Am not I
more happy now, that my Savior will take me from it? Let us therefore pray
him, that be would so dispose my Heart, that I may go to him with a full
assurance of his Mercy. O Lord, this is the needful time; help me, my God, have
thee to my relief.

THEN another saying to her, But, Madam, suppose God would spare you to us --
Here she replied, without giving the party leave to go on, Mat. 26.39. Phil.
1.23.
Not my will, O Lord, but thy will be done. Nevertheless it is far better for
me to depart and be with my Savior. But, O my God, Thy will be done on Earth,
as it is in heaven. And so proceeded to the end of the Lord's Prayer; and
afterward rehearsed also the Apostles Creed. Which having done, she sat up in
her Bed, and looking on her Hands, Genesis 3.19. Job 19.25.
said, This poor Body must return to its Dust. But I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day. v. 26.
And though after my skin, Worms destroy this Body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God. 1 Cor. 15.53.
For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality. v.
59.
And then shall Death be swallowed up in Victory. v. 55.
O Death, where is thy Victory? Where is that Sting wherewith with thou would
piece me? My Savior has broken it. After which, she making a little pause, did
seem to fall asleep; but presently turning her self toward the Lady her
Mother, with a cheerful countenance said to her, Dear Mother, give me up to God
again, who thus long has lent me to you. Whereupon the Lady her Mother lifting
up her Eyes to Heaven, with sighs and tears cried out, O Heavenly Father, into
thy hands I commend both my self, and this poor Child thou have given me: Make
us (I beseech thee) partakers of thy holiness, that we may be so of thy
Happiness also.

THEN the Patient answered, I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12.
and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him
against that day. And looking on the Lady her Mother, with a tender look, she
said to her (upon occasion of a Dream she had) Dear Mother, give me to drink
again of your Consolations. Whereto the Lady her Mother answered, It is the
Lord shall do that for you, my Child. Aye, (replied she;) yet have I received
some by your means also. Then the Lady her Mother went on and said, Isal. 12.13.
With joy shall you draw water out of the Wells of Salvation. To which the
Patient answered, Tea verily, I am drinking already of those Waters springing
up into eternal life; and my Cup does overflow. Lord, break this Vessel of
Earth that the Treasure may appear which thou bast laid up in it. Take unto
thee again the Breath wherewith thou bast animated this my poor Body.

THE next night after, she dreamed that she saw two Lamps fastened to Heaven,
which gave a most glorious Light, and that at last one of them was caught up
and hid in Heaven. Which Dream she having told the Lady her Mother the next
Morning, she said to her, My dear Child, thou Virgin of Israel, Mystical Bride,
go to meet thy Bridegroom, with thy Lamp full of that Oil thy Savior has given
thee. Then the Patient cried out, Father, Luke 23.46.
into thy hands I comment my Spirit: Yea, I am now going to the Wedding of the
Lamb, who has married me to himself, in his tender mercies, and I shall sit
down at his Table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. At
which Conversation the Chaplain being present, was going to conclude it, with
these words: [Well done, Mat. 25.23.
good and faithful Servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.] But the
Patient interrupting him, cried out, Oh! this Joy of the Lord is my joy:
adding, That Mercy rejoiced against Judgment, Jam. 2.13.
in her behalf. After this, the Lady her Mother, and one of her own Sisters,
who remained alone with her, heard her most fervently pray to God, and rehearse
several Sentences of the 6.51. and 143. Psalms; which she delivered either in
Prose or Verse, sometimes according to the Old, and at other times according to
the New Translation. And thus applying her self to God, with a Zeal beyond
expression, all her thoughts were now so raised, that she felt such ravishing
Joys, as no Tongue can utter. How happy am I! (repeated she often.) How
surpassing is my Joy! How can I express it? It Is so great, that is exceeds all
comparison. What thanks have I to return to my good God! You, my dear Friends
(speaking to her Mother and Sister) help me to ascribe the Glory due to his
Name, and to set forth his worthy Praise.

THE Lady her Mother seeing her in this happy condition, called those in again,
who were gone out of the Room, that they might be Witnesses of this her Joy and
Consolation, as they had been of her Sorrows. She was at this time sitting up
in her Bed, with her hands joined together, and her Eyes lifted toward Heaven;
her looks being very lively and cheerful, and her countenance brisk, though
modest. For the the space of six hours she spoke with a loud voice, and did
express much in few words; using terms very emphatical to represent, sometimes
her Happiness, and sometimes the Joy she was filled with; interlacing her
discourse with several Sentences both of the Old and New Testament, which she
uttered so fast and fluently, that it was impossible to remember them all; and
mixing her inspired thoughts with those written Dictates of the Holy Ghost,
sometimes made her address to our Lord for the Redemption he had vouchsafed to
her; and then again humbled her self before him. At another time she
congratulated her own happy state; and lastly, she returned a thousand times
her hearty thanks to God for the accumulated favors she had received at his
hand.

BESIDES, She paraphrased several Chapters of the Holy Scripture, as the 5th,
8th, and 12th of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans, and the 17th of St.
John's Gospel; applying them to her self, much after this manner: My God, there
is now no condemnation to them that are in CHRIST JESUS: I have therefore
nothing to fear, for I do with all my heart lay hold of his merits, who is the
Redeemer of the World. I am made free from the Law of Sin and Death, which does
no more at all affright me; and I feel the Spirit of Eternal Life communicated
to me by my Savior. Yea, O my God, I know I am one of thy Children, since this
thy Spirit so powerfully comforts me.

Arise, my Soul, and to the Aimighty King, Psalm. 104.35. Woodf.

Sprightly, and cheerful Hallelujabs, sing!
Oh! how great is my happiness, Romans 8.15.
who have not received the Spirit of Bondage, but the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby I can call Him Father, who is the Great God and Master of the World.
Thou Holy Ghost, shall always bear witness to my Spirit, that I am the Child of
God, and. Coheir with Christ. Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! v. 36.
For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things; to whom be glory for
eever. Amen. Lord Jesu (added she) thou said in that Prayer thou did put
up fir thine Apostles. Joh. 17.20.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their words. I have believed on thee, through their words: Thou did
therefore, O Lord, even then, pray for thy poor Handmaid. Lord, thou did
say, v. 24.
[Father, I will that they also whom thou bast given me, be with me where I
am.] O grant (I beseech thee) that where thou art, I may be also, to the end I
may behold thy Glory to all Eternity. Then hearing some of the Company say,
that she spoke well; It is not I (answered she) that speak, but the Holy Ghost
that speaks in me, to whom he has given the Tongue of the Learned. O Hearken to
me therefore, and I will tell you what he has done for my Soul. O join with me
in returning him thanks for his unspeakable Gift. 2 Cor. 9.15.


IN the mean time she frequently clapped her hands, and shouted for joy; often
repeating these words: O the greatness of my Happiness! How can I express the
content of my Soul? That blessed Comforter has overcome for me, and is sent to
cohabit with me. He (I say) is come to me, who is the Fountain of Life, and in
whose Light alone we can see light. How many wonderful favors have I received
from my good God! Psalm. 116.10.
What shall I render unto him for all the Benefits that he has done to me, Genesis
32.10.
who am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth which
he has shown to his Servant, and wherewith he has filled my Soul. Wherefore
with joy and gladness my mouth shall praise his Holy Name. O Lord, how much
enriched am I with those excellent gifts of thy Grace! Thou have wiped away all
tears from my eyes. Rev. 7.17. 2.17.
Thou bast given me the white Stone, and in that Stone a new Name, which no man
knows, saving he that has it. I shall be fatisfied with the fatness of thy
House, Psalm. 36.8.
and thou shall make me drink of the River of thy Pleasures. Psalm. 23.
The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore, can I lack nothing He shall make me lie
down in green Pastures, and lead me forth beside the still Waters. He shall
convert my Soul, and lead me in the paths of Righteousness, for his Name's
sake. Yea, though I walk through the Valbey of the shadow of Death, I will fear
no evil: for thou art with me; thy Rod and thy Staff comforts me. Thou
preparest a Table before me; thou have anointed my heard with Oil, and my cup
runs over. Surely loving kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life; and I will dwell in the House of the Lord for ever.

WHAT am I, O Lord, my Savior? What am I, that thou should vouchsafe to make
my heart thy habitation! I bless thee, I adore thee, I glorify thee, I give
thanks to thee for thy great mercy, O Lord, my God and heavenly Father! And
you, my dear Friends, (speaking to them that stood by) help me to return the
thanks and praise due unto his Name. Which having said, she cried aloud, Luke
1.46.
My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior;
for he has regarded the lowliness of his Handmaid. How great is the goodness
of God toward me, who has taken pity of me! O how exceeding charitable and
loving is my Savior, who has extended this his great love toward me, even
when I was an Enemy to him! yea, he did knock at the door of my heart, and
enter in (even at that time when I would have shut it against him) and spoke
peace to my Soul. O the Abyss of Mercy and Love, that He, very God and man,
should suffer a shameful Death upon the Cross, to redeem both my Body and Soul
from eternal Damnation! O my God, my heavenly Savior, I see, as it were,
Rivers of Blood running out of those Wounds in thy Blessed Hands, Feet, and
Side, which are as so many Rivers of Grace, that have made me whiter than Snow.
I therefore from a true heart, love, adore, and embrace thee, beseeching thee,
O thou Sun of Righteousness, to shine in my Soul, inlighten it with the
knowledge, purify it with the fear, and inflame it with the love of Thee; make
it partaker of thy Holiness and happiness; and when it has put off this weak
and frail Body, grant that at the last day, it may reassume it in a glorified
state, and both of them reign with thee for ever and ever. Amen

AS she was in those Transports of Mind, looking up steadfastly to Heaven, a
Gentleman of the Neighborhood, then present, said to the Lady her Mother, That
he thought her Daughter might very well say with Holy Stephen, Behold, Act.
7.56.
I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of
God. Which the Patient hearing, cried out, Yea, indeed, I behold him, and like,
St. Paul, am placed in the view of things that are unspeakable. And you, my
dear Friends, how is it you don't see the same with me? This Mercy, which is
not vouchsafed to every one, God will show you one day. Then stirring up her
self, she said, Psalm. 103.1.
Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his Holy Name.
v. 2.
Praise the Lord, o my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits. Psalm. 34.1.
Yea, I will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall ever be in my
mouth. v. 3.
O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his Name together.

Let the whole World, O God, Psalm. 145.21. Woodf.
sing praise to thee,
And like mine, may their Songs eternal be.
Oh, how much in love am I with my Savior, for that he has heard my Prayer,
and inclined his Ear to me! Therefore I will call upon him as long as I live.
Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God on high, and on Earth peace, good will toward men. Lord, v.
29.
now let thou thy Servant, depart in peace according to thy Word. For mine
eyes have seen thy Salvation. v. 36.


AFTER she had rehearsed these and several other places of Scripture, with
which she often mixed these words, [Oh! how great is my Happiness! how
surpassing my Joy!] she did sit up in her Bed, and with an admirable
gracefulness, spoke to the Standers-by, in this manner.

O taste and see, Psalm. 34.8. Patr.
as I have done;
And then confess you must,
That God is good, and thy are blessed,
That in his Goodness trust.
Come to me with attention hear, v. 11. Sand.

I will instruct you in his fear.
O come and hear all ye that fear God, Psalm. 66.16.
and I will declare what he has done for my Soul. v. 17.
I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue. If I had
inclined my heart to wickedness, v. 18.
the Lord would not have heard me. v. 19.
But now he has heard me, and considered the voice of my Prayer. v. 20.
Let us therefore praise the Lord, who has not cast away my Prayer, nor turned
his Mercy from me.

WHICH having said, she then prayed for the King, in these words: Psalm. 72.1.
Give the King thy Judgments, O God, and thy Righteousness unto the King's Son;
v. 2.
and grant that he may judge thy people according to Justice, and defend them
that are oppressed with wrong. Bless him, and all the Royal Family, with thy most
exquisite Benedictions from Heaven above, and on the Earth beneath: And thou, O
Lord, who have the hearts of Kings in thy hands, inspire the heart of thine
Anointed with tender Mercy, Pity, and Compassion, and incline him to be the
Defender of thy poor distressed People, that are his Majesty's faithful and
loyal Subjects. Psalm. 20.9.
Save them, O Lord, and let the King hear them when they call.

WITH which she also recited that out of the 44th, 74th, and 102 Psalms, which
was proper in this place; and at the same time earnestly prayed for the church
in general; saying, among other things, O merciful God, vouchsafe in thy tender
compassions, to look upon thy poor desolate Sion, whom thou have chosen for thy
Spouse; She is afflicted and grievously oppressed: Psalm. 102.13.
It is time that thou have mercy upon her, Psalm. 103.5.
and renew her youth like that of an Eagle. Psalm. 90.15.
O Lord, send thy children prosperity; And comfort them again, now after the
time thou have plagued them, and for the years wherein they have suffered
adversity. Alas, poor Church! there is no constant rest for thee on Earth: Here
thou must, like thy Savior, wear a Crown of Thorns; but be of good cheer, this
will not last always; thy miseries shall have an end, and thy Savior will
replenish thee with eternal Joy and Consolations, which he has given me a taste
of already, and will further make us all partakers of, one day, in a more
abundant manner, according to the Riches of his infinite Goodness and mercy.
And particularly she prayed for the Church of Nantes; making it her humble suit
to God, that He, who is the God of peace, would be pleased always to be with
her, and keep Unity and Concord, Love and Charity in the midst of her.

THEN she rehearsed the 133 Psalm; Behold, how good, and how pleasant it is for
Brethren to dwell in unity: And so on. And after that, this Exhortation of St.
Paul: Romans 12.10.
Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in honor preferring
one another. Which having said, she turned toward the Lady her Mother, and
spoke to her thus: Dear Mother, give thanks and praise to God all your life
long, for his great goodness and bounty to you, in giving you a Daughter, whom
(though she be but a wretched Worm) he has made the Temple of his Holy Spirit.
May He, that good God, bless you with his choicest Blessings; may He also bless
your Posterity, and establish his Covenant with them for all Generations, as
long as the Sun and Moon shall endure. Then she proceeded to give her Blessing
to the young Ladies her Sisters, (whom she called to her) and likewise to her
Brothers, Brothers-in-law, Sister-in-law, and Niece, though they were absent.
And after this, desiring they would all come near her, who were in her Chamber,
and had (in company with the Chaplain) watched with her the night before, she
in a most tender manner embraced and blessed them all; speaking to every one of
them according to their respective conditions, and that so pertinently and
properly, that she was the admiration of all.

AND in a particular manner she showed a great deal of respect to Monsieur de
la Colombrie, (who was Steward of the House) expressing her acknowledgment to
him for his great concern and affection for their Family, desiring him to
continue the same. Then speaking to his Wife Mrs. de la Colombrie, said to her,
Come and rejoice with me, and take your share of these delights I am filled
with, as feeling my self the most satisfied and happy Person in the World. And
afterward directing her Speech and Exhortation to the whole Company, said, My
dear Friends, leave off sinning, I pray you: You see what cruel disquiets mine
have caused me: Let us, according to our Calling, edify the Church of God, and
show good Examples in our Lives and Conversations. Tit. 2.12.
Let us (as the Apostle advises) live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present World: Phil. 4.8.
And Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report; if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, let us think on these
things. O how great is my love for you, my dear Friends; I love every one of
you alike in JESUS CHRIST; for I have no more affection to my own Mother,
Brothers, and Sisters, than all other persons I know. I am in charity with all
the World, and would even love my Enemies, if I had any.

NOW she hearing some body weep about her Bed, said, Don't you mourn for me,
but mourn for your sins. Then presently recalling her words, she thus expressed
her self: Oh, let us lament and bewail our sins! And for a proof she was not
moved at all with the tears they shed on her account, added, 2 Cor. 5.16.
That now she knew no body after the flesh. Which saying of the Apostle she had
learned of Monsieur Royer, to whom a pious Lady spoke it on her Deathbed.
Whereupon she calling him to mind, wished him all happiness, and gave him the
character of a real good man; saying, He is a person whom I have always
observed to be most piously and charitably inclined. I pray God bless him, and
more and more increase his Gifts in him. Would I could see him, I know he would
speak comfortable words to me, and we would edify one another. Here she
repeated her earnest wishes for a Blessing upon Monsieur de Malnoe, whom she
always called her good Pastor, and her dear Pastor, and embracing him, heartily
prayed, that he might ever live quietly and in peace with his Brothers, and
Prosperity never depart from his Family; saying to him, I heartily beg of God
to bless you and your Ministry. And she at the same time expressed also a great
desire to see Monsieur de Brissac, praying God likewise to bless both him and
his. Thus having spoken for a while to the Standers-by, she began again to
return her thanks to God, with the same zeal and fervency as before; saying,
with David, O God, the spring of all my joys, Psalm. 42.1. Patr.
for thee I long, to thee I look,
No chased Heart does pant so much after the cooling water-brook.
Blessed be the Majesty above. 41.13.

Whom all true Worshippers adore;
Let every Age consent, and say,
Amen, till time shall be no more.


Which latter part of the 41st. Psalm, she often repeated in Verse. And here
remembering her Aunt the Lady de la Suse, who had taught her the same, she
mightily longed to see her, saying over and over, O my dear Aunt, how much do I
love you! How great would my Joy be now, had I you here with me; for you would
assist me in giving thanks to God for his Goodness to me. O the great love I
have for you, who have so well taught me to praise him! Psalm. 46.1.
Praise the Lord (therefore) O my soul: While I live I will praise the Lord;
yea, as long as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God. Thy Name, O
Lord, will I laud continually for thy great love, who have said to me, Call
upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.15.
and I will answer thee, and thou shall glorify me. Psalm. 91.16.
I will satisfy thee, and show thee my salvation. Yea, Lord, thou have heard
me and comforted my Soul, that did so much long for thee. Thou have (I say) in
a most wonderful manner, comforted me with thy holy Word and Spirit, and rid me
of all my fears. And now, Lord, perfect thou the good work thou have begun in
me, and crown me with eternal Bliss and Glory in Heaven. Yea, O my good God, I
have already obtained this great felicity; I have seen thy salvation.

THUS she took great delight in the paraphrasing of the Scripture; seeming, as
it were, to have received a new Vocation from God, and above all, that of
teaching every one their duty: Neither was she wanting in the stirring up of
her self to the performance of her own, who often rehearsed these words of the
Psalmist: Psalm. 34.1.
I will always give thanks unto the Lord; his praise shall ever be in my mouth.
v. 2.
My Soul shall make her boast in the Lord; the humble shall hear thereof and be
glad: and so on. Which Psalm she repeated every day both in Prose and Verse,
according to the New or Old Translation, and had this place very frequently in
her mouth, Keep thy tongue from evil, v. 13.
and thy lips from speaking guile. After which she added, I will give continual
thanks to my good God for his infinite Mercies to me. I would the whole Church
were here, and all let in, who have a mind to see me; but above all, I wish
those of a contrary Religion were present, that they might take notice how good
my Religion is, since it makes me die so well. If any man love not the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, 1 Cor. 16.22.
let him be Anathema. Oh, how vast is my Happiness! How great my Joy! How
numberless are the Blessings I have received. Praised, praised for ever be the
name of my Lord and Savior for all his wonderful Mercies bestowed upon me.

IN the mean time they that stood by, looking on a Watch that was upon the
Table, and perceiving thereby (it being now past Midnight) that she had been
speaking above six hours, were much astonished, considering the vehement
palpitation of her heart, and the difficulty she had to fetch her breath: Which
made the Company desire her to leave off discoursing, for fear of spending her
self too much. But this advice was so unwelcome to her, that she presently,
with some indignation, answered, I cannot hold my tongue, I must speak; Psalm.
45.1.
for, My heart is inditing of a good matter. O God, Psalm. 108.1.
my heart is ready, my heart is ready; I will sing and give praise with the
best member that I have. After which, she remaining silent for a little while,
broke out immediately into these words: O what pain do I suffer in holding my
peace! And indeed she had no sooner left off speaking, but they heard a Rattling
in her Throat that was very troublesome to her; but she nevertheless continued
still to entertain her self with God; when the Company withdrawing, the Lady
her Mother laid down her self by her, and both of them had a pretty good rest
that night.

THE next morning (being Thursday) after she had had some discourse with the
Lady her Mother, she gave her hand to a Gentleman of the Neighborhood, that
was come to visit her; and observing him to weep, said to him, What, Sir, do
you weep? Is it because God has a love for me, and will take me to himself?
Here she alleged the Example of Josiah King of Judah, whom God took out of the
World, because he loved him, that he might not see those calamities that were
to befall the city of Jerusalem, and the whole Jewish Nation. Then she speaking
to the Lady her Mother, said, O dear Mother, how well composed am I at this
time! I feel no pains at all; but am very easy, and do perceive my Savior has
delivered me from all my fears and troubles: Therefore I will give him eternal
thanks and praise. Whereupon she presently began to recite several Psalms (both
in Prose and Verse) as the VI. XXV. XXVII. XXXII. XXXIV. LXVI. CIII. CXVIII.
CXLVI; insisting particularly upon those places that were most proper for her
condition, and afforded her most comfort: which she uttered with so much zeal
and devotion, that it made the Lady her Mother say to her, Well, dear Child,
thou art a going to make one in the Quire of Angels and Seraphims, and shall
very suddenly sing the Song of the Lamb. Yes, (answered she) I shall make sweet
Melody, and sing everlasting Hallelujahs to his Glory. And perceiving the Lady
her Mother was very attentive to what she said, added, Good Mother, we must
always endeavor to edify our Neighbors by praising God; and administer such
Comfort to them, as we would be glad to receive our selves at God's hand.

AFTER this, a Gentlewoman asking her, whether she would not take something,
she answered, I have no will of my own; bring me what you will, and do what you
please with me, it will be all one to me. Then she turned to another
Gentlewoman, that was just come into the Room, who expressing her self to have
been much edified by the good things she had heard her speak the night before,
this devout Patient replied, My dear Friend, don't you wonder at my speaking so
long with so much boldness and freedom, who was ever bashful, and of few words?
These are Gifts of God not to be forgotten. Which having said, she looked
about, and perceiving the Lady her Mother weep, said to her, It Is not you, dear
Mother, have cause to shed tears; it is Madam -- (she meant a Gentlewoman, who
was Mother to one that was turned a Papist) who has reason to bewail her
Daughter. But as for yours, she is going to Him who is the Dispenser of true
Glory, and not of Vanities.

SOME hours after this, the young Ladies her Sisters coming to sit upon her
Bed, the Lady their Mother came and sat with them; and as she was saying to
God, Isai, 8.18.
Behold, Lord, here am I, and the Children thou have given me; the Patient
answered, Dear Mother, let us yield thanks to God. Psalm. 116.12.
But what shall I render to the Lord for all his Benefits toward me? Pray, my
dear Mother and Sisters, afford me your assistance to bless my God, and never
mourn for me; for I am too happy, in that my good god calls me to himself. How
miserable (alas!) should I have been in the World, where we do nothing else but
offend Him, go through a great deal of trouble (being our own Tormentors) and
in a word, run after Vanities, and mind nothing but Pride. To which the Lady
her Mother answered, My dear Child, thou wast very far from being worldly
minded, and have any vain or proud thoughts. O Mother (replied she) you did not
know the bottom of my heart: Certainly I had pride in me, and would fain have
made a show in the World; and (perhaps) if I had remained longer in it, it
would have proved my undoing. Pray God keep our Brethren, who are exposed to
great trials. Some of them she did name, and added, 1 Cor. 10.12. 1 John 2 17.
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest be fall. The world passes away,
and the lust thereof; but he that does the will of God, abides for ever. Then
applying her self to the young Ladies her Sisters, she said to them, Dear
Sisters, keep always constantly to God's Word, and store your selves well with
it. Psalm. 138.2.
(Lord, thou have magnified thy word above all thy Name.) And withal she
charged them to learn the Psalms of the late Monsieur Conrart's Translation,
and Monsieur Gilbert's; picking out (first) such as afforded most comfort. As
for her, she had got twenty five of the former, and twelve of the latter, by
heart, at thirteen years of age; and the whole Book of Psalms, according to the
Old Translation, which she had learned at the late Lady Marchioness de Verac's,
that was both her Aunt and God-mother, with whom she lived for a time. She had
also several of them in Prose by heart, which she extremely delighted in; and
though she was very perfect in sundry Chapters, and most of the edifying places
of the Scripture, (which she could say without Book) yet she did often complain
of her want of memory.

AFTER a little pause, she began afresh to speak, and applying her self to one
of the young Ladies her Sisters, she exhorted her above all, to learn a certain
Prayer out of the forementioned Book, called [Comforts against the Terrors of
Death] for God's Assistance and Grace to die well, and advised her to use the
same daily; intimating, that God had granted to her self all the Petitions
therein. She was also wont to repeat every morning the 90th Psalm.

Lord thou have been our Refuge from one generation to another; and so on, to
the end.

A GENTLEWOMAN of the Neighborhood having brought her two Daughters to her,
whom she had the night before desired to see, she said to them, My dear
Friends, have always the fear of God before your Eyes, and never depart from
that eternal truth which is in his Holy Scriptures. Obey your Parents and
Superiors; 1 John 2.15.
And love not the World, neither the things that are in the World; for if any
man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him.

AT the same time she remembered four or five other She-Friends of hers, wishing
them with her, and one above the rest, whom she ever had a great kindness for,
and recommended her to the Lady her Mother, desiring her to take care of, and
provide for her. And the Lady her Mother naming her some others, she earnestly
prayed God to bless them all, and in a particular manner implored his Divine
help and assistance for one, who lay under an extraordinary great affliction.

WHEN she was in health, she was not more backward, than she was forward and
desirous to speak now she was sick; delivering her self with a great deal of
freedom, and omitting nothing of what she knew to be edifying. After which, she
fell into a little slumber, and rested about an hour; and then awaking, one of
her Physicians was surpised to find her so well composed, she neither
speaking, nor looking like one that was sick, but on the contrary having a
serene countenance, and a free and undisturbed mind. He did also wonder to hear
her talk so well, as she did, of her condition; but yet for all that, he now
began to despair of her Recovery, considering her great shortness of breath and
weakness of her Stomach, that was not able to bear any thing: Nevertheless, she
took whatever he gave her, saying to him, Sir, I will do any thing you shall
please to direct and prescribe; for since you are called to look after me, and
give me relief, it behooves me to follow your Directions.

THE Lady her Mother, whose follow was greater than can be imagined, and who
had no other comfort than what she received from her observing the Holy and
Blessed Frame she was in, said to her, O dear Child, how edifying were thy
Words to me last night, and are still! Aye, surely (replied she) my mind was
then much at liberty, and I had a great deal more freedom in my utterance than
ever before. I was speaking very eloquently and freely of the wonderful works
of God; and my mouth did utter things I never knew before. I then was made
acquainted with the Mysteries of our Salvation, which are not to be known here
below. I cannot express them to you; for they are Things unspeakable; and
through Mercy, I continue still in this heavenly condition.

THE rest of the day she was very still, and felt almost no pains, except when
they gave her something; for that did set her a coughing. her slumbers were
frequent; and as she waked, always addressed her self to the Chaplain, and
congratulating her happy condition, rejoiced and triumphed in the Grace she had
received the day before. The only subject of her Entertainment, was the HOLY
SCRIPTURE, from whence she drew all her Comfort; and particularly she found
much of it in the first of the Romans, and often blessed God in several
passages of the Psalms, such as these: Lord, I will bless thee, Psalm. 34.1.
Woodf.
and thy praise
Shall up to Heaven my voice and numbers raise:
Of thee my soul all times shall boast,
Who sav'dst me when I gave my self for lost:
And with us shall the humble join,
Hoping thou will their refuge be as thou were mine.
To thee, my God, Psalm. 138.3.
I mourned in my distress,
My doleful groans thy heart did move,
Thou did refresh me from above,
And answer gav'st of thine own faithfulness


Lord, Psalm. 18.16.
thou did send from above, thou tookest and drewest me out of many waters.
Psalm. 85.5.
Thou have been favorable to me. Romans 5.20.
For where my sins abounded, thy grace did superabound. Therefore when thou
say to me, Psalm. 27.8.
Seek thou my face; my Heart shall 'answer thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek.
Yea, O my God, thou will very suddenly unvail it to me in thy Holy Paradise.

THEN she entered upon a most excellent Edifying Dialogue (which is intended to
be published by it self) with the Chaplain, who protests she therein opened his
Understanding in a most wonderful manner; and after that, spoke to the Lady her
Mother, thus: Dear Mother, my Soul is possessed with that Peace of God which
passes all understanding. The Lord has sought, and found me. O how good is my
Lord and Savior, that He the Just One should have given himself for the
Unjust. After which, she rehearsed several sentences out of the 119th Psalm,
and namely these: My soul faints for thy salvation: Psalm. 119.81.
but I hope in thy Word.
I am thine, save me: v. 94.
for I have sought thy Precepts.
How sweet are thy words to my taste! yea, v. 103.
sweeter than honey to my mouth.
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. v. 105.

Uphold me according to thy Word, that I may live; v. 116.
and let me not be ashamed of my hope.


AND now reflecting upon her past sorrows and disquiets, she cried with David,
Psalm. 31.22.
I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes; nevertheless thou
heardst the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto thee.

Preserve me, my undoubted aid, Psalm. 16.1. Sandys.

To whom, thou, O my soul, have said,
Thou art my God, no good in me,
Nor merit can extend to thee;
But to thy blessed Saints that dwell
On Earth, whose graces most excel.
To the safe path of Life direct my way, v. 11. Woodford.

Thy presence, where perpetual joys flow over,
Whose pleasure spring for evermore;
By those clear streams let me delighted stay,
And melt away in love as well as they.
She often repeated, Come ye blessed Saints, Psalm. 34.3.
and let us rise
Together with our Songs, and reach the Skies!
Praise him who my first groan did hear, v. 4.

Yet with his hand seemed to prevent his ear:
And when like mine, v. 5.
your troubles be,
But look to him, that hand shall save you which helped me.


And here she proceeded thus: Who shall in thy Tent abide, Psalm. 15. Sand.

On the Holy Hill reside?
He that is just and innocent,
Tells the truth of his intent.
Slanders none with venomed tongue;
Fears to do his Neighbor wrong;
Fosters not base infamies;
Vice beholds with scornful eyes;
Honors those who fear the Lord;
Keeps, though to his loss, his word;
Takes no bribes for wicked ends;
Nor to use his money lends.
Who by these directions guide
Their pure steps, shall never slide.


THOU have dealt graciously with thy servant, Psalm. 119.65.
O Lord, according to thy word. It is that word that gives wisdom to the
simple; therefore I will never forget it.

To this she added also diverse other places of the Scripture; and then
meditating a little, she said, Now my fear is over, Romans 8.1.
and (with St. PAVL) There is now no condemnation to me, who am in CHRIST
JESUS. v. 33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of god's Elect? It is God that
justifies: v. 34.
Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again, who is ever at the right hand of God, making intercession for us. Upon
which the Chaplain taking occasion to tell her she had done like that prudent
Merchant in the Gospel, who sought for and bought that Pearl of Price; she
answered, Aye, it is my Savior has made me a Present of this invaluable Jewel!
For, Sir, is it not true, that none can affirm JESUS to be the LORD, but by the
Holy Ghost? and that none can love him, but by the same Spirit? It is even He
that has put this Word into the mouth of his Handmaid. O the unutterable
Comfort and Relief this Word administers to me! It is you, my dear Mother
(speaking to my Lady) who taught it me. you have so well instructed us, and
shown us a good Example, which I wish I had better improved. By this you have
procured our Family the favor of God, whom I heartily pray to continue it, and
more and more increase his Blessings upon you, and prosper all your ways. To
which discourse the Lady her Mother made this reply: Dear Child, these
Instructions and edifying words you now utter, I apply as so many Checks and
Reproaches to my self, for my not having performed my Duty in all respects, as
I ought to have done. I pray god give me grace to do better for the future,
according to my Calling; 1 Cor. 3.6.
and as it is in vain that Paul plants, and Apollos waters, except God give the
increase; so I beseech him to prevent and bless my endeavors with his Divine
Grace, and Heavenly Benediction.

THE rest of that day, and part of the following night also, were spent in like
Conversations. But toward the morning the Patient took some little rest; and
as she awaked, asked what a Clock it was. To which they answering, that it was
upon the stroke of three, she cried out, O my God! shall the Sun shine once
more upon my Sufferings? Lord, thou could, if it were thy pleasure, make this
the Dawning of the Day of my Deliverance and Eternal Sabbath; and then would I
say with a holy transport of mind, 2 Cor. 6.2.
Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of Salvation.

UPON which the Lady her Mother said, I hope every one of us shall once see
that Day, when we may say one to another, Isal. 60.20.
Thy Sun shall go down no more, for the Lord is an everlasting Light to thee;
and the days of thy mourning are ended. 'Aye, dear Mother, (answered she) Yet a
little while, Heb. 10.37.
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.

This is the Day which he has made, Psalm. 119.24. Woodf.

Hosanna's now befit our voice; Come, let us in our God rejoice,
And in the Day which he has made be glad!
That be prosperity may send,
And to our troubles put an end.
Set open unto me the Gates v. 19. Old Transl.

Of Truth and Righteousness,
That I may enter into them.
The Lord's praise to express.
O Death! thou that bring'st good tidings, how welcome would thou be to me,
by casting me into the Arms of my dearest Friend, who has loved me before the
foundation of the World!

THIS day she was visited again by one of her She-Friends, who being come to
her Bedside, expressed an extreme sorrow to see her in this Condition, and with
that gave her her hand, which the Patient squeezing in hers, replied to her, O
my Dear, did you but know the Divine Consolations my God has bestowed upon me,
and how happy I am, you would confess with me, that I should have been
miserable, without this his gracious Visitation.

AFTER this, she had about an hour's sleep, out of which being awaked, she
said, What is our Life? Jam. 4.14.
Truly, it is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes
away. Psalm. 90.12.
Therefore, O Lord, teach us so to number our days, as that we may apply our
hearts to Wisdom. Psalm. 8.4.
What is man, that thou art mindful of him; and the Son of Man, that thou
visitest him? Psalm. 146.4.
When his breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth. But we know, 2 Cor. 5.1.
that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
Building of God, an House not made with hands, Hag. 2.9.
eternal in the Heavens. And the glory of this latter House shall be greater
than that of the former. 2 Cor. 4.18.
For the things which are seen, are temporal; but the things which are not
seen, are eternal.

THEN she said, Pray let my Chaplain be called in, that he may comfort me. O
the comforts of the Holy Ghost are the refreshment of my Soul. LORD, Psalm.
119.103.
how sweet are thy words to my taste, yea sweeter than honey to my mouth!

When the Chaplain was come in, she said to him, 'Come, Sir, Heb. 4.16.
Let us go boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need. Whereupon he answering, Why don't you say, [Let
us go and implore for Mercy] rather than say, (as with confidence you do) Let
us go, that we may obtain mercy; She replied, Sir, it is because I find a
Redeemer there, 1 Cor. 6.20. Joh. 6.37.
who has bought me with a price, and said, Him that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out; 'and I am persuaded, 1 John 1.9.
He is faithful and just, to keep his promise. Aye, Madam (answered the
Chaplain) this Promise he has made to your Contrition, Repentance, and Faith.

DURING this whole day (which was Wednesday) she spoke many other admirable
things, that could not, all of them, be remembered. One would have thought by
seeing her, that her Soul was set loose from the Body. She had quite forgot the
Earth, and all Ties and Relations here; her only thoughts being now to unite
her self with her God by Meditation, till she might be more perfectly united to
him in Heaven.

ABOUT Evening she felt a great drought in her Throat, and was very thirsty;
yet they durst not give her any thing, by reason her Stomach could not bear so
much as one drop of fair Water, without bringing of it up, and that with a
vehement Cough, accompanied with a stoppage and shortness of breath; they
therefore only called for an Epitheme, to allay her great palpitation of
heart. But she little regarding the Relief they were willing to give her Body,
cried out on a sudden, LORD JESUS! thou my Heavenly Physician, apply the Merits
of thy precious Blood to me; for that alone can infallibly heal my Soul.

IMMEDIATELY after this, she fell into most cruel Agonies, which made her take
very little rest all that night: But yet she continued to comfort her self in
God; seeking nowhere else, but in his Word, for a Remedy to all her griefs.
And in these circumstances she often cried, 1 Samuel 3.10.
Speak, O Lord, for thy servant hears. Speak thou, O my God, to the Soul of thy
poor Handmaid.

WHICH having said, she asked a Gentleman that was opening the Windows of her
Chamber, what time of the day it was; he answered, It was almost daylight;
adding, Madam, why do you ask me this Question? have you a mind to do as David
did, and rise by break of day to praise God? No, Sir, (replied she) I cannot do
that; but I will continually bless and magnify him upon this my Bed of
Languishing.

Early, my God, before it is light, Psalm. 63. Woodf.

And all the Stars are up, but that which makes the day,
Whilst Heaven alone with flames is bright,
And all below is hurled in sable veil of night,
Which they can neither draw nor take away;
Early I Will worship, and one glance from thee,
E're it is with others day, shall make it noon with me.
And as this dry and thirsty Land,
Where the ground, ready to expire for want of Rain,
Gaping, and out of breath does stand,
And shows its very bowels shrivled like its sand;
And having drunk, gapes for more drink again:
The Wilderness and I in this agree;
For as that thirsts for Rain, so, Lord, I thirst for thee.
I thirst thy glorious Power to see,
As I have seen it in thy Temple heretofore;
When ravished with thy love to me,
To die I was content, could I but so love thee;
And so to die, this Life would choose no more:
Those thoughts so high my fainting Spirit do raise,
That through my lips they force their voice in Songs of praise.
For this Pll bless thee, and on high,
To thy Great Name send up my praises whilst I live;
For since at present I enjoy
A mind content, it shall prepare for more supply,
Though thou at present only that do give;
Even that shall bring my famished Soul more good,
Than what my body had from most delicious food.
Marrow and fatness it shall be,
And all the solid meats which please and feed the strong;
For I shall come at last to thee,
Who art the blessed End of all felicity,
And the best subject of my humble Song:
And on my Bed when I revolve thy might,
My Praises shall, instead of Watches, part the night.
ABOUT four of the Clock her Illness so increased upon her, that she felt most
intolerable pains; which was perceived both by the sharp Shreeks and lamentable
Cries she from time to time put forth, and by the violent Convulsion-sits she
suffered, that distorted her Arms, and bent her Body double. But for all this,
her mind was still the same, and lost nothing of its strength and freedom.

IN one of these Fits she did cry to God, Lord, have mercy on me. Mat. 26.39.
Let this Cup pass from me: Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. In
another Fit (which one would have thought would have thrown her out of her Bed,
so vehemently it tossed her Body) she cried out, Thunder, lightning, bruise,
break to pieces, and do what thou will with this poor Body; yet will I still
love thee, O my God! Yea, I will always bless thee, for thy wondrous Love and
Mercy to me.

AT another time, as she felt a Fit a coming again upon her, said, Verily,
Thine arrows have wounded me already; Yet, O my God, though thou should
multiply thy Plagues upon me to infinity, yet would that but the more increase
my love toward thee.

Hear me, O Lord, Psalm. 69.16.
for thy loving kindness is good; turn unto me according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies. v. 17.
And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble; hear me speedily:
Draw nigh unto my soul. v. 18.
And thou, Rev. 22.20.
LORD JESV, come; yea, come quickly.

My soul out of this Prison bring, Psalm. 142.7. Sand.

That I may praise thee, O my King.
I most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, mitigate and allay my pains, and speedily
place me with thee. Luke 22.42.
Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. Then she looking on the Lady her
Mother, said to her, Dear Mother, I now suffer the cruel wounds and pangs of
Death.

AGAIN, at another time, when her violent pains seized her, she cried out, Pray
to God for me, my dear Friends; pray assist me: I am quite spent. I am now a
drinking the very dregs of the Cup of Affliction. Upon which the Chaplain said
to her, Madam, God deals now with you, as he did once with his only begotten
Son, with whom he never was more pleased, than when he lay under his deepest
sufferings. O (answered she) I do wholly submit my self to God's will. For when
I am weak, 2 Cor. 12.10. Phil. 4.13.
then am I strong. I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me.

NOW the Fits returning very thick upon her, she cried to God, O my good Lord!
How much do I suffer! But it is thy will, and it is mine too. Grant I may
suffer patiently; 1 Pet. 2.20.
for that it is acceptable with thee. 'And I beseech thee, O Lord, set a watch
before my mouth, Psalm. 141.3.
and keep the door of my lips, that I may not speak unadvisedly with my tongue,
or murmur against thee. For it is my earnest desire, always to bless and love
thee, O my God.

AFTER a little pause, she turning to the Company, said to them, I pray God
shorten your Agonies, when any of you shall arrive at your latter End. And then
again she called upon God, in these words of David: O thou, Psalm. 57.1. Woodf.
on whom my soul for help relies,
Let my distress find pity in thine Eyes.
Mercy, Psalm. 56.1.
my God, on me thy mercy show,
And if thy pleasure does, my need says now.


The sorrows of death compass me round about, Psalm. 116.3.
and the pains of Hell have got hold upon me. I find trouble and heaviness:
Hide not thy self from me in the needful time of my distress. Hearken unto me,
answer me, and haste thee to help me. O my God! I spread my complaint, and make
my trouble known unto thee. Have mercy, Lord, on thy poor Handmaid. My heart
fails, and my soul faints within me. All these Passages she rehearsed at
several times, in the midst of her terrible pains: for she had not now breath
to speak for a long time together.

AFTER this, she sat up in her Bed, and with a tone that would have made one
think she was not the same person, cried out, Why art thou troubled, soul,
Psalm. 42.11. Woodf.
and and restless grown,
As if forgetten through despair,
As if thy God had left his care,
And lower, than indeed thou art, cast down?
Trust in him still, for thou his Name shall praise;
And whom his absence has depressed, his sight shall raise.


Then the Lady her Mother saying to her, Like as a Father pities his Children,
Psalm. 103.13.
so the Lord pities them that fear him. Aye, dear Mother, (answered she) your
love is nothing in comparison of that my Savior has for me. I know my God
loves me: He speaks to his Handmaid according to her heart, and heaps his
mercies upon me. 2 Cor. 12.7.
Only, lest I should be exalted above measure, he has put this thorn in my
flesh.

WHENEVER she had any intervals from pain, she sat up in her Bed, praising God
for the relief and ease he gave her, saying, I will ever bless and love thee, O
my good God. And when her grief returned, she held her sides with her hands,
and excited her self to patience, with these words: Courage, my Soul, still
bless thy God; Courage, my Soul, still love thy God. Romans 8.18.
For the sufferings of this present World, are not worthy to be compared with
the glory which shall be revealed in us: 'Though indeed my pain is very
grievous.

And grief to The Earth my soul so low does bend, Psalm. 31.10. Woodf.

That scarce in sighs I can to Heaven ascend;
Consumed with care my soul and life decay,
And in my wasted flesh unwillingly do stay.
Now her violent pains returning upon her, she cried out again, [I am quite
spent.]

O let me gather strength, Psalm. 39.13. Sand.
before
I pass away, and be no more.
O my God, thy Correction is very severe; yet will I Kiss the Rod wherewith
thou chastisest me.

Whereupon the Chaplain said to her, Heb. 12.8.
If you were without chastisement, then were you a Bastard, and not a true born
Child: for you know, v. 6.
Whom the Lord loves, he chastens, and scourges every Child he receives. To
which she answered, It Is true, Sir, I am well persuaded of what you say: Why?
My Savior has suffered for me; and if I suffer with him, I shall reign with
him also. He had Vinegar and Gall given him to drink, and was wounded to the
very heart for me. Lord! cover me with thy Merits; impute thy Righteousness to
me, and let those cruel pains thou enduredst upon the Cross for me, make me
forget my own. As they gave her a little Wine to refresh her, she took the
Glass, and said, Mat. 26.29
The hour is coming when I shall drink it new in my Father's Kingdom.

IMMEDIATELY after this, her pains seizing her again, she cried, Psalm. 42.7.
All thy Waves and thy Billows are gone over me. Which the Chaplain hearing,
said to her, But, Madam, you don't add, that the Waves of his Mercy, and the
Billows of his Grace have overwhelmed you also. Aye, (replied she) it is very
true, the Grace and Mercies of my God, are greater than all the Miseries I
undergo. Do you think (continued the Chaplain, who heard her still groan and
complain of her being overborn with anguish) your Heavenly Father is an gry
with you, and will let you sink under this temptation? No (answered she,
sitting up in her Bed) No, Sir; I know that in all these things I am more than
Conqueror through Him that loved me: Romans 8.37.
and that as my miseries and troubles abound, so his Grace and Comforts abound
much more. If the Daughter of Sion cries to them that pass by, Lam. 1.12.
Behold and see whether there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow! Yet I will add
[Come and see whether ever any joy were like unto my joy.] But O how much
sorrow and solace meet together! Thou, O my sweet Savior, Joh. 16.20.
have said, Your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

Here the Chaplain saying to her, Now, Madam, you experience what St. Paul
affirms, 2 Cor. 4.16.
That though our outward man decay, yet the inward man is renewed day by day;
she answered in the words of the Psalmist: On God's Almighty Word will I
depend, Psalm. 56.4. Woodf.

On God I Will trust, who certain help will send.
Come let us sing unto the Lord, Psalm. 95.1.

And all his deeds with thankfulness record.
Unto our God, come let us sing,
And to his Courts with shouts our presents bring!
He is our God, to Him our Verse we'll raise,
And he who heard our Prayers shall now attend our praise.


AT the same time she also rehearsed the greatest part of the LXII Psalm, and
often repeated these words: Psalm. 62.1.
Truly, my soul waits upon God; from him comes my salvation: adding, Where
indeed rests this salvation of mine, but in him, whose presence is the fullness
of joy? Psalm. 34.5.
They looked unto him and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed.

AFTER which, she fell into a little slumber, and then putting her hand out of
her Bed, said, O Blessed be the living Lord,
Most worthy of all praise, Psalm. 18.45. Old Transl.

That is my Rock and saving health,
Praised be He always.


And to that added several other Verses of the same Psalm, and also of the
XXXV, and other Psalms; picking out such places as were most pathetical and
pertinent to her condition, and more particularly insisted upon those that
expressed a true and thorough repentance, thereby to move God to be more
favorable to her. Every word of these Divine Hymns, was a Sacred Balm for her,
which she applied to her Wounds with such success, that she presently found her
grief give way to the virtue of it. And what is more to be wondered at, is, that
the violence of her pains had not almost altered her at all; but she looked as
fair as ever. Her Eyes were brisk and lively; her Countenance gay, and her
Speech strong: yet did she not think her self to be in this condition, when
observing them, who were about her, to look upon her with mournful Aspects, she
said to them, I suppose I fright you. Pray, reach me a Glass, that I may see
how I look. Which being brought her, and she having viewed her self in it,
said, God be thanked, yet I look very cheerful: And then in a kind of contempt
striking the Glass with her hand, bad them have it away.

THE Lady her Mother desiring nothing more than an opportunity to give this
dear Daughter of hers some Token of her Tenderness, and let her see, that she
was very far from affrighting her, as she supposed, did offer to kiss her. But
the Patient withdrawing her self, and seeming to be as much scandalized at it,
as if her Mother had been going to commit Idolatry, said to her, Ah, Mother,
what do you do? Sure you forget your self. And turning to the other side of the
Bed, where the Chaplain stood, said to him, Is this not a cruel thing? I am got
loose from the World, and my Mother would tie me to it again!

A little while after this, she also perceived that her Sister the Lady De
Ponthue, with whom she had ever lived in perfect love and union, looked upon
her with a very compassionate look; but without being in the least moved or
concerned at it. And now finding none of those kind and tender motions, which
her great love to her Sister had formerly inspired her with, she said to her,
Pray, dear Sister, forbear; you are no more to me now, than another.

ABOUT seven a clock in the Evening, the doors of her Chamber being set open,
she said to Monsieur de la Colombrie, 'Sir, that is the place (pointing with
her hand to the Chapel, in which were the tombs of her Ancestors) where this
my Body is very suddenly to be laid up, till the Day of the Resurrection of the
Just. Upon which, he taking occasion of asking her, whether she had any
Commands to lay upon him; No, Sir, (replied she) my thoughts are no more
emply'd about things here below, now my Soul is raised up to Heaven already;
and if she still animates this Body, it is but to give continual praise to my
God. And thus persisting to turn all her discourse to the concerns of
Salvation, she went on, and said, I have overcome all the fears of sin; I shall
also conquer all my pains, though they be never so great: Yea, I shall be more
than Conqueror through JESUS CHRIST, who has strengthened me. O how worthy is
this Combat of my Courage!

WITH these and the like Expressions, she either took out of the Scripture, or
received more immediately from the Holy Ghost, she was entertaining her self
and the Company; and would frequently say, I shall be sheltered from the wrath
of God; and often repeated these Ejaculations: O my God, I will ever love thee;
I will ever bless thee! And thou, my Soul, be of good cheer. Not my will, Lord,
but thine, be done. Come, Lord JESV; yea, come quickly.

THESE were the words she used in her Complaints, and with which she appeased
her grief. But for hasty and murmuring words, there fell not one from her
mouth. And as some body was once speaking to her of the temptations of the
Devil, and his great Warrings against the Faithful, at all times, especially
when they were at the point of death, she cried out, Tush, I fear him not. 2
King. 6.16.
They that he with me, are more than they that be against me. Joh. 14.30.
The Prince of this World has nothing in me. The Prince of Darkness cannot
prevail against me. Romans 5.1.
For being justified by Faith, I have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ: And there is no condemnation to them, which are in Him.

AS it drew toward Midnight, she fell into a little slumber; and her Friends,
that were continually with her, were glad of this opportunity they had to take
a little repose also: for as they had watched, suffered, and prayed, so they
were willing likewise to take some rest, with her. The Lady her Mother, who had
laid her self down upon the side of her Bed, heard her about an hour before
daylight, often repeat these words: '[Mercy, Lord, Mercy. Come LORD JESV, come
quickly:] And she observed, that her Daughter's cries did not express any grief
now, but a great deal of joy, which she took notice of to others. It was now
Friday-morning, when the Lady her Mother seeing her enjoy a greater
tranquillity, than she had since the preceding Wednesday at night, and that she
looked very cheerfully, said to her, Dear Child, the Lord will suddenly put an
end to our troubles. Wait for thy God with patience. Whereupon this young
Virgin raising her self in her Bed, and with a serene pleasant countenance,
looking upon my Lady, said to her, Dear Mother, I shall not die: Death is but a
passage to a more constant happy Life. Joh. 11.4.
This my sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God. Luke 15.6.
Come and rejoice with me. JESUS CHRIST has found me, who was a lost Sheep; me,
who was the lost Piece. v. 9.
Then a little while after this, she with a loud voice cried out, as one coming
out of a deep Meditation: Luke 23.31.
For if these things be done in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry?

WHICH having said, she now spoke no more to any body; only she once cried
out, O how much sorrow and joy, how much grief and comfort do meet together in
me! and then lay down, and fell into a slumber. In which she had not long
continued, but the Pangs of Death came upon her; she had vehement risings at
her Stomach; her Countenance was fallen; sweat proceed from her Body in
abundance; the Rattling in her Throat increased; and her Eyes grew dim and were
distorted. And being in this condition, one of her Acquaintance, by name Madam
Herault, touched her arm, thinking she was a departing: But she recovered of
this Fit; and these Agonies being somewhat over, her Eyes reassumed the same
briskness and liveliness as before; she rubbing them with both her hands, to
disperse the Clouds that had begun already to cover them. Her Countenance also
was restored to its former gaity and cheerfulness; and she was heard to make a
Melody, in singing the 84th Psalm.

How beauteous is the place where thou Patr.

Thy presence, Lord, do grant!
O how long t'approach thy Courts,
Impatient of restraint!
And so on.

THIS was a great surprise to many of them that were there; and yet, that was
not all: For after she had took a little breath, and slumber'd (as before) a
very little while, she stirred up her self anew, and began to sing the LXXXXII
Psalm.

O what a pleasant task it is, Patr.

To praise the Lord above;
Morning and Evening to proclaim
His faithfulness and love.
THUS far only she went, tuning it to the Treble of Claudin, with all the
Ornaments and Graces that could be: And then falling again into the like
slumber, she remained in it as long as the first time; after which, she tuned
the LXXX Psalm, whereof she sang these following Verses only.

Thou Shepherd of thy ISRAEL, Sandys.

That, Flock-like, leadest, Joseph's Race;
Who 'twixt the Cherubims do dwell,
O hear! show thy inlightning Face:
Exalt thy saving power before
Manasseh, Ephraim, Benjamin:
O from Captivity restore!
And let thy beams upon us shine.
Great God of Battle, will thou still
Be angry, and our Prayers despise?
Bread, steeped in tears, our stomachs fill;
We drink the Rivers of our Eyes.
Our scoffing Neighbors fall at strife
Among themselves to share our Right:
Great God, restore the dead to life;
And comfort by thy quickening Light.
AFTERWARD being seized the fourth time with the Pangs of Death, she so
remained for the space of four hours; and then being come to her self again,
she sang this Stanza.

Into thy hands, Lord, I commit
My Spirit, which is thy due; Psalm. 31.5. Old Transl.

For why, thou have redeemed it,
O Lord, my God most true!
THE Lady her Mother hearing her sing with so much strength, said to her, My
dear Child, since I have by God's Grace, put the first word into thy mouth,
wherewith thou have praised Him, let me put in the last also I shall ever hear
thee speak in this World: And so she rehearsed these Verses.

God, who my kind Preserver is,
I will for ever bless Psalm. 34.1. Patrick.

My tongue and lips shall be employed
His Goodness to confess.
Which the Patient sang with a strong voice; her Eyes being open, and her looks
smiling all the while. Then her agonizing fit coming again upon her, and the
Lady her Mother not being able to see her expire, bad her farewell, with a most
wonderful strength of mind: Adieu (said she) dear Daughter, 2 Samuel 12.23.
adieu; I shall go to thee, but thou shall not return to me. We shall see one
another again in that Blessed Day of the Resurrection of the Just. And
thereupon she withdrew, and went and lay down upon her own Bed, till her dying
Daughter had given up her Soul into the hands of her Heavenly Father. But above
three hours after this, the Chaplain, Monsieur De Malnoe, being desirous to see
whether she had any sense left in her, took her by the hand, shook her arm, and
called to her to clinch his hand, if she heard still, and with that, pricked her
with a Straw; but she gave no sign of life. But as he was going out of the
room, her Body was re-animated on a sudden; and sitting up again in her Bed,
she sang the second time.

Into thy hands, Lord, I commit
My Spirit, which is thy due;
For thy, thou have redeemed it,
O Lord, my God most true!
THEN he drew near again, and laying his Ear to her mouth, heard her say to
God, Luke 2.29.
Lord, now let thou shy servant depart in peace, according to thy Word. v.
30.
For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. Which having uttered, she, without
stirring in the least, breathed forth three Sighs, and so gave up the Ghost;
there being seen at the same time, both in her Countenance and Eyes (which
remained half open) a signal impression of Joy, that showed her Soul had a
taste of the Celestial Bliss, even before the Bonds, wherewith it was tied to
the Body, were wholly dissolved.

THE END.
Here follows the PRAYER Taken out of Mons. Drelincourt's COMFORTS Against the
Terrors of Death, Which is mentioned in the 55th Page of this Book.
O GOD of all Flesh, and Father of our Spirits, I know that any Death of thy
Beloved Ones, is precious in thy sight; and that whatsoever mine may be, thou will take care of my Salvation. I weighing every thing in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, do find it very little imports me, whether my Life be taken away by
a Disease, or forced from me by Violence, provided my Soul enter into thy
Glory, and be made Partaker of those unutterable Felicities that are with thee.
To me it must be all one, whether my Lamp go out of it self, or be blown out by
any contrary wind; so it be but kindled again at the Beams of the Sun of
Righteousness, and shine in the highest Heavens for evermore. Whatsoever Death
I die, I shall be happy, provided I die in the Lord, and enter into that
Eternal Rest from all my Labors. O Lord, thou know all thy works from
everlasting. Thou, with one glance, discoverest the deepest Abyss, and see to
the very bottom of Eternity. As thou have precisely appointed the Hour of
Death, so have thou been pleased also to determine the manner of it. O Great
and Living God! it is my Duty wholly to acquiesce in thy Adorable Providence,
and absolutely submit my self to thy wise Decrees. But, O my God, my Heavenly
Father! if thou will vouchsafe me (who am but dust and ashes) the liberty of
speaking to thee, and permit thy Child to pour [his / her] heart's desire into
thy Fatherly Bosom, I do, with all the powers of my Soul, humbly beseech thee
to grant me this favor, that I may know my End, and not be (like Job's
Children) surpised by a sudden Death: But, O Lord, be thou pleased to give me
notice of my dissolution, as thou did to thy Servant Hezekiah. I do not sue
for years, but some few days; or at least, a few hours Warning. I beg of thee,
that my Mind may never be disturbed by any malignant Vapors, or affrighted
with any false Representations or Delusions of the Devil; but that I may end my
Days with all quietness and tranquillity: that I may always have the free use
of my Senses, my Reason, and Understanding, and above all, the Light of thy
Grace, that so, I may glorify thy Holy Name, and edify my Neighbors, to my
very last breath. Finally, that my Soul may not be snatched away by any sort of
violence, but that I may freely commend it into thy Fatherly Hands. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS SOLD By John Lawrence, AT The Angel in the Poultrey, Over against the
Compter.
AN Account of the Imperial Proceedings against the Turks; with an exact Diary
of the Siege of New Heusel, and its Taking: As also a Relation of all the Noted
Performances of the Imperialists in all Parts, from the beginning of this
Summer's Campaign, till the 27th of August. As it was taken by Mr. Travestin,
an English Gentleman, who was all the while Resident in the Army at New Heusel,
and now in the Imperial Army, and by him sent, by way of Letter, to a Person of
Honor of this Kingdom; with an exact Map of the Town, and the Works of the
Besiegers. In Quarto.

The Merchant-Royal: A Sermon preached at White Hall before the King's Majesty,
at the Nuptials of an Honorable Lord and his Lady. In Quarto.

Several Discourses: viz. 1. Of Purity and Charity 2. Of Repentance. 3. Of
seeking first the Kingdom of God. By Hezekiah Burton, D. D. Late Rector of
Barnes near London, and Prebendary of Norwich. In Octavo.

A Relation of the Invasion and Conquest of Florida by the Spaniards, under the
Command of Ferdinando Desoto. Written in Portuguese by a Gentleman of the Town
of Elvas; Now Englished. To which is subjoyned two Journeys of the present
Emperor of China into Tartary, in the Years 1682, and and 1683. With some
Discoveries made by the Spaniards in the Island of California, in the Year
1683. In Octavo.

English Military Discipline: or, the Way and Method of Exercising Horse and
Foot, according to the Practice of this present time. With a Treatise of all
sorts of Arms and Engines of War, of Fire-work-Engines, and other Military
Instruments, both Ancient and Modern. Enriched with many Figures. In Octavo.

The Military Duties of the Officers and Cavalry: Containing the Way of
Exercising the Horse, according to the Practice of this present time: The
Motions of Horse, the Functions of the several Officers, from the Chief Captain
to the Brigadeer. Written originally in French by the Sieur de la Fontain,
Engineer in Ordinary to the Most Christian King, and translated for the Use of
those who are desirous to be informed of the Art of War. In Octavo.

Clavis Grammatica: or, the Ready Way to the Latin Tongue, containing most
plain Demonstrations for the Regular Translating of English into Latin.
Together with Instructions how to Construe and Parse Authors. Fitted as a Help
to such as are desirous to attain to the knowledge of the Latin Tongue, and
accommodated to the Meanest Capacity. Also how to Vary or Compose Latin more
Elegantly. With necessary Observations for Epistolizing or Writing of Letters
in English or Latin: And how to perform all kinds of School-Exercises that are
usually practiced in Schools. By J. B. Schoolmaster in London. In Octavo.

Humane Prudence: or, the Art by which a Man may Raise Himself and Fortune to
Grandeur. The third Edition corrected and very much Enlarged by the Author. In
Octavo.


