OSTELLA Or the FACTION OF LOVE and BEAUTY RECONCILED.

By I. T. Gent.



LONDON

Printed for John Tey, at the White-Lion in the Strand, near the New EXCHANGE,
1650.

To the deservedly Honored, and highly accomplished Sir Richard Hastings.
Baronet.
SIR,
I Am no stranger to your worth, though I am to your Person; The fame of the
one makes me Ambitious to be known to the other. It has been the goodness of
all Noble Souls, to Communicate their Virtues to the feeble, by taking them
into their Protection; The light of which leads me to the boldness of
sheltring these Poems under your Patronage. And though (Sir) this Presumption
may justly Merit your Check, yet when your Judgment shall discover their
Nakedness, and find how much they need your fence against the storms their own
weakness may draw upon them, your Native Sweetness (doubtless) will
intercede for, and open the Sanctuary to

Sir, Yours in all humbleness devoted. JOHN TATHAM.

To the truly Ingenious, and promising fullness of Gallantry, Kimsmel Lucie.
Esquire.
SIR,
W' Orthy Presents are received for their own value; mean ones (if at all) for
his sake that bestows them: I will not then despair of kind Entertainment from
you, since you have been pleased not to account me unwelcome to your self. The
favors from your Noble Father, and your self Oblieges me to this dutious
offering: And if you deny not it what you have vouchsafed to me, it shall be my
care to render my self grateful by a more worthy Present. In the mean time,
these may serve as Sallats, to provoke the Appetite of a young wit: I dare not
commend them to you to feed on, since the smallest fragment that falls from the
Banquet of your Fancy, the nicest Pallat may feast with. And therefore be
pleased to admit me, if for no intrinsique worth of my own, yet in regard I
have the virtue to admire yours.

Your ever Honourer* I. T.

The Book to the Reader.
I AM troubled with no less
Than the Plague of the Press,
you see the Spots are on me:
Yet, I would not be crossed,
Lest my Author be lost;
but I Would have -- MERCY UPON ME.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 3. for orment read torment. p. 9. l. 23. for loves r. ^eaves. p.
10. l. 4. for heart r. tears. p. ^2. l. 19. for hold r. held p. 26. l. 21. for
if it be r. if it be. p. 35. l. 19. ( the) too much. p. 38. l. 8, for the r.
thy. l. 29. for best r. blessed. p. 43. l. 1. for was r. was. p. 44. l. 1. for
insection r. infection. l. 18. for votury r. votary. p. 47. l. 8. for does r.
do. p. 48. l. 4 for it is r. to's. p. 51. l. 9. for with r. which. l. ^3. for
All r. He. p. 55. l. 15. for nubrown r. ^utbrown. p. 61. l. 6. for sweetness r.
sweets. p. 79. l. 4. for its r. it p. 92. l. 18. for the r thy. p. 97* l 14.
for not r. our. l. 20. for as r or. p. 98. l. 5. for Lortes r. Lutes. l* 22.
for Milk r, Meat. p. 100. l. 20* for sight r. sight. p. 103 l. 16, for which r.
with. p. 104. l. 24. for draw r. drown. p. 106. l. 12. for just r. mist. l, 19.
for enjoyed r. envied.

OSTELLA: Or The Faction of Love and Beauty Reconciled.
Upon my first sight of OSTELLA.
IN what dark world have I entombed my sight
thus long, till now, I never saw perfect light:
The Sun his common favors does dispense,
as well unto the Peasant as the Prince.
Each Ploughman whistles forth Aurora's ray.
and proudly vaunts, an interest in the day;
The Moon we know does slender light maintain,
she is scarce in the full, before she is in the wain:
The Stars (those petty instruments of light,)
seldom appear, but in a frosty night.
These lights do rule by turns. Nor can One take,
another time on; or All one light make.
When here is one whose luster does excel
all natural causes; heaven on her brow does dwell.
Her glori's still the same, and never declines,
but with the self-same Majesty still shines.
Sure did those Negro's that adore the Sun:
but feel her temperate heat they soon would shun
That Heresy, and offer sacrifice
to the Celestial vigor of her eyes.
All share not in this bliss, she has the sense
to curb by want the common insolence:
Her beams are lasting such a heat is pure,
for though her light be sparing, it is sure.
My Resolution.
REturn me not disdain, for if you do,
By all those nimble Fairies wait on you
I will indict you for a witch; and tell
how you do hang on er'y hair a spell.
Your brows are Magic circles in each eye,
where fools think Cupids lodge, do spirits lie.
That in unseen Flames issue forth and kill
such, your hate points out slaves to your will;
That in the Dimples of your Cheeks we may,
discern chained hearts, kept for your sport, who pay
Each hour a death, yet die not; that your breath
darts more infection than the spleen of Death.
That 'twixt those two round hills (now to our view,)
lie buried all those hearts your Anger slew.
That slaughtered hearts you make your chiefest Fare,
whose dying Groans speak music in your ear:
That for your drink you have Lovers blood and tears
distilled through the Limbeck of their fears.
That when you kiss you Traitor like betray,
or with it some strong Philtre do convey.
Yhat after once poor man has seen your face,
your Devils will not suffer him to raze
It out on's memory; but 'twill appear,
to terrify him, his Hell er'y where.
That you can walk unseen and so torment,
poor man he shall not have grace to repent.
And if these accusations will not take
with potent proofs, and you a Circe make,
I must conclude for it is part of my fear,
you have bewitched the Judge and charmed his ear:
And if the Jury find you not, Them too:
yet I will stand it out with them and you,
Then be advised and bribe me with a kiss,
not of a Killing temper but of bliss.
For which I Will change the scene and will acquaint
the World, you are no Devil but my Saint.
Ostella discribed.
LEt others search for Metaphors to raise
unto their Mistress Pyramides of praise
If mine deserve it, she in time may have it,
in the mean time it is labor and 'ile save it,
Only without the help of Art as nature,
has ornamented her behold her Feature.
Her hair is lovely brown, her Face is fair,
Her eyes are black, her cheeks such colors wear.
As Art may imitate, but not excel,
her forehead high, composed passing well;
Her nose of modest size, her mouth the like,
her lips are full and red, the veins do strike;
Into Meanders, down her Neck and Breast;
her Breast round, plump, and white; her skin the best
That Nature ever blanched; her fingers small;
Hand, long and white; of Person something Tall,
Her waste of just proportion for a span,
straight shaped; her feet (for there is the last I can
Discover) slender, instep somewhat high:
you have the full of my discovery.
Each Painter thus may take her Outward part,
But he must needs have skill, can take her Heart*
In the Morning: A FLAME.
FRom the deep sense of hope and fear,
raised by the vigor of desire,
which of it selfe's all fire,
Blown by the issues of our grief,
who break their Pison for relief,
A flame is kindled in my breast,
pure, as the Vestals ere possessed,
Whose mild heat receives welcome there.
The Sacrifice.
FRom the sweet hopes that do arise
From a safe faith of joys to come
in loves Elysium;
From the chaste incense of each Thought
Pil'd up, and into matter wrought,
And from that Sense seems to Divine
A glory to it by being thine.
my heart's become a Sacrifice;
And if thou be as just as fair,
Smother it not, but give it air.
To Ostella, an Advise before she send an Answer.
LEt loose your reason first, and then
exile those Enemies to love;
Those flattering Thoughts, that in your Sex do reign,
as Self-Conceit, Pride, and Disdain,
Which do such desperate Tenets move,
That you can live without us Men,
So to your selves you do injurious prove,
A loss to Nature, Heretics to Love.
Let not your glass abet your will;
for though it speak you fair,
It bids you not to hope to raise a Fame
out of the Relics of a flame;
Nor think your Beauty is not rare,
Unless it has the force to kill.
So Tyrants lest their names forgot should be,
Do some Grand Act to scare Posterity.
Ostella smiling.
Who would not think those Rising Beams
So temperate were, that no extremes
Attended Them to cloud our Day,
and our Credulity betray,
Who could be such a Slave to Fear,
to think a Tempest could be near
So Fair an Omen? Who'd not dare
Danger it self, and Anchor there?
Who would not think himself secure,
and safety to himself assure,
When such a mild and gentle Ray,
does smooth the wrinckles of the Day.
But (oh) it takes the Lightnings form,
and I Am betrayed into a Storm.
To Ostella upon the pain of her Toothache.
REvengefull Love thy Cruelty to fit,
in Throngs and Pangs did use his wit
How he might hit some secret part,
whose tenderness might ad edge to his dart:
and make the Grief far greater than the Smart.
Knowing thy Brest's of such Materials made,
no Force could enter, though invade
It might, in labor was his Brain;
to bring't about, but finding 'twas in vain,
he fret, and sweat himself into a pain.
The which his Tenderness could not endure,
and to his Mother sought for Cure;
Who madly Angered seemed to be,
and cursed that Burning Torment into Thee,
not half so bad as Those which flame in me.
But I to Love will pray an ease for Thine.
so by Thine own thou wilt learn to pity Mine.
To Ostella upon the lamenting the death of her Sparrow.
WHat from a thing so mean, could raise
so much delight in thee,
That for its loss so soon thy Rays:
with storms should covered be?
A Bird that wanted Natures lays,
nor Beauty had, nor Worth.
Whom Nature never meant for praise;
but tongue-ti'd sent it forth.
That it is a wonder strikes my heart,
and seems my sense to mock,
From whence it should achieve an Art
to draw tears from a rock.
But if the death of such a vain
thing, so much troubles you.
What for the heart your scorn has slain
ought you in soul to do?
Upon the Sparrow.
What time has been tan^ up for thee,
in play and pleasure fine,
When scarce a Glance could come to me
so great a bliss was thine:
When thou did tipple at her lip,
and swil*d in drink divine,
My Thirsty Soul one Heavenly sip,
her hate would not assign.
Often have I envied thy poor life,
and could grasped forth thy Breath,
And now my Genius is as rife
to envy this thy Death.
Since from the Treasure of her eye,
such plenteous tears do fall;
That should my soul in torment lie,
none would be seen at all.
But though in life and death I seem
so much to envy thee,
Yet art thou raised with more esteem,
from Death to Life by me.
A Summons to a Seige.
COme thou Paphian Engineer,
since there is no human Art,
can redeem my captived heart;
Oh come and plant thy Canon here.
In you Citadel there is
a Female wonder, that does own
a Breast of flesh, but Heart of stone:
Nay sure far more relentless it is.
With my Heart here she thought fit;
to retire secured against war;
but I know thou wilt find it far
More hard to Conquer her than it,
What no human force could do,
in the conquest of her breast,
my hopes are with faith possessed,
That, Love, thou may in time subdue.
The Retreat.
REtreat, Retreat, do you not see
as fast as you Grenades throw;
she quenches them in Pits of snow.
Intrencht about with Ivory.
And when you Undermine, you are,
by cunning Countermining crossed,
and all your Pioneers are lost
Nay, all your Treaties are but Air.
Your Cannons do no terror sound;
for she with Penetrateles strength
Repells them: then Retreat at length
E're your own Weapons give you wound.
Ostella's Kiss.
WHen you Ostella graced me with a Kiss,
it was conceived, it could not wound my Bliss
Or discompose the quiet I possessed,
e're Love usurped the freedom of my Breast.
But this I find, such Bliss, such Torment too,
I never had felt, had I not fancied you.
That welcomed kiss shot fire through every part,
till it had seized the Chamber of my Heart;
And there surpised the Virgin of Content
that never knew Love before or Detriment*
The Be so loves her Sting, yet does not know,
mistaking thus where she has hurt or no.
Then when with sighs and tears I strive to kill,
the raging heat, they but augment my ill.
The more I breath, the more the Flames aspire
Love turns my heart to Oil to Feed the fire;
And when to you my Griefs I would impart,
Fear ties my Tongue, and Love Enthrals my Heart.
License my love Ostella then, and give
A Cure to that, else must not hope to live,
Nor glory in this conquered heart of mine,
Pity will make your Beauty more Divine.
Soften your Heart like mine that dotes on you,
or teach me how to make mine Marble too.
Returning to my Chamber at night to the Taper.
HEnce Feeble light, I will not have thee burn
near me, go and attend some needy Vrn,
Until 'its Damp undo thee I retain
a stronger Flame in my Ostella's name;
Which Fate cannot expire, not yet the Breath
of Furies which hate Light, nor envious Death.
It is a virtuous flame, and shall aspire
to Heaven, when the whole world speaks but One Fire.
Wilt not henceh Hw officious do thou grow,
I Have known the time Thou would not serve me so,
E're this time of thy self thou have gone out,
when I did need Thee most, thou went about
To help me least, go weep thy self away,
I want thee not, it is madness to burn day:
This service is not welcome, then begone:
there are more ways to wast thy self upon
Than by thy tedious waiting, and pretense
of service, to become a mere offense:
It were more Charity to watch the Dead,
the thought of Love shall light my Soul to Bed.
To Love.
IT is no marvel, Love thou liv'st so long,
and though exactly Old, art perfect Young;
To all men's sense thou had consu^'d and di'd,
had not our kinder heat thy want supplied.
Thou do extract thy Comfort from our Hearts;
our Feebleness thy Nutriment imparts:
Thou suck'st us dry, and leave us never a Vein
unsearch'd, that may thy Youth and Pride maintain
At their luxurious height, In that poor we
are tortured several ways to nourish Thee:
And yet thou (cruel) never art satisfied,
but to support thine does our States divide.
By weak'ning us, thou do renew thy strength;
by shortning of our lives thine receive length.
Thou take thy Beauty from our Cheeks; thy Youth
from ours; and thy Decrees are from our Truth
Originally framed; though young, art sage,
and Thou deriv'st thy Youth from others Age.
Sure thou extract'st the very Quinte sense
of Life from Hearts, for Mine left me long since.
After this rate Thou may for ever live,
since Our decaying's Thy Preservative.
To Ostella's Brother.
IT is not now, as when my Soul was free,
and could contract my time to Mirth and Thee;
Meet the loved Sack with lips as resolute,
as Merchants in the heat of their pursuit,
Ofth' Virtue on it, when our exacter taste
to make their Wits secure, Our own did wast;
When our Succeeding Cups, did Music send
through eithers ear, in health to eithers friend:
When, our Comptrolless, Mirth her Voice did fit,
and laughed even Melancholy out on's Wit;
When every Brow was clear, and every Heart
unthrall'd, showed Friendships Concord without Art:
Then was the time of times! But now (alas)
I have not so much Heart will break a Glass
My Soul is out of tune as well as I,
I Am a mere Eunuch to Society;
Fly all things but my Passion, and do stalk
along the Thames sides Melancholy walk,
As though I meant a Wedding with the Willows,
bidding adue to Sack, Mirth, and Boon-fellows.
This was thy fault then blame thy self not me:
had I never seen thy Sister, I had been I.
This is a Metamorphosie, as true,
as Ovid ere in's strength of Fancy drew.
Ostella visiting me in time of Sickness.
Blessed be that Tongue that whispered in your Ear,
my Sickness: Heaven did surely send you here,
Upon some Angels Wing to give repose
to my Distracted Thoughts, this Pity shows
You are allied to Heaven, I was but now,
cold as the Morning Air, or Deaths chill Brow:
And now a soft Heat steals through every Vein,
and warms my Heart, thus you revive the Slain,
The Dark Cimmerian that has sealed his eyes
up in continual sleep, would rouse and rise
To bless this happy Omen, so from far
the Kings rejoiced when as the Eastern Star
Appeard to them; like Comfort You do bring:
for when good Works are done Angels do sing.
My Scorn to Cupid, or Cupid ungodded.
A God! some juggling Gypsies Brat
that silly People wonder at,
Whose faiths thou have abused with lies,
And fortune-telling fopperies*
No more assume the title God
that fitter art to have the Rod:
But use thy Quiver and thy Bow,
to kill Iack-Daws, or fright the Crow,
Nor boast thy Parentage or Power
thou have lost thy Godhead in one hour.
Henceforth in scorn thy Figure shall,
be placed on every Potters Stall.
Or on the Tester of some Bed;
thy Altar be some Cup-boards head,
No fumes of Sacrifice shall rise,
less from the Mists of Childrens eyes;
When in their Play they Ruin Thee,
and thou the Sacrificed be.
No, No, thou shall abuse no more
our Faiths, with thy huge Deeds of Yore,
Fame lies to prate so much of thee,
could thou so great a Conqueror be,
Over Gods themselves, and now want wir,
sufficient Power, and Strength to hit
A Heart of Flesh, and not of Flint?
odd's death, I think the Devils in it.
Loves melancholy.
I Live in The World, but how? in such deep Woe,
as though I were not made 'its joys to know:
I eat, yet feed not; from the choicest food,
I cannot extract that goodness does me good.
I drink, and often, still my Sorrow's dry,
and to chase sadness keep much company.
Them I disturb; for when their Mirth flies high,
damp't with a fit I break Society.
Retired unto my Chamber, I converse
with some known Author either Prose or verse;
In my Survey, if any joys I find,
conferred on any, I am stricken Blind;
If any Man's hard Fate be queintly shown,
I straight Compare his Torments with mine own;
And finding mine exceed, leave off to Read,
the Weight of Sorrow, bears me to my Bed:
There if I sleep my troubled Soul does Walk,
and just as Madmen use, to 'its self does talk.
Awake, my Fancy wanders too and fro,
as though I knew not where to rest or go.
In such distracted Passions I am thrown,
I Am neither well in Public nor alone:
I Am young and apt for Pleasure single too,
Objects enough that may my fancy Woo,
And yet not Helens Beauty can delight
my eye or raise in me an appetite:
Nor is this Miracle I do impart,
And yet I breath, live, move, without a heart.
Ostella's Scorn.
HAd I not Loved thee Cruel fair,
thou had not prized thy self so high:
And thou had mist the title Rare,
had not received it from My eye.
The Flames that from my Heart did rise,
wrought by the fuel of Desire,
To seek the Glory of thy eyes
has raised in others breasts a fire.
And I that first did blaze thy Name;
that long before Obscured lay,
Am left Consuming in my Flame
whilst others Pity find their Pay.
Thus by my Love, thou were made Great,
and by thy Pride my Hearts cast down*
Ingratitude is the worst Cheat,
and Prides more infamous then Clown.
But oh fond Love, thou did my Pen subborn
to make her Proud, now Pride does make her Scorn.
To Ostella.
Would thou live, and have thy Name,
stand glorious in the eyes of Men,
And fixed above the common aim,
make thy Sex Emulate thy Fame.
And Treasured up in Story be
an ever-living Fame to them?
Or would thou to example thee,
raise Flames in all Posterity?
Then let thy Lenity re^seat
My Heart, late Captived by thy power;
Raise it, to make thy own more Great:
they best can save that can Defeat.
So Caesar's setting up of Pompey's Name,
Made his own stand secure with brighter Fame.
A Tempest.
HElp Love, or else I sink; (for know,
he best can help that causes Woe.)
Help (...), and with thy smoother Palm,
the fury of my Passion Calm*
Succeeding tears in Billows rise,
as there were Seas met in my eyes,
My Sighs united, proudly groan,
as the four Winds combined in one.
Hark how they roar! my Sighs and Tears
sure have conspired to tempt my fears.
See how they swell! now they are met,
and even a Tempest do beget:
It shakes my Bark, her Ribs do Crack,
and now my hopes expect a Wreck.
Help Love for Pity, then I pray,
cre my poor Heart be cast away.
To Death.
THou Grand Physician to a troubled Breast,
thou that both kill'st, and cur'st, in one expressed
Thou Terror and thou Comforter no less
then Messenger of Hell and Happiness;
Thou Conqueror of frai^ Humanity,
who yet t'imprisoned Souls giv'st liberty.
Why come not I within the benefit,
of thy Decree? thy lingering does beget
My Jealousy: say, for my life to me
is hatefuller then thy Grim shape can be.
In every Street Mottality appears,
and yet I live though drowned in my Tears:
Kill me, and make me happy in my Death,
that living draw but discontented Breath.
I thus invoked in Wrath, He made Reply
Lovers were made for Torment not to Die.
A Bird presented to Ostella.
FAir Bird thou art designed to be
a Messenger from Love and me,
An Embassy though not so high
as that which from the Ark did fly
Yet such as Nice Divines admit
and Loves Religion Warrants it.
Go, and those sadder Notes of thine
which so improved by Discord mine,
Unto the Sovereign of my Heart
Peal forth in a confused A^t,
Sing out my sigh, chatter my Groans:
imperfect speech best breaks our Moans.
Strike all Hearts sad that hers may know
How much of pity she does ow
To mine: pursue her day, by day,
Let her not eat nor drink nor pray
Till for her own safe ease and rest,
her bosom does become thy Nest,
Where if thou art Martyred by her eyes,
Thou shall from thence a Phaenix rise.
Imagination.
HOw pleasingly does thy Deceit
insinuate into our Sense,
Where having taken up a Seat,
what it is we wish thou steal'st from thence,
And to thy self thou form'st the Shape
which represented to the Mind,
Does on its Peace Commit a Rape,
leaving our Fancy unconfined:
That time that for our Rest is lent
employed our thoughts awake to keep,
Is prized to be the sweetest spent,
although it does exile our Sleep:
What Numerous Joys do thou beget
to flatter each inclining thought,
As seem t'exceed the Appetite,
whose subtilty the Wonder wrought!
But (oh) the falsenesse of thy Charms,
that such bewitching joys prepare,
That when we think they are in our Arms,
Ixion like, we grasp the Air.
Ostella saying she pitied me, but could not help me.
Pity without Relief is just
one on a sleevelesse Errand sent:
That wanting what should Shape his trust
returns more simple than he went.
For, Naked Pity brings but Cold
and heartless Comfort on his back,
It only guilds the grief is told
and make us worse in what we lack.
Compassion bears a Sense with it,
as though it felt the afflicted'st Grief,
Loves Messenger it is termed fit,
It never comes without relief.
But th'Pitty that proceeds from you,
adorns my Temples and my Eyes
With Wreaths of Roses mixed with Rue,
decked only up for Sacrifice,
And in the sweetness of that breath
You do but Music forth my Death.
Reason.
REason and I long time known friends,
in all things did comply,
Till suddenly for unknown ends
It shunned my company:
And whatsoever I said or did,
It still did fly the Sense,
As though some Sophistry lay hid,
Or Error came from thence.
At last admiring at the Cause
of its so strange Neglect,
I Conjured it by it is own Laws,
to yield me more respect:
And to resolve me speedily why We at difference were,
Since first a solemn League did tie us, to a Sense more fair,
Knowing I was in Love, it answered me, Reason and Madmen never could agree.
Ostella saying, she would not say she did, could, nor would not Love me.
I Am wrapped in such a Mist, Reasons clear light
cannot lead me through lost betwixr; Day and Night:
*Twixt Doubt and Joy my faculties do rise,
and War with in me, and my sense despise,
One while I Am lifted to the Throne of Bliss,
straight Ponierd by my Fears and struck to the Abiss.
Now I am sinking, now, I Tryton like
ride on the Neck of Danger and do strike
With my strong hopes my fears into the Main;
now I Am a Prince, and now a Slave again.
And thus my fainting joy 'twixt hope and fear,
does Ebb, and Flow* now Winged, now Clogged, in the Air,
Mocked with the shadow of thy Love, which I
seeking to catch at, my pursuit does fly.
Why did not say, thou did not, nor could Love me?
but those are spoken plain enough to move me:
Yet why that nimble close then? though thou could not
to sweeten it thou would not say thou would not?
If thou nor do, nor can* what hope can I
assume thou ever wilt? oh Destiny!
So flattering Oracles did tell Men's fate
and yet in the Mystery concealed their have,
To Ostella my Choice.
I Would not Wed the Creature that desires
to know the secrets of the Marriage Bed,
And to repel the fury of her fires,
forsooth in all haste must be Married.
Nor she who by her Parents Cruelty
is made to loath her self, and cares not how
She is bestowed to Joy or Misery,
never minding Love nor marrriage strickt vow.
Nor she that has to any been a Stale,
and now with frantic Resolution swears,
The next that comes to Court her shall prevail:
Oh such a Piece would lug Love by the Ears.
Nor she that would be Wed to be made fine,
thinking Content should her Attendant be,
Believing not to want what ere was mine:
faith such a Piece does love her self not me.
Nor your half, Matron of some thirty five,
whose in good law, and good-sooths have worn out
Her lips and teeth, whose Heart is but a Sive,
as fast as Love creeps in, it goes out.
Nor the Green-piece that weds for the Ring sake,
and other pretty things belonging to it
That man that has her must her Babies make,
and have a sool and thousand Plagues to boot,
Nor yet the serious Soul that does employ
her whole day at her Work, or pries into
The Cooks affairs, in her there is small joy:
She Will Love me when she has nothing else to do.
Now, some will say I cannot find such a one
that are from one or all these follies free
To such I answer, that they are unknown
unto thy Worth and ignorant of Thee.
Ostella Confessing She loved Me.
A Blessed confession, for which expect
(though you have justly merited Neglect
From Love and me,) an Absolution for
all your past ills against us, since that War
Brought on this happy Peace, This Truce does give
me more than hope, assurance I shall live*
Nay live to joy in You the only sum
of all my hopes, from whence my Bliss must come.
The Gods will recompense you for this Deed,
And amplify your Glory in your Seed;
But I admire you hold me in suspense
so long* knowing my Loves pure innocence;
That though with Love I seemed to be all fire,
yet was a Stoic to impure desire;
But I have found the Reason, and you know it,
The cleernesse of this Truth does plainly show it,
"The longer growth Diseases do endure,
"The more the Grief, more famous is the Cure
So from your Patients Tortour you would raise
an honor, and by Curing him, a praise.
And by that Weakness I Am more hearty grown
Than if my Strength had never Weakness known.
'Twas pretty Policy which I commend,
that Sorrow's sweetn'd that does find an End*
Your Answers pli'de me as you would beat back fire
not to suppress the Flame, but raise it higher.
Ostella as king why: I loved Her.
NOt because thy face is fair,
though the Colors be thine own,
and their Parallel unknown:
Nor for all thy All that is rare,
Which perhaps others may prize
Less, than IIdolatrize.
Nor for that thou art perfect good,
which few of your Sex can claim
as a title to their Name;
Or a sweetness to their blood.
This to others to may seem
Not so great as I esteem.
No, nor for thy love to me,
though it strongly may persuade,
and my Manhood much invade.
In this none can judge of thee
But my self, to which i will swear,
Never Turtle loved more deer.
Yet I love thee and pray why?
in Obedience to my Fate,
I should love though thou did hate:
Yet I would not have thee try.
This Woman's Reason I Will give you
troth I love you cause I do,
The Nut to Ostella.
THou have my Heart and I have thine
a blessed Exchange is this!
They seem to part, yet never dis join.
and when they meet they kiss.
Though they in several Beds do lie
two Rooms do not them severe,
So that they may with safety fly
and mingle bliss together.
My Heart breaths freshness on thy Rose
that else would droop and wither
My Breast had wanted its repose
had not thy Heart come hither.
Replanted Plants do prosper so,
in other Soils far better
Then in the first, and (...) do show
to the Gods we are (...) a Debtor.
Oh may my Heart so thrive with thee
and thine with me so dwell,
That they may knit and (...) to be
two Kirnels in one shell.
To Ostella.
I Sent my Heart even as my Child to thee,
to be brought up, as thine shall be with me:
Be careful os't as the Apple of thy eye,
so shall I be of thine, or may I die,
Let mine not sorrow, I shall comfort thine;
in this we prove our Amity Divine.
But if mine droops, thine holds not up the head;
as mine does fare, thine shall be cherished.
Mine Is of a softly Nature, and may be
wound like a twig, even any way by thee.
But thine more stubborn was, until in tears
I bathed it supple, even with Cares and Fears:
It would not stoop: But Heaven to Crown the end
of my sad toil, at last, did make it bend.
And now it proves a greater joy to me,
than did mine own before it came to thee.
The FACTION. To OSTELLA.
BEauty glorious as the Light
that unveils the face of Day;
Think it is her proper Right,
that all Hearts should her obey:
And in Competition stands
with All*Conquering Love, who try
By eithers power which most Commands,
and best deserves the Diety.
Loves inviting oily words
on his party many gain.
Beauties beams wound worse than swords,
strongly do her side maintain.
Eithers strength 'ginning to waste
straight they unto Reason fly,
Who well seasoned bids them taste
of this sharp Antipathy,
Love not linckt to Beauties Rays
is Majesty in disguise
And loses its reverent praise
'cause it is clouded from our eyes;
Beauty without Love declines
as the Heart that wants heat,
Or the Flowr that droops and pines,
when the Sun should it repleat:
And so wisely did Decree
Love and Beauty should agree;
And least the Union should undo,
sends them to reside with you.
Ostella asking me how I liked a painted Lady came to see her.
Why I will tell thee: Is that face her own,
she makes so much on it, or takes't up on Loan?
I promise if it be so, she does deserve
to have it lent again, she does preserve
It with such care, but this is jest. I know
she is a painted cloth, a Puppet show;
I must confess when she unvailed, I stood
in such amazement as though made of Wood:
Perhaps she did conceive as much, just so
when Persius did uncase unto his foe
Medusa's head, they were transformed as I
beholding her strange Metamorphosie.
I Am sure my Heart was Marble; I forgot
all civil manners, and saluted not:
I might have prejudiced her, if I had,
kissed off her colors, then she had been mad:
And I did ow such dear regard to thee,
because she was thy friend so Wise to be.
She was thy foil, O stella, for, when I,
compared with hers thy Native Livery,
Finding hers false, and she to Art was more,
beholding, than Nature for that poor
Decaying Pride, which the least Air does vade,
I blessed my fortune that by thee was made:
'Twere Sin to doubt her inside cause, with thee
she does converse the Soul of Piety.
Yet be she what she will, this joys my Heart,
Thou art the Pride of Nature not of Art.
Upon my assurance of OSTELLA's Love.
ANd do thou Love indeed, in very deed,
Ostella? prithee speak, and yet take heed:
It Is requisite my Question be denied,
lest I do surfeit e're I Am satisfied:
So from that sweet receive my ban* and be
as slow in thanks for Love as Cruelty.
Yet be not Cruel neither, it is not just
thou should be so, and worse I should mistrust
Thy spotless Faith: I would not have thee hate,
nor would I have thy Love become my Fate;
For the excess of each may dangerous prove,
and seeking to preserve, may ruin Love.
Lightning is swift, as soon it does retire;
let our flames softly burn, and not expire,
By whose kind heat our hearts may warm, not burn:
there is safety in it, we may out, last our Urn.
Tell me, do Love? Yet do not tell me so:
and yet I know thou do; for on thy Brow
I read it, 't cannot be hid by all the skill
thy Art can purchase; Yet delight thy will
As I shall mine. Answer me then, and prove
by Paradox, thou do not, yet do Love.
Ostella veiled.
OStella, thou do injure me
by this Veil of Modesty.
Thou the Sun of my Delight
thus obscured, I am in night,
I would not show thee sweet to sell
but to be admired is well;
For from thee by others praise
I to my self a Trophie raise,
It Is my Pride the World should be
in Love with thee, as thou with me:
Which adds a glory to my Fate;
that they for thee me Emulate.
Open thy Beauty to the Day
give thy Cupids leave to Prey;
Inflame all Hearts, make the World thine,
I have the glory thou art mine.
Ostella showing me Verses sent to her by a friend of mine.
VErses to thee! is he so Love-some grown
just on a sudden, are the lines his own?
Or does he Court by Proxy, and has paid
dear for his wit to one whose need has made
Him a pro^st Poet, that he should be
guilty of Wit, Condemns himself and me.
Miracles may chance to walk, and light on him
he is empty enough, and may receive to th'brim.
But yet why should I doubt this, since thy eye
can make a Spark a Flame in Poetry,
And were not I as confident of Thee
as Saints of Heaven are, a Jealousy
Would work into my Faculties, thy Love
might leave my Sphere, and in another move.
Women are Charmed, when praises do persuade,
for then harmonious Spells their Ears invade.
Ostella advising me to leave off drink* ing Wine.
HOw dearest! art thou weary of thy Fame,
that thou would banish that preserves the same?
When I would write on the Vigor of thy eye,
a sprightly Glass of Sack I Have standing by,
From whence my Pen takes life and speed; that Smile
of thine, thou ow'st to Sack for my fair Guile,
That lively Color of thy Cheek and Lip,
from the rich Claret did my fancy sip,
And from the mantling sparks which thence arise
I Metaphor'd the Cupids in thy eyes.
From the Loved Grape I can create Conceit,
enough to raise Dejection to the Seat
Of Honor, it is the Nepenthean Spring
about the which the jolly Muses sing
Thy praises from my Verse. Oh let me lack
all things else useful, so thoust give me Sack.
Thou may as well go bid me leave to live,
as have me leave the means which life does give:
Faith leave my Wine, and farewell Poetry,
forgetting which none will remember Thee.
To one asking how he should know my Mistress.
THou may know her by her dress
both of body and of mind;
Where so many Graces press
as just Heaven had assigned
her the Glory of her Kind.
Thou may know her by the flame
which proceeds from her eye.
But (oh) who can see the same
who can see it and not die:
it is so full of Majesty.
Thou may know her by her Balm,
the blessed issue of her breath,
Which in Passion is so calm,
it gives life instead of Death:
such a virtuall power it has.
Thou may know her by a Heart
full of Love and Constancy;
More of Pity then of Art.
but all this thou can not see,
'Less my Fate did govern theee.
My Vow to Ostella upon her doubting my faith.
Believe me Love by those fair eyes,
that bless the World with Light,
and to the blind give sight;
By this chaste kiss, this precious breath
That rescued my poor heart from Death,
It still remains thy Conquered prize.
By virtues self enthroned in thee:
for other Beauties wear
but th'bare figure of what is rare.
No thoughts of change disturb my Rest,
Whose heats consume not, warm the Breast;
there is no Content like Constancy.
But should thou not continue mine,
as firm as when I first
Love in my Bosom Nursed?
I should the Bastard banish thence,
(Though yet the Child of Innocence,)
and prove him humane, not Divine.
Did not thy fires preserve my flame,
it should dispersing fly
in Sparks at every eye,
With Wanton Liberty should range,
And every minute covet change,
'till it dissolved Loves hallowed frame.
But till thy Fancy change thy Mind,
(if I without offense
may doubt such Innocence,)
My Love shall be so purely free
From loose thoughts of disloyalty,
it shall teach Turtles to be kind.
Upon an occasion; to Ostella, Of Jealousy.
THe Day that is lost et'e scarcely shown,
might rule Eternally.
Did not th'Prerogative of Night
insinuate a Sovereignty.
The Spring and Summer cropped e're blown
with all their gaudy Train,
Might ever season our delight,
did not intruding Winter Reign.
The Sea whose often Shipwracks strike
a fear into the advent'rers mind
Would safely harbor did no Storm
engage its nature to the wind.
All things in goodness would be like
did not the ills their difference show
Beauty in freedom as in form,
and nature no decaying know.
Youth dwell for ever on our Cheeks*
did not the Iron hand of Age
Imprint a Ruin, or Disease
invade our healths, and life engage.
Man might possess as soon as seek
the Pleasures that do so entice,
But his own Nature does displease,
else Earth had been a Paradise.
So had not cruel Love crept in,
my Heart had been from Passion free,
And my Content had been mine own,
Not slav'd to sottish Jealousy.
But Love has raised such Wars within,
they do disturb my Peaceful pores,
And Tyrant-like (alas) have thrown
my Rest and Quiet out of Doors.
Ostella forth of Town: To my Heart.
HEart be Content, though she be gone,
let Reason govern thee:
Thou have so much of Pleasure known,
it is fit a seasoned Misery
should temper thy Prosperity.
Absence does whet the Appetite,
which Presence dulled before,
There is no Pleasure truly great,
nor sweet of such effectual power,
'till seasoned with a little Sow'r.
He cannot truly prize Delight,
that never knew Misery;
Nor deem the glory of the Light,
untili by wanting it, he be
sensible of its purity,
Think this the time of thy lost health
which when restored to thee,
Even from the Ruin of thy Wealth
it brings a perfect Remedy,
to double thy Felicity.
To the worst of Passions:
THou that destroi'st our Peace, giv'st Liberty
to fury, ruin; Thou, grand Enemy
To man; Thou, whose unlimited pretense
deposes Reason, and confounds our sense.
Thou, whose Tyrannick Cruelty extends
to the separation of long linked friends.
Thou, that art all irregularity,
rash, inconsiderate, madly bold and free,
A foe to goodness, Author of our ill.
thou, that art Wisdoms inconsistent still.
Thou, who can boast thou never were overcome,
and slav'dst so many gallant Hearts at Rome.
Thou, that did vanquish Caesar, know I Will prove
greater than He, and Conquer Thee with Love.
The Jealous Lovers, A Dialogue.
Thirsis. SAy, Daphnes say, for I desire to know
The cause from whence these sad effects do grow*
Art thou in Love?

Dap. O yes.


Thirsis. With whom? confess.


Daph. With my Murderess.


Their. Love baits on easy hearts; is thine so tame
To hugg thy Ruin, and appear his Game?
Who is the Shepherdess?

Dap* Do ask her name?
Have not the Winds whispered her Beauties fame
Through every Ear? do not observe each Tree
Wears on it is Breast her name? My misery.

Their. Did she e're love thee,


Daphnes. say,


Daph. She did,


Their. Are those flames now extinguished, or but hid?


Daph. Extinguished as my Jealousy, which made
Her leave this walk, which now appears a shade,
Wanting her Beams to warm it, and my Heart
Cold as the Deaths Dart.

Their. Did thou abuse her Love?


Daph. I cannot tell,
Unless it were by loving too too well,
Excessive Love, and her exceeding Grace
Supplanted Reason, and gave Passion place.

Their. Such was my fate.


Daph* Too cruel mine.


Their. It may be so.
But there is no example of my Woe.

Chorus. Since we derive our heat both from one fire*
let thy Heart mix with mine* and so Expire,
That to her Glory from us may arise,
in one pure flame a double Sacrifice.

To my Thoughts.
When fortune flatters you, believe her not,
she then upon your safety has a plot;
And if she threaten, be the same you are,
and seem the fullness of her spleen to dare.
Though all the World should in division be
For empty glories, golden Slavery,
Be you united; let not their disease
Poison the sweet Contentment of your Peace.
For while you keep together, and be true
unto your selves, the World cannot Conquer you.
In this y'exceed the happiness of Kings
armed still against the Tide, and change of things.
That neither hopes of Honor can dissolve,
nor Misery with sad despair involve.
Thus be your selves, and tread upon the Neck
of Danger, and despise Dame Fortunes beck.
Let her to you be held but Air, or Name,
not worthy to deserve from you a Fame.
"None is so worthy to be envied at,
as such as whose content is wondered at*
So in the midst of the Worlds strife and debate
your cheerfulness does soar above your Hate.
To Joy.
UNconstant as a smile, uncertain as
beauty, or life, or a reflecting Glass.
Shorter than the days glory, that brings on
a tedious win ters night t'exact upon
The virtue of our Patience; Or the tears
of Widows, which but serve to drown their fears.
Oh had I not acquainted been with thee,
I Would been insensible of misery,
And comforted my self in my first State,
with the thought that all men suffered the like Fate*
Better 't had been still to have lived in Woe,
than once thy happiness and sweets to know:
He that never tasted of Delicious fare,
thinks his own Cates the best and primest ware;
His Water is his Wine, which he does drink
with greater Pleasure from the fountains brink,
Than ever the Epicurean Roman found,
when in variety he did abound.
Such unto whom Nature denies a sight
can make no difference betwixt dark and light,
But to have known the day, and suddenly,
by some sad accident deprived be
Of the Virtue of the splendor, he inward finds
a greater Torture than whom Nature blinds.
So had thou not apted my Heart for thee,
I had not found how great thy want would be.
Unkind in thy departure, the amorous Wind
though swift in course, does leave a Sweet behind
On its loved Flowrs, but thou in taking leave
giv'st us a kiss, as meaning to deceive,
Yielding us up into the hands of Grief,
whence there is scarce redemption or relief.
Yet while thou art with us, thou do act thy part
with such delightful and reviving Art,
That dead Hearts are stirred up to life by thee,
but violent things do seldom last we see:
Thou art but here to day, and gone tomorrow*
the Scene is past, now enter Tyrant Sorrow*
Ostella's Welcome to Town*
VVElcome Ostella with thy Beams more bright,
Than those that brought the Chaos, form, and Light:
Welcome, as is a timely seasoned Spring,
And the kind tokens it with it does bring:
Welcome, as are the Seasons of the Year
Unto the earth, or News unto the Ear
Of him that has long time lain doomed to die;
A pardons brought for his Delivery:
Welcome, as health to the afflicted Sense,
Or wealth in its intended innocence:
Welcome, as Ransoms to poor Captives are,
Or as deliverance to the Mariner:
Welcome, as peace to a Distracted State,
On which a tedious War has quartered hate:
Welcome, as is the end to all my fears,
And welcome, as the Music of the Spears
To a departing Soul, or Angels sing
A Message to it, which heavenly Comfort bring:
Welcome my Dearest unto me, as joy
To the sad Heart, whom Love sought to distroy:
Welcome, as is loves best fruition to
The longing Souls of them did long time Woo.
Welcome, as is my fancy to my Pen,
When it is rich, and fit for fight of men:
Welcome, as is restored Roses to
The Checks, the hand of sickness would undo:
Welcome, to me thou Sum of earthly good:
Welcome, as honor to deserving blood:
Welcome, as Conquest to the valiant mind:
Welcome, as Restoration to the blind:
Welcome, to me as is that holy fire
Into the Vestals Breasts Heaven does inspire:
Welcome, as is their bliss, when they resign
Their Clay to earth, and do become Divine:
Welcome, as is Divine untainted Love,
And welcome, as a blessing from above.
A Dialogue between Love and Honor.
Honor. WHy Fli'st thou me, I never knew,
Honor was shunned before.

Love. I Have heard that none but Madmen do
thy slippery State adore.

Honor. The Gods from such they hate, conceal
the virtue of my Name,
To such they Love, they do reveal
the Glory of my Flame.

Love. But I have known in climbing up
to reach thy Starry Crown,
That who was raised to the top,
was suddenly cast down.

Honor. Those had no reverence to me,
but Fortunes Wealth made great,
And they being as blind as she,
did tumble from their Seat.
They did but at my Title aim,
of me were never possessed,
And only wore me in their Name,
and not within their Breast.
My way unto the Stars does lead,
where Gods do keep their Court,
Where no unhallowed foot must tread,
there Virtuous souls resort.

Love. The Virtuous, who are they frail Man?
conceivs the prosperous so?
The Miserable needs must than
have naught with it to do.

Honor. The Captive that in Dungeon lies,
if he but virtue own,
When all the world does him despise
I Will raise him to a Throne.

Love. Then Honor thou, I feared thee much
I now from it am free,

Honor. And Love thy purity is such,
I needs must honor thee.
For we are both allied to Heaven,
and from the Gods receive
Those special Glories that are given
us, to Desert to give.

Chorus. Then let us join and Crown Ostella's name,
whose Virtue does excel the voice of Fame*
That in her choice she may so happy prove,
Heaven may applaud her Merit, and his Love.

Ostella weeping for my Imprisonment.
WAst not those precious tears for me,
Since Jnnocence cannot be free*
They sin that live at Liberty.
I boast a freedom more Immense
Than he that is in every Sense
A Prisoner to his Conscience*
Weep not Ostella; for I Am sure
Whilst thou this Passion do endure,
Thou rather help'st to kill than cure.
Should they Eclipse my eyes the sight
Of Day, and shut me up in Night.
Those eyes must then afford me Light.
Should the chill Earth appointed be
My Bed. Content should Cover me;
And I would laugh at Misery.
For how can I be dispossessed
Of weet Repose, when in thy Breast
My Heart securely takes its Rest.
The ruined Walls would seem to me
Rich as the Tyrian-Tapistry,
So they deprive me not of thee.
Should I with Bread and Water dine,
To make the Miracle Divine,
Thy Lips would change the last to Wine.
Know then Ostella, I am free
In every part, enjoying thee,
The only Soul of Liberty.
Ostella questioning of me concerning Clarinda, a former Mistress.
TWere sin to lie, Ostella, and to thee
the greatest piece of Wilful Treachery
That Wickedness can gloze: That she whom You
do style Clarinda, I did own is true.
So may the Babe suck Venom from the Tet;
and so the Dew may blast the Violet.
Such was my Innocence abused by her:
the Wisest in their Loves do soonest err.
But I, that hardly could judge black from white,
mistook my Day, and wrapped my self in Night.
The little Bees, unskil'd, so may in flight,
mistake the Rose, and suck the Aconite:
She Courted me with such destroying tears
as the Crocodile, or the cursed Hinbane wears;
And like the Spider, wove a curious Net
of her entici^ng Hair my Heart to get;
A Bird of Paradise was thought to be,
but she a Bird of Rapine proved to me.
In the Summer of my Fortunes she did sing
much like the Swallow; but the Winters sting
Poys'ning my Hopes; she, like the Licorish Fly,
follows the next Sweet 'til sh' as sucked it dry.
The Morning dew so leaves the Violet,
when the Suns prouder Beams exhaleth it:
And this decreed Truth I Have bought with smart,
that there is most danger where appears most Art.
These were my Childish Errors, for which I
have often distilled my Sorrow from my eye
The blind Man so in darkness walks, and yet
discerning not his want, never questions it:
But You have formed me new, and given a sight
to my dark Judgment, I know now the Light:
And I will prize it Dearest as my Soul,
Which thou have partly Cleans'd, once sadly foul.
As by the Suns infusive heat, the Earth
receives the Virtue, to give Gold a Birth,
Out of its sordid Womb. So from your eyes
my Heart receives the Joys of Paradise:
Which I was losing. Am refined now.
by your pure fires: rejoicing Angels owe
You thanks for my reclaiming which Create
new Joys with Them, which bear a lasting Date.
Thus I Am become thy Convert (Dear) and will
pay all the Good I Have forfeited for Ill.
Clarinda's Name shall like the Shadow be
forgot ere Night; Thine to Eternity
Shall last. Oh I could Curse that wretched Pen
that wrote her mine, the common Stool for Men,
May all those Books as fast as bought, have flame:
may she as they Consume, Burn with the same;
That so the insection of her name that fills
the earth with looseness and the Air with ills,
May die with her, and from her Grave shall rise,
as from a Load of Dung, Maggots and flies.
Pardon ( Ostella) this unusual rage
wrongs hid, stirred up, in Man new Wars do wage.
Goodness perverted troubles a Calm State,
and Love abused grows desperate with hate*
Look on me Dear with that compassionate Sense
as you would on betrayed innocence,
Clothed in a Robe of Penitence from your eye
gracious Ostella let my pardon fly.
Confession and Contrition may win
from Heaven forgiveness for the greatest sin.
Your Saint like temper does my faith persuade;
Your Mercy can Out-vy the faults I made.
Deceive not then my confidence I am
your votury now; and in my Heart a Flame
Burns with Religious Duty, and when I
Extinguish it may I unpitti'd die.
The fervent Light shall sooner leave the World,
(which through the darkest Roab that ore it is hurled
By night shoots forth some Splendour,) and the Air,
the holy Vestals breath in frequent Prayer,
Become infectious Saints from Heaven shall fall
into Perdition. All now righteous shall
Become Apostats* and this Globe receive
by its own weight its Tomb and Nature leave
To Propogate her kind ever my Faith wastes
for know Ostella Love 'bove Nature lasts,
To Ostella upon her Reproving me and Councelling me from some Inconveniences.
THe Breath of Winter that does Curd the Earth
to give the Season free and timely Birth
Comes not so sharply violent as this,
from you to me, 't has nipt the budding Bliss
In me, your Beams of Goodness cherisht. All
the Comforts I received from this sweet Gall
Is this, that I to You may be more Pure,
you pierce my Heart to make a way for Cure.
It is a stinging Salve, a tickling Smart,
a pleasing Potion, that does turn my Heart
Into faint Qualms, to clear and set it right,
a bitter Prologue to a sweet Delight.
A sharp Reproof brings Mercy in the end,
so Judges Chide when Pardon they intend.
Unskilful Surgeons may the Vlcerous place:
make, by false Applications in worse case
And when they see the Virtue of their Skill
extends not to a Cure, make have to Kill.
But thou, Physitian-like, wisely do give
Cor'sives where needed, and the Lenitive
In its due place, that the afflicted Sense
may gather something Cordial from thence.
Thy Council to my Ears did cruel seem
but the effect on it did my Heart redeem,
From the loose humors that were gathering to
a Head, its prim'tive whiteness to undo
So Physic when Diseases do abound,
does make Us sharply Sick e're perfect Sound,
Music in the dead Season of the Night.
OSTELLA hark! how sweetly does the sound
of Music in our Ears resound!
How it is advanced by the Night!
whose silence adds to the Delight*
Our Senses dead as Night, are by
the Virtue of it is Harmony
Stirred and revived, who frisk and play
like wanton Kids in th'dawn of Day.
One Voice does now more Comfort bring
then the whole Quire of Birds in the Spring,
It comes to vsit us, like that
rare thing in Man so wond'red at,
Friendship, to set our Spirits free,
when thrall'd in Fortunes Slavery.
Ostella commanding my absence for a time.
REvoke that Doom, Ostella, call it back,
it is so heavy that my Heart does Crack
Under its weight; thou may as well Command
my Soul to leave its Mansion: 't shall not stand.
How can I live, Ostella, when that I
do want the vertual Influ'nce of thine eye?
Suppose Ostella, that that glorious light
thou now enjoy'st by th'virtue of thy sight
Should be hid from thee, would not th'sudden Change
depose thy Comfort: and thy hopes estrange?
The Memory of what you once possessed,
Would Tyrant-like strike Daggers to your Breast a
Danger once past bring to our Memory,
a kind of a delight when we are free:
When safely we may tell what shelves* or Rocks
composed for Ruin we have escaped, what Shocks
Our Barks received by some rude Waves, and how,
we cousen'd Ruin of of its sport: this now
Might reassume content, But when we think
On our lost happiness, our souls does sinck
Beneath the hope of Remedy, or Relief.
nothing is then so powerful as our Grief.
Man's Misery does so much more distroy.
by how much more he was deprived his Joy.
And were I blind (not absent) and coul'd hear
thy voice 'twould send Loves harmony through my Ear
Unto my Heart, and so restore that Sense
that was defective: thus thy Excellence
Would so unite my thoughts that discontent
durst not approrch never my Hearts Continent.
But so exiled the very sum of Bliss
enthroned my soul would prove my Extas^s.
But it is your wise Apology to say,
it is but a fortnight you enjoin my stay:
When know each minute is ^n Age to one
whose Love in all transcends comparison.
How is his heart afflicted with the shape
of jealous fears when they commit a Rape,
Upon his Reason, and what he admired,
he now suspects; his faith almost expired
Thinks on his former and his present State;
examines to his own by others Fate,
Concludes his Mistress glorious, then dispairs
with the thought of his own Indigence, and in's Prayers
He weeps to think that other men may be
deserving of her favors more then he.
Minutes produce this, what will hours do then
and days, and weeks, oh call that back again
That cruel imposition and set free
my exiled Heart it is ancient liberty
And I Will confess to me thou life do give
since without thee it is a death to live.
To Time.
THou that even from thy infancy
natures Surveyour have been,
And with a curious searching eye
her choicest wares have seen.
As she to a perfection grew
in strength and skill to frame,
Thou did increase in judgment to
commend her works to fame.
Tell me, for thy Propriety
is to discover Truth
And not by subtle Sophistry
to paint or blemish Youth.
Did ever Greece or Rome afford
a Mistress like to mine
Whose breath is Balm whose every Word
's a Mystery Divine.
And if the Ages past did never
produce her like, then we
May with the self-same safety swear
Her like shall never be.
A Dialogue between Nature and Art.
Nature. COntend with me! Art, thou art too bold.
Am I not Empress of this Mould?
The Rose from me its Red receives;
The Lilly whiteness, Trees their Leaves.
Am I not Former of all things,
Who give both birth and life to Kings.

Art. The former true I were to blame
Not to confefs't but know I am
Reformer and that bears a Name
As large in the expanse of Fame
What thou in framing Careless were
Is both supplied and helped by Art*
The Tawny are made fair by me,
The crooked Straight as Cedar-tree,
The Pale Cheeks I supplied with Red,
To which thy Rose does look as dead;
And not a Creature comes from thee
But I can draw more Buxomly.

Nature. By this thou show thou have the fame
To imitate but not to frame:
Can thou unto the Rose give sent;
Or breath a Vertuall Ornament
In Flours or Fruit, or Man or Beast,
Or yield a vital to the least?
If so, I Will yield my self to thee,
And we will be friends undoubtedly.

Art. First tell me if thou can preserve
What thou do frame, and do not swerve
From Reason, Silence renders no;
Then be not troubled to know
I can, and by that consequence
Ought to have the pre-eminence*
For he that can preserve from Death,
Can without doubt give more than breath:
The Rose and Lilly I can keep
Fresh as in June, from Death or sleep:
And if my Pencil fall, my Pen.
Can keep alive the acts of men
That life is nothing worth forgot
Even shadow like where I am not
For I can do more than I Have said,
By powerful verse revive the dead,

Nature. Then Art.


Art. Then Nature.


Both. Let Us oh let us agree,
And keep alive Ostella's Memory,
That wheresoev'r Nature and Art does Rest,
Ost ella may with Glory be expressed.

To Ostella upon her saying she wondered how one S. B. got into preferment, and
not I.
HE is not worth your Wonder, what in Place
he is? Plusht to the Ears, daubed over with Lace.
His fingers some superfluous Diamonds wear,
at which the Drawers and the Fiddlers Stare.
His Ladies Chamber Maids perhaps do take
upon them much his Love for his Stones sake.
Never wonder how the slave his Tallent imps,
let him be damned, he is one of Fortunes Pimps.
To Ostella, commending meekness of Spirit.
IT is not safe to be too soft of Spirit,
a sottish patience has a Cowards Merit:
It gives occasion many times to ill,
and Cruel Natures, whose harsh Custom still
Seeks not out whom deserves, but who will bear,
the most, to wrong the easy hearted Hair,
It draws on injuries, with Pronsethean hearts
repel with flames of courage, the Minds Darts,
This is a Maxim we ought all to know,
he that will bear the weight shall not want the Woe,
All that is besotted to his fear or ease,
does make his Patience prove his worst disease.
The Swallow.
MArk Ostella when the Spring,
has dissolved the frosty King,
And reseats her self on Earth;
giving Flowers and Plants a Birth;
When the glorious Sun does shine
full of heat as does thy eyn,
When the feathered Songsters do
seem the Princely maid to Woo,
Then, oh then, to us will come
to our Cottage to our home
An amorous guest, who will salute
you from the chimney top with Flute.
Like Notes; when you least need the same
to sing to you 'twill be on ^leme*
But when the tedious Winters night
comes on, that wants both heat and light,
And that his pretty music may
with pleasure pass the time away,
Which else perhaps might sadness bring;
your Guess is hoarse and cannot sing
Acquaintance so leaves Men in Misery,
who did adore him in Prosperity.
Upon my Departure.
GIve me a parting kiss* oh why in store
kept you this bliss, ravish me with oue more;
Come let my Sighs dry up the Dew does make
thy Roses to look pale, thy Lillies quake
Into cold fear, keep in those tears a while,
for I have heard Water will Diamonds spoil:
Seal on my Lips my license to depart,
one kiss more and I Am gone: how sweet thou art?
And leave behind such an effectual power,
all sweets to thine hereafter will be sour.
Heaven send us happiness to meet again,
my lips will never sweetness taste till then;
But I must hence, Fame calls me to the field,
Virtue has set her Standard up, the Shield
Of Honor's waved at me, and I must hence;
but what on th'sudden does enlarge my Sense
Tells me I need not further go, for here
Virtue and Honor rest as in their Sphere,
And may be purchased with less danger, (oh)
that, that, alone inflames my Soul to go
For Man conceives that Honor slightly bought,
that is not through danger, and with hazard sought,
I go, but leave a sadder heart behind,
than e're thou made it glad by being kind:
How Reason flies me! what brave Act can come
into his hands that leaves his heart at home?
But if Ostella thou will give me thine,
I by my Flames will make it Masculine,
DAPHNES.
1.
WHen as the soft wings of the Day
had fanned the Clouds of Night away,
The early Light did soon discover
where lay the Emblem of a Lover.
2.
On a Banck Grief had made Gray:
born down with sorrow Daphnes lay;
His Cheeks like Roses ravished,
his Lips like Cherries withered.
3.
Clouds of woe his eyes benight,
swelling tears entomb their sight,
Which pursued like fleeting rain,
made each Channel seem a Main.
4.
The Brooks his Sorrows had drank dry,
replenisht were from either eye.
Until his fighs made up one Flame
Malie'd by Fate, and parched the same.
5.
His many Griefs of sense deprive him,
his weight of Griefs to sense revive him,
That his troubled Soul would force
from a Heart of Flint remorse.
6.
Striving with his Fate he rises,
hope of Comfort he despises;
Since that blessed means should joy him,
was converted to destroy him.
7.
Quoth he, you Powers whose Breast did never
know Pity, now Exhaust a tear
At your own Cruelty, yet give,
as great a Plague to let me live.
8.
Not that one minute can revive
my Sense or keep my Heart alive,
Dead to all joy; to you I Will pay,
my life for the poor use of one Day.
9.
Which I will waste as fast as breath
to tell a Story e're my Death,
Shall out live me, and be to Swains
a sad example: thus he plains.
10.
Before these sad Trees were bereaved
their Virgin-issue, and dis-leav'd,
My Pipe was known to Music forth
Ostella's Beauty and her worth.
11.
Ostella's! she! that was the Flame
of every heart, whose blessed name
As though some Mystery were hid
in it, rejoiced each Lamb and Kid.
12.
Then Apollo did inspire
with Phaebean touch my Lyre,
That Laboring Bees did from my Lays,
at their work rehearse her Praise.
13.
Lovely Nut-brown was her hair;
her forehead full as smooth as fair;
Her eyes black, shot Beams more bright
then does the Empress of the Night.
14.
When Cupid did intend to stray,
he made her Cheeks his Rosy way,
In whose dimples he lay hid
'till by his Power discovered.
15.
Soft and white as Curds and Cream
were her Limbs; as rich a Theme
As ere Shepherd chose to write
Sonnets on, to Charm the Night.
16.
Young and sprightly as the Morn
when the Spring does it adorn
Active as the vein of life;
full of mercy, foe to strife.
17.
Innocence and spotless Truth
were the Jewels to her Youth;
That stainlesse Turtles might envy
the glory of her Purity.
18.
Not a Tongue that knew her Name
but were Heralds to her Fame,
And their Hearts as full of Flame,
each resolved to win the Game.
19.
Amongst those Swains my self was one.
at the which brake forth a Groan,
Like the Winds long locked in Earth,
cracks the Ribs e'r't can have birth.
20.
He stood and did erect his sight
as though his Soul had taken her flight.
In that sad Jail recovering breath,
he seems the Conqueror of death.
21.
And then he moans: At that blessed time,
I had the glory to be prime,
My Pastures full, my Flock did wear,
as rich a wool as any bear.
22.
Harmless mirth did Crown the Cell
where my Pipe and I did dwell:
Which invited many a Swain,
that Ostella hoped to gain.
23.
There they tuned their Reeds by mine
Pan's music never was more Divine
Sonnets roundly past the throng,
still Ostella graced my song.
24.
Such as did that favor see,
did, yet durst not envy me:
For Love to enjoy his sport
had designed my Cell his Court.
25.
When we tript it on the Green,
if Ostella were but seen.
Not a Shepherd there was Lame
danced as though from Court he came.
26.
I that had small Mind to Dance,
bequeathed my senses to a Trance;
Till from the Godhead of her eye,
my Soul received its liberty.
27.
Then with measured speed I showed,
what the Swains in duty owed
To Ostella; which! poor they
with their store could never Pay.
28.
And then I entered to my Bliss,
My Guerdion was Ostella's kiss,
Whose strong fires, as soon did aw
my heart, as theirs to softness thaw,
29.
When I did kiss, she kissed again,
as though she would not count in vain,
Sure, Numberless they were, and yet
we told, and did as soon forget.
30.
Such soft kisses on the Rose
gentle Zephirus bestows:
Nor can the early sun discover
Chaster heat from his famed Lover.
31.
Then in the language of our eyes
we conversed, and did surprise
Eithers Heart, yet neither could
Boast of Conquest if we would.
32.
When I joy'd she was content,
When I moan'd she did lament,
At my sadness pined away,
Joylesse of her life a Day.
33.
When some Cross had me molested,
it seized her, her Heart arrested.
Did I look pale, the Native red
of her fair Cheeks, forsook their Bed.
34.
Nothing that I said or did,
But Ostella favored,
And those favors I did prize
more than Vesper Cynthia's eyes.
35.
Were I sick she lost her health,
my Hearts welfare was her wealth,
And my pain, her pain increased;
as mine did, so hers decreased.
36.
Thus like Twins, whose lives sad Date,
does depend on eithers Fate,
We did live, as from one breath
we derived our lives, our Death.
37.
Joys we had even such as made
us boast belief, they could not fade:
Pleasures Phoenix like did waste
still renewed by our taste.
38.
Turtles never could rejoice,
more in one another Choice:
Palms so prosper when together,
sunder'd they decay and wither.
39.
Such my wounded heart received,
so did hers when as deceived
By the credulity we had
of our Fate grown too too bad.
40.
Oh'tis dangerous to trust,
to smiling fortune, she is unjust.
For the end she seldom shapes,
like th'beginning with her Rapes,
41.
When she flatters she intends
to destroy, and has her ends:
When she threatens we have less
cause to fear, armed against distress.
42.
Deep security we know
does turn tail and overthrow:
Joys uncertain as our States:
Ours they are not, but our Fates.
43.
This experience I too late
bought, and at too dear a rate:
Yet the sweetness that I did reap
made me deem their price to cheap.
44.
We foresaw no Pendent Storm
over our heads, to Menace harm:
But we were of our delight
confident as day of light.
45.
But (oh) Fortune that e're while
blessed our union with a smile,
Clouds her Brow, and with the noise
of shrill war, severs our Ioys.
46.
Peaceful Tempe is become
deaf with the jarring Fife and Drum:
Blood does stein her snowy Breast;
to our cares, hope gives no rest.
47.
Ruin does pursue our Stocks
slaughter seizes on our Flocks,
Plenty suffers with increase,
banishment cause friends to peace.
48.
'Stead of Pans soft lays, our Ears
are enchanted with our fears:
And the surly Cannon knels
sadder farewels than our Bells,
49.
Not a Bird dare keep her bough,
nor a He ifer guide the Plough;
Nor a Less to dance, or run:
all their dancing days are done.
50.
Thus our Tempe changed is quite:
"such power has Envy over Delight*
And so sad a place is made,
As where Sun never blessed with shade.
51.
All our sports are spoiled, and he
now is the only Man dares die,
He that friezeth to the Earth,
he whose scars give life a birth.
52.
He that will not flinch his ground
till all is body be one wound,
He, He Is the Man, that shall out* live
his Fate, and to Time Trophies give.
53.
This is that, which makes the mind
of man, as venurous as the wind.
Honor glorifies that breath,
that her Champion is, in death.
54.
Returned with Conquest is it not brave
One can say, he past his Grave?
Nay, the very sons of fear,
love of glorious Acts to hear.
55.
I exalted with Desire,
(filled with more than common fire.)
That Ostella, to her Name
might have Honor, sought out fame.
56.
See my Error, Fools so may
bring their Torch-light to the day:
For (alas) could she have more
than her own worth owned before?
57.
"Great things many times arise
from small beginnings, be men wise:
Acts I Have read in Honors Story
'gun with danger, end with glory.
58.
These great hopes made many a Swain,
to forsake his er'st loved Plain,
To lay Hook, and Tarbox by,
And with a sword their room supply.
59.
When so many Ladds do roam
'twere Cowardice to stay at home:
And my thoughts did soar as high
as the proudest Shepherds eye.
60.
But Ostella! she that knew
no other Bliss than what she drew
From me, (alas) and I. that never
drew breath, but from her Sovereign air.
61.
She (alas) could not dispense
with my so soon parting thence.
Sorrow'd, then advised, quoth she,
thy parting sure will murder me.
62.
My life does depend on thine
as I hope thine does on mine:
Should Death seize thy nobler part
alas, alas, where were my heart.
63
Never like cruelty was shown
when two lives are lost in one:
And with that her sad heart tries
to have passage through her eyes.
64.
Then I kissed, to stop that grief,
Mine did need as much relief:
As we sought to Cure each other
Sorrow did our Comfort smother.
65.
Her eyes overflowing showers,
might have drowned her Cheeks Flowers,
Had not my sighs dried up those tears,
then each Rosie-Bank appears.
66.
United to her Sense, at last
quoth she, why do thou make such have
To thy own sad Fate and mine,
what have I that is not thine.
67.
Or what can there be more dear,
to thy self, than thou have here?
Love no other prize regards
than it self, it, it, rewards.
68.
Sure I am thou once did prize
no prize dearer than my eyes:
Those thy worth has made thy own,
can thou leave thy joys so soon?
69.
Thou by hazarding thy life
make me Widow e're a Wife.
Such keen fears my heart do go^e,
that I never shall see thee more.
70.
But, (alas) I sadly doubt
that thy flame of Love is out:
Fires that fiercely burn do waste
e're they warm, such was thy haste.
71.
Blame me not, my Love is such,
that it cannot fe^ too much.
Love is subject to suspect
where it finds the least neglect.
72.
And as apt is to believe
things which many times deceive*
Confidence (alone) betrays
like a Thief, us from our ways.
73.
Soft suspicion keeps the Road
brings us safe to our abode:
It Is a Lecture Love does read
that credulity's the fools Creed.
74.
If I err in doubting thee
it is a pleasing fault in me.
And a joy to be deceived
when my fears are not believed.
75.
But to think that thou will go
re-assumes again fresh woe
But thy will disposes mine,
I Will refer my good to thine.
76.
Fain my heart would give consent,
that thou might receive Content:
But my fears do check my will;
"thus Love Passions Combat still.
77.
When I would say go, my Tongue
Tells me I would do thee wrong.
If stay, I should Cloud that same
might Eternize thy Loved Name.
78.
Thus poor heart Her love Contends
with her reason who pretends
A claim to love and now agree
only for the good of me.
79.
And at last, as though she meant
to breath her last she spoke consent
Go, and what Fate follows thee,
assure thy self shall govern me.
80.
We kissed, and parted. Oh (quoth she)
never shall this be tan'e from me,
'Till Deaths rude Lips ravish it,
or thy breath revive the heat.
81.
With such sadness the loved Vine
divested of its pride does pine.
Birds so feel the sense of smart
when they and their Summer part.
82.
Our Hearts with grief like vessels grow,
so full they cannot vent their Woe*
Who could part with so much Bliss
on such cruel tears as this.
83.
But the Will of Fate must be
obeyed, none flies his Dstiny;
And my thoughts pursued the worst,
that Heavens Anger ever cursed.
84.
Parting my promoting hope
gives my mind a glorious scope,
And presents such shapes of joy,
that my former Griefs destroy.
85.
Loves forgot, and now I crave
either Honor, or a Grave:
Fortune hears my wish, and shows
that she must be won with blows.
86.
No attempt I leave unsought,
danger hold a thing of naught,
Which I spurn, and take a Pride
in the Blood falls from my side.
87.
Courage makes that wound a scratch;
Straight at Honors lock I snatch;
For unless I have another,
that same wound does want a Brother.
88.
Which I win from the stern foe
as my Heart had willed it so.
All the prize in this I gat,
was the honor to be envied at.
89.
In the heat of these sad Wars
fame to breed at home fresh jars,
Id'ly rumored of my Death,
which was taken by every breath.
90.
Not a Less, but did give over
their mirth, and my sad loss deplore:
And the home*kept*Lads do strike
Passions Discord much alike.
91.
This Ostella's mother hears,
sweeter Music to her Ears
Never came from Brook or Dale,
but she feared 'twas but a Tale.
92.
While I absent was, there came
A Shepherd great in Purse and Name;
Who solicited my Dear
breathing Poison through her Ear.
93.
But she long before had taken
an Antidote against that bane,
As fervent was her flames to me
as the light to Day can be.
94.
But her cruel Brested Mother
long had practiced how to smother
Her old flames, and to invest
new thoughts where mine were possessed.
95.
Now again assaults the Prize,
and withal the subtilties
Mothers power, or Woman's skill
can invent, she tempts her ill.
96.
Twits her with her duty then,
tells the choice she'ad made of Men
The very best, rich of clear blood
what he wants wealth can make good.
97.
But Ostella that could never
to such sor did thoughts adhere
In Loves name stands to her guard
and her constancie's her ward.
98.
Though in the conflict Nature strove
to defeat the force of love,
Yet her thoughts bring fresh supplies,
armed against all Batteries.
99.
Which when her spleenfull mother saw,
nor fair means win, nor threatening aw,
Knels my Death, as though from thence
she might Warrant her offense.
100.
But Ostella th'truest made
that e're at Loves Altar laid
A broken heart, faints and does die
each minute, fore her Mothers eye.
101.
Now they wail, but oh too late,
they have killed her with my Fate
It Is vain to Court or waste their breath
she is become a Bride for Death.
102.
Her blood has forsook her face
and cold dew usurps the place;
In her Agony does rave,
fetch my Duphnes from the Grave,
103.
Would he die unkinder he,
but hark he has summoned me,
And I must hence, you do me wrong,
in keeping me from him so long.
104.
Thus in pain poor Soul she lay
with Snail*like*speed she did decay,
And wasted like a slow soft fire,
that is dead to sight ere't does expire.
105.
I come (quoth she) and bring with me
my Hearts unstein'd Virginity,
Unblasted and unpluckt so lay,
and sighing sent her soul away.
106.
She parted hence as pure and white
as the chaste Primrose, when no light*
Rude-hand has crop't it, does return
making what was its Womb its Vrn.
107.
Near this time the Wars did cease,
I arrived with Love and Peace,
Near Ostella's home, where I
expected her Loved Company.
108.
But I found in every eye
Sorrows profuse Livery:
My poor Heart was at a pause
doubting 't was some general Cause.
109.
This sad Story I have told,
I did hear: but oh! how cold
It struck my Heart; there is none can guess,
but such whose Cause speaks little less.
110
This was her Walk, and here I Will end
my life and Woes, then be my friend
Good Fate, now thou have let me tell
my own mishaps, ring thou my Knell.
Occasional Copies upon several SUBJECTS.
To a Mistress that told me, I could not live without her Love.
TEll me not that I die, or live by thee,
and as thou point'st my Doom so it must be:
Or that my life, did thou but leave to love,
would like a long Disease as weary prove:
Since he whose M^d is proof against his Fate,
makes himself happy at the worst Estate,
It Is vanity for Man to build his Bliss,
On the frail favor of a Woman's kiss,
And most un-manly to enthral his eye,
When Heaven and Nature gives it liberty;
For women's fancies with their fashions change,
And love for fashion, to each face that is strange.
I know the humor of thy Sex is such,
They never could value any one thing much,
Forshould thy Breasts with constant flames be fired,
'Twere more than I expected* though desired;
Then think me not so fond, although I love,
But as thou steer st thy course, so mine shall move.
He that has Wealth and can that Wealth forgo,
is his own man, not slav'd to any woe,
So armed with resolution I am free,
and still ore-comer of my destiny:
Yet know I love, though I can leave that state,
he best knows how to love, knows how to hate.
To a simply Coy Mistress.
WHat though I did swear your eye,
had enough to take a heart,
Yet from mine I will not part.
I have read Loves sophistry:
for know proud, I nere was born,
To endure your sexes scorn.
Though I you a Lilly swore,
yet the Violets azur'd hue,
is for use more prized than you:
Nor will I those lips adore,
since the Cherries, trees do bear,
Are far sweeter than yours are.
Though I praised your swelling Breast,
yet the Grape or Gooseberry,
yield a juice more savoury:
Nor will I again protest
to an Outside, 'till I know,
It Is for taste as well as show.
To an imperiously proud Mistress, swelled with my Praises.
FRail Beauty, boast not of that Face,
to which I gave the perfect'st Grace:
For leaving me, thou must resign,
That Glory which I made Divine.
Thou art no longer fair, than thou art mine.
Though Nature might thee lovely call,
I made thee supernatural;
Set on thy Face so pure a form,
That neither Age, nor Death by storm,
could ever do the virtue of it harm.
Our knowing sense, tells us the Grave,
shall swallow what ever Nature gave;
Her own Philosophy has said,
She cannot preserve what she has made,
for which her self, her self she does invade*
When I that did such Beauty give,
by the same power can make it live,
My praise out-did thy Mothers care,
No Art but mine, could make thee fair,
the power of Love then made my Fancy rare*
Prize me, I will reverse thy Doom,
and bring thy ruined Beauty home
To that Supreme Felicity,
Affection first conferred on thee:
Love me, and live to all Eternity.
Upon the acquaintance of a Gallant Gentlewoman. To my self.
SHe is exactly glorious. On her eye
Lovers may read better Philosoyhie
Than e're the Athenians taught, she is high in Name,
higher in Beauty than the reach of Fame.
But highest in her Virtue, and her Mind,
and yet she wants not Nature to be kind,
But even unto the meanest Creature she
shoots Luster through a sweet humility.
She Is great, but yet not greater than my Love,
nor higher than my Flame: then on, and prove
The temper of her Breast; try if it be
armed against Love, and his Artillery.
But (oh) I feel my heart consume like fire,
that wastes it self in seeking to aspire*
Crying and Laughing.
PHelicia wept. and from her eyes.
the Pearly showers did fall
Upon her Cheeks, and straight did rise
the Sun, and drank up all.
If Women are so quaint to cry,
and laugh too in one breath,
He Is mad will keep them company,
they will jeer a horse to death.
To Meritricia.
POx take your tempting face,
with its illusive grace;
Men ought to be
armed against your Venery,
Which pierces Buffe, or Coat of Mail,
there is no such terror as your Tail.
I boast no greater Wealth
than that I am in health;
Nor would I be
in debt to Surgery;
For thy Adulterate sweets so rot,
there is scarce a man can 'scape thy Pot*
Curse on this frail desire,
it set old Troy on fire:
Many have bin
burnt since for the same sin:
And yet we do not dread the flame,
but every minute Court the same
Why should we deem that Fair,
each minute wants repair?
Or Colors gay,
as often kissed away?
For though above thou art Heaven in show,
he is blessed that escapes thy Hell below.
To Mistress S. W.
SHoot not so fast your scorching Beams,
lest they do burn that should not harm:
Or like to Fire in its Extremes,
consume and die e're scarce it is warm.
Yet t'be a Martyr to thy Eye,
who would not run with eager speed?
And offer up himself to die,
and at thy Altar freely bleed.
That Act alone would Crown with Fame
the trivial Deeds his Life had done,
And raise his Soul above his Flame,
whose brightness might out-brave the Sun,
For know he that thus Phoenix-like does burn,
Must needs derive a Glory from his Vrn.
To Silvia
THou take a wrong course to be rid of me,
void both of Wit and Policy.
It Is not thy surious hate can do it,
and take thy Pride and Scorn to boot:
Who ever knew one angry Flame
the fury of another tame?
The youngest fire that is fiercest blown,
spreads widest, and most flame does own.
Opposed Winds do fiercest blow,
and Streams rebated highest flow.
The more thy Hate seeks to suppress my Love,
the more it does increase, and stronger prove.
Those things that hardest are to be come by,
brave Spirits soonest after fly:
Things that are easy to be bought,
are by the common People sought.
What ever seeks to shun us, we
wing our Desire the most to see.
What is denied us to know,
our Inclination's aptest to:
When we are prohibited from meat,
we have the greatest mind to eat;
And thus thy hate does but enlarge Desire,
the more represt, the more it does aspire.
But 'cause I love thee, I will show to thee
an easy way to be rid of me.
Let me first Sat my longing Eye
on thy fair Shapes discovery;
My hands may next offencelesse Rove,
and want on in the shade of Love.
Then let my Ears receive Content
in Words that speak a free Consent,
From thence thou breathe forth Frankincense,
to open my obstructed Sense.
Next let my Appetite be pleased,
each Sense being sated, I Am appeased.
Thus having known All I desire to know.
Surfeit may soon effect what Hate would do.
To a timorously willing Mistress.
LIke Summer bringing in a Dearth,
or Beauty blasted in its Birth*
Such is thy Love to me, that fills
but expectation 'till it kills.
Thy Smiles no sooner warm my Heart,
but Frowns dart Death through every part,
And the choice pleasure of thine eyes
invite me but to Tantalize.
When thirsty Grief desires to sip
Life from the Cherries of thy lip;
The Root of Life by which they grow,
declares my Death by answering No.
Nor can I guess why it has bin,
unless to love be held a sin;
If so, the Gods themselves must be
in such a sort as deep as We.
Oh think not ( Dearest) it is in vain
to hope for pleasure without pain:
Whilst equal Love and Joys attend us,
Both Faith and Silence shall befriend us.
Could thou my Heart Anatomize,
wherein thy perfect Figure lies,
There should thou find what neither Fate
nor envious Time shall violate,
Such Constant Truth my Love does bear,
in all thy Fortunes I will share;
And of each Misery will boast,
wherein my self shall suffer most.
Thus dare I boast my Love to thee,
beyond our frail Humanity:
For he whose Love transcendeth mine,
must not write Mortal, but Divine.
And should thy Cruelty extend
this loathed Life of mine to end,
The Arabian wonder shall not die
more glorious in her Flames than I.
Upon my Noble friend, Richard Lovelace Esquire, his being in Holland. An
Invitation.
A Song.
COme Adonis, come again,
what distaste could drive thee hence,
Where so much delight did reign,
sateing even the soul of sense?
And though thou unkind have proved,
never Youth was more beloved.
Then loved Adonis come away.
For Venus brooks not thy delay.
Were thou sated with the Spoil
of so many Virgin-Hearts,
And therefore did change thy Soil,
to seek fresh in other parts:
Dangers wait on forreign-Game.
we have Deer more sound and tame.
Then loved Adonis, etc.
Phillis, fed with thy delights,
in thy absence pines away;
And Love too has lost his Rites:
not one Less keeps Holi-day.
They have changed their Mirth for Cares.
and do only sigh thy Airs.
Then loved Adonis, etc.
Elpine, in whose Sager Looks
thou were wont to take Delight,
Has forsook his Drink and Books,
'cause he cannot enjoy thy sight.
He has laid his Learning by,
'cause his Wit wants Company.
Then loved Adonis come away,
For Friendship brooks not thy Delay.
All the Swains that once did use
to converse with Love and thee,
In the language of thy Muse,
have forgot Loves Deity:
They deny to write a line,
and do only talk of thine.
Then loved Adonis come away,
For Friendship brooks not thy Delay.
By thy sweet A(...)'s voice
we conjure thee to return;
Or we 'l rob thee of that choice
in whose Flames each Heart would burn:
That inspired by her and sack,
such Company we will not lack.
That Poets in the Age to come,
Shall write of our Elysium.
To a Mistress that thinks the sight without other enjoyment is Love
sufficient.
IF thou intend'st only to try
the silent Courtship of the eye,
Without the sense of what is Good,
which by Loves fires are understood,
Command those Cupids to retire,
Whose Darts are headed with Desire.
Forbid the Union of our Hands,
each Amorous touch a heat commands:
Forbid our Lips to meet and melt,
where the pure Sense of Love is felt;
Forbid thy Tongue to whisper love,
That very word has power to move.
Whose ardent Breath infused, can
raise Courage in a dying Man;
And through each Vein fresh heat restore,
that had been scared with cold before:
So from thy Air such Vigor came,
It curled my Heart into a Flame.
Forbid thy Cheeks to show their Spring;
forbid thy Nightingale to sing;
Forbid thy All and every part,
to show so much their Mistress Art:
For 'less thou keep'st those Baits within,
They Will tempt an Anchorite to sin.
Yet should those Excellencies be
deprived their proper use in thee,
Men would be apt their Faiths to pawn;
thou art but a Picture lively drawn,
On which each rude presumptuous eye
Admiring, feasts as well as I.
So I confess my flames may end,
and thou, a Shadow, lose thy Friend:
Unless my Fancy raise Conceit,
thou art my Mistress Counterfeit.
And so surveying each fair part,
I paint her Figure in my Heart.
To a virtuous Lady, on whom Envy had thrown a Scandal, for which she Mourned,
and hung her Chamber with Blacks.
LEt not the Sables so benight your eyes,
nor yet entomb your Beauty ere it dics;
Envy does from this Sorrow gather strength,
and grows more huge and monstrous in length:
He gluts himself upon your Discontent,
and raises from your Sighs his Merriment.
The giddy people, that naught understands*
Strangers to Truth, will* like to firebrands,
Kindle a hot suspicion in each other,
till they your Honor and your Fame do smother.
A Stream that may be stopped at the Springs head,
if let alone may overflow a Mead,
Nay drown a League of Earth. Now Envy sings;
and t'paint his Falsehood like to Truth, he brings
This inference; Sorrow does Guilt imply,
and your offense makes you so often die.
Then Madam tear those Death-like-Sables thence,
in the stead set up your Flags of Innocence:
And brave Desiance that Truth's light may be
no longer hid by Envtes Treachery.
Thus re-assuming your Hearts jollity,
Envy will want his food, so starving die.
Spying Splendora through a Casement.
'Twas late and dark, and yet the early Day
in her Springs pride, never shot a brighter R^
Than met my eyes. So does the Queen of light
dart through the Ebon Casements of the Night
Her comfortable Splendour, to redeem
The world from darkness, lost in our esteem.
If You shoot such Beams through Obscurity,
how full of Glory would your Presence be?
My Friend Paul Squire.
THou lent'st me twenty shillings, (true) and ten,
which thou would have me pay thee back again;
And for the speed of it thou bid'st me baul,
and borrow, or rob Peter to pay Paul.
Rare Christian Counsel, I commend thee now,
I Will gang about it, -- but -- I ken not how:
Comfort thy self with hopes. I prithee do;
I have a Friend will do it, -- I -- ken not who;
Perhaps he is at the Indies with his Ware,
Constantinople, -- or -- I know not where:
Yet I an honest mind bear, thou feast then,
and thou art like to be paid -- I -- know not when.
Take this ^y Paul in the Exchange of thine;
I Am confident it is far better Coin.
Seeing a Lady --
OH she is fair: Fair as the Eastern Morn*
when she is pleased the Summer to adorn
With her Springs Glory: Sweet as --
Leave begging-Muse, thy praise gains no Relief,
since from her glory I derive my grief.
An Occasional Frolic to an unknown Friend.
SIr, By my life I know not what to write:
Jack Ager swears your wit is infinite;
As boundless as his praises, or the seas,
or our swelled Cups that Elboe-in with these.
Of such a fervent Fancy it might win
an Anchorite to fall in love with sin.
Our Healths, that clip Times wings, and swifter pass
than his dwarff-Minutes, or his spacious glass
Disburthens her big Womb of Pigme-sands,
to you we dedicate: whilst our Commands
As weighty as our Liquor, sais on's head,
that dares but hope that he can grope to Bed.
As our Gorge fills, we give our bodies ease.
and gush forth Floods, as Seas do combat Seas:
That as an Inundation plays its pranks,
we make the Ioraanes to overflow their Banks.
If any Nod under fell, Morpheus weight,
our waking Justice takes him Napping straight;
And in Contempt we let the Stinckard sink
in his own puddle, though we swim in drink.
To stand is out of use; to walk upright
does savor too much of the Hypocrite.
But, like mad Greeks, we fight upon the knee,
'till to the chin in blood of Grapes we be,
And him we count a most Herculean Ass,
that wants the Art to multiply a glass,
That so our Optics may with little trouble,
take quarts for pottles, and see all things double.
If any shrink 'cause money he does lack,
we will drown his Hogshead in a But of Sack.
But by the addition of my Cups, I feel
my Muse is drunk, and now my Verses reel;
I Am sure they have the Staggers; then ( Sir) think
what I have done amiss was in my drink.
Your Healths our Healths preserve, and hearty Sack
is Belly-food, and Raiment for the Back:
Nor want we Music to maintain the Season;
our Pottle-pots do keep their Diapazon.
Thus much as I am Mortal; but the sire
that Courts your Knowledge of me, reaches high'r,
And cannot be less powerful than the Flame
circled Prometheus, till I meet the same.
I rest, as you please to style
I. T.

To a Gentlewoman that Loved me, and I not her.
DArt, dart thy Beams at one who is
a Subject fit to receive fire;
Thou sooner mai'st turn me to Ice,
than kindle in me a Desire.
The Sea may sooner flame than I
who am a Sea of liquid woe,
Even dead I am, before I die,
and my heart's Coffined up in Snow.
Loves precious Oil and Sacred fire,
which in the Lamp my breast did burn,
Have left it empty, and retire
to wait upon Ostella's Urn.
That now a Vault it is become
and retains naught but holy Air,
Where Damps of Sadness take up room,
and Ghastly sorrows do appear.
How can thou then hope heat from me,
whose Sorrows like to Damps, destroy
All Flames of joy, but what may be
kindled by thinking of her joy,
Another upon the same.
NOt but thy Beauty may Command,
an Host of armed Cupids rise,
Each with his flaming Dart in hand
taken from the Storehouse of thy eyes.
And having vigor gained from thence
may with huge Courage, Sword and Flame
Lay Seige to beat down my Defense,
enchanted by Ostella's Name.
But when they think my faith to shake,
and all their force and strength do try,
They Will find it difficult, to take
a Breast so Manned with Constancy,
A Dialogue.
1 TEll me fair Nymph, can thou love me?


2 No, it is a breach to Liberty:
I yet enjoy a free Estate,
Neither a slave to Love nor Hate.

1 Thou art mis-inform'd in this,
For without Love, no Joy there is.

2 Alas we know, you Men have skill,
To guild the poison of the Pill;
But it is beyond your utmost Art,
To make the practice on my Heart.

1 True, not in mine; but his that can
Aw even the heart of Mighty Pan,
Soften the rigid Satyrs Breast,
And to each troubled Soul give rest:
To Discord he can Concord give,
And teach Society to live;
For wheresoever he does come,
The Place is made Elysium.

2 What place is that?


1 The place of Rest,
Where Love's in every Sense expressed;
There dying Hearts he does revive,
And makes them All their Cares survive.
There are no Sighs, nor sign of Tears,
No jealous thoughts, nor panting fears.
But such a lasting Spring of Joy,
That Age nor Death cannot destroy.
Oh that I might those joys possess!
Love me, and here thou It find no less.

2 I would, but know not how.


1 That Is fine;
Come warm thy softer Palm in mine,
Now meet a kiss.

2 I Am all one slame.


1 It Is in Loves power to quench the same.


2 Say Shepherd, say, Can thou love me?


1 No, it is a breach to liberty.


2 Oh do not mock me,


1 Oh do not mock me.


2 Indeed I love.


1 And so do I.


Chorus There Is nothing like Loves liberty.
To which we will win the heart of many a Swain,
who knowing not his sweets, their good refrain:
And flinty brested Nymphs soften, till they
by our Example, learn who to obey.
Since Love has the instinctive Power alone
to tie and fasten thus two Hearts in one.

To --
I May revoke each Vow I made to thee,
without the guilt of wilful Perjrary.
I swore I Would Wed thee, and I meant no less,
had thou but proved the same thou did profess:
But being not what thou did seem to be,
it were a sin to keep my Faith with thee.
Our Fancie's ost deceived by the sight
of some far Object, some exhaled Light,
That seems a Star, but falling to the Ground,
the falsenesse of th'admired thing is found.
So though thou did mislead my eyes, thou wilt find
thy fair illufion cannot my Judgment blind.
I Would rather marry one resembles Night,
that has an Inward part can make her bright.
For Lapidaries value not alone
the make, but secret Virtue of the Stone.
I care not for the whites of. Shape or Face:
a black Heart's often hid in a Crystal Case,
A Rose, whose Virgin Beauty casts a sent,
passing through many hands, is quickly spent:
So is a Picture, though as neatly Limbed
as Art could fancy, breathed on too much dimmed.
Sure that man then is void of Reason quite
that binds his faith unto a stale delight,
Thus Hellen like a Canceled bond I leave thee,
the Date is out, thou shall no more deceive me:
For thou have wasted so thy Youthful fires
thou can not thaw the Ice of my Desires.
Then Glowworm know, I Will not admire that light
cannot yield me Comfort in the frostiest Night.
To a Mistress that bid me make another Choice.
KNow Dearest't was no easy Art,
could have Conquered me:
My Breast was proof against the Dart
of any foe but thee.
And had not wounded me with smiles,
then Cured me with a kiss.
I had contemned thy Sexes Wiles,
as Enemies to Bliss.
But having caught me in the Snare,
I cannot with ease return:
Had others harms made me beware,
I might have left to burn.
But greedy of my misery.
I Courted so my Fate,
The Object spoke all love to me,
but the Effect on it hate,
No Beauty but thy own shall make
me sensible of Woe:
For when I do the same forsake
I must my bliss forgo.
My Heart shall never yield it self
a prisoner but to thee;
For no respect to Praise or Pelf
shall bribe my Constancy.
When thou shall from thy Throne of Bliss
look down on my sad Heart,
And know for whose dear sake it is
appointed so to smart;
When thou shall find I prize thy joy,
more than my own Content,
What heart but thine could so destroy
a heart so innocent.
When thou shall find my Youth to waste,
my Loyalty endure,
And I no other Ioys do taste
than what thy Hate does sour;
When thou shall find I take Delight
in nothing, save in thee,
If Pity will not my love require,
be kind to murder me.
Till when my Soul when it is most sad,
shall find the way to sing,
There is no Comfort to be had,
but what thy Love must bring.
And if thy Glories think it meet,
I must their Martyr be,
When Natures Watch has left to beat,
Parewell fair Cruelty.
To my self.
ANd why love I the thing that hates me?
Reason will not admit of this:
Rather prize the thing that baits me,
there a promise is of Bliss,
Though the effect of it perhaps we miss.
For what appears good or great
to our Eyes, our Hearts so deem;
The Taste directs the Appetit,
Sweets are made as We esteem:
But Reason thral'ld to Love who can redeem.
To the Deceiving Mistress.
THine eyes shall be my Stars no more,
they have deceived me,
He madly does his Death implore,
that seeks from them Security.
I thought they had been fixed on me,
but wandering Lights they prove:
The more they are admired in thee,
the more they love to gad and rove.
As though they would out-vy the Light,
contracted to the Day,
Until the Glory of the sight,
some simple Hearts like mine betray.
Yet boast not of that cruel Art,
that so outwitted mine:
For sure thou never had got my Heart,
had I not more than hoped for thine.
I see there is Policy in Love:
the slower Men come on,
The faster your Desires do move,
it is Madness You to dote upon.
For this sad Truth I boldly tell,
Experience finds it such,
That had not I loved half so well,
Thou had not hated me so much.
To Cupid
Cupid to Arms, or thou art betrayed,
there is a Cold Complexion'd Maid,
That teaches to ascribe to Thee
a Deity is Heresy;
That thou art made of Wood or Stone,
set up in Fairs, admired by none
But Children, who do Idolize
thy Golden Locks, and smoother Thighs;
And at a slender rate may buy
thy Godhead and Artilery.
Cupid lest thou should not know her,
these are tokens that will show her:
Her Beams are such, though blind they say
thou art, thou need'st not grope thy way:
An awful Brow, a piercing Eye,
presaging Signs of Sovereignty.
Her Language smooth, of weighty Sense,
which seems as fair as her pretense;
Whose specious Beauties do infer,
There is no Sweetness but in her.
And this assumes her Virtual Breath
has power to send us Life or Death:
Which will be credited by all,
and Thou, thy Fame, and Altars fall,
Unless thou do by force beat down
these rising Evils against thy Crown,
Arm then thy self, and thou will get
by wounding her more Praise than yet
Tradition ere pil'd up for thee;
Be now One, or no Deity.
Pursue the Game, and thou shall prove
the force of Beauty, I of Love.
Lycoris a Rapture.
IN vain thou striv'st Lycorice to defeat
my purposes, thy blushes may retreat,
But not my Love, nor can they easy flight
pass unpursu'd, or escape the Eagles sight;
Thou can not fly my Love, for it has wings
swifter then Swallows, so the Falcon sings,
When he has seized the Dove, and vainly she
with feeble force strives her poor self to free.
Art thou not mine? did not my Love surprise,
thee and thy Faith, and did not thou devise;
An equal Snare for mine? since they agree,
why should not pleasures then at difference be?
That I do love thee, I must needs confess,
and I am confident thou think no less:
But he that loves to talk and not to do,
loses his Time, his Oil and Labor too.
What man can love the thing he would not possess
as by his mind express his willingness,
Who spares to speak must never hope to speed
The heart that seeks not help may ever bleed:
Who only look's, and loves but to admire,
smothers his flames ere they embrace a fire.
The Face is but the Index to invite
our Eyes to view the thing of more delight;
So Painters set their pieces forth to win
us to survey their better works within,
And I could be content with all my heart
to give my judgment on the inward part.
It Is not the Face (alone) that men adore,
Love softly whispers, it is for something more,
And has so well that secret-sweet expressed;
we ought to love that part amongst the rest.
Who values Lories, but for the Airs they make?
or who the Grape but for the Iuyces sake?
Who slaves himself to love, not to enjoy
surrenders up his Freedom for a toy.
And she that out of simple modesty
denies Love Tenets, can no Lover be.
Love answers Love, and in that Language best,
when he is truly by himself expressed,
Nor put me off with such your queint delays,
as heretofore, to hope for After-dayes.
Delays are dangerous, and my hopes may be
like Physic mis-apply'd to poison me.
What thanks can she deserve that shows us meat,
with this proviso that we must not eat?
He must be Madman, or a Fool at least,
that starv's himself with hoping for a Feast.
And he recorded be a Fool at last,
that stays for Milk until his Stomack's past.
Or shall against Gods Benefits repine,
and drink cold Water when he may have Wine.
What pleasure can there be in this or this?
we use to flatter Children with a kiss.
And sure more flames do from my heart arise,
when I salute those sweet Babies thy Eyes.
Thou smil'st, but like the Sun before a storm,
so violent fires decay ere scarce they warm.
Thou lett'st me kiss thy hand to raise my flame,
then leave me to be ruined in the same.
Can this be judged Love, or can there be,
'twixt Love and Beauty such Antipathy?
How should I know my Friend from Enemy,
but by the secrets he entrusted me;
But thou art so severe none can discover,
whether thou writ'st thy self, or Friend or Lover.
Happy were they that lived in Ages past,
when nature tied both Love and pleasure fast:
Blessed were those Days, when Breast with Breast did meet,
and the stolen sweets of Love not held unmeet.
When Man had License given him with his Eyes,
to search into Loves profound Mysteries.
When I do court thee to it thou plead'st a sin,
so putt'st a period to it ere I begin.
Tell me that Chastity's as cold as Snow,
and by that Metaphor you must be so.
But says Experience when the Sun appears,
he straight dissolves its Body into tears.
To mourn its own Condition, and it turns
by often handling, so you would think it burns.
Think me the Sun my Dear, and by my Art,
I Will thaw the Snow congealed about thy Heart.
For know Lycoris there is no greater Vice,
in Woman, then to be so over nice.
What though the Fruits forbidden and the Tree,
Points death to others? it speaks life to me.
Our fears deceive us, he whose poor heart dare
not stand the peril must not hope to share
In The prize or profit: So the Merchants gain
does recompense his Travel and his pain.
That thing that is with greatest danger won,
brings greatest pleasures when the doubts are gone.
So's fame and Honor purchased, and by this
We make our Acts the Authors of our Bliss.
For never would Soldier any Siege begin,
did not his hopes persuade him he should win.
Nor ere did Army (only) lie before
a Fort to look on it, and to give it over,
If there were hopes of Batt'ry, and all know
long Siege the strongest Fort does overthrow;
For violent Outward storms the In works break;
and Confidence may make the strongest weak.
Thou art but Woman dearest, and can do
no more then what the strength directs thee to,
Thou have endeavored strongly to resist
but still the Seige continues, all things mist
Thy aim, thou shot'st in vain, thy force is spent,
yield on Free Quarter then, no Treason's meant.
No noise but such as Turtles sigh shall fill
thy Ears my dear, and I thy victor will
Become thy Captive, then who'd shun to be
overcome by such a loving Enemy.
The Bed shall be our Field, and our Alarms
shall be soft kisses, though we sight in Arms;
Which I will sow faster then thou can reap,
who would no purchase Amity so cheap?
They say Love Conquers all things if it be true,
it is possible that mine may Conquer you,
And if no Fable that accounted be
I will oppose my Love against destiny.
I Will steal the Frnit from the Hesperides
spite of the watchful Draggon, when I please,
And more, to further our Content I Will charm
those Argoes Eyes about thee, no Ear harm
Our whispers by a listening, nor a light
but thine shall lead me to that blessed delight
That pure Elizer, that All happyness
whose Sweets none can but he that tastes express.
Nor think it desperate to be undergone
the Will does make the difficulty none.
She that yields up her Reason to her Fear,
loses her Joy, and finds her Ruin near.
For when thy coyness has me Murdered,
thy Pity proves bad Physic to the dead.
Or could that Pity me to life restore,
it cures but one wound to make thousands more,
Unless it carry with it express consent,
and liberty to warrant my content.
Then he so merciful to let me be
overcome in Love by my o'recoming thee.
And let your understanding reach at this,
none hunts the Game but when the Season is.
Make use of Time, Flowers never so fair decay,
and Love may turn his course another way.
Then while our youths do last and Loves agree,
let not our Pleasures at such difference be;
The Sweets whereof will lengthen out our time,
and never fade, but still be in their prime:
The breath of Love shall make our kisses sweet,
till we conceit our very souls do meet.
And as our Limbs do lovingly entwine,
we will grow together like the amorous Vine;
And want only our fancies shall invent
fresh Pleasures, when our old grow stale or spent.
We Will fright Age from us, and force Nature to
supply our wants, till sheher self undo;
Revive our Pleasures with each Breath, and taste
the sweets as often, and yet find no waste.
Thus we will build an Altar, to delight
on eithers lips, and with a flaming sp'rit,
Our Actions shall be offered full of fire,
first kindled from a mutual desire;
That Poets now and in the Age to come,
shall fancy ours the true Elysium.
Lycoris weeping.
WEep not Lycoris, it is not meant
thou should for this one Act repent;
For, where such constant Love has bin,
it were a Crime to think a Sin.
When sin does bid thee love, love not at all,
but Love to bid thee sin is natural.
A Smile.
WHo would not think to see that Glance
the sprightly Genious of a flame,
But from the heat of Love it came;
and meant some dead Heart to advance
With warmth to Life? but oh! the ill
it only shows its power can kill.
Who would believe, that has the Eye
of Reason to direct his sense,
A Hill of rigid Ice could fence
the Sun, and so dissolveless lie
So near the torrid Zone? but oh,
that is the frigid one below:
So eithers Natures works upon excess,
as they excel in either more or less.
To Mrs. J. H. upon my recovery of a fit of sickness.
Song.
It Is true
I did receive a life from you,
for he is unjust,
That shall deny the Miracles thou do.
when my poor heart
Was ready to depart
This air, thou came to visit me,
And brought me heavenly Surgery,
in either eye.
But see
This Mercy's full of Cruelty;
for I had paid
But one poor life, had then my frame decayed:
When now to please
Your Pride is a disease
past Cure, for which each minute I
Suffer a death, yet cannot die;
it is Tyranny.
My Heart,
Whereon you practice all your Art,
you will says your own:
So Surg'ons torture er'e their skill be shown
if you will devise
Mine to Anothomise,
that so you may advise your skill,
First be so kind as thoroughly kill
my Wish fulfill.
To Mrs: I. H. upon the sight of a Marble Coverture or Statue in the Church.
OBserve Ostella how it weeps,
As though it grieved for what it keeps,
And seems a pitteo^s sense to own
Because its empty guess has none,
Or that it should not be the same,
In sense it seems to be in Fame,
And can thy Breasts be harder far
Then Rocks of Flint or Marble ar?
Is It not a shame thou should be known
To have less pity then a stone;
But since thy Heart of flesh Tears cannot persuade
My prays shall be to have it Marble made.
A Frown.
INdeed I am the same I was last night,
My wit's as safe, and have a heart as light
As Air in'ts subtlist Motion, and I swear
I have not wronged the least Curl of my hair
With violence, nor has my manly Breast
with any thumps (ridiculous) been oprest
My Buttons and my Button-holes are firm,
so is my shirt: my Eyes did need no term
Of Art or Charm to close them: but soft sleep
did in her bosom safe my senses keep,
I waked this Morning in so good a mind,
I would not draw my self, and have designed
This day for Mirth, not to fright Sorrow hence,
That should from thee have any Influence
Upon my free* born soul; it is not a Frown
Can my aspiring Heart kill, or cast down;
Should every Frown your Sex casts, slay man Pat,
He Would need of Ninety nine lives more than a Cat.
Upon my leaving off the Company of Hellena.
I Go from thee with a more willing Heart,
than Prisoners from their shackles can depart:
Or Camels from the Burdens they lay down,
or Men to fly Infection leave the Town.
I go from thee as from a house of Sin,
a Saint does fly he had been betrayed in.
I leave thee, as I Would leave my Robe of Woe,
or as I would my Misery forgo.
I leave thee with as hearty a Desire
as Sinners do there sins, when the holy fire
Of Grace does Beam into their Breasts. Or they
when mounting Heavenward leave their Gaol of Clay.
I go (shame to thy Sex) I do, nor shall
Oceans of tears, or Gaoles of sighs recall
Me or my vows, the Crocodile I Will trust,
sooner than thee, and yield my self to dust;
I, and will first at the Hyaena's call
return to Death, with life end woes and all.
Yet i will not leave behind me any Curse.
on thee, least I anticipate a worse
Which the just Gods intend to shower on thee,
forth' violation of thy vows to me
My Charity not love bidds thee repent;
the Gods, though slow, throw home their Punishment.
Songs in a Masque.
1 Song: Fortune Descending.
SAy, say* ungrateful Mortals, why
do you so much at Fortune rail
Since there is not any can deny,
but by her power they do prevail,
Or in their Love or Chivalry.
Chorus. Then you that are from envy free
Come and make up a Simphony.

The Soldier and the Amorist
the Courtier, Clerk, and Clients Case,
Each had their several purpose Just,
if fortune had not been in place
To make them happy as she lift.
Chorus. Then you that are from envy free
Come and make up a Simphony.

2 The poor Scholars Song.
What Creatures on Earth
can boast freer Mirth
Less enjoyed and loved than we.
Though Learning grow poor
We scorn to implore
a gift but what is noble and free.
Our freedom of mind,
cannot be confined
With Riches are inwardly blessed;
nor Death, nor the Grave,
Our worths can deprave,
nor malice our Ashes molest.
When such Moals as you,
your own Earth shall Mew,
And worms shall your memory eat:
our names being read
Shall strike envy dead
and Ages our worths shall repeat.
3 Song. The Country-life.
Who can boast a happiness
more completely sure than we;
Sinc(...)armless thoughts we dress
i(...)pure simplicity:
And ^ast nature does dispense
here her Beauties Innocence.
Envy is a stranger here.
blessed Content our Bowls do Crown.
Let such Slaves themselves to Fear,
on whose Guils the Judge does frown:
We from evil Actions are
Free as uncorrupted Air.
With the Turtles whisper Love,
with the Birds we practice Mirth;
With our harmless Kids we move,
and receive our food from Earth:
Nor do we disdain to be
Clothed with the Lambs Livery.
4. Song. Ambition.
HOw deceitful is the State
of that Greatness we adore,
when Ambitiously we soar,
And have ta'n the glorious height;
it is but Ruin painted over
To enslave us to our Fate;
Whose false Delight is easier got than kept;
Content never on it is gaudy Pillow slept.
Then how fondly do we try
with such Superstitious care,
to bulild Fabrics in the Air;
Or seek safety in that Sky,
where no Stars, but Meteors are,
That portend a Ruin nigh:
Where having reached the Object of our Aim,
we find it but a Pyramide of flame.
5. Song.
HAng up this delaying devise,
since I am resolved to roam:
I hate things so peevishly nice,
and will frolic it e're I go home.
Thou tell me thou love me best,
how am I assured of that?
Thou suffer me to dandle thy Breast,
but debarr'st me the thing thou know What.
Hang Lipolove, and such foolish toys,
they do but augment our Desires:
Let Kisses be nourished by Boys,
it is Action that shows Manly fires.
Wherefore think thou I came hither,
but to tickle thee into the Mood,
'Til with striving we do melt together?
such Surfeits do our Bodies most good.
Then I prithee tell me thy mind,
if thou to the Feat be willing;
If not, I shall find one more kind
though less fair, shall do it for a shilling.
For the times you know are barely made,
Men cannot much Money disburse:
And it is fit Women should live by their Trade,
light gains make a heavy Purse.
A Prologue spoken at the Cockpit, at the coming of the Red Bull Players
thither.
I Am amazed! So one long kept from Light,
'Twixt Joy and Wonder, trembles at the sight;
The Blind that is cured by accident, does pay
In such Distraction, Duty to the Day,
As we present to you: it is long since here
So many Glorious bodies did appear,
Whose Beams gave Life to Action, as the Sun
Gives growth to the Infant Plants he Smiles upon.
Then flourisht here those Roscio's of the Age,
That trod the perfect measure of the Stage,
Who from your eyes took Motion; such as d^ew
Encouragement to them, Content to you.
Yet* those so exquisite in Comedies,
Have Acted since their own sad Tragedies.
Who could have di'd more bravely? Yet we must
Leave to Opinion that; our only Trust
Is in your Favors: Nor think cause your share
Of Sweets are gone, that all things bitter are.
If you will shoot equal Beams on us* we will strive
'I'o make you think that They in Us survive*
Imagination's strong; but if your eye
Dart a dislike, it is time to yield or die.
A Prologue spoken at the Red-Bull to a Play called the Whisperer, or what you
please.
NOw bless my eyesight! what! the house so thin,
And we upon preparing to begin!
Whence comes this strange Neglect? have you enjoyed
Of late so much variety y' are cloi'd?
Or do you think you pay too dear for Wit,
And so would grossly take your leave of it.
Grossly indeed; for hither you do come,
Like so many Chu^ls, and leave your Wives at home,
Our Author likes the Women well, and says,
You do'em wrong to hinder 'em from Plays.
And therefore wishes you to be more kind,
And on his Day to leave them not behind.
The more the merrier, rather than come alone
For once make use of what is not your own,
And bring your Neighbors Wife, which if you do
It Is ten to one he will do as much for you;
And if our Mirth cannot your Anger smother,
You may go home, and Laugh at one another.
If what we fancy, you like in the Play,
It Is a good sign that good Wits jump, you will say.
But though Detraction's become a Disease,
In spite of It, you shall have what you please.
On the Report of Master William Laws his Death.
Who says Will Laws is dead? had not his breath
Virtue enough to charm the Spleen of Death?
He that to Discord could pure Concord give,
instructing all Society to live,
Doth't come within your Reason he can die,
who bears a part in Friendships Harmony?
Let not such thoughts abuse you; for the Earth
receives no Music but what was his Mirth.
He dead, the melancholy World must be
brought straight into a general Lethargy:
Yet this I guess, finding his Health impair,
He made this change but for a better Air.
To my Mother, Mris. Dorothy Tatham, one of the Daughters of Christopher Percy
of Manson in the County of Dorset, Esquire, then Justice of Peace and Quorum,
and High Sheriff of that County.
SEe the inconstancy of things,
the Revolutions of this life,
That even appears in the State of Kings,
and nothing's constant but our Strife.
The Court, the Ages wonted Pride,
has put her Beauty off, and now,
Her very Glass does her deride,
and shows the wrinkles on her Brow.
Then though y' are not so great as good,
yet far more happy than you are poor;
None can defile your Name or Blood,
then let that Comfort Guild thee over.
At first or last, alike all People sares.
And Kings themselves are not exempt from Cares.
Upon the Death of my Father.
THe youthful blood that beat the winding Maze
Within your veins, gave length unto my days;
The active heat distill a crimson Dew
Through those warm Limbecks, and made Me of You:
That to such full proportion I am grown,
People do still Me for Your figure own.
Then since I have derived a part from Thee,
Thou can not die whilst Thou have part in Me.
Song.
DEfine a Woman! who can do it?
'less you put the Devil to it.
He that first she yielded to,
best knows how with her to do.
To their treacherous smiles he is known,
and promotes them as his own:
They can turn as he can do
Devils into Angels hue.
When they prattle he directs them,
when they Raunt it he protects them:
In all points of Sophistry
They are skilled as well as He*
When they make themselves so trim,
what do they but even Act him?
Not for Air their Breasts are bare,
but some poor Soul to ensnare.
For the Spots upon their Faces,
tell you what the the other place is,
And when for some prey he watches,
he lies sculking in their Patches:
Since then they so well agree,
Pity they should parted be.
To Cupid.
SEt me to tame a Tiger* melt a Rock,
Number the Sands, Plough up the Seas, or knock
Both Poles together, I with as much ease
Dare enterprise these Wonders, as to please
A Woman. Lay thou any Plague on me,
But to Love them, I Will deem it Clemency;
For they are Riddles past Man's finding out,
No task so difficult to go about;
For in that one Act I have labored more
Than Hercules did in his twelve before.
To the --
Song.
DEep as the Earth Decline your Ray,
your Glories bury there;
It is not meet the Guilty Day
should ever wear a Vestment clear.
Since what should make it fair leaves to appear.
But from the Center of your Souls,
draw forth your Griefs and die,
He still his Enemy Controuls,
that makes his Death his Remedy;
For Resolution slights Extreamitie.
Or in your Closets mould away,
where there is only Room
Enough, to raise your selves a Tomb
there, leave your Epitaphs to pray
The Day the Night may overcome,
To welcome your Deliverance home.
FINIS.

