THE RUMP: OR The Mirror OF The late Times, A NEW COMEDY, Written by J.
TATHAM, Gent.

Acted Many Times with Great Applause, At the Private House in Dorset-Court.

London, Printed by W. Godbid for R. Bloome. 1660.

Dramatis Personae.
BErtlam. Woodfleet. Competitors for the Protectorship. Stoneware. A Scotch
Lord, President of the Committee. of Safety. Lockwhit. A Lawyer, of the same
Committee. Desborough. Huson. Cobbet. Duckinfield. Colonels, and of the same
Committee. Lady Bertlam. Wise to Lord Bertlam. Mrs. Cromwell. Olivers Widow.
Lady Woodfleet. 3. Ladies. Prissilla: Woman to Lady Bertlam. Walker. Secretary
to Lord Bertlam. French Mounsieur. 4. Prentices. 4. Soldiers. 2. Clerks, and 2.
Dorekeepers to the Committee.
PROLOGUE.
THe Author not distrusting of his Play,
Leaves Customs Road, and walks another way.
Expect not here Language Three stories high;
Star-tearing Strains fit not a Comedy.
Here Is no Elaborate Scenes, for he confesses
He took no pains in it, Truth does need no Dresses.
No Amorous Puling passions, here the Lord
And Lady rather differ then accord.
What can be in it, you will say, if none of these?
It is all one; he is sure the thing will please
The truly Loyal Party; But what then?
Why, truly he thinks them the better men.
But if in's Progress he does chance to hit
Hab nab on something that may sound like Wit,
Pray take no notice often; for if you do,
You Will spoil the Poet, and the Players too;
They will grow proud upon it, and in the Street
In stead of Cringing, Nod to those they meet.
Yet now I think on it, 'twill not be amiss,
We'd rather have your Plaudit then your Hiss:
And promise faithfully we will endeavor,
If you do favor this, to please you ever.
ACTVS Primus. SCAENA Prima.
Enter three or four Soldiers severally. 1. Soldier. AH, Rogues, the business
is done,


2. Soldier. In a dish I Warrant you,


1. Soldier. And thrown out oth' Windows:
The Town's Our own, Boys,

3. Soldier. And all the Wealth in it.


1. Soldier. And Wenches to boot Boys.


2. Soldier. Boot me no Boots, it is Bootless, 'till we have 'um,


4. Soldier. Those are Commodities, I confess I sain would truck for.


1. Soldier. Thou shall have them by the Belly, Lad.


4. Soldier. Rare Recruits after a long March!


1. Soldier. Gramercy Bertlam.


2. Soldier. Heroic Bertlam.


3. Soldier. The Man of Men and Might.


1. Soldier. We were Opposed, and even at Push a Pike for it; though a wet
Morning, 'twould have been dry Service had We gone to it.


2. Soldier. Dry blows would never have done't, some must have swet blood
for it; but it is prevented.


1. Soldier. The Nail of Providence was in it.


2. Soldier. Or the parings rather; but no matter which, it is done.


1. Soldier. Leymor was a Stubborn Lad, yet Bertlam fitted him, and in his
kind too, his Rhetoric silenced the Mouth of his Pistol; it had sent a bad
Report else, and a home one: But Bertlam, brave Bertlam, that carries Charms on
the Tip of his Tongue, acted the part both of a Soldier and a Courtier, an
Enemy, and a Friend, Exposing his Breast to danger, under the Canopy of
Security; And all this for Us you knaves. He told 'um a fair Tale, but means to
trust them no further then he can fling 'um:


2. Soldier. That Is some out of Commission,


4. Soldier. Or into Prison, or both.


1. Soldier. We may Lads in time grow up to something.


2. Soldier. Ill Weeds grow apace, Brother, and thou art one of them, and in
time may reach the Gallows.


1. Soldier. Speak for your self, Brother, I need not your Oratory; well,
Bertlam has Wit at Will, Woodfleet's an Ass to him.


2. Soldier. A mere Milk-sop.


3. Soldier. A Whey-brain'd fellow.


^. Soldier. And of Courage as cold as a Cucumber.


4. Soldier. A Fool in Folio.


1. Soldier. Ambitions Puppet.


2. Soldier. A general in the Hangings, and no better.


3. Soldier. What think you of Vane?


1. Soldier. As of a Vain fellow.


3. Soldier. And what of Haslerigge?


1. Soldier. A Hangman for Haslerigge, I cry.


2 3 4 Soldier. One and all, One and all.


1. Soldier. It Is Bertlam for my Money Boys, he is Our General, Our Protector,
Our King, Our Emperor, Our Caesar, Our Keasar, Our -- Even what he pleases
himself.


2. Soldier. If he pleases himself, he shall please me.


1. Soldier. He is Our rising Sun, and We Will adore him.


3. Soldier. For the Speakers Glory's s^t


1. Soldier. At naught Boy; how the Slave looked when his Coach was stopped?


4. Soldier. Like a Dog outlawed, the Pallat of his Breech fell down with fear.


1. Soldier. He told Us he was our General.


2. Soldier. Of what? Bills, Bonds, and Obligations, or Green-sleeves and
Pudding-pies.


1. Soldier. And we told him he was an Old doring fool, and bad him get him
home, and take a Cawdle of Calves Eggs to Comfort his Learned Coxcomb, for he
looked but faintly on it.


3. Soldier. And what said he?


1. Soldier. Said he! I prithee what could he say that. We would admit for a
reasonable answer? We were better principl'd then so, Reason and our business
were two things, what We did We did, that was Our Will, and the word of Command
lodged in Our hilts. Alas poor Worm, Cobbet and Duckingfield showed him
Cockpit Law, and O're-rul'd his Rolls, he understood not the Soldiers Dialect,
the searching Language of the Sword puzl'd his Intellect, the Keenness whereof
would have proved too sharp for his Wit, had he been Obstinate or persisted in
the Interpretation; and therefore very mannerly he kissed his hand and wheeled
about


2. Soldier. To the place from whence he came,


3. Soldier. And e're long to the place of Execution.


1. Soldier. No, hang him, he will have his Clergy.


2. Soldier. Is he such an Infidel to love them?


1. Soldier. Yes, as We do: Barbers, that is, while they are Trimming Us;
he would fain go Ala mode to Heaven.


2. Soldier. If his foot slip not, but if it do, his sinery is spoiled, he
will be so sootifi'd.


1. Soldier. He that deals with Pitch must expect no better, black will to
black, quoth the Devil to the Collier; but, do thou think there is a Heaven
or Hell?


2. Soldier. Why do thou ask me that question? I am a Soldier, and so art
thou, let us never trouble Our heads about it, a short life, and a merry life I
cry, happy Man be his Dole.


3. Soldier. And so say I, while We are here, We are here; when We are gone,
We are gone, for better or for worse, for rich or for poor; amongst the good or
the bad We shall find room I warrant thee Lad, and Our General can expect no
more.


2. Soldier. And now you have put Us in mind of Our General, I mean Bertlam*
(not Woodfleet) (that Son of a Custard-maker, always quaking) let us as
bravely spend his this days benevolence, as he Nobly intended it.


3. Soldier. A good Resolution.


1. Soldier. Rather a proposition, Brother; but where, how, and in what?


2. Soldier. Not in Rot-gut Beer, I will assure you, or Muddy Ale, Wine for my
money.


1. Soul. Wine is the life of Action, it is Decreed and I obey.

Blood requires blood, then from the Purple Grape
I Will suck my fill, spite of you, Jack a Nape:
There Is Poetry for you, Gentlemen.

2. Soul. A Pin for your Poetry, March upon it.

Exeunt. They go out, and come in again at the other end of the Stage, 1.
Soldier. Bring us Wine there, come who sings?

A Song for the Soldiers.
2. Soul. Though the Morning was wet,
We are merrily met
In a house more dry then Our skin, Boys;
We Will drink down the day,
Never question Our Pay,
Let them heartily laugh out that win, Boys:

Chor. Then drink a full Brimmer to him that intends
For the good of the Soldier to labor his ends.

II. Let let him flatter and lie,
What is it to thee or I,
And Ape Noll in every Condition;
If we thrive upon it,
Let all the world want,
And the City kneel down and petition:

Chor. Then drink a full Brimmer to him that intends,
For the good of the Soldier to labor his ends.

Soldiers. Hey Boys, come away.

Exeunt. Enter Bertlam, and Walker his Secretary. Bertlam. Trotter.


Secretary. My Lord?


Bertlam. Has Lockwhite been here yet?


Secretary. Not yet, my Lord, Sir --


Bertlam. What would thou have?


Secretary. Nothing, my Lord, not I.


Bertlam. Thou have not thy name for nothing, I see thy Tongue will keep pace
with thy wit, and still be Trotting, I rethee leave off thy Impertinences, I
have told thee enough on it.


Secretary. Why my Lord, and it shall please you.


Bertlam. I tell thee it does not please me, it is my fear thou wilt be my shame,
I sent thee into France to learn some breeding, and thou rendrest me the
poorest and the pittifull'st Account that ever Porter gave on a slight Errant.
Do thou keep Company?


Secretary. Yes, my Lord.


Bertlam. What are they, of what sort?


Secretary. Of the better, Sir.


Bertlam. It Is strange! thy knowledge being so bad:

Are they Men of Intelligence?


Secretary. I think so, my Lord.


Bertlam. You think so! sad, I profess it is very sad; were it my Case as it is
yours, and it behooves you, as you assume the Title of a Secretary;) I Would draw
Men's Souls out by Inspeculation, and in the Inquest of their Faculties cull out
such matter as would yield advantage to him I had relation to, and without
this, thou neither do deserve the place thou have, nor art thou sit for
Company.


Secretary. My Lord, I have done my Endeavor.


Bertlam. A weak one, let Thurloe be your President.


Secretary. When your Lordship is Translated to your Highness, and that you
have Command of the Public Pu^se, I shall be as ready to waste it, as he or
the proudest of 'um, but I am but a fool to Explain my self.


Bertlam. That time is drawing near.


He turns about in wrath with his dapper Dagger at his Breech. Secr. In the
mean time I have not been idle, I have done something.


Bertlam. What have thou done that may deserve Recording.


Secretary. Why, I have Endeavored to find how the Common Cry of the Town goes,
as to this days business.


Bertlam. That Is something indeed, and how do the People relish it?


Secretary. Relish it! why truly Sir it is thought --


Bertlam. Thou will return to thy Vomit.


Secretary. Why truly Sir it is thought, and if I may speak my thoughts
freely, the Rump was but a stinking Rump, and sented so ill in the Nostrils of
the People that they feared a sudden Plague attended the Concavity, and with
much Joy blessed the Rue and Wormword you brought to their Conservation.


Bertlam. Do thou know what thou say?


Secretary. I could say more, Sir.


Bertlam. To as little purpose -- begone, I would be private -- yet if Lockwhite
come admit him.


Secretary. Nay my Lord, I warrant here will be the whole fry presently.


Bertlam. Thou a Secretary, and talk so like a Fisherman; what Fry, you fool?


Secretary. Woodfleet and the rest, Sir.


Bertlam. My mind is not at rest while thou art here. Begone --

Exit Secretary. I wonder Lockwhite comes not? he is a Man
Has run all h^zzards, with as good success,
Except Old Noll, as any Man I know;
He was his Creature, and he now is mine,
And hitherto he has performed his part
In my Revenge upon that family,
So home, even to their doors, that my disgrace
Enter Secretary and Lockwhite. Lies buried in their Infamy -- How now --

Secretary. My Lo^d, he is come.

Bertlam. It Is well -- Leave Us.
My Lord, how goes Causes?

Lockwhite. They cannot go amiss, Sir,
Whilst you are Advocate.

Bertlam. The Sword thou meanest,
That must decide all Controversies.

Lockwhite. It will do much Sir, but Policy puts the best Edge to it.


Bertlam. And that you have, come my Lord be free,
Where shall We set up Our Rest?
We have had Tossing times.

Lockwhite. Indeed, my Lord, Time has been tossed in a Blanquet; but I hope now
We shall use time better then so.


Bertlam. As how?


Lockwhite. You may Trim him, Sir,
You have him by the foretop.

Bertlam. If I thought so, I Would hold him fast.


Lockwhite. Now, or never, If you let slip your hold you are undone, aut Caesar
aut Nullus.


Bertlam. But the Remora to that is Woodfleet.


Lockwhite. Alas! you know him, Sir.


Bertlam. True, he is but of a softly Nature.


Lockwhite. A fine Commendation for a General, that should be rough as War it
self, but he has a soft place in his head too, and that is worse, how ever he is
a fit Subject for your purpose, and therefore, Sir, use him as Cataline did
Lentulus, drill him along with hope that all this tends to his only
advancement, fools are soon persuaded; And believe me (my Lord) that was the
very Engine made him consent to the blowing up of his Brother, a Gentleman in
some sense better qualified.


Bertlam. I, but a small Nutshel I am confident may with ease contain both
their Courages, yet I know Woodfleet will sleer (he dare not grin) after
Honor, and is as greedy on it, as a Cat is of a dish of Milk.


Lockwhite. 'Twill be ill bestowed, Sir, if it light on him.


Bertlam. Wha^, a Dish of Milk?


Lockwhite. You misinterpret me, Honor I me^nt Sir,
If you make him groom of your Close-stool,
'Twill draw more from your goodness then his Merit,
And keep his wife in Smocks too, during pleasure,
That will be (Sir) your Highness pleasure.

Bertlam. It is not come to that yet.


Lockwhite. Oliver had it, his time is past, and your time's coming on, Princes
have power over the persons of both S^xes.


Bertlam. Name him no more, I hate his memory.


Lockwhite. I confess I do not much care fo^t, yet I hate nothing brought, or
brings me profit. I loved the Father of the Heroicks, while he had a power to
do me good, that failing, my reason did direct me to that Party then
prevailing, the fagg end of the Parliament. What though I took the Oath of
Allegiance as Oliver, your Lordship* and others did, (without the which I could
not have sat there?) yet it Conducing not to Our Advantage, It was an ill Oath,
better broke then kept, and so are all Oaths in the stricter sense, the Laws of
Nature and of Nations do dispenle with matters of Divinity in such a case, for
no (...) willingly would be an Enemy to himself, the (...) Beaf^s do by
instinct of Nature seek for self-reservation, vation, why not Man who is the
Lord of Reason? Oaths, what are they, but Bubbles, that break with their own
Emptiness.


Bertlam. You say very right, my Lord, I am of your Opinion.


Lockwhite. Yet the Pulpiteirs belch forth Fire and Brimstone against it: But
my Lord, how could I have served my Country, by setting the Dane and Sweed by
the Ears, while the Thread for a Protectorian interest was spinning here? how
could I have carried on, or rather promoted the Design for Iamaica, (though it
went in Revilo's name?) how could I have lopt off those ill branches to the
Common wealth, the Cavaliers and Essex his discontented Reformadoes? how could
I have showed my self loyal to your Interest, by foolling Fleetwood in the
disseating of Dick, by his dissolving the honest Parliament as they call it,
and bringing in the Odious Rump? how could I in my Speech at the Council of
State, have raked up Revilo's ashes, by bespattering him and his family, and
told Ireto^, how Providence had brought things about, and that the hand of the
Lord was in it, when I meant nothing less? how could I (under favor) have
advised you to this days Enterprise, if I should have startled, or scrupled at
Oaths, preferred honesty or Divinity before temporal interest or humane reason?
I desire (my Lord) in this case you will be my Judge.


Bertlam. Nay, my Lord, you are your own Judge in this Case, but in my Opinion
you have done your self but Justice.


Lockwhite. And he that will not do Justice to himself, will never do it to
another.


Bertlam. You advise well.


Lockwhite. My Lord, take it from me, He that will live in this world, must be
endowed with these three rare Qualities; Dissimulation, Equivocation, and
Mental reservation.


Enter Walker. Bertlam. How now, the news with you.


Secretary. The Lord Woodfleet, Sir.


Bertlam. What of him?


Secretary. My Lord, he is come, Sir.


Bertlam. Prithee -- Thy wit and his may walk together, admit him -- I knew I
should be troubled with him.


Exit Walker. Lockwhite. I doubt not but you have prepared your self for the
Encounter.


Enter Woodfleet. Bertlam. I am pretty well Antidoted against the Poison, He Is
here -- My Lord, your most submissive Servant.


Lockwhite. My Lord, I cannot Complement, but I am in heart your Creature, that
is, at your disposal.


Woodfleet. Seriously, I profess, I cannot reach your meaning, Gentlemen.


Bertlam. Our meaning's not amiss, Sir,
We know Sir, what we say.

Woodfleet. Indeed, I profess I believe so Gentlemen, I hope things are now in
the Lords handling, and will go on well, and become the doings of Christians.


Lockwhite. The Government has been all this while in the horrid hands of
Infidels, Jews, Pagans and Turks -- I must make him up a Medly.


[Aside to Bertlam.] Woodfleet. Yea, Abomination has been in the hands of
Iniquity.


Bertlam. But, my Lord, those hands are now cut off, and all our Ambition is,
that your Lordship would take the Government into the white hands of your
goodness.


Woodfleet. Who I, Gentlemen -- Seriously -- I profess -- Indeed -- And by yea
and nay law -- You shame me -- So you do! I can say no more, alas! I!


Lockwhite. You -- Why, my Lord, if you knew your self as well as I do, you
would say more.


Woodfleet. Truly, I think, I have been something in my time,


Bertl. Something! You have been more then something.


Lockwhite. That Is stark naught, (my Lord) but it shall pass.


Aside. Within, where is my Lord Bertlam? where is my Lord Bertlam? Enter Walker.
Bertlam. What Is the meaning of this?


Secretary. The Lord Stonware, the Lord Huson, Colonel Cobbet, Colonel
Duckinfield, and others, desire your favorable and Courteous Admittance, Sir.


Bertlam. By all means, let them Enter: but my Lord be sparing of your Speech,
for these are Catching fellows, and will interpret strangely, Our aim is only
to advance your Interest.


Woodfleet. You know my Lord, I can keep my Tongue within my Teeth, sometimes.


Lockwhite. It Is a high point of Wisdom in you, Sir.


Woodfleet. Oddso they are here, I cry Mum --


Enter Stonware, Desborough, Huson, Cobbet, Duckinfield. Lockwhite. The less
you speak, the better 'twill be, Sir.


Bertlam. My Lord Stonware.


Stonware. Many Benisons lite on you for this days wark my good Loord.


Desborough. How do you do my Lord Woodfleet? how do you my Lord Bertlam, how
do you my Lord Lockwhite? and how do you all? Hah.


Woodfleet. The better for your asking, Sir.


Desborough. Say you so, then I Will ask again, and how? and how?


Huson. And what? and what?


Cobbet. Your Language cannot be Translated, Brother,


Huson. Let them take me by the meaning then.


Stonware. By the Members, hawd there my Loord, it is sere, and faw pley, Sirs.


Duckinfield. My Lords, I have not been backward in this days business, nor any
here I think.


Bertlam. It Is confessed (Sir) what would you infer farther upon it?


Duckinfield. And therefore requisite We should know how things will go.


Lockwhite. As they may Sir, soft fire makes sweet Malt, you know that Colonel.


Desborough. And that I know very well too, and you have said very well, as
much as a Man can say, and no more.


Huson. And that is enough.


Duckingfield. But We are in a Chaos, a Confusion.


Huson. A mere Chaos, a Confusion.


Cobbet. And the People expect suddenly something from Us.


Lockw. Why Gentlemen, Rome was not built in a day.


Stonware. Mickle Wisdom geod feath in that, Sirs, there is Mickle wisdom in
that Ise sure ye.


Bertlam. At three a Clock we will meet at Wallingford-House, and discuss the
business further, what say you my Lord?


Woodfleet. I profess I say so too, at three a Clock be it Gentlemen, what say
you?


Duckingfield. Huson. Cobbet. We Will wait upon my Lords -- Your Servants.


Exeunt Duckingfield, Huson, Cobbet. Desbor. I protest I am glad of this withal
my heart, for I have business in Smithfield where my Horse stands, now it comes
in my mind, on my Conscience the Roguish Ostler has not given him Oats to day,
and the Knaves Hay is Musty too; well, my Man is such another Ass, farewell
Gentlemen, I Will see you anon, if I come not soon enough, pray keep me a place
in the Council, or let my Vote stand for one, no matter how.

Exit.
Stonware. Au geod rason too my Loord, he is a braw Mo^ this, my Leords ye kenn
him we will enough.


Lockwhite. And you too, Sir.


Bertlam. Come my Lord Stonware, We presume you are a knowing Man, to what kind
of Government stand you affected?


Stonware. E'ne tol what ye plase Sir.


Lockwhite. What think you of a Single person? here is my Lord Woodfleet.


Stonware. Marry an he is a braw Mon, Sir, bet are ye in geod earnest Sirs.


Bertlam. What else, my Lord.


Stonware. Bred a God Ise for him than.


Lockwhite. You see, my Lord, how heaven does raise you friends.


Woodfleet. Seriously I profess my Lord you know, it is none of my seeking.


Aside. Lockwhite. Nor is like to be of your enjoyin -- My Lord, a word with
you, what if my Lord Bertlam were the Man?


Stonware. Reight Sir -- Ou'z in on word ya ha spoken aw, Sir, he is a Mon,
inded Mon, gif Stonware ha any brains Sir.


Lockwhite. You will live I see Sir -- My Lord he is your friend now.


Bertlam. No matter whose, he is a required Property, and must be used by some
body -- And why so Melancholy, my Lord?


Woodfleed. I profess not I, I was thinking 'twas Dinner time.


Bertlam. Will your Lordship please to take part of our small Cheer?


Woodfleet. No indeed my Lord I thank you, not I, my wife I profess stays for
me, adue Gentlemen all --

Exit Woodfleet.
Omnes. Your Servants my Lord.


Bertlam. Nor you my Lord Stonware?


Stonware. Ne in geod feath, Sir, pardon me, Ise invited by a gay Mon Sirs, tol
platters of bra Capons Sir, and aw the foles in the Air, Sirs, I an marry
Sirs, tol oue a my none Country men ta, geod feath noow.


Bertlam. If you please to stay my Lord, you are welcome.


Stonware. Gods Benizon and mine lite on you, Sir, geod feath, you are like a bra
Mon, 'twould berst a Mons heart to part fro ye, Ise ce'n yar humble Servant my
geod-Loord.


Bertlam. You Will stay then.


Stonware. I marry Sir, wi yar none sell tol deeth Sir, gif ye ta plase Sir.


Woodfleet. I knew, a small hair would have drawn him to your Table, without
this ado.


Bertlam. My Lord, lead Lockwhite the way.


Stonware. Ater ye is geod manners Sir --


Speaking to the L. Lockwhite. Lockwhite. That Is more then you know -- My Lord
I am your Servant.


Bertlam. Well I Will break off the Complement then.


Exeunt. ACT the II. SCENE the I.
Enter the Lady Bertlam, and Prissilla her Woman. Lady Bertlam. Priss, Priss.


Prissilla. Madam.


Lady Bertlam. Why, how now Priss? where have thou left thy breeding, in thy
other Pocket? Art thou not read in Times and Seasons?


Prissilla. I never was such a fool to put trust in Almanack-makers yet, Madam.


Lady Bertlam. What a Wench art thou? and why Madam, prithee? there is a word
indeed, as Common as the Cries about the Town.


Prissilla. Your Ladyship has used me to it.


Lady Bertlam. I Will break that Custom, it is a rude one; have thou no wit
Wench? can thou pick out no better title for me.


Prissilla. Insooth I cannot reach it yet, Madam.


Lady Bertlam. Reach a fools head of thy own, sure thou art Mad, Wench.


Prissilla. The Secretary indeed says I am a Mad Wench, but I thank my Stars I
can make a fool of Twenty such as he is, Madam.


Lady Bertlam. Again, can flesh and blood endure this, I must new Mold thy
Manners, Madam! there is a Gammers title, out upon it.


Prissilla. Seriously I know not by what other Names or Titles to distinguish
you, Madam.


Lady Bertlam. I profess thou art dull, abominable dull; do thou not know
upon what Score my dear, and secondself is gone to Wallingford-House.


Prissilla. How should I Madam, I cannot Divine?


Lady Bertlam. Lord help thy head, why, he is gone to be made a made a Man Wench.


Prissilla. Was he not so before, if not, your Ladyship has had but an ill
time on it.


Lady Bertlam. The Prince of Men, you Baggage; thou art such a dull one.


Prissilla. I cannot help it, Madam, while I remain in Ignorance.


Lady Bertlam. I see I must open thy Eyes by way of Explanation; Then know that
from henceforth I will be called her Highness.


Prissilla. Nay, now you tell me what you would be called, I shall Obey your
Highness.


Lady Bertlam. It will do well, and 'twill be but your Duty, prithee tell me,
how do think I shall Behave my self in it?


She struts it^ Prissilla. Highly well, you cannot choose, you begin so soon,
if it shall please your Highness.


Lady Bertlam. I think I am better shaped for it then Iea^, or what do you call
her Cromwell.


She survey^ her self. Priss. Abundantly, for at her best She was but a bundle
of ^ -- Madam -- Lord, I am so forgetful, Highness I should have said.


Lady Bertlam. That Is the Word, Con it, and be perfect in it, or I profess you
and I shall part --

Priss repeats to her self, Highness, Highness, Highness, Highness. Enter
Walker. What Is the News with you?
Am I sent for to Wallingford-House?

Secretary. No, Madam.


Lady Bertlam. What a beetle-headed fellow's this.


Prissilla. Highness, you Changling; you must call her Highness.


Prissilla pulls him by the skirt. Secretary. No, and it shall please your
Highness.


Lady Bertlam. It pleases me very well,
She struts it, and surveys her self. What Is your business?

Secretary. Gammer Cromwell would speak a word or two with your Highness.


Lady Bertlam. Bid the poor Woman wait without, I Will do her what good I can
for her Childrens sake.


Prissilla. Or rather for Husbands sake, if it shall please your Highness; good
turns ought not to be forgotten.


Lady Bertlam. Thou say true, One good turn requires another, he was, I
confess, a Man every Inch of him.


Prissilla. I, and though he was out with my Lord many times, he would be in
with you, as the saying is, and please your Highness.


Lady Bertlam. Well, I care not if I go to her.


Prissilla. Your Highness will decline much your State then.


Lady Bertlam. Say thou so Priss ^Walker admit her, I Will hear what the poor
Creature can say for her self.


Exit Walker. Enter Walker, and Mistress Crommell the Elder. Mrs. Cromwell. I
thought I should have staid at the door 'till Midnight; Marry come up Mrs.
Minks. Is there such a do to speak with you? No marvail indeed.


Lady Bertlam. Prithee woman, what would have?


Mrs. Cromwell. Thy Husband by the Throat, had I him here, and I could find in
my heart in the mean time, to claw thy Eyes out, and make thee wear black
patches for something, thou proud Imperious Slut thou.


Lady Bertlam. The Woman sure is lately come from Billingsgate: Priss, ask her
how goes Oysters there.


Priss. She Is very quick of hearing, and't please your Highness.


Mrs. Cromwell. Highness in the Devils Name, it is not come to that sure yet,
is it? hah! Thy Husband may be hanged first like a Crafty knave as he is; Did
my Husband make him a Lord for this? to Ruin our Family? Or as the Word is
indeed, Trapan'um? Curss on the time thy Husband was born, he fooled my Son in
Law to betray the Innocent Babe my poor Child Richard, that Our Fames are now
brought to the Slaughter houses, and the very Names of the Cromwells will
become far more Odiou^ then ever Needham could make the Heroicks; Woe worth the
time.


Lady Bertlam. Priss, I pity the Creature, never trust me, alas it Weeps.


Mrs. Cromwell. Thou lie Baggage; I scorn thy pity, my Spirit is above it --
Let me come at her -- As old as I am, I can spoil that fine face, my dear,
deceased Lord, did so much dote on, let me come at her, Hands off, I Will do it,
thou Iezabell.


Priss holds her. Lady Bertlam. She begins to rave, send her to Bedlam among
her Consorts.


Walker. I promise you, you shall have, clean straw Mrs. Cromwell.


Mrs. Cromwell. Out Rogue, Rascal, Vagabon, a fellow raised from the Horse
heels, do thou upbraid me too? I Will be the death of thee, if thou come near
me. Oh Dick, Dick, had thou had but thy Fathers Spirit, thy Mother never had
come unto this Shame.


She falls back into a Chair. Lady Bertlam. Priss, a Cordial presently, Odds so
She faints.


Prissilla goes in and enters immediately. Priss. I run, and't please your
Highness -- I have it here.


Lady Bertlam. Prithee give it her, I would not for a hundred pound She should
die here, we should be put to the Charge of burying her.


Then Priss offers her the Cordial, She starts up and with her hand casts it on
the ground. Prissilla. It Is a precious Cordial-Water of my own making, Madam, I
hope there is no offense in that.


Mrs. Cromwell. I need it not, proud Woman, I Divine this Scorn will be
Revenged on thee and thine.

Exit.
Lady Bertlam. Farewell Naught,
Thou Art better lost then sought.

Prissilla. She has a Notable Spirit of her own.


Lady Bertlam. 'Twill get her nothing, She beats against the Wind.


Prissilla. She Is Wind fallen, and't please your Higness.


Lady Bertlam. It Is an ill Wind they say bloughs no body good, let her rave,
and rail, my dearest second-self will fare the better for it.


Prissilla. The fox fares best when he is cursed.


Walker. Priss, Priss, a word or two, Sweet Priss.


As they are going off, the Secretary pulls Priss by the Sleeve. Prissilla. Why
how now Sauce? Plain Priss? Am not I her Highness Maid of Honor?


Walker. I know thou art a Maid of Honor, but the meaning of this, dear Priss?


Prissilla. The meaning of what, thou Novice?


Walker. That Madam is so suddenly turned to Highness, Is my Lord made
Protector?


Priss. No, you Dunce; well, thou art the simpl'st Secretary! what must I find
thee brains and Understanding, know then and grow wise upon it, She will be
Protectoress whether he be Protector or not: If he has any Honor it must come
from her, for ought I see; she is before hand with him, and has Installed her
self already, I Am sure my Voice was Herald to it, thou piteous thing, question
the Pride and pleasure of a Woman? I will have thee Scribe to know, the time
will come I shall have Honor too, and be Courted by the better sort.


Walker. Have I been wanting in that Duty, Priss?


Prissilla. Wanting, why thou art always wanting, never provided, still behind
hand, never before hand to a Woman; this I profess, and to thy shame be it
spoken: And therefore walk upon it, I have no more to say to thee.


Walker. But I have something to say to thee, oh Ungrateful Priss!


Prissilla. Ungrateful? and why Ungrateful, pray?


Walker. Have thou forgot the small token I sent thee.


Prissilla. I was a small one indeed if it came from thee.


Walker. The tweezers out of France


Prissilla. Did Travail hither, but were as dull as he that sent them, they
would not cut a feather. Is that your precious Present? If thou have no better,
Walk alone for Priss, She Is not for thy Company.


Walker. Nay, Dear Priss, shall We be Married.


Prissilla. What are you so hot, Sir? there is a jest indeed, Marry, before your
Prentiship is out.


Walker. What do thou mean Wench? prithee kiss me.


Prissilla. I Will see better Clothes on your back first.


Walker. Why, are not these good?


Prissilla. Enough, had not a fool the Wearing of 'um.


Walker. Thou may say any thing Priss, I may have better.


Prissilla. When that time comes, and thy Wit is more refined, I may say
something to thee.


Walker. Oh my Dear Priss, in the mean time, let me but kiss thy hand.


Prissilla. That you may, but hear me, be not proud on it, Nor take this as a
punctual promise from me, I love my self better then so.


Walker. Yet I may live in hope.


Prissilla. If it were not for hope, the heart would break, they say: But odds
so, I forget my Duty to her Highness.


Walker. And so do I, thou have Transported me.


Prissilla. Not to Iamaica yet.


Exeunt. Enter Mrs. Cromwell, and the Lady Woodfleet. Lady Woodfleet. Good Lady
Mother, be patient.


Mrs. Cromwell. Good Lady Fool, hold your prating; Was ever Mother so unhappy,
or Children so sensles^ly ungratious?


Lady Woodfleet. I beseech you think not so, things will make for the best.


Mrs. Cromwell. Oh fond Girl, what hope can thou create unto thy self can
save Us now from sinking? We must perish, undoubtedly We must; though Ber^lam
carry a smooth Tongue to thy Husband, it speaks not the Language of his heart,
for that is rugged. It will deceive him as it did thy Brother, and the late
Idolized Parliament, he set up, out of a Malice to thy fathers Memory, to make
it Odious, because he pulled the Babell down, yet now he has Usurped that
Privilege himself* let his pretense be what it will, it bears no other Weight
but that of his Ambition, to which thy Husband is a Property.


Enter Woodfleet. Woodfleet. Mother I profess I Am glad to see you here, never
trust me law, how do you forsooth?


Mrs. Cromwell. The worse for thee, I wish I never had known the time
Occasioned thee to call me Mother.


Woodfleet. Why forsooth Mother, if it please your Highness?


Mrs. Cromwell. Oh Monstrous, not to be endured! I have been tame too long,
the fool has found a way to upbraid my Misery, She had a husband dear Ireton,
my best of Sons, had Wit, and by his Council s^ilted up Our Honors, which thou
pull'st down as fast by thy simplicity.


Woodfleet. I profess, never trust me, I speak Ingeniously never stur now, I am
no such Baby neither, as you take me to be, Mother.


Mrs. Cromwell. A mere Stalking horse to Bertlam's Pride; his Wife, that
Minion, does assume that title, I once, and my Son Richard's wife Enjoyed; She
will be called her Highness with a horse pox, while I am called Old Joan, old
Bess, old Bedlam, old Witch, old Hagg, the Commonwealth's Night Mare; it is
well, if any have the modesty to call me Gammer, or old Mrs. Cromwell, and
leave out many other horrid Nicknames, this Infamy and more thou have brought
on Us.


She Weeps. Lady Woodfleet. Good Mother, do not Weep.


Mrs. Cromwell. Would I were dead; Nothing Torments me more, then that thy
Father, who whilst he lived, was called the most Serene, the most Illustrious
and most Puissant Prince; (whilst that the fawning Poets Panegyricks swelled
with Ambitious Epithetes) is now called the firebrand of Hell, Monster of
Mankind, Regicide, Homicide, Murderer of Piety, a Lump of flesh sok'd in a Sea
of blood, Traitor to God and goodness, an Advancer of Fiends and Darkness; such
as these and worse, could I but think on 'um, are daily cast into my Ears, by
every idle fellow.


Woodfleet. I pray take their Names, I profess Mother, I Will Order them, as I am
here.


Mrs. Cromwell. Thou Order 'um, alas! they value not so poor a thing as thou
art, had Dick continued, he had kept Our Fame up fair it the World, none durst
have blemished it. They tell me that the time is coming, I must make a Stall my
Court, and learn to thrive by footing Stockings, and if that will not do it, must
be (what I never was) a Woman of Carriage, either for Tubs of Ale, as Suiting
best with my Original Condition, or else for Oysters; I was made for Burdens,
and am too Old, and Ugly to cry Oringes; If these Trades fail me, then I must
turn Bawd, they think me tough enough to endure that Tempest, and tell me
there is a place called Sodom, will receive me and my Retinue; I know it not,
but thus I am made a Public scorn by all Men; And in that, thee nor thine, nor
any other that claim relation to Us are exempted; And all this by the foolery.


Woodfleet. I profess Mother I will be even with 'um, I know what I know, and
there is an end, as I am here.


Mrs. Cromwell. I would there were an end to Our disgraces, which I do
prophecy is but beginning. What will become of that fair Monument thy careful
father did Erect unto thy memory, before (least none should do it after) thy
death, next to thy Husband Iretons; nay, even of his, thy Fathers too, and all
that living bore a love to him and Us? The raging Malice of proud Bertlam is so
irrisistible, 'twill destroy all.


Woodfleet. I profess Mother, my Lord Bertlam is a very honest Gentleman, and
he loves me well, I profess now to you; well, I know what I know, few words are
best, I am, and must be the Man when all is done, as I am here.


Mrs. Cromwell. It Is very likely, when all is done, shoul't be the Man will
prove their Scorn and laughing stock.


Woodfl. I profess now Mother, in sober sadness, I scorn the words, so I do --
You know what I told you, Sweet heart, as I am here.


Lady Woodfleet. Very well, and do believe't, though you forsooth are so
doubtful.


Mrs. Cromwell. Doubtful, of what? of that I never heard.


Woodfleet. No more words, but Mum, I say, I charge you Sweetheart.


Enter a Messenger from the Committee of Safety. Messenger. My Lord, the
Council waits your coming.


Woodfleet. Why law ye now, as I am here, you thought I warrant, I should not
be sent for neither; I profess forsooth Mother you are very hard of belief --
Tell the Lords I Am coming.


Messenger. I shall, my Lord, most honored Lady your most humble Servant. Your
humble Servant Madam.

Exit.
Mrs. Cromwell. I have seen this fellows face before, methinks he does retain
something oth' duty he paid me formerly.


Lady Woodfleet. Be put patient Mother, I Will warrant, things will go according
to your wish.


Woodfleet. I, if you will have some patience, if not, I profess Mother I cannot
tell how to help it, for I must to Coach, that is the truth on it. Sweetheart,
pray make much of my Mother.

Exit Woodfleet.
Lady Woodfleet. Will you please to walk in, forsooth.


Mrs. Cromwell. My heart was very heavy when I came hither, it is somewhat now
at ease, by the disburthening of my Oppressing Griefs.


Lady Woodfleet. I hope forsooth, you will have no cause to Create more of them.


Exeunt. Enter Lady Bertlam and Prissilla. Lady Bertlam. Have thou Summoned
those inferior things?


Priss. What the Ladies of the last Edition?


Lady Bertlam. Those whose husbands have been Stygmatiz'd by Noll and Dick,
with the Title of Baronets.


Priss. I gave Order to Trotter to Trot about it, an't shall please your
Highness.


Enter Trotter. Trotter. The Ladies are coming forth.


Lady Bertlam. They were not bound to their good behavior, but -- It Is well
they Understand their Duties; set Us Our Chair of State, and then admit 'um.


Enter Ladies. Lady Bertlam. Gentlewomen, for Ladies We cannot call you, your
Obedience to our Commands is well rese^ed, if you persever in it you will Oblige
Our favor: Priss proceed.


Priss. By what Authority, and from whom do you derive your Titles of Madams, I
pray.


Ladies. From Our Husbands.


Priss. What are they? of what standing?


1. Lady. Of no long standing, We confess.


Priss. That Is a common complaint, and a general grievance.


Lady Bertlam. And shall be taken into consideration for a thing we know;
Priss, prick that down in your Note book: Who made your Husbands Knights?


Ladies. Oliver the first


Lady Bertlam. Of horried memory, put that in your Note book, Priss,


Ladies. And Richard.


Priss. Of Sottish memory, shall I put that down too, '^is remarkable?


Lady Bertlam. By all means, put it down in the Margin, as a hand directing to
the rest.


Priss. Of their foolish Families, it is done an't please your Highness.


Lady Bertlam. What Coares of Arms do your Husbands beat?


1 Lady. Who? Mine, Madam.


Lady Bertlam. I, thine, Woman.


Prissilla. You a Lady, and show so little manners: Forget her Highness!


Lady Bertlam. I pass by their dirty breeding. Woman. We say, what Coat of Arms
does thy Husband give?


1 Lady. He bears Argent upon a Bend Gules, three Cuekolds Heads Attyr'd Or.


Prissilla. Three Cuckolds Heads! Why one is sufficient in all conscience.


1 Lady. It Is a Paternal Coat belonging to the Family of the Wittals.


Prissilla. It may be they were Founders of Cuckoldsaven.


Lady Bertlam. No more of Cuckolds, Priss, it is approbrious, and intrencheth
much upon the Honor of our Sex: Put that down in your Note-book as a public
Grievance, and it concerns Us to look after, and the Committee of Safety to
Remedy.


2 La. It Is a material and punctual point to a Woman.


Lady Bertlam. And what does thy Husband give, prithee?


2 Lady. He bears Three Gantlets Dexter Or.


Priscilla. Or again: Your Highness may perceive they have had Golden times
on it.


Lady Bertlam. Dexter Or: Well, we know he has been an Ambo-dexter all his life
time, and he shall now give another Coat; A Body without a Head in a Field
Sable -- And what is thine, prithee?


3 Lady. Ours is but Part per pale.


Lady Bertlam. Part per pale: What Is that?


Priss. A Motley Coat of two colors.


Lady Bertlam. It Is a wonder with what Impudence those Fellows Noll and Dick
could Knightifie your Husbands! For it is a Rule in Heraldry, that none can make
a Knight but he that is a Knight himself: It Is Zanca Panca's Case in Donquixott.


1 Lady. If none can make a Knight but he that is a Knight, how shall our
Husbands receive honor from your Husband, who is no Knight himself?


Lady Bertlam. Let me alone to Dub him.


Priss. You have done that already, and 't please your Highness.


1 Lady. If Dubbing our Husbands will carry it, we can do that our selves.


Lady Bertlam. But Ours is of greater Honor and Antiquity, and therefore ought
to take place. Receive that as a Maxim from Us, dispute no further.


Ladies. We shall not.


Lady Bertlam. Since, being Infranchis'd through our grace and favor you are
become Members of Our Commonwealth, Declare your Grievances, and we will hear
'em, whether public or private.


1 Lady. Begin with the private first, Sweet Mrs. Priss.


Prissilla. This Lady complains her Husband prays too much, and it take him off
his other business.


Lady Bertlam. There can be no Charity in that Man is remiss in his
Benevolence. Receive that as another Maxim -- Priss, You mind Us not.


Pris. I Am pricking of it down* and't please your highness.


Lady Bertlam. But, it may be he prays when is Zeal's on fire (as Bells ring)
backwards.


1 Lady. And then he ^ails against the Whore of Babylon, and then the people
think he calls me Who^e.


Lady Bertlam. That Is gross, and shows small breeding; We Will have it rectified,
it concerns Us.


2 Lady. And my husband says I talk in my sleep, and call on Men to come to bed
to me, and discover his infirmities.


Lady Bertlam. Oh! have a care of that.


2 Lady. Have a care of what? Were he capable of more care of me, I should have
less care of my sel^.


Prissilla. I commend the Ladies resolution.


Lady Bertlam. And, what say thou?


3 Lady. Why truly I cannot say much. My husband is a Man of reason, and is
willing I should satisfy my self; he know the ^ailings of Women, and imputes
it to the frailty of our Sex.


Lady Bertlam. He Is an honest Man, I warrant him.


Prissilla. Such a Husband for my money.


1 Lady. As you are a Lover of Women, let the Act of the 24 of June against
Fornication be repealed; Me thinks it frights as there were a Furnace in'^.


Lady Bertlam. As there were Conveniences in that Act, which tied up Men's
tongues from babbling, so there were destructive Inconveniences in it,
familiarity not so frequently used between Man and Woman. When know, Society is
the life of Republics -- Martin the first, and Peter's the second -- Indeed,
things were rather done in fear then freedom.


1 Lady. In a Free State who is not Free?


2 La. I beseech you in the next place, that the Cavaliers may not be looked
upon as Monsters, for they are Men.


1 Lady. And that it may be imputed no Crime to keep 'em company, for they are
honest.


3 Lady. And men that will stand to their Tackling.


Lady Bertlam. Well, we will have these amended: What have you more to say?


1 Lady. Now, Mrs. Priss, to the Public, I pray.


Prissilla. Whereas several abuses have lately crept in amongst Us.


Lady Bertlam. That Is a small abuse; Love must creep till it can go.


Priss. Her Highness has the Feeling sense of it, and gropes out the meaning
already, you see.


1 Lady. We could not go to Hide-park, nor Spring-garden so much as with our
own husbands.


Lady Bertlam. Why, what had you to do to go with them? Could you find no
better company?


1 Lady. Good men were scarce; and then to avoid suspicion.


Priss. In my foolish opinion that rather bred it; what walked with your own
Husbands? How contrary to Conscience and high breeding is that?


Lady Bertl. When things are settled, we will have an Act that no Lady or
Gentelwoman shall be put to that Slavery, but shall have liberty to walk or --
talk, with whom they please: Now may a multitude of men's blessings light on
you. Priss proceed.


Priss. Here Is a Lady desires a pa^ten for Painting.


Lady Bertlam. It Is too great for a Subject, we intend it for our selves, and
to that end, have employed several persons as our Agents in foreign parts, to
find out the readiest and securest way for making it, that it may not eat into
the Cheeks, beget Wrinkles, impare the Eyesight, or rot the Teeth.


3 Lady. I have found the woeful experience of that.


Lady Bertlam. We have Intelligence of a Water that will in two hours time take
the withered skin off the face, and a new one shall supply the place. That no
Lady or Gentlewoman, though she have out-worn Sixty, shall appear above five
and twenty years of Age.


Priss. That makes your Highness look so smooth upon it.


Lady Bertlam. There Is no Invention for sleeking, glazing, or anointing, but
we have notice of; and for Powders and Perfumes, we may be sented a street off.


Ladies. Oh sweet Woman!


Lady Bertlam. Then for Attyring, and to find out the Mazes of Fashions,
there is no Lady but must follow Us.


Ladies. You are at a great charge, sure.


Lady Bertlam. We are so, but it is Princely. --


[She rises] 1 Lady. We hope your Highness will remember the foregoing
premises.


Lady Bertlam. Priss, be it your care to mind Us; We must to Wallingford House
and have um confirmed.

And in the mean time, let our Music play
To Celebrate the Glory of this Day.

Exeunt. ACT the III. SCENE the I.
Enter one of the Dorekeepers, he trims up the Table, lays the Paper and
Standishes in their places; then Enter 2 Clerks to the Committee. 1 Clerk. The
Lords are coming.


Dorekeeper. Are you sure on it?


Clerk. They are upon us already.


Dorekeep. That they are not, I Will assure you, Gentlemen; However I will attend
my charge. Keep back there, keep back there, I say, keep back there, make room
for the Lords there. God bless your Honors.


Enter Bertlam, Woodfleet, Lockwhit, and Stoneware. Enter Duckingfield and
Cobbet, they pass a Complement to the rest, Cobbet takes Stoneware by the hand,
Duckinfield and they walk together whisp^ring, Bertlam Woodfleet and Lockwhit
do the like, after a turn or two Bertlam speaks. Bertlam. It must be done (my
Lord) we have nothing else to take him off.


Lockwhit. Scots, we know generally are greedy of gain, and since we have made
him President, and sensible of our Secrets, it is requisite we do something to
stop his Mouth.


Bertlam. Lest he -- No matter, it must be done, my Lord.


Woodfleet. Say you so, I profess, seriously, If I thought good would ensue of
it, with all my heart.


Cobbett. My Lord believe us, all We can serve you in you may Command.


Duckingfield. And you shall find it so when occasion serves, and the
Governments new molded.


Stoneware Marry Sirs, a^ise sa mold itt, it was near so molded, sen the Dam
bound the head on it.


Cobbet. I know there are some Ambitious spirits, would have it settled in a
Single person, but we are quite against it.


Stoneware. The few Deel splitt his pipe will be sort than, for Archibald.


Ducking. But my Lord Bertlam is a stirring man, you see,


Stoneware. Bertlam, let Bertlam gang tol Bedlam in the Deels nam, what ha I
to da with him, Ise year humble Servant Gentlemen.


Enter Desbrough and Huson. Desbr. How do you, how do you, and how dow do you
my Lords and Gentlemen all, how do you?


Huson. And how do you, how do you?


Stoneware. Ah my geod Loords, ken ye me, Sirs.


Bertlam. We shall make up our number anon: Will you please to assume the
Chair, my Lord.


Stoneware. Marry, and Ise your humble Servant, my geod Loord Bertlam.


Desbr. Come come, What Government must we have? what Government must we have?


Huson. I, I, I; What Government? Let Us know quickly: Come, you talk of
Conservetat, Conservetat, it is a hard word, hanged; but there is tors in it, I Am
sure of that.


Duckinfield. Conservetor, my Lord! Conservator.


Huson. Conservators let it be then; When shall we have um, when shall we have
um?


Bertlam. My Lord, We Will think on that hereafter.


Huson. Hereafter comes not yet then, it seems.


Desbr. But while the grass grows the Horse may starve.


Cobbet. Howere, Gramercy Horse, though it has no tail to it.


Stoneware. Geod feath Sirs, and I Will tell you a blithe tale of a Scottish
Puddin, will gar ye aw tell laugh, Sirs.


Bertlam. That Puddin will have no ent ^o't, good my Lord.


Desbr. I love to hear of a puddin, so it be a bag-puddin.


Huson. So do I, if it be a good one.


Stoneware. Bred a goad, as geod a puddin as ere was cut up.


Woodfleet. I profess my hair stands an end.


Duckinfield No more Swea^ing, my Lord, it is not seasonable in this place.


Stoneware. Hark ye me than, Sirs, mind ye me now or near: There was a
poor woman, Sirs, bog'd oath Karle the Speaker, Sirs, an heed gee her noought
Whilke guard her to let a crack, Sirs; I marry quo the Woman quo now I see my
Rump has a Speaker too. Haw lick ye my Tail now, Sirs?


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha!


Bertlam. My Lord, I know you have many of them, but pray let us mind our
business.


Desbr. Business, Why there is the thing; I think every man ought to mind his
business: I should go and bespeak a pair of Mittins and Sheers for my Sheerer,
a pair of Cards for my Thrasher, a Scythe for my Mower, hob-nayl Shoes for my
Carter, a Skreen for my Lady Wife; and I know not what: My head is so full of
business, I cannot stay, Gentlemen.


Lockwhit. Fie, fie, Gentlemen, will you neglect the business of this Day; We
meet to gratify our Friends.


Desbr. Nay, then do what you will, so I may rise time enough to see my Horse
at night.


Lockwhit. Is that it? Clerk, read what we past the other Day; I mean the heads
of 'em; what Papers and Petitions remain in your hands, referring to this Days
business.


Cobbet. Forbid we should be backward in rewarding such have done Service to
the Commonwealth.


Lockwhit There Is Money enough, Gentlemen.


Duckinfield. If we knew where to find it. However, Clerk, read* To Walter
Walton Draper 6929 l. 6 s. 5 d. for Blacks for his Highness.


Bertlam. For a Halter: Put it down for Oliver Cromwell's Burial. We Will have no
record rise up in judgment against Us for such a Villain.


Lockwhit. But first let us consider whether that were good Service, or not.


Bertlam. However, we will give him a Paper for it: Let him get his money when he
can: Paper is not so Dear, Gentlemen, and the Clerks pains will be rewarded.


Stoneware. Geod Consideration my geod Loord; bred Sir, that Cromwell was the
veryest Limmer Loone that ere came intoll our Country, the faw Deel has taken
him bith Lugs by this time for robbing so rich a Country; bred Sirs, I.


Woodfleet. I profess my Lord Stoneware you are to blame, I promise you, you
are; Why do you Swear so?


Stonew. Geod feath I gi you thanks for your chastisement, Ise sit ye Sir, au
professta, an se gif you ha me.


Cobb. That may bring you profit indeed. Clerk, proceed.


Clerk. To Walter Frost Treasurer of the Contingencies, 5000 l. To Mr. Edward
Backwel 4600 l. To Mr. Hutchinson Treasurer of the N^vy, 200000 l.


Stoneware. O^nds, there is asum! marry it came from a Canon sure. Clerk. To Mr.
Backwell more 326 l. 16 s. 5 d. To Mr. Ice 400 l. To Mr. Loethur Secretary to
his --


Lockwhit. To Oliver Cromwell say, leave out Highness: You were ordered so
before, where ere you find it.


Clerk. Secretary to O. Cromwell, 2999 l. 5 s. 7 d. for Intelligence, and
Trapanning the Kings liege people.


Stoneware. Marry Sirs, an ye gif so fast, yeel gi aw away fro poor Archibald
Johnson.


[Aside.] Lockwhit. Oil the Wheel (my Lord) your Engine will go the better:
Move for him first.


Bertlam. Be it your business, I Will do as much for you.


Lockwhit. Content* Gentlemen, since we have set this Day apart from other
business, purposely to gratify our most concerned Friends, let us consider the
Worth of the Lord Stoneware, a person of eminent fidelity and trust.


Stoneware. Geod feath, and I ha been a trusty Trojan, Sirs.


Woodst. We know it very well Sir, I profess, my Lord.


Duckinfi. And it is but reason you should be rewarded.


De^br. I Would scorn to let a Dog go unrewarded.


Huson. And so would I, he fawns so prettily.


Cobbet. My Lord, you are Witty, I hope we shall have no more on it. Huson. And
performs his Graces to a Scottish Pipe so handsomely.


Duckinfield. You may content your self with that (my Lord) he is our Friend.


Stoneware. Geod feath Sirs, an sa I am; wha denies it?


Huson. Nay, my Lord, we are not Foes; I am for you.


Desbr. And so am I, as live.


Stoneware. Geod feath weel sed* ye ken well enough Ise sure Ise a man can
serve ye aw, Sirs: Sin ye are so kind Sirs, Scribe read my Paper to.


Lockwhit. You have a Petition then?


Stoneware. Geod feath I had been a very fool else.


Bertlam. Give us the substance of it.


Clerk. That your Honors would be pleased, in consideration of his faithful
Service, and the constant charge he is at both at home and abroad, to grant him
some certain considerable sum of Money for his present supply.


Duckinfield. Order him Two thousand pound.


Bertlam. Seriously, let it be Three thousand, Gentlem. You must understand he
is much in debt.


Stoneware. God; benizon lite on your saw, my geod Loord Bertlam.


Huson. Three thousand pound! Why, half such a sum will buy all Scotland.


Stoneware. Bred Sir, ye leoke bett blindly out than.


Bertlam. Gramercy, my Lord.


Cobbet. Well Brother, the time was, a mi^e of it would have bought all the
Shoes in your Shop, I will not say your Stall for your Honor sake, though now
you do abound in Irish Lands.


Stoneware. You Are my geod friend Sir, geod feath you have ^ene hit him h^me.
Clerk, gang a tyny bit farther.


Clerk. That your Honors would be pleased to Confer some Annual Pension upon
him.


Bertlam. Gentlemen, I think it but reason; he has been faithful, and I hold
him a good Commonwealths Man, and the rather because Hazlerigge has so
bespattered him; since you have consented to his present supply, let him not
suffer for want of a future one: What think you of 400 l. per ann. It Is but
small; Say, are you willing to it Gentlen.


Omnes. I, I, I.


Bertlam. Are you pleased, my Lord?


Stoneware. Bred, thar'es a question indeed; Onnz Sir, ye ha won my heart.


Bertlam. Then Gentlemen, since my Lord Lockwhit's Modesty is such he cannot
speak for himself, give me leave to become an humble Suitor in his behalf --


Bertlam. That you will be pleased to make him Const^ble of Windsor Castle,
Warden of the Forests, etc. Lieuten^nt of the Castles and Forests, with the
Rents, Perqu^sites, and profits thereof. Gentlemen, I need not instance his
faithfulness to us and our Designments hitherto: No man here (I presume) but
has been, and is satisfied in himself of his reality; And therefore I am
confident you cannot confer a place of so great honor or trust upon a person
more deserving: But I submit to your Wisdom.


Omnes. It Is granted.


Stoneware. Bred my good Lord, what can ye ask that we sall not grant?


Bertla^. I have heard some say, that Honor without Maintenance is like a blew
Coat without a Badge.


Desbr. Or a Pudding without Suet.


Bertlam. You have made him Keeper of the great Seal; it is honor, I confess,
but no sallary attends upon it; and bribes you know are not now so frequent as
they were in Noll's time: Besides, my Lord is a person of that honor.


Huson. Well my Lord, let us be brief and tedious, let us humor one another; I
love my Lord Lockwhit well.


Bertlam. I move for a Sallary, Gentlemen; Scobel and other petty Clerks have
had 500 l. a year apeice granted to them* I hope he merits more.


Huson. Let him have a thousand pound a year then, you shall not want my voice,
my Lord.


Lockwhit. It Is a liberal one, my Lord.


Woodfleet. I profess soberly with all my heart.


Bertlam. Does that please your Lordship?


Lockwhit. Your faithful Servant, my Lord; but if I may be so bold to know from
whence I shall receive it.


Cobbet. Out of the Customs, the best place, I think.


Stoneware. Sure pay my Loord, bred a goad, Ise uphold you now, ga^g your
ways; on Scribe, let us mind mere good Warks, we sall prosper then, aw my
s^w, Sirs.


Bertlam. Clerk, proceed where you left off.


Clerk. Honyleybres 3000 l. upon account, Backwell for 9600 l. Worseley Aubrey
for 2500 l.


Stoneware. Bred holt for tham, where the Deel sall they ha aw this siller,
Sirs.


Lockwhit. Never trouble your self for that, my Lord.


Bertlam. These things must be granted, we know the persons, they are our
friends.


Woodfleet. I profess, indeed Brotherly love ought to go along with us all; but
when all is gone, when shall we have more?


Bertlam. Pough, my Lord, the City's big with riches, and near her time I hope
to be Delivered.


Huson. I Will be the Midwife, or what you will call me, I Will under^ake to do my
office as well as Dr. Chamberlyn can do his.


Desbrough. Well said Brother, what is the matter there?


The Lady Bertlam strives to enter, the Dorekeeper goes to the Lord Bertlam,
and whispers him, he rises, and goes to her. Bertlam. I Will wait on you
immediately, Gentlemen.


Huson. Is the Lord Bertlam gone?


Woodfleet. I profess, I know not.


Bertlam. Why, how now Sweetheart, What make you here?


Lady Bertlam. Nay, what make you here then?


Bertlam. This is not a place for Women.


Lady Bertlam. How so, Sir, pray, while thou art here I have as much right to
the place as thou have, if I am John Bertlam's Lady, and for ought I know my
advice may do as well here as thine, for all you perk it so.


Bertlam. Good Sweetheart, return to thy Coach.


Lady Bertlam. Good Sweetheart, tell me, am I her Highness or not her
Highness, or what do you intend to make of me?


Bertlam. Thou make thy self seem to be a Mad Woman.


She strives, Bertlam holds her. Lady Bertlam. Do I so, Sir, I Will be madder yet;
then I Will to the Board, and know what they intend to do with me.


Bertlam. Thou will not, sure.


Lady Bertlam. But I will, and hear what they will say to me; I will be put off
no longer.


Bertlam. Be not so loud.


Lady Bertlam. I Will be Louder Sir, and they shall hear me; If I am not Her
Highness, they shall not sit there.


Bertlam. Thou shall be as high as can be, if thou will be patient.


Lady Bertlam. Patient, I, thou know too well I am a patient fool; pray, when
will the time come I shall be styled Her Highness? for that I will be.


Bertlam. I Will tell thee that anon; prithee Sweetheart take thy Coach.


Lady Bertlam. I, thou think with thy fine Words to Work me to any thing, but
if you Deser the time too long, you will find the Contrary -- Call my Man there --
Do You hear me? pray make haste home.

Exit.
Bertlam. Well.


Huson. My Lord, We thought you had been gone.


Bertlam. No, my Lord, I have been better bred then so, to leave you in the
heat and midst of business.


Lockwhit. Nay, I think the heat of our business is over for this Day. Clerk,
See, have you any more Papers?


Clerk. Not any.


Huson. Let us rise then, I think we have sat a pretty time by it.


Desbr. And my colon begins to cry out beans and bacon.


Woodfleet. I profess my Lord, it is not I think fit to put you in mind, I hope
I need not, I profess.


[they rise.] Bertlam. Oh, to move concerning a Single person.


Lockwhit. By all means, for his Lordship.


Bertlam. Seriously, my Lords, I hold it would have been unseasonable, but at
the next Sitting it will fall in course my Lord, and then my Lord --


Lockwhit. We are your Creatures.


Woodfleet. Say you so, I profess let it be so then.


Desbr. Come let us go, I Am mad to be gone; What should we stay here for?


Stoneware. Marry, an ye speak right, Sir. Scribe, See aw these Orders be
ready for my hond aneust Morn; mere especially my none and my geod Loods
here, that they may gang to the Pattent Scribe, here ye me.


Clerks. They shall, my Lord.


1 Clerk. Come Sirrah, here be thriving Times, some men rise with their Breech
upwards.


2 Clerk. And it is very probable may be lasht for it: How they Divide the
Kingdoms Treasure.


1 Clerk. I commend them, they make use of their time, make Hay whilst the Sun
shines. I wonder my Lord Desbrough mist that Proverb at the Table.


2 Clerk. Was ever such Language heard at a Council Table before? They are all
made up of Proverbs and Old-sayings, except his tamen semper, Bertlam and
Lockwhit.


1 Clerk. Oh! those are two precious Devils; but for a fawning and colloguing
Devil, give me the Scotch Devil.


2 Clerk. No more of this, the Dore-keeper has Ears.


1 Clerk. I would his Ears were off, they are not worth the Sense of Hearing:
But come, let us put up our trinckets; a pox on it, I did not think they would
have sat so long.


2 Clerk. Thou have some Baggage or other to go to, I Will be hanged else.


1 Clerk. Thou may be hanged in time; however weel go.


Dore-keeper. Well, go your ways, you are a precious Couple.


Exeunt. [A noise within, crying Tom, Will, Harry, Dick; Have you a mind to be
Murdered in your beds.] Enter a Corporal and Soldiers after him in a confused
manner, as from their several Lodgings. 1 Soldier. What Is the matter? Corporal.


Corporal. The City's up in Arms.


1 Soldier. I am glad on it.


2 Soldier. And so am I, there is plunder enough, I am mad to be at it.


Corporal. The Committee sat all this night about it; it is said they are up
every where.


1 Soldier. I warrant that Dog in a Doublet Has^erigg i^ the Ringleader.


Corporal. It Is likely, the news came but within this hour, and the danger
that lu^ks in it has called the Committee together, to morrow the Prentices
intend to petition the Lord Mayor for a Free Parliament.


1 Soldier. Let em', it is good fishing in troubled waters.


2 Soldier. Must the RUMP come in again?


Corporal. I know not, good Lads make haste, the Captain stays for us.


1 Soldier. Pox on it, let us never stand buttoning our selves, We Will leave our
Doublets behind us.


Corporal. No, by no means.


1 Soldier. And is it come to that, then hey for Lumbard-street, there is a Shop
that I have marked out for mine already.


2 Soldier. You must not think to have it all your self, Brother.


1 Soldier. He that Wins gold, let him Wear gold, I cry.


Corporal. Well, we shall have enough, it is a rich City, never came better news
to the Soldiery.


1 Soldier. We Will Cancel the Prentices Indentures, and bind them to us in
surer bonds.


2 Soldier. And they shall never be made free by my Consent till they have
paid for their Learnings.


1 Soldier. Me thinks I see the Town on fire, and hear the Shrieks and Cries
of Women and Children already; the Rogues running to quench the fire, and we
following the slaughter. Here lies one without an Arm, and he cannot hold up a
Hand against us; another without a Leg, and he shall not run for it; another
without a Nose, he will never smell us out; another without a Head, and his
plotting's spoiled: Here lies a rich Courmogeon burnt to Ashes, who rather then
he would survive his Treasure, perishes with his Chests, and leaves his better
Angels to wait on Us, you Knaves.


2 Soldier. Oh brave Tom.


Corporal. I know you have all Mettle enough, but our Captain stays.


1 Soldier. Not a minute longer -- hey for Lumbard-street, hey for
Lumbard-street!


Omnes. Hey for Lumbard-street, hey for Lumbard-street!


Exeunt. ACT the IV. SCENE the I.
Enter a company of Prentices with club;. 1 Prentice. Come boys come, as long
as this Club lasts fear nothing, it shall beat out Husons the other Eye, I scorn
to take him on the blind side, I Am more a man than so.


2 Prentice. Thou a Man, a mere Pigmy!


1 Prentice. Children are poor Worms, I would have you to know that I am the
Cities Champion.


2 Prentice. Thou the Cities Champion!


1 Prentice. Yes, and will spend life and limb for Magna Charta and a Free
Parliament.


Omnes. So we will all, so we will all.


1 Prentice. Why then you are my Boys, and true Sons to the City; Cry up a Free
Parliament.


Omnes. A Free Parliament, A Free Parliament!


1 Prentice. Boys, this was done like Men; but do you hear the News? My
Intelligence is good.


2 Prentice. What is it Champion, What is it?


1 Prentice. There Is a Proclamation come from the Committee of no Safety.


Omnes. For what? Champion.


1 Prentice. To hang us all up if we Depart not to our Homes: How like you
that, Gallants; how like you that?


2 Prentice. This hanging is such a thing, I do not like it; well, I Will go home.


1 Prentice. Why now you show what a Man you are; I was a Pigmy as you said but
erewhile; but now I say and will maintain it, Thou have not so much spirit or
spleen in thee as a Wasp.


Omnes. Oh brave Champion!


1 Prentice. Will you like Cowards forsake your Petition and have no Answer
to it? Rather let us dye One and All.


Omnes. One and All, One and All.


1 Prentice. Why this is bravely said, now I Will tell you what you shall do; when
the Sheriff begins to read the Proclamation, every man enlarge his Voice, and
cry No proclamation, No proclamation.


Omnes. Agreed, agreed; No proclaamation, No proclamation, No proclamation.


Exeunt. Wavering their Clubs over their heads. Enter Huson and his Mirmydons
with their Swords drawn. Huson. Was ever such a sort of Rogues seen in a City?
Come follow me, I Will so order um.


Soldiers. Oh brave Colonel!


Exeunt. Enter Prentices at the other end of the Stage, crying, Whoop Cobbler,
Whoop Cobbler, and he pursuing them. Huson. Shoot, shoot; I charge you kill the
Rogues, leave not one of them alive,


[A Musket is let off within. Ex. Enter Prentices again, crying Whoop Cobbler. 1
Prentice. Cain has killed his Brother, Coll. Cordwayner he has spun a fine
Thread to day.


2 Prentice. It may bring him to his End.


1 Prentice. St. Hugh's Bones must go to the wrack, and there let him take his
Last, Whoop Cobbler.


Omnes. Whoop Cobbler, Whoop Cobbler.


Exeunt. Enter Huson again persuing the Prentices; they continuing their cry,
Whoop Cobbler; Turnep Tops are thrown at him as from House tops; Boys run in.
Huson. From whence come these? Search that House, and every House: I vow
there is not a Street free from these Rogues.


Exeunt. Enter the Prentices severally. 2 Prentice. Where have thou been,
Champion?


1 Prentice. Where none but a Champion durst be.


2 Prentice. Where Is that? Where Is that?


1 Prentice. Stand here and admire; You are beholding to me, I have past the
Pikes to meet you, and swet for it: I tell you I have been at Guildhall, and
what I have done there, let Histories record. I Will not be my own Trumpet.


Omnes. What did thou do there?


1 Prentice. Do you see this small Engine? It Is a good one, and has been trusty
to his Master: I say no more.


Omnes. Nay, good Champion; What, what?


1 Prentice. How Dull you are! With this (I say) heartily charged and ram'd,
under my Apron closely hid, Latit anguis in herba, (There Is Latin for you
Rogues) I got into the Yard.


Omnes. What then, What then?


1 Prentice. By good fortune I espied a very fine fellow, some Officer no
doubt, he did Ran Dan so.


Omnes. But prithee be plain and short.


1 Prentice. No it was home, the sting of my Serpent has either killed him or
lamed him downright, I warrant he troubles us no more this Day. Hark, the A
Drum is heard within. Rogues are Marching; let them go and be hanged they shall
not abide here, I have given them an earnest penny already, and if they come
again, I Will double it. Well Boys, when they are past Weel go and Drink the Kings
health: Say Boys.


Omnes. Viva le roy, Viva le roy.


Exeunt. Enter Lord Bertlam and Lord Lockwhit? Bertlam. My Lord, you will still
endear me.


Lockwhit. A Duty so obliged cannot be paid too often, my prayers go with you,
my most honored Lord.


Bertlam. If I return, my Lord, Command my Heart; In the mean time, let not
your friendship Cool.


Lockwhit. My body shall be Ice first.


Enter Secretary and Lord Stoneware. Bertlam. My Lord Stoneware, this is a high
piece of Kindness indeed.


Stoneware. Marry, Ise come toll kiss your none hand, Sir, ^re ye gang anenst
the limmer loowne.


Enter Walker and the Lady Bertlam. Bertlam. Your Servant, my Lord -- Walker,
Are you ready?


Secretary. Yes, my Lord.


Bertlam. Direct the Lord Stoneware to the Blew Chamber; where I Will attend your
Lordship.


Stoneware. Your very humble Servant, my Loords.


Exit Secretary and Stoneware. Bertlam. I know She Is clogged with passion, and
it is not fit a Scot should understand it.


Lockwhit. You have done wisely in that, my Lord.


Lady Bertlam. Have I stayed long enough, may you be spoken with yet?


Bertlam. Why not, Sweetheart?


Lady Bertlam. Am I a Wife, or no Wife.


[She weeps.] Bertlam. My only Joy and comfort -- Why do Weep? There Is not a
Tear but Wounds me. Prithee leave, I Am sure thou have no occasion for it.


La. Bertlam. Did Noll do so by his Wife Bess, that Puss? He had some care of
her, and made her what her heart could wish; but I have naught but empty
promises.


Bertlam. Will you believe me? This Gentleman --


Lady Bertlam. He Is a Lawyer, and may lie.


Bertlam. He Is my Friend.


Lady Bertlam. 'Twas a by-Complement, I confess; but I believe he knows more
then you do. Pray Sir, say, Shall I be what I will be, as he says?


Lockwhit. The power is now in his own hands, and Doubtless my Lord's so wise
he will not part with it.


Lady Bertlam. Say you so! Then prithee kiss me John, never stir, I shall so
love thee.


Bertlam. But we forget the Lord Stoneware.


Lockw. H'as got a Scottish Fog in's mouth by this time.


Lady Bertlam. Hang him, it is such a Boorish stammering fellow, I cannot endure
him.


Bertlam. But he is a property, if I return Victorious, I must make use of;
Therefore, prithee Sweet, be modederately sparing in thy language; let it not
soar so high, lest it prevent my Towering thoughts of their fruition, and clip
those Wings should hover thee to Greatness.


Lady Bertlam. I Will not tie my tongue up for no man's pleasure living: I think I
am a Free Woman, no Bondslave, Sir.


Lockwhit. But under favor, Madam, when you Weigh the Advancement --


Lady Bertlam. I Weigh it not a rush, nor shall I Fee you for your Counsel, Sir.


Bertlam. He Is a good Man, Sweetheart.


La. Bertlam. Let him be near so good, I Will have my will,


Bertlam. I prithee do.


Lockwhit. I trust I have not angered you, Madam.


Lady Bertlam. Again Madam! let his goodness be what it will, I Am sure, he has
but ill breeding.


Enter Walker. Walker. My Lord Stonware is going, Sir.


Bertlam. Odds so, indeed, we have been too uncivil, come Sweetheart, my Lord,
will you please to walk in.


Exeunt. Enter two or three Soldiers. 1 Soldier. How now Gentlemen? you are
upon the merry March, I hear.


2 Soldier. I, a pox on it, We shall have little cause, I fear, to call it a
merry one.


1 Soldier. Well, I thank my Stars, Our Regiment stays here at the well head,
you Rogues, where there is plenty of all things.


2 Soldier. What says Pluck? The Worser knave, the better luck.


3 Soldier. But do you hear me, Sirrah? for all that, your Colonel may be
hanged for killing his Brother Cobbler.


1 Soldier. I hear no harm, I Am not to answer for him: But prithee tell me,
Do You think there will be bloody Noses?


2 Soldier. Those that have a mind to it, let 'em give, or take 'em, hang him
that fights a stroke, for my part.


3 Soldier. Or mine either; Our Company swear they will all be hanged first.


1 Soldier. The General is like to be well hoped up with such Soldiers.


2 Soldier. Why, what would you have us to do? If the General cannot agree
them, let 'em fight it out themselves and the Devil part 'em I cry.


3 Soldier. If they will fight, we will make a ring for 'em.


1 Soldier. They say that General Philagathus is a gallant Stout Man, an
Excellent Soldier, and a Marvellours honest Man.


2 Soldier. Then we have the less reason to fight against him.


3 Soldier. Nor will we fight against him.


1 Soldier. But Brothers, let me advise you to have a Care what you say, lest
you make your Words good, and be hanged in earnest, there are Rogues abroad.


2 Soldier. I, too many, I thank you Brother for your Advice.


3 Soldier. A lack we talk away our time, let us go, let us go.


1 Soldier. Nay, sure Brother Soldiers, we will not part with dry Lips.


2 Soldier. What you intend to do, do quickly.


1 Soldier. Come away then.


Enter Walker and Prissilla. Walker. Now Priss, what think you now?


Prissilla. Why, truly Secretary I think thou will be a brave Fellow when my
Lord returns.


Walker. You will let me kiss you now, I hope.


Prissilla. No indeed Secretary, I will not make you so bold yet; If you return
safe and sound, and in good plight, that is, my Lords brows circled with
laurel, and people smell you out to be a Secretary of State, it is very probable
you may have admittance to my Lip, and something else in a lawful way.


[calls within Walker, Walker.] Walker. These words have comforted my heart,
I Am overjoyed, trust me now: Odds so, my Lords upon taking Horse; ah! ah! Dear
Priss.


Prissilla. Sigh not Man, thou shall have it; come take Livery and Seisin, and
adue.


Walker. Oh, So sweet as the Hony-combe!


[kisses her.] Prissilla. Have a care you do not surfeit with it.


Walker. I must begone, Dear Priss, once more.


Calls within Walker. Prissilla. Why law you now give you an Inch and you will
take an Ell; I shall be troubled with you -- Kisses.


Walker. No truly Priss --


[Calls within.] Prissilla. Why, you are bold indeed.


Walker. Oh Heart! Oh Fates! Why should such Lovers part?

Exit Walker.
Prissilla. Well, go thy ways for a Modest Ass, thou might have had
something else, had thou pressed me to it; but the Fool will make a fine
Husband; when he comes to taste the fruit, he will so love the Tree! It Is a sweet
thing for a Woman of Knowledge to meet with a Man of Ignorance, and better to
keep him in it. My Secretary I see never read Arratine, if he had he would have
been furnished with more Audacity. Lord, how Honor Creeps upon me! I shall be
Ladifi'd there is no Doubt on it. How my Ears will be sill'd with Madams! And,
Will your Ladyship be pleased? What will your Honor have to Breakfast? How do
you, Madam? I am come to give you a Visit, Madam. Will you go to Hide-Park to
day, Madam? How does your good Lord, Madam? Did you Sleep well to night, Madam?
Is your Dog recovered of his Fit, Madam? Your faithful Servant, Madam. Have you
any Service to Command me, Madam? This her Highness despises. I am as proud as
She; and me thinks it sounds very well. Madam! Why, it is a word of State.


Enter Scullion-Boy. Scullion. Mrs. Priss, Mrs. Priss, You must come away to
her Highness presently.


Prissilla. Why, how now, Sance?


Scullion. Sauce! Why, what are you, pray? Will you come away? I Will tell her.


Priss. I Will have you boxt anon, Sirrah, for this.


Exeunt. Enter Prentices severally. 2 Prentice. Champion, how now Champion?
What news, Champion?


1 Prentice. Nay, what news do you say, then?


3 Prentice. Bertlam is gone.


1 Prentice. The Devil and John a Cumber go with him. Well, I hope General
Philagathus will so pay his Jacquet!


2 Prentice. He will be forced to turn it.


1 Prentice. That he has done often enough already.


3 Prentice. The Rogues were well mounted.


1 Prentice. May the Horse founder, and the Foot die in Ditches! My prayers go
along 'em.


2. 3. Prentice. Oh brave Champion!


1 Prentice. Come Gentlemen, If you have any Chink go along with me; Weel drink
Philagathus Health. How they look at one another!


2. 3. Prentice. Faith Champion --


1 Prentice. Speak no more, your Countenance betray your meanings, I perceive
your Masters are not so tenderhearted as mine; He Is honest, lives in hope,
allows me the merry Sice a day to spend till better Times come.


2. 3, Prentice. Thou art happy, Champion.


1 Prentice. You shall participate of that happiness! 'Twere pity such proper
Fellows as we are should part without Drinking a Health to Noble Philagathus
his Success.


2. Prentice. Well Champion, weel make you amends.


1. Prentice. Let the mends make it self; Come away, begone.


Exeunt. Enter Woodfleet, Mrs. Cromwell, and Lady Woodfleet. Woodfleet. How say
you so forsooth Mother? as I Am here.


Mrs. Cromwell, I say thy folly will undo us all.


Woodfleet. I profess Mother, as I Am here you always harp upon one string:
Never stir, As I Am here, and like the Cuckoo, have but one Note, Never stir now.


Mrs. Cromwell. What do make of me, a Hooting-stock?


Woodfleet. No, I profess not I, I know my Duty, as I Am here.


Mrs. Cromwell. Thou Would fain seem a Soldier, and a Courtier, but thou art
neither.


Lady Woodfleet. Good Mother be not so bitter, he is an honest Man.


Mrs. Cromwell. Hang honesty, it is mere foolery; thy Father had more Wit then
to be thought one of that needy Crew; could ever Man have given the power out
of his own hand, as he has done, and to his Enemy, a fellow as fierce as Aqua
fortis, and will eat into the very marrow of our families.


Woodfleet. I profess Mother, you may be mistaken for all this, he is in some
sense, but my Servant.


Mrs. Cromwell. And he will become thy Master to thy shame, why did not go thy
self?


Woodfleet. Why? I profess, Whether you believe it or not, Mother, I am the
greatest Man in the Nation.


Mrs. Cromwell. Until a greater come; How stupid art thou? Girl, prithee
instruct him.


Lady Woodfleet. 'Twould ill become me, sure to teach my Lord, I near was
guilty of that crime yet, he knows his own Business best.


Woodfleet. I profess, Mother, you are such a strange Woman, I know not what to
say to you; had not General Philagathus (like a fool) made this disturbance, I
know, what I had been this time.


Mrs. Cromwell. Thou had been neither better nor worse then what thou art,
the Common Tavern, and Town Table-Talk.


Woodfleet. Why? I profess, Mother, you are not so well spoken of, neither, for
all you look so.


Mrs. Cromwell. That Is long of such an Idiot as thou art.


Lady Woodfleet. Nay Mother, indeed you do not well: He Is my Husband, I ought
not to suffer this.


Mrs. Cromwell. Good Lord! It seems he plays better at Tratrip with thee then
thy Husband Ireton did: Thou could find Tongue enough for him: Or, there is
foul liars if this March-pane fellow did not Melt in your Mouth in his life
time.


Lady Woodfleet. I thank you, Mother.


Woodfleet. What Is that, what is that she says Sweetheart?


Lady Woodfleet. Nothing, my Lord, worthy your notice.


Mrs. Cromwell. Had not a sool rid thee, thou had known thy Duty better. So
much for that, farewell.

Exit.
Lady Woodfleet. Nay, good Mother.


Woodfleet. Let her go, Sweetheart; the house will be the quieter, I profess.


Lady Woodfleet. She is my mother, my lord.


Woodfl. And I Am your husband my lady, as I Am here I think so: I profess I know
not any body cares for her company.


Lady Woodfleet. She does not come to trouble you, Sir.


Woodfleet. Yes, She does, I profess, and very much: I was just thinking of
State Affairs, and She has put all out of my head: The Committee have no reason
to thank her, to my knowledge.


Lady Woodfleet. Why, my Lord?


Woodfleet. Why, the Citizens are mad for a Free Parliament, the Counties are
all up; and is it not time to look about us, I profess?


Lady Woodfleet. Indeed, my Lord, you say right.


Woodfleet. If a Free Parliament sit once, what will become of Us, I profess we
must secure our selves as well as we can: the Rump (as the Wicked call it) must
and shall come in again, I profess.


Lady Woodfleet. What will become of your Friend the Lord Bertlam then?


Woodfleet. I profess, I care not; your Mother takes me for a fool, but let me
alone to deal my Cards, the Speaker and I are reconciled: But Sweetheart, I
profess I must be gone, I say no more, Bertlam, Stoneware, and Lockwhit are
Knaves, downright Knaves, I profess they have fooled me all this while, it
will now turn to 'em, I profess, let 'em suffer.


Lady Woodfleet. I understood, my Lord, they were your Friends.


Woodfleet. But I have found 'em out; say no more, will you go in, Sweet heart?
I profess I must be gone.


Lady Woodfleet. I obey you, my Lord.


Exeunt. Enter Lady Bertlam, and Priscilla her Waiting Gentlewoman. Lady
Bertlam. I Wonder Priss, that none of the Modern Poets have been here with
their Encomiums since thy Lord Went!


Prissilla. It may be Helicon is Dried up, or their Brains are turned Addle.


Lady Bertlam. Well, I Am resolved to make Him that brings me the first Copy
Poet Laureat, provided he brings Victory in it: I will Dispose of my Places my
self, and be Lord Steward my self, or it shall cost me a fall. Lockwhit for all
his art shall never Carry it.


Prissilla. How, Her Highness become Lord Steward!


Lady Bertlam. No matter for that; Profit and Service will come by it: I Will have
the ordering of all Places both above and below Stairs, and so give out to the
people.


Prissilla. And good reason too, bir Lady.


Lady Bertlam. A Counselor, a foolish fellow, at every end he calls me Madam.


Prissilla. Truly, there was one called me Madam too the other day. Lord, we Women
are so frail! I thought my self to be a Madam in good Earnest.


Lady Bertlam. I Priss, thou might, and be proud on it; but I, I think am
somewhat above that.


Prissilla. A Story, so please your Highness.


Lady Bertlam. I will have Eight Gentlemen Ushers, that Puss B^ss had Four;
Two shall bear up my Trai^.


Prissilla. Rather Four, and it shall please your Highness; that Petty-fogger
Loethur's Wise had one, and as I Am a Christian, another foolish fellow went
bare before her, no Countess could have been better Manned -- Well, it will come
to my turn shortly, but that the Wicked Rump is sat; there lies my fear, Oh
Woodfleet! Woodfleet! thou art stark naught.


Lady Bertlam. What say thou, Priss?


Prissilla. I was thinking, and it please your Highness, what a Canary-bird
Woodfleet was, to settle the Rump, the abominable Rump, and pretended so much
love to my Lord and Master.


Lady Bertlam. His love is not Worth the enquiring after, Wench; as for the
Rump, I smell it is stale already, and must be peppered when thy Lord returns;
do think Wench it shall have a sitting place then, no I warrant thee, he that
jerkt it when he came out of the West, will do the like, when he comes out of
the North.


Prissilla. I, and it shall please your Highness, if he return with Victory.


Lady Bertlam. Never fear it Wench, I have sent for Lilly, and Wonder he stays
so long, it is such a Dreaming fellow.


Enter a Servant and Master Lilly. Servant. Here Is Master Lilly, an't please
your Highness.


Lady Bertlam. How now Lilly, have thou don what I Commanded thee?


Lilly. I have Examined the Zodiac, Searched the 12 Houses, and by my powerful
Art, put the whole regiment of gods and goddesses out of order, Saturn and
Jupiter are by the Ears, and Venus will he rampant assisted by Mars the god of
Battles.


Priss. This makes for your Highness, I love Mischief with all my heart.


Lady Bertlam. How stands my Husbands fortune?


Lilly. In the Alnathay of Aries, or as some others have it Salhay, being the
head of Aries.


Lady Bertlam. Aries, what is that Aries?


Priss. A Monster, I Warrant it.


Lilly. It Is a sign, and signifies a Ram.


Lady Bertlam. You Rascal, Do you put the Horns upon my Princely Husband.


Prissilla. It may be a new piece of Heraldry.


Lilly. He Is subtle, politic, and crafty.


Lady Bertlam. Thou hitst pretty well there.


Lilly. Then in the Allothanie, or (as some have it) Alhurto, being the Tail of
Aries, I find him eloquent, prodigal in necessity proud, inconstant, and
deceitful.


Lady Bertlam. Do thou abuse me, Rascal.


Lilly. No such matter.


Prissilla. Alas! he means innocently, for these are virtues given to most of
the Male-kind.


Lilly. He Is there denoted to be fortunate in Warfare.


Lady Bertlam. Go on, Fellow.


Lilly. In Adoldaya, being the Head of Taurus.


Lady Bertlam. Taurus, What Is that?


Lilly. A Bull.


Lady Bertlam. Dare thou Horn him again.


Lilly. It Is a Sign.


Prissilla. A very ill Sign, the Sign of the Bull: But he does not mean, and
it shall please your Highness, the Town-Bull of Ely.


Lilly. Has your Lord are a Mark or Mold upon his Members? If he has, he
vanquishes his Enemies.


Lady Bertlam. He has that Priss, I Am sure on it.


Prissilla. You are best acquainted with his Secrets.


Lilly. For Mars being with the Moon in the Sextile Aspect, incourages men of
War, and in the Trine promises Success.


Lady Bertlam. I Will love that Trine while I live for it.


Priss. I wonder where the Fellow got all these hard Words.


Lilly. Lose not an Inch of your State, lest you diminish the luster of that
Planet predominates.


[She struts it.] Lady Bertlam. Why Sirrah, you grow sa^cy. Priss, Let the
Footboy pay the Fellow for his pains.


Lilly. I hope she does not mean to pay me with Kicks: Is she angry?


Priss. No no, you have only put her in mind of her Majesty, she loves you
never the worse for it; You must flatter her.


Lilly. I have been bred to it. I take my leave of your Highness.


Lady Bertlam. But take thy reward with thee: Thou art sure of what thou say?


Lilly. As sure as if I had the Planets in my hand; a man can say no more.


La. Bert. Well, go thy ways, and if thy judgment ^alter, To second thy gold
Chain expect a Halter.


[ Exit Lilly.] Priss. What do thou think now?


Priss. How can I think amiss? He Is a notable Man: I Will get him into the Larder
one time or other, and I Will make him show me all.


Lady Bertlam. Show thee all, Wench! Out upon it.


Priss. What, the Lilly and the Rose: I promise you, for ought I see, the Lilly
is the best flower in your garden.


Enter a Servant. Servant. Here Is a Letter from my Lord to your Highness.


Priscilla. Have never a one for me from the Secretary?


Servant. Yes, Mrs. Priss.

[ Exit Servant.]
Priscilla. So, this Fellow is Saucy, I must take him down a button-hole lower.
Good news, no doubt on it; and then we shall have such Bonefiring. I Will read my
Switter-com Swatter-com's Letter anon. But, her Highness begins to look pale
upon it; I do not like this changing Countenance.


Lady Bertlam. Thy Lord is Murdered.


Prissilla. Then my honor goes to the Dunghill: A pox of Lilly and his legion
of Devils.


Lady Bertlam. Murdered in his ^ame, his honor, the Soldiery have forsaken
him.


Prissilla. If that be all, (...) matter Madam.


Lady Bertlam. Even call me what thou will.


Prissilla. I should have called you Highness, I confess, but I hope you are
not offended; Lilly is a mere rogue, I Will never endure a Lilly hereafter, it is a
flattering flower, and stinks abominably.


Lady Bertlam. He Writes me Word, he will be in Town this Night, he is sent for by
the Rump.


Prissilla. Oh nasty Rump! But an't shall please your Highness, shall I seek
out for eight proper Striplings to to man your Highness and four Spring-cits to
trick up your Train, a French Tailor that has a yard thus long, a Cook whose
Nose will not offend your Sauce by dropping in it, a Gentleman Sewer that can
dance before your Dishes, an able Carver to cut up your Custards, a Taster that
has a sweet Breath and no rotten Teeth, a Baker whose hands is not mangy; who
shall be Lord Chamberlain, Groom of the Stool, your Maids of honor, your
Starcher, your Tyrer, Yeoman of your Cellar, Yeoman of your Pan^rey, Yeoman of
your Pastrey, Clerk of your Kitchen, Clerk of the Roles? Lord, I Am even out of
Breath with reckoning up your Servitors!


Lady Bertlam. How now Audaciousness!


Priss. Why, seriously I dreamt last night, an't please your Highness, that we
have been but Princes in disguise all this while, and that our Vizors are now
falling off; and who would think that Dreams should come to light so?


Lady Bertlam. Now could I tear my flesh, all my hopes are lost.


Priss. No, you say there is one a coming.


Lady Bertlam. How? this Woodfleets Wi^e will ore-top me.


Prissilla. Pull her eyes ont, and then let a Dog lead her.


Lady Bertlam. Well, I Will do something.


Prissilla. I Will see your second so good, and 't please your Highness.

Exit.
Enter 3 or 4 Prentices. 1 Prentice. Hy Boys, the Noble General Philagathus
lay at Barnet last night.


3 Prentice. Say thou so, Champion.


1 Prentice. And the pityful, dityful Lambert, one of Donquixott's Lords, is in
the Tower. H'as been a Whipste^ all his Life time, and now is become a staid
Gentleman.


2 Prentice. Well said, Champion.


1 Prentice. No more of that if you love me, Noble Philagathus must be the
Cities Champion, I Will resign my Office, and yet be Loyal still.


Omnes. Who will not? who will not?


1 Prentice. Then you are my Boys again; do you not observe how the Phanaticks
are trotting out of town, some of the Rogues begin to mutiny?


2 Prentice. Hang 'em up then, I cry.


1 Prentice. So say I, by thousands; noble Phylagathus enters with love, and
they go out with curses, or like the Snuff of a Candle, stinckingly.


3 Prentice. I Am sure they have eaten our Masters up.


1 Prentice. Even to their Bowels, that Trading is become a mere Skelliton.


2 Prentice. Now I hope we shall see better days.


1 Prentice. Never fear it Lads. Philagatbus is right, and sound to the very
Core.


2 Prentice. What will become of our Exchange. Merchant.


1 Prentice. What? he that turned part of the House of God into a Den of
Thieves.


3 Prentice. The very same, the very same.


1 Prentice. Let him hang himself, and when he is cold meat, the Devil
carbanadoe him for a Breakfast: But hark they are marching out, and [Drums
heard within.] Philagathus his honest Soldiers are coming in. Oh let us see um!
let us see um.


Omnes. By all means let us see um.


Exit. Running. ACT the V. SCENE the I.
Enter Mrs. Cromwell and the Lady Bertlam; they meet at several Doors. Mrs.
Cromwell. Bless my Eyesight! what? her Highness without her Train: Where is
that precious Bird thy Husband, Cag'd? His Wings are Clipped from flying: Faith
now, this comes of Threachery: Had he been true to my Son Dick, he might have
still continued honorable, and thou a Lady; and now I know not what to call
thee.


Lady Bertlam. Thy rudeness cannot move me, I impute it to thy Want of Breeding.


Mrs. Cromwell. My Want of Breeding, Mrs. Mincks.


Lady Bertlam. We Cannot expect from the Dunghill odorous savours: Were our
affections greater than they are, they merit not half the Contempt and Scorn
persues thy wretched Family, and the Memory of thy abhorred Husband.


Mrs. Cromwell. How durst thou name him but with reverence: He that out-did all
Histories of Kings or Keasors: was his own Herald, and could give Titles of
Honor to the meanest Peasants; made Brewers, Dray-men, Cobblers, Tinkers, or any
body Lords: Such was his power no Prince ere did the like: Amongst the rest,
that precious piece thy Husband was one of his making.


Lady Bertlam. Would we had never known these painted Titles that are so easily
washed off: Enter Woodfleet. But yonder comes the cause of all our miseries.


Wood^^eet. Never go, yonder is my Mother; I profess, as I Am here, I Would rather
meet, never stir, a Beggar in my Dish, so I had, as I Am here.


Mrs. Cromwell. And, art thou there? Nay, never hide thy face for it, though
thou may be ashamed of all thy Actions.


Woodfleet. Why I, forsooth Mother? I profess, never go, not I Mother, as I Am
here.


Mrs. Cromwell. C^ll (...) not Mother: Thou have ruined my Children, and thy
self too, like a Fool as thou art.


Lady Bertlam. And me and my Husband, like a Knave as thou art.


Mrs. Cromwell. Would ever Coxcombe have committed such folly!


Lady Bertlam. Or ever Changling done the like! Jack Adams is a Man to thee.


Woodfleet. I pro^ess indeed law, you are strange folks, I profess, never go
law: Cannot a man, as I Am here pass the Street, I p^ofess law?


[Walks about the Stage, they following him] La. Bert. Hang thee, you are good
for nothing,


Mrs. Cromwell. But ^leering and fooling.


Lady Bertlam. And how do you, forsooth? I profess.


Mrs. Cromwell. And truly, I know what I know, and there is an end,


Lady Bertlam. Of an old Song, Few words are best.


Mrs. Cromwell. Never go, I Am the greatest man in the Nation* I profess I,
never stir now: Think you what you will, forsooth Mother, as I Am here.


Woodfleet. I profess, never stir, as I Am here, there is no enduring it, law
now* as I Am here; and therefore farewell, as I Am here, for I Will be gone, never
stir now.


Exit running. Enter Pren^^ces with Clubs. 2 Prentice. Now Champion, what think
you of your General Philagathus?


1 Prentice. A ro^e on it, I know not what to think on it: Was ever such a Ra^e
committed upon a poor She City before? Lay her legs open to the wide world, for
every Rogue to peep in her Breech. I


3 Prentice. It Is Monstrous!


2 Prentice. Is this the Cities Champion?


1 Prentice. Well, On my Conscience he is honest for all this: The plaguey Rump
has done this Mischief: Well, Club stand stiff to thy Master, some body shall
suffer for it: I say no more.


2 Prentice. We shall be Cooped up shortly for Hawks-meat in our Cellars, while
they possess our Shops, and Feast upon our Mistresses*


1 Prentice. Well, I Will Warrant the Soldiery will be honest for all this, and
then we will Sindge the Maggots out of the louzy Rump, or else Swindge me.


Enter the 4th. Prentice. 4 Prentice. News Boys, News.


1 Prentice. From whence, from Tripulo?


4 Prentice. From Guildhall, you Knaves: We shall have a Free Parliament.


Omnes. Hy, hy, hy.


[they make a shout.] 4 Prentice. The General and the City are agreed, and he
has promised it.


1 Prentice. Oh noble Philagathus!


2 Prentice. Brave Phylagathus!


3 Prentice. Honorable Philagathus!


4 Prentice. Renowned Philagathus!


1 Prentice. Now you Infidels, What think you now? Has your Fears and
Jealousies left you, or will you still damn your selves up with dirty
Suspicion. You that spoke even now you should be Cooped up for Hawks-meat,
shall be Crammed up for ^apons; your Cellars shall become Warehouses, your
Shops Exchanges, and your Mistresses persons of honor.


Omnes. And, what shall we be?


1 Prentice. Squires of the Body: Honor sufficient enough for men of our rank,
Gentlemen.


Omnes. Oh brave Champion!


1. Prentice. I tell you, I will have no more of that: Where is Lilly now?


2 Prentice. In one of the Twelve houses.


1 Prentice. We Will fire him out of 'em.


3 Prentice. How will the Man in the Moon drink Clarret then?


1 Prentice. Clarret is best burnt, Sir, by your leave.


3 Prentice. I, but Lilly has Eighteen houses.


1 Prentice. A Bakers dozen: we will fire the odd end first.


Omnes. A Match, a Match; we will do it.


1 Prentice. But now I think on it, we must have no fireing of houses, there is a
Statute against it: Better once Wise than never.


Omnes. Oh brave Sack!


1 Prentice. We Will be merry to night, I Am resolved on it, or else never let
Prentices presume to be honest again, and therefore follow me: God bless the
General!


Exeunt. Enter Walker and Prissilla. Prissilla. Now Secretary, where is your
Titles now? Not so much as a title of 'em remaining, all sunk in the Sand-box.


Walker. I Am between Silla and Carybdis, I must confess; and thou have
gravelled me, my dear Priss.


Prissilla. Hang your Dog Poetry, it made my Lord thrive so ill as he did: I
think thou did infect him; he used to have a Serene brain, and Courage good
enough: Sure the Viccar of Fools was his Ghostly Father: Be beat without a
blow, there is a mystery indeed!


Walker. Truly Priss, my Lord could not help it.


Prissilla. Not help it, there is a jest indeed, I Am sure he has helped himself
into prison for it, let who will help him out again. What course will thou take
now, Secretary?


Walker. Not horse-coursing Priss, I Would have thee know that.


Prissilla. Why, you are pretty well Timber'd for such an Employment. Can
thou make pens?


Walker. Yes, and Ink too Priss, I tell you but so.


Prissilla. There will be a Trade indeed for thee.


Walker. Nay, and the worst come to the worst, I can teach to Dance.


[he frisks about.] Prissilla. I confess thy Sword is always Dancing.


Walker. That Is the Alamode is learnt in France.


Prissilla. Come, if thou can Dance so well, let us have a frisk, if thou
dare.


Walker. Truly Priss, I have not my Pumps in my pocket.


Prissilla. It Is well thy Mother left thee Wit enough for an Excuse.


[he draws.] Walker. That is not all, look here, I can fence too --


Prissilla. What do thou mean to do! --


[she starts.] Walker. Set your right foot forward, keep a Close guard, have an
Eye to your Enemies point, extend your Arm thus.


[she runs and he follows her.] Prissilla. Lord, Lord, the man is mad sure.


Walker. Traverse your ground sometimes reverse, as thus: Give back then, come
on again, play with his point: I^ he makes a pass, put it by, make a home thrust
thus, run him thorough, and he falls I Warrant you.


[she screams.] Prissilla. Put up thy Fools-bawble there: I profess I Will ^all my
Lady else.


[he puts up his sword.] Walker. Why, did it fright thee, Priss? seriously, I
did but show thee what skill I had at my Weapon.


Priscilla. Thou would make a rare fellow to fence before the Bears, if there
were any.


Walker. Why, Priss? I dare say I can kill any man living that cannot defend
himself.


Priss. Ha, ha, ha! I am of thy mind, that cannot Defend himself.


Walker. Why Priss, such as fight must take all Advantages.


Priss. And I that do not ^ight, will take the advantage to leave thee and thy
foolery.

Exit.
Walker. Nay, dear Priss, never go I Will follow thee.

Exit.
Enter Prentices with Faggots upon their Sholders, they pass the Stage whooping
and hollowing. Enter again whooping and hollowing with Rumps of Mutton upon
Spits. Omnes. Roast the Rump, Roast the Rump.

Exit.
Enter a Boy upon a Colt-staffe carried by two, and others follow him whooping
and hollowing. 1 Prentice. Silence, Silence, I say.


Omnes. Silence, Silence there.


1 Prentice. Gentlemen all, I tell you plain,
My Rump does itch, and we shall have rain.

Exeunt whooping and hollowing. A piece of Wood is set forth painted like a
pile of Faggots and Fire* and Faggots lying by to supply it. Enter Prentices
and Soldiers. 1 Prentice. Come Gentlemen, you are Welcome, Sit down, bring
some Drink there, it is a night of Jubilee, we will want no Drink while the Rump
roasts.

[a Form is set forth.] Enter one with Drink. Here Is a Health to your noble
General.


Soldiers. Thank you, young Man.


Racks are set out one turn^th sp^t with Rumps on it. 1 Prentice. Baste the Rump
^oundly.


2 Prentice. It bastes it self, i^ his been well^ed, a D^g take it: But pray
give us some Drink too, we are almost Dry roasted.


Enter Frenchman. Frenchman. Begarr* dis b^ very lite night* me can ^ind my way
to my loging* begarr very well if me not take a Cup to (...) by the way: Now
ga^soone, (...) be de matter (...) you?


Prentices. Some (...) the Bonfi^e (...).


Frenchman. Bonfi^es! begfrr me (...) be in the bonfires: here garsoone, (...)
larshan to de bonsire?


Enter Musicians. Musicians. We are Musicians, and will give you a Lesson
Mounsieur.


Frenchman. A Lesson, dat be very good, begarr me love itt vitt all mine heart,
all all vic moy to de bonfire, begarr furboone Company de Souldate [they go
to the bonfire.] dece Angletar, me love them vitt all mine heart, play a lesson,
or begar me vil brake a your Fiddells.


Omnes. Oh brave Mounsieur!


Frenchman. Furboone begarr now give me de merry Song, me give you de Larshan.


Musicians play a short Lesson. Soldiers. Have you this Song? We came from
Scotland.


Musicians. Yes, Sir.


Frenchman. Begarr me vill have a dat.
We came from Scotland with a small force,
With a hey down down a down a,
But with hearts far truer then steel;
We got by my fay,
The Glory oth' day,
Yet no man a hurt did feel:
[All sing the tune, and throw their hats about their heads.] When Bertlam
first our Army did face,
Hey down down a down a,
He looked as fierce as the Devil;
We feared a Rout,
But he Wheeled about,
The Gentleman was so Civil:
[All sing the tune again.] Our General Marched with the Countries love,
With a hey down down a down a,
All persons to him did address;
Small money we spent,
For we found as we Went,
Good friends, and here find no less.

[Sing all again.] Frenchman. Furboone, begar furboone, done moy de toder Cup
burn a de Rump.


1 Prentice. That has been often done in your Country, Mounsieur.


Frenchman. Begar me vilt dance about de Bonfire, come vit me men.


They dance about the Bonfire. Omnes. Oh brave Mounsieur!


Enter Priscilla. Prissilla. Let my Lady say what she will, I will see the
Bonfire.


Frenchman. Begarr Metress you be a very fine Shentileveman, begarr me dance
one time vitt you, nay begar you noe serve a me ^oe.


Prissilla. I cannot dance indeed, Sir.


Frenchman. Begarr me vill have on touch vitt you, Metress.


1 Prentice. What, before all this Company, Mounsieur?


Frenchman. Datt me vill begarr.


Prissilla. Well, if I must dance, play Fortune my foe.


1 Prentice. No, Sellingers Round, We are beginning the World again.


Frenchman. Me vill have none of dat, me vill have a de Corrant of de foot sa
saw, come Metress lend a [sings a tune.] me your hand, courage courage Metress.


[they dance.] Prissilla. Well, now indeed I must begone, Sir.


Frenchman. Begar me vill see you to your loging, pardon a moy.


Prissilla. By no means, I shall be knocked oth' head then.


Frenchman. Me no care for dat, par ma moy adue Iee vou remercy pour dis^boone
Company, adue petit garsoone.


Omnes. Adue Mounsieur.


2 Prentice. What are you resolved to do? Every man to his home, or shall we
make a Night on it.


Omnes. A night on it, a night on it.


1 Prentice. Come to the next Bonfire.


Omnes. To the next Bonfire, to the next Bonfire.


Exeunt* hooping and hallowing. Enter Lockwhit, Stoneware, Huson, and
Desborough. Desbr. We have played our Cards fair.


Huson. I deny it, We have not played our Cards fair.


Stoneware. B^ed Sirs, then ye have played then faw, and that's faw play geod
feath, Sirs.


Lockwhit. A Fool had the shuffling of them, the game had gone better else.


Stoneware. The faw deel himself was Trump, Sirs; I think s^rrs we ha had nee
geod luck, Sir^, this bout.


Lockwhit. We are lost Sirs, utterly lost.


Huson. No Sir, we are found Sir, caught in a Net of our own making.


Desbr. Thou would give all the Shoes in thy Shop to be ont often.


Huson* Is there no remedy my Lord Lockwhit?


Desbr. No remedy (...) ^ill.


Stoneware. Bred, (...) no (...), he is my Noble Liar Sirs.


Huson. Who^e Kee^^^ of the (...) now?


Desbr. Where will you find your 1000. l. p. annum now.


Stoneware. Bred Sir^* (...) y^e gire* do ye gire? he is gatt rought Sirs,
^eit^^er of any the gifts I had geen me geod feath.


Desbr. He^^k you Mr. Lawyer, have you e^re a Habulus Corpulus to remove us
from the Storm is coming?


Huson. With a Sy^^ers, Razer, or what a Devil do you call it.


Desbr. You are politic, will you sell a penny worth of Policy, Sir?


Stoneware. Bred, he had mere need buy some to save his Cregg, Sirs.


Huson. Come lets let us leave the Law in the Lurch, and every man shift for
himself? Adue! Mr. Lawyer.


Desbr. Adue! Mr. Lawyer.


Stoneware. Adue! Mr. Liar.


Exeunt. Lockwhitt. How monstrously have I exposed my self to the dirty Censure
of the basest Creatures, things never mentioned but with scorn, and now I am
become the Thesis unto theirs? The very Cobbler reads a Lecture to me and I Am
convinced, I should amend my manners, and become Loyal Dictates long before
Divinity discovered! There Is no sin like that we know, and that we surfeit in.


Enter Walker. Walker. Do you want any Pens or Ink, Pens or Ink? Will you
Fence, or will you Dance? What Pens and Ink do you want, Gentlemen?


Enter Priscilla with her Basket of Oranges and Lemmons. Prissilla. Fine civil
Oranges, fine Lemmons* fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons: Me thinks it sounds
very well; a pox of her Tallnesse for me, no matter, never repine Wench, thy
Trade's both pleasant and profitable, and if any Gentleman take me up, I am
still, Fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons.


Walker. Pens or Ink, Pens, Pens or Ink?


Prissilla. It Is he. -- Walker.


Walker. Priss, my Dear Priss.


Prissilla. Why, how now Secretary, thou see my words are come to pass, I
knew what a Lord thou would be: But Fortunes a Whore.


Walker. A whip take her: But shall we meet now: Priss?


Prissilla. I think we are met Walker, although unhappily.


Walker. I mean upon equal terms.


Stoneware. Will you buy a geodly Ballad, or a Scott Spur Sirs, will we buy a
geodly ballad, or a Scott Spur Sirs, any thing to live in this World? Bred, if
I should gang intoll my none Country, my Cregg would be stretched two inches
longer then it is: Will ye^ buy a geodly ballad, or a Scott Spur Sirs, will a
buy a Line a Iack-line, a Line a Jack Bertlams Line?


Walker. It Is the Lord Stoneware.


Prissilla. No more Lord then thy self, Walker: Let Us have some sport with him,
Fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons: Will your Lordship buy any Lemmons and
Oranges? Fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons.


Walker. Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens, will your Lordship buy any Ink or Pens for
the Committee of no Safety?


Stoneware. Bred a geod what a Whore and a Knave is this.


Enter Desborough. Desbr. Turnips, Turnips, Turnips hoe, did ever Lord cry
Turnips before? But a pox of Lordship, would I had my old Farm over my head
again, Turnips, Turnips Turnips hoe, Turn-up Mistress, and Turn-up the Maid,
and who buys my long Turnups ho!


Prissilla. He does it rarely well; Fine Oranges, fine civil Oranges, fine
Lemmons.


Walker. Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens for the Lord Desborough.


Stoneware. Bred it is he indeed, these are Witches sure, how does your geod
Lady, Sirr?


Desbr. What my Lord Stoneware?


Stoneware. Ne bred a geod I Am ne mere a Loord then yer neene self, my Honoor
is in the dust, Sirr.


Enter one eyed Huson. Huson. Have you any old Boots or Shoes to mend, I have
helped to under lay the Government this 20. years, and have been upon the
mending hand, but I fear now I shall be brought to my Last, and therefore ought
to mind my end; will you buy Shoes for Brooms, or Brooms for Shoes?


Prissilla. Or a Knave for a whip, or a whip for a Knave? Fine civil Oranges,
Fine Lemmons.


Walker. Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens, how do you my Lord?


Huson. Do mock me fellow? Who are these?


Stoneware. My geod friend.


Desbr. Brother Huson, and how, and how?


Huson. And what, and what? and pox of that, and that; lets embrace however.


Enter Mrs. Cromwell with Boys after her. Mrs. Cromwell. What Kitchin-stuffe
have you Maids? was ever Princess brought to such a pass? what Kitchin-stuffe
have you Maids?


Boy. Gammer Cromwell, our Maid calls you.


Mrs. Cromwell. Where you Rascal?


Boy. In my --


Mrs. Cromwell. You Rogue do you abuse me? I Will claw your eyes out.

^^ings down her Tub and runs after him. Exit.
Enter again presently and takes up her Tub. Mrs. Cromwell. Oh Dick! Dick! Did
ever I think to come to this? What Kitchin-stuffe have you Maids, Maids have
you any Kitchin-stuffe Maids?


Prissilla. Fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons? Will your Ladyship buy any
Oranges and Lemmons?


Ms. Cr. Do thou mock me Bag^ge? I Will be at thee presently.


Walker. No indeed she does not, it is Priss my Lady Bertlams Woman, and I am
Walker her Secretary.


Mrs. Cromwell. How? Thou have walked fair indeed, where is her Highness now?


Priss. They say she intends to cry fresh Cheese and Cream.


Mrs. Cromwell. She has brought her hogs to a fair market.


Huson. And so we have all me thinks.


Mrs. Cromwell. What art thou there too?


Stoneware. Bred an Ise here ta, and my geod Loord Desborough, bred a geod
heeres eene a Jolly Company.


Mrs. Cromwell. It somewhat palliates my misery, That inafflictions yo^ like
Sharets be.


Prissilla. Come let us mind our business, words are but wind* Fine civil
Oranges, fine Lemmons.

Exit.
Walker. Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens, will you buy any Ink or Pens?

Exit.
Stoneware. Will ye buy a geodly Ballad, or a Scott Spurr, will ye buy a
Iack-line a Jack Bertlams line, or a line for a Jack a Bertlam.

Exit.
Desbr. Turnips, Turnips, Turnips hoe! Turn-up Mistress, and Turn-up Maid, and
Turn-up my Cousin and be not afraid of a long, long, Red Turn-up ho.

Exit.
Huson. Boots or Shoes, Boots or Shoes to mend?

Exit.
Mrs. Cromwell. What Kitchin-stuffe have you Maids? what Kitchin-stuffe have
you Maids?

Exit.
Enter Lockwhit. Lockwhit. I am a poor Lawyer Gentlemen, and can show you
Legerdemain for your money, no Hocus Po^us like me. I have two hands, neither of
them disabled from taking ^ees; have you any canses to split? for that is my
Doom, my Bag is a Receptacle for them; I am for that ^^use brings me most
profit, be it good or be it bad; but indeed have been better experienced in the
bad, and now would ^ain follow the good Cause and turn honest; but a man shall
hardly grow rich then you will say, and then 'twill vex a man.

How e're I Will try' ^, for to my grief I find
Riches ill got, do scatter with the Wind.
Have you any work for a poor Housell Lawyer, for all (...) honest Lawyer, I am
your next man, Gentleman.

Ambition and (...) Avarice, adue!
How e're your Gl^^yes yes seem, they are not true.

EPILOGUE.
T^s done, and now to Censure; But be just;
The Authors name's committed to your trust*
You have here in a MIRROR seen the Crimes
Of the late P^ageantry Changeling Times.
Let me Survey your Brows -- They are Serene,
Not clouded, or disturbed with what you have seen:
None whose grand Guilt appears touched to the quick*
And in Revenge would against their MIRROR kick.
Nor in a Corner can I one descry
Sneaking, that dare give Bellarmine the Lie.
So that we do conclude, the Authors fear
Is now removed; there is no Phanatick here.
You are a glorious Presence, clear as Day,
And innocent as Buds that sprout in May.
It Is you must gild our Hemisphere, and give
A life to us who willingly would live.
Then, If you please to grant ^us our Request,
Sign us your Servants, and we^l do, our best.
THE END.

