THE PASTOR's Care and Dignity, AND The People's Duty. A SERMON Preached at the
Assembly of Ministers, AT TAVNTON, 7th September, 1692. By G. T.

LONDON: Printed for John Salusbury, at the Sun in Cornhil, and R. Osborne,
Bookseller, near the Bear, in Exon, 1693.

The PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
HAD not the unhappy Product of a former Piece pleading for a Seventh-Day
Sabbath, a few Months since morally necessitated; and the Importunity and
earnest Entreaties of those whose conjunct Desires were deemed cogent and
undeniable Injunctions, now constrained, you had never seen the Author in
print; than whom scarce any one more desires Retiredness and Obscurity, or was
resolved more against appearing in Public: But as the former Discourse was
judged seasonable and proper to obstruct an Error, so this Sermon has been
judged (both by others) to be beneficial and useful for Practice, especially
for the Regulators of others Practice (the Ministers of the Gospel) unto which
if it conduce any thing, you ought to thank those who have wrested it from me;
for I could not judge it worthy of any better Fate, than other of its
Companions, even to breath out its last gasp in the Pulpit, and to lie buried
ever after in scattered Papers.

Concerning the Sermon itself, I shall only say, I have been as exact as well
as I could in sending the same Discourse to be printed, that was preached,
(only a Scripture or two may be added, which were in the Notes, but not
delivered, because of too great Prolixity, and some little Alteration in a few
words.) which if it conduces as much to the Glory of God, and Spiritual Good of
Others, (chiefly of my Brethren in the Ministry) as I was made to believe by my
charitable and judicious Auditors, 'twas adapted to, I have all my Design, and
my Prayer is, that God will make it so.

VALE.
THE Pastor's Care and Dignity, AND THE PEOPLE's DUTY.
1 Cor. IV. i. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of GOD.


THE holy Apostle having in the foregoing Chapter sharply reproved the
Corinthians for their factious Adhering to, and Applauding of one Minister, or
some Ministers, with the Contempt and Rejection of others, and declaring them
to be carnal, ignorant, and silly in so doing, backs his Reproof, and proves
his Charge by several Arguments:

1. As that all Ministers have the same Function and Calling, are all Laborers
with God.

2. That they are all employed in the same Work, and carry on the same Design,
the Manuring of God's Husbandry, the Advancing of God's Building.

3. That whatever any Minister does of good, whatever success he has in his
Labors, it is not from himself, nor from his Labors, nor from his Parts, (his
Learning and Eloquence) no nor from yet his Graces; but it is alone from God's
Blessing, and by the Operation of his Spirit. Wherefore the Apostle concludes
with an express Prohibition of this carnal and sinful Practice.

4. Let no Man glory in Man, for all are yours: Whether Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas, all Ministers; whether Apostles, or Evangelists, or others, are the
Churches for her Edification and Salvation, with all their Abilities, Parts,
Graces, and Labors, which are for the Spiritual Good of the People of God; of
what Parts or Opinion soever, all those that are found in the Fundamentals of
Faith and Practice, that teach what we ought to believe and do that we may
please God here, and be saved by him hereafter; though they have different
Apprehensions of things at greatest distance from the Foundation, and about the
Fringes of Religion

And having thus reproved them for and dehorted them from this Over-valuing of,
and Doting upon some Ministers, lest as it is usual with imprudent and
unconsidering Persons, they should run into the other extreme; and because they
must Idolize no Ministers, they should Conculeat them all; and because they
must not Overvalue any one, they should Undervalue every one of them; he
begins this Fourth Chapter with the Text, Let a man so account of us, etc.

A Man indifferently, Explication (...).
every Man, the highest and greatest, as well as the the lowest and meanest,
the most learned and unlearned, account, judge, and esteem; be rationally
convinced and satisfied in his own Mind that we are. (...).


Which primarily and immediately signifies Rowers in, (...).
about, under a Mster or Patron; and is from thence drawn and used to signify
other sorts of inferior ones in Service, as here Ministers or Domestic
Servants; yet not of the meanest or common sort of Ministers and Servants: But,

Stewards, Dispensators, Distributers of Goods from (...) and (...), (...).
tibua, pasco, rego, to distribute, to feed, to govern; all proper Acts of
Stewards: And so of the Minister's Stewardship there is a twofold Stewardship,
A Rural and Domestical, the former being the Inspection and Management of the
Estate without Doors, Setting and Letting, (as we use to say) Receiving and
Disposing of the Revenues, etc. Such a Steward was he of whom we read in the
beginning of the Sixteenth Chapter of Luke, who behaved himself knavishly and
dishonestly in his Place and Trust, and left and resigned it as knavishly as he
had kept and managed it; for when upon intelligence of his Unfaithfulness, his
Lord discarded him, and required an Account of his Stewardship, and told him he
should be no longer Steward; he goes to his Lord's Debtors, and bids one to
abate fifty Measures of Oil, another twenty Measures of Wheat, which upon their
Account was due to his Lord; that so he might have them for his Friends and
Harbourers when he was turned out; for he was too proud to beg, and too
delicate to dig and work: and they that are so haughty and nice, when they come
to Poverty, are in the Road to Dishonesty and Knavery, to get their Livelihood.

1. Our Lord commends the Unjust Steward, Verse 8.
not for his Injustice, but for his Wit, for the Abilities that God gave him,
not for the Abuse that he and the Devil made of them. The other, the Domestical
Stewardship is the Trust and Charge of the Store and good Things of the Family
within Doors, to bring them forth, and to distribute them in due time and due
manner to the Household, and such an one is spoken of.

2. A Servant whom his Lord made Ruler of his Household, Luke 12.^^.
to give them Meat in due season. A Periphrasis and Description of this
Steward, as he is expressly called elsewhere.

3. A Steward whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his Household, (...).
to give them their portion of Meat in due season. And this is the Steward here
spoken of, entrusted with

The Mysteries of God; the secret, sacred, hidden Things of God, Spiritual,
Heavenly, Evangelical Things, Mysteries, and hidden from the greatest
Scholars, the most learned Philosophers in the World, and from the very
natural Man, who cannot discern them as they are in themselves, and according
to their own spiritual Nature.

Division. 1. We have here the Function and Office of Ministers, Service and
Stewardship; or what they are, Servants and Stewards.

2. The subject Matter of their Stewardship, or the Things whereof they are
Stewards, The Mysteries of God.

3. The Duty of the People, They must account them so, carry it toward them as
such.

Their Office shall be the Doctrine, and the People's Duty part of the Use.

Doct. 1. That Ministers are Christ's Stewards: Tit. 1.7. A Bishop (a Minister)
must be blameless, as the Steward of God. 1 Cor. 9.17. (...).
1. A dispensation (a Stewardship, the same word as in the Text,) of the gospel
is committed unto me. Col. 1.25.
So, 2. According to the Dispensation or Stewardship which is given to me for
you; the Scripture expressly tells us that Ministers are Stewards, and that
their Function and Office is a Stewardship.

Which Stewardship is no ordinary and common Stewardship, but the most
excellent and glorious, the most necessary and useful, and the most profitable
and advantageous of all other: Which will appear if we consider,

1. Whose Stewards they are, the Lord Christ's and God's, so expressly said to
be in the Text. And St. Paul tells us, that his Stewardship was committed to
him, Cor. 9.7.
viz. by the Lord Jesus. And they are usually called in Scripture, the Servants
of Christ, Ambassadors of God, and of Christ, etc. now according to the
Excellency and Degree of the Lord and Master, so is the Excellency and Worth of
the Stewardship. Thus a Steward of the King's Household is a far more honorable
Person, and his Office of greater Dignity, then any others; wherefore the
Ministerial Stewardship must be incomparable more Noble in this sense then any
others.

2. Over whom, or toward whom they are Stewards, God's House, his Church, the
whole Household; authoritatively over the whole Church, I mean so in a safe and
well expounded sense; that is, being once duly ordained and authorized
Stewards, they may exercise it toward, or over any Society of Men, either
without or within the Pale of the Church; without in any place of the World,
among Heathens or Mahometans, where Providence may have cast them; they have
Authority to gather a Church from among them; and if they have Ability and
Opportunity, they must endeavor it; and being gathered, they ought to exert
the Office of God's Steward over them. Within the Pale of the Church, among
what Society of Christians soever God may bring or place them, or by what
Communion of Christians soever they may be called, they have there the
Authority of Stewards, and if due Convenience present, they ought to exert it
also: For when a Minister for the greater Glory of God, and Profit of the
Church, may be called from one Society of Christians to another, that Call
collates no new Authority on him, but gives him an Occasion and Opportunity to
exert it over themselves. Wherever a Minister comes among Christians (all
other things duly concurring,) he has Authority to exert his Ministerial
Stewardship over them; so it is said,

1. A Servant whom his Lord has made Ruler over his Household: Matthew. 24.45.
Indefinitely over his Household, that is, universally, not over some one
particular part hereof, or some sorts of Servants therein, but over all. And so,

2. The Steward whom his Lord has made Ruler over his Household; Luke 12.42.
without Exception or Limitation. So,

3. St. Paul having spoken of Christ's Body, which is the Church, immediately
adds, Col. 1.24 25.
Whereof I am made a Minister according to the dispensation of God; Of the
Church, of the Body, not of a particular part of the Church, nor a singular
Member of the Body, but of the whole in this sense; not that they can ever
simultaneously exert it over the Church; which is the Antichristian Usurpation
of Rome, who pretends to be Lord of all the Stewards of God's House, as well as
of the inferior Family: Neither can another ever successively exert it among
all the Congregations of Christians, seeing the Universal CHURCH is so far
dispersed throughout the Face of the whole Earth. So that by their Calling they
have such an Universal Stewardship, though they are in their Employment limited
to particular Parts of the Family and Household of God: Now according to the
Greatness and Excellency of the Family over which Stewards are placed, is the
Worth and Dignity of the Stewardship; wherefore seeing Ministers are Stewards
over the whole Church of God, so vastly numerous, and the Family being the most
glorious and excellent for Qualifications and Privileges, this Stewardship
must in Worth and Excellency surposs others.

3. If we consider the Duration thereof, this Stewardship is for ever, during
Life, being once taken into this Service and Office of God and the Church; they
are always in it, and are bound while they have Abilities, Opportunities, and
any of the Family to officiate over, to dispense to them those Things whereof
they are Stewards: For though Defects in Nature, and Corporal Inabilities, and
Persecutions, and Civil Impediments may hinder the Employments of the Ministry,
they cannot deprive of the Office and Function, but these being removed. they
must be sure to act as Stewards. Every consecrated Minister has nailed his Ear
to the Posts of the Sanctuary for a perpetual Service; 1 Cor. 9.16.
so says St. Paul, Though I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of, for
necessity is laid upon me: Tea, woe is unto me if I preach not the gospel,
having the stewardship of the gospel once committed to him. A moral Necessity
was layen upon him to preach it ever after; and if he should wilfully refuse
it, woe would be unto him as a wilful Neglecter of the Duties of his Calling.
As consecrated Priests and Levites under the Law never became profane Persons,
but were still accounted Holy to the Lord, and fed and maintained by the holy
Things; so neither can they, who under the Gospel are devoted to, and by God
taken into this Ministry and Stewardship, ever alienate themselves from it; and
if they do, they incur the Guilt of horrid Sacrilege: Indeed there may be some
extraordinary Case, wherein it may be lawful for a Man to lay aside his
Ministerial Function, and assume another: As suppose two Brothers, the one a
King, the other a Bishop, (as has been usual, because of the great Riches and
Authority of the Clergy,) the King dies without Issue, and unless the Bishop,
that next Heir to the Crown, succeeds, there is a Moral Necessity of the
Overthrow of Church and State, of the Introduction of Popery and Slavery; and
the Law of the Land makes the Regal and Episcopal Dignities to be utterly
inconsistent in one Person: I doubt not, but 'twould be the Duty of the Bishop
to degrade himself, and to lay aside his Crosier, Miter, and Lawn-sleeves, and
to invest the Royal Robes, and take to himself the Crown, the Sword, and the
Scepter. But such an extraordinary Case falls not out in many Ages. Wherefore
seeing this Stewardship is for Term of Life, it is a more excellent one then
those that are but for a few Months and Years, and at the Been placitum of an
inconstant Lord and Master.

4. If we consider the Subject Matter of their Stewardship, or the Things they
are entrusted with to keep and dispense. In the Text they are called the
Mysteries of God; and these are.

1. The Word of God, whereof they are the Preservers and Dispensers, the
Preachers, the Expounders, and the Appliers: So St. Paul in that forementioned
place tells us, 2 Cor. 9.16, 17.
that a Dispensation was committed to him, which he calls the Preaching of the
Gospel; and so again he tells us, Col. 1.25
That the Dispensation which was given him, or his Stewardship, was to fulfill
the Word of God; not to fulfill it in itself, for it is complete and perfect in
itself, and so its own end and design even the Glory of God in our Salvation:
for whoever truly believes the Doctrines, and conscienciously obeys the
Commands of our Bible, shall certainly be blessed of God on Earth, and saved by
him in Heaven: But the meaning is, to fulfill it as a Minister of Christ toward
them, in a due, full, plain manner revealing, preaching, or writing it to them,
and pressing it upon them; and their Commission runs thus: Matthew. 28.19, 20.
Go and disciple all nations; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you. And so Christ said unto them, Mark 16.15.
Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. The
Dispensation of the whole Word is committed to them: Of the Promises, to
declare their Riches, their Certainty, and their Condition, and suitably to
apply them. Of the Threats, to show their Dreadfulness, their Infallibility,
and their Terms, and suitably to apply them. Of the Doctrines, to show their
Truth, their Harmony, their Natures, their Tendency to God's Glory and Man's
Salvation, to expound them, and prove and confute all Errors by them. Of the
Commands, to teach their Spirituality, their Latitude, their Perfection, and to
press them upon the People for their Obedience and Observance.

2. The Ordinances and Sacred Rites of Christ's Institutions; I mean the
Sacraments, which are only two, Baptism and the LORD's Supper, both which are
entrusted to Ministers, and as Stewards they only have the Administration of
them. So is Baptism, Go and disciple all nations, Matthew. 28.19.
baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Those same Persons that are authorized to Teach, are authorized to
Baptize, and none other, and therefore we say, that if the Form and Matter of
Baptism be used by any profane Person, that is not a Minister that is Null,
and it is no Baptism. So is the LORD's Supper; and therefore St. Paul says, 1
Cor. 11.23
I have received of the Lord, that which I also delivered unto you, that the
Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread: and when he
had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my body, which is
broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he
took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my
blood: this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. Where he tells
us, that he delivered to them the Eucharist after the same manner that Christ
instituted, as he had received Authority from him. And whoever has a Right as a
Steward of God's Mysteries to Administer one Sacrament, has as great a Right
and Authority to Administer both.

3. The Discipline and Censures of the Church are committed to their
Dispensation, Suspension, Excommunication, Readmission: Matthew. 16.19.
So, I will give to you the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Which is not singularly and personally
appropriated to Peter, as the Pope would have it, and so to himself his
pretended Successors; but was committed to all the Apostles, and in them to all
Ministers their Successors in the Ministry and Stewardship of the Gospel: John
10.23.
Whosoever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whosoever sins ye
retain they are retained. From which Passages we may gather that Ministers only
have Authority to exclude from, and reduce unto, discriminating Ordinancers;
though in particular and well-governed Churches the People ought to be
consulted with, and the Reasonableness of the Minister's Proceedings herein
toward any particular Member, ought to be evinced, (and this is according to
Scripture) and so their Approbation required: which seems to be taught us in
that Passage of our Savior's, in which our Savior enjoins, upon the stuborn
Impenitency of a Delinquent, Matthew. 1 15, 18.
upon a secret Address of the wronged Party to him, and upon his taking one or
two more with him, that then he should tell it to the Church, and if he refused
to hear the Church, and for his Obstinacy be sentenced by the Church, that then
he should count him as a Heathen and a Publican: Which Sentence of the Church
seems to be employed in (as antecedent) the words following, Verily I say unto
you, Whatsoever ye (the Church) shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. And that
there should be this Harmony between the Ministers and the People, and that
their Consent be had in the Censures, seems to be very expedient, yea,
necessary to the Ends of Censures of Suspension or Excommunication; which are
the Humbling and Spiritual Profit of the Delinquent, the Warning and the
Security of the Congregation, the Reputation of Religion, and the Glory of God
by all. Now except there be a Concurrence between Pastor and People, these will
not be produced for if a Minister should deny the Ordinances to a Person, and
excommunicate him, and yet the People own him as a Brother, he will little regard
his Minister's Exclusion of him, and be apt to be more proud and headstrong
against him; the People will be no way secured but be in greater Danger to be
infected; and by such Divisions and Animosities, Religion will be disgraced,
God dishonored, and the Devil's Interest exalted. The like will be if the
People should separate from a Member, and the Minister own him, the same if not
worse Consequences will issue therefrom; wherefore St. Paul expressly enjoins
the Concurrence of the whole Church in Excommunication: Having greatly blamed,
and sharply reproved them for owning the Incestuous Person as a Member of their
Society; he commands them, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.
begin.
When ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to deliver such a one unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. So he also enjoins
them jointly to concur in the Readmission of that excommunicated Person; 2
Cor. 2, 8.
when he had given sufficient Evidence of his unfeigned Repentance, sufficient
to such a Man is this Punishment which was inflicted of many, (many, not the
Minister alone, but with his People,) so that contrariwise ye (the same many)
ought to forgive him, and comfort him; lest perhaps such a one should be
swallowed up with overmuch Sorrow; Wherefore I beseech you that you would
confirm your love toward him. Wherefore supposing that a Minister should know
a Person to be most unworthy of Fellowship, and most worthy of Excommunication;
yet if his Crime be such, as he ought not to reveal, and his People being
ignorant of it, and contending for his continuance with them; he may probably
suspend his own Act, but 'twould be no way advisable to proceed to a formal
Censure and authoritative Excommunication, because so more hurt would redound
to the Church, then good: and Ministers ought not only not to do those things
which are unlawful; but also they ought not to do those things which are
imprudent and inexpedient: Wherefore seeing the things that are committed to
Ministers, are these spiritual, heavenly, evangelical Things infinitely more
excellent rich and glorious then all the Riches, and Mines, and Concerns of
this Life, which are nothing in comparison of them, therefore their Stewardship
is more noble and excellent, more useful and profitable then any other.

5. It will also appear if we consider the Ratification of all the Acts of this
Stewardship by God and Christ in Heaven; all that they duly perform in their
Stewardship, according to God's Word, Clare non erante, either in Word or Deed
is confirmed by God in Heaven, and shall be made good for ever and ever. The
Threats that they pronounce against Sinners and Hypocrites in their Preaching,
how presumptuous or secure soever they be, shall certainly be inflicted by God,
(if they persevere to be so;) and all the Promises and Blessings that they
proclaim to the Godly and Sincere, what sad, hard, dismal, next door to
dispairing Thoughts, they may have of themselves, shall certainly be made good
by God: and so whoever they exclude from the Privileges of the Militant Church
here on Earth, shall be excluded from those of the Triumphant Church in Heaven;
according to those Scriptures already quoted, Whatsoever you shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose on earth shall
be loosed in heaven: Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whosoever
sins ye retain they are retained. And thus we have proved that Ministers are
Stewards, and have shown the Excellency of their Stewardship, and proceed to
the Application:

1. Use of Information. It serves to inform us,

1. In the great Usefulness and Profitableness of the Ministry in and to the
Church of God; I had almost said the Necessity thereof thereunto, if it be not
absolutely necessary to the Bene-esse, the well-being of the Church: What
Confusion! what Waste, what Want and Ruin, must the Absence of a Steward cause
to a great and numerous Family, wherein are too many unwise and headstrong
Persons, too many proud and self-conceited ones, too many slavish and prodigal
ones, etc. his Absence would soon dissolve the Household. In the Church of God
are too many weak and peevish ones, too many proud and self-conceited ones, too
many unruly and extravagant ones, etc. who without the Rule and Guidance of a
Minister, would soon dissolve and ruin Churches. This Metaphor therefore shows
the Utility and Benefit of Ministers in the Church of God; as do also those
others of Fathers, Nurses, Pastors, Shepherds, Guides, Watchmen, and
Ambassadors, etc. To show that as these are useful and necessary to Children,
to Flocks, to blind Ones, to Cities, and Armies in time of War, and between
dissenting Nations, so useful and necessary are Ministers to the Church of
Christ.

Use 2. It informs us in the Error of those who judge Ministers to be the most
useless, contemptible, and burdensome Persons of the Humane Society, and
especially if they be plain, powerful Heart-searching and Conscience-startling
Ministers. These profane and ungodly Wretches are grossly mistaken, and under
dangerous Delusions.

Exhor. 1. This Stewardship of the Ministers is serviceable for Exhortation;
and the Object hereof is threefold:

1. To the Stewards themselves. 2. To those who intend to be so. And, 3. To the
Household over whom they are so.

1. To the Ministers and Stewards themselves: And here I will only briefly
premise, that though I am very unfit and unworthy to advise or excite you to
those things which you know better, and are more forward to do than myself; yet
God's Providence, and your Call, bringing me hither, I must be your Monitor and
Remembrancer: wherefore I crave your Patience and Condescension toward me, but
require your Reverence and Subjection to our supreme Lord, while I exhort to
some few particulars: As,

1. That you would still consider, and walk constantly under the due
Apprehension of the Greatness, the Honor, the Weight, the Consequence of this
your Function and Stewardship; a profound and clear Persuasion hereof would be
a good, and is a necessary Preparatory to what follows.

2. To be in Abilities, and Qualities, and Practice, and Behavior what their
Function and Stewardship require, and exacts from them: To be such, and to act
and do as their Office does call for, in all (as much as possible) excelling
all other Servants to the Family and Household. And here I shall take leave to
mind you of some particulars: As,

1. Such must be learned (not to mention those Scholastical Sciences, which all
hold useful and necessary for understanding, analifing, and handling the Word
of God, and all others are educated in before they pretend to be Candidates for
this Function:) I would here recommend the Ecclesiastical History, and the
knowledge of the Original Languagues, at least some competent skill in them, if
we cannot arrive to a critical and exact one. Every Steward should have the Key
of his Storehouse at his own Girdle; if not when his Duty requires his
Distribution of the Family's Provision, he may be to seek, or else may have a
Key with false Wards put into his hand: You are wise to adapt the Simile. To be
able to go immediately to the Fountainhead ourselves, must be more contenting,
satisfactory, and delightful, then to receive the streams through Pipes, by
which we know not what may have been contracted to allay its Purity: And
withal, by such a Knowledge we shall be qualified the more easily to vindicate
the Scripture from false Glosses and Interpretations which the Unlearned and
Heretical are apt to impose upon it, and more clearly prove the Mind of the
Holy Ghost therein.

2. Such must be seen, very well seen, in the things themselves, in the matter
of their Stewardship, even in all the Mysteries and Oracles of God; they must
have a clear, distinct, settled, satisfactory Knowledge of all Doctrinal and
Practical Truths; they must have a spiritual Apprehension of them according to
their own spiritual Nature: How can a Steward ever be a good Steward, and duly
dispense those things whereof he has no knowledge? His Ignorance will make him
to mistake one thing for another, to the disgrace of his Charge, and to the
detriment of the Family: Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his
mouth: for he is the Messenger of the Lord of hosts. His Lips, and to be sure
his Head first, must keep Knowledge, before he can distribute it to the
enquiring People. So our Savior says, Every Scribe which is instructed unto
the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 13.^2.
is like unto a man that is an householder, which brings forth out of his
treasures things new and old. He must be stored with all due knowledge of the
things of God, and have Treasures of all sorts of them: which that we may
attain, there is required a serious, a diligent, a humble, an assiduous and
constant studying of the Holy Scriptures, with servent, frequent, and constant
Prayer to God for his Blessing our Study in them, and enlightening our Minds,
and enriching our Souls with them. Which St. Paul exhorts Timothy to, Tim.
4.^3, 15.
Till I come, give attendance to reading; meditate upon those things, give thy
self wholly to them, that they profiting may appear to all. If such an eminent
and enlightened Minister as Timothy must read and meditate to profit himself
more and more in Divine Knowledge, then much more have we need; and must it be
our Duty to read and meditate daily and constantly, that we may increase
therein: I mean reading in, and meditating on the Word of God, which doubtless
St. Paul chiefly, if not only meant in this his Exhortation to Timothy, for he
tells him in another place, 2 Timothy 3.15, 17.
That the scriptures were able to make him wise unto salvation, through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good Works. So that the Scripture fully and infallibly furnishes us with all
Truths, with the Confutation of all Errors, with all Duties to be pressed upon
all our People; and with a Discovery of all Sins to be forbidden: And hereby
the Steward of God's Mysteries may be completely furnished for the Discharge of
his Function. And here for the more clear satisfactory Discovery of the Truths
of Scripture, and a more ready Use and Improvement of them for the Benefit of
the Household of God; I would exhort to the framing in our Minds of a Methodical
Body of Divinity, of all the Articles of Faith, and of all the Duties of Life.
A Steward should keep all his Store and Treasure in a distinct Order, or else
he may be confounded, when having occasion on some unexpected Emergency, he
shall be to seek and not be able to find what is required he should produce:
Such a Method of Theology is called, Romans 12.
(...), the Analogy of Faith; which we translate Proportion of Faith, wherein
every thing is fitly and proportionably placed, has its proper dependence one
upon another, refers each to other, is proved, illustrated, strengthened and
confirmed each by other, and it is called (...); Tim. 1.
The Form or the Scheme of the Platform of sound Words, formally so in
themselves, efficiently so in others; being the grand Instrument in the hand of
the Spirit to make Souls sound and healthy in the Faith. Such a Platform the
Apostle would have Timothy to hold fast, to have it always with him; and
without question it is more noble and useful in the Head, then it is in a Book:
He that has clearly and distinctly such a Body of Divinity in his Head, and
has experienced the Grace of God in his Heart, and keeps alive the Graces of
the Spirit, will be prepared upon any warning, within a little time, with his
Bible (when he can have no other Helps,) only, to preach distinctly,
orthodoxly, and profitably upon any Polemical or Practical Point that may be
proposed: by the usual assistance of the Spirit of God. Whereas such as decry
and jeer at this as Systematical Divinity, if they should be engaged to
discourse upon such a Subject, and have no opportunity to recur to their own
common Places and Collections, nor the help of other Books, would make but
sorrowful, jejune, consus'd and blundring work on it.

3. Such must be wise and prudent: The former of these three you may call
Learning or Knowledge; the second you may call Sapience or Wisdom; and this you
may call Prudence and Discretion: By which I mean a diligent and sagacious
Inquisition into, and Discovery of the Condition and State of the Family, and
of each Person in it, over which we are stated Stewards; that so we may know
what to distribute of the Mysteries of God unto them, which requires a very
careful Inspection into them and their ways and doings, and a diligent Converse
with them, and Examination of them as far as conveniently we may. A Steward
should know the Temper and Constitution of the Family, lest he should give Food
where Physic is more necessary, and so hurt instead of benefiting those that
are committed to his Charge: he ought to observe whether they work and deserve
their Maintenance, or whether they be idle and merit nothing; lest he should
waste his Master's Goods, by giving them to those who ought to have none of
them; Ministers must so endeavor to know the People of their Charge, as to
know to whom they ought to apply the Promises; and whom they ought to cheer
with the Cordials of the Gospel, and to encourage with all the Privileges
thereof; and to whom they ought to apply the Threats of the Law; and to make
them to smart with the Corrosives of the Word, and cast them down by a due
Exclusion from Evangelical Communion: who are Babes, and want Instruction and
gentle Carriage toward them; and who ought to be reproved and severely dealt
with: In a word, they ought so wisely and prudently to know their Personal
Charge, as to know what is every ones due; and so to give to every one suitably
his Proportion and proper Part of the Word, Sacrament, and Censures. Which
requires great measures of Discretion and Prudence: and this is that which is
chiefly declared by our Lord Christ in those places where he says, that it is
the part of a wise Servant and Steward over God's House, Matthew. 24.^5.
to give them their Meat in due season; when 'twill be most useful for them,
and not when 'twould be hurtful to them. Luke 12.^2.
And as his Wisdom is shown in the Seasonableness, so also in the Quality and
Quantity of the Meat which he gives them, which ought also to be such as is due
to them. Three great Books which a Minister ought chiefly to study, to make him
wise and prudent, are the Holy Word, his own Heart, and his own People.

4. Such must be sincere and faithful; they must be Loyal to their Trust, and
according to their due knowledge they must dispense what they are entrusted
withal. An unfaithful Steward may greatly wrong his Master, and injure the
Family, either by an extravagant Wasting, or a clandestine Embezelling of the
Goods committed to him: it is therefore an especial Qualification in a Steward,
and especially in a Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Steward, that he be true and
trusty: This is the Property our Ssaviour gives of his Servant and Steward,
Matthew. 24.45.
that he be faithful as well as wise, Luke 12.42.
have an honest Heart as well as an able Head, to give his Household their Meat
in due season. And this the Apostle speaks of in the Verse immediately
following the Text.

Moreover, it is required in Stewards, 1 Cor. 4.
that a Man be found faithful, as though 'twere the only necessary Qualification
of such an one. And when he directs Timothy to the Properties of those that
should be entrusted with the Mysteries of God, he tells him, 2 Timothy 2.
The things that thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit
thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. NOw this
Faithfulness and Loyalty to God, excludes all base and sinister ends of the
Stewardship, as, Honors, Riches, Applause from Men, Partiality, Men pleasing,
sowing Pillows under Elbows, dawbing with untemper'd Mortar.

5. Such must be diligent and laborious; Stewards must have their heads, their
eyes, their hands, their feet busied, or they will never discharge their
Office; Ministers must redeem all the time they can from their Recreations of
the Body, from Sleep, from Visits; they must employ and exhaust all their
strength in this their Stewardship; they must wear out their Lungs in Praying
and Preaching, and blunt their Brains in studying, grudge no Pain nor Labor,
devoting their all to, and employing it in, and laying it out about this their
Function: Matthew. 24.
So our Ssaviour says, that his Servant must be found so doing when he comes;
that is, he must be always busy and employed, very industrious and laborious,
and that without ceasing; because our Lord's coming is always uncertain. So St.
Paul commands Timothy, Tim. 4.2.
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick
and the dead, at his appearing, and his kingdom, Preach the word instant in
season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and
doctrine. Day and night, at all times he must labor, when any Convenience
presented: And he was a most excellent Practiser of his own Precepts; for he
tells the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1 15.
That he would very gladly spend and be spent for them: Exhaust his Spirits,
Blood, and all for their Souls good. And when he had at Miletus called the
Bishops, the Presbyters of Ephesus, he tells them in that excellent Speech to
them, Acts 20 21, 231.
I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you: but have showed you, and
have taught you publicly, and from house to house: All day preaching and
praying in public assemblies; and at night instructing private families. And
again, watch and remember that by the space of three years, I ceased not to
warn every one night and day with tears. An excellent Example proposed for our
Imitation.

6. Such must be courageous and magnanimous; Of an undaunted and fearless
Spirit in the Discharge of their Office. Stewards must be so, or else every
saucy and unruly Fellow will daunt them, and tread them down, and so either
make them cease to Discharge their Duty, or else out of fear to act quite
contrary thereto. So must ministers, because they will meet with Affronts,
Accusations, Contradictions, Evil Entreaties from some other of the Family;
besides Persecutions of all sorts from abroad, (if the Devil can raise them)
even all Persecutions of Tongue, Hands, Sword, Prisons, Gibbets, and Flames;
and the more able, wise, faithful, and laborious they are, the greater
Oppositions, and more stout and daring Encounters they are likely to meet with,
even in the Church are Tares as well as Wheat, Chaff as well as good Grain, bad
as well as good Fish, Vessels of Wood and Earth, and to Dishonor, as well as
Vessels of Gold and Silver, and tho Honor; and from these, if foreign
Persecutions come not, they must expect, and will experience, very great
Oppositions and Discouragements, and therefore they must have a courageous
Spirit, and a Countenance like a Wall of Iron, and a Gate of Brass; or they
will never be able to bear up against, and wade through all these: God therefore
forbids his Prophets this carnal Fear of Men, as, Jer. 1.17.
Gird up thy loins and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee: Be
not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them. So also, Son of
man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, Ezekiel. 2.6.
though briars and thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among scorpions: be
not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they be a
rebellious house.

7. Such must be zealous for God's Glory, and devoted to his Honor: Stewards
must be heartily affected with, and swayed by their Master's Interest, and must
look upon their Lord's Reputation as their own grand Concern; and this will
engage them to be prudent, faithful, diligent, etc. in their Place. So must
Ministers be toward God, toward his Name, Kingdom, and Glory. So was St. Paul
that glorious Steward, that incomparable Example of all Stewards; who did and
suffered more for the Glory of his Lord, and for the Good of his Household, then
any other; Phil. 1.20.
he tells us, That 'twas his earnest expectation, and his hope, that in nothing
he should be ashamed; but that with all boldness, as always, so then also,
Christ should be magnified in his body, whether 'twere by life or by death. He
would labor, he would suffer, he would live industriously, and wear out
himself; he would dieshamefully, and give up himself for the Magnification of
the Lord Jesus. And so in other places he professes, Acts 20.^
Bonds and afflictions abide me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so I
might finish my course with joy; and the ministry which I have received of the
Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God. So that he might
testify the Gospel, and introduce Jews and Gentiles to believe in Christ, and
to worship God, he would willingly undergo all Persecutions home to a cruel and
disgraceful Death. And so again, I am ready not to be bound only, Acts 21.13.
but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. For his Praise
and Glory; so also ought we to be zealous toward it, if ever we hope to fulfill
our Ministry.

8. Such ought to be loving and affected toward the Church, and People of God,
to st a due Value upon their Souls, and to have an ardent good will toward
them: Stewards should have Love toward the Family, rejoice in its welfare,
delight in its Prosperity, etc. without which they will either carelessly
neglect, or heedlesly and heartlestly perform their Duty toward them. So must
Ministers be toward their People; and herein also follow that glorious Pattern
St. Paul, who says concerning the Jews, I say the truth in Christ, Romans 9.1, 3.
I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, That I
have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart: For I could wish myself
were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh.
And again, Brethren, Romans 10.1.
my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved.
The same ardent Love and earning Bowels had he toward the Gentile Churches; so
he tells the Corinthians, Behold, 1 Cor. 12.14, 15.
the third time I am ready to come to you; and I will not be burdensome to you;
for I seek not yours, but you: for children ought not to lay up for the
parents, but the parents for the children. And I will very gladly spend and be
spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved. And
so also he declares his Love to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2.^, 8, 11.
But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherishes her children: So,
being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted to you,
not the gospel of God only, but also your own souls, because ye were dear unto
us. Ye know how we exhorted and comforted, and charged every one of you (as a
father does his children.) So should our hearts be affected toward our People,
and so we should follow that Precept, Feed the flock of God, and take the
oversight thereof, not by constraint, 1 Pet. 5.2.
but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.

9. Such must be humble and patient: Stewards must be of a composed and even
Spirit, and not be in a passion and storm for every little Miscarriage; else
they will be unfit to manage the Affairs of a great Household. So Ministers must
be of a settled and undisturbed Spirit, not soon angry, overlooking, passing by,
and dis-regarding of, and not troubled at the ill Humors, and unhandsom and
provoking Carriage, which they must expect to meet with from some or other of
the Family; yea, from them from whom they least expect it, and least deserve
it: This is expressly commanded them; a Bishop must be patient: 1 Timothy 3.3 4.
and so the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all Men, apt
to teach, Tim. 2.^, 26.
patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth, and
that they may recover themselves out of the Snare of the Devil's who are taken
captive at his will They must imitate Moses, and be zealous in God's Cause; but
meek and as unconcerned in their own, etc.

10. Lastly, Such must be blameless, and free from all Vice, commendable,
praise worthy, and shining in all Graces and Virtues, in all Gravity and
venerable Deportment: Stewards must be so, or they will never keep up their
Authority in the Family; if they be vain or vicious every one will despise
them. So Ministers must excel in all excellent and eminent Manners and
Practice, and give all good Examples to their People; so they are enjoined, Not
as Lords over God's heritage, Pet. 5.3. Tim. 4.
but as examples to the flock. So is Timothy charged, To be an example of the
believers in word, in comversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.
And St. Paul tells us that he was so, Brethren, Phil. 3.1^ 20.
be ye followers together of me; and mark them which walk so as ye have us for
an ensample: For our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for
the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ. Which they must do to confirm their
Doctrine; they must preach out of the Pulpit by their Lives, as well as in the
Pulpit by their Sermons: this they must do to maintain their Authority over,
and their Respect from the Household of God. So St. Paul directs Timothy to do,
having commanded him, 1 Timothy 4 12.
Let no man despise thy youth. He knew that some Persons would be apt to
disdain to be taught, to be reproved by a young Lad, a beardless Boy, (as we
use to say) and so to contemn him; which he warns him against, and directs how
he may avoid it, even by being an Ensample to the Believers in Word, in
Conversation, etc. by shining in all Graces, Duties and Virtues toward God and
Man. And this was that which procured to John the Baptist so great Reverence
and Respect from Herod, Luke 6.
He feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and observed him,
and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly. So that his
eminent Life and shining Conversation won him, from such a cruel Tyrant, awe to
his Person, attendance to his Doctrine, and obedience in many things to his
Injunctions; though in the case of his Herodias, rather than be parted from her,
he would part John's Head from his Body. The Title that the Holy Ghost gives
Ministers do all engage them hereunto; as they are called Ambassadors, Fathers,
Lights, Stars, Angels: How grave then, how shining, how exemplary, how heavenly
should they be? The chief Graces and Duries which they ought to have and
perform, and the great Vices and Sins which they ought to subdue and avoid, we
have specified in 1 Timothy 3.1, 7. Tit. 1.5, 6, 8. to which I refer you. In a
word, let us but well study and follow the three Epistles of Paul to Timothy
and Titus; and we shall need no other Cannons or Directory; for he tells
Timothy that 'twas for this end that he wrote those Epistles to him, If I tarry
long, 1 Timothy 15.
that thou may know how thou ought to behave thyself in the house of God,
which is the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth.

Now because I know that through the Corruptions of our own Nature, and our base
inward Discouragements, and the manifold and great Oppositions and
Contradictions that we do or may meet with. Motives are useful to excite us to
all these Particulars, I shall take leave to hint some few very briefly,
because a word to the wise is sufficient.

Motives. 1. Because of our Lord, whose Stewards we are, there is nothing in
him, (as there may be in Humane Lords and Masters,) that can give us the least
Encouragement to omit, to be remiss in, or to contradict our Duty; but all to
the contrary: God is not ignorant, but knows us, and all we do; he is not
careless or heedless, but strictly and exactly observes us, and all our
Behaviors; he is not unconcerned about his Family, or no way touched with our
Misdemeanors, and its Wrongs, but very jealous of his own Glory, and his
Family's Good; he is not impotent or unable to Avenge himself, or execute his
Displeasure, but Almighty, etc.

2. Because of the Household over which we are, it is the Church of God, his
Flock and Heritage, his peculiar Treasure, the Apple of his Eye, and the
Darling of his Soul, etc.

3. Because of the great and glorious things that are entrusted with us; Word,
Ordinances, Discipline, Spiritual, Heavenly and Divine Things, subserviated to
God's greatest Glory, and to Man's supreme and eternal Good.

4. Because of the great and glorious Reward, they shall receive that duly
discharge their Stewardship: It Is said concerning the good, wife, faithful and
perseveringly diligent Servant and Steward, Maith. 24 46, 47. i Luke 12. 43,
44. 1 Pet. 5. 1 4.
that he is blessed; and his Lord will make him Ruler over all that he has.
And that the Elders who feed the Flock, and take the Oversight of it willingly,
and of a ready Mind, and are Ensamples thereto: when the chief Shepherd shall
appear, Dan. 12.3
they shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away. Ministers, good
ones, shall shine like Stars, while others shall be but as the Firmament: We
shall be rewarded not according to our Success, but according to our Labor and
Faithfulness in our Ministry; for Success is God's, but Labor and Industry is
ours by God's assistance, and therefore if there be a Minister more faithful,
laborious, zealous, etc. in his Function, though he convert no Souls, yet he
shall receive a greater Reward then another, who is less so, and converts many
Souls.

5. Because of the dreadful Punishment which those Stewards must endure, Matthew.
21 48, 51.
which are nor, which do not, so as we have been exhorted to: Luke 12.45, 46.
In those so frequently quoted Passages it is threatened against the Lazy, the
Secure, the Rude, and the Fighting Servant and Steward, That his Lord will come
in a day that he looks not for him, 1 Cor. 9.16.
and at an hour that he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder; and will
appoint him his portion with the hypocrites and the unbelievers. and Sr. Paul
denounces a Woe against himself if he preached not the Gospel; and so to us,
if we do not preach it and practice it as we ought. As good Ministers are
ordinarily the best Men, and do God most service, and the Church most benefit
on Earth; and so receive the greatest degrees of Glory in Heaven: so bad and
profane Ministers are usually the very worst of Men, bring to God greatest
Dishonor, to the Church greatest Detriment, and shall lie down deepest in the
bottomless Pit.

6. I would add one more to Ministers of our Persuasions, and that is, Because
in these days God has given us so wonderfully our Liberty, has opened our
Mouths, given us Freedom to preach, boldly and publicly to Congregations
without fear of Fines or Bonds, and has hitherto to this day so graciously
prolonged it to us, and given us a Meeting of so many in Peace, Ingenuity and
Gratitude should constrain us to do all that possibly we can for God and his
Glory, for Christ and his Church.

We proceed to the second Object of Exhortation:

2. This serves to exhort those who intend for the Ministry, to consider well
and wisely what they are about, what the greatness, the weight, the charge of
this Stewardship are, and what they ought to be and do that are of this
Function, and so not to dare to enter rashly thereon, without the due
Qualifications (at least in some good measure,) of Head, Heart, and Life, of
Learning and Orthodoxy, of Grace and Experience, of Manners and
Praiseworthiness, of Conversation. St. Paul enjoins that a Minister must not be
(...), 1 Timothy 3.6.
a Novice, or a Novel Graft just now grafted in; he must not be a Novice in the
Faith, nor a Novice in Grace, nor a Novice in Manners. Persons must not take
the Charge of the Mysteries of God to themselves, when they are but little
better qualified then the meanest Servants, not so well as most, yea, perhaps
really not of the Family of God themselves, of the Invisible Church by Grace. I
would not here be thought to discourage all young Men from entering upon the
Ministry, (especially now that the Church of God is in so great need of
Pastors,) for I well know that a young Timothy may be as well qualified for it,
and demean himself as well in it, as a more aged Apollos: But then I am sure
such qualified young Men will be the least forward, and the most backward to
undertake it, because they know the Naughtiness of their own Hearts, the
strength and working of their own Corruptions; they know they have a hard task
to look after, and to keep their own Souls, and therefore they tremble to take
upon them the Charge of others Souls; to be put upon keeping others Vine-yards,
when they cannot keep their own; and so must be thrust out (as it were) with
Violence into the Lord's Harvest. Whereas they who are least prepared and most
unfit, are the most forward to undertake the Ministry, and will not be
restrained by any Cautions from rushing upon that Function, for which they have
no Fitness nor Preparation.

I proceed to the third Object of this Use:

3. This serves to exhort the Family and Household over which Ministers are
Stewards; that in the words of the Text, They would so account of them, duly
carry it toward them in Mind, Heart, and Practice; I shall mention a few
Particulars very briefly:

1. Do you Honor and Reverence your Ministers as in such a Function; for though
they be your Fellow Servants toward God, yet they are your Superiors in the
Family, having the highest Office therein, and none above them as they are
Stewards of God's Mysteries, (for though we acknowledge the Magistrate to have an
Authority about sacred Things and Persons, yet he has nothing to do in them,)
and so are said in Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
to be over you, to have the Rule over you; and in those forementioned Texts,
the Lord Christ is said to make his Servants and his Stewards Rulers over all
his Household: Heb. 13.27.
and that which the Apostle calls Dispensation or Stewardship in one Verse, 1
Cor. 9.17, 18.
in the very next he calls Power or Authority. Wherefore you owe them Respect
and Reverence, which you must have in your Hearts and Carriage toward their
Persons.

2. Obey your Ministers, and submitting yourselves unto them, to their
Authority in Christ you must submit, and to their Commands from Christ you must
obey: (If what we enjoin be not according to the Word, do not obey us; as if
what we teach be not according to it, do not believe us; and if what we
threaten be not according to it, do not fear it, etc.) Whatever we enjoin or
forbid, if it be proved from the Word of Christ, you must do the one and
forbear the other: You are commanded, Heb. 13.17.
To obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they
watch for your souls, as they that must, give account, that they may do it with
joy and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

3. Love your Ministers dearly, and affect them highly, (in all these
particulars we suppose them to be such as deserve the name of Ministers, and do
their Duty) for their great Labors, and the great and inestimable Profit they
bring (if the Fault be not your own,) to your own Souls: So they loved St.
Paul, Acts 20.36, 38.
who when he took his Leave of them, and told them he should see them no more;
wept sore, and fell on his neck and kissed him. And yet more the Galatians
loved him at their first Conversion, and before they were alienated from him by
Underminers and false Teachers, for he bears them Record, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
That if it had been possible they would have plucked out their eyes, and have
given them to him; (that is) if thereby they could have done him any service)
And the Apostle commands you all to esteem them very highly in love for their
Works sake, Who labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you.

4. Content yourselves with the Portion of God's Mysteries which they
distribute to you: You must conclude that such are wiser then you, and better
know what is best for your Souls than yourselves; if they reprove you, if they
caution you, look upon it as more proper and useful then Commendation and
Encouragement: If they advise you to abstain a short time longer from the
Sacrament, till you have gotten more Knowledge and better Preparation; not to
exclude you from it, but that you may come more profitably and comfortably to
it, be well content, and do not fling off in a Pet, as the foolish and
inexcusable manner of some is, and never come near and hear him more.

5. Help your Ministers in their Charge and Labor, and make it as easy as you
can for them: The Stewardship and Charge of God's Mysteries, and of Souls, is a
most weighty and tremendous Burden, which you should endeavor to alleviate,
which you should do, by being thriving Christians in Knowledge and Godliness,
for this would be their Delight, and where the Heart is joyful, there the
Labor will be easy. By edubating your Families (Parents and Masters) in the
Faith of Christ, and the Fear of God; by watching lovingly and prudently one
over another, and mutually reproving, advising, exhorting, warning, as just
cause is given. Were these things duly performed by the People, much of the
Minister's Care and Pain would be diminished.

6. Pray to God fervently for such Stewards when you are destitute of them; and
bless God enlargedly for them when you are furnished with them, as one of the
greatest Blessings under Heaven. Thus we have finished the Use of Exhortation,
and proceed to a third.

3. This Doctrine serves by way of Reproof, 1. To Stewards. 2. To the Household.

Repreh. 1. Of all Ministers that either are unable or unwilling to do the Duty
of the Stewards of God's House, that either neglect or contradict their Duty
either in Language or Carriage, who by speaking or living do poison or disorder
the Household, or by silence and laziness starve it, the condition of such
Wretches is miserable and dreadful.

2. Of those of the Household who either omit or contradict these Duties they
owe to their Ministers, do not so account of them as of god's Stewards, but
demeans themselves quite contrary; these little consider that the Dis-respects
and Injuries they offer the Stewards (the Ministers) are offered to the Lord
(even God himself) of the Household; yet he tells them they are so, He that
despises you despises me, and he that despises me despises him that sent
me, Luke 10.16. And Christ's and God's Dishonor will redound to your
Destruction, if Repentance and Reformaton prevent not. I proceed to the fourth
and last Use.

This Doctrine also serves for Comfort to laborious Ministers and People.

Consol. 1. To all good, able, faithful, shining Ministers, who faithfully
discharge, and duly demean themselves in their Stewardship; 2uch are most
excellent and most blessed ones, whatever a proud, foolish and profane World
judges of them.

2. To all those of the Family that duly demean themselves toward their
Ministers, and in all things do dutifully account of them as Ministers of
Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, for the Honor and Respect, the
Obedience and Duty that are given to these are given to the Lord Christ
himself, as he himself assures us, He that hears you, hears me, and the
honors that is given to Christ shall return an hundred fold into the bosom of
him, that gives it, Luke 10.16. Would to God that all Congregations had such
Stewards and Pastors, and that all Stewards had such a Family and Congregation,
each discharging these Duties here discoursed of; for so 'twould fare very well
with the Church of God.

FINIS.

