Trincalo Sainted; OR THE EXALTATION Of the Jesuits Implement, and Printer
General, The NOTORIOUS Nathaniel Thomson, On this present 5th of July, 1682.
The day of his being Registered among the Popish Saints, for his Meritorious
Libel, Concerning the Murder of Sir EB. G. and Magnificently and Numerously
attended, to his Enthroning in the Pillory, for that purpose Erected in the
Pallace-Yard in Westminster, for the Encouragement of Towzer and Heraclitus, to
proceed till they obtain the like Exaltment.

WHO would ever have believed, once upon a time, that this poor Printer Not.
Thomson, that, went up and down Town to beg Work to Buy his Manks Lady Porridg,
should grow to that Pride, Riches, Impudence, and Lying, as to arrive at this
Exaltation to the Pillory, and to become a Popish Saint in the rank of St.
Celliers, his great Patroness and Example: But alas! who knows his Fortune, to
day a Villain, to morrow a Saint. I find it was beyond the Capacity of Gadbury,
himself to find out this man's Fortune, whose three penny Stars nevr foreshew'd
so great Preferment. But what Achievements has this Hector performed for the
Cause! How bravely has he behaved himself forth with might and main to gain
this Exaltation! This is he who has privately Printed whole Cart-Loads of
Popish Mass-Books, and other prohibited Papistical Doctrines, spreading them to
impoyson the Nation. This is he who privately Printed the Appeal, and other
pernicious Libells against the Government. This is he who publicly Printed
innumerable Scurrilous Songs and Ballads, lewd and Scandalous Libells against
many persons of great Quality and known Loyalty, daily spawning them to abuse
the Loyal Subjects, to corrupt the Ignorant, and to encourage the Mischievous.
This is Trincalo the Jackcal to Towzer, who used to lead the way like a Treble
in his Loyal Intelligence, whilst Towzer with a full mouthed Base, in his
Observations hunted the Protestant Puss, to make the Papists sport, and to show
the Tories game. This is the Loyal lying Knight of the Post, who is now exalted
to be the Knight of the Wooden Ruff, which he had long since deserved. But of
all those petty Atchivements, of Lying Intelligences, Appeals, abusive Songs,
false Advertisements, Popish Ballads, Treasonable Pamphlets, Jesuitical
Catachisms, and such like, of which the single Eyed Observator took no notice
at all, nothing was so meritorious to him as to gain him this Preferment of
Saint and Pillory Martyr, as his notorious Letters to Mr. Miles Prance, to
prove Sir EB. G. selo de se: wherein He, and his two Secretaries Pain and
Farewell, most Impudently, Scandallously, and Maliciously, by Jesuitical and
Diabolical Instigation, endeavored to wrong the pious memory of the Dead, and
to Scandalize and Impeach the Justice of the Nation, to bespatter and make
Perjured the Kings Evidence, and to render the Protestants of this Kingdom
rediculous to all Nations; to disanul and overthrow the belief of any Popish
Plot, (the main end and design) against so many Royal Proclamations, so many
Declarations and Votes of several Parliaments, and against the mind,
acknowledgment, and belief of so many Ministers of State and Justice concerned
in the proof of it; this is the high and meritorious Act, that has got our
famous Impudent, Brazen-forheaded Printer a Name, and brought him to his
deserved Preferment. Alas! He that burnt the famous Temple of Diana at Ephesus
to get him a Name, was a Fool to this man: who has made himself famous or
rather infamous to all posterity, and got Money and Saintship to Boot. But what
did this bold Not think, and those who set him on work, to affront and arraign
Justice, to have thus brought the Lives of several Persons in danger, to have
made the Popish Plot an Invention, and those who suffered for it Innocent,
after such undeniable proofs against them? I say, did they think or believe
that the Eyes of Justice had been out? and that the whole Nation were blind,
that they should so much as hope to carry on this so unlikely project? The God
of this World had hood-winked this Barking Trincalo: He could see nothing but
Mammon, and the Golden shower that fell into his Pockets, and the Devil had
taken away his Reason, and the understanding of his Masters, who had set him on
work. Perhaps he thought he could not go amiss under the tuition of the Guide
to the suferior Clergy; and that having escaped so many horrid Villainies, he
durst now attempt the greatest that ever was known, arming himself like the
Giants of Old, and assaulting Heaven it self. But the Devil and the Observator
have forsook him at last, left him to the mercy of a City Jury, and to the just
punishment of the Law. Alas! he thought they were all Ignoramusses, and that
they knew not how to write Billa vera; but it seems he was mistaken. But is
mighty Nat's Boastings, to prove that Sir E. B. G. murdered himself by Sixty
Witnesses come to this, that those very men he brought should be Evidence
against him, and should openly confess, that they believed in their
Consciences, that he was traitorously murdered, first strangled, and then run
through? Thus they who lay a Snare, and dig a Pit for others fall into it
themselves. Are the great Designs of the Papistical Tories dwindl'd away to
nothing? Is the mighty and impudent Champion laid on his back? But you are
deceived, he still keeps his face of Brass; and though convict of horrid Crimes,
he openly and impudently avows, he had done nothing for which he should be
ashamed to show his Face. Oh brave Not! Oh unparalled Impudence! now the
World will see that shameless Face, that graceless Visage, looking through a
wooden Port-hole, with an Helmet on its Head, to stand the Tempest of Turnips,
Apples, and rotten Eggs. The Day of this Exaltation has been long looked for,
and it is come at last. What will they now do for another Printer, to Midwife
the Popish treasonable Brats into the World? How disappointed will the
undermining Jesuits be for the want of their Implement, to infect the silly
Vulger with their wicked Pamphlets? What Lamentation and hanging down the Head
will there be among the Fraternity in Newgate, and elsewhere? How will Dame
Celliers rejoice to have a Fellow Saint, that has bravely withstood the Battery
of Dirt and Stones for the Cause, and arrived to the Honor of the Calender? But
what will his Friend and Crony the Observator say, and observe upon all this?
Does not he think his Turn may come, and that he may arrive at last through his
great pains to the like Exaltation. Well, impudent Not. thou have obtained thy
long merited Glory, and now thou will be most justly rewarded with the Order of
the Wooden Ruff, and with the Honor of being a Popish Saint and Sufferer. This
may comfort thy Heart, and the Cockles of thy Bawling Spouse, who having
printed many a Ditty, cannot but be well pleased at her Lord's Exaltation; and
to encourage thee, and in honor of the Holy Day of thy Exaltation, suppose
some Popish Dogeril Poet has taken the pains to write a Stanza or two for thy
Dame, she with her wide Throat and old croaking Voice, sings thus to her
Beloved Not.

The Knight of the Wooden Ruffs Exaltation,
Sung to a delicate Tory Tune, by the Manks Lady his Wife.
1.
COme stand to thy Tackle Not,
Let thy bonny sweet Face be seen,
I scorn to lend thee an Hat
Thy Brazen Face to skreen.
2.
Thou need'st not an Iron Cap,
To keep off Stone or Dirt,
For though they should give thee a Rap,
Thy Horns will keep thee from Hurt.
3.
Then hold forth thy impudent Face:
For It must be a delicate Sight,
To see it peep through a Wooden Case:
For now thou art dubbed a Knight.
4.
Unless hung at the Triple Tree
What could we wish for more?
A Lady I now shall be,
Whatever I was before.
5.
A Villain I have thee known,
Such as Pen could scarcely paint;
But now my dear Not. is grown
On a sudden a damnable Saint.
6.
Hold forth then thy graceless Snout,
Which never had yet Shame in it,
And lest of it any should doubt,
Thou have told the World so in Print.
7.
Now thou art exalted high,
The Whigs, though below, thee do see;
Then like a true Tory Cry,
Now hey Boys up go we.
8.
Who serves Jesuit, Priest or Pope,
Shall thus advanced be
With Pillory, Whip, or Rope,
Thus Hey Boys up go we.
London, Printed for J. B. 1682.


