A true and exact Relation of the several passages at the Siege of MANCHESTER,
Between the Lo: STRANGE his Forces, and the Town.

Wherein is evidently seen the wonderful mercy of God in their deliverance.

Written by one that was an eie-witnesse, and an Actor in most of that service.

Also a Protestation of Master Hotham, and diverse other Knights and Gentlemen,
against the 14. Articles of Pacification, and Neutrality.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Blackmore, at the Angel in Paul's Churchyard. October.
12. 1642.

An exact relation of the several passages at the siege of MANCHESTER.
Saturday the 25. of September, 1642. the Lord Strange having the fortnight
past drawn to Warrington great Forces of Horse and Foot, was feared to have
intended something against our town, yet could not any certainty (by any sure
ground of appearance) be gathered, yet upon that night about ten of the clock,
a letter came from Warrington aforesaid, intimating that the Lo: Strange was
coming with great power to disarme us, this was seconded, and that four great
pieces upon cariages were on the way, and his purpose was to assault the Town
very early in the morning. This wrought in us great fear and a general
astonishment, there being in our town some few gentlemen, Master Hellaude,
Master Edgerton, Master Dunkefienld, Master Booth, Master Hids, Master Rosworme
a German, whom God has sent into our Town a little before, who the night
before had finished the mud-walls and chains, that were done by his directions
at the several passages of our town: Also Captain Bradshaw. These being
present in Town, coosulted about an hour with the chief of the Town, and
then it was concluded that the drum should beat up, the bells ring cross to
give the Country notice, and every man within to stand to his Arms, and before
the morning lights, notice was given that they were very nigh the town, at
which being by scouts discovered, every passage was as well manned as that
present time would admit, which by reason of some Country Forces that were come
unto us, our Neighbors and town all joyneing, kept them of a sudden Asault,
which caused them to take up some houses and passages very near the town at
three principal passages, South, North, and West, to hinder us of the least
both of men and provision, the Lord Strange his Forces (as is certainly
Reported) was about two thousand Foot, some say, four, five, or six thousand,
are betwixt five and six hundred horse, six great pieces of ordnance they being
settled, sent word to Require the Arms of our town, and to billet an hundred
men, which being denied them, two Gentlemen from our town were sent to know
the Reason of my Lords coming in that manner against the Kings Subjects, one
of them was kept two or three bowers, but at length got Releast.

Sunday.
THis day (being the Lords day) passed away with great fears and troubles as
the like was never seen in Manchester, yet it pleased God to send us some aid
from several Adjacent parts, so that before the next day at noone, there was
about one thousand men in complete Arms within our town, most of them
musketeers.

Monday.
Monday they strengthened all the passages as well as the Fort could do;
Captain Bradshaw the Dense gate end, Captain Ratcliffe the market street lane,
Cap: Booth the Mill gate, Captain Rosworme the Bridge against Sawford way,
Listermain, Barwick, the Hunts banck: and a company of resolute Soldiers the
Sned hill without any commander, toward the Afternoon it was observed that
diverse Horsemen of the Lord Stranges went out to asault the town Eastward, or
to have stopped the way, which being taken notice of, Captain Bradshaw with
about 30. Musketeers issued forth, Shot Sharply at them and made them retire
back with have toward their places of Randevouze.

Notwithstanding there were then laid betwixt our men and that place 40. or 50.
Musketeers that played very vehemently upon them, and having the advantage also
of a Ditch-bancke, our men feareing that they should be compast in with them,
Retreated without any loss or hurt to the Dense-gate end; the place that was
first assaulted.

And presently after that, diverse of our enemies stoale down to the end of a
great Barn that was full of Corn and Hay, and set it on Fire with some other
buildings that was betwixt them and the new made Mudd-wall, the same being
about an Hundted and Fifty yards distant, they gathered together (the Barn
beginning to burn) and thought to take the advantage of the smoke to cover
them, and by a sudden shot to have driven our men from their Fort, which
assaying to do, were answered so well by our shot, that they were beaten
back, and a chief Commander of their Horse slain, with diverse others of
their Soldiers. This fight continued for the space of three quarters of an
hour in a vehement manner, our enemy having another company of foot to have
seconded the first, and behind them a great force of Horse to have come on, but
their welcome (by the grace of God) was so hott that they durst not aproach
nearer but retired back, in this fight was not one of our men touched, save
that an unskilful man (whose Musket was ready to be discharged) let it fly at
unwares and struck one of his fellows through the neck that he died, this man
that was thus slain, was Servant to Master Ashton of Middelton.

Now when the flame of the fiered barn appeared (which might have discouraged
all our hearts, had not the Lord supported us) came down from Sawford to the
foot of the bridge, great store of horse and foot of the Lord Stranges with a
sudden shout, and Assayd to enter, but were so Answered with our ready shot,
that they durst not ventur on it again, At which fight it is said some Commanders
were cut off, and many Common Souldyers, for some lay dead in the street (that
they durst not come near all the next day for fear of our shot): the night
beginning to aproach great care was used for our safety and with great fear the
night passed on, About twelve of the Clock that night came (at the bottom of
the parsonage) it is thought an hundred or an hundred and fifty men down by the
water side, Intending to have fired the town by some stacke of faggets that
lay close behind the houses, but four men standing Sentinel at that back
passage, with the help of 8. men more that came in unto them, drove and forced
them back, how the Lord preserved these twelve men it is wonderful, for as the
enemy shot fiercely at them before, so their own friends behind them, (not
knowing who they were) shot as fiercely at them, yet God be praised none of
them were touched, the night passed on with great fear.

Tewsday.
THe next morning were planted some Ordnance, which first played upon the Deans
gate end, the first shot struck off 2. ridge tiles of a barn, and the bullet
fell down among our Soldiers, the fight whereof did some what terrify them, but
their Cap: encouraged the^ so as by little and little they were drawn past
fear: they shot several times again but did no hurt at all, then they planted
two ereat pieces at Sawford, to batter down about that passage that came forth
over the bridge, and shot twice, then my Lord Strange sent a Trumpeter to
require passage through our Town with his Forces, out that was refused, then
played four great pieces with great violence, the bullets shooting through and
through diverse houses so that the bullets came tumbling amongst us like balls
but did no harm to any, only one boy (that was a wicked Child, having overrun
his parents) was with Cannon shot mortally wounded, by gazing in the face of
the enemy, at a work made by the mudwall, who within a few hours died, then
presently followed out a troop of their horse to stop part of the passage
Eastward, but some of our musketeers issuing forth at the market-steed-lane,
drove them back, in which fight one of our bill men only was shot into his
shoulder, the shooting continued with such vehemency, then it is scarce
credible to believe so little hurt should be done, our town lying so open and
naked on all sides, in the Afternoon seven of our men went over the bridge to
cease upon a house that commanded the bridge, but were presently discovered,
this night passed away with great fear and trouble.

Wednesday.
ON Wednesday morning our seven men were surprised in the said house, and
taken, and diverse of our enemies were placed in their rooms; then they fell to
shooting again, which we likewise answered, and Fortifications were soon
made, that no great hurt was done to us. In the afternoon a man was shot into
the leg as he was crossing down to go to his guard, and another of our
Bel-men was by peeping forth of his Rank shot through the head with a bullet
and dyed. This night continued with such shooting betwixt us and Salford, as
the like has not been heard. One of our men, his musket breaking (in the
Churchyard) struck off his hand. The same evening they made an assault on the
Sned-hill, but were beaten back. The Troopers went out into the Country this
day to rob and spoil about two miles from our town, where two or three
Musketeers and five or six Bill-men chased them and routed them, and took
four Horse, and slew one, and five men that evening, besides many other
prisoners were taken and brought into our town, with some Arms. About seven
of the clock in the evening, notice was given that they had a design to fire
our Town, but store of rain fell that evening, which proved much to our
advantage; for the waters were raised, and they could not so readily pass over
the rivers; yea some one cried within the compass of the Watch, Fire, Fire,
which gave the Alarm, and ran quickly through the town, which put us in great
fear, but proved nothing. Warning was given to all men that they should watch
their own houses both within and without. About eleven of the Clock at night,
the enemy made an Assault at the east side of the town, and came upon the
Brick croft with a great shout and a sudden discharge, where there lay 8 of
our men in the brick kill, who had Fortified themselves there, and Answered the
other with as sudden a shot as they could, They continewed shooting the space
of an hour, and then the Cavaliers began to Retreat. In this fight one of the
poor men in the brick kill shot of two of his little fingers of one hand, and
his hand also bruised by the bursting of his piece.

This night was very greevous to our men, they being almost quite spent with
watching, and toyling, and running to and fro, that beyond the ordinary course
of Nature they held out: that Night it please God to send us about twelve of
the Clock about 80 musketeers and pikes, eleven whereof were slain as they came
to the town, by seven of the enemies who lay secretly in the way as they
should pass and shot them suddenly, which was a great greef to their fellows,
these when they came in Joined themselves to Captain Bradshaw they being his
neigbours, which strengthened him very much, he having endured a sharp, long,
and bitter time of it. A great strength lying against that passage to enter
there that night, before it was morning, were brought two great pieces and
placed at the head of Salford, to come down to the foot of the bridge to make
open way by driving down our works and our men from them.

But on the Wednesday morning, it being espied, care was taken how to prevent
that danger. Shooting continued still very vehemently till toward the
alt^^ncone; then his Lordship sent for a Treaty, requiring a thousand Arms;
we were then in a great straight, having powder and shot, but no match, neither
had any way to get any; time was required till seven the next morning;
whereupon the Lord Strange engaged his honor, that nothing should be done in
that time; in which time his Soldiers went about the work they came for, that
was to pillage and play the thieves in the Country all thereabouts: in this
little time of cessation, there was some man in our Town that had seen the
making of Match, and had thereby gained some little insight in the making
thereof, he fell to work, and gave direction about the making thereof, and
performed it well, and got supply of Match; and our Soldiers being a little
refreshed by rest and sleep, did mightily encourage one another to stand to
it, and would admit of no Parley; the Gentlemen being inclinable to condescend,
but the Soldiers expressing a great unwillingnesse, by a general shout of
Captain Bradshaws Company, declared that they would part with their Arms and
lives together. Now his Lordships Soldiers began to start aside, for they
would not come near but gave back; for by reason of cold, and wet, hunger and
thirst, and labor, want of sleep, and a bitter welcome that we gave them,
their hearts were discouraged mightily, in so much, that unarmed men of ours
took courage and brought in both prisoners and Arms of theirs, so as scarcely
can be believed. Now the time of Treaty was almost spent, and it was espied
(by some of my Lords men) that some man of ours at the back side of a house,
stood where was a ditch and small bancke cast up, to play upon Salford, they
took exceptions against that which was done partly before that time, as also
for taking down a wool pack, and laying it as it was the night before, a
Soldier turning it down to rest himself upon it; as also that a Countryman
newly come into the Town, and knowing nothing of the Treaty, shot off his
Musket; all which as they said, was against the Law of Arms, which being
excused, his Lordship answered, that he was informed, that during the time of
the Treaty, his Soldiers had not made one shot, not taking notice of the two
men they killed us coming to the Town, nor of the pillaging and plundering the
Country, nor any of those Acts of injustice and violence, and therefore it was
resolved, that we would treat no more with him, neither would give him any
Arms.

Thursday.
Then began they freshly to their work again on the thursday morning about
ten of the clock, and immediately was discharged two great Pieces of Ordnance
against the new bancke that was raised along the waterside to command the
Street that leads up to the Chapel, they being discharged struck through
and through a house of one that much favored my Lord, but mist the work. From
whence we playde so hotly, that the Canno-neere having again chargde his
Cannon, durst not stay to discharge it, but so they stood all that night, and
all the next day, and part of the next night, and they durst not come near
unto them, yea they were got away the second night, by what device I cannot
tell. His Lordship sent for a Parley again, but the Soldiers would admit of
none. We pass here through great difficulties, Master Butterworth, a prime
man, is gone out for aid toward London we hear, Master Holland the chief,
upon good reason, thought fit to condescend, had drawn Master Booth and Master
Edgerton with him: the Soldiers also that were ill affected, began to murmr
and complain, making this an excuse, that the Country was spoiled, and they
to save the Town hazzarded their own estaies, so that we were even at a
stand, which being taken notice of, the well affected Soldiers encouraged by
Master Hyde (the meanest of the Lievtenants) Captain Bradshaw, and Captain
Rofworme, spoke openly, that if all the Gentlemen deserted the cause, yet would
they cleave unto it, and depend and rest upon the promise and engagement of the
Parliament, for the making good any loss or damage that should befall them.

Great and terrible words are given out against the Rogues of Manchester (as
they please to term us) calling us bloody minded Roundheads: Lies published by
them, that Mr. Johnson one of our fellows, was taken, hanged, and quartered,
that Master Bowker our Constable was slain, that our Town was given up, and
that the Queen had sent great battering Pieces; These and the like Reports
went very far into the Country, which hindered us of help, discouraged us
within, so that had not the Almighty God (whom they scoffed against in their
reproachful way) saying to this effect, we shall see where their Almighty
Gods help is: I say, had not our Lord God been our present help, certainly in
that very extremity we had perished. For encouragement rested only in the
breasts of a company of poor despised Christians, who with our Town, our
poor Manchester, engaged themselves against the great mighty ones of our
County; For, for ought I can learn, there was not one Gentleman of Eminency,
Knight or Lord, throughout our Shire, nor any eminent man of note, but other in
person or best assistance he was against us. Great boasts were made abroad, and
our Town condemned for proud and bloody people, because we would not give up;
and general notice was given (by my Lords friends) to all those whom they call
well affected people, with all innocent women and children, as they did tender
their lives, to forgo and leave the Town; yea, and before this time, many of
the chief of our Town, had left and forsaken us; and our own neighbor Town
Salford was up against us, keeping us in play with their continual shot, so as
the thieves had more liberty to rob, yea, hope of help now failing, and no
aid appearing, hope of provision beginning to slack, the villains having
spoylde all about them, what they could not eat and carry away, either for
horse or man, most shamefully they cast abroad and spoyld it. It is confidently
spoken, they have done ten thousand pound of hurt. Also report came, that
Master Leigh of Adlington, with four hundred men, were at Stopport, ready to
assist the Earl of Darbie. Master Ardene of Huden went our Eastward to clear
a passage, and had one of his men shot and dyed; more prisoners were this day
brought into our Town; The Cannon still play through and upon diverse houses,
and hurt none: this night passed on with great and general fear, not knowing
how we should subsist.

Friday.
Friday morning the great Pieces were drawn out of Salford, the well affected
peoples houses there plundered, robbed, and spoiled, what they could not carry
away, they mangled and pulled in pieces; the former fears removed by Soldiers
that were sencible Christians, they did veil themselves with valor, and gave
out words, that if the head Gentlemen did still persist in destroying them,
they would commit them, and thereupon Listed themselves to every place and
Captain apart. The Earl of Darbie sent again for a Parley, requiring to have
the Trained and Freehold Bands with him made out two hundred, part whereof were
with him already, and that he required them to defend the Kings person, the
Laws and Liberties of the Subjects. But answer was made, that they were bound
by the Laws of the Kingdom to keep their Arms to defend themselves against
Atheists and Papists, which they were sure was Law, and that he should not have
one inch of match but against their wills. This day it was known that Captain
Standish was slain by peeping out of a door in Salford, which was a great
grief to the Earl of Darbie. The same time was three or four drowned near
our Town, one of them (as it is reported) had three Rings on his fingers, of
an hundred and twenty pound value; three of our enemies men were buried at
Drosbery, some four miles from our Town.

The Post came in this night and brought some good news, which did encourage
us a little, who were till then almost out of courage; and also reported that
Mr. Leigh his men would not follow him out of Cheshire into Lancashire: here,
was two very remarkable things that happened.

One Bloomely of Ardwick was cocking his Match to have shot and killed an
honest man that came to assist the Town, the said Bloomely (wresting the
Scriptures) that obedience (as if every obedience were lawful) was better than
sacrifice, the said Bloomely was this night killed by them that he so much
defended, going with his wife to milking, was by the Cavaliers shot into the
belly; And though upon his knees he begged that they would save his life, yet
could not obtain it. Also a man of a bitter spirit, one Bradshaw, fleeing out
of our Town to our enemies, for speaking some unadvised words, was slain and so
requited. Another man, a Constable of Blackley, would not admit of a Watch,
till his house was plundered, and the worth of thirty pound taken from him, and
then he was pleased to alter his opinion. And concerning the Barn that was
burnt with Hay and Corn by our Town side, it was worth an hundred and fifty
pound at least, and he that owed it was noted to be a man that did (as much as
in him lay) comply with the Earl of Darby: and was so requited by his
Cavaliers. Several other remarkable passages might be collected, as this
afternoon the plunderers coming to an honest man's house intending to slay him,
got in, and cockt his pistol or peternell, ready to discharge at the man's
breast, but his fellow hitting him on the elbowe as if he had had something to
have said to him, turned therewith the mussell of his Pistol upon one of his
own Company and killed him, whereby the poor man had time to make an escape
with his life. Now the last and greatest project was by fire-bals, which as it is
credibly spoken, twenty pound was spent in the making of them, which were
accordingly shot and cast at our Town, but, God be praised, could take no
effect, the Lord had respect to his own cause, and to his poor peoples prayers
and tears; for otherwise certainly they had spoiled us, for no means for our
overthrow, was left unattempted.

Saturday.
This night past, with the like shooting as before, the next day being
Saturday, a parley was moved for exchange of prisoners, which was assented
unto, we had about fourscore of theirs taken: and that they might not want a
complete number, they had taken diverse poor men that were about their several
businesses in the fields.

And had used our men which they had taken very inhumanely, and had threatened
to take their lives, yet God preserved them. Then his Lordship raised his
siege, and went back with his baggage; for the Lord had caused them to return
with loss and disgrace. Those that were slain by us, and those that (...) away
from him were very many, and is not yet known.

Sunday.
The Lords day following, our men were upon their march, and many of them
issued out and took much Arms that they had left behind them in diverse places.

The report of their coming on was very terrible to my Lords Companies as it is
said.

Monday.
Monday being come, our men being wearied out, went home: those of the Villages
near hand, promised us to be ready again at a very short warning. The next
morning a sudden report was that our Town was again assaulted, which was very
terrible to us we being naked; notice was given, and diverse came presently to
our help, but it proved no such matter. It is now said that the Earl of Darby,
with Earl Ryvers, are at Armeschurch, and at Wiggen, and Warrington, and in
Cheshire, and are there raising Forces to come against us again, our good God
stand for us, we have no other hope nor help but from him; the cause concerns
the whole County, and if the Lord give us over, none can then expect to stand,
all hanging (for the most-part) the other way. We expect aid of horse daily
from London, with some great Pieces, which if the Lord send them us, we shall
be enabled more powerfully to resist. In the mean time with prayers and tears
we entreat the help of Gods people by their prayers for this poor Town of
Manchester.

Believe my Reports, for I am confident that I spare to speak out, because I
would be within the bounds of modesty and truth. My words are as the words of
one risen from the grave, and sure you will hear him, they are my own
observations, and what I know in great part to be true, being an eye witness:
our troubles are so great, and fears so many, that we can scarcely tell what we
do. Pass by the manner of my writing, for I cannot have time to peruse what I
have writ: and though this and more be fresh in my memory, yet the time, and
circumstance being different, I may omit something in the order. I desire that
this our deliverance may be had in perpetual remembrance, that the generations
to come may hear and know what the Lord God has done for poor sinful
Manchester. We daily look for assistance from London, but our only trust and
safe dependancie is in God: The Lord shield his poor people from the rage of
the oppressors and give us faith still to depend and pray to God with faithful
hearts, that our King may comply his heart to and with the faithful of the
Land. I shall ore-run my self, if any word or thing be wrong written, omitted,
or left forth, let me entreat you to gather the sense of it by what is written
before or after: if I have committed any fault in writing, for I have not time
to read it over. I pray you pray for us all, and the Lord be with you all, and
keep us all steadfast to the day of his appearance. And so I rest your loving
Friend.

Manchester, the 8. October. 1642. Although there is nothing more desirable to
us whether we look upon our own particulars, or the present distractions and
dangers of our Country, then that all our conclusions may conduce to a quiet
and peaceable settlement for the effecting whereof we are not at all insensible
how necessary it is for us to hold concurrance with those Gentlemen with whom
in all our consultations hitherto we have communicated to the same end: yet
inasmuch as those Articles hereunto annexed being as we conceive, totally
against the privileges of Parliament, and the Protestation we have already
taken, and no way at all tending to the peace, but rather to the exposing of us
to more ensuing dangers, being that it is a fundamental liberty of Parliament,
to send for Delinquents in such a way as they shall see needful; and we
conceive that the eight Article does directly and plainly oppose it; being that
now the Delinquents are so strong that they cannot be sent for in an ordinary
way of proceeding: we therefore hold our selves necessarily obliged as well in
discharge of our selves, as duty to our Country, utterly to disavow the said
Articles. To which end we have published this our Declaration, to which we have
subscribed our names this. 8. of October. 1642.


John Hotham. Matthew Boynton. Henry Fowls. Thomas Remington. Francis Boynton.
John Anlaby. Arthur Beckwith. Phell. Saltmerse. Jeffery Gaile. William Darby.
John Boucher. Tho. Notcliff. Francis Lassels. John Lister. John Dent. Henry
Wickermer.
And four more.

FINIS.

