A True Account of the Forts and Castles belonging to the Royal African
Company, upon the Gold Coast in Africa, with the Number of Men, and Guns, the
Nature of the said Forts and Castles, and the Guns planted on them, as taken
from sundry Persons very lately come from thence.
Names of the Forts and Castles. Number of Men. Number of Guns. Dickiscove,
built by this Company. 24 10 The Guns very good, Sakar and Minion, from 2
Pounders to 6 Pounders, the Fort of 4 Palankers, strong built of Stone and
Lime. Comenda, built by this Company. 67 12 The guns 4 of them Demiculverin of
9 Pounders, the rest large Saker 4 to 6 Pounders, the Fort square, and very
strong built of Stone and Lime. Cape-Coast-Castle. 133 44 A strong Regular
Fortification. Fort-Royal, bought of the Dane for 4500 l 33 16 Good Guns, the
Fort built of Stone. Annamaboe. 22 14 The Guns very good, the Fort Walls 24
foot high, strong built of Brick and Stone. Winebah, built by this Company. 35
16 A Regular Fortification, very strong built of Stone and Lime, the Guns very
good, Demiculverin, Sakar and Minion. Mera, built by this Company. 32 25 The
Fortification very strong of Stone and Lime, 4 Palankers, the Guns very good, 2
Demiculverin 9 Pounders, the rest large Sakars and Minion. 346 137

There has been since sent for Supplies, by the Ships Fauconberg, Prince
George, the Coaster, and Sally Rose, which did Arrive safe, 69 Recruits,
besides others the Company did send in the Ships Hannibal, and William, and
John, which miscarried,

And have Entertained 34 more, which goes by the Ship Prince of Orange, now
ready to Depart.

On the North part of Guinea.
Men. Guns. York Island, Sherbrow. 150 20 The Guns very good, the Fort of 2
Palankers very strong, built of Stone and Lime, in a Half Moon, very high, the
Water beating upon the Walls in some places; the Factory adjoining to it is a
strong large House built of Lime and Stone, covered with Lead, and in very good
Repair, besides several OutHouses for Conveniences of the Trade.

Men. Guns. James Fort at Gambia. Demolished by the French. To be Reestablish'd
150 90 Bence Island, Serelion. Demolished by Ditto. To be Reestablish'd 24 16

The said Forts and Castles are likewise sufficiently provided with small Arms,
Powder, and other Necessaries of War.


