A true and good RELATION, of the Valliant Exploits, and Victorious Enterprises
of Sir Simon Harcourt, and Sir Charles Coote, with their valliant overthrow, of
at least 5000. Rebels, with the burning of three Towns, where the Rebels lay
encamped near Dublin.

AND ALSO The relief of Droghedaugh, and other particulars related in a Letter,
dated Jan. 20. 1641. from Mr. Chapel of Dublin, to his friend, a Draper in
London, and brought by the last post, Ian. 25.

Whereunto is added another Relation concerning (these particulars) the taking
of the Town, and Castle of Enishannon from the Rebels, by Sir Simon Harcourt,
and Sir Thomas Temple, with a notable Victory over the Rebel Mac-Carty at
Enishannon Foord: Mac-Con the Rebels attempt upon the Town of Bandon Bridge,
and their happy Defeat by Sir Richard Grinfield.

depiction of two roosters staring angrily at one another

LONDON, Printed for F. Coules, and W. Ley at Paul's Chain, 1641*

A Letter sent from M. Chapel out of Ireland, to a friend of his in London.
YOur Letter bearing date the ^8 of the last Month, I have received, being
sorry to hear of your discontents in London; but I hope God will in his good
time turn all to the best: for those that that truly fear him. Our Rebellion
hear daily increases, so that we cannot travel any way from this City above
a mile or 2 without danger; since S. Samuel Harcourt came over, we in this City
have been much encouraged, his men were landed on Newyears day, and though they
were but one regiment, concisting but of 7 Companies, yet they have bred some
terror to our enemies, who before reported that the King would send us no help,
and calls us English Rebels; they began to incamp close about us at Clanta^,
which is but 2 miles hence; but Sr. Charles Coote, the week before Christmas,
with about 1500 horse and foot march toward them, and was with them as soon as
there was any light in the morning, and put them to slight; some he killed some
he caused to be hanged, and 3 or 4 he took prisoners, and after the Town was
pillaged by his Soldiers, he set it a fire with the Corn, which fire was not
out in 3 or 4 days after: it is thought that there were at least 2000 Rebels
in the town when Sr Charles came to it, he lost not one man at that time that I
can hear of. The last week the Earl of Ormand and Sr Charles marched forth,
both of them about 1 and 2 of the clock in the morning, and when they wear
without the Town, my L. of Ormand with his forces marched toward Finglas, and
Sr. Charles with his marched toward Santrey, in both which Towns the Rebels lay
in garrison, the Towns are both almost one distance fron hence, the farthest of
them is accounted but 2 miles and they are about a middle distant the one from
the other; Sr Charles quickly put his Rebels to slight, who seemed to be
furious at first, and made great shows with their coullers displayed, but durst
not stand to sight; Sr Charles burnt the Town and the next Town to it, and
then marched toward my Lord of Ormand, who was then in fight with the Rebels of
Finglas, and it was reported that he was in danger at that time; the Rebels
seeing another Army coming toward them from the way of Santrey, thought it
had been their own coming to help them, but as soon as they perceived the
contrary they fled; their Coronall (being a man too familliar amongst us)
amongst the rest of his Rebel rout fled, leaving behind him his hat, scarlet
coat, and blue plush lump lined with fur, which were no sooner seen but were
known to be Luke Neterfeelds, the L. Neterfeelds son, who is likewise a Rebel,
after they had pillaged the Town, they set the Irish houses on fire, hanged
some, brought some 4 or 5 prisoners, releast some of our English that were
formerly taken by them, and should have been hanged that very morning: The
Rebels that were in both Towns were thought to be at least 6000, and both our
Armies were not above 4000. It is thought that there were slain of them that
day almost 200, but I hear not of above 2 or 3 of ours. The 10 day of this
Month, Sr Charles marched forth toward Tallow and the Mountain foot, about 4
or 5 miles from Dublin, where there were thousands of Rebels that night, but
perceiving Sr Charles coming toward them, of which it is thought they had
intelligence, they fled, but he burnt 4 of their Irish Towns where they were;
and the Soldiers bringing home their pillage, came into Dublin before Sunset:
about 10 of the clock that night, he took other Soldiers and marched toward
Swords, which is about 6 mil. from hence Northward, where he was with his Army
before break of day the next morning, and as soon as it was light he began to
charge the Rebels, but at a great disadvantage, for he was forcd to keep the
body of his army in a lane, and the Rebels shot from their works and tampars
of earth: but the wings of our Armey got into the next fields where they did
very good service, but within an hours fight he put them to flight; and after
the Soldiers had made their pillage, they burnt the Town to the ground, not
leaving one house standing: there were slain of them that day about 150, and
of ours but 4 men, whereof one was Sr Lorence Caray my L. Fancklands brother,
who was shot in the head as he was bringing up his men to fight, and is to be
buried on Sunday next. Sr Charles with the army returned to Dublin that night,
where he was of the Protestants blessed; but by the Papists cursed: for some of
them could not forbear, but openly to wish that all our Army were in the same
case and served as Sir Lorence was, one of them, as I hear, was hanged this
morning. Sr Charles Coots name is terrible to the Irish, and I could wish that
the E. of Ormands were so too but as long as his Troopers are most of them
Papist, and so many Papist to his servants, that they lay, eat and atend on
him, I fear it will not be. Our Parliament is proroged till June next, the
Rebels threaten to bring 60000 before Dublin very shortly, but we fear not
their worst, had we but here but 8 or 10000 Soldiers more, so that we might go
to meet them in the field, and yet leave strength enough to defend our City. On
Monday last there was a supply of victuals sent from this Port by Sea to
releave our Soldiers in Droghedagh, the which I pray God to send them there
ways they are like to suffer; and the Town lost, the which God forbid they have
been now beleager'd above 2 Months, the Rebels are grown more bloody in their
cruelties and merciless dealing with those poor Protestants, that they now
daily take than heretofore they have been* They lately took the* Town of
Strongford, and ripped up the Ministers belly, whose name was Traford, his wife
being in the street with him, she with her hands put his bowels into his belly
again, and with the help of some other, drew him a little way where there was
straw, with which she covered him, and run to the house to see her children,
which the Rebels were striping, and in pulling off of one of the children cots
they brok the childs neck, she run again to her husband and found him to have
received a wound in his head to the very brains, she run to seek again, but
whilst she was gone the Surgeon past by, and Mr. Traford spoke to him, and he
replied that he durst not meddle with him: his wife was meet by others of the
Rebels, which stripped her stark naked, she returning in that case to her
husband, put away the straw and found him dead with his throt cut: they have
barbarously murdered, hanged and destroyed diverse others of our Ministers, and
now say Mase in their Churches. It is too tedious for me to writ the tithe of
their cruel and merciless dealing which daily I hear of, and with my own
eyes see, those people that have been stripped stark naked, and come through
frost, snow, and rain to this City for succor; have here died for want, 30 of
them in a day and night, there are at this instant between 4 and 500 of them
shipped to be sent to West Chester. Should you see the multitudes of them and
their miseries, and know the plenty that most of them lately lived in, it could
not but make the hardest heart to grieve: God in mercy comfort them, and send
them relief according to their several wants. If there be so many in this
City, how many may there be through the whole Kingdom, and have and do perish
in the high ways and open fields, besides those that the Rebels have in prison,
and are daily like to fall into their merciles hands, If that they have not
speedy relief from England and Scotland, the which I pray God send us in due
time; otherwise many that at this time, which are in Castles and other holes,
being environed with their enemies, will be forced out of them or starved to
death: there are very few Papists, but they are Rebels, either in part or wish
well unto their proceedings, (I mean in this Kingdom) and I pray God to turn
the hearts of all those which seem to be, what indeed they are not, but more
especial those: If there be any such brearing Office in our Armies, and to
root them out from amongst us, which wish well to this Rebellion, yet seem
other ways; For many have promised fair, which meant nothing less than open
Rebellion, as daily they discover themselves, for one day they come as good and
loyal subjects, and the next being returned into the Country, show themselves
to be Rebels, and this is too usual a thing amongst us, God in mercy a^end it:
Many of our Citizens and most of the richest sort that are Papist, have sent
their goods, wives and children into the Country, some to their Country
houses, other to their friends: But all amongst the Rebels where no Protestant
may live or come, except with strength, and what differ these from Rebels
think you? Some of our Aldermen are returned to Dublin, and some others whose
wives, and children are not as I take it: Alde^man Joanes, who was the last
Summer at London, and brought over a Pattent to make a Lord Major of our City:
I dare swear rejoices to hear that his son is a Captain amongst the Rebels;
and should you meet those men as I do daily, and hear their discourse: You
would say they had brazen faces indeed: for should we go into the Country
amongst them, there were no death or misery bad enough for us, and as long as
such false brethren are amongst us, I fear there is but little quietness or
peace to be expected? There are 4 Lords, whose names are Butler, that are
Rebels, I pray God the sift, who I fear, is to curtious and favorable to his
Countrymen, may never affect their Religion, or covertly countenance, or other
ways violate the trust reposed in him. Hereafter I may chance write you more,
as the time gives occasion, but for the present with my love and best respects
to your self and the rest of my friends, I remain Your loving friend,

Richard Chapel.

SInce that I had ended this Letter, I am now told that Captain Bartlet has
relieved Droghedaugh with the victuals that were sent from hence, and that he
is now come to Dublin again with 2 prisoners that he brought from thence; upon
the relieving of the Town the Rebels made a breach in the wall thereof, and
there came in of them above 400, who were quickly for the most part slain, to
the number of 360 or there about, the rest taken prisoners, and how many were
slain by the long Boats, Gaboards and Pinnases that went to the Town is not
known, for they were furnished with store of Musketeers and small pieces of
Ordenance, the which they discharged toward the rebels on the shore, who
thought to have stopped their passage, as fast as they could let fly for 2 miles
space, we lost not a man, but their could not so, being so thick, 2000 on the
shore.

More nevves from Cork, in Ireland, the 16. of Ian. 1641.
Sunday, Jan. 16. Sir Simon Harcourt, and Sir Thomas Temple hearing that the
late risen Rebel, Dominick Mack Carty was drawing toward the Town and Castle
of Enishannon: with intent to victual and man it better, as we conceived:
considering how near that Castle stands unto Kingsale, lately recovered, and
how bad an enemy likely to prove, if we should suffer the Rebels, not only to
nestle there, but even to pass by our door, and to relieve them in a Bravado,
desired of God dispensation for breach of the Sabbath, and after some short
prayers, and recommending our selves unto God: with refreshing our bodies with
such food, as the condition of the time, and place, would permit: We advanced
200. Horses, and 115. Foot, and five small field Pieces, with this equipage; we
came unto the foord of Enishannon, being very exceeding broad, but not very
deep, hard chalky clay, being the siedge of the Foord: An arm of the Sea
flowing up from Kingsale, three Irish miles: we must needs pasle this Foord
unto Enishannon, other way there is none.

Monsieur Mack-Carty passed along the other side of the Foord upon the Strand,
in passing good order, as ever saw Rebels, since I came over, his Horses being
at least four or five hundred compleately armed: his Foot two thousand, and
about six or seven hundred completely armed with Pike, half Pike, Musked, or
Calliver, (which makes me suspect something, seeing that a Rebeell but lately
risen, and of no great note, this being the very first exploit that ever he
took in hand, as we hear of, should in so short a time be able to raise so
many men, and in that manner to furnish them) we expected not, till he should
bid us now come over: but forthwith sent over our Cavalery to charge him, and a
little to stay his have, and to peswade him to take us along with him to Enish.
if we could not obtain so much as to be there before him: Sr Simons 200. Horses
were as good* and as serviceably fitted, as ever were horses, that went out of
England, and the Cavallieers that sat them, as experienced Fire-men: Yet their
marching so far in the water; and the enemy standing on the dry strand, much
broke their charge, and advantaged the Enemies, who received their charge
boldly, and answered it stoutly: at least whether that they wanted powder, or
(which I rather believe) their powder was dame, being carried in bags by their
side, (as their manner is) whether it was one or the other, their Pistols would
no longer fire, which Mack-Cartie percelving, caused his Cavallery to retire:
and advanced his Infantery against onr Cavalery: and not the worst in front you
may be sure.

We victualled and mannerd the Castle with such provision and Ammunition as we
could well spare, until we shall hear farther from you; and on Monday were
back again at Kingsale.

Tuesday the eighteen we heard news that Bandon Bridge was suddenly surprised
by the Rebel Mac Con; and most fortunately relieved by Sir Richard Greenvill,
a very fine Eeglish Town walled in, belonging unto the Farle of Cork; the
manner thus: Sir Richard at his arivall to Cork, it being a thick and foggy
air, was something ill disposed; Captain Thomas Fineh Captain of the Fort,
persuaded him to take his Troop, and to scour the Country, passing as far as
Bandon, thereto lodge a night or two, being a most sweet air, thereby not only
to recreate himself, but also to revive the drooping hearts of his dear
Countrymen, with the presence of so worthy a Commander: Sir Richard consented,
and the next morning being Monday, Ian. 11. with 80. Horses, and only thirty
Musketeers, passed thither; when he came upon an hill, within a mile of the
Town, he heard their Drum beat, and saw their colors fly, The Town standing
in a bottom; likewise about some hundred shot play, wondering that they played
so fast: within half a mile we heard lamentations of women, and crying out of
children, we liked not that: Sir Richard caused his Trumpets to sound, his
Horses and Muskets to order and thus they all crying courage countrymen, a
Grinfield, a Grinfield: we came to the gates, which by reason of the great
confusion in the Town, were not opened scarce within a quarter of an hour.

Being entered, they found the enemy to have entered in the Low Town thorough
the water, between two buts of wale; some 40 were entered, and scirmishing with
the Towns men: the rest to the number of 600. were passing the foord a maine;
when they saw our trumpets and such a number of fresh Horses in that equipage,
and the shot plainly increased, they in the passage retired with all speed they
could make, into the wood and bog, some Two miles above the River, never
staying for their fellows in the Town, who were all slain to the number of
45. nine* Bandon men were either slain or dangerously hurt: Thus was that
pretty Town happily relieved, but all other news is not of this nature, I wish
it were,

Towns of greater importance are taken, that way we had sustained some harm,
had not Sr Simon, so wisly considered the Rebels advantage, (having not only
the strand, but diverse high and broken sandy banckes behind him shocked with
his supplies) and caused his infantery upon the falling back of his horses to
come up anckle deep in water in one whole body and to power in such a valley of
shot into the Rebels gross, that they dropped wonderfully, neither could their
shot at that distance reach onr men, as appeared afterward, being most of them
Calivers: Sir Simon perceiving how the game played, would not suffer his men to
move any further, but to play their shot at such distance, which he perceived
sufficiently anoyed their Enemies, and did them much harm; at the third
volley, the Enemies Infantery gave over and retired to the banks upon their
horses, how much they retired as near as could be guessed, ours at distance
advanced, till at length, the Enemy gave the freedom of the strand: then after
one volley more, our horses now under the command of Sir Thomas Temple, having
recovered the strand also, as now our foot had already the bancks. At last,
having found where they got up two horses a breast, (the foot in the mean time
awing the Enemy, fell upon them in such a fierce manner) that no resistance in
a manner was made; there was dead upon the ground eight hundred horses and
foot, with Mac-Carty and his two bastard brethen, whose heads were strait way
smitten off, and carried upon poles unto Enishannon.

Whither being come, the Town made, nor could make no resistance; The Castle
would not answer; whereupon Sir Simon with his five pieces battered the gate,
and wicket, entered by force, found thirty desperate Villans in it, hanged some
of them over the Castle wall, some in other parts of the Town. *

FINIS.

