A True and Credible Relation, OF THE BARBAROVS CRVELTIE AND BLOODY MASSACRES
OF THE ENGLISH PROTESTANTS That lived in the kingdom of Ireland, Anne Dom.
1641. In the province of Vlster, and other of the Provinces there, by the Irish
Rebellious Traitors.

Written by a Gentleman, who was an eye witness, of most of the passages
hereafter following, who was forced with his wife, to abandon, house, estate
and Country, for fear of the Rebels, and arrived in London, this 15. of
January. 1642.

LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin, 1642.

A true and credible Relation of the Barbarous cruelty, and bloody Massacres of
the English Protestants, that lived in the kingdom of Ireland, in Anno Domini,
1641. In the province of Ulster; and other of the Provinces there by the Irish
Rebellious Traitors.
THeir Cruel and Damnable Design, was first to have surprised the Castle of
Dublin upon the 23. day of October Anno predicto, upon a Saturday; the same
night all the Popish houses were to be marked with a Cross to be known from
the Protestants houses, their intent being upon the Sunday following to have
surprised all the protestants and to have stripped them naked, as they did many
thousands of men, women and children in other parts of the kingdom of Ireland
upon the same day, and also to have surprised all the English shipping, riding
at Anchor at a Harbor commonly called the Rings End, about a mile distant from
the City of Dublin. But God that saw their bloody intent discovered their
practice by one of their own faction suffering them to run on in their own
wicked hope and cruel imagination, until the night before their practice
should have bin put in execution, for the same night the Lord Mack-Gueere an
Irish man, and Captain Mack-Mahowne also an Irish man (who confessed the whole
plot) were apprehended, the one in Cookstreet within the City of Dublin, the
other near Dublin in Saint Mary Abbey in the suburbs of the same City, both
which have been ever since imprisoned in the Castle of Dublin, and do still
remain there: what man so blind as may not herein see the finger of God, and
how their malicious hearts are bent to shed innocent blood, that
notwithstanding they have so often failed in their wicked and bloody purposes
and intents both private and publik, which they have secretly attempted in
darkness will take no warning, but still run on in their bloud-thirstines, to
extirpate whole states, to suppress the truth, and to shed the blood of Gods
Saints, the Lord confound their devices*

It is too manifest that the Jesuits those firebrands of hell, and Popish
priests were the plotters of this and other Treasons, which can at their
pleasure absolve subjects of their obedience to their princes, and give power
to murder* and depose Kings, neither could they work upon a more rebellious
and forward Nation to do mischief.

The Irish is well known to be a people both proud and envious, for the
commonaltie they are for the most part ignorant and illiterate, Lazy and
poor, and will rather beg then work, and therefore fit subjects for the
Jesuits, to spur on upon such bloody Actions, for Ignorance is without mercy,
for never was it heard or known, that ever Turk or Infidel did ever use a
Christian so unmercifully as they have used the English protestants, who have
releived them, and kept them from starving,

It is too well known (the more is the pity and to be lamented) that they
have murdered, and starved to death of the English in the province of Vlster
and other provinces where they are risen up in bellion, of men, women and
Children above 20000.

Their manner is and has been, cowardly and trecherously to surprise them
upon great advantages, and without respect of persons* to rob them of all they
have, but being not content therewith (but as insatiable of blood) hunting
after their precious lives, stripped Ladies, and gentlewomen, Virgins and Babes,
old and young, naked as ever they were borne, from their clothes, turning them
into the open fields, (where having first destroyed the husbands and Parents,
before their wives and childrens faces) many hundreds have been found dead in
ditches with cold for want of food and raiment, the Irish having no more
compassion of their age or youth, then of Dogs.

As for the protestant Ministers, those they take (which have been many) they
use them with such cruelty, as it would make any heart to melt into tears that
does but hear this relation; Their manner is first to hang them up, and then
they cut off their heads, after they quarter them, then they dismember their
secret parts, stopping their mouths therewith, a thing indeed for modesty
sake, more fit to be omitted then related.

Many of their wives, they have ravished in their sights before the multitude,
stripping them naked to the view of their wicked Companions, taunting and
mocking them with reproachful words, sending them away in such a shameful, or
rather shameless manner that they have (most of them) either dyed for grief,
or starved with want and cold, such cruelty was never known before.

As to speak of the ravishing of wives, maids and Virgins in particular, it
would take up a great volume, and therefore I leave that to the consideration
of such as have learned, what effects fruits and mischiefs, wars and
Rebellions produce,

The Priests and Jesuits commonly anoint the rebels with their sacrament of
the unction, before they go to murder and rob, assuring them that for their
meritorious service, if they chance to dye or be killed, they shall escape
Purgatory and go to heaven immediately, and what they can get by stealing and
murdering shall be their own, a good reward for such a bloody and murdering
service, and what man will not venture upon such conditions to get wealth upon
earth, and heaven for murder? O Damnable Doctrine, and Doctors!

After they have murdered men; surprising them cowardly and treacherously,
they do usually mangle their dead Carcases, laying wagers which shall cut
deepest into their dead flesh with their skeyns as they did unto one master
Champion, a Justice of the peace in the province of Vlster, whom they cruelly
murdered by treachery, and one Master Iremonger, whom they killed, as he was at
prayers in Master Champions house, and also destroying the whole household.

One worthy gentleman nere Belturbat, in the province of Vlster, was surprised
as he was at Dinner with his vertuou* wife and four small children, and after
they had robbed them, and all his family, and stripped them naked, they
threatened them to kill them, if they went not away presently, who coming
toward Dublin, hoping that way to find some comfort, the further they came the
more miserable they were beholding others of their friends handled in the same
manner, which struck in them such amasement, and bred in them such fear, that
being hopeles, and helpless they, sat down in a Ditch, where they were all
found dead by some Troopers, the Gentleman and his wife having their arms
embracing one th*other were found dead, but a sucking Child, which was between
them, was alive grabling and striving for the dead Mothers breast, who was
taken up by the Troopers and carried to a Nurse.

At Belturbat they robbed all the English, being about 500. persons, who
submitting themselves to their mercy found no quarter but cruelty, for they
stripped them all naked, and so turned them out of the Town to shift for
themselves in bitter cold weather, in a most shameful manner, not affording
them a ragg to cover those parts, which should be hid, amongst which company
there was one Master Hudson the Minister of the said Town of Belturbat, a
Religious and Godly Minister and his wife, whom they abused in a shameful
manner, not sit to be spoken.

In another Town the English fled all into the Church being ab one two hundred
and twenty, where they remained 3. days and nights both men, women, and
children, till they were almost starved, and so were forced to come forth, whom
these cruel Rebels stripped out of their Clothes, and drove them over the
Bridge at the Towns end naked, having before cut off the middle Arch, unknown
to those poor Christians, with a devilish intent there to murder them (as
they did) for coming to the middle of the Bridge, they found no passage; for
the poor naked Souls must either go back, or fall in and be drowned: some
that went back they kil^d, some that fell in the water were drowned, some that
could swim, the cruel Rebels run and met them at the water side, and knocked
them on the heads in the water, O mercylesse and cruel murderers!

Many Ladies, and Gentlewomen, which have been great with Child they have
turned them out of doors, where they have been delivered in the open fields
upon a little straw, without the help of any woman, and so having ended their
misery* others that have escaped death in Childbearing, they have mercilesly
carried away upon Carts (lying in stinking and lousy straw stark naked) to
places where they and their poor infants have been murdered

The Lord Blany escaped their cruelty, being forced to ride 14. miles upon a
poor Garroon or Jade without Bridle or Saddle to save his life, his Lady being
taken and his children the same day, and imprisoned by the bloody and cruel
villains, who use her most barbarously and her children, neither regarding her
nobleness of birth nor her Lord, but suffer her, or rather force her to lodge
in straw, with a poor allowance of two pence a day, for her relief* and poor
sweet children* and to ad affliction to the good Ladies misery, slew a kinsman
of hers* and caused him to be hanged up two days and nights before her face to
afflict and terrify her.

It is most certain that many thousands have suffered in this nature and
worse* as I have heard reported by very honest and credible persons who
(through Gods mercy) have escaped their cruelty, for it has been told me by
the mouths of very Religious and Godly Divines* who came over with me in the
same ship, wherein I came from Dublin* how they had lost their wives* their
children* and their estates, being glad to fly for their lives, having not
left wherewithal to pay for their own carriage into England, some of them to
mine own knowledge* having lost very great estates.

Upon the 8. of December last, the Lords of the Pale* (so called because they
live round about the City of Dublin, in the province of Leinster) did generally
meet at a village called the Saintred, and there did mutually protest against
the Kings Government, and then and there proclaimed that all the English should
depart the kingdom within 14* days* or otherwise they should expect nothing
but fire and sword* which being known to the Lords Justices, all the Papists
in Dublin were presently disarmed: at or about the same time the Lord Fitz
William of Miriam, living nere Bullock, and within two miles of Dublin, sent
word to the Lords Justices that there was 1500. of the Rebels would come down
from the County of Wickloe to Bulloch, and so come from thence in flat boats,
to surprise the shipping at the Rings end which is the harbor, and where there
lay at that time about 27. ships of the English and Dutch, whereupon the Lords
Justices, sent a hundred Soldiers from Dublin, to be dispersed into several
ships for their safety, and gave order, under their hands to the Capt. of the
Kings Frygot a man of war, who rid at Anchor by us, to have a special care of
our ship called the Phoenix and (if occasion were) to guard us safe over the Ba^
of Dublin so that we were driven to keep a Guard many nights on shipboard for
fear of a surprise, for the Rebels were come to a place called Finglas within
two miles of Dublin, so that we were driven to leave our houses (living in the
Suburbs) for fear of firing, and so lay aboard 14. days and nights in our
Clothes, before we had a wind to carry us to Hollyhead, the Kings Attorney for
Ireland, Sir Thomas Tempest, the Bishop of Ardagh, Sir Robert Dixon, Sir Robert
Foord, Mr. Carleton, and diverse Ladies and Gentlewomen, being all passengers in
the same Ship.

As for the number of the Rebels, it is not certainly known; but without
question there is a great many of them, but not the third part of them armed,
and those arms they have, they have taken from the English* in surprising and
murdering them cowardly and trecherously, and some of them under pretense of
being robbed by the Rebels, have deceiptfully gotten Arms to go fight against
them, and then have run away from their Captains to the Rebels, and indeed
there is no trust nor confidence to be put in them, they are so trecherously
perfidious.

It is suspected, that the chief Rebels do intend to steal away by Sea
(having gotten a great estate from the English Plantators whom they have robbed
and murdered) and so leave the ignorant rabble of Irish in the lurch.

There is a great want of English protestants for Soldiers, not only to secure
the City of Dublin and the Suburbs, but also to releeve the distressed estate
of the Lord Viscount Moore in Drogheda, who deserves both love, praise, and
honor.

It is to be believed that the Rebels will never give a Battle* and that in
short time they will be starved for want of food, for they have gotten in most
parts from the English all they can get, and they wast and devour that plenty
they have, and there is neither plowing nor sowing in those parts, so that it
will be impossible for them to subsist long.

It is most certain that 1400. Soldiers volunteers, were landed at Dublin,
under the Command of Captain Harcot, and other Captains upon the second day
of January last Anno 1641. which was a great comfort to the English, and 400.
Soldiers which were not in pay went along with them, so that the whole number
was 1800. men. and marched along from the Rings end to Dublin in Battle Array
in very good order.

They report and allege that Religion is the cause of their war, but that is
false, for they have had too much liberty and freedom of conscience in
Ireland, and that has made them Rebel. I hope that God that has discovered
their bloody practice, will confound their devices, and bring them to
confusion. To the which God be all honor, praise and Glory for ever.

FINIS.

