A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the Entire Defeat of the Rebels in IRELAND; Contained in a
Letter from the Lords Justices of that Kingdom, to Their Majesty's Privy
Council of SCOTLAND.
Dated the 15th Current.
AFter the Taking of Athlone, the Rebels marched to Billynaslow, and thence
about three miles further, to a place called Aghrim in Connaught.

Their Majesty's Army marched from Athlone, in pursuit of the Enemy, and
pitched their Camp very near the place, from whence the Rebels had removed a
little before.

The Enemies Army consisting of about 8000 Horse and Dragoons, and of no less
than 20000 Foot, besides Rapparies, had posted themselves very advantageously,
having Bogs very near round them; Their Majesty's present Horse, Foot and
Dragoons, making about 20000, began the Fight betwixt five and six a Clock upon
Sunday the 12th. in the Evening; The Action lasted very sharply for about two
hours; then the Enemy began to run, and Their Majesty's Troops had the pursuit
of them for about four miles, and would have made the Slaughter much greater
than it is, if the Night had not overtaken them. The present Account making the
Enemies loss about 6000, and of Their Majesty's, not one thousand.

The Enemies General St. Ruth had mightily bestirred himself all that Morning
to animat the better sort to this Engagement, and sent the Priests about to do
the like to the common Soldiers, to whom they also gave Absolution; And it is
said, the Irish were never known to fight so well, as in this Battle.

On the Irish side, the Lord Galway, Colonel Barker, and several other
Officers of Quality are killed; and Major General Hamilton, MajorGeneral
Dorington, Lord Bedlow, Colonel Bourk, Colonel Gourdon, O'neill, Colonel
Butler, are taken Prisoners, and a great many more; And of their Majesty's
side, not a General-Officer killed, except Major General Hossaple, and the
Prince of Hess, Lord George Hamilton, Lord Lord Cutts, Colonel Earl, and
Lieutenant-Collonel Brudwell wounded.

It is not certain whether St. Ruth be killed or not; some say he is, but all
his Equippage is taken, as also all the Enemies Baggage and Cannon.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, by Order. 1691.


