A True ACCOUNT OF THE Lord Delamere HIS Reception and Welcome IN CHESHIRE,
And at the City of Chester.
OUR English Barons have ever made a great Name in History; their Power and
Popularity, and the Barons Wars, are never to be forgotten; though at this time
the Face of Affairs and Government with us is so Modelled and Altered, that
little remains of that their Authority and Greatness, save what we read of, and
remember from Books and Monuments of former Days. Only for an Instance of that
kind, we may reckon the late Sir George Booth, who showed, before the
Restoration, what Influence and Authority an Ancient Family (which had always
treated his Neighbors and Country with an unfeigned Heart and Tenderness)
might have over them.

Nor upon the King's Restoration did the Title of Delamere alter the
Conditions betwixt them; the Name of Lord made no Stranger on either side. Upon
his Death, the present Lord Delamere found come upon him the New Title, but
without any Accession to the Old Estate. He had the same Hearty Affection to
his Country, and actually succeeded to that Hereditary Virtue of the Family.
Nor have his Countrymen been less ready, on their part, to express on all
Occasions the Esteem and due Sense they had of his Love and Inclinations for
them. This good Understanding and Correspondence upon any Extraordinary
Conjuncture, carried the Eyes of the Nation upon my Lord Delamere. And the
People became possessed with a Conceit, that England could not be rescued from
their Oppressions, England could not be Saved, unless my Lord Delamere had an
Hand in their Deliverance.

Hereupon, when Monmouth precipitated Matters, and threw himself on that
ill-concerted, unfortunate Expedition at Lyme, every one had their Eyes upon my
Lord Delamere, every one suspended their Thoughts, and were upon the
Expectation which way my Lord Delamere would stir, and whether he would appear
or not.

This deference of all People to my Lord Delamere so alarmed the Court, that
after Monmouth's Defeat, they resolved to be no longer under those
Apprehensions from my Lord Delamere, but by one Law-trick or other, to dispatch
him out of the way. So they set their Instruments to work, and rummaged all
their Magazines of False Evidence to play against him. How his Wit, and
Conduct, and Bravery of Mind brought him off, and baffled his Enemies, is to
the World well known already. This provoked him to retire to his Country
Friends and Enjoyments, there to cultivate the Popularity he had so ancient and
so good a Title to.

There we find him, when the Nation all over rung with an Invasion by the
Prince of Orange; a Design that then seemed too great to be believed, and only
too good to be true. But we had not long been convinced by the Fact, before our
Letters and Prints were full of my Lord Delamere, his Tenants and Friends, and
their Rendezvous at Bowden-Downs. His March and Motions were presently
concerted with the Prince; and according to the Measures then taken, he joined
the Prince afterward; and had the Honor and Satisfaction to wait on him to
London, and there see him possessed of the Seat of our Empire, and of the
Supreme Administration of Affairs Civil and Military.

Thus having succeeded, and all settled to his Mind, he returned to his
Country, where his Welcome was so Extraordinary, the Expressions from all
sorts of People, and the Joy so Immoderate, that the like has not been observed
in any Age.

He went down at the Head of those Gentlemen he had formerly Mustered at
Bowden-Downs. And no sooner had he entered into his County of Cheshire, but he
was met by Foot and Horse, from that and the adjacent Counties, incredible
Numbers. The modestest Account makes the Horse upward of Ten Thousand. These
all divided, and made a Lane for him as he passed along, they throwing up their
Hats, with loud Acclamations and Shouting, We have him again, we have him
again, we have him again safe. Whilst the Trumpets and the Vollies from their
Guns, made up the Chorus to their Mirth and Harmony.

When he came to the Downs he Mustered his Troops, and ordered them to their
several Quarters. He took the Officers to his House at Dunham, where they and
the other Gentlemen of the County that could stay conveniently, Supped together.
Two or three days after, his Occasions called him to Chester, and that City
would not be short in their Complements and Congratulation. About a Mile from
the Town, their Mayor and Magistracy met him in their Scarlet Robes and
Formalities, and gave him their Hearty Thanks for the Care and Fatigue he had
undergone for the sake of his Country, their Liberties, and the Protestant
Religion. When they came back to the first Gate, besides the Bells and the
Boonfires, all the Guns from the Castle proclaimed his Welcome. He was carried
to the Town-Chamber, where a Noble Banquet was provided for his Entertainment;
and when his and the Prince of Orange's Health came to be Drank, the Guns from
the Castle were again all Discharged.

More Particulars would be needless. In short, there be still Englishmen who
deserve well of their Country; and People who have a due Sense where they find
that Virtue.

With Allowance.
London, Printed in the Year, 1689.


