A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE GREAT VICTORY Obtained over the REBELS in SCOTLAND, BY
HIS MAJESTY'S FORCES Under the Command of his Grace the DUKE of Monmouth, The
22d of this Instant June, 1679.
In a LETTER to a Person of Quality.
SIR,
AS no Sin is more detestable to good and sober men than that of Rebellion, so
none is more remarkably punished here by a Divine hand than that; For we shall
rarely find either in sacred or profane Story, any Rebellion that has
succeeded. And ours (through the blessing of God) has undergone the like Fate
with the rest. And I well know, the success of His Majesty's Forces, and the
Great deliverance God has wrought for us by them, will be very acceptable to
you, who have been so passionately concerned for our welfare. A Brief and true
Account therefore, be pleased to accept as follows.

After his Grace the Duke of Monmouth came up to the Army, who lay then at
Blackburn, he viewed and mustered the whole Forces; and from thence marched the
next day to Moorhead, and the next day after marched toward the Enemy, who lay
at and about Bothwell-bridg.

On Sunday early in the Morning the 22d Instant, his Grace drew up the Kings
Army in the view of the Enemy, the River of Clide being interposed between them.

Then the Rebels sent over one with a Petition; the Contents whereof was, That
they would lay down their Arms if they might have the terms granted them, which
were exemplisied in their last Declaration: If not, they would sacrifice their
Lives in the Quarrel.

The Duke returned Answer, That the Terms they insisted on, were contrary to
the fundamental Laws of the Land; and their Demands such as he could not, nor
would Grant. But withal gave them to understand, That if they would lay down
their Arms, and submit to the Kings Mercy, he would not fall upon them.

After they had debated on this, they absolutely refused it.

Whereupon the Duke immediately ordered the Cannon to play upon them; and
commanded a Party to Attacque Bothwell-bridg, which the Rebels had strongly
Barricado'd.

This was done so smartly, and with so great Resolution, that the Rebels Guard
fled from the Bridge, and returned to their Body.

Upon this (the Bridge being gained) the Kings Forces past over, and drew up
near to the Enemy, who stood upon a rising ground, drawn up in Battalia.

The Rebels fired first at some distance, which the Kings Forces received
without any hurt or discomposure, and then advanced toward the Enemy and gave
them a severe charge; upon which the Rebels run into confusion, and began to
fly.

The Kings Forces having thus broken their Main Body, had nothing then to do
but to pursue them in scattered Parties. Great numbers of whom they killed and
took Prisoners.

Their Horse are wholly broke; and those that have escaped of the Foot, fled
immediately to the Wood in Hamilton-Park.

His Grace drew up his Forces, and surrounded the Park, and sent in Lieutenant
Colonel Duglas with a detacht Party to ferret them out of the Wood.

At this time, Sir, the Express that was sent to the Council comes away; and
therefore I cannot give you an Account of the particulars: But this you must
know, that as soon as ever the Duke has scowred the Wood, and encamped his
Army, the Particulars will be sent to his Majesty and Council.

And now (worthy Sir) having given you this true (though brief) account of this
signal Victory over the Rebels, I can do no less than give you an account also
of the joyful reception of this good news at Edinburgh; the Inhabitants whereof
as soon as they heard it, made Bonefires, and nothing was heard there but
joyful acclamations, Ringing of Bells, and roaring of Cannons from the Castle.

The Losses of the Kings Forces are inconsiderable, though they were much
inferior to the Rebels in number. On the Rebels side, it is said by some they
have lost One thousand, by others Two thousand: But you will have a more
perfect account of that, and other particulars, by the next.

I cannot omit the acquainting you of one remarkable passage, That one of the
Kings Soldiers, going into a Country House for a little Meal, and as he stooped
down to take it out of a Chest, was by the Master of the House stabbed through
the back. For which atrocious Murder he was immediately apprehended, and Shot
to death.

This shows the cruel and merciless disposition of that sort of people.

I shall conclude (Sir) when I have given you an Account of Two Proclamations,
published by the Rebels sometime before the Fight, with a List of their
Officers of note, and the Ministers that influenced them, and were joined with
them.

The Proclamations are as follow.
WE the Officers of the Covenanted Army do require and command you the
Inhabitants of the Burgh of Glasgow to furnish us with Twenty four Carts, and
Sixty Baggage-Horses, for removing our Provision from this place to our Camp,
wherever we shall set down the same, and abide with for that end during our
pleasure, under the pain of being reputed our enemies, and proceeded against
accordingly.

WE the Officers of the Covenanted Army do require and command the Magistrates
of Glasgow to extend and banish forth thereof all Archibishops, Bishops and
Curates, their Wives, Bairns and Servants, and all other Families and persons
concerned in the Kings Army within Forty eight hours after the publishing
hereof, under the highest pains.

List of Preachers.
Mr. Welsh, Mr. King, Mr. Cargill, Mr. Buxley, Mr. Ray, Mr. Douglas, Mr.
Forrester, Mr. Mure.
Officers of Note.
Rober Hu^^i^^^on, Lieutenant General. Captain Patrue, Colonel. William
Cleklard, Major. John Balfour of Kinloch, Major Principal. -- Welford of
Blachan, Captain of Horse, -- Rosse, Major. -- Huckstoune, a Captain of Horse.
-- Criumchell, Captain.
This is the best Account that can be given at present; by the next I shall be
more particular.

FINIS.

