LONDON'S Anniversary Festival, Performed On Monday, October the 29th. 1688.

For the Entertainment of the Right Honorable, Sr. John Chapman, Knight. Lord
Mayor of the City of London;

Being Their great Year of JUBILEE.

WITH A PANEGYRIC upon the Restoring OF THE CHARTER.

And a Sonnet provided for the Entertainment of the KING.

By M. TAVBMAN.

Virg. Lib. 6. Hic Rem Londinam magno turbante tumultu
Sistet Eques --
Printed and Published by Authority.

London, Printed for J. Fleming, and Sold by the Booksellers, 1688.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN CHAPMAN, Knight. Lord Mayor of the CITY of LONDON.
My LORD,
IF the Custom of a Dedication at this Time did not make it necessary, your
Eminent Merits do justly lay claim to the discharge of this Duty. And though
the present Impending Storm, the Dread of a Foreign Invasion, has Obnubilated
the usual Splendour of this Day's Solemnity, such Remarkable Occurrences have
happened, this Year, as will render your Name and Memory famous to all
Posterity: What is most to be Recorded, is, the Restoring of the Charter of
London, which happened in the Year of your Mayoralty, 88. Auspicious 88!
England's great Year of Jubilee, twice Propitious to this Famous City: First,
In Restoring our Lives and Estates: Secondly, Our Laws and Freedoms, in the
free Exercise of our Ancient Established Government. What other Worthies durst
not Attempt, you like Jason, bravely Adventured for the Prize, and brought the
Golden Fleece in Triumph home. In the late threatening Deluge, when the Ark was
tossed upon the Foaming Billows, you, like the Dove, was sent Abroad, and like
the Dove returned with the Olive Branch of Joy. This unspeakable Mark of Royal
Bounty occurring this Year with your Right of Succession to the Praetorial
Chair, will Record your Name to future Ages, beyond all the Witless Panegyricks
of,

My LORD, Your Lordships most Obedient, and most Devoted humble Servant, M.
Taubman.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Chapman, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, on the Return of the CHARTER.
WElcome as Day to Nighted Travelers,
As Light to Darkness, or as Peace to Wars.
Welcome as when the Six Months night is done,
To frozen Climates the Approaching Sun;
Who after a long Winters Storm does bring,
All the dear Blessings of a fertile Spring.
To You our Thanks, as well as Praise, is due,
In whom's Restored our Lives, and Freedoms too.
What the loud Tumults lost in hot Debate,
Is Re-invested in its former state.
Your Patience has their Fury overcome,
The Captive Ark is brought in Triumph home;
The Charter is Returned with cheerful Cries,
Our Rights, our Customs, and Immunities.
All which in 88, with You Restored,
In everlasting Annals we'll Record.
The new exalted Meteors cease to shine,
And to the old Extinguished Lamps Resign.
Who in their former state their Freedoms hold,
Like Diamonds newly set in the same Gold.
Tamely they bore the Cloud of their Disgrace,
While Stars less Radiant were advanced in place;
These may by Day cast forth a glimmering Spark,
While the true Gem shines brightest in the Dark.
This made the World your Loyalty admire,
And the bright Palm depressed, to mount the higher;
Then were you Loyal, at that very time,
When to be Loyal, was esteemed a Crime:
This worthily Advanced you to the Chair,
When mean complying Intrest proved a Snare.
There was a Time when Loyalty prevailed,
And on her Sons large Favors were Entailed,
E're Temporizing Converts did Comply
For Interest, to Sell their Liberty.
This Bliss with you restored, this Year we share,
The CHARTER to the Town, and you the Chair.
Here the KING's Bounty, as your MERIT's Great,
Has made your Laws and Liberties Complete.
With you this Year we are Possessed of more,
Than all our Predecessors were before;
What they by Parcels scarce in Ages gained,
We have in Gross, in one blessed Day, obtained:
Each Grant Enlarging our unbounded Power,
From Royal JAMES, to the first Conqueror.
What Monarch yet e're Graced the British Throne,
But dropped a Royal Jewel from the Crown?
Like the Sword added to your Quartered Field,
T'Enlarge the CHARTER, and adorn the GUILD.
No fierce Dragooner here for Quarter calls,
No Noise of War within your Peaceful Walls.
And what exceeds all Privileges far,
You are not Summoned from your Gates to War.
No dreadful Trumpets Sound annoys your Ears;
All Innocent and Charming as the Spheres.
If Musicks softer Notes your Throne ascend,
It Is such as on your harmless Mirths attend.
Music, which like a Consort, does agree
With LONDON's Government, the soul of Harmony.
Nor in the Walls is this your only Friend,
Toll-free through England does your Power extend.
Even to the Surges of the boundless Sea,
The Wealthy Thames is made your Royalty.
Nor can we here your Liberties Confine,
Your CHARTER does extend beyond the Line.
Through the vast Globe, you may with Drake be hurld,
A London Merchant's Freeman of the World.
And shall that State, which has the Sovereign Powers
Of Sea and Land, dread Foreign Conquerours?
Where is the Grandeur of our English Nation,
If we are Blasted at a Dutch Invasion?
In vain vast Armies and a Fleet oppose,
Against a Fate that is more strong than those:
That Grandeur which once met the Pride of Spain,
Like a huge City floating on the Main,
Met it, and to the Bottom sunk it down;
The Gods and Winds fight for the English Crown.
Those Masts which lately seemed to touch the Sky,
Now low in the vast Oceans Womb do lie.
And where the Armada did its Pride display,
Fishes resort, and wanton Dolphins play,
May the same Fate make all your Foes a Prey.
LONDON'S Anniversary Festival For the Year, 1688.
ALthough the present Juncture of Affairs, and the Rumor of a Foreign Invasion
has Eclipsed the Glory of this Days Triumph; yet since the Mayoralty has fallen
in the First of Companies, and in the time of so Eminent a Patriot, I think my
self in duty bound, to Publish this short Description, that what it wants in
the Pageantry, may be supplied by a Panegyric, to perpetuate the Occurrences
of so remarkable a Jubilee. The Right Worshipful the Company of Mercers, (who
have the Honor and Charge of this Day's Entertainment) are the first in Order
and Place, having the Priority of all other Companies of London. They were
Established to be a Company, and to purchase Lands in the 17th Year of the
Reign of Richard the II, 1393. Mercers Hall, famous for the Magnificence of its
Structure, is the Seat of their Public Assemblies; where are likewise several
spacious Rooms and Apartments, for their private Courts, Committees, and
Consultations. This was formerly an Hospital, Founded by Sir Thomas of Acon;
Militia Hospitalis, says the Record of Edward the III, Founded by Thomas Fitz
Theobald, in the Reign of Henry the II. It was purchased by the Mercers, in the
Reign of King Henry the VIII, by the Famous Sir Thomas Gresham. The Chapel was
Founded by that Eminent Patron and Benefactor, Sir John Allen, who lies there
Entombed.

This particular Record I thought necessary to make, that the want of a Show
might not Derrogate from the Grandeur of so Ancient and Honorable a Society.

Nevertheless, though the Pageantry was Omitted, there wanted nothing that
could contribute to make it Great both by Land and Water; nay, rather more
Sumptuous in the Magnificence of their Cavalcade, which was in the manner
following.

The CAVALCADE.
ABout Eight a Clock in the Morning, (to attend his Lordship in Mercers-Hall)
do meet the Right Worshipful the Company of Mercers, and the most eminent
Citizens appointed for that purpose.

I. The Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in their Gowns faced with Foyns, with
their Hoods. II. The Livery in their Gowns, faced with Satin, and their Hoods.
III. Threescore poor Men, in Gowns and Caps, march in the Front, each of them
employed in bearing a Banner. IV. Fifty Gentlemen-Ushers in Velvet-Caps follow
next, each of them having a Chain of Gold about his Shoulders, and in his right
Hand a White Staff. V. A splendid Train of Batchelors, invested in Gowns, and
Scarlet-Sattin Hoods (which, in this Company, above all others, are most
numerous) called, The Rich Batchelors; who often bear the Charge of this Day's
Solemnity. VI. Another Division of Batchelors. VII. Twelve more Gentlemen for
bearing Banners and Colors, some in Plush-Coats, and some in Buff, with Scarfs
about their Shoulders of the Company's Colors. VIII. Thirty-six Trumpets: The
Serjeant-Trumpeter, with a Rich Scarf of his Lordships Colors about his Waste,
and a Leading-Staff in his Hand. IX. Fourteen of his Majesty's Drums: The
Drum-Major, with a Crimson Scarf about his Waste, and a Leading-Staff in his
Hand: And Three Fifes with Banners. X. Diverse other Drums and Fifes, with
Scarfs of the Colors of the Company. XI. The Two City-Marshals on Horseback,
and six Servants to attend them, with Scarfs and Colors of the Company. XII.
The Six Foot-Marshals, with Scarfs and Colors of the same. XIII. The Master of
Defense, with Scrafs and Colors likewise of the same, having Persons of the
same Noble Science to attend him. XIV. Diverse other Pensioners invested with
Red Gowns with Sleeves, and flat white Caps, each of them carrying a Javelin in
one Hand, and a Target in his other; wherein is painted the Arms of Rich. II.
the first Founder, and Sir Thomas Gresham, the first Benefactor of the Company.
XV. As an Addition to this Solemnity, and to supply the defect of the Pageants,
is added the Artillery Company in the Rear, led up by that Eminent and Worthy
Citizen, Sir John Moor.
The Order of their March.
THE Foot Marshals, with an Assistant appointed for that purpose, rank them out
two by two, beginning with the Pensioners in Gowns; and in the Front of them
places the Companies Ensigns, four Drums and one Fife.

In the Rear of these fall in the several other Pensioners in Coats, bearing
several Banners and Standards; after them the Arms of the Kight Worshipful the
Company of Mercers, which is the Maidenhead, with this Motto, HONOR DEO; which
is also inserted in the other Banners, Standards, and Streamers, appertaining
to the Company; whereof this, as the Largest, is attended with six Gentlemen
Ushers; and after them follow the Batchelors, who conclude this Division.

In the Rear of those fall six Trumpets; after them two Gentlemen bearing two
Banners, the one of the City's, the other of the Companies; after them follow
two Gentlemen Ushers, and after them the Foyne Batchelors, who conclude this
Division.

In the Rear of them, fall others of the City Trumpets; after them two
Gentl^m^n, bearing the Banners of the City, and the Lord Mayor. After those
follow twelve Gentlemen Ushers, Equipped and appointed as before; and after
them the Court of Assistants, who puts a period to that Division.

In the Rear of them follow the Sergeant-Trumpet, with sixteen other of the
King's Trumpets, and Kettle-Drums; after them three other Gentlemen bearing the
King's, the Lord Mayor's, and St. George his Banner, attended by fourteen
Pages: And after them the Master and Wardens, who Terminate the first and
chiefest Division.

Being Placed in this Order, Grocers-Hall, till such time as his Lordship, with
the Sheriffs, and his Brethren the Aldermen, are mounted.

Which being done, the whole Body march toward Guild Hall; where the Lord
Mayor Elect, with his new Equipage, joins with the other Companies, marching in
great Order and Decency through Kingstreet and Cheapside, down to the Three
Crane-Wharf; where the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and their Attendants take Barge;
the whole Company of Mercers do likewise Embarque, with the rest of the
Companies, as many as have Conveniences; some of their Barges being at present
employed in his Majesty's Service.

His Lordship, the Aldermen, and the Right Worshipful the Company of Mercers,
with such other Companies as have the Conveniences of their Barges, Landing at
Westminster, have a Lane made them from Kings-Bridg, from which they pass
through Westminster Hall; where having taken the Accustomed Oaths before the
Lords and Barons of the Exchequer, they Return to their Barges; where a Lane
made as before, to the Waterside, they go back by Water; being often Saluted
by their Majestles from White Hall, both going and coming, with several Shots
and Salutations from the Pleasure-Boats; who for that purpose are all the way
playing upon the River.

His Lordship, with the Companies attending him, Landing at Black-Friars, are
welcomed there with three Volleys by the famous Artillery Company, all Adorned
in their Martial Ornaments in Buff, and shining Head-Pieces of Massy Silver.
From Black Friars they March before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, in the same
State, Order, and Decency, as before, through Cheapside to Guild Hall; where
his Lordship is Received by the Ld. Chancellor, Ld. Chamberlain, and Principal
Officers of His Majesty's Household; The Principal Secretaries, the President,
and most Eminent Lords of the Council; all Ambassadors and Ministers of State,
both Foreign and Domestic; all the Learned Judges, and Principal Officers both
of Court and City, who all Dine that Day in Guild Hall: His Majesty having
Himself promised to Confer that Honor upon his Lordship, if the present
Juncture, and his Care for the Public, do not otherwise Divert him.

This Anniversary Festival, is, for the Magnificence of their Entertainment,
the greatest that has been ever seen in any Nation: All the time of Dinner, the
Hall Echoing with Huzza's, and Healths to His Majesty, who Returns the same to
his Lordship; wishing him Success and Happiness in the Discharge of his Trust,
for the Year ensuing.

Dinner being ended, his Majesty is Entertained with the following Song.

SONG for the Entertainment of His Majesty.
WIth Hearts united, and Exerted Souls,
Brim full of Loyalty as are our Bowls,
To Mighty James a grateful Health go round;
The Jewel lost so long, this Year is found.
This Name our Bounteous Charters Grant inrols.
For this new Grace, a just Oblation due;
But why his Praise do I in vain pursue?
It is that Name, that Sacred Name, must give
To Indigested Verse a power to Live,
And make our Loyal Song Immortal too.
Chorus.
To the Son of the Martyr,
Who Restored us the Charter,
Let French, Dutch, and Spaniard beware it;
While the Foes that invade us,
With their sinking Armado's,
We drown in an Ocean of Claret.
The Laws to every City does prescribe
Their Bounds, and Limits, be they nere so wide;
Amongst the Wives, whom Ties of Nature bind,
London, a Royal Bride, sits unconfind;
By Landmark bound, nor Circumscribed by Tide,
As far as Royal James (that does Defend)
From Silver Thames his Scepter does extend
(Whose Empire yet no Foe could e're confine)
From the Bleak North, beyond the Tropic Line;
Even there our Boundless Charter knows no End.
Chorus.
To the Son of the Martyr, etc.
Augusta, who so long bore the Renown,
Of Sovereignty, next to the Royal Crown,
Does yet this Year a greater Glory share,
Where Loyalty's advanced into the Chair,
To Rule as long before the joyful Town.
In this above her Neighboring Sisters blessed,
The Royal Chamber, The bright Phoenix Nest;
Where one Expiring 'midst the sweet Perfumes,
Another strait his Image re-assumes;
Her Lords with Immortality possessed.
Chorus.
To the Son of the Martyr, etc.
THE END.

