Londons Great Jubilee Restored and Performed On Tuesday, October the 29th
1689. For the Entertainment of the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Pilkington, Knight.
LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON.

Containing a Description of the Several PAGEANTS, and SPEECHES, Together with
a SONG For the Entertainment of Their MAJESTY'S, who with their Royal
Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Denmark, the whole Court, and Both Houses
of Parliament, Honor his Lordship this Year with their Presence.

ALL SET FORTH At the Proper Cost and Charges of the Right Worshipful Company
of SKINNERS.

By M. T.

Londinum Vrbs Inclyta Regum.

London, Printed for Langley Curtiss at Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's (...)

To the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Thomas Pilkington, Knight. LORD MAYOR OF THE City of
London.
THOUGH there be several Remarkable Occurrences Contributing to the Solemnity of
this Day, (as the Presence of their Majesty's, the Court, etc.) yet the general
Joy, and Satisfaction of the City, is no less Worthy of Record, which is an
Universal as their PREPARATIONS are Public. Nor can it Choose but add a Rubric
in the Calendar of Your Life, that you were the first Advanced to the
Pretorical Chair of this Great Metropolis, after the Year of Redemption, the
Happy Day of Deliverance from Pagan and Egyptian Bondage, by Miracles and
Wonders. When Idolatry, like a Deluge, had Overspread the Land, and the
Church, like the Ark, lay Tottering upon the Billows, then came the Dove with
the Olive Branch of Joy; He Allayed the Swelling of the Waters, Restoring us to
our Liberty, and Religion. When Arbitrary Force, and Lawless Usurpation had
Unreasonably Imposed upon us New Lords, and New Laws, contrary to the Practice,
and known Customs, of this City. Then did You, in Defense of our Just Rights
and Liberties, stand in the Gap, and Bravely Opposed the Violence of the
Impetuous Torrent. So great a Champion were You, and so zealous an Asserter of
these Rights, that You preferred our Privileges before your Liberty, and
Glorying in Your Chains, while You were yet a Magistrate, became Twice a
Prisoner. Like Daniel, You are taken out of the Lion's Den to be a Ruler over
us. Nor had those Ravenous Beasts any Power over You, although their Malice was
sufficiently Exasperated against You. Their Jaws were stopped till the
Delivering Monarch Ordered You Enlargement, raising You Higher by Your Fall,
and a greater Object of His Favor by Your Sufferings. This Royal Bounty of the
Prince could not but beget in us a Grateful Emulation to Prefer You in the
City, for whose sake You had Suffered such long and severe Persecution. The
Chair being Vacant by the Death of Sir John Chapman, with one Consent You are
Chosen for the remaining Time, and then with an Unanimous Heart and Voice of
the Elective Assemblies to continue for the Ensuing Year. My Lord, we mention
not this as a Favor done, but as a Debt due to Your Sufferings, and at last
should think all this too little, were it in our Power to do more. This must
stop the Mouth of Envy, that all Tongues must confess Your own Merits have most
justly Advanced You. You have Asserted our Rights, Restored our Customs, and
Immunities. Every thing runs clear in its proper Channel. That it may never
again be Disturbed by the Violence of Impetuous and Arbitrary Men, is the
Prayer of

My LORD, Your Lordships most Obedient, and most Devoted, Humble Servant, M.
Taubman.

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE COMPANY OF SKINNERS.
Right Worshipful,
THere is not a Company in this famous City, (though yet more ancient) has
arrived to the Dignity you have done: You have had the Honor to have Six Kings
Members of your Society, and this Year a KING and QVEEN for your Royal Guests,
in the First Year of their Reign, and the First of your Deliverance from
Arbitrary, and Tyrannical Impositions.

There is yet another Remarkable Honor worthy to be Recorded, the deserving
Patriot of his Country Sir THOMAS PILKINGTON Lord Mayor, whom (Signalized for
his Sufferings) you have most deservedly exalted from a Prison, to the
Pretorical Chair. This will be your Applause for what is done, that his
Lordships own Merits have given him a Title thereunto. Your costly
Preparations, Prudent Contrivance, and bounteous Contribution toward so
glorious an Entertainment, is not only a Demonstration of your Respect to his
Lordship, but of Zeal to their Majesty's. That you have made me an humble
Instrument to contribute toward the Preparations of this great Day, requires
the Acknowledgment of

Your most humble Servant M. T.

LONDON's great Jubilee Revived in the Year 1689.
SIR John Chapman being Deceased in the Year of his Mayrolty, the Right
Honorable Sir Thomas Pilkington was Chosen for the remaining Term. This being
Expired, He is again Chosen for the Ensuing Year. This time of Election is on,
or about Michaelmas-Day, there being a Month allowed for the preparations of
the Festival, which falls on the 29th of October, the next Day after Simon and
Jude. During this time there is a Committee Chosen of the most Judicious and
Experienced Citizens, to Contrive, Consult, Order, and Debate of all Matters
Relating to the Solemnity of this Day; which, for the Antiquity of its
Institution, the Grandeur of the Preparations, the Splendour of the Pageants,
the Concourse of Nations, and the Stateliness of their Entertainments, may be
called the greatest and most Costly in all the Univers. This Year especially
Claims the pre-eminence, being Honored with the Presence of their Most Sacred
Majesty's, the Prince, and Princess of Denmark, with all the Principal Officers
of Court, and both Houses of Parliament. The Bishop of London, and all the
chief Prelates of the Church. The Lords Commissioners of the Privy Seal, the
Lords Chief Justices of both Benches, the Lord Baron, and all the Learned
Judges in the Law. The Four Dutch, and all Foreign Ambassadors, Envoys, and
Residents, who stand more Amazed at this Days Entertainment, than any Feast
they had either seen, or heard of in all the World before.

It is Necessary, before we come to the Description of the Pageants, to make
some Remarks on the preparations of the Morning.

Betwixt Seven and Eight a Clock in the Morning the whole Company, designed for
the Duty of the Day, meet at Skinners-Hall at Downgate.

1. The Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns faced

2. The Livery in Gowns Faced with Budg, and their Hoods.

3. Diverse Foins Batchelors in Gowns and Hoods.

4. Thirty Budg-Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

5. Thirty Gentlemen-Ushers in Velvet-Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about
his Shoulder, and a White-Staff in his Hand.

6. Thirty other Gentlemen for bearing Banners and Colors, some in
Plush-Coats, and some in Buff, they also wearing Scarfs about their Shoulders
of the Companies Colors. The Motto in the Banners, To God only be Glory.

7. Several Drums and Fifes with Red Scarfs, and the Colors of the Company in
their Hats, Red and Yellow.

8. The Sergeant Trumpet, and Thirty Six Trumpets more, whereof Sixteen are
their Majesty's, the Serjeant-Trumpet wearing Two Scarfs, one of the Lord
Mayor, another of the Companies.

9. The Drum-Major to the King, wearing a Shoulder-Scarf of the Companies
Colors, with other of his Majesty's Drums and Fifes.

10. The Two City-Marshals, each of them Mounted on Horseback, with Rich
Furniture, Hoosings, and Crupper Cloth Embroidered; Six Servitors likewise
Mounted to Attend with Scarfs, and Colors of the Companies.

11. The Foot-Marshal, and Six Attendants with the like Scarf and Colors.

12. The Master of Defense with the same Scarf and Colors, having Ten Persons
of the same Science to Attend him.

13. Threescore Pensioners Accommodated with Gowns, and Caps, each of them
employed in bearing of Standards and Banners.

14. Several other Pensioners in Blew-Gowns, White-Sleeves, and Black-Caps,
each of them carrying a Javeling in one Hand, and a Target in the other,
wherein is Painted the Coat Armor of their Founders, and Benefactors of the
Company.

Thus ordered, and accommodated, they are committed to the management of the
Foot Marshal, who distributes them into Seven Divisions, and ranks them out two
by two, beginning with the inferior part of the Standard Bearers. In the head
of them are placed two Drums, one Fife, and one Gentleman, bearing the
Company's Arms.

In the Rear of them, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, being the Arms of deceased
Benefactors.

After them march the aged Pensioners in Gowns, and in the Center of them fall
in two Drums, beating the Dutch March, in Token of their Deliverance by the
Prince of Orange, His present MAJESTY.

In the Rear of them fall in three Drums, one Fife, and two Gentlemen in
Plush-Coats, bearing two Banners or Ensigns, one of the KINGS, the other of the
Companies. After them fall in Six Gentlemen Ushers, and likewise the Budg
Batchelors.

The next two Gentlemen bearing two other Banners. After them fall in Six
Gentlemen Ushers, and after them the Foyns Batchelors.

In the Rear of them fall in two Drums, and a Fife. Then two Gentlemen, the one
bearing my Lord MAYORS, the other the City Banners. After them Twelve Gentlemen
Ushers, and after them the Court of Assistance, which makes the last Division.

The Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, with the principal Aldermen and Sheriffs,
while this is doing, take their usual Repasts in Skinners-Hall, while the
Trumpets sound a Levit, and the Kettle-Drums echo their harmonious Sounds in
the Court. Having Notice of the Companies motion, his Lordship mounts his
Horse, with the Aldermen in their Order, two by two, the Sheriffs in the Rear.

In this Equipage of two and two, till taking in his Lordship and his
Attendants, they march directly from Skinners-Hall through Queen Street into
Cheapside, there being no Lord Mayor this Year, to join him from Guildhall.

In this Order they march to the Three-Crane Wharf, where they enter into their
several Barges, which are gloriously adorned with Banners, Flags, and Pendants.
His Lordship at the Stairs next Westminster for the Priority of place, as
Admiral to this golden Armado; the rest of the Companies at another pair of
Stairs, yet so, as in Order and Seniority: For this peaceful Navy moves not
like Men of War by Couples, grapling in an Engagement, but, like Princes of the
Blood, one by one, that their state may be more discernable, and their Grandeur
the more remarkable. In the mean time the Gentlemen Ushers, Budge Batchellors,
and Foyn Batchellors have their opportunity to repair to their several places
of Defection.

His Lordship being Landed at Westminster Stairs, and performed the accustomed
Ceremony of taking the Oaths, comes at last to the Exchequer Bar, where the
Lord Chief Baron makes an Elegant, but short Speech; which being ended, the
LORD MAYOR, with his Retinue marching down Westminster Hall, repair to their
respective Barges, which return in the same Form and State they went. Nothing
but Gold and Saphir represent themselves unto your view: The Pendants flying,
Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Music playing, which is echoed from the
several Pleasure-Boats, and others that are playing from each side with
Pattarara's, and other small Pieces, to compliment them as they pass, insomuch
that the Thames is nothing but a continual flowing Harmony, which never Ebbs
till his Lordship is Landed.

After this glorious Object upon the Water had afforded all that could be
delightful to the Eye or Ear, his Lordship hastens to Black-Fryers-Stairs,
where the Batchelors are ready set in order by the Foot-Marshal, as in the
Morning, to attend Him, and both Bodies conjoined, march up Ludgate Hill, and
so into Cheapside, till about the Half Moon Tavern, where his Lordship is
entertained with the first Pageant, which is thus adorned.

The First Pageant
IS a Triumphant Chariot, adorned with Oriental Pearl, Topaz and Carbuncle.
This stately Structure is carried by a Panther and Sable, which are the
Supporters of the Right Worshipful the Company of SKINNERS. Their Ensign, or
Bearing, is no less Honorable and Peculiar, being Ermin in a Field Argent,
Three Crowns on a Chief Gules, with Caps of the First. The Crest a Panther
Couchant, with a Wreath and Laurels about his Neck, as has the Supporters. The
Motto, To God Only be Glory. They were formed a Society in the First of King
Edward III. who was the first Founder of this ancient Society. Since this time,
in so high a value was this Company with the Court; that from the first Founder
no less than Six Kings have been Founders and Members of this Corporation,
Edward III. Richard II. Henry IV. Henry V. Henry VI. Edward IV. Besides Nine
Dukes, Two Earls, and One Lord. The Crest and Supporters of the said Arms, was
obtained and granted by William Harvey Clarenceux, who was free of the same
Company, Anno Dom. 1561. These Arms, with the Supporters and Crest as blazoned,
are painted on an Imperial Arch of the Dorick Order in the Frontispiece of the
Chariot. HONOR placed in a distance below beats the Kettle Drum, which is an
Emblem to the Martial Bands and Artillery of the City, to be ready for their
Arms in Case of Defense.

On a Distance above, under an Imperial Canopy of Golden Fringe, sits AUGUSTA,
Representing the Famous City of London. At her Foot sit Peace and Concord
before, behind Mercy and Innocence as her Attendants, which we will describe
hereafter.

On the Panther is mounted a Figure, Representing Wisdom; For, besides its
Usefulness, it exceeds the Lion in Cunning, being of that Subtilty, that he
will decoy the Lion from his Den, who, in hopes to make him his Prey, is
caught himself. in the snare: For this subtle Creature being of a slenderer
Shape, digs its Den to his own Dimension, wherein leaping to defend himself
from the Violence of the enraged Lion, who leaping after, sticks by the middle,
and becomes his Prey.

On the Sable is placed Government, because the Sable is the distinction of
Honor by their Ermin, and those persons of Honor so distinguished: (Not by
their Merits only) are the People to whom the Government is generally committed.

Honor in a Purple Robe wrought with Gold, a Mantle of White Silk Fringed with
Crimson, bearing in her Left Hand a Shield of the Companies, in her Right a
Banner of my Lord Mayors. On a Coronet of Stars, Or, this Motto, Honor solius
Dei est.

Wisdom in a Silver Robe and Blew Mantle seeded with Stars, and Fringed with
Silver. In the one Hand bearing a Banner with this Inscription, Sapientia
Docet; in the other, a Banner of the City's.

Government in Armor of Silver and an Helmet; in the Right Hand, a Gold
Truncheon; in the Left a Banner of the Kings.

Peace in a Robe of White scattered with Stars; in the Left Hand a Branch of
Palm; in the other a White Flag.

Concord in a Crimson-Colour'd-Robe, a Sky-Colour'd-Scarf, Fringed with Silver,
Fair Bright Hair. About her Head a Garland of Red and Yellow Flowers,
representing the happy Concord of King and People, Court and City in the Honor
this Day Conferred upon them, in their Majesty's Presence; in her Left Hand a
Shield charged with a Grove of Myrtles; in her Right Hand a Banner of the
Companies.

Mercy in a Robe of Crimson, and Silver Mantle, holding in one Hand a Spear, in
the other a Banner of the City's. Innocence, with an Harmless Mild Countenance.
AUGUSTA, or LONDON, Gloriously Attired in a Robe of Crimson, and a Mantle, Or,
a Cap of Maintenance, representing the Colors of the King and Company, Salutes
his Lordship in these Words,

The First SPEECH.
SInce first AUGUSTA was my ancient Name,
LONDON has more than once been in a Flame.
Our Fierce Elections, our Domestic Wars,
Our hot Contentions, and our Civil Jars,
In a few Years have prejudiced us more,
Than all the JESUIT's Powder did before.
But Thanks (my LORD) the Cloud is now dispersed,
And we are of our former Rights possessed.
The Sun, with You, Resumes its Course this Year,
And shines again within our Hemisphere.
All we Enjoy we must acknowledge due
To England 's Great PRESERVER, and to You.
You did assert our Privileges. He
Timely Redeemed from pointed Tyranny.
You, for our Freedom, sacrificed your own,
What more could POMPEY for his ROME have don?
In some degree, to make you Recompense,
Behold Peace, Concord, Mercy, Innocence,
These are the best Supporters of a State,
My Handmaid's here assigned on you to wait.
The Second Pageant.
AN Imperial Throne gloriously Adorned with all manner of Jewels, Pearls, and
Topaz, Mounted on a Royal Pedestal of the Compositive, Corinthian, and Roman,
Order. On the top of this Pedestal sits a Masculine Warlike Person, styled
Monarchy, dressed in the Habit of a Caesar, with a Scepter in his Hand, and a
Laurel about his Head, holding a Globe in his Hand, with this Inscription,
(Britannia.) It seems to slip out of his Hands, which he, timely recovering,
Kisses, and hugs it in his Arms.

At a distance below, on the Torus of the Base, are placed the Four Cardinal
Virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance, as the best Support and
Foundation of Monarchy, all these Virtues being naturally Inherent to our
present Monarch. On the lower square of the Cornish are placed Four Figures,
Representing the Four Kingdoms, quartered in the Royal Arms, England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, which are Habited as follow,

Prudence in a Scarlet Robe, and Silver Mantle Fringed with Gold, a Chaplet of
Flowers, a Shield Vert, charged with a Dove Argent, bearing a Banner of the
City.

Justice in a Crimson Robe, a Purple Mantle Fringed with Gold and Silver; in
the Right Hand bearing a Shield, with a Balance; in the Left, a Banner of the
Companies.

Fortitude in a Blew Robe, a Silver-Mantle, a Golden Corslet about her Neck, a
Garland of Orange-Leaves, bearing a Tower Argent, and a Banner of the Kings.

Temperance in a White Robe, Green Mantle, a Chaplet of Lillies and Roses; in
one Hand bearing a Shield, with a Golden Cup,; in the other, a Banner of the
City's.

England, or Britannia, in a Scarlet-Colour'd-Robe, with a Mantle of Gold, a
Crown Imperial; a Trident in her Left Hand, and in her Right, a Standard of
England.

Scotland in a Blew Robe, a Silver-Mantle, and a Scarf of Gold; a Chaplet of
Thistles, with their Leaves about her Head. In her Left Hand a Shield, bearing
St. Andrew's Cross; in her Right, a Banner of the Kings.

France in an Azure-Colour'd-Robe, spangl'd with Gold -Flower-De-Luces. A Crown
Imperial dropping, of which he supports with one Hand, bearing in the other a
Banner of my Lord Mayor's Arms.

Ireland in a Robe of White Linen, a Mantle of Frize Fringed with Silver; an
Helmet of Gold, with a Laurel of Shamrogs, or Green Leaves, round it; in the
one Hand a Target bearing the Irish Harp; in the other, a Banner with the
Companies Arms.

His Lordship having Viewed the Variety of these Figures, pleased with the
Ornament of the Pedestal, and the Gloriousness of the Workmanship, makes an
Halt, when Monarchy rising in State, with a Golden Scepter in his Hand,
descending Three Steps, Addresses him in these Words,

The Second SPEECH.
FRom Foreign Regions, and the Toyls of War
I come to guard you to a peaceful Chair.
When naught but Chains proclaimed the Freeman's Doom,
LONDON almost a Tributer to ROME
Against the Intrigues of the Most Christian TURK,
Then great NASSAW was sent to do our Work.
Sent by Indulgent Heaven to set us Free
From Arbitrary Force and Slavery.
We now are Happier than we were before.
The Halcyons build their Nest upon our Shore.
Hearing the ROYAL PAIR had graced your Feast,
I come with Virtue to intrude a Guest.
Such Virtues as few other Monarchs have,
Prudent, Just, Sober, Resolute, and Brave.
These Virtues shall subdue the Nations under,
And make their Terror what is now their Wonder.
England appears in Triumph. All her Tears
Are vanished with our Jealousies, and Fears.
Scotland 's united to the British Crown,
IRELAND subdued, proud FRANCE shall be our own.
The withered Flower de luces Head shall droop,
His lofty Neck shall to the ORANGE stoop.
These should be Trothies of my Victory,
The Hieroglyick of true Monarchy.
But since (my LORD) like Caesar, you improve
A Government divided with great JOVE,
My Laurel at your Foot stool I submit,
And lay my Scepter at his Royal Feet.
The Third Pageant. The Ship PERSEVS, and ANDROMEDA, from the LEVANT, Inward
Bound.
AS a further Mark of their Bounty, the Company have this Year Added the Ship
Perseus and Andromeda, Inward Bound, from the LEVANT, Laden with Spices, Silks,
Furs, Sables, Panthers, and all manner of Beasts Skins, hanging in the Shrouds
and Rigging. This Ship is peculiarly Attributed to the Lord Mayor, as a proper
Emblem and Characteristick of his way of Traffic and Adventure, being a Turkey
Merchant. Nor is the Name of Perseus and Andromeda less properly Applied,
having Analogy and Respect, as well to his Lordship, as the Company. Perseus
was the Son of Jupiter and Danae. Mercury gave him Wings, that is, Sails, with
which he Mounts his Pegasus, that is, his Ship, wherein he slew the Gorgons,
Medusa, Sthenio, and Euryole. He Cut off Medusa's Head, whose Hair were
Serpents, the Emblem of Envy, and placed it in his Shield. This is peculiarly
Adopted to his Lordship, who has overcome his Malicious Enemies, and this Day
Rides in Triumph over them. Minerva gives him a Golden shield Covered with a
Goat Skin, called Aegis, which is an Hieroglyphick of the Companies. He Rescues
Andromeda from the Sea Monster; the Moral is, the Church from the Deluge, that
was ready to Overflow it. How Applicable this is to the present Revolutions of
this Year, will need no Comment to Explain.

This Ship has on Board it a Jolly Brave Captain, Master, Gunner and his Mate,
Boatswain, Pilot, besides the ship's Crew, continually Toping, Bousing, and
Carousing, who for Joy of coming into England, having the Pot, or Quarter-Can,
continually at their Noses, get Merry with Drinking their Majesty's, and his
Lordships Health, discharging a Cannon at every Round. The Boatswain giving the
signal with his Whistle, Three great Huzza's are given, and the Health is
renewed with a Cannon, as before, and a Bowl of Punch.

Boatswain, Sixty Fathoms and an half, Ho; Helm a Lee, starboard, hard a Port,
thus, keep her thus; there, there, fall not off, brave Boy, well steered,
Pilot, and better Con'd. Helm a Lee. This Son of a Whore he will Overset us,
Loof, Loof, you Dog, No Near. What a yaw this Lubberly-Land Crab has made us,
steady, steady, Port, there she scuds away.

The MARINERS SONG. Captain. NOw Boys, our Voyage is out,
And we are Richly Fraught,
While Fools do stay
At Home and Play,
We trace the World about.

Pilot. Would I were in close Harbor,
From Noise of Port and Larbor.

Boatswain. Thoud'st run a Head
With JENNY in Bed,
And Anchor in her Harbor.

Pilot. But if She should not come to it,
If she should not come to lt,

Boatswain. If she has a Rudder,
As well as her Mother,
I Will warrant thee Boy she will do it.

Boatswain. Sixteen Fathom and a Quarter, Master, Port.


Captain. Hawl in your main Braces, Down with your Anchor, and lore your
Topsale to the Royal Sovereign of London.


The Captain's SPEECH.
Through Storms and Tempests I am here arrived,
Fierce as your Foes against your Life contrived.
The Seas, the Winds, our Ruin aid conspire,
Their Tumults, Torrents, their Hot Brains a Fire.
A Thirst of Ruling over Judge and Bench,
Which nothing but an Holland Draft could quench.
To trade to Turkey we in vain had sailed,
If Mahomet in England had prevailed.
Or the most Christian Sultan nearer home,
By sly Intrigue had made her Slave to ROME.
But, thanks to Providence, the Storm is over,
And we once more arrived on Native Shore.
We Boast not of the Riches brought from Far,
Virtue, not Riches, must support the Chair:
Justice and Peace your Pilot be to steer
A steady Course through the Ensuing Year.
The Fourth Pageant.
THis is a Scene of Mirth and Jollity, and called the Company's Pageant, in
which are various strange Figures and Shapes is lively Representing their
Mystery and Occupation. It is a spacious Wilderness, in which are Planted all
sorts of Trees. Bushes, Shrubs, Brambles, Thickets, and Groves. In the former
part the Orange-Tree with its Fruit flourishing in their Prime. This Wilderness
is Haunted and Inhabited with all manner of Wild-Beasts, and Birds of various
Shapes and Colors, even to Beasts of Prey, as Wolves, Bears, Panthers,
Leopards, Sables, and Beavers, even to Dogs, Cats, Foxes, and Rabbits, which
Tossed up now and then into a Balcony, fall often upon the Companies Heads, and by
them Tossed again into the Crowd, affords great Diversion; with these, several
Oranges of the Trees which are Planted at every Corner of the Wilderness, which
is no less Divertive.

In the Rere of this Wilderness is Erected a spacious Triumphal Arch, the
Banisters Richly Gilded, all the Rails and Colomns Adorned with Ensigns and
Coats of Arms of their Majesty's, the City's, his Lordship, and the Companies.
About the Column, under the Lord Mayor's Coat, is Painted this Inscription in
Capital Letters,

DEPRESSVS SVRGO.

In the Front of this Triumphal-Arch, which is of the First, and Tuscan Order,
sits Amphion playing upon an Ho-Boy, with Two Dryades, or Wood-Nymphs, one on
each Hand; These Wood-Nymphs seeming to be Charmed with his Music, whose
Melodious Harmony likewise Allays the Fury of the Wild Beasts, who are
continually Moving, Dancing, Curvetting, and Tumbling, to the Music, while the
Birds are Chanting their Wild Notes amongst the Trees in every Grove and Thicket.

These Dryades are Habited alike, of a Brown and Tawny Complexion; Hair Thick
and Long, hanging loose over their Shoulders, and their Attire of a Dark Green.

Amphyon a Young Man of a Ruddy Complexion, in a Robe of Crimson Velvet, on his
Head a Coronet of Red and White Flowers, with his Ho-Boy in his Hand, making
his Obeisance, Expresses the Charms of his Melodious Harmony in this short
Speech, AMPHION's Speech.
IN this Wild Haunted Wilderness you see
The Powerful Effects of Harmony;
This Harmony, (My Lord,) does Represent
UNION, which is the Soul of Government:
London 's a Den where Savage-Beasts do Lurk,
Keep them in Concord, and you do your Work.


This being the Last Pageant, placed at the End of King's street, his Lordship
moves to Guild Hall, where he is ready to Receive their Majesty's, who come
Attended with the City Royal Regiment of Horse. The Trumpeters Coats of Crimson
Velvet Laced down with silver and gold Lace. The Trumpets made with silver, and
several Damask Standards and Banners very Richly Embroidered, with Kettle
Drums; While their Majesty's are at Dinner, they are Entertained with the
following Song. A SONG to their MAJESTY'S in Guild Hall.
(1)
HOW great are the Blessings of Government made,
By the excellent Rule of Our PRINCE.
Who, while Troubles and Cares do his Pleasures invade
To his people all Joys does dispense:
And while He for Us is still caring and thinking,
We have nothing to mind but our Shops and our Trade,
And then to divert us with Drinking,
And then to divert us with Feasting and Drinking.
CHORUS.
From Him we derive all our Pleasures, our Pleasures, and Wealth,
Then Fill me a Glass, nay, Fill it up, Fill it up Higher,
My Soul is athirst for Their MAJESTY'S Health,
And an Ocean of Drink cannot quench my Desire,
Since all we enjoy to His Bounty we owe,
It Is fit all our Bumpers like that should oreflow,
It Is fit all our Bumpers, It Is fit all our Bumpers
(2)
Then whilst in a Consort the Minstrels do play,
Let a Health to great CAESAR go round.
He who crowns with his Presence the State of this Day,
Whom all Conquering Laurels have Crowned.
And whilst we enjoy the inestimat Blessing,
The Extent of our Freedom, each Man his own way,
Let Us show it in Thankful Caressing,
Let Us show it in Thankful, in Thankful Caressing.
CHORUS.
From Him we derive all our Pleasures, our Pleasures, and Wealth,
Then Fill me a Glass -- etc.
A Song to the LORD MAYOR, and Company.
(1)
COme, Boys, Drink an Health to the Chiefs of the CITY,
The Loyal LORD MAYOR, and the Legal COMMITTEE.
The Emperial CITY this Year that with YOU
Has restored us our Lives, and our Liberties too.
(2)
With Justice, and Peace, may it ever be Floting,
May the Heads that support it agree in their Voting,
May a strong Tide of Union still flow in your HALL,
And no Sea of Faction e're beat down your Wall.
(3)
A Health to the DONS of the Company's Table,
Crown every Bumper with Ermin and Sable.
If Ermin's the Emblem of Honor, then You,
As well as their Lordships, are Dignified too.
(4)
From Heats and Contentions for ever be Free,
Let CITY and COURT make one Harmony.
May never more Discord amongst You be found,
But one Loyal BUMPER for ever go round.


About the midd(...) Majesty's Health is begun, all the Hail (...) with (...)
and Loud Acclamations. His (...), begins his Lordships Health which is (...) as
Loud Acclamations as before; the (...) and Trumpets, after the other Music,
Beating and Sounding in their Turns.

The Songs (...) over, their Majesty's return back to White Hall in the same
State and Order they came, haing an Entire Regiment of Foot-Guards before the
Coach, Led by (...) the Lord Sidney, the Guards of Horse behind, with a Lane of
the T^^in-Bands of the City on each side to Temple Bar, from thence by the
Liberties of Westminster to Charing Cross, a Lane on each side the Streets. The
Lord Mayor (...) to (...), where all the Silk-works, Banners, and Flags of the
Company are Lodged. The rest of the Companies, to their Respective Habitations.

Also the famous Artillory Company that this Day Attended on his Lordship,
Marched off in Order at the same time.

The Painters and (...) of the Pageants, with the Speakers and Children, having
performed their Parts with Satisfaction and Applause, Repair to Refresh
themselves, having sat all Day in their appointed Postures and Attire.

I will Conclude, with the Motto of the Right Worshipful Company, who have so
(...) Contributed, and Unanimously gone (...) Cost and Trouble of this Day.
Soli Deo Gloria.

FINIS.

