THE TRUE CHARACTER OF AN ORDINANCE OF PARLIAMENT in general.
Written by Tho. Tel-troth, Clerk to the long-abused Commons in England,
Scotland and Ireland.
Printed at Amsterdam 1647.
AN Ordirance of Parliament (without the Royal assent) is an illegitimate
Monster, or State-bastard, begotten between Pride and Disobedience, and forced
upon the Commonwealth to keep: It has so many fathers, that one cannot tell
who had the greatest share in begetting it, unless the Devil the father of
Lies, who is the grand cause of its Production; It enters into the world in a
confused and monsterous shape, not much unlike to a Bear-whelp, which some
Knave or Promoting Varlet in a City or Company licks into a form, and so draws
it up, or apparells it in the Cobweb-lawne Rags of his own ignorance, folly,
madness or Knavery, till it be dressed up, and made ready to be presented to
the gods of this world, to be dipped or sprinkled; The Godfathers consist most
of Commons, and many times of LORDS and COMMONS; the Gosips are Mrs.
Trouble-state, and Mrs. Wood-have-all; The Holy Synod, (that are always too
officious to undo the poor Commonwealth, sprinkles it, and prays over it,
which besides THE ORDINANCE (God save us from a gun) which this young babe of
grace, (in stead of Crossing,) is marked withal in the forehead when it
receives the adoption, with a new Ceremony or Subscription at the tail, made by
the Clerk, H El. That hereafter it may not be ashamed to fight under their
banners. All which Ceremonies being performed, it is committed to the care of
that learned Typographist E. Husbands to be schooled, or taught to speak plain
English at his school on Addling Hill: He many times has a lease of his life,
and continues sometimes a year, sometimes more, and sometimes less; he has a
numerous issue, and all named alike; Ordinance is a common Name for them all;
only their sir-names are all as different as their natures, for there is such
disparity between them, that they seldom agree in one and the same thing;
therefore it is not much amiss to rank them in order.

Ordinance for raising men under the E. of Essex, to murder his Majesty's
Loyal Subjects, as if then our happy peaceable estate under the government of
so pious, good and merciful a Prince, (that all Christendom cannot parallel)
had procured such an universal Plague, that nothing could cure the same but
the sword, to let out the very heart-blood of his nurse the Commonwealth, to
the utter ruin of millions, both in lives and Estates.

Ordinance for the Earl of Straff^rds blood, written in so red a Character, and
cried so lowed to heaven for Justice, that it immediately brought the Plague of
the bloody-issue over all Ireland, nay and England too; V^x sanguinis fratrum
vestrorum clamat de terra. The voice of the blood of their murdered brethren
cries out of the earth against them: And this voice it is that has had so
powerful and forceable a working amongst them.

The Ordinance to butcher the Bishop of Canterbury, so eagerly prosecuted by
the over-blinde zeal, hate, and malice of his cruel persecuters, that the
rather wrought home their own Plagues, then that Martyrs punishment, when they
preferred him to more Titles, and greater glory by put^ing him to death; When
they condemned him, then they crowned him, when they killed him, then they gave
him life, when they spoiled him, even then they enriched him. Plures efficinem,
quoties metimur a vobis, semen est sanguis Christianorum. Our number increases
so often as you reap us, and the seed of the Church is the blood of
Christians. The more the Children of Israel were oppressed the more they
increased, and so it is in all true Protestants, as Saint Augustine, says, 22
de civitat. cap. 7. Resurrectio immortalitatis pullulabat faecundius, cum in
Martirum sanguine sereretur, The resurrection of Immortallity sprung more
fertilly, when it was sown in the blood of Martyrs; The sweet spice yields
the better scent when it is bruised or pounded; when you persecute such Men,
you but till and manure the ground of the Church; and though you think by such
means to root out her corn, you but sow seed, that soon after will spring with
a more glorious and plentiful harvest. I might enlarge my self much upon this
subject, and tell you of many other things that are not half so strange as
true, to remember you of one Timkins, Challoner, His Majesty's Messenger, and
many others, that died with no more Law, then you your selves had Gospel when
you condemned thens; These are all notch'd upon your Parliament-tally, and must
for certain (in the end) come to a strict reckoning.

The great constancy of these men's sufferings inciteth all Loyal Subjects to
look the more steadfastly into their Cause, that so by seeking they may find,
understand, and believe, and become all as ready to die in the just Cause of so
good a King, as these men did.

If you daily devise to vex and grieve his Majesty with Propositions, which
yourselves know before you frame them, that it stands not with his Majesty's
honor, neither can he sign unto them without danger of a perjured conscience,
that must needs render him as odious both to God and all honest men, as your
selves are, for the breach of your several Oaths of Allegiance unto him; or
if you carry this Royal Ark to any one of your four Prisons, (as the report
goes) you must expect plague-fores, swellings, risings, and blanes breaking
forth too; it will not be the fear of Prisons, Racking, Hanging, Drawing, nay
grinding to pieces that will affright thousand of thousands of Loyal Subjects
from their obedience to His Majesty; all the Tyranny you can invent, or
inflict upon us, shall be but a testimony and proof of our Allegiance and
Fidelity to our Gracious Sovereign, that God has placed over us; so long as
that impregnable Fort Royal holds out, there is not the least doubt of
Victory, since it is so strongly fortified with Grace, and armed with the
complete armor of Righteousness, manned with Angels, whose chief Governor is
the Lord of Hosts, in whose hand the heart of the King is: If Sir Thomas lay
siege to this Fort, (as God forbid) heel loose more men before it, then ever
the Conqueror did before Bazing-house: But I hope better of that Noble
General; and am persuaded, that though never so many rebellious Monsters
should rise up against Him, and should imbrue their bloody and cruel hands in
the fresh bleeding wounds of Him and his Loyal Subjects, and make never so
loud a noise of victory, yet when it comes to the proof, God will show them
(by rufull experience) that all the noise and sound of victory, was but the
sound of their own fall and ruin; and his Majesty appear the more glorious,
and His Honor not one whit hurt thereby, but much bettered by their treachery.

Ordinanes for Contributions, Assessments, Excizes, Sequestrations, and an
infinite many more force free quarter from the poor Commonwealth, and a
thousand firks to pump her dry, and drain all her money into their own Coffers,
their notorious ingratitude to the City of London; that so long have upon all
pretended occasions whatsoever, emptied not only their veins of blood, but
their coffers of money) that so they might enable themselves to undo the
Country; and when the Country lies languishing in misery, and past recovery,
then to undo the City, imprison the Lord Major (His Majesty's Lieutenant) of
the City, with the Aldermen, the chief Merchants and upholders of Trade and
commerce, which must at the best prove but an utter undoing of us all in
general, both City and Country, both desperately sick, even unto an universal
judgment, and must both taste of His Majesty's cup: Lord look upon Him and us,
for we are all in great slavery, even whilst they pretend liberty, we are daily
bound: the cure of our disease has proved fatal, and worse then the disease
it self; for we have bowed our necks to a heavy-yoake, and are in worse then
Egyptian slavery.

New Monopolies are every day invented, and farmed out to Promoting
catterpillars, even for Printing Pamphlets forsooth; Pamphlet- Symmonny for a
year and a day, to print the learned Works of the Agitators.

Ordinance for suppressing unlicensed Pamphlets, must truth be licensed, and
lies authorized: Goap Gilbert, five shillings a penny Pamphlet, must the Press
be shut up to all but Walker, eldest son to the father of lies: Clerk,
Preacher, Ironmonger, Bookseller, Poetaster, and all too little to maintain so
goatish a leacher; must Hunscott, that old grizl'd thief come to his old trade
of breaking open houses, as lately he has done, and under pretense of
searching for unlicensed books, take, steal and carry away what ere they can
lay hands on, and be protected by Ordinance? must power be entrusted in the
hands of such notoriously known villanes, the very scum of mankind, and
excrement of decayed nature, that rake hell, and scim the devil, (as the
proverb goes) you will hardly find two the like for all manner of sorded
villainies, not to be equalled: these two hounds, with carret-beard Lewis, a
whelp of the same litter, hunt up and down continually, seeking whom they may
devour: It were well that all honest men would take notice of these Curres, and
lend a helping hand to muzzle them, else poor Tell-troath will be worried even
to death, and then the abused Commonalty may be still led blindfold by the
nose to more new taxes yet? New Assessments and penalties laid upon those that
refuse the pay^ent thereof, or to streine presently for the same? Is this the
Liberty of the Subject, purchased with so much blood and sweat, and that has
cost us so much money? Shall not poor Tel-troath think ye be imprisoned 40.
days in the common- jayle, for his saucy blabbing, thus boldly too? Must he
pay 40. shillings for speaking truth, that now is forced to sanctuary her self
in corners and holes; walk in the dark for fear of persecuters, lame, cold, and
clad in rags? Do you think to Ordain or Order any thing so closely, that it
shall not be one day revealed, and laid open as clear as the Sun; at which
great Assizes, and Higher Court of Parliament, many of you (it is much to be
feared) will be committed to the Prison on the left hand for a longer term
then fourty-dayes: Understanding men believe that truth has rubbed many of
your gual'd backs, that you kick and winch thus? Truth fears no colors,
though you set on all your Ppursuiavants, Beadles, and the Devil and all upon
her, she will at length prevail, and maugre all your malice: in the mean time
she dispaireth not of some friends, to help and comfort her, in despite of
Iron-face, or the learned Stationer at the Exchange, that would have set out a
whole Troop at his own charge to foment a new war; surely the very same wise
Common-counsel-man, put this new Ordinance for Pamphlets into its
swadling-clouts; for himself and his honest Brethren must pay but 10 s. for
selling of them, and the poor man that carries them about the streets, must be
whipped for a Rogue: Merciful Ordinance! and why not he whipped as well that sells
unlicensed books in his shop, as he that selfs them in the street, they both
offend alike; and for ought I know, the poor man may be the honester man of the
two. But he that prints them must have his Presses defaced; alas poor
harmless things, you must be degraded too, and made: or ever incapable of
printing, though your masters, with their wives and families harve in the
streets for want of bread.

O (...) for the Twentieth part; then why not the 18, 19; and to consequently
all the rest; for that power that commands a part of our Estates, will not
spare the rest upon occasion; This the King told us once, but we wanted the
grace then to believe Him; but now all is gone, it is too late to shut the
stabledoore.

Ord. for Tithes; The Synod have as good stomachs as Bells Priests; the tenths
of the Kingdom will not suffice them, and 4 s. a day to boot: O intolerable;
The mercy of God, and the covetousness of the priest is without end: The
tenths of right belong to the fatherless, the stranger and widow, yet Sir John
would have all, or else to prison, and there ly without bail or mainprise,
till the utmost farthing be paid, though the poor wretches have not bread to
help themselves and children, it is all one to them, they show you no other
reason, but the Ordinance for all.

Ord. for the Directory; The Service Book out of date; what new Religion next
must we expect, Shakers? the Soldiers had the wit to cast dice, lest they
should rend the seam-lesse coat of our Savior; Get you some dice, and cast too
for shame; should the seamlesse-coat or Church fall to Dr. Burges, what a
goodly portion would it be to feast him and his Compu^gators; or to Dr. Gouge;
and he would take use for it, as he does his money; or to D. Sybalds, 'twill help
pay for nursing his illigitimate children; Or to Mr. Sedwick, 'twill do him
the feat now, and anen too, and bring that Great Wark to a speedyer end. Good
God rescue thy Vineyard from such Boares, that root up her Vines, and divide
her tender clusters of grapes; deliver thy Susanna from the hands of these
wicked Elders, these diseased pieces of Apocrypha, that no sooner are bound up
with the Bible, but they corrupt the whole Text: Ignorance and fat feeding are
their best founders; and their life but a borrowed blaste of wind; for between
two Religions, (as between two doors) they are always whistling: Where the
gate stands open, they will always be seeking a style; and where their
learning ought to climb, they must creep tharow; give them advice, you run
presently into Traditions, and urge a modest course, they cry out Counsels;
and cannot abide to dispute in any place, but Where the meat is best, there
they confute most; for their arguing is but the efficacy of their eating; They
can better afford you ten lies then one Oath; and dare commit any sin, so it be
gilded over with pretenses of sanctity; They will not stick to commit
fornication, so it be done sinceerly, and for the propagation of the godly; and
hate no whore so much as the whore of Babylon. They hold it lawful to steal,
so it be from the wicked. They are of so good discourse, that they dare
challenge the Almighty, to talk with them ex tempore; Lastly their their
devotion is O stinacy, the only solace of their hearts contradiction, and the
main end of their sitting, consultations and debates, nothing else but
hypocrysie.

Ordinance to grant the Boys a Holy Day, and the thankful boys, in
requital, to force the Parliament to make two or three: The King signed to a
trienial Parliament, the Synod praid it into an everlasting-Parliament, to
requite His Majesty: Sir Thomas and his Agitators will make it a bienniall
Parliament, or put a period to the same; and thus all things are out of square,
and subject to change and mutabillity, and nothing under the sun firm and
permanent, and man more unstable, then any other of the creatures, and is not
what he seems to be, his understanding is intricate and full of windings: he is
the prima materia, and his intents give him form; he dies his means and his
meaning into two colors, he baits craft with humility, and his countenance is
the present disposition. He winnes not by battery; but undermining, and his
rack is soothing. He knows passion only by sufferance, and resists by
obeying. He makes his time an Accountant to his memory, and of the humors af
men, weaveth nets for his own occasions.

This Character is licensed according to Order, by Tom Teltroath, Cler. to the
long-abused COMMONS.

FINIS.

