A True COPY OF A Letter of CONSOLATION Sent to NOT. the Printer, Near the
POPE's Keys in Fetter-Lane, from the Meal-Tub Mid wife, in Newgate.
Printed to prevent False, Seditious and Lying Reports.
Dear Not.
I Have with great Sorrow heard the News of Thy Bumbasting, by our Heretical
Enemies; But now under Thy own Hand, and Composing, I have Read, That they did
not Beat thee enough -- to send Thee to our Holy Father for a Consecrated
Martyr and Saint. Alas! may Thee and I say, That we are (deservedly) made
Sufferers for so good a Cause, that we have now for some years so vigorously
Served. But indeed (poor Rogue) I would not have. Thee Angry with Me, as though
I Flattered Thee, when I Commend thy Industry in our public Calling [of Lying]
for I cannot but Observe (notwithstanding Thy late wholesome Chastisement) Thou
holdst that good old Principle firm; since in thy last Relation of the
Heretics making a Bon-Fire of our most Dear Father the Pope, Thou bast
altogether left out the true Story of the Popish Printer Riding with his Face
to the Horses Tail, all to beset, and bedeckt with Lying Intelligences, least
the people should have taken it to have been Thine own Picture; being so
exactly like Thee, as few could discern any difference: Next, Thou did like
Our Party too, omit the Suborners and Suborned on the Pillory; for though we
Love Hugg and Carress them with Huzzah's to the Brim, yet it would be Madness
in us to let the People know them, and suffer such a conceit to run in their
Noddle, as if we made great use of them. In reality Not. badst thou (when thou
wast last here) foreseen this Thumping, Bumping Disaster; my Stone Jacquet, if
the Keeper would have Lent it Thee, had been freely at Thy Service, however my
Headpiece, (that kept off the Stone of twenty pound weight at my Exaltation)
is wholly at Thy Command, least next time Thou peepest out of White friars,
some Bold Protestant Heritick should Ring the second Part to the same Tune on
thy empty Noddle, and make the incapable of Serving the Catholic Interest any
longer. However cheer up, for whilst the Fathers of this College can Write a
LIBEL, Thou shall not want the Honor of being the Catholic Printer; and, if
thou can Believe Me, (who gave a true Account of Racking of Mr. Prance in
Newgate, though he was a Sleep all the while and never felt it; and who has
sent to thy Forge so many useful LIBELS to our Cause) I say, if, Thou can
confide in Me, pull up thy Courage, Write, Swear, Print, Lie, as Bold as a
JESUIT, and ten times worse: Curse, and Ruin Thy Native Country, if Thou
can, by Sowing and Fomenting DIVISIONS; all these Services for our CAUSE, and
ten times as Much, if Thou can do, shall Eternize Thy Name in Golden Letters
in the Holy Vatican, and keep Thee ten thousand Years out of Purgatory. Salute
our Fellow Sufferers, Madam Joana, alias Monsieur Observator; together with the
Most Oblieging, Seigneur Heraclitus Ridens: To Conclude, We earnestly wish Thy
good Campany here; where Thou woudst be as well Guarded as in White-fryers;
Farewell, and do Well, and thou will greatly Oblige her, whose Motto is, I
NEVER CHANGE,

Eliz. Cellier.

Postscript.
THE Muses of Our College being got Tipsy in Drinking the old HEALTH, they
have (Dear Implement) Composed a Sonnet, for Thy further Consolation, and in
Memory of Thy Basting, which They desire Thee to send to Monsieur Heraclitus
Ridens our Regester, to be by him Published among his Odes and Ballads, which
we Compose for him, when our Pension comes fresh in, and that we Drink Sack
with an Huzza, Farewell

E. C.

The SONNET of the CANE.
To the Tune of, To prevent False, Seditious and Lying Reports, etc.
COme be not dismayed,
Though Thou were well paid,
We swear by the Soul of King Arthur,
In spite of the Smiter,
Or Jack the Presbyter
Thou shall be put down for a Martyr.
Our Father the POPE
Without Tyburn or Rope,
Since thou art so known a Transgressor:
With thy own black Paint,
Shall Print Thee a Saint,
When we have a Romish Successor.
Thou have the Popes Keys
As every one Sees,
They 're hanged up at Thine own Door,
For what use? cannot you tell?
To open Heaven and Hell,
Dear Not, what would Thou have more?
The Authority is good,
If well understood,
And in it, Thou well may Glory,
You may abuse whom you please,
Of all Sorts and Degrees;
And make a Damned Saint of a Tory.
Though we are now in our Drink,
We cannot but think,
What Laughter, what Jest, and what Sport there is,
To see Thee give an hint
Of Thy Sufferings in Print,
To Vile, Care, Janaway, and others,
Take Courage, we say
When we get the Day,
Thou shall be well Paid for Thy Basting;
And in the mean time,
Accept of our Rhyme,
To make a Knaves Name everlasting.
London, Printed for W. Johnson, 1681.


