Advertisement About the ENGLISH ATLAS now Printing at the Theater in Oxford by
Moses Pit Bookseller in London.
THat the First Volum of the said ATLAS, which contains the North Pole, the
principal Countries of which are, Muscovy or Russia, Poland, Sweden, and
Denmark; will be finished, and ready to be delivered to the Subscribers about
Christmas next: And therefore it is desired, that those tha^ have Subscribed
and not Paid their Money, as also others that desre to Subscribe, do
immediately pay their Subscription Money, viz. Forty Shillings, to Dr. Thomas
Yate, Principal of Brazen Nose College Oxon, or to Moses Pit at the Angel in
S. Paul's Churchyard London; where they shall have a Receipt.

And all those that have a mind to have their Coat of Arms engraven on any of
the Plates, shall have it done for Twenty Shillings if they please to send
their Coat to either of the two Persons above mentioned in time.

If any desire to satisfy themselves as to the well-doing of the said Book,
let them inquire at the Theater in Oxon, or at the Shop of the said Moses Pit
in London, where they may be fully satisfied by seeing of the Sheets of the
said Book as they are wrought off at the Press.

It Is desired, that if any Gentleman has any Curiosities of any Country
whatsoever, if he please to communicate them to the said Moses Pit, and they
are approved of and judged fit to be Printed by those Learned men, whose
Judgments are consulted, they shall have Satisfaction for them to their own
content.

A COLLECTION OF SEVERAL Relations and Treatises Singular and Curious, OF JOHN
BAPTISTA TAVERNIER, Baron of Aubonne. Not Printed among his first Six Voyages.

Divided into Five Parts, viz.

I. A new and singular Relation of the Kingdom of Tunquin, with several
Figures, and a Map of the Country. II. How the Hollanders manage their Affairs
in Asia. III. A Relation of Japon, and the Cause of the Persecution of the
Christians in those Islands; with a Map of the Country. IV. A Relation of what
passed in the Negotiation of the Deputies which were at Persia and the Indies,
as well on the French King's as the Company's behalf, for the Establishment of
Trade. V. Observations upon the East India Trade, and the Frauds there subject
to be committed.
Published by EDMUND EVERARD, Esquire.

IMPRIMATUR hic Liber, cui Titulus, A Collection of several Relations and
Treatises, etc.

Anth. Spinedge, Rev. in Christo Patri and Dom. Domino Gulielmo Archiep. Cant.
a Sacris Domesticis.



LONDON, Printed by A. Godbid and J. Playford, for Moses Pit at the Angel in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Robert Clayton, LORD MAYOR ELECT OF THE CITY of
LONDON.
MY LORD,
THE Encouragement the City-Trade and Foreign Discoveries is like to find under
Your Lordship's Magistracy, ought to be the chief Encouragement of any
Publick-spirited Person to render unto You all due Acknowledgments and
Testimonies of Honor in this kind. The City of LONDON is doubtless the Head
and Promotress of all English Trade, and Your Lordship is the designed Head and
Representative of the City: That Obligation Foreign Traffic has to London,
London owes partly to the wise Councils and Government of its Chief
Magistrate, and it scarce ever had any, of whose Prudence Courage, and
Moderation, it ought to conceive greater hopes than of Your Lordship's. Hard
Weather needs Resolute Pilots, and Good Magistrates are ordinarily sent by God
against bad Times: And far be it from us that we should make Times worse than
they are. But as it has been my bad more than my good Fortune to be some years
ago the first Avaunt Courier, who from the Enemies Camp brought the Tidings of
these Hellish Attempts, that now cause our Domestic Troubles; so I in this Book
present to Your Lordship, and all England, an unavoidable and impartial
Argument, to show that our Fears from Jesuitical Practices are much less
magnified, than they are by them beyond measure extenuated, by a new Popish
Device of Creating Security: For herein Your Lordship may see what the Jesuits
are, where ever they get Footing and Credit, in the furthest part of Japon, as
well as in Venice, Paris, Ireland, and England.

Coelum non Animum mutant, cum trans mare currunt. You shall observe (I say)
how these Ignatians Covetousness and State-undermining, brought the greatest
Rebellion, Bloodshed, and Massacre upon about 60000 Christians at one blow,
that ever was seen in those Eastern Parts of the World; and how thereby some
Hundred Thousands in after Persecutions were destroyed; may, and the whole
Christian Name quite extirpated (in hatred of their Practices) by Heathen
Monarchs, who could not think their Heads, Crowns, nor Estates, to be otherwise
safe from the Factious Disciples of this Loyola. Yet all theirs, and their
secret Factors Devices, will (I hope) come to naught, if we follow those
moderate, peaceable, and judicious Counsels, Your Lordship's Eloquent Speech
has set out unto us; begetting a sober and hearty Harmony 'twixt Prince and
People. If the Ship be kept in good order within, there is little to be feared
from Storms without. I remark, That it depended much on the Tribunus Plebis, or
Lord Mayor of the old Rome, (most like to our London in Policy and Magistracy)
to keep it and the whole Government in an even temper, and to maintain a Lovely
Correspondency betwixt the Senate and the People; and it was by him that the
Enemies or Friends of the Commonwealth ordinarily wrought their ends of Peace
or Disturbance. Therefore as Your Lordship has always appeared, as well in
your Actions as in your Words, a Sincere and Brave-spirited Patriot, a Moderate
and Reconciling Subject, it is not to be doubted but that Your Lordship will
give that Satisfaction to the Court, City, and Country, and even to all Foreign
Traffiquers themselves, that is justly expected and conceived of you. So that
Quiet, Peace, Trade, and Foreign Discoveries, being encouraged and promoted in
your Times, your Name shall be not only respected and honored among your
Countrymen, but also in those remotest parts of the World, where this small
Work (most necessary for all East India Merchants and Travelers) will sound it
out, and testify with all the due Respects and Obligations on the Public
Account of,

Your most Humble and Dutiful Servant, EDMUND EVERARD.

THE PREFACE.
THE World being an ample Volum, in whose Extent and Varieties the Framer's
Wisdom and Attributes are manifestly read and set out, it seems that great
Travelers are the best Scholars and Proficients in this Book; since on's
Native Country is but as a single Leaf, where all the Singularities are not to
be seen which are found in the other.

-- Non omnis fert omnia Tellus. And the truth of it is, those Ancient
Philosophers, who have first laid the Foundations of Arts, Sciences, and
Commonwealths in the World, were Travelers into these very Eastern Parts,
(partly described by us here) whence they brought home all their Knowledge; it
being here that Man and Knowledge it self had their first beginning. So that
wise Travelers are not unlike those rich laden Vessels which through many
dangers bring wholesome and profitable Cargo's, Drugs, and other Conveniences,
to be dispersed among the several Societies of their own Country: They are
like those diligent Master-Bees, who run diverse miles to extract out of many
bitter Herbs that sweet Liquor, which they afterward kindly refund to be
enjoyed at home in common, in the hardest Seasons of the Year, by their
Fellows. What costs them dear, others have it cheap: And there is scarce any
Private Persons in the Commonwealth, to whom we owe greater Honor and Thanks*
than to Worthy Travelers and Discoverers of For^^^ Countries.

Yet it may be truly said, That Ancient Travelers and Geographers have but as
course Limners and Coast-Drivers, drawn a very rough Draught in their Relations
of those Countries they described unto us, in comparison of some later Writers,
who also sometimes do but copy their Predecessors Stories; and Merchants, with
most other Travelers, are weather-driven by their private Occasions or
Misfortunes, to take but a Cursory Survey of Places, and so give but an
answerable account of the same to the World.

But among all the Ancient and Modern Travelers, none had such fair
Opportunities and Advantages as the Illustrious Monsieur Tavernier had, to make
a true, profitable, and exact Relation of the Singularities of those Remote
Parts of Asia, where he past so many Years in great Splendor, as shall appear
by the ensuing Considerations and Qualifications of a good Traveller.

1. He from his Youth had a strong Inclination to Travel, which secret Instinct
is certainly a Preordination of God for an Undertaking; and this unseen
Impulsion carries such extraordinary Instruments cheerfully and prosperously
through all the Difficulties, others of a contrary disposition would never wade
thorough, for whom it would be in vain to strive against the current of Nature.

2. This Traveling Genius made him begin early to fit himself for his design,
and soon to go about it. He was therefore sufficiently imbued in his
Intellectuals with all due knowledge of Sciences, Language, and Geography, and
precedent Travelers Maps and Books, without all which common Travelers cannot
conceive so soon and so orderly, nor reap so much benefit for themselves or
others.

3. But Speculations without Experience are but unprofitable Notions; and the
Experiments of this kind are not to be had without great Means and Expense, for
want of which many a good Undertaking is Still-born. Haud facile emergunt,
quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi --
is an old and true Saying. But our noble Tavernier had an ample Estate, drove
a great Trade, had Money in abundance, and a Prince's or Embassador-like
Retinue, without which and great Presents none is scarce looked upon in
Luxurious Asia, fit for admittance into great and worthy Companies, where
Knowledge may be attained; so that he thereby soon got into the Presence,
Familiarity, and Closets of the Emperors, the Ministers of State, and the
Philosophers of Persia, Mogol, etc. and got into the Acquaintance and
Conversations of the leading and common Merchants, Traffiquers, and People; and
knew their Languages very well: for it is in vain to have Eyes, if one have not
also a Tongue in such cases.

4. And whereas Learning and Riches do sometimes render narrow Souls of a more
proud and unsociable temper, Monsieur Tavernier is by Nature and Education, an
obliging, cheerful, and insinuating Traveller, and of a graceful Countenance.
Comely Personages are beloved almost as soon as they are seen; and those that
have but fair Souls, are not so till after they are known. Now Monsieur
Tavernier having both these Advantages, had a free entrance into the Friendship
and Notions the Indians (great or small) had concerning the Natural,
Mechanical, Political, Religious, and Trading State of their own Country;
which he made more his business to know, than to grow more rich. And at some
times he would reckon Thousands of Pounds as nothing to attain his ends in this
point of Knowledge and further Experience; as the perusal of this his own Work,
and Persons now in London, that knew him in and after his Travels, can fully
testify.

5. Moreover, Mutual Help of Persons equally understanding and curious, is a
great advantage in such Researches and Observations as these. Now John Baptista
Tavernier, besides many other Heads and Hands, had herein the Assistance of a
Brother, as complete a Traveller as himself in those furthest Parts of Asia,
and had no less the foregoing Qualifications in Person and Estate than this his
Brother John Baptista had, as the Reader may well perceive by this Volum of
Travels.

6. And as for the Time; Six Voyages, and about Forty Years Abode in those
Countries they do describe, did render these Brethrens Knowledge vast, their
Experiments tried over and over, and this their Account more sure and exact (as
I said) than that of any other Traveller heretofore.

7. And finally, to confirm the undoubted Credit that is to be given to this
Nobleman and his Relation, (who is above all design of Flattering or Deceiving
the Reader) you may meet with several Worthy Persons in this City and the Court
of England; and I my self, who was at Paris some few years ago at Monsieur
Tavernier's Arrival, and who can witness the grand Esteem, the solemn Honors
and Thanks, that were then given him by Persons of all Ranks and Degrees, the
French East India Company's Admiration and Recommendation of him, that he had
done his King and Country more Credit in those proud Eastern Courts than ever
any did before him; the French King's employing of him there; the Rarities he
brought home to the Learned; the vast Riches and Memoirs he gained for himself,
and the incomparable Jewels and Singularities he brought to the French King;
the Titles of Lord and Baron conferred upon him extraordinarily, though he were
a Merchant and a strict Protestant. These (I say) Public and Private
Testimonials do show what Credit other Nations and his own (which is Singular)
had given to him. But in a word his own Observations herein gathered will prove
it better.

But if any desire to have some Account of the Work it self, the Newness,
Profit, and Satisfaction the very Subject must needs yield to all Persons and
Professions cannot but be acceptable.

The Naturalist shall have Plants, Minerals, Animals, and Phoenomena's never
seen in our Climate. And about Physic, the Law, Music, and Poetry, more Time
and Trials are required in those Countries than here; and you shall accordingly
read of Cures done that draw near to natural Miracles.

The Divine will see things worth his Observation in their Religion and Morals,
wherein they may confound the very Christians; whereof I Will only touch but
thus much: That by the Light of Nature those Heathens own a Supreme Deity, and
a Future State of Happiness and Torments; and do in view of the same most
strictly keep the Civil and the Ten Moral Commandments, much answerable to
ours, which their Prophets have left to them. So that they punish Murder and
Adultery even in Tunquin chapter 7. p. 18.
Princes and Princesses; terrible Examples whereof you may here read at large.
And the Church and State Government are subservient in a Subordination, the one
being a Prop to the other.

Even Statesmen may find Subject of weighty consideration, in the Antiquity,
Model, and Exactness of their Government. As for instance: Though they have a
special regard to Monarchy, so as to keep the Succession within the same Line;
yet the Tunquin c. 11. p. 35.
Great Constable, and the King's Council have Power left them to propose and
choose the fittest Person among the Royal Children, or Collateral Successors,
who is nominated in the King's Lifetime, to prevent after Disturbances. They
have also on the other side very singular and unimitable ways to prevent the
Insurrections, Divisions, and Rebellions of the Militia and the People.

But above all, the Traveller and Traffiquer into those Parts will be like to
run into a thousand Inconveniences, and Losses of Health, Life, and Estate,
without being guided by such Directions as he carefully gives herein, which
others cannot possibly so soon and so well know.

It is in fine herein declared, by what means the French, Holland, and Portugal
East India Companies were Settled, Improved, and Worsted in those Countries;
also the Coinage, and the Reduction thereof to ours; the particular places
where all sorts of East India Commodities are best and cheapest had; the Rates
and Exchange Returns are here to be found; the manner how to know their
Falsifications in Gold, Silver, Jewels, Drugs, Silks, Linen, and all the other
Merchandises which are brought from those Nations are here set down: It being
otherwise hard or impossible to escape the Cheats of the Persians, Chinese,
and Japoners, without such Instructions.

I Will say no more, but that in this Work was employed the Help of another
Worthy Gentleman, who labored in the first Volum of Tavernier's Translation;
but it was brought to an end and perfection by me, who had the occasion to be
more particularly acquainted with Monsieur Tavernier himself, his Native
Tongue, and other Particularities abroad.

Edmund Everard.

The TABLE to Tavernier's Volum of Japon, China, and Tunquin, etc.
A Relation of Japon, and of the cause of the Persecution of the Christians in
those Islands. page 1. A Relation of what passed in the Negotiation of the
Deputies which were sent to Persia and the Indies, as well on the behalf of the
French King, as of the French Company, for the settling of Trade. 26
Observations upon the Trade of the East Indies. 51 Of the Commodities which are
brought as well out of the Dominions of the Great Mogul, as out of the Kingdoms
of Golconda and Visapour, and other neighboring Territories. And also of the
Weights and Measures of the said Commodities. 57 Chap. 1. A discourse in
general concerning the City of Tunquin, and of the manner how the Author came
to have knowledge thereof. 1 Chap. 2. Of the Situation and Extent of the
Kingdom of Tunquin. 5 Chap. 3. Of the Quality of the Kingdom of Tunquin 7 Chap.
4. Of the Riches, Trade, and Money of the Kingdom of Tunquin. 13 Chap. 5. Of
the Strength of the Kingdom of Tunquin by Sea and Land 14 Chap. 6. Of the
Manners and Customs of the People of the Kingdom of Tunquin. 16 Chap. 7. Of the
Marriages of the Tunquineses, and their Severity toward Adulteresses. 18 Chap.
8. Of the Visits, Feasts, and Pastimes of the Tunquineses. 21 Chap. 9. Of the
Learned Men in the Kingdom of Tunquin. 24 Chap. 10. Of their Physicians, and
the Diseases of the Tunquineses. 28 Chap. 11. Of the original Government and
Policy of the Kingdom of Tunquin. 31 Chap. 12. Of the Court of the King of
Tunquin. 38 Chap. 13. Of the Ceremonies observed when the Kings of Tunquin are
advanced to the Throne. 40 Chap. 14. Of the Funeral Pomp of the Kings of
Tunquin, and of their manners of burying their Dead. 46 Chap. 15. Of the
Religion and Superstition of the Tunquineses. 49
Of the Government of the Hollanders in Asia.
Chap. 1. Of the Island of Formosa, and how the Hollanders possessed themselves
of it, and how it was taken from them by the Chinese. 57 Chap. 2. Of Maurice
Island, where they cut Ebony. 61 Chap. 3. Of the Grandeur of the General at
Batavia, and what befell his Wife and his Niece. 65 Chap. 4. Of General
Vanderbroug, and of the Original of the City of Batavia. 69 Chap. 5. Of the
Country about Cochin, and how the Holland General crowned one of the Indian
Princes. 74 Chap. 6. Of the Sieur Hollebrand Glins, President of the Factory at
Ormus. 77 Chap. 7. Touching the Islands of the Prince. 79 Chap. 8. How the
Hollanders sent to declare War against the Persians, and of the ill success of
their Fleet. 80 Chap. 9. Of the Severity of the Holland Commanders in the
Indies. 83 Chap. 10. Touching the Women. 85
A MAPP OF THE ISLES OF IAPON
ORIENTAL OCEAN THE SEA OF COREER THE SOUTH SEA MAPP OF TUNQUIN



An Alphabetical Index to the Map of Tunquin, made on the place by B. Tavernier.
The first Figures are Longitude, the second Latitude.
BOdego, whence they embarque the King's Body: as also the Huts for those that
attend the King's Body 144-21 Bonten, an excellent Haven 151-9 Camelee, a great
River, but bad Port 146-13 Chancon, an Isle where S. Xavier died February 4.
1552. 155-21 Checo, the Capital City of Tunquin, and King's Seat 144-21 Colaure
146-14 Cuaci, the Bounds between Tunquin and Cochinchina 142-16 Cuadag, a Lake
140-22 Cuad^g, the Port where all the great Ships lie, not able to enter the
great River of Cheche, being stopped up 142-20 Dinphoan, a good Port, but
difficult entrance 149-10 Haifo, this Isle is a Forest of Orange and Pomgranat
Trees 145-14 Hainanen, an Island wherein is two Rivers, one is very hot and
smells of Sulphur, and the sick come from all the adjacent parts to bath in it
148-19 Island of Fishes 146-19 Pulociampelio Isle 146-15 Sansoo, one of the
greatest Cities of Cochinchina, and greatest Trade, but the Port failing, it
now decays 143-15 Tacan, an Isle where the Fowls retire during the heat 148-12
Tortose Islands 152-11 Tulatan Isle 147-14
An Alphabetical Index of all the Towns in the Map of Japon.
A
AChas 175-34 Acosaqui 177-34 Aizu 184-38 Akas 174-34 Amessima 171-34 Amusana
175-34 Anai 174-34 Anzuqui 176-35 Aqui 173-34 Aquita 182-40 Arcy 177-34 Ava
174-33 Ava 181-34 Autua 170-33 Axicanga 182-36 Aximot 181-36
B
Bandel 179-34 Bigen 174-35 Bingo 173-34 Bipchu 173-34 Bugen 172-34 Bungo
171-33
C
Camba 179-34 Cango 177-36 Cansula 182-35 Cataizu 175-33 Caucani 175-34 Cochite
170-33 Coreer Isles 169-34
The Sea 171-34
Coyssina 171-34
D
Daura 180-34 Deva 182-38 Dongo 172-33
F
Facoua 180-34 Fairma 174-34 Favissida 178-34 Fintsautwa 177-34 Firanda 170-33
Firazima 172-34 Fitaqui 182-37 Flagway 177-34 Foncorai 178-34 Foqui 174-35
Forissauva 180-35 Fucha 179-36 Fumay 172-33 Fuximi 176-35
G
Ganamisaqui 171-34 Ganomi 172-34 Ginkay 171-34 Gold Mines 184-38
I
Jaai 178-34 Jamman 171-34 Idiumo 173-35 Idzumi 175-34 Jedo or Jendo 181-35
Jesse 184-40 Jesare 179-34 Inaba 174-35 Ingo 176-34 Jobeco 170-33 Jokeits
176-34 Josinda 177-34 Isakuts 176-34 Juani 172-35 Jussimara 179-34
K
Kakinkw 179-34 Kakingaren 178-34 Karaye 178-34 Kisma 170-33
M
Maicazima Isle 183-36 Marganni 174-34 Mia 177-34 Miaco or Meaco 175-34 Micava
177-35 Mimalaea 173-35 Mino 177-34 Mirico 179-34 Mulaxi 181-35 Muro 174-34
N
Nanastgamma 170-33 Namba 184-39 Nangati 171-34 Nangisaqui 171-33 Nayma 178-37
Nibarascq 178-34 Niborasaca 178-34 Nivata 181-37 Noto 178-37
O
Ocambe 179-34 Ocasaqui 177-34 Okais 179-34 Omodo Key 170-33 Oquayama 174-34
Ormeda 176-34 Oseaca 175-34 Ova 176-34 Owaeri 177-35
Q
Quano 176-34 Quinocuni 175-33 Quirenoxo 176-36
R
Roches 171-33
S
Sacca 178-34 Saccaiia 175-34 Sace 176-34 Saikock 171-33 Samma 176-34 Sando
180-37 Sangani 180-35 Sanuqui 173-34 Saquio 171-34 Sapui 175-34 Sateuma 170-32
Sateque 183-37 Savola 174-34 Scabarei 179-34 Silver Mines 179-37 Simanda 178-34
Simissima 170-33 Sinagawa 181-35 Sincubi 170-33 Sintsi 176-34 Sino Sima 171-34
Sirion 177-34 Sirack 178-34 Stintgo 175-34 Surunga 179-34 Suva 180-36 Suvo
172-34
T
Tambo 175-35 Tanegaxima 172-32 Tango 175-35 Tatomi 178-35 Tauma 175-35
Tucnocuni 175-34 Tenri River 178-34 Toia 172-33 Tokoesi 173-33 Toi Isle 183-34
Tomo 173-34 Tondozima Isle 180-38 Tottori 174-35 Tsumgaer 184-40
V
Vacosa 176-35 Vasumi 171-32 Ubama 176-35 Vitchu 178-36 Vomi 176-35 Vouri
177-35 Voxu 183-37
W
Waka 176-34
X
Xendai 183-38 Xidaibama 182-37 Xikoso 173-33 Ximo 171-32 Ximosakock 170-33
Ximolu 182-36 Ximomaxoqui 171-34 Xinan 178-35 Xio 173-33 Xiva 177-36
Y
Yamamguela 172-34 Yamato 176-34 Yamaxico 175-34 Yazuqui 174-35 Yechigen 177-36
Yechingo 180-36 Yhe 176-34 Yonazaua 183-38 Yynoxima Isle 183-33
Z
Zetta 170-33 Zima 176-34
FINIS.
A New and Particular RELATION Of the KINGDOM of TUNQUIN: With a MAP of the
COUNTRY and several FIGURES.
CHAP. I.
A Discourse in general concerning the City of Tunquin, and of the Manner how
the Author came to have knowledge thereof.
THE Kingdom of Tunquin has been long unknown to the People of Europe; neither
have they, who have given us Relations thereof, well understood the Country, as
having trusted too much to defective and fabulous Descriptions and
Observations. Not that I am willing to be over severe in censuring; but
submissively I am bold to affirm, That this which I here make Public was
extracted out of my Brother's Writings, of which I had the overlooking in my
second Voyage that I made to the Indies; and of which I was the more confident,
for that the Author had been one who had made Eleven or Twelve Voyages from
Batavia, Bantam, and Achem, to Tunquin: Other Observations I collected from the
Tunquinesi themselves, with whom I have had several Discourses, during the time
that I was at Batavia and Bantam, where they principally trade. And that which
gave me the more light was this, That those Merchants several times bring along
with them some of their Bonze's or Priests, as also some of their Learned Men
to teach their Children to Write and Read. For these Merchants when they make a
Voyage by Sea, carry all their Families along with them. And from these Bonze's
and other Learned Men I had several Observations and Memoirs in Writing, as
being desirous to be informed by me of the Government and Situation of our
France. And as I was never without an Atlas and some other particular Maps,
they were ravished with admiration, when I showed them the Structure and
Composure of the whole World, and the Situation of its several Kingdoms and
Estates.

Therefore may the Reader with the more pleasure and delight peruse these
Relations, when he has so much reason to be persuaded that they are cordially
done, and that they are made public by a person whose sincerity has no design
to abuse him. My Brother, who was a person both cunning and courageous, and one
that loved to Travel as well as my self, having heard much talk in the Indies
of the Grandeur of the Kingdom of Tunquin, resolved to go thither, and as he
had a particular gift to learn a Language in a little time, he soon grew
familiar with the Malaye, which is the Language of the Learned in those
quarters of Asia, as Latin is among Us in Europe. He understood that Silk,
Musk, and other Commodities of the like nature, were much cheaper there then in
other places adjoining, and that the People dealt with more fairness and
honesty. Upon the encouragement of which Information he prepared a Ship, and
made his Voyages with good success.

He always carried with him a good Sum of Money; and more then that, he stored
himself with a considerable number of small Curiosities, to present the King
and his Nobility, according to the general Custom of all the Eastern Countries:
Thus he came to be well received the first time that he set foot in the
Country; so that the Customer being by him obliged with a small Clock; a pair
of small Pistols, and two Pictures, which were the Pictures of two Curtesans,
immediately gave notice to the King of his arrival. Thereupon having order to
attend the Court, and coming to kiss the King's hands, the whole Assembly was
surprised to hear a Stranger, born in a Country so far distant, speak the
Malaye Language so fluently. The King gave him a favorable reception, and
kindly received the Present which he brought along with him. It was a very
noble Sword, of which the Handle and Hilt were all over enchac'd with Rubies
and Emraulds, with a Backsword Blade. To this he added a pair of Pistols,
adorned and inlaid with Silver, a Persian Saddle and Bridle, embroidered with
Gold and Silver, a Bow and Quiver full of Arrows, and six Pictures, like those
which he had given the Customer. These things highly pleased the King, who
presently drew forth the Sword out of the Scabbard, the better to look upon and
consider it. At length one of his Sons took it up, to try whether it would fit
his hand as well as those of his own Country, and offered to make a blow. My
Brother, seeing the young Prince handle the Weapon gracefully enough, after the
manner of the Country, told the King, that if he pleased, he would show the
King how they handled that Weapon in France, of which the King readily
consented to be a Spectatour.

This was my Brother's first Reception at Court; for he made several Voyages to
Tunquin, and every time that he returned, they still the more and more
obligingly entertained him. But that which fixed him more in the good opinion
and favor of the King and Lords of the Court, was his ^olic and gentile
behavior in playing with them for several large Sums, insomuch that being one
that ventured deep; he lost above 20000 Crowns in one Voyage. However the King,
who was a generous Prince, would not suffer him to be a loser, but gave him
those considerable Presents that supplied his losses. By means of my Brother's
thus long sojourning in Tunquin, and the familiar acquaintance which he had at
Court, together with the Trade which he drove in the Kingdom, as he was
diligent to inform himself of all the Curiosities of the Country, it was easy
for me upon the same foundation to lay the Structure of these Memoirs. Though I
may safely say, I was no less laborious in my own particular, and by the
frequent Discourses which I had with a great number of the Tunquineses, with
whom I met both at Bantam and Batavia that came thither to Trade, and whom I
often treated at my own Expenses, to inform my self of the particular
Ceremonies and Customs of their Country.

Thus you see the Grounds and Foundations of this Relation, which is both
faithful and exact, and by which that noble Country, of which the Descriptions
hitherto have been so obscure and uncertain, shall be truly discovered and set
forth, such as it is; declaring withal, that no other Consideration or
Interest, then that of speaking truth, has incited me to undertake this
Description.

For the better observation of a right Method in pursuance of this Relation,
and to conduct the Reader gradatim to the more perfect knowledge of this
Kingdom, I will speak first of its Situation, its Extent, and its Climate. Next
I shall come to discourse of its Qualities, its Riches, and its Trade, which
are the three Springs and Sources of the Strength and Force of a Nation. Next I
shall give an Account of the Customs and Manners of the People as well in their
particular Economy and Civil Society, as in relation to their Marriages, their
Visits and Festivals. Next to this we shall give a brief Account of the
Learning, and learned Men, and among them of their Physicians, and the Subject
of their Art, that is to say, of the Diseases particular to the Country. We
shall also give a Relation of the Original of the Government and Policy of the
Kingdom of Tunquin, of the Condition of the Court, of the Inauguration and
Funerals of their Kings, and in the last place of the Original of the
Inhabitants.

And I dare engage, that the Map of the Country, and the Cuts which were drawn
upon the place, will no less contribute to the Divertisement of the Reader,
then to the Explanation of the Matter which they contain.

CHAP. II.
Of the Situation and Extent of the Kingdom of Tunquin.
WE shall have the less reason to admire wherefore our Predecessors had so
little knowledge of this Kingdom, when we consider that having formerly been a
considerable part of China, the Inhabitants in the same manner as the Chinese
did, kept themselves close within their own bounds, never minding to have any
Commerce with other People, whom they contemned and looked upon as Barbarians
come from the other part of the World. But now that they find that Strangers
come to find them out in their own Territories, they begin to see that other
People have as good Government as themselves; which has bred in them a desire
to Converse and Trade with Foreigners; so that now they associate themselves in
friendly manner with all other People, as I have observed them to do both at
Batavia and Bantam. Most people believe this Country to lie in a very hot
Climate; nevertheless it is now known to be very temperate, by reason of the
great number of Rivers that water it; which, together with the Rains that fall
in their Seasons, cause a brisk freshness of the Air; which indeed happ'ns most
usually over all the Torrid-zone, as I have observed in my Indian Travels. From
whence we may also have reason to believe the Country to be very fruitful and
thick inhabited.

To the East this Kingdom lies upon the Province of Cauton, one of the best of
China.

To the West it is bounded by the Kingdom of Brama.

To the North it borders upon two other Provinces of China, Junnan and Quansi.

To the South it lies upon Cochinchina, and the great Gulf of the same name.

To return to the Climate, the Air is so mild and temperate, that all the year
long seems to be but one continual Spring; Frost and Snow are never there to be
seen; and besides, the Pestilence, the Gout, the Stone, and other Diseases so
frequent in Europe, there are never known. There are but two Winds, which
divide the whole Year between them; the one blowing from the North, the other
from the South, and both continuing the same for six months together. The first
refreshes the Earth in that manner, that there is nothing so delightful as the
Country of Tunquin. The other begins to blow from the end of January to the end
of July; and the two last months are their months of rain. The greatest
inconvenience is, that there arise once in seven years, as well in this
Country as in other parts of the Indies, those hideous and terrible Tempests,
that blow down Houses, tear up Trees by the roots, and make strange
Desolations. They seldom last above four and twenty hours, nor are their sad
Effects to be felt but only upon the Seas of China, Japon, Cochinchina,
Tunquin, and the Manilles, being rarely known in any other Seas.

The Astrologers of those parts believe that these terrible Tempests proceed
from the Exhalations that rise out of the Mines of Japon. It comes with that
sudden force that when it surprises a Vessel out at Sea, the Pilots have no
other remedy then to cut down all the Masts, that the storm may have the less
force upon the Ship.

In this fair extent of Land, almost equal to that of France, are several
Provinces, whose limmits are not well known; the Tunquineses being no great
Geographers, nor having bin over curious to write the Annals of the Nation. But
the most understanding and knowing among them assured me at Batavia, that the
whole Kingdom contained above twenty thousand Cities and Towns. They also
affirmed that there might be many more, but after the manner of their
Neighbors the Cochinchineses, many of the People choose rather to upon the
Water then upon the Land; so that you shall see live the greatest part of their
Rivers covered with Boats, which serve them instead of Houses; and which are
very neat, though they also keep their Cattle in them.

CHAP. III.
Of the Quality of the Kingdom of Tunquin.
THis Country for the most part is a level Extent, which rises up and down into
pleasant Hillocks; the greatest Hills which it has lying to the North. It is
watered by several Rivers which inter-cut and glide through the Country: some
of which carry Galleys of good burden, and large Shallps, very commodious for
trade. Yet in all the Country there grows neither Corn nor Wine, by reason of
the want of rain, which never falls but in the Months of June and July. But it
bears an infinite quantity of Rice, which is the chief sustenance of the
People. Of this Rice also they make their Drink, besides which they have good
Aqua Vitae or Strong-water. Their Fruits are excellent, but much different from
ours, as are also the Trees that bear them. The chiefest of these Trees are the
Palm Tree, which bears a Fruit bigger then in any part of Asia. The Nut is
about the bigness of a Man's Head, in shape like a Coco-nut; the Shell is very
hard, and being opened, the Pulp within is as white as Snow, having a taste like
our Almonds, and every one of the Fruits contains about two glassfuls of
Liquor, very refreshing and pleasing to the Palate. The Gogavier, very much
resembles our Laurel, of which there are two sorts; the one bears a Plum, green
without and red within: but the Fruit of the other Tree, which is in much more
esteem, is yellowish without and white within, the top of the Fruit being like
a small Nosegay: the Pulp is full of small Kernels, less then those of a
Pomegranate; and if they be eaten before they are ripe they bind the belly,
whereas being eaten when they are come to full maturity they work a contrary
effect. Formerly this Fruit was not known in the Kingdom of Tunquin, but after
the Portugals seated themselves at Macao, they carried several Plants thither,
so that now the Fruit is grown very common. The Papager bears a Fruit which
very much resembles a small Melon, the taste whereof is very delicious. The
Arager grows upright and straight, like the Mast of a Ship, bearing no Branches
but at the top; which makes it appear like a Crown. The Fruit which it produces
is like a Nutmeg, but a little more round. The People break this Nut, and
bruising it together with Betle leaves, mix both with a little Chalk, and make
use of the Powder to keep their Teeth clean, to dye their Lips of a Vermilion
color, and to keep their Breath sweet.

They have but two sorts of Figs, the one like ours, and the other like those
which are called Adam's Figs, as long as a Man's finger.

There is also another Tree, very like our Willow, which they call the Powder
Tree, because that of the Wood they make Charcoal, and of the Coal a Powder
which they make use of in their Wars.

The Jambager is another Tree, that grows very high, which bears a Fruit about
the bigness of a Citrul-Cucumber, the Pulp whereof is full of Kernels like a
Granate, very cooling and pleasant, and very frequently eaten in the Season of
heat.

The Highways are also planted with Trees on both sides for the convenience of
Travelers: And there are some of these Trees so big that two or three thousand
men may stand under them, like that at Ormus, or Bandar Abassi, by me described
in my Relations of Persia, and of which many other Travelers have made
mention. When the Branches of these Trees are about ten or twelve foot long,
there issue forth other little Branches which turn downward, and by little and
little descending to the ground, take root and afterward become as it were so
many Pillars to support the Master-Branches. There are some of the
Master-Branches three hundred Paces long, which are supported by these
outgrowing Branches at the distance of every ten or twelve foot. The Fruit is
of the bigness of one of our great Nuts, the Shell whereof is red, containing
within nothing but a Kernel like a grain of Millet. The Rere Mice feed upon
'em, and also make their Nests in the trees. These Rere-mice are as big as a
good Pullet, insomuch that their Wings are above a foot and a half long. They
never light upon the tree like other Birds, but you shall see them all the day
long hanging at the branches of the trees, fastened by their Claws to the tree
with their heads downward. Upon every Wing they have seven as it were little
Hooks or Claws, so that being shot, they never fall to the ground, but remain
fixed to the branches, that at a distance you would take them to be some great
Pears that hung upon the tree. They are accounted a great dainty among the
Portugals, who leave their Pullets to eat them. It Is true that their Flesh is
very white, and when they are young they are a delicate sort of Diet. I
happened to eat of them two or three times with the Portugals, who thought they
had obliged me with a great dainty; and had I not known what they were, I
should have taken them for Pullets. And now I am talking of the Delicacies of
the Country, I will tell you of one sort of Diet which is very singular. This
Food is the Nest of a certain Bird which is no where to be found, but in the
four Islands that lie upon the Coast of Cochinchina, and of which you have the
Figures in the Table A, B, C, D. These Birds are about the bigness of a
Swallow, and build their Nests in such a manner, that they are neither too
close compacted, nor altogether transparent; they are like an Onion composed of
several rings and envelopings; that compose a Nest of a certain sort of Gunim,
which is steeped in warm water, and mixed with all the Sawces which are made
both for Fish and Flesh. It is transported all over India and into Holland for
Curiositie's sake. You would believe in eating those Meats which are seasoned
therewith, that those Nests were composed of all the Spices in the Orient. I
have not only brought this Diet into France, and presented of it to several
Persons of Quality, but I have also my Vouchers for the truth of what I relate,
several of my Friends who have brought it from Holland, among the rest M. de
Villermont, whose Name is famous for his Travels into the East Indies. He and
all those that have eat thereof agree with me, that all the Spices of the East
put together, do not give that effectual relish and savor as these Nests do,
to the Meats and Dishes wherein they are used.

Near to these four Islands, where these Birds Nests are found, are five others
marked in the Map 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. In these five Islands are such infinite number
of Tortoises, and such excellent Food, that the Tunquineses and Cochinchineses
do not believe they have entertained their Friends at a Banquet as they ought
to do, till the Tortoises are brought in. Those two Nations pickle up great
quantities of them, and send them abroad, which is a vast trade among them; and
indeed the chiefest occasion of the Wars between them is, because the
Cochinchineses do all they can to hinder the Tunquineses to fish for them,
alleging that those Seas and Islands belong to them. Neither is the Meat but
the Shell also of great esteem, and one of the greatest Commodities for Trade
in Asia.

Tunquin also affords great store of Anana's and Orange trees, of which there
are of two sorts: the one that bears a Fruit no bigger then an Abricot; the
other bigger then those of Portugal: both alike in taste, and being to be
gathered from the tree for six months together. They have also two sorts of
Citrons, the one yellow, the other green; but both the one and the other so
tart and sow'r, that they cannot be eaten without offense to the Stomach.
Nevertheless, the Juice is made use of as we do here of Aqua fortis, to cleanse
Copper, Tin, and Iron, before we gild those Metals, as also for Tinctures,
especially those of Silk. They are also made use of for Lies to whiten Linen,
and to take out Spots. Through all the Territories of the Great Mogul they make
use of this Juice of Citrons to whiten their Calicuts; whereby they make them
sometimes so white that they dazzle the sight.

They make great quantities of Silk in the Kingdom of Tunquin, of which both
rich and poor make themselves Garments. The Hollanders, who thrust themselves
in every where, where there is any hope of gain, carry off such a quantity
every year, that it is now become the chiefest part of that Commodity which
they carry to Japon; whereas before they fetched their Commodities from Persia,
Bengala, or China.

As for sweet smelling Flowers, the Tunquineses have but one sort, which they
call the Flower of Bague. It grows like a large Nosegay, and the Branches of
the Shrub that bear it, spread themselves crawlingly upon the ground. As they
have great store of Sugar, so they eat very much, while it is yet in the Cane,
not having the true Art to refine it: and that which they do grossly refine,
they make into little Loaves weighing about half a pound. They eat very much,
making use of it always after Meals to help digestion.

Through the whole Kingdom are neither Lions, Asses, nor Sheep; but the Forests
are full of Tigers, Hearts, and Apes, and the Fields are full of Beeves, Cows,
and Hogs. As for Hens, Ducks, and Turtles, they are not to be numbered, which
is the general Provision for their Festivals. Their Horses are very well
shaped; of which there are always five or six hundred in the King's Stables;
He also keeps the same number of Elephants, of which some are for the Service
of his House, the rest bred for the Wars. These Elephants are of a prodigious
bigness, neither are there any so tall nor so nimble in any part of Asia; for
they will bow themselves, and stoop so low, that you may get upon their backs
without help. They have no Cats, but they have Dogs that serve for the same
purpose, and will watch all night to kill the Rats and Mice, which are very
large and very troublesome. Very few Birds are to be seen in the Air, which
toward the evening grows duskish, by reason of those vast number of Gnats that
get into the Houses in the night time and hinder people from sleeping, not only
by the noise which they make, but with their continual stinging; which is one
of the greatest inconveniences of the Country. For remedy whereof in some
measure, an hour before they go to sleep they take the Husk or Chaff of the
Rice, which flies from the Rice when it is beaten, and strew it upon a small
Fire in a Fire-shovel, and so let it smoke, and by that means they kill or
drive those Flies away. Besides this, they cover the Bed with a Pavilion or
Tent that trails upon the ground, made like a Net with very small holes to let
in the Air. But notwithstanding all the prevention can be used, they will be
about a man when he rises in the morning. But there is yet a far greater
inconvenience in this Country, which proceeds from the infinite numbers of
white Emmets, which though they are but little, have teeth so sharp, that they
will eat down a wooden Post in a short time. And if great care be not taken in
the place where you lock up your Bales of Silk, in four and twenty hours they
will eat through a Bale, as if it had been sawed in two in the middle. Several
of them have fallen from the Cieling into my Neck, where they raised Blisters
upon the Skin, which presently fall again being washed with cold Water.

I have told you that Hens and Ducks are infinitely numerous in Tunquin; I will
now tell you how they preserve the Eggs of these Creatures, which they will
keep for two or three years together without being spoiled. They salt them, and
to make them take salt, they fill a Vessel full of Water, and throw a good
quantity of Salt into it. If the Egg sink to the bottom, the Pickle is not
good; then they throw in more Salt, till they find that the Eggs swim. The
Pickle being thus made, they take Ashes, and make them up into a Past with this
Pickle: and in this Past they enclose every Egg by it self, and then wrap it up
in a leaf of an Herb, not unlike one of our Pear Tree leaves, but much larger,
and then put the Eggs into Earthen Pots close covered: after which manner they
keep their Eggs for two or three years together.

In other parts of the Indies where there is great store of Oil, as in the
Dominions of the Great Mogul, the Kingdoms of Pegu, and Arochan, they put their
Eggs into great Earthen Pots well varnished, and then fill the Vessel with an
Oil which is made of a small Seed like Rape-seed. For as for Sallad Oil, after
you are once passed Aleppo, you see no more Olive Trees over all Asia, but only
in one place of Persia near Casbin, where between the Mountains lies a little
Valley, about a League long and half a League broad, full of Olive Trees, but
they make but very little Oil, preserving the Olives only to eat. But to return
to the Eggs; they are the chief Provision which they eat a Shipboard. But the
Eggs which are preserved in Salt are preferred much before those that are kept
in Oil; because that in using the first, there is no need of carrying Salt to
Sea, or of boiling Salt with their Rice. When they eat them, they boil them
till they are hard, and with every mouthful of Rice they eat a Pea's bigness of
Egg, which is as good and better then Salt with their Rice. As to what remains,
there are neither Mines of Gold nor Silver in the Kingdom of Tunquin, neither
do they Coin any Money.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Riches, Trade, and Money of the Kingdom of Tunquin.
THE chief Riches of the Country of Tunquin consist in the great quantity of
Silks which they sell to the Hollanders, and other Foreigners, and in their
Lignum Aloes. Of which there is some worth a thousand Crowns the Pound,
according to its goodness and oyliness. There is some that is not worth above
three Crowns, but it is dry and good for nothing but to make Cabinets, or Beads
to hang about Women's Necks. All the Mahumetans, especially such as let their
Beards grow, make great account of this Wood; and when they give a Visit, they
presently bring a little Chafing Dish, and cast a small piece of this Wood upon
the Coals, which yields a smoke and pleasing mist; with which they perfume
their Beards, at the same time lifting up their hands to Heaven, and crying,
Elhemed Illah, or God be thanked. If the Wood be oily, the bigness of a Pea
will serve to throw upon the fire, which being a little moistened in Water,
will yield as much smoke as a dry piece as big as a Man's fist. Which is the
reason, that if it be oily and good it wants no price. One of the chief
Presents, as I have observed in another part of this Book, which the Portugals
of Goa sent to the Emperor of Japon, was a piece of Lignum Aloes, six foot
long, and two round. It cost 40000 Pardo's or 54000 Livres.

It is so much the more pleasure and profit to trade with the People of
Tunquin, by how much the more faithful and frank they are in their dealing then
the Chinese, who will deceive you if they can; so that it is a hard thing to
be too cunning for them, as I have often found by experience. When you have
sold them any Commodity, and they find that their Bargain is not very
advantageous, their general way of getting off is this: As they have generally
three sorts of Reals, one sort that is full weight, others which are light,
four, others eight per Cent if they have no mind to stand to their bargain,
they offer to pay you for your Goods in light Reals, which they have clipped
themselves, and so you are deceived. There are no such People for Trade in the
World: they refuse to deal in nothing, even in old Shoes, and if you will sell
them but one of them too, they will buy it, without ever enquiring why you will
not sell the other. But for those of Tunquin they are more blunt and plain in
their dealing, so that it is a pleasure to have to deal with them. I have told
you, there are neither Mines of Gold or Silver in Tunquin, neither do they Coin
Money there. So that in Trade they make use of certain Lingots of Gold, as they
are brought out of China, some of which amount to 300 Livers of our Money,
others to six hundred. They also make use of Bars of Silver as they are
brought from Japon. As for small Payments they either cut the large Bars into
small pieces, to which purpose they have their Scales, like our Stelleers; or
else they pay in Foreign Coin, which are the Reals of Spain generally. This
Gold and Silver is brought from China, and Japon, in lieu of those vast
quantities of Silk which are exported out of the Country, which with Musk and
Lignum Aloes are the chief Riches of the Kingdom.

CHAP. V.
Of the Strength of the Kingdom of Tunquin by Sea and Land.
THey who have written before me concerning the Kingdom of Tunquin, have spoken
largely of its Forces both by Sea and Land, and allow it a prodigious number
both of Soldiers and Galleys. They write that the Forces which were usually
wont to meet at the Rendevouz were 12000 Horse, 2000 Elephants, as well to
carry the King's and the Nobilities Tents and Baggage, as for the Service of
the War, 300000 Foot, and 300 Galleys. And in regard the Kingdom is well stored
with Provision and Ammunition, that in time of War the whole Army exceeds
500000 Men. But the number which my Brother

The King of Tunquin's Setting out for the War.
1. The King going out of his Palace is carried in his Palanquin or Chair by
the Chief Officers of his Household.

2. The Order of the King's March when he goes to the War.

3. The Musicians and Trumpeters who follow his Chair.

4. An Officer who carries a Basin full of Water, on which does float a Brass
Boul with a hole in the bottom of it; so that exactly in an hour this Boul
becomes full of Water, and suddenly sinks to the bottom.

5. Then presently two other Officers do strike the Hour upon two great Brass
Platters, N. 5. of about a Yard Diameter, and much after the Form of our
Burning Glasses, yet of the Metal that Bells are made of, which causes that
they are heard a very far off.

Afterward he that carries the Basin of Water takes up the Cup from the
bottom, and sets it again a swimming atop of the Water, just as it was before.
When it is full and sinks, they after the same manner strike on the said
Platters. And this is their way of reckoning the Hour and Times in Tunquin, as
well as in the Indies, and almost throughout the Eastern Parts betwixt the
Tropicks; for that the Clocks which are made in Europe become useless in those
Countries during the Rainy Season, the Air being there so heavy and damp, that
all Iron and Steel, nay the very Knives and Watches in peoples Pockets do grow
rusty, though you wrap them up never so well in Cotton or Leather, and take all
the care imaginable to keep them dry; yet it will be impossible otherwise to
preserve them from Rust, than by letting them lie in Oil while that Weather
lasts.

This Foggy Dampness of the Air is predominant as soon as you are past Persia,
in all the Mogol's Country, from the Fifteenth of June to the end of
September. The further one goes on toward the East, the later these Rains do
begin and are met withal.

It Is good likewise to observe, that in the Empire of the Great Mogul, in
Tunquin, and in other Easterly Parts between the Tropicks, they do as we divide
the Day and Night into 24 Hours, making the Day of 12, and the Night to be of
as much; so to proportion equally the Times of Working and of Rest. But they do
subdivide both the Day and the Night into 4 equal parts, and this Division is
made known by the Strokes given upon those Platters. As for Example: The first
Hour of the first Watch of the Night is marked by one Blow, the second by
another, and the third likewise by another. In the second Watch of the Night
the first Hour is made known by two Blows one after another, and so of the rest
until the third Watch; then at the first Hour of that they give three Strokes.
And this Order is observed till the last Hour of the fourth Watch, which is
marked by four Knocks. In this manner they continue to marck the first Hour of
the day with the same Regularity.

All Persons of Quality do keep Eight Officers on purpose for this Employ; who
likewise are to have a care of keeping the Palace Gates. This Engine for the
marking of the Hours is ordinarily hung up at the Entry of great Palaces near
the Porter's Lodge.

Place this Page 14.
Order Of The March Of The king Of Tunquin When he goes Out Of his Pallice.

The Order and March Of The king Of Tunquin When He goes To War:



The Order of the March of the Queen Mother and Reigning Queen of Tunquin when
they go abroad out of ye Palace*



The Order of the March of the Queens of Tunquin, when they go abroad out of
the Palace.
A. Six Elephants go in the Front, drawing a kind of a Sedan close shut up,
with Grate-like Windows.

B. Fifteen Captains or Officers walk next, Armed with Firelocks.

C. The Sedan wherein the Queen is.

D. Six of the Queens Gentlemen do carry Parasols, for to guard the Queens
Chair from the Scorching of the Sun.

E. Six Ladies of Honor of the Queens go next. The first has the Command of
the Queens Eunuchs: these Eunuchs, though thoroughly Spaded, yet are never
admitted into the Queens Apartment; the Kings of Tunquin being in that
particular more jealous than other Kings and Mohammedan Princes, who allow this
sort of Eunuchs to serve their Queens within the Palace. The next in Office of
these Ladies presents the Queen with Sweet Meats when she is about to drink;
for they usually eat some before they drink, they alleging that this keeps
them from having the Cholic, to which they are very subject in Tunquin. The
third in rank carries a Box of Perfumes and Betel. The others usher the Queen
when she gets into the Sedan, or alights.

G. Here is a Chariot drawn by Eight Maids of Quality, when she gets out of the
Sedan; but before she appears, all the Men and Eunuchs do withdraw into such
places, whence they cannot have the sight of her, it being a Crime to look upon
her: then the Ladies help her out of the Sedan, and the Maids draw her along to
whatever place she has a mind to go in unto.

Place this next to, The King of Tunquin setting out for the War.
saw in the year 1649, when the King was preparing to make War against the King
of Cochinchina, for certain Ships which the Cochinchineses had taken from the
Tunquineses: though the Quarrel was taken up by certain Ambassadors which the
King of Cochinchina sent to the King of Tunquin, to whom the former made
satisfaction.

The Army that was then prepared to march upon this Expedition was composed of
8000 Horse, 94 thousand Foot, and 722 Elephants; 130 for the War, and the rest
to carry the Tents and Baggage of the King and the Nobility; and 318 Galleys
and Barks, very long and narrow, with Oars and Sails; and this was that which
my Brother saw. The Condition of the Soldiery is very toilsom and laborious,
and of little advantage in the Kingdom of Tunquin. For they are all their life
time so ti'd and engaged to the Service of the Wars, that though they are
capable of other Labors for the support of their Families, they are not
permitted to undertake it. Those days that they are not upon the Guard, they
are obliged to attend their Captains wherever they go, and two days in a week
they are compelled to Exercise with their Bows and Arrows in their presence.
Their Companies consist of a hundred or a hundred and thirty Men; and they of
each Company that have made the best shot, have one of them two Months Wages,
the other one, which is paid them in Rice. He that makes the worst shot, next
time he mounts the Guard, is obliged to stand Sentinel double his time. All the
Captains look upon it as a great piece of glory to have their Soldiers Arms
and Weapons neat and bright. If they find any rust upon them, they sconce them
eight days Wages for the first fault, and for the second they are very severely
chastis'd. As for those that serve in the Galleys, they are entertained and
listed proportionably. And sometimes the Captains send their Soldiers aboard
for some days, that they may learn to row. For it is one of the chiefest
Pastimes of the Kings of Tunquin to see the Mock-fights of the Galleys. When he
has a mind to delight himself with this Divertisment, the King, with some part
of his Court, removes to one of his fair Palaces, that stands upon one of the
largest Rivers in his Country; and it is a great Honor for any of the Captains
whose Soldiers carry the Victory. Now as the Victory is only got by the force
of the Oars, it happens sometimes that there are some Soldiers who strain
themselves so hard, that they fall down dead with the Oar in their hands: for
the King is the only Judge of the Combat. Wherein the pleasure that he takes is
such, that he sends an Elephant to the Captain that obtains the Victory, and
gives him three Months Wages besides. If any Soldier chance to die in this
Exercise, his Widow or his Heirs have two years Pay. But notwithstanding all
their pain and labor, their Wages are so small, that they are not able to
maintain their Wives and Children. But in regard they Marry very young in this
Country, the Wives as well of the Soldiers as of all the meaner sort of
people, take care to learn some Trade besides, that they may be able to
maintain their Families. The Captains also have their work prepared for them.
For they are obliged to look after the King's Elephants, and to manage them for
the Wars, and so to breed them, that they may not be afraid of Wildfire, or
any other Artificial Fires: as also to build places all along the Rivers, for
the Galleys to ride sheltered in, when they can no longer live out at Sea. All
these Officers and Captains, and Lords of the Court, which are generally called
Mandarins, have but four days in a Month to divert themselves, two at the first
change of the Moon, and two at the full.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Manners and Customs of the People of the Kingdom of Tunquin.
THe People of Tunquin are naturally mild and peaceful, submitting easily to
reason, and condemning the Transports of Choler. They esteem the Manufactures
of strange Countries far beyond those of their own; though they are not very
curious of seeing any other Countries but those where they were born; and
where, as they say, they always desire to live, to honor the Memory of their
Ancestors. They have a tone in speaking, naturally soft and pleasing; happy
memories, and in their Language, which is very florid, they use several
apposite Comparisons. They have good Poets among them, and People that love
Learning; in which respect they are no way inferior to the Chinese, their
Neighbors.

The Tunquineses, as well Men as Women, are for the most part well
proportioned, of an Olive Complexion, very much admiring the whiteness of the
Europeans. Their Noses and Faces are not so flat as those of the Chinese, as
being generally better made. Their Hair is very black, which they usually wear
as long as it will grow, being very careful in combing it. The Common People
plait it in tresses; and tie it like a great Roll upon the top of their Heads.
But the Nobility, Men of Law, and Soldiers, tie their Locks about their Necks,
that they may not flutter in their Faces. They do not believe their Teeth to be
handsome, till they have made them as black as jet; and they suffer their Nails
to grow; the longest being accounted the fairest.

Their Habit is grave and modest, being a long Robe that reaches down to their
heels, much like that of the Japonneses, without any distinction of Sex. This
Habit is bound about at the wast with a Girdle of Silk, interwoven with Gold
and Silver, the Workmanship whereof is alike on both sides. As for the
Soldiers, their upper Garments reach no farther then their Knees; only their
Breeches reach down to the mid Leg, without either Hose or Shoes.

The vulger sort of People are altogether slaves for one part of the year. For
unless they be the Citizens of the Capital City, where the King keeps his
Court, all the other Handicrafts of what Trade soever, as Joyners, Carpenters,
Locksmiths, Masons, and the like, are obliged every year to work three Months
at the King's Palace; and two Months; or Moons more (For the Tunquineses reckon
their Months by the Moon) for the Mandarins, or great Lords. The rest of the
year is for themselves, all which time they have liberty to work for the
support of their own Family. This Service in their Language is called Viecquan,
or the Condition of a Slave. But they are liable to other drudgeries worse then
those before mentioned; as to lop Trees, with which they chiefly feed their
Elephants. This is a severe days work, to which they were condemned by the
great Grandfather of the King that now reigns, after he had put an end to the
Civil Wars that turmoil'd his Kingdom, and that he had brought his rebellious
Subjects to submit themselves. They had occasioned him a great deal of trouble,
and in regard he could not subdue them without a great hazard of his Army, his
Council advised him to famish them; but he rather chose to give them their
Lives, and to condemn them and their Posterity to this laborious Service, of
which he might in time reap the benefit.

I have told you elsewhere that the Tunquineses take great delight to live upon
the Rivers, which are there free from Crocodiles and all other dangerous
Animals, which haunt the Waters of Nile and Ganges. Where we are to observe,
that these Rivers overflow their Banks every year, after the Rains are fallen,
with that terrible violence, that many times they carry away whole Towns and
Villages, at what time a good part of the Kingdom looks like a Sea, resembling
the lower Egypt under Water upon the Inundation of Nile.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Marriages of the Tunquineses, and their severity toward Adulteresses.
THE Tunquineses cannot Marry without the consent of the Father and Mother, or
if they be dead, without the allowance of their nearest Kindred. They must also
have the permission of the Judge or Governor of the place where the Marriage
is to be made, for the obtaining of which they must give him some Present. But
in regard they were wont to exact upon the poor people more then they were able
to give them, so that many Marriages were disappointed, to the great damage of
the Public; the King, who reigned in the year 1639, being informed of these
Extortions, and their ill Consequences, set forth a Law to regulate those
Abuses, and to curb the Authority of the Governors. He ordered that the young
Man who was desirous to Marry, should pay no more then such a Sum, according to
the proportion of his Estate, amounting to one or two fourths per Cent. and
that they were not worth above a hundred Crowns should pay nothing. Now in
regard the Common People, both Men and Women, are naturally laborious, all that
the Maids can get they preserve for their Portions, and to buy them two or
three handsome Garments, with a Neck-lace of Coral or yellow Amber, and a
certain number of Beads, to garnish their Locks; which they suffer to hang down
upon their Backs, accounting the beauty of their Hair to consist in the length.

There is no Wedding kept without a great Feast; and they must be very poor
when the Feast lasts not above three days; for sometimes they junket for nine
days together. The next day after the Wedding the Bridgroom calls the Bride his
Sister, and she calls the Bridegroom Brother. The Law of the Land permits the
Man to divorce his wife when he pleases, which they do many times for very
slight causes. But the Woman has not the same Privilege: or at least, if she
desire a separation, it is much more difficult to obtain; and the occasion must
be very notorious. The Tunquineses say that this Law was made to keep the Women
in subjection, and to oblige them to be respectful to their Husbands. When the
Husband desires this separation, the Ceremony is this. You must know that many
of the Eastern People never touch their Victuals with their hands, but make use
of two little sticks about six inches long, gilt and varnished, which serve
them instead of Forks. The Husband then, when he goes about to repudiate his
Wife, takes one of his own sticks, and one of his Wife's, and having broken
them, they take each one half, and sow it up in a piece of Silk, in which they
keep it. Then the Man is bound to restore the Woman what she brought with her,
and to keep the Children which they had between them. But these Divorces are
not half so frequent as formerly.

The Laws are also very rigorous against Adulteresses. So that if a woman
accused of this crime be convicted thereof, she is cast to an Elephant bred up
to this purpose, who presently throws her up into the Air with his Trunk, and
when she comes to the ground, tramples her under his feet, till he can perceive
no life in her.

While my Brother was at the Court at Tunquin, he was a witness of the severe
Punishment, to which a Princess was condemned, for being taken in the Act with
a certain Prince. It is the Custom in the East, when a Prince dies, to shut up
in the most private and retired part of all his Palace all the women which he
made use of in his life time. There they are allowed two Maids to attend them,
they eat alone, and see no person living any more to the very day of their
deaths. I cannot tell by what means one of the Princes of the blood had got a
view of one of the deceased King his Uncle's wives; but being desirous to see
her again, and to overcome all difficulties that opposed him, and to deceive
the Guards that watched the Doors, he made use of a slight not easily
discovered. For you must know, that in the Kingdom Tunquin, as in all the
Kingdoms of Asia, in the Houses of the Kings and other great Lords, the Kitchen
is usually separated from the House, and that the Garden is between them; so
that for the better carrying the Meat from one place to another, the Servants
make use of a kind of Flasket, or rather Iron Chest. And to keep the Meat warm,
the Dishes are supported by little sticks laid athwart, about an inch distant
one from another, under which is an Iron Plate with holes pierced quite
through, about half a foot above another, which makes the bottom of the Chest;
between which Plates they put lighted Coals, to keep the Meat warm. These
Chests being to be carried by two men, the Tunquinese Prince played his game so
well, that he was put into one of these Chests wherein the Princesses Meat was
wont to be carried up into her Apartment. But he was not there many days before
the thing was discovered. He was presently brought before the King, who caused
him to have several weighty Chains to be put about his Neck and Wast, and upon
his Hands and Legs; and thus chained and manacled, he ordered him to be led
about for five Months together, to be seen by the People. After that he was
shut up in a close Prison, where he remained seven years, till the death of the
King, whose Son coming to the Throne, set him at liberty, upon condition he
should serve as a private Soldier upon the Frontiers of the Kingdom. As for
the Princess she was shut up in a little Chamber upon the top of a Tower, where
she remained twelve days without having any thing given her to eat or drink;
after that the Chamber was all uncovered at the top, that the sun might come at
her, and scorch her to death, and so she di'd in three days. The two Maids that
served her had a little more favor, for they were thrown to the Elephants, who
presently trod them to death. The two Porters of the Chest, or Flasket, were
ti'd to four small Galleys, by the two Hands, and two Legs, and as they Rowed
several ways were presently dismembered. Being at Daca, in the Kingdom of
Bengala, I saw the same Justice done to a Bramere, who would have betrayed
Cha-Est-Can to the King of Arachan.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Visits, Feasts, and Pastimes of the Tunquineses.
AMong all the Eastern People the Tunquineses are the most sociable, and most
frequently visit one another. Generally they make their Visits about Noon, in
the hottest time of the day, and then every one walks with a Train suitable to
his Condition. The Princes and Mandarines ride upon their Elephants, or else
they are carried in a kind of Litter, where they may either sit or lie. Six Men
carry it, and behind them follow six more to ease them by times. Their Train
consists generally of fifty or sixty Persons; neither are they permitted to
exceed that number. As for the ordinary Gentry, and Officers of the Court, they
ride a Horseback, not being allowed above seven or eight Servants to attend
them. They chew, Betle continually, as all the other Asiaticks do in such
places where it is to be had. And when any one comes to visit another, it would
be taken for a great affront, if at his taking leave, he should not be
presented with a Box of Betle, to take what he pleased.

The richer that Box is, the more Honor is given to the Person to whom the
Betle is presented: Insomuch that when a Prince is about to be married, he
usually sends three of these Boxes to his Spouse, of which I have seen some at
the Apartments of some of the Princes that came to the Court of the Great
Mogul, which were worth above 4 or 500000 Livres: One shall be covered with
Diamonds, another with Rubies and Pearls, another with Emraulds and Pearls, or
else with other Jewels.

The Tunquineses take it for a great dishonor to have their Heads bare, which
is only for Criminals, whom they cause to be shaved so soon as they are taken.
So that it is a difficult thing for a Criminal to escape the hands of Justice,
for wherever they go, when they find that a man has no Hair, he is taken and
carried to the Governor, who causes him to be nailed to a Cross immediately.

They sit cross legged, after the manner of the Asiatic People. At great men's
Houses, in the Halls, where they receive their Visits, there is as it were an
Alcove, with a kind of a Bedsted raised about a foot from the ground. It is
covered with a very fine Mat, made of little Reeds bound together, as it were
with fine thread. For it is not the Custom to spread Carpets upon the Floors,
as in other Countries of Asia. Not that the deerness hinders them from making
use of them, for these Mats cost them more then a fine Persian or Indian Carpet
would do, but because they are cooler to sit upon, and because the Punies do
not get so easily into them. Being at Bantam I bought one of these Mats of a
Tunquinese, which was admired for its fineness. It was nine Else square, and as
even and as soft as Velvet. With these Mats they cover the Beds or Couches,
upon which the Mandarins, or Princes, and the Nobilty which accompany them,
seat themselves round the Chamber, every one having one Cushion under him, and
another at his Back.

As for their Diet the Tunquineses are not very curious. The Common People are
contented with Rice boiled in water, and dried Fish, or salted Eggs. For as for
Flesh they eat none but at their Festivals. The great Lords are served every
day with Flesh and Fish, but their Cooks know not what belongs to baked Meats.
Otherwise they are more neat in their Kitchins and Chambers then we, only they
make no use either of Napkins or Table-cloaths. Whatever is set before them to
eat, is served in little Plates, not so big as our Trenchers, being made of
wood lacker'd with all sorts of Flowers, like the Cabinets which are brought
from Japan. All these Plates are brought up, ranged in order, in a large
Voyder, lacker'd like the Plates. Usually the Voyder holds ten or twelve
Plates, and the Meat is cut in little pieces, about the bigness of a Hazle Nut.
They make use neither of Spoons, nor Knives, nor Forks, but only of those
little Sticks, of which I have made mention in the foregoing Chapter, never
touching their Meat with their fingers.

When there are several sitting at the Table, either at their ordinary Meals,
or upon some Festival, they account it a great piece of Manners to be silent;
or if they have a desire to Discourse, they always allow the Eldest the honor
of beginning, bearing a great respect to them that are aged. But the Youngest,
at the Table, is never permitted to begin the Discourse. They wash their Hands,
their Mouths, and Faces before they sit down, but never after Meals. And when
they desire to know whether every one has had his fill, they ask him whether he
have eaten his Rice, according to the Custom of the Ancient Fathers in
Scripture, who, by Bread, meant the whole Repast. Neither is it a Custom among
them to ask one another how they do? but how many Measures of Rice he eat for
his Dinner, and whether he eat with an Appetite. This is a general Custom among
all the Idolatrous Indians, unless in the Dominions of the Great Mogul, where
they eat not Rice only, but Bread, and there they ask in civility how much Rice
they boiled, and how much Meal they baked for Bread; for the more he eats, the
better in health they think a man is.

Among all the Pastimes of the Tunquineses there are none wherein they take so
much delight as in Comedies, which are only Acted in the Nightime; but those
which are presented the day that they first behold the new Moon are the best.
They last from Sunsetting to Sunrising, and they are set out with beautiful
Decorations and Machines, very pleasing to behold. They are excellently well
skilled in representing the Sea and Rivers, and making a show of Sea Fights,
and Combats between Galleys and Barks, though they have seldom more then eight
Actors, Men and Women. The places appointed for these sights, are great Halls,
the third part whereof the Theater takes up, the rest being filled with Benches
for the Spectators. Upon each side of the Theater is a Box very sumptuously set
out, reserved for the King when he pleases to come. The Actors and Actresses
are very magnificently clad. The dress for the Women's heads being a kind of
Miter or Diadem, which exceedingly becomes them, from the hinder part whereof
two Ribonds, three fingers broad, hang down below their wastes. Both the one and
the other Act their parts very perfectly, and, according to their manner,
observe an exact time in their Dancing.

At one of the corners of the Hall sit the two Judges of the Comedy, one of
whom beats time upon a Brass Drum. Their other ordinary Pastimes, especially
for the Lords and Mandarins, are Fishing and Hunting, though they take more
pleasure in the former, by reason of the plenty of Fish which their Rivers
afford them. But, as I said before, they follow these sports only upon the days
that are permitted them, as being better husbands of their time then we, not
sparing any part of it from business. So that they who at the beginning of that
little knowledge which we had of these People, wrote that their Manners and
Customs were wild and barbarous, were misinformed. For as there is no reason to
doubt of the truth of what I affirm, and what others have confirmed by other
Relations, we may well conculde from what I have said, That all the Duties of
Civil Society and Politeness are not confined within our Europe; but that the
Kingdom of Tunquin, anciently a part of China, still retains the good
Government and Civility of the Chinese themselves.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Learned Men in the Kingdom of Tunquin.
CErtain it is, that the Tunquineses have a very great inclination for
Learning, and that they apply themselves to their Studies with diligence and
success: for that they cannot be advanced without it to the Offices and
Dignities in the Kingdom. I do not here, by Learning, mean the understanding of
the Languages of our Learned Men of Europe, which are altogether unknown to the
Eastern People, and much less the Philosophy of Aristotle, of which they never
so much as heard. But we mean the knowledge of the Laws of their Country, by
means whereof they obtain the charges of Judicature; the Mathematics, and
particularly Astronomy, to which all the Orientals have a great inclination, as
being great observers of the Stars, by whose assistance they flatter themselves
to be able to foretell things to come. The Tunquineses are also passionate
lovers of Music and Poetry, as being great admirers of Comedy and Tragedy, of
which those two Sciences are the main Composition; so that the Musicians and
Actors of Tunquin are accounted the best in the whole Eastern part of the World.

That you may acquire Nobility by Learning, in your Youth, you must pass
through three degrees, of the Synde, the Doucan, and the Tansi, from which
degree you may ascend to that of the Nobility.

To attain the first degree, it behooves the Youth of Tunquin to apply
themselves for eight years together to their Studies, and that very close, to
enable themselves for the Office of a Notary, Proctor, and Advocate, to which
there is nothing more conducing then to speak Eloquently in public. At the end
of eight years, they are examined concerning the duty of those Employments; and
if any one fail to give an Answer to the Questions propounded, he is sent back
again as incapable to obtain any Employment for the future, or to study any
longer. For those that acquit themselves well of their Examination, which is
very rigorous, their Names are set down in a Register, and presented to the
King, who first grants them the liberty to take upon them the Title of Synde,
and then if it be their aim to enjoy the Quality of Doucan, they are commanded
by the Tansi's to study Music, Astrology, and Poesy, not only to be able to be
judge of it, but also to perform themselves upon occasion. For to be good
judges of Comedy, which is a great Honor among them, it behooves them to be
both good Comedians and Musicians. Nor indeed is there any Pastime more
frequent then that of the Theater in this Country; for there is never any
solemn Festival among them, which is not accompanied and set forth with
Artificial Fireworks, in making whereof these People are exquisite; after
which they have their Comedies, with Machines, and change of Scenes in every
Act. Besides this, their Actors have a prodigious memory, so that let the part
be never so long, they never make use of Prompters to assist them, as we do in
Europe.

They that will learn the Mathematics, must make their own Instruments
themselves, and spend five years in this study. They are examined every year,
and if they fail to answer such Questions as are asked them, for the first four
they are pardoned; but at the end of the five years, if upon the grand
Examination, they fail to answer the Questions demanded them by the Tansis,
they are utterly degraded; whereas if they satisfy their Examinors, they are
permitted the Name and Dignity of Doucan. After thirteen years thus spent,
before they can arrive to the degree of a Tansi, they must spend four years
more in learning to write and read the Chinese Character to such a certain
number of Words. For the life of a Man would not suffice to learn to write and
read the Chinese quite through. The reason is, because that as to this
particular, it is not in China as in other Nations, where one Word is composed
of several Letters. The Chinese for every Word have a different Figure, all
which Figures are very numerous, as you may easily conjecture. By the by let me
tell you, that these Figures are made with small Pencils, and that the Chinese
make use of a certain Ink, which is made up into a Paste, and so moistened in
Water as you make use of it. They have also another sort of Color for certain
Words. But they cannot make use of Pens, as our Europeans, which are made of
Quils; nor of those of other Eastern People, which are made of small redish
brown Reeds, the best of which grow in certain Mershes in the Kingdom of Pegu
and Arachan.

But to return to the Students of Tunquin, they are also obliged to understand
the Laws and Customs of the Chinese, as well as their own; and the last four
years being at an end, the last and great Examination is made in the great
place, within the Enclosure of the Palace of Tunquin, which is a stately Marble
structure. There the King is present, with the Princes and great Lords of the
Court, the Manderins for Learning, and all the Tansis; and many also come on
purpose from distant Provinces to the Solemnity. Some Relations of Tunquin have
been a little too ridiculous in this particular, asserting extravagantly; that
sometimes there are above 30 or 40000 Students present at these Examinations;
but by what I could learn from my Brother, or gather by that discourse which I
have had with the Natives, the number of Students never exceeds three thousand.
There are in the place nine Scaffolds set up; of which the one is for the King
and Princes, the other for the Examiners, and those that are to be Examined:
And for the better hearing what is said, the Scaffolds are built like an
Amphitheater. But whereas there are eight days spent in this Examination, the
King and the Mandarins are never there but only the two first days. The last
day all the Names of them who have been Examined, as well they who have
answered well, as of them that have falter'd, are left in the Hands of the
sixteen chief Manderins, who are as it were sixteen Counselors of State, and
then it is at the King's pleasure to favor whom he thinks fit, of those who
have not given full satisfaction to the Questions propounded to them. As for
those who were found very ignorant, they are degraded with shame, and there is
no more said of them. All those Names are usually written upon large Tables,
set up at the Gate of the King's Palace for eight days together, to the end,
that all the People may know who are received into the Rank of Nobility, and
who not.

The eight days being passed, they are all to appear again upon the same
Scaffolds, where in the view of all the World, they who have had the misfortune
to have falter'd in their Examinations, are dismissed as unworthy of any
Employment: while they who have behaved themselves worthy of approbation, are
honored with a Vest of Violet Satin, which they presently put on, and then
take upon them the Name of Tansi's. Then they have given them a List of the
Towns and Villages, where they are to receive the Rents which the King allows
them; wherein however they have not an equal share; some being allowed more,
some less, according to their merit, or the favor of the Prince. Presently
they send notice to the places assigned them of the time, at which they intend
to be there: and then all the Inhabitants come forth to meet them, in Honor of
their Dignity, with all sorts of Music, and a Gilded Branquar, carried by
eight Men. There they are permitted to stay three Months to divertize
themselves, and for their own recreation. After that they return to Court, to
instruct themselves in the affairs of the Kingdom, and the King's House, and to
perfect themselves in the knowledge of those things, which is the way to obtain
the Dignity of a Mandarin. All Ambassadors who are sent to the Princes
adjoining, especially to the Chinese, are chosen out of these Tansi's, among
whom they always make choice of the ablest, and not of the richest, the King
allowing them sufficient to maintain their Port, and defray the expenses of the
Embassy.

CHAP. X.
Of their Physicians, and the Diseases of the Tunquineses.
THe Physicians belonging to the Kingdom of Tunquin do not make it their
business much to study Books; spending their Youth in searching after the
nature and qualities of the Roots and Simples, and how to apply them according
to the nature of the Distemper. But more particularly they apply themselves to
the beating of the Pulse, and its diversity of Measure, by which they chiefly
pretend to understand the cause of the Disease, and what Remedy to make use of
for cure. And therefore when they go to feel a Pulse, they feel it in several
parts of the Body; and according to the diversity of the part, and the beating,
they judge of the quality of the Distemper. Therefore upon their first coming,
they feel the Patient in three places, first upon their right sides, and
secondly upon their left. By the Pulse which they feel upon the wrist of the
right hand, they guess of the condition of the Lungs; by that which they feel
upon the Vein of the Arms, where generally People are let Blood, they guess at
the Distempers of the Stomach, and the Region of the Kidneys. The Pulse of the
left Wrist discovers to them the condition of the Heart: By that in the Veins
of the left Arm, where usually they let Blood, they are informed of the estate
of the Liver. By the Pulses of the Temples, both right and left, they give a
more exquisite judgment of the Kidneys. They are very careful to count how many
times a Pulse of a sick Person beats in the time of one Respiration; and
according to these several Pulses, they tell you which part of the Body is
particularly distempered, whether the Heart; the Liver, or the Lungs; or
whether the Distemper proceed from any outward cause, as from Cold, Sadness, or
any other disorderly Passion.

They never make use of any other Remedies but of Herbs and Roots, which they
choose themselves; there being no distinction among them of Apothecary and
Physician. These Herbs they mingle sometimes with a little Ginger, which they
boil in Water, and give the Decoction, being strained, to the Patient. They
have very good Receipts for the Purples, Epilepsie, and several other Diseases
which are accounted incurable in Europe. They make use of China Ink to stop a
Dysentery, and for the cure of Wounds. When the Sea Ebbs from the shore upon
these Coasts, they find upon the Sand a little small kind of Crabs, which dye
immediately, and by the heat of the Sun, which is there extraordinary, become
as hard as a Stone in a short time; these the Tunquinese Physicians beat to
Powder, and give to their Patients in Dysenteries, and Fevers, sometimes in
Aqua Vitae, sometimes in plain Water. They mightily admire the Herb Tea, which
comes from China and Japan; which latter Country produces the best. It is
brought to them in Tin Pots close stopped, to keep out the Air. When they would
use it, they boil a quantity of Water, according to the proportion they intend
to use, and when the Water seeths, throw a small quantity into it, allowing as
much as they can nip between their Thumb and fore Finger to a Glass. This they
prescribe to be drank as hot as they can endure it, as being an excellent
Remedy against the Headache, for the Gravel, and for those that are subject to
the Griping of the Guts; but then they order a little Ginger to be put into the
Water when it boyls. At Goa, Batavia, and in all the Indian Factories, there
are none of the Europeans who do not spend above four or five Leaves a day; and
they are careful to preserve the boiled Leaf for an Evening Sallad, with Sugar,
Vinegar, and Oil. That is accounted the best Tea which colors the Water
greenest; but that which makes the Water look Red, is little accounted of. In
Japan. The King and great Lords, who drink Tea, drink only the Flower, which is
much more wholesome, and of a taste much more pleasing. But the Price is much
different; for one of our ordinary Beer Glasses is there worth a French Crown.

The most dangeroug Distempers that befall the Tunquineses, most usually happen
when the bad Air surprises the People; for of a sudden it deprives them of
their Speech, and then Death suddenly follows without a speedy Remedy. The best
Remedy for this sudden Distemper is to mix some Counterpoison with Aqua Vitae
instead of Wine, and to let the Patient drink it as hot as he can. The Patient
also, must at the same time be rubbed with a Cloth dipped in Aqua Vitae, where
Ginger has been boiled. This takes away the pains caused by cold Winds, and
unwholsom Airs. Though some for the more speedy cure of these pains, lay the
Patient upon a Bed made only of Girts, four Fingers distant one from the other;
and then setting a Chasing-dish underneath, cause the sick Person to sweat in a
Cloud of Frankincense, till the pain is gone, repeating the same thing Morning
and Evening.

As for Blood-letting, it is by no means used in that Country. They make use of
Fire, especially for the Purple-Feaver, a Disease so dangerous in France. For
the cure of this, the Physicians of Tunquin take the Pith of a Reed, which they
dry very well; dip it in Oil, and set it on Fire: and then apply to every
Purple Spot one of these lighted Wicks. The Spot will give a whif like a small
Squib, and that is an infallible sign that the Venom is gone out of the body.
This Remedy is seldom applied but in the night time, because the Spot does not
appear so well in the day time. And the Physician must be very careful, that
when this Venom flies out of the Patient's Body, it does not find a way into
his own; for then there is no Remedy but Death. There are some Physicians that
will prick the Purple Spot with a Needle, and let out the Pestilential Blood;
after which they burn the part so pricked, and then rub it with Ginger, not
permitting their Patient to take the Air in 20 days after they are cured. While
they are under cure, they drink nothing but Water, with Citronpeel boiled in
it, and abstain from Flesh and Butter. They give them to eat Rice boiled in
Water, and salt Fish; but the more they abstain from eating and drinking, the
sooner they are cured. And indeed it is a wonderful thing to see the excellent
effects of their Remedies in so short a time; for they have no lingering
Distempers to hold them years together, as they do among us.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Original, Government, and Policy, of the Kingdom of Tunquin.
IT is not above six hundred years since Tunquin was first governed by
particular Kings, in regard it was anciently a part of the Dominion of the
Chinese. What is reported of the first Tunquineses, That they were without
Governors, and without Kings, is altogether fabulous, like to that which is
related of a certain Infant of three years of Age, who appearing before a great
Assembly of the People, exhorted them to free themselves from the power of the
Chinese, who were their Oppressors. Upon which a lovely Horse miraculously
appearing to the said infant, he mounted the Horse, and immediately setting
forward with those that were gathered after him, as also others that appeared
as wonderfully to assist him, he set upon the Chinese, and defeated them in
such manner, that they never durst venture after that to return any more to
reconquer what they had lost. But the most certain truth of Tunquin History
assures us, That for these six Centuries last past, it has been governed by six
various Families. The first that assumed the Title of King was a famous Robber,
whose Name was Din, who having gathered together a great Number of
Malcontents, and Vagabonds, became so powerful and formidable through his own
Valor, that after several bloody Battles gained, it was no difficult thing for
him to seize upon the Throne. But he did not reign long in peace, for the most
part of the People rebelled against him; and in the first Battle that he
fought, he lost his Life. However his own Party won the day; and having left
two Sons, his eldest reigned three years; after whose death, the younger
Brother ruled in his stead, but died soon after, neither of the Brothers
leaving any issue behind them. After that the Kingdom was miserably distracted
by several Civil Wars, till the weaker Party calling in the Chinese to their
Assistance, became the most puissant. Then it was that a certain Mandarin, of
the Family of Lelequel, was advanced to the Throne, who being a valiant and
prudent Prince, restored tranquillity to the whole Kingdom. Who, when he saw
himself Established in peace, built that large Palace, which they, who have
seen it, admire, as well for it is Circuit, as for its magnificent Structure,
being all of Marble of diverse Colors, both within and without. This King had
but one Daughter, who soon after her Father's death, the better to secure her
self, married one of the most powerful Mandarins in the Country, of the House
of Tran. But soon after, one of her Subjects rebelling against her, gave her
battle, took her Prisoner, and put her to death. Having thus got the Power into
his hands, the Rebel usurped the Throne; but nine years after, he was also
slain in Battle by his own Subjects, who had called the Chinese to their
Assistance. They being thus Masters of the Kingdom, held it for twenty years,
and set Governors over every Province. But at length the Mandarins grew weary
of their Oppression, because of the heavy Tributes which they laid upon the
Tunquineses; so that a valiant Captain of the House of Le, having assembled a
numerous Power together, gave the Chinese three Battles, and in every one
overcame them. The Chinese thus expelled out of Tunquin, the Conqueror seized
the Crown, and in his Family the Regal Government continued for above fourscore
years. After which time, a great Lord, of the Family of Mar, which had
formerly enjoyed the Scepter, to Revenge himself of an affront which the King
had put upon him at Court, found a way to escape his hands, and being assisted
by a great Number of discontented Persons, of which the best regulated Kingdoms
are always full, and the Chinese, who always sought an opportunity to regain
what they had lost, after a bloody Battle, he possessed himself of the Kingdom,
it being never known what became of his Predecessor. But this new King enjoyed
the Fruits of his Victory but a small while. For two years afterward, a
Mandarin, of the House of Trin, having espoused the Daughter of another great
Lord, openly declared War against his Sovereign, with a design utterly to
extirpate the House of Mar. Unhappily for him, death put a stop to his
designs, though he left two Sons behind him, able enough to have pursued his
undertakings. But the eldest, naturally timorous, and fearing to engage himself
in a dangerous War, voluntarily submitted himself to the King, who gave him the
Government of a Province, and married him to one of his Sister's Daughters. The
younger Brother being a valiant Prince, and having his deceased Father's Army
at his Devotion, though the King proposed him great advantages, would give ear
to nothing, but out of his ambition to Reign himself continued and successfully
accomplished what his Father had begun. In the second Battle which he gave the
King, who was there in person, he took him Prisoner, together with his Brother,
who had submitted to him, and some few days after he put them both publicly to
death at the head of his Army; the one as an unjust usurper of the Throne; the
either as a desertor, who had abandoned his Father's Army, and so ill followed
his intentions.

Now though as Victor he might easily have ascended the Throne, and taken upon
him the Name and Title of King, yet he would not accept of any higher Title
then that of General of the Army; and the better to Establish himself in his
Authority, and to gain the affection of the People, he caused Proclamation to
be made through all the Provinces of the Kingdom, that if there were any Prince
of the House of Le yet remaining alive, he should show himself, with full
assurance that upon his appearing, he should be put into possession of the
Kingdom. There was but one to be found, who had been so closely pursued by the
House or Mar, while it ruled, that to save his Life he was forced to abscond
himself in the Frontiers of the Kingdom, under the Habit of a private Soldier.
The General was overjoyed to find that there was yet a lawful Heir of the House
of Le to be found, that he might place him upon the Throne. So that so soon as
he was known to be of the Legitimate Race, all the Equipage and Attendance of a
King was sent to him, with Order to all the Provinces as he passed along, to
receive him as if he were already crowned. The whole Army marched two days
march to meet the King, and brought him to Checo, the capital City of the
Kingdom, where he was placed in the Throne of his Father, and with great Pomp
proclaimed King of Tunquin. But General Trin, who cared not so much for the
Royal Title, as the Royal Power, so ordered his business, that leaving to Le
all the outward show and Pomp of Royal Authority, he reserved to himself the
whole command of the Army, and the greatest part of the Revenues of the Kingdom
absolutely to dispose of at his own pleasure. So that from that time to this
hour, we may affirm that there has been, and still are, two Kings of Tunquin,
of which the first has only the Name and Title of King, and is called Boua, and
the second Choua, who has all the Authority, disposing of all things at his
pleasure, while the other remains shut up in his Palace like a Slave, not
permitted to stir abroad but upon certain days: and then he is carried through
the Streets of Checo, like an Image, though with a magnificent Train and Royal
Equipage. He has generally 2000 Soldiers for his Guard; and sometimes 20000
which are quartered upon the Frontiers, chiefly toward Cochinchina. He also has
ready upon the Frontiers 50 Elephants for War. And upon the Rivers of the
Kingdom where the Enemy can come to damage him, he usually keeps 100 great
Galleys, with a vast company of small Galliots, to which the Soldiers and
Rowers that belong, have more pay then the others at Land. And these, that they
may row with more strength, row standing, with their Faces toward the Prow,
quite contrary to our Rowers, who turn their backs.

The King gives public Audience almost every day; but he makes no Edict, or
public Decree, that is of any effect, if it be not also Signed by the Choua. At
these Audiences he has with him thirty two Counselors of State, and besides
these, a hundred others to judge of all Appeals of the Kingdom. The Eunuchs
have a very great Power at Court, as in all other Courts of Asia, and the King,
as to his most important affairs, confides more in them then in his own
Children. The eldest Children do not always succeed their Father; for the
Choua, or General, with all the Counselors, which are generally his Creatures,
thought it convenient, that when the King should have more Sons then one, he
should make choice of whom he pleased to succeed him. So that so soon as he has
named him, the Choua, attended by the principal Officers of the Army,
Counselors of State, and Eunuchs, come to congratulate him, and to give him
their Oaths to set him upon the Throne after the death of his Father; and for
the other Brothers they are always shut up in the Palace, as in a Prison,
without meddling with any affairs of State. They never stir out of the Palace
but four times a year, and they never stay abroad above six days at a time, the
Officers that attend them being put upon them by the Choua, who is as it were
Lord high Constable of the Kingdom. The first of these six days of liberty they
go to visit the Temples, and the Priests, to whom they give large Alms; the two
next days they take their pleasure in hunting; and the three last days they
spend their time upon the Rivers, in Galleys sumptuously trimmed and adorned.

The Kingdom of Tunquin is divided into eight large Provinces, every one of
which has its Governor, and its Magistrates, from whose sentence there lies an
Appeal to the Court. We should wrong this Country to say that there were no
Nobility therein; as indeed there are none in most Kingdoms of Asia. But they
must all attain to this degree their merit; some by the Wars, and some by
their Learning. They who attain their Nobility by Arms, have wherewithal to
live handsomely at home; and they begin to learn their Exercises betimes, at
farthest by eleven or twelve years of Age. The first thing they are to
understand, is how to handle their Swords; the Blades of which are straight,
long, and broad, like those of the Switzers, having but one Edge. They are also
taught to aim with their Bows, and to fire a Musket with Matches, (for they
know not the use of Firelocks) to ride the great Horse, to shoot running, and
to manage their Zagay's, which are a sort of Staves, cheek'd with Iron, like a
Half-Pike. When they are ready in all these Exercises, then they learn to make
all sorts of Artificial Fireworks; as also how to invent new ones, to make use
of them against the Elephants. By the way I must needs tell you, there are some
of these Elephants as I have seen several times, that are so accustomed to
these Artificial Fires, that they regard them not at all, neither are any way
disturbed at the Squibs that are thrown, and go off under their very Noses and
Bellies. Nevertheless of 200 of these Creatures which the Eastern Kings carry
to their Wars at a time, you shall have hardly fifteen that are so hardy and
valiant. So that unless their Governors take not great care, instead of
running upon the Enemy, they turn upon their Friends, and put the whole Army
into a most dismal confusion; as you shall hear by the following Story. For
Aurenge-Zebe, the present Great Mogul, being then a young Prince, obtained of
Cha-gehan, his Father, to let him have the command of an Army of threescore
thousand Men, and fourscore Elephants; and with this force, out of his
Antipathy to the Christians, he laid Siege to Daman, a Town belonging to the
Portugals, fourteen Leagues from Surat. The Governor was a person of great
Valor, and had also two Sons with him, who, together with himself, had both
served the King of France. He had also in the Town eight hundred Gentlemen, who
voluntarily put themselves into the Garrison for its defense, from all parts of
India where the Portugueses had to do, and were all excellently well mounted.
For the Portugals at that time made use of none but Arabian Horses, the worst
of which cost a thousand Crowns at least. The Governor finding that the Indian
Prince began to press hard upon him, having already made two Assaults, resolved
with all his Cavalry and Infantry to make a Salley upon Sunday Morning, causing
them to fix at the ends of their Spears and Lances certain Artificial
Fireworks, to which they were ordered suddenly to give fire, as soon as they
should gain the Elephants Quarter. This design was so successful, that when it
came to be executed, the Elephants were so suddenly terrified, that running
impetuously through the Indian Army, they trod to the ground, and cut in pieces
with the Swords and Scithes which were fastened to their Trunks, what ever
stood in their way. The Portugals taking advantage of this confusion, made no
less havoc among the amazed Multitude, whom they had surpised securely and
profoundly asleep. For they had an opinion, that the Portugals would never
attack them upon the Sabbath day, believing they had the same veneration for
that day which the Jews had. But they were utterly deceived, in so much that
the Portugals, by virtue of this Stratagem so closely pursued, obtained a
notable Victory, to the utter destruction of 20000 of Aurenge-Zebe's Army, the
spoils whereof are reported to have amounted to above twelve Millions.

But to return to the Kingdom of Tunquin, I must tell you, that the Tunquineses
have often waged War against the Chinese, because the first would not pay the
latter the Tribute which was accorded them by a Treaty made by one of their
Kings, of the House of Le. But in the year 1667, the Chinese, seeing that the
Tartars had made themselves Masters of their Country, made a Peace with the
Tunquineses, wherein it was agreed, that the said Tribute should be no longer
paid; but that they should every year send an Ambassador only to Pequin, to do
homage to the Emperor of China.

As for their Justice and Policy, they observe a very exact Order and
Regulation over all the Kingdom of Tunquin, as well in their Cities, as in the
Country. So that few of the best regulated Kingdoms exceed them. More
especially they have a great care, for the public good, to repair the Bridges
and Highways; and every quarter of a League there is such Provision made, that
any Traveller may there meet not only with Water, but Fire also to light his
Pipe, being generally great smoakers of Tobacco.

As for Murder, they are very exact in punishing that crime. For they carry the
Person apprehended before the Judge; and then he must hold to his Mouth a
little wisp of Grass, to show, that by his disorderly life he had made himself
a Beast. Not much unlike this is the custom in Persia, where the King and his
Council condemn or pardon all but such as have murdered a Man that has any
Kindred. For then all the favor that the King can show him is, to deliver him
into the hands of the next of kin to the Person killed, who has power to agree
with the Criminal for a Sum of Money, which is rarely done, as being accounted
an Act both infamous and ignominious. So that if there be no agreement made,
then it behooves the next of kin to be the Executioner himself, and put the
Criminal to that death to which he is before condemned.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Court of the Kings of Tunquin.
ALthough the King, as I have already said, have not much Authority in his
Kingdom, which is governed altogether by the General, who has the whole Militia
at his Devotion, yet he is highly honored by his Subjects, and he keeps a very
splendid Court. The first and fifteenth day of every Month, all the Mandarins
who are the Grandees of the Kingdom, are bound to come in their Chinese Habits
to kiss the King's hands. The Constable, or General, was formerly wont to
perform the same Office, but by degrees he has obtained a dispensation, and
only sends another Prince in his stead. As for all the other Mandarins,
Governors of Provinces, Justiciaries, and Military Officers, every year they
go to kiss the Choua's hands, and to congratulate him upon the first day of the
year, which is the fifteenth of the fifth Month; as also when he has obtained
any great Victory over his Enemies. So that the General has more Honor done
him then the King himself. It Is also the custom of the Tunquineses, among the
Men, that when they meet any Person higher in condition then themselves, they
make four profound obeysances to the very Earth. But for the Women, what ever
their condition be among themselves, they never make but one. They who are
desirous to be admitted into the Palace to see the King, are obliged to put on
Violet Robes, and their Servants must be clad in the same color. They that
approach the King's presence to obtain any favor, must carry a Present along
with him. For though the Constable be the person that disposes of all Offices
and Commands over all the Court and Kingdom, yet every year upon the fifteenth
day of the seventh Month, the King distributes several considerable Gifts and
Largesses to his Courtiers; as also to the Children of such Fathers who have
performed any important Service for the good of his Kingdom. He gives them
Pains of Gold, every one worth six hundred Livres; and Bars of Silver,
amounting each to forty six Livres. The same day he also releases all
Prisoners, both Criminal and Debtors, provided the crime do not deserve death;
and that the debt do not exceed two Bars of Silver. Also every year, the three
last days of the last Month, the 40 Mandarins, who are the chief Counselors of
State, take the Oaths of all the Lords and Officers of the Court, and of their
Wives; causing them to swear to be faithful to the King, and if they know of
any thing that concerns the King's person, or his Kingdom, to discover it. All
Governors of Provinces give the same Oaths to the Lords and Gentlemen under
their Jurisdictions; and the Governors of Cities to the Citizens, and other
Inhabitants. They that discover any Treason never fail of any reward; only with
this distinction, in reference to the quality of the Persons that reveal it.
For as for the Mandarins and Gentlemen, the King rewards them according to his
own pleasure: But as for the meaner sort, whether Men or Women, they are
ennobl'd, and gratified with a reward of 50 Pains of Gold, and 500 Bars of
Silver, which in all amounts to 53000 Livres. But they esteem their Nobility
far beyond their Money.

At certain times of the year, there is a Muster of the Youth of the several
Provinces; and all those who are found not to be either of the Nobility, or not
to have learnt any Trade, are presently enrolled for the Service of the King,
who every five years make choice of such as he intends for his Guard, and sends
them to the Frontier Garrisons. There are some who endeavor to get off by
Money; but if they be discovered, both the Officers and the Soldier are
punished without redemption. For they hang a little Bell about his Neck, Fetter
his Arms, and in that posture send him to the Constable, who presently orders
his Head to be struck off. But in regard the Tunquineses are very averse from
seeing any Blood shed, the Kindred or Friends of the condemned Person,
intercede that he may be hanged, believing that death to be most honorable
which is not defiled with Bloodshed; wherein they seem to be of the Opinion of
the Turks.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Ceremonies observed when the Kings of Tunquin are advanced to the
Throne.
BEfore we speak of the Enthroning the Kings of Tunquin, and of the Ceremonies
that attend it, it behooves us to relate the manner of their setting out of the
Palace, when they go at any time to take their pleasure. The King is seated
upon a most magnificent Palanquin, carried by eight Men, where he may be beheld
by all the People; the Lords and Officers of the Court attending him on foot,
provided he do not go out of the City: for when he goes into the Country he
rides upon an Elephant, and the Lords follow him on Horseback. When the Queen
Mother, or his first Wife go abroad, they are likewise carried upon a close
Palanquin, with Lattice-Windows, to the end, they may see and not be seen; and
behind the Palanquin follow the Maids of Honor on foot.

The Mandarins, and great Princes, solemnize their Birthdays every year, with
great Feasting, Pastimes, Comedies, and Fireworks, and all their Friends and
Kindred fail not to attend them to honor the Solemnities. In the year 1645,
the eldest Son of the King, who was by his Father appointed for his Successor,
upon one of his Birthdays showed the Court all the divertizements he could
imagine, and the King who had a great affection for him, sent him a thousand
Pains of Gold, and five hundred Bars of Silver, to the value of 120000 Livres.
At which time, large Alms are distributed, especially to poor Widows and
Prisoners.

When the King dies, and leaves several Sons, they set up him whom (when alive)
he chose for his Successor. The third day after the Decease of the King, the
Constable with all the Military Mandarins, the Lords of the Council, and all
the Governors of Provinces, repair to the Prince's Appartment, where they
present him with a Chinese Habit, after which having mounted him upon an
Elephant, they bring him into one of the great Courts of his Palace, which is
all covered with Cloth of Gold and Silver as with a Tent. There it is, that
being placed upon a Throne magnificently enriched, all the Mandarins prostrate
themselves upon the Earth with their Heads downward; in which posture having
lain for some time, they rise, and closing their Hands together, with their
Arms and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, they swear to the new King to be faithful to
him till death. This first Ceremony being over, the new King, to show himself
liberal upon his first coming to the Crown, causes four Panes of Gold, and six
Bars of Silver, to be given to every one. But to distinguish the Constable from
the rest, he gives him twenty Panes of Gold, and forty Bars of Silver: and to
the President of the Council or Chancellor ten of Gold and twenty of Silver.
These Presents being thus made, several Pieces of Artillery are fired round the
Palace, accompanied with several Volleys of small Shot, there being then in
Arms above 30000 Horse and Foot; and then the King is set upon a magnificent
Palanquin, and the Constable and chief of the Council ride before upon lovely
Horses. Sixteen of the principal Officers of the Court carry the King, viz.
eight Military Mandarins, and eight of the Council. And in this manner they set
forward to the Apartment of the deceased King, from whence all the Lords retire
for two hours, except the Eunuchs; and then it is, that the Princesses, Ladies
of the Court, and chief Wives of the Mandarins, come to kiss the King's Hand,
and congratulate his Advancement to the Throne. Which done, all the Lords
return again to a noble Feast after the manner of the Country ready prepared.
Their Viands are not so delicate, nor so deliciously dressed as ours, neither
have they so much variety. It Is true, they have those Birds-nests, already
mentioned, which they mix in the most part of their Dishes, which gives the
Meat a taste of almost all sorts of Spices. Of all the Meats which they eat
Colts Flesh is in most esteem, and Dogs Flesh, neither of which agree with our
Palates. The Festival is concluded with Comedies and Fireworks, which la allst
the night. The next day the 30000 Men that gave their Volleys of small Shot the
day before, are drawn up in good order in a Field next, and all the principal
Officers of War, Colonels, Captains, and Lieutenants, leave the Frontiers to be
at the same place. Then the King mounted upon his Palanquin, and carried by
sixteen of his principal Officers, the Constable and grand Squire riding
before, and attended by several other Commanders on foot, with several Mummers
that play and dance before the Pallanquin, goes forth of his Palace, the Drums,
Trumpets, Cornets, and other Warlike Instruments, filling the Air with their
Martial Sounds. In this Pomp, and with this Equipage, the King being come to
the Camp, quits his Palanquin, and mounts one of his great Elephants of War,
which are used to the noise of the Guns and sight of the Fireworks. Being thus
mounted, he rides into the middle of all his Troops, in which place all the
Officers swear Fidelity to him; after which he bestows his Gifts upon them, to
every Colonel two Panes of Gold, and forty Bars of Silver; to every Captain the
half of what he gives a Colonel, and to every Lieutenant the half of what he
gives a Captain: and as for the Soldiers, they have every one a Months Pay.
These Presents being made, the whole Army discharges three Volleys, and then
every Company retreats into a large Hutt, where they have Meat and Drink
prepared for them, enough to serve them a whole day and a night. In the same
Field is also set up a fair wooden Palace, sumptuously enriched within with
Paintings and several pieces of Workmanship in Gold. There the King spends all
the night, some part in Feasting, some part in Plays and seeing the Mummers
dance, and the rest in beholding the Fireworks. The next day the King leaves
his wooden Palace, which is afterward fired by the Soldiers, as well as their
own Hutts, and so returns to the City. Being arrived at his Palace with the
same pomp that he went forth, he seats himself upon his Throne, and there shows
his Liberality to those that made the Fireworks, to the Comedians and Dancers,
and all the rest that were any way contributory to the setting forth the Pomp
of the Ceremony. Then he gives Access to all the People, and two Commissioners,
one for the Merchants, and the other for the Handicrafts, make a Speech to the
King, the substance whereof is; that all the Burgesses and Inhabitants of the
good City of Checo do acknowledge him for their King, and that they will be
faithful to him till death. The Speech being ended, the King presents the Body
of the Merchants with 50 Panes of Gold, and 300 Bars of Silver; and the Body of
the Tradesmen with 20 Panes of Gold, and 100 Bars of Silver. The People gone
home, every one strives who shall spend most in Feasting and Comedies, adding
of their own to the Kings Bounty; so that every Quarter of the City is full of
Jollity and Rejoicing for a week together. Some days after come the
Commissioners for the Commonalty, from all parts of the Kingdom, who in the
behalf of their Cities and Towns make known to His Majesty the universal Joy of
the People for their lawful Prince, assuring him of their Fidelity, and of
their Service against the Chinese. They name particularly the Chinese,
because the Tunquineses have no greater Enemies then they, and for that the
Hatred between them is irreconcilable. The King observing the good will of his
People, testifies his Acknowledgment in this manner: All that have not time out
of mind been Rebels to their lawful Sovereigns, but have constantly taken up
Arms for their Defense, are discharged for a year from all Taxes and
Impositions; and for the rest, who have at any time formerly assisted the
Enemy, they are only exempted for six months. All Prisoners for Debt partake
also of the King's Bounty, so that after the President of the Council has made
a Composition with the Creditors for half the Sum, the King pays the rest.

It is a thing almost incredible, what a vast number of Sacrifices the King
sends to the Temples of his false Gods, to be there offered to the Idols.

The number of Beasts is said to exceed an hundred thousand, besides the value
of a million in Panes of Gold, Tissues, and Silks, to adorn the Idols, and
Orange-coloured Calicuts for the Bonzes, and those that attend the Service of
the Pagods. Among the rest of these Presents he sends a vast number of Pieces
of blue Calicuts for the poor people that are kept in the Pagods, as our Poor
are kept in Hospitals. The Idolatrous Princes also consume incredible Sums to
adorn the Pagods and Images of their false Gods. There are some of them three
foot high, all of massy Gold; others of Silver bigger than the Life.

The new King after all these Ceremonies are over, takes his time to go and
give thanks to his false Deities for his coming to the Crown when the Moon
first changes, shutting himself up for the first week with the Bonzes, and
living in common with them with a great deal of Frugality.

During this time he visits the principal Hospitals, to see how the poor people
are used, especially the old Folks, whom they have in great Veneration, to whom
he distributes new Alms; for naturally the Tunquineses are very charitable. To
conclude, he makes choice of some fair Situation, where he orders the building
of a new Pagod, which he devotes to some of his Idols. Thus his Devotion being
ended, upon the first day of the second Quarter, he mounts one of his Elephants
of War, attended by all the Officers of his Court on Horseback, and ten or
twelve thousand men on foot, chosen out of the whole Army to attend him. All
the second Quarter the whole Court says in a certain Plain, where are three
Houses set up, one for the King, one for the Constable, and one for the
President of the Council; with a world of Huts for the rest. There are also
several small Cabins set up, which are not covered and closed but upon one
side, which they turn as the Wind blows; and these are the places where they
dress their Victuals: For at that time the King allows two meals a day to all
his Attendants.

Through this Plain runs the River of -- which is very broad in that place.
Upon this River are several Galleys richly gilded and painted, but especially
the Admiral, which exceeds all the rest in Maginificence. The Prow, the Poop,
the Ropes, the Oars, but only that part which goes into the water, glitter all
with Gold; the Benches very ingeniously painte the Rowers well clad. For there
the Rowers are all Soldiers and Freemen, contrary to the Custom in Europe. The
Soldiers in their youth are taught to handle their Oars, and have somewhat
better Pay than the Land-Souldiers. The Galleys are not so big as ours, but
they are longer, and cut the water better. While the King stays in this place,
he diverts himself with seeing these Galleys row one against another. In the
Evening the Rowers come ashore with their Captains to kiss the King's Hand, and
they that have behaved themselves most stoutly and nimbly, carry off the Marks
of his Bounty. The seven days being past, the King calls before him all the
Soldiers of the Galleys with their Officers, and gives them two months Wages
extraordinary, as he does to his Land-Souldiers. It Is a wonderful thing to
behold the vast number of Fireworks which they throw about, as well upon the
Land as upon the Water. For my Brother, who has been present at all these
Shows, has told me, that for these seven days together you would think the Air
and Water all on fire. Being at Bantam I once saw one of these artificial
Firework-Shews which the Tunquineses that were there played off before the King,
and I must confess it was quite another thing from what we make in Europe.

The seven days being past, the King returns to the City in the same order, and
with the same pomp, as he went forth; and being come to his Palace, he goes
directly to the Apartment of his Princesses, where none but his Eunuchs
accompany him, where he stays all the rest of the month. Every Evening he
diverts himself with new Fireworks, which are played off before the Women's
Lodgings; where also the Eunuchs, together with the Comedians and Mummers,
contribute to divertise the Ladies.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Funeral Pomp of the Kings of Tunquin, and of their manner of Burying
their Dead.
WHen the King of Tunquin dies, he is presently Embalmed and laid in a Bed of
State, where for sixty five days the People have liberty to come and see him.
All that time he is served as he was when he was alive; and when the Meat is
taken from before the Body, one half is given to the Bonzes, and the other half
to the Poor. So soon as the King has breathed his last gasp, the Constable
gives notice thereof to the Governors of Provinces, and orders them how long
they shall Mourn.

All the Military Mandarins and Judges wear Mourning generally three years, the
King's Household nine months, the Nobility six, and the meaner sort three
months. During these three years there is a Cessation from all Divertisements,
except those that attend the Ceremony of the King's Advance or Elevation to the
Throne. All the Viands which are served up to the King are vernish'd with
Black. The King cuts his Hair, and covers his Head with a Bonnet of Straw, as
do likewise all the Princes and Counselors of State; neither do they leave off
that Habit till the King's Body be in the Galley which is to carry him to his
Enterment. Three Bells which hang in one of the Towers of the Palace, never
leave tolling from the King's expiring till the Corpse be put into the Galley.
The third day after his Decease all the Mandarins repair to Court, to testify
their sorrow which they have for the Death of the deceased King, and ten days
after that the People are allowed to see the Body lie in State, till it be put
into the Galley.

During the sixty five days that the Body is thus exposed, the Constable is
busy in preparing for the Funeral Pomp. From the Palace to the place where the
Galleys wait for the Body, it is about two days Journey, and all the way

The Order observed in the March of the Funeral Pomp at the Interment of the
Kings of Tunquin.
1. Two Messengers of the Chamber proclaim the deceased King's Name; each of
them bears a Mace, the Head whereof is full of combustible stuff for Artificial
Fire or Fusees.

2. Next proceed Twelve Elephants; on each of the four foremost is one bearing
the King's Standard. Then follow four other Elephants, with Wooden Turrets on
their Backs, and in every one of these are Six Men, some being armed with
Muskets, others with Fire Lances. The four last Elephants do severally carry a
kind of Cage; some of which are on all sides shut up with Glass Windows, the
other with a sort of Grates; the first being of a Square, the other having six
sides and facing.

3. Then rides the Master of the Horse, attended with two Pages on Horseback.

4. Twelve Horses are led by the Bridle two and two, by as many Captains of the
Guard. The Harness of the first Six Horses is very rich, the Bit, and all the
Furniture of the Bridle and Saddle are of pure Gold, the Saddles are
embroydered likewise with Gold: But the Six other Horses Harness is all covered
over with Gold Plates.

5. The Chariot which bears the Mausolee, wherein is the King's Corpse, is
dragged by Eight Stags trained to this Service. Each of these Stags is led by a
Captain of the Life Guard.

6. Then follows the new King afoot clad in White Satin, with a Straw Cap on
his Head. If he has any Brothers, they attend on him in the like Attire; and
they are surrounded with Musicians and Players on the Hoboys, and other
Instruments.

7. There proceeds afterward Six Princesses in White Satin, who carry Meat
and Drink for the deceased King. These are attended by two Ladies of Honor in
Purple Garments; and about these Ladies are several Musicians.

8. Eight Princes of the Royal Blood go in Purple Garments with Straw Hats.

9. Four Governors of the four chief Provinces of the Kingdom, each bearing a
Stick on his Shoulder, on which hangs a Bag full of Gold and several Perfumes;
and these Bags contain the Presents which the several Provinces make unto the
deceased King, for to be buried with his Corpse, that he may make use of the
same in the other World.

10. Two Chariots go next, each drawn by Eight Horses, and every Couple being
led by Two Men. In each Chariot is a Coffer or Trunk full of Bars of Gold and
other Riches, for the deceased King's use in the Life to come.

11. A great Crowd of the King's Officers, and of the Nobility, do follow this
Funeral Pomp, some afoot and some on horseback, according to their Offices and
Qualities.

Place this Page 46.
Representation of the Wagons and Boats which in form of a Convoy carry the
Beasts and provision necessarry for the sustenance of those (...) (...)end the
Funeral Pomp at the interrment of ye Kings of Iuquin from Choco to Bodlego
where the body is put in a Galley to be conveyed to ye Sepul(...)



A Continuation of the Order observed at the Funeral Pomp of the Kings of
Tunquin, setting out from the City of Bodlego.
The King's Body is put into a Galley, which is drawn up the River. This River
is increased by several Brooks that come down from the Mountains, and it runs
through barren and Desert Countries. In some of these places they are wont to
bury the Corpse very privately; for six only of the chief Eunuchs of the Court
are to know where the King has been buried. An Oath is tendered to them never
to reveal the place. And this is done perhaps on some Religious Motive, and
likewise through Fear, that the Treasures which are buried by him should be
dug up. These Riches are ordinarily some Massy Bars of Gold and Silver, as
likewise some Pieces of Cloth of Gold and Silver, and such kinds of other rich
Furnitures, which he is to make use of (as they say) when he has need of them
in the other World. Many Lords and Ladies of the Court will needs be buried
Alive with him, for to serve him in the places where he is to go. I have
observed in passing through the Estates of the Raja or Prince of Velouche,
which border on the Easterly parts of the Kingdom of Visapour, that the Wives
suffer themselves to be buried Alive near their deceased Husbands, instead of
being burned, as they practice in other Provinces of the Indies.

A. Here you see the Prospect of the City of Bodlego.

B. The Galley where the King's Corpse is.

C. Two Galleys do carry the Lords who go to be buried Alive with the King.
That which is grated about is full of Ladies, who likewise offer themselves to
be interred Alive with him.

D. Other Galleys, wherein are the Treasures which are to be buried with the
Corpse.

Place this next to, The Order in the March of the Funeral Pomp, etc.
spread with Violet-colour'd Calicut, which is the King's Color. But in regard
the King and all the Court march afoot both going and coming, they make it
seventeen days Journey. At every quarter of a Leagues end are set up Huts,
where is ready prepared Water to drink, and Fire to light their Tobacco. After
the Pomp is over, and that the King is returned home, the Cloth is taken up and
given to the Bonzes.

As to the order of their March it is thus:

The two men that go foremost of all, are the two Ushers of the Door of the
King's Chamber, who go repeating aloud the Name of the deceased King, carrying
each of them a Mace of Arms, the bole whereof is full of artificial Fireworks.
The twelve that follow, are the twelve chief Officers of the Galley, which draw
the Tomb whereon the King's Name is written. Then follows the grand Squire on
Horseback, attended by two others. Next appear twelve led Horses, which are led
two by two, six of which have their Bridles enriched with thin Plates of Gold,
and their Saddles embroydered. The other six with Bridles of Gold, and Housses
embroidered, and fringed about with a Gold and Silver Fringe; every Horse being
led by two men. Next to them follow twelve Elephants, four which carry each of
them a man carrying a Standard; four others which carry each of them a Tower
with six men apiece, some with Muskets, others with Fire Lances; the four last
carry each of them a kind of a Cage, of which one is made with Glass Windows
before and upon each side; the other like a kind of a Lattice, and the other
with four kinds of Ruffs: and these are the King's Elephants which he rode upon
when he went to the Wars. Behind them follow eight Horses, every one of them
led by a Captain of the Guard, who draw the Hearse. The new King, and his
Brothers if he have any, or the Princes of the Blood, follow the Hearse, clad in
Robes of White Satin, which is their Mourning Color. Lastly follow two
Chariots, each one drawn by eight Horses, and carrying two Coffers, wherein are
the Panes of Gold, Bars of Silver, rich Tissues and Habits, which are to be
buried with the Body of the deceased King.

The Funerals of the Tunquineses.
AS fer the ordinary Funerals of the Tunquineses, they are more or less
pompous, according to the Quality of the Persons.

At their Enterments they use great store of artificial Fireworks, which are
the Companions as well of their Sorrow as their Joy. They set upon the Tomb of
the deceased good store of Victuals and Comfitures, out of a belief that the
dead are the better for them. For their Priests keep them in that blind Error
for their own advantage, and so well order their business, that there is
nothing left by morning. The same thing is practiced by the Chinese at
Batavia, where they have a place without the Town to bury their dead, which
puts me in mind of this Story: Every evening the Guard is relieved as well in
the City as in the Fortress. At the same time also they put forth eight
Soldiers and a Corporal at each Gate of the City, who go the Rounds about the
Walls of the City, and as far as within Canon-shot of the Walls, being fearful
of being surprised by the King of Mataran, or Bontam, their Capital Enemies.
Now because the Chinese burying place lay in the Walk of these Soldiers, when
they saw the Provant upon one of the Tombs, took it away to their Guard, and
there feasted themselves. The Chinese Priests, that usually came about midnight
to take away the Victuals, finding themselves several times bereaved of their
Expectations, and suspecting the Soldiers belonging to the Holland Garrison,
first complained to the General and Council; but that not taking effect, they
resolved to poison both the Meat and the Drink, to prevent the like Fraud for
the future. This took so good effect, that afterward many of the Dutch
Soldiers being poisoned, deterred the rest from any more such Licorish
Attempts.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Religion and Superstition of the Tunquineses
THe Tunquineses as to matters of Religion are divided into three Sects: The
first takes its original from an ancient Philosopher called Confutius, whose
Memory is very famous over all China, and the neighboring Countries. Their
Doctrine asserts that Man is composed of two parts, the one fine and subtle,
the other material and gross; and that when Man dies, the subtiler part goes
into the Air, and the grosser part stays in the Earth. This Sect maintains the
use of Sacrifices, and adores the seven Planets. But among all their Gods and
Idols they have four in particular veneration; the Names of these Gods are
Rauma, Betolo, Ramonu, and Brama. They have a Goddess also, whose Name is
Satisbana, which is she whom the Women adore; but for the King and the
Mandarins, especially the more studious sort, they adore the Heavens. The
second Sect had for its Founder a certain Hermit called Chacabout, and is
followed by the most part of the meaner people. He has taught them the
Transmigration of Souls, and has enjoined his Followers to observe 10
Commandments.

The first is, That they shall not kill. 2. That they shall not steal. 3. That
they shall not defile their Bodies- 4. That they shall not lie. 5. That they
shall not be unfaithful in their words. 6. That they shall restrain their
inordinate Desires. 7. That they shall do injury to no man. 8. That they shall
not be great Talkers. 9. That they shall not give way to their Anger. 10. That
they shall labor to their utmost to get Knowledge.

As for them that design to live a Religious Life, they must renounce the
Delights of this Life, be charitable to the poor, overcome their Passions, and
give themselves up to Meditation. He taught moreover, that after this Life
there were ten distinct places of Joy and Torment: and that the Contemners of
this Law should feel Torments proportionable to their Offenses, without any end
of their Torments. That they that endeavored to fulfill his Law, and had
failed in any point, they should wander in diverse Bodies for 3000 years before
they entered into happiness. But that they who had perfectly obeyed his Law,
should be rewarded without suffering any change of Body. And that he himself
had been born ten times, before he enjoyed the Bliss which he possessed, not
having in his first Youth been illuminated with that Knowledge which he
afterward attained. This Chacabout was one of the greatest Impostors that ever
was in Asia, having spread his Opinions over all the Kingdom of Siam, over a
great part of the Provinces of Japon, and from thence into Tunquin, where he
died.

The third Sect is that of Lanthu, to whose Fables the Japonneses and Chinese
give great credence, but the Tunquineses more. He was a Chinese by Nation, and
one of the greatest Magicians in the East. He made a great many Disciples, who
to authorize this black Impostor, and the more to impose upon the people, made
them believe that the Birth of Lanthu was miraculous, and that his Mother
carried him in her Womb, without losing her Virginity, seventy years. He taught
much of Chacabout's Doctrine; but that which won the Hearts of the people was,
that he still exhorted the Grandees to build Hospitals in all Cities where
there had been none before. Insomuch that several of the Nobility betook
themselves to those places to look after the Sick, as did also a great number
of the Bonzes for the same reason. While my Brother was there, the Choua, a
great Enemy to these Vagabonds, sent for a great number of Bonzes and Says, or
idle Fellows, and picking out the strongest and best proportioned, sent them
away to the Frontiers for Soldiers.

It Is the Custom of the Tunquineses to adore three things in their Houses: The
first is the Hearth of their Chimney made of three Stones The second is an Idol
which they call Tiensa, which is the Patroness of Handicrafts, as Sculpture,
Painting, Goldsmith's work, etc. So that when they put forth a Child to learn
any of those Trades, before they let him work they set up an Altar, and
sacrifice to this Idol, to the end he may infuse into the Lad wit and aptness
to learn. The third is the Idol Buabin, which they implore when they design to
build an House. For then they erect an Altar, and send for the Bonzes and Says
to sacrifice to this Idol. To this purpose they make great preparation of all
sorts of Viands, and then present him with several gilt Papers, wherein are
written several Magic words, endeavoring by that means that he may not suffer
any misfortune to befall the House they are going to build.

There are some Tunquineses that adore the Heaven, others the Moon, and others
the Stars. There are also some that adore five parts of the Earth, making a
fifth part in the middle of that which is known to us, and to them also, but
confusedly. When they worship them, they have for each of the parts a
particular Color. When they adore the Northern part, they clothe themselves in
black; and the Dishes and Table whereon they lay their Sacrifices are likewise
black. When they worship the South their Habit is red; when the East, green;
when the West, white; and when they adore the middle of the World, they wear
Yellow.

They offer Offerings likewise to Trees, Elephants, Horses, Cows, and almost to
all other sorts of Animals. They that study the Chinese Characters are
accustomed every fifth month of the year, to sacrifice for the Souls of the
dead who were never buried. They believe that by so doing their Understandings
shall be more enlightened for the apprehending of all things.

Every year, at the beginning of the year, they have a great Solemnity, to
honor after their death those who in their lifetime have done any noble
action, and were renowned for their Valor, reckoning in that number those that
have been so hardy as to rebel against their Princes, as being men of Courage.
Three days before this great Solemnity, which is performed in a large Field,
they set up several Altars, some for the Sacrifices, others for the Names of
the Illustrious Men whom they design to honor. The Eve before above 40000
Soldiers spend the night in this Plain, where all the Princes and Mandarins
are ordered to meet with their Elephants and led Horses, and the King himself
goes thither in person. After they have finished all their Sacrifices, and
burnt good store of Incense to the Honor of the dead, the King and all the
Mandarins make three profound Reverences where the Altars are; then the King
shoots with his Bow and Arrows five times against the Altars, where lie the
Names of those that were so rash as to rebel against their Sovereigns. After
that the great Guns go off, and the Soldiers give three Volleys of small Shot,
to put all the Souls to flight. Then they burn all the Altars, and a great
number of gilt Papers, which were made use of at the Sacrifices; concluding all
with a most hideous shout of all the Soldiery. Which done, the Bonzes, Says,
and such like people, come and devour the Meat that was made use of for the
Sacrifices.

The first and fifteenth days of the Month it is a wonderful thing to hear the
Chiming Din of their great Bells. For those are the more especial Holydays set
apart for the Worship of their Gods, and all the Bonzes and Says give them more
than ordinary Worship upon those days, redoubling their Prayers, and repeating
upon those days every one of them a strange kind of Charm six times over. At
these times several people bring Meat and Drink to the Sepulchers of their
Kindred, to sacrifice for the good of their Souls to eat. The Bonzes fail not
to be there, and when the others have paid their Devoirs the Bonzes fall to,
and what they cannot eat they give to the poor. But for all the austere Lives
of these Bonzes and Says, neither the King nor the Mandarins make any account
of them, so that they are in credit only with the common people.

In the Kingdom of Tunquin, where the great Cities have several Pagods, there
is hardly a Town or Village that has not one, and for every Pagod at least two
Bonzes and two Says. But there are some Pagods that maintain forty Bonzes and
as many Says, who live in common under a Superior, they keep to the Doctrine
of Chacabout, and a Goat is the Idol which they adore. They wear about their
Necks a kind of Necklace, consisting of 100 Beads, very big and made of Wood.
In their Hands they carry a Staff, which is headed with a Bird of varnished
Wood. They beg for their living, and are not like the Bonzes in other Kingdoms,
who beg Alms as it were their due; these on the contrary use all the modesty
and humility that may be, never taking more than is needful for them: and if
they have any thing to spare, they give it to the poor Widows or Orphans that
cannot get (...)he Representation Of The Pagods Or Temples Of The Idolators In
Tunquin, With The Figures Of Their Dieties, and Their Different (...)s;turs
Which They Use When They Do Penance, And Accomplish Their Superstitiuos Vows*
Or When They Practice Their (...)agic Imposturs Which They Are Much Addicted
Nj. Thaibout. 2. Thaiphou Thoui. 3. Bagoti, Magitians, And Witches

their living. Their Orders permit them to marry, provided they leave their
Monastery. They assist at the Funerals of great men, where they say a kind of
Orizon, sounding their Trumpets and Cornets, while the Bells in their Pagods go
at the same time.

The Tunquineses also have a great veneration for two Magicians, and one
Magicianess. The first of their Magicians, whom they call Tay-bou, makes them
believe that he knows the Events of things to come; so that when they have any
occasion to marry their Children, build a House, buy Land, or undertake any
business of Consequence, they consult this Oracle to know what shall happen to
them. The Magician courteously receives them, and with a counterfeit modesty
demands of them (for Example) the Age of the person concerned. Then taking into
his hands a great Book about three fingers thick, wherein are the Figures of
Men, half Men, and several sorts of Land and Water Animals, of Circles,
Triangles, and Squares, he goes to work, and at the same time puts into a
Goblet three Pieces of Copper, whereon are engraven several Characters only
upon one side. After he has shaken the Pieces in the Cup, he throws them upon
the ground as at Cross and Pile; if all the Characters lie undermost he looks
no further in his Book, but looks upon it as an unfortunate sign; but if one or
two Characters come up, he looks in his Book, and makes the person believe what
he pleases. But if all the Characters happen to turn uppermost, then the
Magician cries out, that the Party is the most fortunate in the world.

The second Magician is called Thay-Phou-Thouy, to whom they have recourse in
all their Sicknesses. When any sick person comes to him, he takes a Book full
of Figures like the former; only the Form of the Book is different, for this
is not above an inch thick, and about four fingers long, with eight Panes full
of Ciphers. If after several Apish tricks which he acts before the sick person
to amuse him, he affirms that the Distemper comes from the Devil, he himself,
together with the sick party and they that brought him, do Homage to the evil
spirit: this Homage consists of several Sacrifices, and the Friends of the sick
party present to the Devil, or rather to the Magician, a Table furnished with
Rice and other Viands. But if after all these Offerings the sick party do not
recover his health, all the Friends and Kindred of the sick party, with as many
Soldiers as they can get, surround the sick persons House, and shoot off their
Muskets three times, to drive away the Devil. Sometimes the Magician makes the
sick party and his Friends believe, that the God of the Waters is the cause of
the Distemper, especially if the sick person belongs to the Water, as being a
Mariner, Boatman, or Fisherman. And to the end he may be cured, and that the
appeased God may return to his watery Habitation, he orders that all the way
from the sick parties House to the next River may be spread with all the Pieces
of Stuff which all the Kindred have, and that they set up Huts at such and such
distances, and keep in every one a several Table furnished with all sorts of
Viands for 3 days. And all this to oblige the Deity to retire, and to entertain
him till he gets home. But the better to know the rise of the Disease,
Thay-Phou-Thouy makes them believe, that they must go and consult Thay-Bou, who
is the chief Magician, and if he answer that the Souls of the dead have caused
the Distemper, the Magician imploys all his tricks and devices to draw to him
those mischievous Souls; and when he has got into his Clutches, as he pretends,
the Soul that is the Author of the Disease, he shuts him up in a Bottle full of
Water till the party be cured; and then breaking the Bottle he sets the Soul at
liberty to go about his business. When the party recovers, he makes him and his
Friends believe, that if the Bottle had not been well stopped to keep in the
Soul, their Kinsman would have died infallibly.

The Magicianess, which the Tunquineses also consult, is called Bacoti, and she
keeps a great Correspondence with the Devil, to whom, if she has a Daughter,
she offers her as soon as she is born, the more to oblige him. If any Mother
bewail the death of her Child, and be desirous to know in what condition the
Soul of the Child is in, in the other world, she goes to Bacoti, who to
satisfy the Mother presently falls a beating her Drum, to summon the Soul to
come to her, who presently appears, as she pretends, and tells her its
Condition whether good or bad. But most commonly she makes the silly Mothers
believe that the Soul is happy, and bids them be of good cheer.

The Superstitions of these people are very numerous, but the most remarkable
are these:

The studious sort of people are very diligent to learn, how by looking in a
Mirror to foretell things to come.

There are some that present Aqua Vitae to the dead, and sprinkle their Ashes
with it; but this only upon the Ashes of their Ancestors, from whom at the
same time they beg for Health; Honor, and Riches.

Others there are, that upon the first day of their year take a piece of Chalk,
and make several Figures round, square, and triangular, upon the Threshold and
Steps of their Doors. They say those Figures fright away the evil spirits. Some
there are that make great Observations upon the Feet of their Hens, and draw
strange Conclusions of bad or ill fortune from thence. Others traveling into
the Country, if they sneeze but once by the way, return to the place from
whence they parted in the morning, saying, That had they gone on, some mischief
would have certainly befallen them: but if they sneeze twice, they pursue their
Journey, never fearing any danger for that day.

There are some so superstitious, that going out of their Houses, if they meet
a Woman, they return home again for two or three hours; but if they meet a Man,
it is a good Omen.

The first Fruit which they gather at the beginning of the year, is that which
the Araguer bears, spoken of in the third Chapter. And this is the first which
they eat with great Ceremony, during the first Quarter of their second Month.
To which purpose they are so possessed with the Devil, that they poison one of
these Fruits, and give it to a Child to eat, believing that by taking away the
life of the poor innocent Child, they shall thrive the better all the year
after.

When the Moon is eclipsed, they say there is a certain Dragon that assails
her, and endeavors with all his might to overcome her, with an intention to
devour her. Then to assist the Moon, and to put the Dragon to flight, they
discharge their Muskets, ring their Bells, beat up their Drums, and make a
hideous noise till the Eclipse be over: and then they believe that they have
rescued the Moon, for which they make as great a rejoicing, as if they had
obtained some eminent Victory over their Enemies.

They are also very superstitious in reference to the hours of the day. They
divide the natural day into twelve hours, and to every one they give the name
of some Beast, as of a Tiger, a Lion, a Bear, a Horse, a Dragon, an Ape, etc.
The Months also and Days have their particular Names: and when a Child is
born, presently the Father and Kindred go to see the name of the Beast by which
the Hour was called wherein the Child was born; believing that Animal will
prove fatal to it. At the time that my Brother was at the Court at Tunquin, the
King then reigning being born in the hour of the Horse, would never give
Audience, nor ever stir out of his Palace at that hour, for fear some mischief
should befall him at that time. That Prince was so superstitious, that one of
his Children dying in the fifth month, which bears the name of the Horse, he
would never permit him to be enterr'd, but caused him to be burnt, and
scattered his ashes in the Air.

This is that which I could gather of most remarkable and most considerable
matters concerning the State of the Kingdom of Tunquin, either out of the
Manuscripts which my Brother (who died in the Indies) left me, or from the
Discourse which I have had with the Tunquineses themselves both at Bantam and
Batavia.

OF THE ISLAND OF FORMOSA.
CHAP. I.
How the Hollanders possessed themselves of it, and how it was taken from them
by the Chinese.
THE Island of Formosa is about Eighty Leagues in compass; so that the
Hollanders were never in possession of the whole Island, but were only Masters
of four Fortresses, and two and fifty Villages, wherein they could number about
fourteen or fifteen thousand Inhabitants. As for that part which is under the
Indians, the best discovery that we can give, is only such as was made by a
young Hollander upon this occasion.

There was in the chief Fort belonging to the Hollanders a young man, employed
there as an under-Factor, who being wild and extravagant, was put out of his
place and made a Soldier. He not able to undergo that miserable course of
life, resolved with himself rather to die, than live in that mean condition.
Thereupon having at several opportunities made a shift to make up a little Pack
of what he thought was most fit for the Mountainiers of the Island, he watched
his time and stole out of the Fort, and took his way directly toward the
Mountains. With these Highlanders he lived four years, in which time having
learnt the Trade and Language of the Country, he ventured to return to the
Hollanders again, who received him kindly, as being willing to understand the
Government of the People, and by what means they might traffic with them.
Whereupon the young man made them this Relation.

As for the Government of the People he said, that over every six Villages
there was an Overseer with four Counselors, who administer Justice, and punish
the smallest Theft with Death. The Men are crucified; the Women are laid along
upon a thick Beam of Wood, and then with a Scimitar their Bodies are divided
into three parts. The Men are so punished for Theft or Murder, and the Women
for Theft or Adultery. If it be a Pety Larceny, not above the value of a
Shilling, they give them an hundred Lashes with a Whip, and burn them in the
Cheek. They that believe themselves to be unjustly dealt with, whether in Civil
or Criminal Causes, enter their Appeal to go to the North East part of the
Island, in which division of the Island there stands a City by the Seaside,
where he that commands all the Highlanders resides. At the end of our Month of
March several of these Highlanders resort to this City, especially the
Merchants, who carry along with them all their whole Stock that they had
hoarded together the year before in Horns of Oxen, Hearts, Bufulo's, and Raw
Hides; and then return again at the end of April, bringing back in return of
their Commodities Japon and China Stuffs, Clothes, and Linen of the same
Country, and Gold and Silver Japonese Money, of various Coyns and Value. He
told them also, that he believed that in the Mountains near the Sea, there are
certain Mines of Gold and Silver, or some River where they find it in Powder,
and that the Japoneses fetch it in their Vessels. He did all he could to
discover the truth, but after he had traveled two or three days Journey, the
People would let him go no further. For at the end of every three or four hours
travel there are Guards set, who examine all Travelers whither they go;
neither will they let their own Countrymen pass, but such as go about their Law
or to trade. Moreover he told them, that if they would give him Goods to trade
withal, as Amber, Coral, Looking Glasses; but chiefly some Skins of the Sea
Fish, which is rougher than Seal-skin, he would endeavor to get to the very
City it self where the Ships ride. These Skins are greatly esteemed by the
Natives to adorn the Scabbards of their Cutlasses and Swords. For usually upon
the back of this Fish you shall find nine little Stones, which make a kind of a
Rose, eight in a Circle and one in the middle, as you see these nine disposed
in their exact order. When the Portuguezes traded only to Japon, it is
incredible how dear they sold these Skins. For if Nature had well set these
Stones at an equal distance, and even in bigness, one of these Skins would
yield above ten thousand Piasters, and more. This Fish is caught in the Persian
Gulf, where I have seen of them, but I saw but very few so perfect as that
which I have described, which would in those Countries yield ten thousand
Crowns.

But to return to the Story; the Governor gave the young man what he desired,
and sent him going: but the Chinese soon after expelling the Hollanders out of
the Island, it was never known what became of the young man.

It may be wondered why Formosa was taken so soon: but here were two Reasons,
first the faint-heartedness of the Governor, and secondly his breach of word
to a French Soldier of Rouen, called Abraham du Puys; for he having served out
his time of seven years, desired leave to be gone, but the Governor, after he
had promised him fair at first, at length absolutely refused him. Soon after
the Chinese came to besiege the place. The Soldier thus disappointed, and
seeing himself cooped up who might have been free, had the Governor so
pleased, studied a fatal revenge upon all his Countrymen; for being by this
means grown desperate, watched his opportunity, and flinging himself from the
Fort into the Sea, swam directly to the Enemy. The Governor offered 200 Pieces
of Eight to any person that would venture after him, and bring him back dead or
alive. A Sergeant accepted his offer, but it was to get loose as the other had
done; and so they got both safe into the Enemies Quarters. The Chinese
presently carried them to the General Coxima; and he being a person of Valor
and Discretion, made very much of them, whereupon they readily and willingly
informed him of the strength and condition of the Fortress. They also advised
him to remove his Batteries to the weakest part of the Town, whereas he was
then assailing it where it was most strongly fortified: which if he would do,
they assured him he should be soon Master of the Fort. The General was thinking
a little before they came to have raised his Siege, but upon their
encouragement he fell on again according to their direction; and as he was
preparing for a general Assault, the Holland Commander, fearful of losing his
Life and his Estate, beat a Parley, and surrendered the place upon Articles.

During the Siege the Hollanders made a Salley, but were beaten in again, and
fourteen of their men were taken Prisoners. The Chinese finding those fourteen
men in their power, and remembering how cruel the Hollanders had been to their
Nation when they took any of them at Sea, brought the fourteen men all
together, put out one eye of each, cut off their Noses, Ears, and one hand, and
so sent them back to the Fort, with order to tell the Commander, that the Dutch
had taught them that kind of Mercy.

CHAP. II.
Of Maurice Island, where they cut Ebony.
THE Island called Maurice Island lies almost in 84 degrees of Longitude, and
21 degrees of Southern Latitude, being but 2 degrees and 30 minutes from the
Tropic of Capricorn, right over against the middle of the great Island of
Madagascar, which it has upon the West, from whence it lies 140 Leagues, and is
in compass about 60 Leagues. It bears great quantities of Ebony: and here it
was that the Hollanders did formerly send their Slaves, their banished and
condemned Persons, to cut that sort of Wood, which is Labor much more severe
and cruel than that of Rowing in the Galleys. The whole Island is subject to
those violent and outrageous Tempests called Ouragans, which nothing can
withstand, so that the People are forced to dig themselves Holes in the ground,
not being able to keep their Huts standing. Neither had the poor Creatures any
other Food than a little boiled Rice, and about a Farthings worth of Salt-fish
among four for a whole day. Since that the Price of Ebony being brought very
low, the Dutch have forsaken the Island, the Profit not bearing the sorry
Expenses which those poor Creatures put them to.

So soon as this Tree is cut down it must be sawed into Planks, and then buried
seven or eight foot deep in the Earth, which ought to be somewhat moist. There
those Planks must lie two years, and sometimes three, if the Wood be very
thick. After that the Wood is fit to be wrought upon, neither will it splinter
or split, and will the sooner admit of a glittering Polishment.

This Maurice Island puts me in mind of a Story, that the Sieur Loocker told
me, concerning what befell him in his Voyage from Holland to Batavia in the
Year 1643. Cha Abbas the second of that Name, King of Persia, having a great
desire to learn to paint, signified to the Hollanders at Hispahan, that he
desired them to send into Holland for some person who was excellent both in
Designing and Painting. Thereupon the Chief of the Factory wrote into Holland,
and upon his Letters the Company sent away Loocker, to oblige the King; and to
do him the greater honor, gave him the charge of Merchant of the Vessel, who
is equal with the Captain, during the Voyage; to whom the Wind and Season was
very favorable till they came to the Cape of Good Hope; but after they had
doubled the Point, the Pilots bare too much to the North, whereas they should
have steered directly East; so that when they had made the Height of the Island
of Madagascar, they met with nothing but contrary Winds. For it is observable,
that all the year long there blows but one Wind toward Maurice Island; so that
a Ship may go thither in eight or nine days, but cannot return in thirty or
forty. For you must steer Westward to 30 degrees, and from thence Eastward to
14 or 15 degrees, and then you light upon Maurice Island. Five days together
the Ship was but rudely handled by the storm; which at length grew so violent,
and the Sea so boisterous, that all the great Cabin was broken to pieces, the
Beak of the Ship carried away, and the Foremast made unserviceable. Thirteen
days together they remained in this miserable condition, tossed up and down by
the Sea and Wind, all which time they never saw the Sun, unable to take any
height or observation where they were. The fourteenth day it cleared up, and
the Sun appeared, and then taking the Height they observed themselves to be not
far from the Maurice Island, which was very true; for the next day by break of
day they found themselves not above two Leagues from the Island; and they found
themselves upon the North side of the Island, whereas the Hollanders lived upon
the South. And therefore perceiving that if the Wind did not change, it would
be a long time, and that with great difficulty too, before they could fetch a
compass about the Island to come to the Fort where the Hollanders were, they
called a Council, where it was resolved that Loocker with ten Soldiers should
be put on shore, and that he should endeavor to get to the Fort by Land, there
to make provision of Water and Refreshments for the rest of the Company,
against they could come about. Maurice Island has this advantage, to be
furnished with excellent Water, and great store of Goats, Oranges, Citrons, and
other Fruits: but when the Ouragans happen there is not one to be seen upon the
Trees, unless only upon those which are sheltered by the Ebony Boughs, which
are thick and strong, and the Trees deeply rooted in the Earth. Loocker
thereupon with ten Soldiers was put on shore in a Shallop, with Provisions for
six days. Nor was the Island in that part above eight or ten Leagues broad,
which they thought to travel in few days: but the Woods were so thick, that had
they not been well provided of Carpenters Hatchets and Axes, they could never
have made their way. The first day they traveled not above a League, and the
next day not above as much more, being still forced to hack their way along
with great travel and pains. So that being now weary and spent, they laid
themselves upon the ground to repose themselves, and get a little sleep. When
they waked they heard the voices of several people, which much rejoiced them,
believing them to be the Slaves and poor Creatures that were cutting Ebony not
far off. Thereupon they fell to work to get as near them as they could: but the
Woods proved so thick, that they despaired of doing any good. Nevertheless the
further they advanced, the clearer they could hear the voices of the people,
some speaking Dutch, others Portuguese. Whereupon Loocker caused one of the
Soldiers in his company that had a strong voice, to call out in the Portuguese
Language, to the people to come and help them. But instead of that they all
betook themselves to their heels, and fled to the Commander's Lodge, telling
him that there were Devils in the Woods, and that they had called to them in
the Portugal Language. The Commander seeing both the Soldiers and the Slaves
in such a dismal amaze and terror, knew not at first what to think; however he
endeavored to resettle their distraction, and to revive a sort of people that
were half dead with fear. The next day he persuaded them to return to their
Work, persuading them to lay aside their vain Fears, which proceeded only from
idle Apprehensions: but they flatly denied him, telling him that they would
rather die, than return to be torn in pieces by the Devil. However, others that
had not been present at the accident, and therefore gave not so much credit to
the report, proffered to see the utmost of this business, provided any one that
had heard the voice would bring them to the place. Away upon this went a good
number of them together, and coming to the place fell to work. Now because
Loocker and his Companions having labored all the night before, were fallen
asleep; for a good while the Workmen heard no voice at all, nor so much as any
thing stirring, so that they began to laugh at those that had brought them
thither, who still obstinately maintained the truth of what they had heard.
This Dispute at length began to grow so hot and so loud, that at length they
waked Loocker and his Fellows, who being now got nearer to them by means of
their last nights labor, heard distinctly every word they said, and
notwithstanding their distress could not choose but laugh. Soon after Loocker
and the Soldiers called out again, Work toward us, they cried, we are
Hollanders, come and help us out of the Wood, and we will put an end to the
dispute. But the Workmen no sooner heard them, but away they ran for their
Lives, and when they came to the Lodge, they were so har'd, so scared, and
quite out of breath, that the Governor in vain endeavored to get the least
tittle of a word from them. At length being come to themselves, they assured
him that it was too true that the Devils were in the Wood, and that the more to
deceive and wheedle them, to day they had not only spoken Portuguese, but
Dutch too. This put the Governor and all into a deep Consternation, insomuch
that they were all at their Wits end. But the next morning Loocker and his Gang
having made their way through, the Sentinel spied them first from the Fort, and
by the discharge of his Musket gave notice of the approach of the Devils. And
then it was that the poor affrighted Mortals, laying aside their fears, and
going forth to meet their own Shapes, found them to be a company of their
Countrymen in distress, whom they then received into their kindness, to give an
account of their Misfortunes. Three days after the Ship came into Harbor,
though in a miserable condition.

CHAP. III.
Of the Grandeur of the General at Batavia, and what befell his Wife and his
Niece.
THe Company to maintain their Authority and Commerce in the Indies, believe it
to be to their advantage, that the General whom they send to Batavia, and who
commands in all the places in Asia where the Dutch traffic, should keep up the
Port of a Prince. There is no Cavalry in Europe so well clad or mounted as his;
the Horsemen all upon Persian or Arabian Steeds. Nor is his Foot Guard less
sumptuous: His Halberdiers wear their yellow Satin Doublets, Scarlet Breeches
laced with Silver Lace, and their Silk Stockins. But this only for the
General's Guards; for those which they send abroad to their Forts and
Garrisons, it is a great pity to see how poorly they are attired, and how
meanly fed. When the Dutch Fleet arrives at Batavia, the Soldiers which they
bring are drawn up in the Parade of the Fortress by the Major, who chooses out
the handsomest to remain at Batavia, the rest are sent and distributed into
other places. When the General and his Wife go abroad, they always ride in
their Coach and six Horses, with six Halberdiers attending at each Boot, and a
Troop of Horse and two Companies of Foot for their Guard. The Authority of the
General is very great, though he may be sometimes commanded by his Wife:
neither is it safe for them that depend upon them, to do or say any thing that
may offend them. But for others, who have their Employments immediately from
the Company, they never oblige themselves to be so circumspect. For truth
whereof I will relate the following pleasant Story.

The Wife of General Matsuker having one day undertaken to play upon a Captain
of a Ship called the Lucifer, and to laugh at him, for having lost a Bale of
Goods which had been seized by the Company, in regard no particular person is
permitted to trade. The Captain nettled at her Discourse* resolved to be
revenged. Nor was it long before he found the means; for being commanded away
for Maslipatan in the Kingdom of Goleonda, where being arrived, laden, and
ready to set Sail to return to Batavia, the chief of the Factory desired him to
take in four Bales of Goods for the General's Wife, as belonging to her, and to
deliver them privately to her. This was Nuts to the Captain: so that being
returned to Batavia, he went he went immediately to visit the General, and
deliver him the Letters which concerned the Cargo. Immediately according to
custom the General invited him to dinner, at which time it is usual for the
General to inform himself of the Condition of the Factory. Among the rest of
the questions the General asked the Captain whether he had any Counterband
Goods aboard, or any that were not upon the Company's sole account. To which
the Captain answered, that all the Goods belonged to the Company, except four
Bales, which the chief Factor at Maslipatan had particularly recommended to his
care, as belonging to Madam General. This being publicly spoken in the
presence of a great many that were at Table, the Lady that was not aware of
such a blow, was not a little surpised, and the General himself was not a
little in wrath, sternly asked her how she durst undertake to trade without his
knowledge. Presently she denied the whole matter, and averred that the Captain
was mistaken, and took her for some other person. But the General sent for the
Fiscal, and ordered him to go forthwith with the Captain, and fetch the four
Bales ashore; which being done, he ordered further that the Goods should be
carried into the public Hall of the Town House, with a Writing fixed upon them,
that whoever owned those Goods should come and claim them; but no body came. So
that the Captain had the pleasure to see the Lady in a delicate raging passion,
and the Goods disposed of to the Fiscal, and the Poor of the Hospital.

The same General and his Wife having no Children, they began to consider to
whom they should leave their Estates. At length the General bethought himself
of a Niece he had at Amsterdam, and therefore wrote to the Directors of the
Company to send her to him. This Niece of his cried Potherbs and Onions about
the street to get her living; in which Calling she was at last found out, and
brought to the Directors, who presently changed her Habit, and of a Crier of
Cabbage made her a little Lady; who though she were of such a low condition,
was not without a good proportion of natural Beauty.

The Fleet being ready to depart, there was a Cabin built on purpose for this
Niece, and the Company having presented her with several pieces of Tissue and
Silks; recommended her to C. Rosse, the Viceadmiral's care. This Captain had
been several times at the Indies before, and was both rich and a Batchelour: so
that when the Ship was out at Sea, he failed not to show all the respects
imaginable to this Niece. Now this young Virgin not being accustomed to the
Sea, upon the least gust of Wind she was half dead; and all that time the
Captain would not stir from her Bedside, for fear any Accident should befall
her. And as he was thus diligent not to stir from her Bedside in fowl, it is
verily believed he was seldom far from it in fair weather; and that instead of
sitting by her Bedside, he sometimes got fairly into it. But whether he were
within or without, most certain it is, that before Madam Niece arrived at
Batavia, she found her self to be with child, though she so discreetly
concealed it, that none in the Vessel perceived it.

The Vessel had no sooner passed the Strait that lies toward Bantam, but Madam
General with a great number of her Friends in several little Barques came out
to meet Madam Niece, and were not a little surprised to find her to be a person
so well clad and handsome withal, without any appearance of what she had been
before.

A Coach and six Horses, and six Halberdiers, a Troop of Horse, and a Company
of Foot, waited upon the shore for Madam General. And thus was madam Niece
conducted to the Fort with great pomp, and as kindly received by Monsieur
General. Some few days after several of the Gallants of Batavia came
picquiering to the House to see Madam Niece; and so it was, that all being
smitten, every one desired her in Marriage: but both Uncle and Aunt were deaf
to all their Suits, as having designed her to a young rich Merchant, who was
then out of the way. C. Rosse laughed in his sleeve at the bustle that was
made, and still continued his former respects and double Diligences, which were
the more willingly permitted him in regard of the great care of their Niece,
for which the Uncle and the Aunt thought themselves obliged to him during their
Voyage. But at length seeing such a swarm of Sweethearts about her, he thought
it but charity to undeceive so many poor Gulls, and without further ceremony to
go to her Aunt, and to demand her Niece for his Wife. The She General who
looked upon herself to be a kind of a Queen at Batavia, looked upon it as a
high offense and indignity for a Tarpaulin Captain of a Ship to dare to make
her such a Proposal, having already refused such Matches, persons that might
come to be Privy Counselors of all the Indies. Nevertheless within a day or
two after the Captain renewed his Charge, but then in a Majestic Fury she
utterly forbid him the Fort. He taking little notice of her rage, goes to the
General, and after some Discourse makes the same Proposal, and receives the
same Answer. But then the Captain gave the Husband such a Bone to pick, that he
would not give the Wife; Sir, said he, twice already have I demanded your Niece
in Marriage, this is now the third time that I make the same demand; if you
refuse me, you shall ask me four times before I accept of her: and so saying
briskly left him. The General reflecting upon the Captain's words, went to his
Wife and told her the Story, who guessing at the effects of a long Voyage
Familiarity, called Madam Niece into examination: She not being used to
Dissimulation confessed the whole matter, and without any more to do was
married to the Captain, to the great wonder of the whole City, till the birth
of a Boy at the end of six months unfolded the Riddle. But this lying in was
her ruin; for about five or six days after, the Mother and the Nurse being ill,
the chief Surgeon of the Fort ordered them to take a little Cremor Tartar;
and to that purpose sent a young man to the Master Surgeon of the Town, to
send him two quantities of Cremor Tartar in two Papers. He being drinking with
his Friends, sends a young Barber newly come from Holland, to put up the two
quantities according to direction. But the Barber mistook the Glass, and put up
Sublimate instead of Cremor Tartar. So the two Women taking their Doses,
dissolved in two Silver Cups of fair Water, died in 24 hours after.

CHAP. IV.
Of General Vanderbroug, and of the Original of the City of Batavia
GEneral Vanderbroug was of Anverse, and having studied in the Jesuits College,
retained some tincture of Learning, which he endeavored to improve as much as
his business would give him leave. While he was General he caused the Alcoran
to be translated out of Arabic into Dutch. He was also a man of courage, and
several times exposed himself to great hazards for the Service of the Company,
as you shall see by the following Relation.

After the Hollanders had taken several Prizes from the Portuguezes by Sea,
they wanted a place of Retreat, where they might repair their endamaged Ships,
and repose after the toils of the Sea. At first they cast their eyes upon the
Island of Java, in that place where the English had built a small Convenience
for their Trade. There is a Road in that part, where Vessels ride securely all
the year, into which a River discharges it self that will receive Shallops of
good burden, for above a thousand Paces. The Water of this River is most
excellent; for being carried never so far to Sea, it never stinks, nor
engenders Worms; which can only be said of the Thames and Ganges besides.

The Hollanders therefore came and lay upon the point of a River, over against
the place where the English had their small House. They had with them then the
greatest part of the Ships which they had in the Indies, laden with those great
Bales of Cloth which come from Bengale and the Coast of Surat, so big that a
dozen men can hardly manage them* These Bales they landed, and of them made a
kind of Fortification, planting a good number of great Guns between them: For
they never wanted great Guns ever since they traded alone to Japon, the only
Kingdom of the World abounding in Copper; from whence they brought prodigious
quantities to Macao and Goa, where they cast their Artillery.

Thus the Hollanders thought that by Sea no body could endamage their small
Fortification, made of Bales of cloth, which was defended by their Vessels
which they had in the Road: But by Land they were afraid that the King of the
Island, viz. either of Materan or Bantam, might disturb them. Observing
therefore the Situation of the Island, which on that side was all covered with
Woods, which reached on that side within a League of the Sea; and that where
they ended, to the Shore there was no other way but a Bank, which separated the
Marsh from the River: So that the Hollanders the better to secure themselves
against the two Kings, resolved to raise a Tower upon the Bank. In this Tower
they planted several Culverins and small Pieces, crammed with artificial
Wildfire, and every evening relieved their Guards. The King of Materan
perceiving this, and believing that the Hollanders would not stop here,
advanced a powerful Army to pull down the Tower. To which purpose he brought
with him great Chains of Iron, and Cables made of the Coco Flax; believing that
by the favor of the Night, having got his Chains and Ropes about the Tower, by
the strength of his Men and Elephants he might easily pull it down. But having
failed in his Enterprise, and for that the Hollanders Artillery killed him
abundance of Men, he retreated with his Army. But it was not long before he
returned again with a more powerful Force by Land, and also a great Fleet of
small Vessels to assist him by Sea. With these Forces he gave a furious Onset a
second time, which the Hollanders with no less vigor sustained, and beat him
off. But nothing discouraged with his loss, he resolved to give a third Onset,
only he staid some few days in expectation of more Forces.

In the mean while one of the most considerable Captains of his Army was
accused to the King not to have done his Duty: though seasonably advertised
that the King was resolved to seize upon his person, and cut him to pieces. For
you must know, that among the Javans when any person has merited Death, they
tie the Offender all along upon a great piece of Timber, and the next Lord or
great person that has a mind to try the goodness of his Scimitar, comes and
cuts the Body into four pieces, the first stroke being made upon the Breast, the
second upon the Pit of the Stomach, the third upon the lower part of the Belly.
The four pieces if they be Men, are burnt; if Women, thrown to the Dogs, which
they keep for that purpose. For the Javans never burn any person.

This Javanese Lord therefore knowing what he was to trust to, made his escape
to the Hollanders, and was kindly received by Vanderbroug. To ingratiate
himself, he told the Dutch General all the King's Designs in reference to the
carrying the place; where he would make his Onset, and what number of men he
had. This however did not sufficiently cheer up the General, who knew his own
weakness. So that the Javanese perceiving him still pensive, I find (said he)
that thou art afraid of the King's strength, and reason thou have, but be ruled
by me: Thou art not ignorant that the Javanners are rigid Observers of the Law
of Mahomet, and that if any Uncleanness from a Christian hand falls upon their
Clothes, they fling them away, and spend six whole days in washing themselves,
before they believe themselves clean. Hear then, said he; let all the Ordure
and Dung of the People that are with thee be heaped in a place together, and
made fluid in Pots for that purpose; and when they mount their Ladders, spare
not for Showers of that Liquor, and I warrant ye they will retreat faster than
they came on. Farther continued he; I know that the points of their Arrows and
Cric's are poisoned, and that this poison is so strong, that whoever are
wounded therewith die suddenly, unless they have recourse to this only Remedy;
which is to preserve their own Excrement, and to dry it to powder; and when
they find themselves wounded, to take a little of the powder, and drink it off
in a small Beer-glass of Water. The General observing what the Javan Lord had
said, when the Enemy mounted their Ladders, lustily besmeared them with the
Liquor, which he caused to be prepared against their coming; so that instead of
gaining the tops of their Ladders, they made all the haste they could down
again; but being hindered by those that followed them, they threw themselves
headlong to the ground; by which means several of them were maimed, and several
killed outright. Thus the Army disbanded in a moment, and the Emperor was the
first that took his flight. Vanderbroug observing the disorderly Retreat of the
Enemy, took a small Party with him, and pursued the flying Enemy, who being
enclosed by those in the Fort, that sallied out upon them, were miserably cut
in pieces. But the General having left the greatest part of his men, and
returning only with a small and very inconsiderable Company, the Javanners who
had hid themselves in the Mershes for fear, resumed courage, and suddenly fell
upon him in his return, and so encompassed him on every side, that it was
impossible for him to escape. However they defended themselves stoutly for a
while, but being wounded with the Arrows and Cric's of the Indians, and not
being provided of the forementioned Antidote, they died immediately. The
General was taken alive, not so much as wounded; for as he told me afterward
himself, he found they had no desire to kill him. So soon as he was taken they
carried him to the Emperor, who as soon as he saw him bid him not fear any
thing, but told him withal, that it was his pleasure, that he should command
his Men to quit the Fort and Tower, and be gone; otherwise that he would make
both him, and all those that should fall into his Hands, perpetual Slaves. At
the same time the Emperor with his principal Officers, and the General with a
good Guard, came to the Foot of the Wall of the Tower, where the General in the
Malay Language, laying before them his own misfortune, and the improbability of
their holding out long, commanded them to quit the Fort, after they had
embarked whatever they saw fitting, but only 6 Pieces of small Canon, 200
Bullets, and 500 Quintals of Powder. The Emperor was overjoyed to hear what
the General said, and thought himself sure of the Fort and Tower. But then the
General turning to the Emperor, told him, that none of his men understood
Malay, and that therefore it would be convenient for him to repeat the same in
Flemish. Which being granted, he spoke to the Soldiers in Flemish, and ordered
them quite the contrary; that is to say, that they should not be Traitors to
their Country, but hold out the place till death, not minding what became of
him; and to that end, that they should bid the Infidels forthwith retire, or
else they would immediately fire all their Guns upon them. The Emperor
astonished at their Resolution retreats, and carries the General with him.
Being thus retired, the General made him believe that he would find a means to
write to the Company, to give them an account of what had passed, and that he
was confident they would give such order for an Accommodation, as should
satisfy His Majesty, which satisfied the Emperor for that time. In the mean
while the General found an opportunity to get into a small Barque, and to get
to the Fort, where he was joyfully received. This Recital I had from his own
mouth.

The General having done this and several other eminent Services for the
Company, and acquitted himself with Reputation and a fair Estate, was desirous
to return home, where the Prince of Orange, and several of the States had no
less a desire to see him. Straight he took up his Habitation at the Hague, and
for a good while lived splendidly, gave great Presents and Entertainments to
the Prince, and several other Grandees of Holland, by which means he ran
himself into so great an Expense, that he was forced to desire of the Company,
that he might return into their Service.

One day the Prince of Orange asking him what Rarities he had brought out of
the Indies, he called for five Silver Plates, and setting them upon the Table,
drew out five little Bags out of his Pocket, and emptied a several Bag upon a
several Plate; which surpised not only the Prince, but several others of the
States then present, to see such a number of Diamonds and other Jewels of a
vast value.

It was not without some difficulty that he was again entertained by the
Company; but at length they sent him Admiral of two Ships to Batavia, where
being arrived, the General and Consuls made him Admiral of the Fleet that was
just bound for the Coast of Coromandel, Surat, and Persia.

Being returned to Batavia, General Vandyme and the Council sent him to Malaca,
which the Hollanders then besieged, and where they found a stouter resistance
than they imagined. There in an assault upon the Town he received a slight
Wound, of which he was quickly cured; but soon after he fell sick, and died
before the Town was surrendered.

CHAP. V.
Of the Country about Cochin, and how the Holland General crowned one of the
Indian Princes.
ALL the Country about Cochin is planted for the most part with that sort of
Tree which they call Cocos, the Fruit whereof produces that sort of Wine which
the Inhabitants call Tarry, whereof they make their Strong Water. They mingle
this Wine with course black Sugar unrefin'd, together with the Bark of a Tree
which bears nothing but Thorns. This Bark causes the Tarry and Sugar to boil and
ferment like new Wine. When the Tarry and the Sugar have fermented for above
seven or eight hours, they distill them in an Alembic, and make Strong Water,
which is stronger or smaller, by how much the more often or seldomer it is
distilled.

Besides the Coverture of these Trees the whole Country is full of Cows; for
they are all Idolaters in this Country, that only worship their Cows for their
Gods, feed upon their Milk, and eat nothing that has Life.

When you leave the Countries of these Princes, which they call Rajas,
traveling toward the North East you enter into the Territories of the Raja of
Velouche, which are of a large extent. He and all his Subjects being Idolaters,
unless it be about nine or ten thousand poor People called Christians of S.
John, as being baptized after the same manner that S. John baptized the People
in the Wilderness.

After the taking of Cochin, of which we have given a full Relation in our
Indian Travels, General Vangous, who commanded at the Siege, became so haughty
that he despised all the other Officers, as well Military as those that
belonged to the Government and Justice of the City. However to recompense one
of the Raja's by whose means he had taken the City, he persuaded him to quit
the Name of Raja, and to assume the Title of King, that he might have the
Honor to set the Crown upon his Head. To this end he made great inquiry
through his whole Army for a Goldsmith, and having found out one that undertook
it, and caused him to make a Crown of massy Gold, that weighed near ten Marks,
which I believe the Raja found more inconvenient and weighty upon his Head,
than an old Muckender with three corners bound about his Head, which is the
mark of the Raja's Sovereignty.

While they were making this Crown there were great preparations for the
Ceremony: It was performed in a Garden near the Town, where was set a large
Tent spread all over with painted Calicut. Within was a Throne erected with a
Canopy of China Damask, and all the Steps to the Throne were covered with
Persian Tapistry.

The day being come, the greatest part of the Army, Officers and Soldiers,
went to fetch the Raja, who lay in his Hut a quarter of a League off; where
they mounted him upon one of two Elephants which the General sent him, being
attended likewise with two led Horses, and two Palanquins for more State. Being
come to the place, he was clad in a Scarlet Robe with great Hanging Sleeves,
and so brought in where Vangous was sitting upon his Throne, with a Sword and a
Crown by him. The Raja being come to the Foot of the Throne, the Major of the
Army took the Sword, delivered him by the General, and girt the Raja, who then
ascending the Steps of the Throne, prostrated himself before the Holland
General while he put the Crown upon his Head. Then the new King rises up, and
lays his Hand upon the Head of a Cow that stood near the Throne. Which done,
kneeling with his Hands clasped, and lifted toward the Head of the same Cow, he
took his Oath to be true and faithful to the Company, and to embrace their
Interests. On the other side the General promised him on the behalf of the
Company, that they should assist him when he should have occasion against his
Enemies. Which Solemnities being very gravely performed, the Musquettiers gave
three Volleys, and the new King was conducted back to his Hut with the same
Pomp that he was brought. Thus you see the Pride of a Pepper Merchant, to make
Kings and domineer over Crowns.

One other famous Act of Vangous must not be forgotten. You must know, that at
the taking of Cochin the Jesuits had in that City one of the fairest Libraries
in all Asia, as well for the great quantity of Books sent them out of Europe,
as for several rare Manuscripts in the Hebrew, Chaldee, Arabic, Persian,
Indian, Chinese, and other Oriental Languages. For in all the Conquests of the
Portugals, their first care was to summon all the Learned People of the several
Nations, and to get all their Books into their hands. During that little time
which the Jesuits staid in Aethiopia they had copied out all the good Books
that came to their knowledge, and sent all those Books of Cochin. They had
staid longer in Aethiopia, had it not been for the Jealousy of the Patriarchs,
and their Bishops, which are very numerous; so that if there be two men in one
Village that belong to one Church, the chiefest calls himself Bishop. At their
Ceremonies of Baptism when they name the Holy Ghost, they apply a hot Iron to
the neck of the Infant, saying that the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles
in the shape of Fiery Tongues. The Patriarchs and Bishops were jealous of the
Jesuits, finding that they had insinuated themselves into the favor of the
King and Grandees of the Court. Which so enraged the Aethiopians, that they
caused the People to mutiny, preaching that the King was about to alter the
Religion of the Country, and to draw along with him several of the Lords. And
the Fury of the People grew to that height, that whatever the King could do or
say, he could not appease their Fury: So that they put him in prison, and
elected his Brother in his place. The cause of this disorder was laid upon the
Jesuits, and was the reason that they were expelled the Kingdom; neither had
they escaped so, but that they were afraid of the Governor of Mozambique, and
the Portugals that inhabit all along the Coast of Africa. But to tell ye what
became of this Library, General Vangous made no conscience to expose it to the
ignorance of his Soldiers, so that I have seen the Soldiers and Seamen tear
several of those beautiful Volums to light their Tobacco.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Sieur Hollebrand Glins, President of the Factory at Ormus.
WHen the Ships come to Ormus, it is a great prejudice for the Goods to lie out
of doors. For such is the extremity of the Heat in that part, that if the
Spices, especially the Cloves, be not carried to the Waterside every foot, and
there laid to steep in the Water for four and twenty hours, they would turn to
a mere powder.

Sugar is brought thither in great Wooden Chests, but if there be the least
Cleft for a Fly or an Emmet to get in, in a small time the Chest will be half
emptied.

As for Camphire, which is brought from Borneo in Pipes, if it lie a little too
long in that warm Air, it will exhale above half away.

To remedy these Inconveniences Sieur Hollebrand resolved to build a bigger
Warehouse. Among the rest of the Workmen that were employed in this Building
was a Gunsmith, who came in the interim in a Ship from Batavia. This poor
Fellow was employed to make Locks for the Warehouse; for in those Parts they
have no other Keys, or Locks either, than what are made of Wood: So that it was
a Crime for him to be found idle at any time. And therefore the President
finding him one Sunday in the Afternoon drinking with two of his Companions
that came from the Ship to see him, gave the Fellow half a dozen good Licks
with his Cane, and would have given him more, but that the Smith being a sturdy
Fellow, and feeling the Blows smart, wrested the Stick out of the President's
Hands, and flung it out of the Window. For which the President, upon pretense
that the Fellow had struck him four Blows, which was untrue, as I my self being
there could witness, sent him laden with Chains to the Ship, where he would
have tried him for his Life, in a full Court of the Merchants of the Factory:
but they refusing him, for very madness he took two Notaries, that he had a
power over, went to the Ship alone, made the Officers of the Ship, and
condemned the Fellow to be hanged. And he had certainly been executed but for
me and some other of my Countrymen, (for the Fellow was of Geneva) that
threatened the President out of his design. Yet he caused him to be drubb'd
Naked at the Main Mast after that inhuman manner, that he lost the use of one
of his Arms. This the Genevese could never forget, and therefore sought all
opportunities to kill him; to which purpose he put himself in the same Ship
with Hollebrand when he returned for Holland. But coming to the Cape of Good
Hope, and being sent ashore in the Shallop for Provisions, the Shallop was
overset in a stormy Sea, and Hollebrand's Life thereby secured.

But before we leave Ormus, where Hollebrand was building his Warehouse that
caused all this mischief, let us take notice of this by the way, that there is
no abiding at Ormus till April, lest you pay for your stay with some Malignant
Fever, that may hold a man as long as he lives; or if he be cured by chance,
yet will the White of his Eyes be more yellow than Saffron. This same sort of
Fever seizes our Europeans in the Port of Alexandretta in Syria, and in the
Islands where the Hollanders lade their Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace.

By the way observe, that there is a particular sort of Nutmeg which the
Hollanders call Maneque, and we the Male Nutmeg, as long again and a little
bigger than the ordinary Nutmeg; and this sort they never carry into Europe,
because they sell it to better profit in Persia and the Indies. This I shall
also further add, that the ordinary Nutmeg condited, fuddles more than the
strongest Wine, eating but only one either at the beginning or ending of the
Meal.

CHAP. VII.
Touching the Islands of the Prince.
THE Fort of Batavia has four fair Bastions, and is well built but upon an ill
Foundation, those Bastions being plainly observed to sink, and requiring
Reparation from time to time. For the perfecting of which Work the Hollanders
wanted Slaves: whereupon a Consultation was had where to get Slaves. To which
Answer was made, that there was no better place than the Prince's Islands.
Which being concluded, the General of Batavia dispatched away three the biggest
Ships belonging to Batavia. These Ships visited every one of these Islands;
feigning that they came from Holland and wanted Refreshment. So soon as the
Inhabitants discovered the Vessels, they flocked to the Shore Men, Women, and
Children, as they wont to do, bringing along with them the best of their
Provision, as Coco Wine, Nuts, and other Fruits of the growth of the Islands.
Happy were they that could first get aboard, for they always get more by the
Mariners and Soldiers, than by those that go ashore to trade. Now so soon as
they were ashore, they gave them Strong Water to drink till they were drunk;
and when the Masters of the Ships saw them in that condition, they immediately
sent a good number of their men well armed ashore, who bound them that were
upon the Sand to truck for their goods, and carried them away to their Ships,
killing all those that made any resistance. But they did them little service;
for finding themselves so inhumanly used as the Hollanders use their Slaves,
they took a resolution to eat nothing, and to starve themselves to death,
rather than to be forced to labor and be beaten every day.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Hollanders sent to declare War against the Persians, and of the ill
Success of their Fleet.
MUch about the same time Charles Constant was sent by the Company with a Fleet
of seven great Ships, to declare War against the Persians, in case they would
not comply with the Dutch in reference to their Silk Trade and their Customs.
Being arrived at Ormus he left the Fleet there, and hastened to Ispahan, and
from thence to Casbin, where then the King was. But his Embassy had not that
effect as he expected: For he thought that the King would have been frighted at
the noise of a Fleet of seven great Ships that lay at Ormus, but he was
mistaken. For the Persian knew he need not send any Force against the said
Fleet, in regard it would be ruined without: It being impossible for our
Europeans to stay at Ormus in the heat of Somer, as well by reason of the Heat,
as for want of Water; for there is no good Water at Ormus, nor upon any part of
the Coast of Persia, but what is kept in Cisterns, and that full of Worms. It Is
true, that upon the Coast of Arabia there are Wells of good Water, but when the
Arabians discover any Ships upon the Coast, they come down all in Arms to
defend their Wells; for it is their profit to sell their Water, and that at a
very dear rate, to those that are in necessity.

Now the King and Council not being ignorant, that the longer the Fleet lay at
Ormus, the worse would be its condition, would not give the Commander his first
Audience in two months. During which time there died above half the Men; for
from six a clock in the morning till four in the afternoon, if any of the
Seamen went to take a little Air upon the Deck, he presently fell down dead.
The Admiral was to blame not to make provision of Water being bound for such a
place as Ormus.

The Commander Constant did not take the right course to effect his business,
by publishing what he intended to present the Ministers of State withal. For
the Lords of Persia never take any Presents themselves, for fear it should come
to the King's Ear. But there is a private Bill sent to the Party for whom it is
intended, and he sends whom he thinks fit to receive it. Had he so done, and
doubled his Sum of 5000 Venetian Ducats, perhaps the Athemadoulet might have
used him more kindly, especially for so long time as that King had. For
whatever a Predecessor does, a Successor changes many things. So that if the
deceased King have given any House or Land to any person, it must be confirmed
by the succeeding King in his first Year, or else the Gift returns to the King.
It is the same thing if any person builds a House upon the King's Demesns:
which has been a great inconvenience to the Austin Friars and barefoot
Carmelites, because their Houses are built upon the Lands which Cha Abbas gave
them of the Royal Demesns. So that every time a new King ascends the Throne,
they are forced to make the Athemadoulet new Presents, sometimes to the Value
of the Land: for it is a rare thing to find a prime Minister that is a Friend
to the Christians* But the Jesuits and Capuchins, who came after them, provided
better for themselves, each of those Orders having bought the Ground upon which
their Houses are built.

The Commander seeing that he could not compass his Design, and that the
Athemadoulet would abate nothing of the forty four Tomans which he demanded,
went to the Divanbegai and told him, that buying the same Goods of particular
persons, they might be had for thirty two, or at most for thirty three Tomans.
To which the Divanbegai answered him, That all those particular persons paid
the King Custom, and Convoy upon the Road, the Custom alone amounting to
Eighteen per cent. which the Hollanders did not pay: and that there was not a
Year wherein they did not bring in Goods to the Value of 30000 Tomans; and that
if account should be taken of the Silks which they carried away, and of the
Goods which they brought in, the Athemadoulet ought to make them pay near 50000
Tomans for Duties. The Commander ill satisfied with this Answer went to his
Lodging, and without asking the Advice of the Merchants that were with him, or
of his Frenchman, who better understood the Practice of the Court, or without
taking his leave of the King, returned privately to Ispahan, intending for
Bander where the Fleet lay. The Athemadoulet being advertised of his sudden
departure, was very much offended; so much the more because at the Commanders
first Arrival he had done him great Civilities, even to the furnishing his
Lodgings after the European manner, with a Bed, Stools, and Tables. Thereupon
he gave notice thereof to the King, who when he heard of it uttered these
words, Has any one given him any distaste, or is he turned Fool? He shall be
glad to come back again.

Being come to Ispahan, to the great wonder of the Franks, who heard nothing of
his taking leave of the King, he began to make up his Pack, intending for
Gomrom, in case the King did not send for him again; which he did, it is true,
but not with those Compliments which he expected; for he flattered himself that
the King would have petitioned him to return. The King sent for him indeed, but
his Compliment was not very pleasing; for the person that brought the Message
told him, That it was the King's pleasure he should speedily return, and if he
would not go willingly he had order to carry him by force. But notwithstanding
the King's Command and the Counsel of his Friends, he set out from Ispahan for
Bander, according to his first intent. We accompanied him some part of his way,
and being just ready to take our leaves, we saw a Persian Gentile and well
mounted, (he was a Captain of an hundred men) who calling the Interpreter to
him, Go (said he) and tell thy President, that he must return to his Lodging,
and to morrow make haste to the King, according to the Order he has already
received: and with that he rode away full speed. The Interpreter told the
Commander what the Captain said; but notwithstanding all this the Commander
being a person of a hot and obstinate humor, continued his way. Neither the
Merchants of Zulpha, nor any of the Persian or Armenian Servants would follow
him, fearing the Bastinado, and believing he was secure enough; as it happened:
for he had not rode far, before three Captains with their Bows and Arrows in
their hands bolted out upon him, one of which riding up directly to the
Commander, Art thou (said he) the only person that ever set foot in this
Empire, that refusest to obey the Companion of the Sun, whom so great a part of
the World obeys? At the same time came up fifty stout Horsemen, and one of them
who cammanded them made at Mr. Constant with his Mace. Then the Admiral was
forced to lower his Sails and return back, forced to receive an Affront which
he might have avoided* When he was come to his Lodging, the Persian Officer
without alighting called the Interpreter, and bid him go forwarn the Commander
in the Name of the King, that neither he nor any of the Hollanders presumed to
stir out of their Houses till further order; for that if any of them were seen
abroad, they should be taught to obey the King's Commands. Thus the Hollanders
having been cooped up nine days, word was brought the Commander he might return
to Cusbin, where he found that all his Rodomontado's signified nothing, but
that he must comply with the Athemadoulet.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Severity of the Holland Commanders in the Indies.
GEneral Speck, before he came to his Employment, had a Daughter by a Woman
which he kept only as his Mistress, not as his Wife. After his time was out he
returned into Holland, and not being willing to carry his Daughter along with
him, knowing that she would go off better at Batavia than in Holland, left her
to the care of General Com, who succeeded him in his charge. The Girl was fair
and left rich, so that her Father was no sooner gone, but she had many Suitors
that courted her, without any consideration of her Birth, among all which there
was none that she fancied, like one that was a Superior Merchant of the Fort,
for whom she had a particular esteem. Neither did she believe but that General
Com would have given his consent upon the first request, knowing the young man
to be of a good Family. Nevertheless they were both deceived; for being asked,
he utterly denied to yield to any such matter. However, the young Man and the
Maid continued their Fidelity to each other, and that with such a close
respect, that at length the Virgin's Belly began to swell. Whereupon she made
one of the Ladies of the City acquainted how the case stood, as also of her
Council, believing that the General upon notice how Affairs went, would marry
her to keep all things private. But so soon as the Lady had revealed the
Mystery, he was so far from answering their expectation, that he threw the
young Man laden with Fetters into prison, and shut up the young Woman close
Prisoner in her Chamber. Next day he called a Council, declared to them the
Matter of Fact, and gave his Opinion, that the young man deserved to lose his
Head, and that the Maid should be whipped. The Council were of a contrary
Judgment, and advised him to reconcile the Mischance by a Marriage. But
notwithstanding all their persuasions the General resolved to have his own
humor, the next day privately sent for the Executioner, and causing the young
Man and the Maid to be brought into his Hall, commanded the Man's Head to be
forthwith struck off, and the Virgin to be whipped though big with Child.

The Sieur Goyre commanded the Holland Fleet that was sent to the Manilles, he
landed all his Soldiers, and most of his Mariners. When they began to march,
he commanded that not a man should stir out of his Rank upon pain of death. It
happened that a young Soldier, who was troubled with the Bloody Flux, stepped a
little aside to ease Nature, which the said Commander perceiving, caused him to
be apprehended and bound, and calling a Council of War would have had him
hanged; and when the Officers refused to give Sentence against one that had
committed no offense, he caused seven or eight Blacks of the Low Countries to
hang him up upon a Tree. But the Sieur Dirk Hogel, Lieutenant General, marching
by in the nick of time, and seeing the poor Fellow in that condition, presently
ordered him to be cut down, and so saved the poor Fellow's Life; who returning
into Holland, and making his Complaint to the Company, the Directors wrote
smartly to the General and Council at Batavia about the business; who upon
Examination of the matter, in regard the Lad was sent by the Directors of the
Orphans House at Amsterdam, condemned the Sieur Goyre to pay four thousand
Crowns to the Orphans House, and three hundred Crowns yearly to the poor
Soldier.

CHAP. X.
Touching the Women.
OFttimes when Women think that their Amors are most secret, they are by some
strange and unexpected accident odly discovered. While I was at Batavia, the
Secretary of the Hospital, as handsome a person as any was in the City, had a
Wife that passed for a Batavian Beauty, neither indeed was she despicable. This
Couple had been seven years married without any Children; so that the Woman
despairing of her Husband's Abilities, and to know where the fault lay,
resolved to bestow her Favors upon one of her Slaves, who was well shaped but
very black; choosing rather a private Familiarity with him, than with any young
Hollander, whose frequent Visits might breed suspicion. It seems the fault did
not lie in her, for her Sable Gallant had so improved his Talent, that in a
short time she found the effects of Change. In short, the Woman's Belly swelled,
and her Husband thinking his time had been come, began to boast of his Manhood,
and great Joy there was among the Friends of the Woman upon the hopes of Issue.
Great Provisions were made against the Lying in, and the General himself made
choice of for Godfather. But when the good hour was come, and the Woman
delivered, their Joy was turned into Mourning, for the Child proved one of the
sooty Offspring of the Sunburned race, a perfect Black. The Husband and Mother
of the Woman blushed as red for shame as the Child was black, and the Gossips
hung down their heads like Bulrushes: nay the Husband was so transported with
fury, that he could not hide his resolution to murder his Wife, for bringing
such a piece of live Charcole into the world. But he was prevented, and secured
in the Fort by the General, till by the intermission of Friends, who wisely
laid before him the original cause of his Wifes Transgression, they were at
length made Friends, and the Slave for having showed himself a Man, was
condemned to tug at the Oars in the Galleys that go to fetch Stone for the use
of the City.

Now as a White Woman may bring forth a Black, so sometimes a Black may be
delivered of a White Child. For at Bacaim a Cafer's Wife, as black as himself,
was delivered of a white Child. The Cafer seeing his Child white, would have
immediately fallen upon his Wife and strangled her, had not the good women that
assisted at her Labor prevented him, and one of those Gossips was so cunning
as to run to the Jesuits House, who are well respected by those Blacks, to
desire Father Thomas de Bare, who had a long time been Rector at Agra, to come
to the Cafer's House. Presently the Father came with another of the Fraternity,
and finding the Cafer stamping and staring almost out of his wits, and in open
hostility without all reason, to appease his fury asked him whether he kept any
Hens, and whether he had any that were black. The Cafer answered that he did
keep Hens, and that he had likewise black Hens. Presently the Father ordered
one to be brought him; and then holding it in both his hands before the good
Women, Does this Hen (said he to the Cafer) lay thee any Eggs? Yes, replied the
Cafer. Of what color are they, said the Father? White, answered the Cafer.
Well then, said the Father, thou art worse than thy silly Creature, and have
far less reason; for if this Hen which is black lay thee white Eggs, why may
not thy Wife which is black bring thee a white Child? This Comparison so
wrought upon the Cafer, who was no Disputant, that he embraced his Wife, kissed
his Child, and all was well again. Though for all the Jesuit's Comparison it
was believed that some Portugal Soldier had quartered with his Wife, which was
the reason of that more than usual Production.

To conclude, there was a certain woman, the wife of one of the Counselors of
Batavia, who had both kindness and affection for a Merchant of the Fort, who
was both young and handsome. And it is the Custom in that Country to be not
only kind but free, she had for several years so well supplied his wants, that
he was Company for the best. It happened that this Counselor was sent abroad
upon some Negotiation, and staid longer than he thought he should have done.
For this reason Money grew short with the Lady; so that her Gallant coming for
a Supply, and she not having ready money to answer his Expectations, she gave
him a Gold Chain worth 400 Crowns to pawn for his present Necessities till she
could redeem it. But this Fatal Chain was the dissolution of all their former
Love: For the young Gentleman being streighten'd for Money, and finding no
person that would lend him so much Money as he wanted upon it, very fairly goes
and offers it to a Goldsmith to sell. While this unfortunate Lover was driving
his Bargain in the Shop, who in the name of ill luck should come by but one of
his Mistresses Slaves, and spying the Chain in his hand, runs and tells her
Patroness how she had seen her Gallant employed. Who surpised that her Gallant
should go about to sell the Chain, when he had only promised to pawn it in
private and sure hands; now (quoth she) all will out, there will be the Devil
upon Dun when my Husband comes home; and I forsooth that have lived credibly
thus long, must be the sport of my Neighbors and the talk of the Town. This
produced a Duel between Love and Interest, wherein Interest getting the
victory, away she immediately sends to all the Goldsmiths, to give them notice
that she had been robbed of a Gold Chain, desiring them to apprehend the Party
that brought it. She also gave the same notice to the chief of the Chinese,
and desired the Advocate Fiscal to make a public Search. Well, by these means
the Chain was quickly found, and the Merchant whatever he could say for himself
was apprehended and put in prison; soon after he was condemned for a Thief, and
sentenced to row all his life in the Stone Galley, which is the Galley that
fetches Stones for the use of Batavia. But happy for him, General Vanderlin's
Lady falling into a hard Labor before the time of Execution, and desiring his
Pardon at such a solemn Juncture, easily obtained it, seasonably recovering him
from the Misfortunes of Folly and Necessity.

A RELATION OF JAPON, AND Of the Cause of the Persecution of the Christians in
those ISLANDS.
THE Modern Geographers have made Descriptions of Japon, by means of such
conjectures as they have drawn from the Relations of certain Merchants who have
traded in those Countries. But in regard there are very few Merchants who are
skilful in Geography, as being such who only mind the profit and advantage of
their Voyages, those Descriptions have proved very uncertain. As to the
knowledge of the Ancients, in reference to this part of the World, it is no
less imperfect; and it is but only by conjecture to this day, that we believe
the Abadii of Ptolomy to be that Island which is now called Niphon. That which
I could learn of most certainty, was by the Relation of several persons who
have Traveled these parts, that the Empire of Japon is at present composed of
several Islands, of which some perhaps may not be absolute Islands, but rather
Peninsula's, and particularly those that make a part of the Land of Yesso, the
Inhabitants whereof are Vassals and Tributaries to Japon. Nevertheless a
Holland Pilot, who has been industrious to discover whether the whole Country
it self were an Island, or a Continent adjoining to that vast Tract of Land
called Corea, unknown to this day, in those parts where it extends it self
behind China to the bottom of Tartarie Niulhan, says, that it is separated
from Japon by a narrow Sea, which at this day is called The Streights of
Sanguar. Through all the Islands of Japon, where formerly were accounted to
have been 66 Kingdoms, there are three remarkable for their largeness, of which
that of largest extent is called Niphon, the next Ximo, and the third Xicock.
The Japonners account it a Journey of twenty seven days from the Province of
Quanto, to the Country of Yesso; and they say farther, that this Country of
Yesso, in those parts which are remote from the Sea, is so full of inaccessible
Mountains, that those Japonners who have attempted a discovery by Land, could
never accomplish their design, being discouraged by the length of the Journey,
and the difficulties and badness of the ways.

The Island of Niphon is four times as big as the other two; and there is also
a Mountain therein that vomits up Flames of Fire, like Mount Etna in Sicily;
formerly it was distinguished into thirty five Kingdoms, but at this day it is
only divided into five parts, the names whereof are Jamasoit, Jetsen, Jetsesen,
Quanto, and Ochio, lying all in order as you travel from West to East. These
five parts are again divided into several Provinces. The Island of Ximo, or
Saycock, is situated to the South-West of Niphon, being about 160 Leagues in
circuit. The Island of Xicock is seated by the South of Niphon, being about 120
Leagues in compass. The other Islands that lie round about are not so
considerable, for in those Seas lie several Islands scattered up and down, as
in the Archipelago, between the Morea and the Coasts of Asia the less. As to
the rest, I refer the Reader to the Map annexed, believing it to be very true,
as having been made upon the places themselves.

The Emperor at present keeps his Court in the City of Yeddo, in regard the
Air is there more temperate, and the Heats not so violent; but when he has a
Son that is arrived to the Age of fifteen years, he sends him to Surunga, there
to reside, till the death of his Father makes him way to the Throne.

Since Yeddo has been made choice of for the Seat of the Empire, it has so
greatly enlarged it self from day to day, that it is at present three Leagues
in length, and three in breadth, very populous, and the Houses standing very
close together. When the Emperor rides through the City, or that there is any
public show to be seen, it is impossible to get by the crowd of the people,
though the Women are not permitted to be of the number. The Emperors Palace is
covered with Plates of Gold, to which the Palaces of the Lords are every way
correspondent in Magnificence; so that afar off the City affords the richest
and most magnificent Prospect that was ever beheld: Though it be not so
beautiful within, by reason that the ordinary Houses are built only of Wood.
The Great Dairy keeps his residence at Meaco, which is also a very large City,
containing above a hundred thousand Houses; it was formerly the capital Seat of
the Empire, at what time the Dairy's were laid aside. So soon as he is Crowned
by the Bonzes, who are the Priests and Lawyers, he is then no more to expose
himself to the light of the Moon, nor to shave his Head, or cut his Nails. The
Natives report, that the Empire of Japon was formerly governed by a Prince
called Dairy, who had acquired so high a reputation for Holiness, that his
Subjects adored him as a God, and that to increase the awe and reverence of the
people, he suffered his Hair and Nails to grow, affirming, that it it was a
piece of Sacrilege to make use either of Razor or Sizzars. The Princes that
succeeded him, though they had only the name of Kings, have still preserved the
same custom, believing that it becomes not their Grandeur to appear in view of
the Moon, as being Sons of the Sun. If he have a Daughter that is ripe for
Marriage, the Emperor is obliged to Marry her, and she it is that bears the
Title of Empress, though she should happen to have no Children, which is
contrary to the Maxims of all the Eastern Monarchs, who give the Title of Queen
and Sultaness only to her, among all the rest of their Wives, that is first
brought to Bed of a Male Successor to the Crown.

At the end of every seven years, the Emperor sends one of the chief Princes
of his Court to the Dairy with a Basket full of Earth, and to tell him, that
all the Lands which the Emperor commands, are at the Dairy's Devotion; and
indeed the Empire belongs to him by right of Succession, though at present he
enjoys only the Title, and very large Revenues, which render him highly
considerable in the Empire.

The Japonners are Idolaters, and adore the Sun; but though they have a great
number of Temples and different Idols, yet they are not over obstinate in their
Devotion, only the Emperor is very severe against all other Religions. They
never stir out of their Native Country to travel, unless it be to China, and
the Land of Yesso; and within these few years the Emperor has prohibited his
people under extreme penalties, from having any Commerce with Foreigners, the
Chinese and Hollanders excepted. He had received Ambassadors at several times
from several Princes, but never sent any of his own to them again. Nevertheless
it is affirmed, that several Lords of these Islands newly converted to the
Faith, in the year 1585, sent their Children to Rome, to render their
acknowledgments to Gregory the Thirteenth; and that being returned back in the
year 1587, to Goa, they were afterward received, and welcomed again into their
own Country with great marks of joy. The little inclination which they have to
Navigation and Traffic, proceeds in part from the great abundance of all
things necessary for Human support, which their own Country produces; and then
in the next place from the jealousies of the Emperor, who is afraid of the
alterations which new Religions may make in his Government; for they are very
fickle, and easily seduced after Novelties, which has been the occasion of many
Revolts, and Civil Wars, till Quabacondon wrested the Empire out of the hands
of the Dairy; and reunited all the Provinces. They are so fiery and revengeful,
that upon the least affront given them, if they cannot have an opportunity of a
present revenge, they will rip up their own Bellies, and kill themselves. I was
told a Story to confirm this. Two young Lords that served the Emperor met in
the Palace, and jostl'd one the other by accident; the most furious of the two
was immediately for drawing his Sword. The other told him, the place was not
convenient, that he was going to wait; but that if he would stay for him in
such a place, he would give him satisfaction. Accordingly the party that
thought himself affronted went and stayed, but his impatience was such, that
after he had stayed a while, not finding the other to come, he ripp'd up his
own Bowels for very vexation. Upon which the people crowding about him, asked
him the reason of his killing himself; to which they could draw no other answer
but this, A cowardly Raskal has affronted me. By and by the other comes, makes
way through the throng, and surpised with what he beheld; Poor Creature, said
he, thou need'st not have doubted my being as good as my word, this Dagger
shall assure thee of it: And so saying, he killed himself upon the place, and
fell by the others side.

There is no Nation under Heaven that fears Death less than this, or that is
more inclined to cruelty. If any Prince or great Lord makes a Feast for his
Friends, at the end of the Feast he calls his principal Officers, and asks 'em,
if there be any that has so much love for him as to kill himself before the
Guests for his sake. Presently there arises a dispute among them who shall have
the Honor; and who ever the Prince is pleased to name, rips up his Belly with
a Cric, which is a kind of Dagger, the point whereof is Poisoned. This custom
is also practiced upon the Death of their Masters, or when they lay the
Foundations of any Palace; for they are so superstitious as to believe, that
these Victims are necessary to render both the Owners of the Building, and the
Habitation fortunate.

They punish all manner of Theft with Death. It Is also a capital Crime among
them to play for Money. Adultery is only punished in the Women: But Coynage of
false Money, setting Houses on Fire, Deflowring and Ravishing of Virgins, are
not only punished in the persons of the Criminals, but also of those who are
next of kin to them. The Women live retired, and are very faithful to their
Husbands. The Emperor having put to Death one of the Lords of his Court, out
of hopes to enjoy his Wife; she fearing violence, besought the Emperor to give
her time to consider, which was granted for some few days. At the end whereof
she shut her self up in a Room with her Children; and after she had delivered a
Paper to one of her Servants to carry to the Emperor, she set the Chamber a
Fire, and burnt both her self and her Children. The Emperor met with nothing
else in the Paper but reproaches of his Tyranny, and attestations of joy from
the Lady, that she had the opportunity to Sacrifice her self to the memory of
her Husband. Several other stories I have heard, which make me believe, that
this Nation is not incapable of doing actions worthy a Roman Virtue.

The Portugals were the first people of Europe that discovered the Islands of
Japon. They were thrown upon the Coast by a violent Storm, in the year 1542,
and understanding that there was great store of Gold and Silver in the Country,
they returned with a resolution to settle themselves. The first place where
they thought to fix was near Surunga, a City which stands about four Leagues
from the Sea: But because there is but one Road, and that not very secure
neither for Shipping, they remained there not above five years. At length they
took possession of a little forsaken Island called Kisma, which they peopled
afterward's; but since the last Persecution of the Christians, the Portugals
were forced to abandon it, having no more Commerce with the Japonners. How the
Hollanders came to erect their Factories there, I shall tell the Reader in
another part of this Relation.

Seven years after the first coming of the Portugals to Japon, St. Francis
Xavier made a Voyage thither to Preach the Gospel. The first place where he
Landed was the Island of Niphon, where he stayed two years and some Months, and
traveled several parts of these Islands; but his principal design being to go
to China, he took shipping accordingly. The Vessel was no sooner out at Sea,
but St. Francis fell sick, so that the Captain put him ashore again in the
Island of Sechen, by others called Haynan, belonging to China, where in a few
days after he died, and never was in China, as some have reported and believed.

After his death the Christian Religion spread it self very much in China, the
people being very docible, and apprehensive of the instructions which were
given them, but the behavior of the Portugals displeasing the Principal
Governors, and those who had most Power at Court, they did them ill Offices to
the Emperor, and the Bonzes misliking the new Religion, and jealous of the
effects thereof, were the fomenters of continual persecutions against the new
Converts, pretending they favored the designs of the Portugueses.

Nevertheless the Christian Religion daily got footing, and perhaps the whole
Nation would have embraced it, if the covetousness and wickedness of the
Christians themselves had not been the chief impediment of their conversion.
The Hollanders did all they could to lay the fault upon the Portugals, but the
truth will easily appear by the Letter written to one Leonard Campen, a
Hollander, wherein it is said, that when the Hollanders were asked by the
Natives what Religion they were of, they made this answer, We are no
Christians, we are Hollanders. I do not go about to blemish a whole Nation for
the fault of a few, but only to show what a dangerous thing it is, to make an
ill choice of Officers upon the settling of a new Commerce in Regions so remote.

The Holland East India Company having set out a Vessel for Batavia, put aboard
about a dozen young Boys, and as many Girls, taken out of the Hospitals in the
Country. Among these Boys there was one who was designed to serve in the
Kitchen, but Fortune made him an Instrument of one of the greatest Misfortunes
that ever befell our Age. During the Voyage, the Merchant having observed him
to be a Boy of a ready wit, and for that reason believing that he might one day
prove serviceable to the Holland Company, caused him to be taught to write and
read; wherein he improved so well in a short time, that being come to Batavia,
he was thought capable of a higher Employment. The Vessel being arrived, the
General and his Council resolved to send the same Vessel to Japon, with some
part of the Lading which was brought from Europe. Thereupon the Merchant was
commanded upon this Voyage, and the under Accomptant happening in the mean time
to dye, this Boy was by him advanced to the place, and by the Merchant
carefully instructed in the knowledge of the East India Trade.

The Vessel being arrived at Firanda, the new under Accomptant believing no
place more proper for him them that to raise his fortune, resolved to leave his
Benefactor, and therefore when the Ship was to return, he hid himself out of
the way, till he knew the Ship to be far enough on word on her Voyage, and by
that means becoming a Member of the Factory, he grew so perfect in the Language
of the Natives, and so useful to the Company, that do length. He came to be
President of the Factory; the Authority of which Employment so puffed him up,
that he was not only for continuing and upholding the Commerce of his own, but
excluding all other Nations. Now, as I have already observed, the Portugals
were the first Traders, and the first that propagated the Christian Religion in
those parts; therefore it was that the Christian Japonners would not Trade with
any but the Portugals, as having known them longer, and finding them more true
to their words. This the President observed, and made it his business to render
them obnoxious at Court, and by virtue of his Presents, engaged the Governors
of Provinces, and other great Lords, to favor his design.

However, the Portugals wanted neither friends nor confederates. And though
they were not in a condition to be so liberal as the President, yet they made
ashift to defend themselves, and render his under hand Dealings ineffectual.
Thereupon finding that those Tricks would not take, he had recourse to the
foulest of Calumnies; for he counterfeited a Letter written in the Portuguese
Language, containing a discovery of a design of the Christian Japonners to have
made a general Insurrection, and a particular Conspiracy against the person of
the Emperor. This Letter he carried to a Lord of the Country, into whose
favor and confidence he had wrought himself, who presently thought it to be
his duty to give intelligence of so important a design to the Court.

The President informed him by what accident the Letter came to his hands, and
gave an account of such circumstances, as made his Imposture look with a
probable countenance, relating, how that the Hollanders had taken a Portugal
Vessel returning from Japon to Goa, and that the Holland Captain having taken
this Letter among other Papers, opened it, and perceiving of what consequence
it was, had sent an Express to the President to proceed as his prudence, and
the affection of the Dutch Company toward the Emperor should guide him. That
the Portugals, who were but Subjects to the Spaniards, had a pernicious Maxim,
not to suffer any Religon but their own in any place where they had to do, and
that for their own ends they never spared either the Life or Liberty of Man;
that they thought it an acceptable Sacrifice to God, to cut the Throats of
those whom they could not convert. And lastly, that the Hollanders were a
people that accorded with all Nations and Religions, and minded nothing but
their Trade.

The Lord believed all these fraudulent Calumnies, and sent a Copy of the
Letter to the Emperor, the substance whereof was, That the Spaniards in the
Philippine Islands, and the Portugals in Japon, being in confederacy with the
Christians of the Country, had sent to the Governor of Goa to send by a time
prefixed eight or ten Vessels, with Men and Arms, but especially a good number
of Officers to command the Revolters, for that then there would be a numerous
Army ready, and that they should easily make themselves Masters of Japon.

The Portugals were then under the Dominion of the Spaniard, and though they
would suffer no Spaniard in their Indian Acquisitions but the Viceroy, yet
several of the Religious Orders did slip into Japon; carried thither by a true
and real zeal; yet this zeal, when once indiscreet, does as much mischief as
covetousness it self. The Father Paulists, for so they call the Jesuits in the
Indies, by reason that their Church in Goa is dedicated to St. Paul; these
Jesuits I say, had made a fair progress, and gained great credit among the
people, notwhithstanding their continual persecutions, according as the Lords
of the Country were well or ill affected toward them. Their number therefore
increased, and the new Converts had this advantage, that they enriched
themselves by Trading with the Portugals, who had made a positive Agreement not
to Trade with the Bonzes. This provoked the Bonzes against them, and the
multitude of the Christians so far augmented the Emperor's jealousies and
fears, that in a short time they produced the effects of open rage and cruelty.

The Jesuits had converted to the Faith a great Lord of the Kingdom, who lived
most commonly at Bugen, in the Island of Ximo, a person of great Interest and
Power in the Island. He had four Sons, two of which lived with him, and
following his Example, had embraced the Catholic Faith. The Father was
Baptized by the name of Ignatius; the eldest of the two was called Francis, and
the youngest Charles: the two eldest Sons were at Court in great favor with
the Emperor. The younger of the two that had embraced the Christian Religion,
addicted himself wholly to the study of the Scripture, and retired with the
Jesuits to their Seminary. His Example had wrought with a great number of young
Lords, and as he was eloquent besides, he was of great use to the Jesuits in
preaching the Gospel, and reclaiming the people from the grossness of their
Errors.

The Japonners are naturally endowed with a noble mind, and great inclination
to Learning; so that there is nothing wanting in that Nation but able Teachers.
Not but that they have Doctors of their own: the Dairy's Court is full of them;
where they preserve the Annals of their Country, and pretend that Printing and
Artillery were in use among them before they were known in Europe. From this
Court come all their Books, in regard the persons that attend upon this Prince
apply themselves only to their Studies. It is reported, that they learnt all
these things by their frequent Commerce with the Chinese, and that they are
also originally descended from them. And in truth, the greatest Province of the
Island of Niphon is called Quanto, according to the name of the Seacoast part
of China, where lies the greatest Traffic between the Japonners and Chinese.
Moreover, if there be any credit to be given to the Chinese Histories, they say
it was but a small part of their vast-Empire, which extended it self from North
to South 56 Degrees of Latitude, from the Frozen Sea to the Equinoctial Line,
being bounded to the West by the Caspian Sea, and extending Eastward over all
the Southern America to New Spain.

Father Thomas Bar, a Portuguese, has often told me when I was at Agra, a
capital City of the Great Mogul, where the Jesuits have a very fair House, that
this and several other young Lords improved themselves so far in six or seven
years, that they were as Learned as their Masters themselves, and that they
were more zealous in converting those of their Nation. Now the Jesuits at that
time had no House for the Instruction of Youth and Proselytes, and therefore
they desired this young Lord to lend them one of his. Thereupon he having four
very fair ones, with great Revenues belonging to them, gave that which was
nearest to the City to his Converters. A while after, the youngest of his Sons
fell sick, and was carried to this House for the Air's sake, where he recovered
by the care of the Fathers, and the Prayers of the Christians; but his Father
did not long enjoy the pleasure of so great a Cure, which seemed almost
miraculous; for he died at what time both his Sons and the Christians stood
most in need of his protection.

The two eldest, who were with the Emperor, understanding the the Death of
their Father, came to take possession of their Inheritance, and demanded of the
Jesuits the House which their Father had given them, for in Japon no Parent can
alienate the Estate of his Children; nay, when they come to such an Age, he is
obliged to put them in possession of their Estates, reserving only such a
proportion to himself. The Jesuits, loath to part with so fair a convenience,
would not quit their hold, though it were for their own quiet, and to engage
the whole Family to stand by them in their time of trouble. This refusal
provoked the two Brethren, and this quarrel between them and the Jesuits
happened at the same time that the Dutch President was laboring to bring about
his designs. He h^d notice of this dispute, and as he was a great Impostor, he
made (...) his business to inflame the two Brothers, not only against the
Jesuits, but against the Portugals in general, giving them a Copy of the Letter
which he had framed, as is beforementioned.

These two Lords, who were Favorites of the Emperor, joining Interest of
State to their particular Interest, made their complaints at Court, with
extraordinary aggravations; urging that there was no security for the Estates
of particular Men, for the quiet of the Empire, nor the Life of the Prince,
unless not only all the Portugals, but also all the Natives of Japon, who had
sucked their Errors, were exterminated out of the Island. To make good the
reasons of their Exasperation they showed the Emperor a Copy of the Letter,
and put him into such a fright, as well for his Person, as the Empire, that he
would admit of no justification on the other side.

Some of his Lords, who were Friends to the Portugals, besought him to examine
the truth of what was alleged, before he proceeded to utmost extremities
against a whole Nation, and against his own Subjects. But he was inexorable,
and presently gave private Orders to certain Commissioners, to go through all
the Provinces of the Empire, and to banish not only the Portugals, but also all
the Christian Natives. Now in regard they had their private confederates, as
well in the Court, as in other places, they had intelligence, in all parts, of
the cruel resolution taken against them, though none were more zealous and
faithful to them then the two Lords of Ximo, Francis and Charles. Thereupon the
Christians met together to consult for their own safety, and their common
preservation, and seeing all attempts to justify themselves prove ineffectual,
they resolved to stand upon their guards, and to dye in the defense of their
Innocence and Religion. The two Lords put themselves at the head of the
Christians Army, the elder of which had been a Soldier, and understood the Art
of War; the younger kept up their Spirits and Courages by his continual
Exhortations.

The Emperor's Commissioners understanding that the Christians were thus
embodied, gave him speedy notice thereof, but said nothing either of the number
of their Forces, or of their designs. The Jesuits and Austin Friars at Goa,
told me, that the Army of the Christians consisted of above 40000 Men, besides
those recruits that came up to them before and after the Battle was fought.

The Emperor not beleiving that the Army was so numerous, sent against them at
first not above 25 or 30000 Men, under the Command of the youngest of the two
Lords of Ximo, that lived at Court. But those Troops were no sooner upon their
March, but he raised new Forces, and sent another Army after them, consisting
of 40000 Men, commanded by the young Lord, to whom the Dutch President had
showed the Letter first of all.

The Christians having intelligence of the approach of these two Armies,
prepared to receive them, choosing an advantageous place to entrench
themselves. The first Army soon appeared in sight of the Christians, who lay so
encamped, that the Imperialists could discover no more than one part of them.
However, before the Engagement, the youngest of the Christian Brothers advised
his other Brother to send to the General of the Emperor's Army, who was their
Brother likewise, to desire Peace, and to beseech him to intercede for them to
the Emperor, and to assure him, that they were ready to lay down their Arms,
and throw themselves at his Feet, and to justify their Innocence. To this
purpose a Letter was framed and sent to the General, but the Messenger that
carried it was nailed to a Cross in sight of the whole Army of the Christians,
and at the same time the Enemy came on with great fury to assail them.

The Fight lasted almost three hours with equal advantage; the Captain of the
Imperialists seeking every where for his Brothers, while they strove to avoid
him. The Christians, who knew that all their safety consisted in their Victory,
and that there was otherwise no hope of pardon, fought with so much valor;
that the Imperialists were forced to give ground. Their General was slain upon
the place, and at length the whole Army of the Idolaters was cut in pieces.

This Victory wrought the Conversion of several of the Idolaters; and the
Christians, after they had given thanks to God three days together, prepared
themselves for a second Combat, not doubting but the other Army would set upon
them while they were weary, and weakened by the last Battle. But that General
more prudent then the former, only posted himself where the Christians could
not come at him, and writ to the Court the particulars of the Defeat of the
first Army, upon which he expected the Emperor's Orders.

In the mean while, the Army of the Christians daily increased, so that in a
few days they were above fifty thousand strong. The Emperor, resolved to
stifle this Revolt in the beginning, sent Orders through all his Empire to make
new Levies; and all the while the Dutch President's Confederates ceased not to
aggravate him against the Christians, not suffering the other Courtiers to open
his Eyes, and prevent so unjust a prosecution. The defeat of his Army had put
him into such a rage besides, that though the Captains of the Christians Army
did all they could to clear themselves from the false accusations laid upon
them, and to obtain their pardons, there was no possibility of being heard.

The Emperor called his Council, where the wisest were of opinion, that it
would prove the best way to receive the submissions of the Christians, who
offered to lay down their Arms upon a general pardon, and the free exercise of
their Religion. But the President's Cabal carried it beyond this sober advice,
and the Emperor, exasperated by his Impostures, took the wrong course.
Thereupon the Council resolved with all speed to raise a vast Army, which was
to join with the other, and so to ruin the Christians all at a blow. The Dairy
also, who is consulted upon all important affairs, approved this Council.
Thereupon the Lords who are obliged to furnish the Emperor with Men, strove
who should bring their Troops and Companies first to the Randevouz appointed,
which was near the place where the second Army lay; so that when both Armies
were joined together, there was in the Field a Body of 150000 Men. The Brother
of the General, who was slain in the first Battle, commanded under the
Emperor, who resolved to go in person.

But first of all he caused a Proclamation to be made in his Camp, whereby he
forbad any Quarter to be given to any Christian, unless it were the two
Brothers, whom he intended to punish openly; and that they who left the Field
before the Christians were banished, should be put, they and their Kindred, to
the most cruel Deaths that could be imagined; but that they should be rewarded
that brought the Head of a Christian to the Emperor. The Copies of this
Proclamation were scattered in the Army of the Christians, though they did no
harm but only encouraged them against the Idolaters, seeing there was no hope
of pardon.

Nevertheless the youngest of the two Brothers offered to go and throw himself
at the Emperor's Feet, to implore his clemency in the name of the whole Army;
saying withal, That he should account himself happy to suffer Martyrdom to
show his Innocence; but they would not suffer him to stir. All he could obtain
from them, was to write a Letter full of respect, submission, and repentance
for what had been already done, declaring that they were ready to lay down
their Arms, if the Emperor would grant them pardon, and the free Exercise of
their Religion, offering with the hazard of their Lives to make out the falsity
of all those things wherewith they had been accused.

This was by an Idolater carried to a certain Lord who secretly favored the
Christians; but the Emperor toar it without reading it, vowing at the same
time, that he would never return to his Court 'till the Idolaters were all
extirpated. The Christian Army understanding the Emperor's resolution, minded
nothing more then their own defense. It Is true, the Ground where they lay was
advantageous enough for the smallness of their Number, but the Idolaters were
three to one; besides that the Idolaters of the Country, who favored the
Christians before, now declared all against them so soon as they saw the
Imperial Army. So that now both Armies lying so near together, several hot
Skirmishes passed between 'em; and at length it came to a general Battle. At
first the Christians overthrew the Idolaters, not able to stand before them:
with so much vigor did the youngest of their Chieftains assail them. He was
remarkable for his Habit that day, but more remarkable for his courage; so that
the Field was covered with the Bodies of the slain, fear and dread possessing
the yielding Enemy. But while the Victor forgot his Brother's advice, and
pursued too far from the Body of the Army, he was encompassed on every side,
wounded, and being carried away by the press of his Enemies, was at length
taken, and lead before the Emperor. His eldest Brother, more experienced in
War, rallied and recalled those that had followed his Brother, and till Night
maintained the advantages, which he had got over the Imperialists, who were
still supplied with fresh Succors, as necessity required. The next day the
Fight was renewed again by break of day, and with a success as honorable, but
more bloody to the Christians.

The third day the Emperor enraged at such a resistance, caused them to be set
upon in several places at one time. The General of the Christians Army rode
from Rank to Rank, encouraging the Soldiers both by his Exhortations, and his
Example: but at length having received several wounds, he was overlaid by the
multitude of his Enemies that crowded to his destruction. And now the General
being lost, and the Christians having no person to command them, it ceased to
be a Combat, and became a Massacre. However, resolving to dye with their Swords
in their hands, they flung themselves into the thickest of their Enemies, and
Sacrificed themselves to their own Innocence. Their Camp was soon forced, and
all the old Men, Women, and Children put to the Sword, except some few that
escaped and hid themselves in the Mountains, who afterward made a relation of
this bloody Story to them who rehearsed it to me.

This was the deplorable end of the Christians, and indeed of the Christianisme
of Japon, which the President procured by his impostures and fallacies. And it
has been made appear by three exact accounts, that there has perished, either
in Battles or by Tortures, above 60000 Christians. The eldest of their Captains
suffered a most cruel Martyrdom for seven days, neither could any offer, that
the Emperor could make him for his Brothers and his own Valors sake, induce
him to renounce the Christian Faith. After that, there was a kind of
Inquisition set up thorough the whole Empire, which lasted for several years,
whereby those that persever'd in the Faith, were condemned to most intolerable
Torments, in so much that the Relation which Van Varen, a Hollander, whose
credit it would be a vanity to question in this particular, cannot be read over
without Horror. In sixteen years, that is, from 1613 to 1629, the Christians
were so multiplied, that there were above 400000; but in the year 1649, the
same Hollander relates, that those Japonners who were brought from thence by
the Company's Ships to Amsterdam, affirmed, that Christianity was utterly
extirpated out of the Island.

Being at Ogli, a large Town upon the fairest Arm of the Ganges, I met a
Holland Merchant, who had served the Company in Japon a long time and had made
several Voyages. He came thither with two (...) laden with Bars of Silver and
Copper, which he had exchanged for Silks, which the Hollanders buy at Bengale.
This Merchant knowing I was there, came to visit me; and I finding him to be a
sincere honest Man, and well verst in the affairs of Japan, especially in
reference to the last persecution of the Christians, grew covetous of his
converse, and invited him often to my House. In our familiar discourses
concerning the settlement of the Hollanders in the East Indies, and of the
extraordinary gain which they make by their Trade there, and passing thus from
one thing to another, at length I asked him who was the Author and Contriver of
a Massacre so horrid, as that was reported to be. Whereupon he related to me
all the particulars of which I have here made a recital, and many more which I
have forgot or omitted, as being either not pertinent to my subject, or else
already related by others. He had his information from such of the Natives that
had escaped out of the Battle, and several of the Idolater Merchants, in whose
memories the fact was then fresh: and indeed he was so ingenious in his Story,
that I could not find any motive to incite me to misdoubt the truth of it. For
many times he could not forbear shedding tears, and to interrupt his discourse
with his sighs, often imprecating Heavens Vengeance upon the President, and
protesting he wondered the Company employed him so long. But God reserved his
punishment to himself. For the deserts of his crimes always attending him, and
provoking judgments and misfortunes upon whatever Enterprise he took in hand,
he miserably perished in sight of Lisbon in fair weather. All the men in the
Ship were saved; only he returning to recover a certain Cabinet of Jewels which
he had there, the Ship split, and the Portugals had the satisfaction to see him
swallowed up in the Sea, who had been the occasion of the Ruin of so many of
their Countrymen in Japon; and immediately they rang their Bells in the City
for joy of his Death.

In my last Voyage to the Indies I was at Bandar-Abassi, where the Hollanders
have a Factory. Thither arrived two Vessels from Japon to take in Silks, which
the Hollanders buy of the Persians to exchange in Japon. The Captain of one of
the Ships told me, that during several trading Voyages which he had made to
that Island, the Emperor had caused two Inquisitions to be made after the
Christians; in the first of which the Inquisitors met with 247, who were all
most exquisitely tormented to Death; in the latter they only found 63, among
whom were seventeen Children, twelve Girls and five Boys, of which the eldest
were not above thirteen years of Age.

Among all the persecutions which the Christians suffered, there was none
comparable to this for extremity of Torments: For the Japonners are the most
ingenious in cruelty of any people in the World, and the most constant in
suffering. For there have been Children from ten to a dozen years old, who for
60 days together have endured to have their Bodies fastened to the Cross, half
burnt, half torn in pieces, while their Executioners forced them to eat, on
purpose to prolong their Lives in misery; and yet they would not renounce the
Faith which they had embraced. Neither did this barbarous Inquisition extend
only to the Christians, but to their Kindred and Relations, nay, to their very
Neighbors. For if a Priest were taken in any House, all the people in that
House, and the Houses adjoining, were hall'd to Execution, for not having made
the discovery.

At the beginning of every year there is a new Inquisition, at which time all
that can write are required to subscribe, or else the chief of the Family
subscribes for all the rest, that they neither are Christians, nor are
acquainted with any Christians, and that they abominate Christianity as a
Religion dangerous to the State.

Don John of Braganza, being advanced to the Crown, that sudden change which in
one day, and without the least Tumult in Lisbon, wrested the Crown of Portugal
from the King of Spain, wrought the same effect at Goa. All the Portugals at
Goa at the same time acknowledged their new Sovereign; the Viceroy who was a
Spaniard, was sent away to Spain by the first Vessels that were homeward bound;
and Don Philip de Mascarennas, a Portugal, Governor of Ceylan, came to Goa,
and took upon him the command of Viceroy.

So soon as he came to the Government, his first thoughts were how to Establish
the Trade of the Portugals in Japon, which when they were expelled, amounted to
three Millions of Pardo's yearly, one Pardo being worth twenty seven Sous of
French Money. The hopes therefore of regaining so great a loss, made him toward
the end of the year 1642, take a resolution to send a solemn Embassy to the
Emperor of Japon, furnished with magnificent Presents: For which reason he
made choice of what was most rare, and most likely to be acceptable to the
Emperor, and the Grandees of his Court. The most costly of these Presents was
a piece of Lignum Aloes, otherwise called Wood of Calambour, four Foot in
length, and two Foot in Diameter; a larger piece then which the Indies had
never seen, having cost 40000 Parao's. To this he added a great quantity of
fair Coral Beads of an extraordinary bigness. This is the most acceptable
Present that can be sent to the Lords of Japon, which they fasten to the
Strings wherewith they draw their Pouches together. With these he sent a great
number of Carpets and Hangings of Cloth of Gold, Silver, and Silk, and several
pieces of Tissue of Gold and Silver. It Is said the whole Present cost the City
of Goa above eight hundred thousand Pardo's, which amounts to about 86666 l. 13
s. 4 d. of English Money. Besides all this, the two great Ships which were
prepared for the Ambassador, carried one of them 50 Pieces of Canon, and the
other 35, both laden with all sorts of Commodities which are esteemed and
prized in Japon, amounting to about 83333 l. 6 s. 8 d. Sterling. The Equipage
of the Ambassador was no less sumptuous. And because the Viceroy would not be
thought to give any occasion of offense to the Emperor, he would not suffer
one Jesuit in the Train, but only four Augustins for the Admiral, and four
Jacobins for the other, Men of discretion and conduct. While I was at Goa, in
the year 1648, I met with some of these Fathers, who gave an exact account of
the Embassy.

They made a prosperous Voyage, and arrived happily at their intended Port. But
you must understand, that when any Ship arrives at Japon, no persons are
permitted to come ashore, 'till the Governor of the place have an account who
they are, that they may give notice thereof to the Emperor, and know his
pleasure, whether they shall be received or no. In the mean time the Ships rode
in a very dangerous place, at the entry of the Haven, into which there was no
steering, without the assistance of the Native Pilots.

The Governor of Nangasaqui surpised to understand that they were
Portugueses, wrote in all have to the Emperor. The Dutch President being
informed of the news, played all the pranks he could, used all the contrivances
imaginable to frustrate the success of the Embassy, and to ruin the Vessels
that brought the Ambassador and his Presents. To which purpose he found a way
to bribe the Courrier, who was sent with the Emperors Orders; so that instead
of twenty days, which were sufficient for his journey, he made it above two
Months before he delivered his dispatches. During which time the two Ships had
suffered very bad weather upon the Coasts, and endured many a severe Storm. At
length the Orders came that none should be permitted to Land but the
Ambassador, the two Captains, and the two Pilots, to give an account of the
subject and cause of their coming. The Ambassador being Landed, acquainted the
Governor that he came to compliment the Emperor in the behalf of the King his
Master, and to assure him that they were no longer under the Power of the King
of Spain. That about a year since, a lawful Heir of Portugal had recovered the
Diadem of his Ancestors which the Spaniard had usurped. That this new King was
so just and generous a Prince, that understanding that some of his Subjects had
deserted the Island of Japon, without paying their Debts, he had now sent to
make a general satisfaction; but chiefly out of that respect which obliges all
Sovereigns newly come to the Crown, to give notice thereof to those Princes,
whose friendship they desire.

The Governor informed the Emperor of all these things; but the President
having as good intelligence by means of his Friends at Court, alleged to the
Emperor that they were Rebels, who came from the utmost parts of the West, to
bring the News and Example of their Revolt to Japon: That the natural
restlesness of this Nation caused frequent disturbances and revolutions among
them. That they were never long at rest themselves, nor would suffer others to
be at quiet. That considering the experience he had had, he could not be either
too cautious for the security of his person, or the tranquillity of his Empire.
Lastly, that the Emperor and the Empire would be ruined past recovery, if
those people were ever admitted to set footing therein.

This Counsel well seconded by the rest of the Cabal, easily made an impression
in the Heart of the Prince naturally Barbarous, and an Enemy to the Christians.
Thereupon he sent an Order to the Governor to invite all the Whites aboard,
and to treat them for eight days in the best manner he could. At the end of
eight days they were ordered to repair aboard again, and at the same time he
made a Present to the Ambassador, and chief of his Train, consisting of six
great Cabinets, and six Coffers lacker'd with black, with Figures in Relief,
intermixed with spangles of Gold, all the Embellishments being of Massy Gold.
With them were six Cabinets, and six Coffers, lacker'd with Red, Embellished
after the same manner with Silver. I saw some of them when I was at Goa, and I
must confess I never beheld any so rare and beautiful in that kind, which made
me admire the ingenious Industry of the Artists of Japon; Our European
imitations of their workmanship being no way comparable to them.

The Ambassador having received his Present, had Order to remove all the Goods
in the second Vessel into the Admiral. He would have made great Presents to the
Governor, who refused them; telling the Ambassador withal, that he had
express command to refuse them, and to declare to the Ambassador, that if he
did not make have away, he would sink his Ship. That the Emperor his Master
had made a new prohibition, forbidding all Portugals and Spaniards to venture
near his Dominions upon any pretense whatsoever; nay, though it were upon
pretense of an Embassy, upon pain of being crucified upon the place, without
liberty to speak for themselves. As for the Debts of the Portugals, he had
undertaken to discharge them himself; only he had sent that Present to the King
his Master to thank him for that Embassy. The Ambassador had no sooner removed
the Goods out of the second Vessel into the Admiral, but they sank her before
his face. And not contented with that affront, the Governor sent for all the
Blacks that were in the Admiral, and cut off their Heads, pretending they were
Indians, and that, as such, they could not be ignorant of the Rigorous
prohibitions which the Emperor had put forth, forbidding all Strangers, except
the Hollanders, to set footing in Japon.

After the Portugal Ambassador was thus harbarously frustrated and dismissed,
he sent News thereof to the General at Batavia, urging him to execute the
design which the Hollanders had upon Macao; telling him also, That though there
were a probability of a League between the Hollander and the Portugal against
the Spaniard, yet that it could be no harm to seize Macao beforehand, as they
had made themselves Masters of several places, while the Portugals were under
the King of Spain. The General taking the President's advice, was ready to set
Sail upon this enterprise, when a Messenger from Portugal brought him the News
of the Treaty concluded between Portugal and Holland; as also of the Navy which
the Hollanders had sent to Lisbon to aid the Portugals. At first he made as if
it had been a false Rumor, and put the Messenger in Prison; nevertheless while
he delayed the departure of the Fleet, he received express Orders from his
Superiors to Treat the Portugals as Friends and Allies. So that he was
constrained to turn all his Forces against the Molucca Islands, then in the
possession of the Spaniards.

The President was very sorry for the last News, by reason that the General and
he had great designs upon the Conquest of that place, and had promised the
Company by that means to make them absolute Masters of the Trade of China, and
of all the East. True it is, that Macao is very advantagiously seated for those
that design to be Masters of those Seas, especially upon the Coasts of Quantung
and Fockien, which are the Provinces, whither are brought down all the
Merchandises of this Empire. It lies at the Mouth of the Gulf of Canton, in a
small Peninsula adjoining to a larger Island, and built upon a kind of a
Promontory, on three sides environed with the Sea, which no Ship can come near
by reason of the Flats, unless it be on that side next the Port, which is
defended by a strong Fortress. This City drew from the only Fair of Quanchiu
1300 Chests of Silks of all sorts, every Chest containing 150 pieces, and 2500
Lingots of Gold, not reckoning the raw Silks, the Gold Wire, and other
Merchandises: whence it may be easily judged what advantage the Portugueses
made of it; and wherefore the President desired so much to expel them from
thence.

But his Designs were disappointed, not only by the revolution in Portugal, but
also by the loss which the Hollanders sustained of the Island of Formosae,
which the Chinese took from them, following the advice of a French Soldier,
whom the Governor of Tayovan had refused to dismiss after his time was out.
For the better understanding this accident, you must know that the Hollanders
being settled in Japon, and having excluded all other Nations from thence,
except the Chinese, whom the Emperor permitted to return, after that the
Massacre committed by the Japonners in a City of China, of which they had a
desire to make themselves Masters, had caused a Cessation of the Commerce
between the two Kingdoms, and constrained the Emperor of China to set a price
upon the Heads of the Japonners. Nevertheless the Hollanders did all they could
to make a new Rupture between the people, or else themselves to seize upon some
place that lay proper to ruin the Trade of the Chinese to Japon.

To this purpose, not daring to attempt upon the Portugueses, they overran the
Seas which environed the neighboring Islands, and took the Vessels of the
Chinese which were bound for Macao, exercising strange Cruelties upon the
people that had escaped into those Islands, after the irruption of the Tartars
into China. Coxinga, the Son of Chinchilunge, that famous Pirate, who saved the
remainders of that ruined Empire, then commanded those people, and was become
formidable to the Tartars themselves. Who to revenge himself upon the Dutch
Pirates, undertook the Siege of Tayovan, where they usually retired, and by
gaining that place drove them wholly out of Formosa.

This is a large Island placed at the point of the Phillippines, stretching out
in length from North to South, and to the West lying opposite to the Provinces
of Fockien, and Quantung. The Chinese call it Talieukieu. Since which time,
it is very probable that the Spaniards gave it the name of Formosa, from its
beauty and fertility. They being the first people of Europe that discovered it,
and inhabited it; and upon one of its Promontories to the North built the Fort
of Kiling. The natural Inhabitants live almost all in the Woods and Mountains,
where they maintain themselves by hunting the Heart, and wild Boar, whose dried
Flesh, Skins, and Horns they sell to the Sangleys, who in exchange bring them
other necessaries. The little Island of Tayovan lent its Name to the little
Fort which the English built, over against the great Island; it was very
convenient for the Hollanders, who made great advantage of the Cattle, Hides,
and Horns, both of Hearts and Bufalo's, which they carried from thence, and sold
to the Chinese and Japonners, who make great use thereof in several of their
Trades and Manufactures. But the chiefest advantage which the Hollanders made
of this Island consisted in this, that it lay in the middle way between Batavia
and Japon, and served as a place of security for their Ships in bad Seasons,
and to take in refreshments. There also they laded off several of the Goods of
the Chinese, which they took by way of Piracy from the Chinese, or which were
brought them by the Sangleys, who are the Original Merchants of the Chinese,
settled at the Philippines, but who drive the greatest Trade of that Country,
independent from the Spaniards.

Coxinga, though an Idolater and a Pirate, banished out of his Country, and
provoked by the Hollanders, had so much humanity as to send to the General at
Batavia to send away Vessels to fetch away his Men, and delivered them all
without suffering them to receive the least injury. He had his Friends and
Favorers in the Emperor of Japon's Court, as being a declared Enemy to the
Tartars, whose near Neighborhood the Japonners cannot endure. For so quick a
Conquest of so many Lands and Provinces in seven years, as it were only upon
sight of the Enemy, had very much alarmed them. He by his Friends acquainted
the Emperor of the acts of Hostility, committed by the Hollanders against the
Chinese Merchants: Adding moreover, that they had made private propositions to
league themselves with the common Enemy; and that it was one of the Nations of
the North, born for the desolation of other Countries, and to invade the Peace
of Empires. That they had settled themselves in the Islands of the East only by
treachery and violence. That for some years since, they had made it their
business to cruise the Seas between China and Japon, on purpose to make
themselves absolute Masters of the Trade, and that if he did not take a speedy
course, they would do the same mischief in his Dominions which the Tartars had
done in China.

The President had much ado to divert the Storm, for the most potent Lords at
Court, although his Pensioners and Friends, began to open their Eyes, and in
some measure took Coxinga's part, saying, That the Chinese were unfortunate
enough, in being laid wast by the Tartars* without being persecuted and
afflicted by the Hollanders. That seeing that after they had been expelled
their Country, they had nothing left but their Boats, and some few Rocks for
their places of refuge, it was a piece of inhumanity to disturb them in their
last Sanctuaries, and to deprive them of their liberty of the Sea, and their
Commerce with Japon, from whence those miserable Exiles had their chiefest
support. The Bonzes, the Merchants, the vulgar People, all took the Chinese
part. Thereupon the Emperor sent for the Dutch President, and told him, I
understand, said he, that thy Company abuses my Protection, and that their
Vessels, instead of being contented with the Trade which I have permitted them,
presume to play the Pirates upon the Chinese, and to trouble the Seas
adjoining to my Empire. If I hear any more of these complaints, I will cause
thee and all thy Nation to be Crucified. I know not how the President appeased
the Emperor's fury; this I know in general, that the Hollanders made a secret
alliance with the Tartars against Coxinga. Him the Inhabitants of Fockien
called to their assistance, having raised an Army of 200000 Men; whereupon he
went to aid them with a very powerful Navy. After several Skirmishes, the
Tartars and Chinese came to a pitched Field, where the Captain of the Tartars
having placed the best part of his Cavalry in Ambush, ordered his Men to
retreat by degrees, 'till they had drawn the Chinese into the Ambuscade; at
what time the Tartars encompassing them on every side, killed 80000 upon the
place; Coxinga with his Navy not being able to relieve them.

During this War, the Hollanders took their opportunity, and made themselves
Masters of the Island of Fishers, between Formosa and the Coast of Fockien. In
a short while after Coxinga died, and Savia his Uncle, the richest Merchant of
China, who out of his own revenue had disburs'd the expenses of the last War,
grew weary of the charge, and was desirous to make Peace with the Tartars. Of
which one of the Sons of Coxinga being advertised, seized upon his Uncles
person, and shut him up in a close Prison, where he killed himself for madness.
The Hollanders overjoyed at the Dath of Savia, who had always hindered them
from the Trade of the Province of Fockien, sent a Navy against his Nephew in
favor of the Tartars, who made War against him all along the Seacoast.
Several Combats happened between the Juncks of the Islanders and the Holland
Vessels in view of the Tartars, who satisfied themselves with being only
Spectators. But all the benefit which the Hollanders reaped from the advantages
which they obtained over the Islanders, was only to put into the Hands of the
Tartars the Cities of Bemos aed Quesmoy, and all the places thereabouts, which
Coxinga's Party possessed before. For notwithstanding all their kindness, the
Tartars would not assist them to retake Tayovan; so that they only were content
to build certain small Forts in the small Islands adjoining to Formosa: and
since my return from the Indies, I never could inform my self of the truth of
the issue of that Enterprise.

But the Hollanders were not content with their settlement at Firmando, which
was an Island both desert and barren, seated upon a Straight, which separates
the Point of the Land of Corea from Japon, a place no way commodious for their
Designs of Engrossing the Trade of China, as being too remote from Nangisaqui:
Besides, that the North and South Winds are so violent at their Seasons in this
Straight, between the two Coasts, that it is impossible to come near the shore
when they blow. The President therefore having such good luck in the Expulsion
of the Portugals out of Japon, doubted not but that he might obtain the small
Island of Kisma, an Island that had been wholly deserted ever since the
Habitations of the people had been destroyed. At first he only desired leave to
build a small Tenement for the convenience of the Factors. Now between this
Island and Nangisaqui, there is only a narrow Frith, not above a Musket Shot
over. Here the President desired the Governor that he might make a Bridge of
Boats for a more easy intercourse between the City and the Port. The Governor
gained by Presents, gave him leave to build the Bridge; but seeing that the
Hollanders made an ill use of it, and that they came too frequently and
numerously into the City, he built two Forts at both ends of the Bridge, and
furnished them with Soldiers, who were to take notice who passed to and fro.
He also published an Order, That such Hollanders as came by day into the Town,
should return to their Lodgings before night, upon pain of Death. This Order,
and the little convenience which they had for Lodging in their own Quarters,
very much troubled them; so that the President made new Applications at Court,
and obtained leave to build a Factory, and Warehouses for their Goods.

The Governor thereupon sent a Surveyor to the Hollanders, to mark out the
Ground which the Emperor had given them to build upon. This person being
largely rewarded, made them good measure, and yet they were not contented; so
that in the Nightime they had enlarged their Quarters, by removing the first
marks. The Governor, being advertised thereof, began to be very angry; but
they found means to appease him with their Presents: so that he easily
condescended to the slight reasons which they gave him for what they had done.
Thus in a short time they finished their work, which was without encompassed
with a Wall, much like a Garden Wall, but within contained a real Fort,
flanck'd and lined according to all the Rules of Art; and which, the outward
Wall being beaten down, not only defended their Bridge, but commanded the entry
into the Haven of Nangisaqui.

They took great care not to admit any but Hollanders, for fear their Design
should be discovered. So that when the whole was finished, the President gave
advice to the General at Batavia what he had done, desiring him to send him
eight Brass Guns, so broken, as to be easily put together in the places where
they were broken. He adviz'd him also to put them up in Hogsheads, packed up
like other Goods; and instead of Mariners, to send a good number of Soldiers,
habited like Mariners, for the security of the Factory. But this Stratagem had
not that success which he expected; for about that time the Emperor had sent a
new Governor to Nangisaqui: So that when the Ships arrived at Batavia, the new
changed Officers, being more vigilant then the former, coming to weigh the
Bales as they were put ashore, and finding certain Hogsheads at the bottom of
the hold, which they could not remove by reason of their weight, they presently
brake them up, and perceiving there the broken pieces of Canons, carried some
of them to the Governor, who immediately sent intelligence thereof to Yeddo,
of which the President had as sudden notice by his Pensioners. He having his
invention at command, repairs forthwith to the Emperor's Court, and there
tells the Emperor, That he had received Orders from his Superiors to present
him with certain Pieces of Canon, made according to the newest Invention of his
Country, the use whereof was so convenient, that they were with little
difficulty and trouble to be drawn up, and made use of, where others could not
possibly be brought to play: and that he thought no Present could be more
acceptable or serviceable to him, to render him Victorious over his Enemies.
Upon this the Emperor was very well satisfied, and sent to the Governor of
Nangisaqui to send him those Guns, and withal, not to molest the Hollanders,
either in their Factory, or in vending their Wares.

Having so fortunately disengaged himself out of these Briers, he lays another
design, and sends to the General at Batavia, a person of a turbulent and
unquiet Spirit like himself, to set out two Vessels, to make a discovery of all
the Coasts of Japon, and particularly of those Coasts which were next the Gold
Mines, and to see if they could find any safe Harbor for Ships to ride in, in
those tempestuous Seas, or any places proper to fortify, that they might no
longer depend upon the uncertain humor of the Court of Japon, which was as
inconstant as their Seas. The General provided two Ships, and furnished them
with excellent Pilots, good Soldiers, expert Mariners, and Provisions for two
years, with all other Necessaries and Instruments, as well for delving as
building. One of the seven of the General's Council was chos'n Supervisor of
the Enterprise. It Is said, that those two Vessels skirted all along the Coast
of Japon, from the East to the South, and from the South to the North, fetching
a compass about the Islands to the 47 degrees. of Northern Latitude, and that they
discovered one Island which they called The States Island, and afterward
touched upon another Land which they named The Company's Land, inhabited by
White people, with long Hair, habited after the Japon fashion, which they found
to be a Continent adjoining to Niulhan, and Corea; and that after they had
wandered a long time upon the Sea, without any other design then to make new
Discoveries, they passed through the Streights of Sanguar, which separates the
Land of Yesso from Japon, and kept along those Coasts of Japon to the East, to
observe the Bays of Aizu, and Xendai, where are the Gold Mines. In that part a
furious Tempest took them, in sight of the Mountains, where the Gold Mines lie,
which lasted four days together. The second of these Vessels run full against a
Rock, and split her self, with the total loss of every Mothers Son in the
Vessel. The Admiral held out a longer time, but coasting the Land where the
Mountains of Sataque appear, the Tempest grew so violent, that she also brake
against the Rocks. In this second Shipwreck only the Admiral, and thirteen
persons more escaped, partly by the help of the Planks, and partly by Swiming.
The Japonners upon the Coast presently ran to view them, and wondered to see
people in those parts, whose Language they did not understand. Nevertheless,
they entertained them civilly enough; but in regard they were Strangers, and
that there was a strict prohibition not to receive any Strangers among them
upon any pretense whatsoever, they were at a great loss what to do with 'em.
One, wiser then the rest, advised his Brethren to carry them to the Emperor,
whose counsel was followed; and so they took their journey toward Yeddo, which
was above a hundred Leagues off.

The Emperor, being informed of their arrival, ordered that they should be
civilly used; and at the end of eight days sent for them, and caused them to be
asked, of what Country they were, and what Design brought them into his Seas?
The Admiral, who was a person of a ready ingenuity, answered, That he was a
Hollander, who all his life time had served his Country as a Soldier, where he
had the command of a thousand Horse, and two thousand Foot, at what time
Fortune, or rather the care of preserving his Honor, forced him from his
Native Soil. I was, said he, one of the chief Commanders in the Army, and
though I say it, my Service had gained me a fair reputation. The Prince, who
commanded us, had a great confidence in me, which made one of his near
Relations jealous of me; so that he was not only content to do me all ill
Offices with the General, but sought all occasions to pick a quarrel with me. I
dare be bold to say, that had he not been so nearly related to the Prince, I
should not have taken his affronts so long patiently. But at length he provoked
that patience to such a degree, and so deeply and openly affronted me, that I
was constrained to meet him with my Sword in my hand. His misfortune and mine
so ordered it, that I killed him at the first push. My Friends assisted me to
make my escape, and kept me hid for some days, thinking to have appeased the
Princes anger; but it continued so violent, that they advised me to absent my
self for some years. Therefore to render my Exile less tedious, and that I
might be still doing something for the Service of my Country, I desired my
Friends to furnish me with two Ships, with a resolution to seek out and destroy
all those Pirates that infested the Indian Seas. I have been in chase of them
for a whole year together; and sometimes we met with Tempests so violent, that
drove us we know not whither our selves, my Pilots not being experienced in the
Eastern Seas. Soon after meeting with another Tempest no less rude and
boystrous, we were forced to let our Ships drive as the Winds themselves were
pleased to force them, which at length drove us upon the Coasts of this Empire,
where we have suffered Shipwreck, not having saved above fourteen of four
hundred, which I brought along with me. Happy in such a misfortune, to be cast
upon the Territories of a Prince so potent and generous, that, no question,
will have compassion upon our miseries.

When the Interpreter had repeated this Relation to the Emperor, the Prince,
and all the Lords of the Court were very much concerned, and admired both the
Courage and Aspect of the Stranger. The Emperor sent him very rich Presents,
and to all those of his Company; and gave Order, that he should be conducted to
Kisma, to the Holland Factory, and that he should be well treated upon the way,
during the whole journey, which was five and twenty or thirty days Travel.
There this famous Champion stayed four Months, in expectation of the Ships that
come every year from Batavia to Japon; so that he had time enough to make a
full Relation of the Lands which he had observed, and of all the particulars of
the Shipwreck. One day as he was telling how he had cajoll'd the Emperor, and
that the President was applauding the quickness of his wit for inventing such
an imaginary piece of Knight-Errantry, a Japonese Boy that served the
President, heard all the discourse, without being observed by his Master. Some
Months after, the President had beaten this Boy, which he, as all the Japoneses
are of a fiery and vindicative Nature, resolving to revenge, went to the
Governor of Nangisaqui, and repeated to him the whole Discourse between his
Master and the Admiral. The Governor, finding it to be a business of
importance, sends advice thereof to the Court. The Emperor was so enraged at
the injury and affront put upon him, that he commanded the Governor to stop
the Admiral and his Train, and to send him with a good Guard to Yeddo, and not
to let any Ship enter the Harbor, 'till he had had a full Examination of the
matter.

This Order was not so secret, but that the Presidents Friends had notice
thereof, who presently gave him intelligence of it so seasonably, that the
Admiral was sent away before the Order came to the Governor. Eight days after,
three Holland Vessels arrived at Kisma, to whom the Governor sent express
command to keep out at Sea, and not to come ashore. The President feigning to
be surpised at this Prohibition, went to the Governor to know the reason, who
gave him this Answer, The Emperor, said he, is acquainted with your tricks,
you shall have no more kindness from me; I have sent to Court to give notice of
the arrival of your three Ships, and I shall follow my Orders when they come.
Upon this the President made no doubt but the Admiral's story was discovered;
and recollecting with himself that he had beaten his Japonese Boy, and that he
was run away from him, he soon conjectured at the Author of all the mischief.
In short, the Governor receives his Orders, the Tenor whereof was, That he
should send away the three Vessels, without permitting them to land either Men
or Goods; and that he should tell the President, That the Emperor was
satisfied that the Admiral was a Cheat and a Spy, whom he intended to punish
severely; and therefore, if he did not send for him to Japon by the first
opportunity of the Winds, he would put to Death all those of his Nation, and
fling their Goods into the Sea.

Upon the return of three Ships to Batavia, there was no small hurly burly in
the Island; for by them they understood the danger that their Countrymen were
in, if they did not send back the Admiral. Thereupon an extraordinary Council
was called, to deliberate upon an affair of so great importance, who were all
of one mind, that the Admiral was to be sent back, and that it was better for
one to suffer, then a whole Nation.

The Admiral being advertised of this their resolution, publicly protested
against the violence and injustice they were about to do him; telling them,
that he was born a Subject of the Republic of Holland, who had only the Power
of his life and death; that in their Service, he would expose his life to a
thousand hazards, but that he was not obliged to sacrifice himself for the
particular Interests of a private Trade. The Ministers took his part, and made
it a case in Religion. The common people mutiny'd against the General, and the
Tumult grew to that heat, that the Seamen were sent for from aboard their
Ships to disperse the multitude. At length, by the interposition of a Minister,
the business was brought to a conclusion; who persuaded the Admiral by his
smooth Language, to appease the disorder of the people, by submitting to the
Result of the Council. Thereupon he promised to return to Japon, provided they
would allow him what he demanded, not only for his reward, but also that which
should bear him out in that same new part which he had in his head to act.

First he demanded two Ships magnificently trimmed, a Train of fifty chosen Men,
every one of which was to have three changes of Habit, of the richest Stuffs
that could be had: Moreover 50000 Crowns for his Voyage, a Cupboard of Gold and
Silver Plate, with all Equipage proportionable, and that those that accompanied
him should respect him, as a person of great Quality.

All this was allowed him, and the Admiral departed from Batavia, and arrived
well at Nangisaqui. The Governor surpised at the beauty of the Vessels, could
not believe them to be Merchants, and therefore sent to know who they were; but
he was more surpised when he knew that it was the Admiral. Forthwith he
dispatched a Courrier to the Emperor, to give him notice, and to inform him
with what magnificence the Admiral was returned. The President also sent, that
he might have a favorable reception, and to desire his Friends to let the
Emperor know, that this was a Person of great Quality, whom an Honorable
Action had driven from his Country, and that he no sooner understood the
accusation that lay against him, but that he was returned with that Equipage
that became him, to justify himself.

'Till the Order came, the Governor, according to custom, caused all the Sails
and Rudders of the Ships to be brought to him, not permitting any person to
come ashore. At length the Order came, that the Admiral and his Attendants
should be received into the City, together with all things necessary for their
persons, and that they should be convoyed to Yeddo, and that in all places
where they came, they should be nobly treated. The President accompanied the
Admiral to assist him, as well with his Coun^ils, as with the favor of his
Friends. Their Entry was very magnificent, and the richness of their Habits
brought the people from all parts, as being mainly greedy after Novelty, so
that the noise thereof was spread all over the Court: Yet the Emperor would
not admit them to their Audience upon the day which they desired.

Two Months were elapsed, during which time the Admiral kept open Table, and
displayed his dasling Riches to the Eyes of the Japoneses, and being of a quick
and apprehensive wit, he caused himself to be instructed in the Language of the
Island, and in a short time he began to understand many Words. When the
Emperor sent for him, he clad himself and his Train in a richer Habit then
that which they had on when he made his Entry. At first the Emperor seemed to
be angry; I understand, said he, that thou art an Impostor and a Traitor, that
thy Birth is obscure, and that thou art come as a spy into my Kingdom, and
therefore I am resolved to punish thee according to thy merits.

When the Interpreter had explained the Emperor's words, the Admiral with an
undaunted countenance, Sir, said he, a Prince so great as you are, should
rather be a comfort and support to the unfortunate, then add to their
affliction. Fortune, that persecutes me, has in nothing been more cruel to me,
then in raising those Calumnies, with which she has endeavored to blemish my
reputation with your Majesty. She might expel me my Country, and cast me upon
unknown Coasts at the other end of the World; but she can never inspire into me
thoughts unworthy of my Birth. This is the second time I have been within your
Dominions, the first by occasion of Shipwreck, the second to obey your
Majesty's commands. The first accuses none but the Winds. And had I been guilty
of what I am accused, I should never have ventured my self into your hands so
far off from your Power. But, Sir, my Accusers have one advantage which I have
not; they speak your Language, I understand it not, nor how to make you
apprehend the truth of my justification. Allow me eight Months to learn the
Speech of your Country, and then, if you will be so gracious as to hear me, I
make no doubt but to confound my Accusers, and to satisfy your Majesty in all
things.

The Emperor was surpised, and moved with his Answer, but more especially at
his request of eight Months to learn the Japonick Language. I grant it thee,
said the Emperor, for it is but just that a person accused should have both
the Liberty and means to do it. And in the mean time I will take care that thou
be honorably entertained in all places where thou have a desire to reside.

The Admiral used this Liberty with so much prudence, and got so much the love
of the Courtiers by his carriage and his liberality, that by their converse, he
not only learnt the Language, but by virtue of their good Character, the
Emperor would often send for him, and ask him several Questions concerning our
Europe, in reference to the Qualities of the Countries, the Manners of the
People, the several Forms of Government, the Extent of the several Kingdoms,
their Riches, Strength, and Warlike Discipline; of all which, the Admiral gave
him so handsome an Account, that the Prince took great delight in his
Discourse. And at length he had gained so much the favor and confidence of the
Emperor, that he utterly laid aside all the ill thoughts which he had of him,
and condemned to Death, as a false Witness, and a Traducer, the Japonese that
had accused him.

After so fortunate an escape, the Admiral thought it but common prudence to
make a fair retreat in the Grandeur of his Reputation, and thereupon he took
leave of the Emperor, who loaded him with Honors and Presents. The Courtiers
were also sorry for his departure, so that some of them accompanied him back,
and took order for his entertainment, which was very magnificent all the way to
Nangisaqui, where he took Shipping a few days after, and returned to Batavia.

All the People thronged to the Port to see him when he Landed. He told them in
few words the success of his Voyage. Some applauded his ingenuity and courage;
others extolled the Service which he had done the Company and Nation. The
Council received him also with thanks and praises, and gave him all the Gold
and Plate which he had brought back. A while after he departed for Amsterdam,
where he was no sooner arrived, but he presented a Petition to the States
General against the East India Company, for sending him back to Japon, and for
reparation of the violence and injury done him. The business was long in
debate, but at last the Company was condemned to pay him great damages, and
Interest for the same.

But to return to the President: He began now to be weary of being confined to
one Factory, though he made up his Pack well enough where he was. But his
Ambition carried him farther, and he thought he had done Service enough to be
advanced to a higher Dignity. Neither was his presence so necessary at Japon,
where he had settled the Dutch Trade in as good a condition as it could well
be. And in truth, the Hollanders had then almost the whole Trade of the
East Indies. They had taken from the English, Formosa, Amboyna, and ^ooleron,
and by that means engrossed all the Trade of Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs. They
had taken Baton by surprise. The Inhabitants of the Celebes, Ternate, and
Tidor, were become their Vassals; and the King of Macassar having made an
Alliance with them, had expelled the Portugueses out of his Dominions. By means
of their Factories in Sumatra, they had got all the Pepper Trade of the Western
Coast of that Island into their hands, besides several other advantages which
they had in several other places, where they had encroach'd upon the Portugals,
Spaniards, and the English themselves. The East India Company at that time
entertained 140 Ships, part Men of War, and part Merchantmen, provided with
great Guns, Ammunition, and Provision of all sorts, and in these Ships above
6000 Men, part Soldiers, part Mariners. Batavia was the Soul of their
Conquests, made upon the Ruins of the Portugueses, which had they lain all
together, would have made a large Empire, and by which they might have grown
infinitely rich, had not the expenses of their Navies and Soldiers eaten out
the gains of their vast Trade. One of their wisest Generals told me frequently,
We have, said he, but too many Fortresses, we need no more then the Cape of
Good Hope, and Batavia, Factories well settled, good Ships, and honest Men to
serve us. For in short, their Officers pillage unmercifully, and cause the
Commerce and Dominion of their Country men to be detested by the Indians,
through their Covetousness and Cruelty.

I know my self, that in the year 1664, the Expenses of the Hollanders in the
East Indies amounted, communibus annis, to twelve Millions a year, not to
reckon Shipwracks, decay of Ships, and wast of Goods, and yet their Cargo's for
Asia and Europe have not amounted to above ten Millions; and sometimes the
Cargo's are so mean, that the Receipts do not answer the Expenses. Nevertheless
their perseverance and courage were worthy of admiration. For what could be
more to be admired, then to see that a small number of Merchants, assembled at
first upon the single score of Trade, should afterward presume to make War in
Regions so far distant, assail so many Princes and Nations, plant so many
Colonies, besiege so many Cities and Forts, and lastly, set forth so many
Navies at such prodigious Expenses, that it would put many potent Sovereigns to
a plunge to do as they did?

This was the Estate of the Holland East India Company, at what time the
President, the principal Subject of this Relation, was recalled from Japon to
Batavia, there to take upon him the Office of Chief Director. He carried
thither great store of Wealth, and built several magnificent Houses in the
City. His Authority also was very large; but he exercised it according to his
usual custom, and was hated by all the Officers of the Company, and the
Citizens themselves. He thought himself secure of the Employment of General,
but he was deceived in his hopes; upon which he took pet, and returned for
Amsterdam, where he lived quietly for some years. At length his turbulent and
ambitious Spirit put him upon new Designs, to revenge the injury which he
thought he had received. To which purpose he returned to the Indies. His
undertaking was not so prosperous for those that employed him, and who merited
to have been better served. He pillaged, cozened, and caused several disorders
in their affairs, and at length returning home again, perished in the River of
Lisbon with his Money and Jewels, as has been already related.

The End of the First Part.
A RELATION OF What passed in the Negotiation of the DEPUTIES Which were sent
to PERSIA and the INDIES, As well on the behalf of the KING, as of the FRENCH
COMPANY, for the settling of Trade.
IN the Relation which I have undertaken, I shall make a faithful Report of
things in such manner as I saw them transacted by the Deputies sent to Persia,
and the Indies, as well on the behalf of the King, as of the French Company,
for the settlement of Trade.

The Thirteenth of July, 1665. the Sieur Lalin, Gentleman in Extraordinary to
the King, and the Sieur de la Boulaye, a Gentleman of Anjou, with the Sieurs
Beber, Marriage, and du Pont, Deputies of the new French Company, for the
settling of Trade in Persia and the Indies, arrived at Ispahan, and took up
their Lodgings at Zulpha, being the Suburbs of the same City, where also at
that time lived the Sieur L'Estoile, a French Merchant. Lalin and Boulaye,
without saying any thing to the Deputies, delivered to L'Estoile the Letters
which Monsieur de Lyonne had written to him; the Inscription whereof was thus.
To Mr. L'Estoile, first Valet du Chamber to the King of Persia, or in his
absence, to Mr. Logis, his Son in Law. Which was not a little to be admired at
by the Franks, who had sojourned any time in that Country, to find that Monsier
Boulaye, who had been before in Persia, and should have better understood the
Custom of the Court, should be no better able to instruct a Secretary of State,
then to let him give L'Estoile the Title of Valet du Chamber to the King of
Persia, who has none to serve him in his Chamber but Eunuchs, and never suffers
a Christian to touch his Habits, for fear of being defiled.

The purport of the Letters, was to admonish L'Estoile to support; assist, and
protect the Deputies in the Business upon which the Company had sent them; and
in case of losses by the way, to furnish them with such necessaries as they
should want.

The King of Persia was then three days journey from Ispahan; for which reason
a Messenger was dispatched with a Letter to the Nazar, or Grand Master of the
House, and another to the Mirzateker, or his Lieutenant, to know whether his
Majesty would command them to wait on him there, or whether they should expect
his return to Ispahan.

In the mean while the Deputies could not agree amongst themselves: For the
three Merchants Beber, Marriage, and du Pont affirmed, that the two Gentlemen
were only interested by the by in this Negotiation; and that having no right to
take cognizance of the Affairs of the Company, they ought not to trouble
themselves any farther, then the King's Letters directed them, in the affairs
of the Company. That the Effect of the King's Letters was no more, then that
two Gentlemen, desirous to see the Court of Persia, were joined with the
Deputies of the Company; and therefore it belonged to them only to treat with
the Ministers of the King of Persia. That the Gentlemen had no more to do then
to deliver the King of France's Letter to the Persian King, and to desire a
nomination of Commissioners to treat with the Deputies. This contest, which all
the Franks in vain endeavored to compose, came at length to the Nazar's Ears;
who was strangely surpised at it, having then a design to procure an Order
from the King to remove out of Ispahan and the Suburbs, all the Christians of
what opinion soever, and place them over against Zulpha.

However, the Deputies raised new objections and difficulties every day; which
Father Raphael of Man's, Superior of the Order of Capuchins in Persia, employed
all his credit and industry to accommodate. He wrote them out several forms of
a Letter, which they were to send to the Nazar; but those that pleased the one
Party, did not like the other. At length Father Raphael, weary of scribbling and
altering, amending and correcting, and all to no purpose; told them seriously,
they did ill to act in such a manner, and to insist upon idle formalities; that
the Persian Style, wherein they ought to write to the Nazar, ought to be
concise and plain, without superfluities, or impertinencies; and lastly, that
all their contentions did but redound to the disadvantage of the Company, whose
Interests they pretended to manage. After several contests, Father Raphael, at
last, finished the Letter to the content of both Parties, which was transcribed
into the Persian Language; with another to the Mirzateker, and both were
dispatched away. The Nazar having read it, presently informed the King of the
French Companies design, and of the arrival of the Deputies. His Majesty
commanded him to let them know that they were welcome, and that in a short
time, he would return to Ispahan, and give them Audience.

Some few days after, the Court returned to Ispahan, and while the King
stopped at one of his Houses near the Gates of the City, the Nazar sent for
Father Raphael, to know of him who the French Deputies were, and who had sent
them into Persia, to which the Father gave him the best satisfaction he could.
For the Nazar wondered that they were come into the Kingdom, and sent, as they
said, from such a potent Prince, and yet that the Governors of Erivan and
Tauris should know nothing of their passage through those Cities. The
Athemadoulet also was in the same Astonishment; and it gave them reason to
suspect both the Quality of their Persons, and the Reality of their Commission.
For either they were ignorant of the custom of the Country, or else they did
ill to travel incognito, like ordinary Tradesmen, and Persons of mean
condition. But Father Raphael having assured them, that they were sent by the
King of France to settle a Company of Trade, and that he had Letters of Advice
thereof out of Europe, the Nazar bid Father Raphael tell the Deputies they
should be in a readiness, for that the King would give them Audience in a few
days.

But the former misunderstanding, still continuing between the Gentlemen and
Deputies, Father Raphael fearing some mischievous consequence of it in the
presence of the King, or that they should make some dispute for priority, the
Father represented to the Nazar, that whereas the Deptuies were of two Orders,
the one of Gentlemen, and the other of Merchants; therefore to take away all
suspicion of jealousy, it would do well, that His Majesty would be pleased
when he admitted them to their Audience, to permit the Gentlemen their seats on
the one side, and the Merchants on the other. Which the Nazar approved, and the
King allowed of the same day.

The 27th of September, the King being at his Palace of Scader-Abbas, upon the
bank of the River, between the Bridge of Zulpha, and the Bridge of Schiras,
caused a preparation of Artificial Fireworks to be made, which came to above
2000 l. and early in the Morning caused notice to be given, that he intended
that day to give audience to the King of France's Deputies. Father Raphael also
had Order to be ready with the Deputies, to the end, the Mehemender, or Master
of the Ceremonies, might not be obliged to wait. Accordingly that very day the
Mehemender came to L'Estoile's House, and from thence conducted the Deputies,
with all their Train, and the rest of the Franks then resident in those parts
all mounted on Horseback, with a march so slow and grave, and for the
advantage of the sight so far about, that it was almost Night before they
arrived at Scader-Abbas; at what time the Mehemender entered the Palace alone,
leaving the Merchants at the Door. In the mean while, the Merchants believing
that Father Raphael did not favor them so much as the Gentlemen, cried out
aloud, that they would have an Interpreter also for themselves, or else would
go no farther. Father Raphael, who acted only by the Nazar's Order, and for the
advantage of the French Nation, told them, that whither they went any farther
or no it was all one to him: that for his part he was not there as an
Interpreter, either for the one or the other, but only in obedience to the
King's commands.

In the midst of this debate the Mehemender returned to carry the Deputies to
their Audience; five hundred Musketeers being ranked in order upon the bank of
the River, to give them a Volley as they passed along. The Mehemender's march
at first was slow and grave, but approaching the place where the King was, and
from whence he had a view of the Deputies, he caused them to double their pace
to the foot of the Steps, where the Lackeys took off their Shoes; and from
thence they proceeded into the Hall of Audience, where the Kans, and other
great Lords were sitting. Upon each side stood the Youth of Quality,
sumptuously clad in Tissue of Gold and Silver, their Cloaks and Mantles being
lined with Martins, Sables, and other rich Furs. The Deputies being come into
the King's presence, the Mehemender caused them to kneel, and bow their Heads
to the Ground three times: That done, he caused them to rise, and lead up Lalin
by the hand alone, as being the person who had in charge the presenting of the
Letter to the King. After him followed Boulaye, and the rest of the Deputies,
and thus they mounted up to the place where sat the Athemadoulet, and the
Nazar. The King was seated upon a Scaffold somewhat higher then the rest,
encompas'd with 150 young Gentlemen magnificently clad, to whom the Sieur
Lalin, at the head of the Deputies, made his compliments in French, and then
humbly presented the Kings Letter, sealed with a flat Seal upon a flying Label,
enclosed in an Embroidered Box, with the Arms of France and Navar, in relief,
upon the Lid. Father Raphael explained to the King the effect of Lalin's
Speech. After which the King gave a little bow with his Head, and at the same
time gave a sign to the Master of the Ceremonies to carry them back to their
places. Being come to the bottom of the Hall, where the Officers had Order to
separate the Gentlemen from the Merchants, the Officers by mistake put Boulaye
with two of the Merchants, and Marriage one of the Merchants with Lalin, which
made Boulaye cry out aloud in the Turkish Language Menbeg-Zadde, I am a
Gentlemen; but the thing being done, and the King being present, there was no
help. Then the Persian Music began to play for a quarter of an Hour; which
having given over, the Master of the Ceremonies came again, and carried up
Father Raphael, and the two Gentlemen, as he supposed, of which Marriage by the
forementioned mistake happened to be one, again to the King: at what time Lalin
with a comely grace made his Harangue, and set forth the occasion of his
Deputation to His Majesty, of which His Majesty testified his good liking by a
nod of his Head. For Lalin had a handsome presence, and spoke with an acceptable
Tone, and his magnificent Habit very much added to the comely Air of his
Person. The Speech was expounded by Father Raphael; which when he had done, the
King asked the Deputies several Questions, and then with his hand made them a
sign to retire to their places, beck'ning at the same time to Father Raphael to
stay; and causing him to come near him, more particularly informed himself of
the Power of the King of France, the Extent of his Dominions, his Military
Discipline, and his Councils: of all which the Father gave him the best account
he could, and then with the King's leave, retired to his place. This Scene
being over, a Flagon of Gold, and a Glass were sent to the Deputies, attended
with a short Banquet of Fruits, and other sorts of Food; the Instrumental and
Vocal Music playing all the while. Which being over, the King again sent for
Lalin, Marriage, and Father Raphael, and after a short Discourse, having
dismissed all but father Raphael, he fell into a dispute with him touching the
Unity of the Divine Nature, the necessity of one Prophet, and how Mahomet was
the Seal and Crown of all Prophets. He seemed to admire that the Franks, who
had the Reputation of being People of Wit and Discretion, could think Jesus
Christ to be a God: to all which particulars, the Father endeavored to give
the King the best satisfaction he could. But then, Father Raphael being
desirous that the three Deputies should partake of the King's favor as the
other two had done. Whereupon the King sent for the other three Deputies, and
having discoursed a while with Boulaye, while Father Raphael interpreted
between them, in a short while he dismissed them all again, but Father Raphael,
with whom he entered into a more jocular Discourse then the former, of the
Colors, Black and White, and of the Beauty of the French Women, the King
confessing that naturally he did not love Brown Women, the White complexion
being more agreeable to him, as being that complexion which alone composed the
Beauty of Women. The Father modestly made his answer, that Beauty consisted
only in fancy; for that the Persians loved thick and full Eyebrows, which were
not at all esteemed in France. Then the King casting his Eyes upon the Box
wherein the King of France's Letter lay, he took out the Letter, and observing
it to be a small piece of Parchment, and not such a one as he had received from
several Princes and Potentates of Europe, nor indeed like those which the
Jesuits had brought him formerly from the King of France himself, in a fair
piece of Parchment, with a large Seal deep cut, he gave evident Demonstrations
of his contempt of it, and was about to have thrown it away. Father Raphael
perceived him to be out of humor, to whom the King in pursuance of his
dislike, said, Raphael, I never receive open Letters without a Seal, take it,
and let me see it no more, for I do not believe it comes from so great a King
as the King of France, and at the same time made him a sign to retire. He durst
do no otherwise then take the Letter, and so returning to his place, he told
both Lalin and Marriage what had passed in his Discourse between him and the
King. Two hours, after that, were spent in beholding the Mummeries of their
common Dancers, a pastime very usual in Persia. Which being over, the King sent
again for Lalin, Marriage, and the Father; and after some few Questions, to
whith they gave the best Answers they could, he again dismissed both the
Deputies, retaining only Father Raphael with him. The Father, then taking his
opportunity, told the King, that he had always observed it to be the custom of
the Athemadoulet to cause the Letters, which the European Princes sent His
Majesty, to be interpreted in his presence. And therefore, added the Father, I
beseech Your Majesty to permit me to give the King of France's Letter to the
Athemadoulet, to the end, it may be truly interpreted to him according to usual
custom. Thereupon the King made a sign to the Father to give it him, and glad
he was to be so rid of it. The Father observing the King in a good humor,
spoke to him in behalf of the other three Deputies, that he would be pleased to
admit them to be sent for a second time, in regard the others had been sent for
three times. But the King told him, it was enough for him to speak to the
Gentlemen, let his Ministers talk with the Merchants. The Father being then
dismissed, he sent for Lalin alone, for whom he showed himself to have a very
great kindness and affection; and at the same time commanded the Nazar to bring
him the next day, together with Father Raphael, and Lagis the Genevese, who was
retained in his Service, to Court, for that he intended to be merry with them.
Then he went on, and told Lalin, that so soon as the French Ships were arrived,
he would send an Ambassador to the King of France, and make a strict Alliance
with him. Lalin replied, that His Majesty of France desired nothing more. Why
then, replied the King, is not my Alliance sufficient, but that you must go
seek the Alliance of the Blacks, from whom you will not draw those advantages,
with which you flatter your selves? For you must know, that the Deputies kept
their affairs so secret, that no body knew of them but all the World, the
Servants as well as the Masters. Not considering, that the Persians are good
Politicians, and that that Court is never without Spies. Therefore the King
knew, that as soon as the Deputies had dispatched at his Court, they were to
depart for the Indies, with which Nation he keeps no good Correspondence. And
for that reason, he was not a little offended with them, though they
endeavored to persuade him, that their Errand to the Indies was only for
Linen and Spices.

The Deputies presented to the King a very fair Fuzee, together with the Kings
Picture, in little, drawn to the Life, which was so much the more esteemed,
because at the same time several large Cuts had been brought to Ispahan, and
presented to the King, which perfectly agreed with the Picture in Oil, by which
the whole Court was convinced that it was the real Portraiture of the King.
When these Presents were laid before the King, he asked the Deputies, for which
of the Eastern Nations the French had most affection; to whom M. Lalin made
answer, that certainly for the Persian; thereupon the King returned, that
certainly they had reason; for that the Persians were white, like the French,
and that it was impossible for them to have any affection for the Indians who
were black.

At length the King, to show the Deputies his highest favor, would have them
drink the HEZARD PICHE, in a golden Cup, which holds about a Pint of Paris. He
ordered the Wine to be the same which he drank himself, which was in a Bottle
of Crystal Glass, studded with Diamonds. Lalin drank courageously, and so did
Marriage; but Father Raphael made a fair excuse, and got off. After midnight the
Zerhaftes, or Table-Cloaths of Cloth of Gold were spread upon the Floor, and
several roasted Viands very hot of the Spice, and Dishes of Salt Fish,
purchased from the Caspian Sea, were brought and set upon the Clothes; together
with several Pastrie Meats, dried Raisins, Comfits, Almonds, and Pistaches, and
other provocatives to drink. The repast being ended, several Buffons were
brought in, who Sung and Danced after the Turkish fashion, and made a hundred
wry Mouths and ugly Faces. Among the rest of the Divertisements, there were two
Men introduced, that played one against another with each a Battoon in his
hand, with a piece of Linen dipped in Naphta, tied to the end of the Stick,
which cast forth a very clear brightness in the dark; at the same time four
artificial Whirle-Winds were made to rise one after another, which were all
hovering in the Air at once, and in a continual Agitation.

Three Hours after Midnight the Masters of the Ceremonies came to raise the
Deputies to take leave of the King; and so leading them to the lower end of the
Hall, after a profound reverence, they retired, not one person beside stirring
out of his place, to the end they might have time to take their Shoes without
confusion. When they were gone, the King dismissed the Court, and then it is
that the crowd is so great, that not one in twenty but loses their own, and
gets whose-ever Shoes he can lay his hands on.

The Deputies and Father Raphael being upon their return home, by that time
they got half way, met an Officer belonging to the Athemadoulet, who told
Father Raphael that his Master expected the French Begzades at his House by Ten
a Clock next Morning, to treat them, by his Majesty's Order.

Father Raphael, Lalin, and Boulaye, were punctual to their time, and no sooner
did the Athemadoulet know of their arrival, but he came down into his Hall of
Audience, to receive them, where he had also ordered a very fair Banquet to be
ready for their entertainment. There Father Raphael left them, while he went
with the Athemadoulet's Secretary, to Translate the King of France's Letter
into the Persian Language; which being finished, and he come again into the
Hall, after several Civilities past on both sides, the Father and the Deputies
returned to Zulpha.

The Merchant Deputies offended at the Honor which the Gentlemen had received,
would have gone in their Turn; but Father Raphael told them, that it was not
the Custom in Persia to visit the Prime Minister, without being sent for. In
the Evening, Father Raphael, and the Begzades received new Orders to attend the
King, but the King stirred not out that Evening, so that their Journey was in
vain.

The Merchants still perceiving the Honors which were done the Gentlemen, and
believing Father Raphael to be the cause of all, they began to rail at him, and
give him foul Language, and threatened to write into France to give an account
of his behavior. Father Raphael netled at the Language of the Deputies, told
them, that he had done what in him lay to procure them the same Honors, which
the others had received, though they were so little sensible of it. That he
would continue his endeavors for the Advancement of their Affairs, though not
for their own sakes, yet for the sake of the Company, that had sent them. Which
answer, though it were sharp enough, and showed that the Father was angry, yet
he did not forget, that they were his Countrymen; so that he ventured to carry
them twice to the Prime Minister of his own accord, contrary to the Custom. The
first time he was not to be spoken with. The second time, he made an Errant to
him with the three Deputies, to present him a Copy of the Letter from the
Directors of the Company, in the Persian Language; at which time he showed them
the Deputies, acquainting him withal that those were the Persons with whom he
was to treat in point of Trade. To which the Athemadoulet replied, that he had
no Commission from the King to meddle with those Deputies, but only, to
entertain the Begzade that brought the King's Letter, which he had already
done. Thereupon the Father desired him he would be pleased to speak to the King
to nominate Commissioners to treat with them, which the Athemadoulet promised
to do. That day in the evening, a Messenger was sent to Father Raphael, to
acquaint him, that the King had appointed the Nazar to treat with the Deputies
the next day, and to know their demands. Of which the Father gave the Deputies
quick intelligence.

The next day, being the First of September, Father Raphael failed not to be
with the Deputies very early in the Morning, to bring them to the Nazar; but he
was very much surpised to see, that they would not go altogether, but still
loo'k with an evil Eye one upon another, and continued their former
differences. To the end therefore that he might set things to rights, he went
to the Nazar, and told him, that he thought it would be the best way for the
Merchants Deputies to come first, because that they were the Persons with whom
he was chiefly to Treat. The Nazar answered, that the King understood that they
were all five in the same Commission jointly. To which, when the Father
answered the second time, that it would be the best way to do as he had
proposed; The Nazar with a Surly Countenance, why, What Is the matter now? said
he to the Father; Are not you Frenchmen ashamed to be thus at odds one with
another, and to give all the World, nay the very Foot-boys occasion to
discourse of your Divisions? What would they have us think of them and their
Commission? Are they so little afraid of offending the King? Or, is their King
more indulgent then the King of Persia, who would never pardon such faults in
his Subjects? To this rebuke the Father made no reply. Only he desired the
Nazar, that he might have two Horsemen to attend the Deputies at Zulpha,
telling the Nazar not a word of his design to bring the Merchants an Hour
sooner then the Gentlemen. This fell out to the Fathers desire; For the Father
sent one of the Horsemen to Zulpha, to the Gentlemen, with order to drink with
them, and not to be over hasty, but to bring them fair and softly along with
him; with the other he made have to the Merchant Deputies, and causing them to
double their pace, they got betimes to the Nazar's House, where they were
civilly received. Dupont presented the Nazar with the Deputies Commission,
translated into the Persian Language; after which they fell into a discourse,
which lasted above three quartes of an Hour, concerning the Customs, Tolls, and
Quality of the Merchants, and the justness of the French in their Dealing. They
had just finished their Discourse of Trade, when the Nazar was advertised, that
the three Gentlemen were arrived; who thereupon desired Father Raphael to go
and receive them. The Father went and waited upon them in, neatly chiding them
for having stayed so long, and making the Nazar wait. Well said he, now you are
together, go into that Cabinet, and write down your demands, and the Articles
of your Commission. The Merchant Deputies, which had now discoursed with the
Nazar what they had to say, were well enough content to enter into a General
Conference with the Gentlemen. Then calling for Pen, Ink and Paper, they made a
draught of their Demands, the chief of which were, three Years Immunity from
Customs and Tolls, to begin from the time of the arrival of our Ships; and that
after that, they should enjoy all the Privileges and Favors granted to other
Nations. They also desired precedence above all other Nations, when they should
be called to Court, as they suggested, that they had at the Court of the Grand
Signior. And lastly, they required a House for those that belonged to the
Company, to live in the City.

These demands were dictated word for word by Father Raphael, to the Nazars
Secretary, in the Name of all the five Gentlemen; and because the Nazar's
Secretary knew not how to pronounce them, the Father undertook to write them in
the Persian Character; which being done, and the writing read in the hearing of
the Deputies, the Nazar took the Paper to present to the King.

Thus after a fair Banquet, accompanied with Music, both Vocal and
Instrumental, the Deputies were dismissed by the Nazar, who bid them rely upon
his care; for that he would do them all the Favor that lay in his power, and
give them his Majesty's Answer in a short time. The Deputies very well
satisfied with the Nazar's reception, sent him afterward a Present, which was
a Shame both to the Nation and the Company, that pretended to such great and
high things, and endeavored to six and opinion of their Wealth and Grandeur
among Strangers. For they sent him only a Tin Cup Enameled, and eight little
Cases of Perspectives, or Looking-Glasses, the whole not amounting to above 40
Crowns. They also made much such another Present, but meaner, to the
Mirzateker, consisting of about a Dozen Pair of Gilt Scissars for Women. We
must speak the Truth: For they were not a little saught at for their ridiculous
Presents, which were the Scorn and Contempt of those that received them, when
the Deputies were gone.

To Father Raphael they presented a Purse, with 40 Tomans, or Six Hundred
Crowns in it, believing that he would never accept of it; and indeed he refused
it with scorn; not a little angry with them, that they should have such mean
thoughts of him, as to believe him Mercenary.

Two days after, the Nazar gave notice to the Father, that the King had granted
the French their Demands; and had ordered every one of them a Calaat, or a
Vest-Royal, and in respect of Superiority, a Horse for Monsieur Lalin. That the
Kings Answer and the Grant were both ready for the Directors of the Company,
according to their desire.

The King was then onward upon a journey to Mazandran, three days Travel from
Ispahan, at one of his Palaces, called Tajabat. A Pleasant Situation, in the
midst of a great Valley, shaded with Trees, and full of Villages.

The Ninth of October, came a Letter from the Nazar, to Father Raphael,
signifying the King's Pleasure, that both he and the Deputies should repair to
Tajabat with all speed. Thereupon the Father and they made such have, that in
less than three days they got to Tajabat, where the Nazar ordered them to lie
in the House of an Armenian Renegado. The King sent them immediately eight or
ten bottles of Wine, with four Gold Dishes, full of lovely Fruits, and
Tapistries for their Dining Room. But these Presents occasioned new Quarrels;
For there being two Factions, and both living apart, there was a great dispute
who should have this present. Father Raphael, having done all that possible he
could to reconcile the business, and not being able to persuade them, in a just
Passion, bid them take their Swords and Pistols, and go and decide the Quarrel
in the Field. Till now, said he, I have done all I could to conceal your
detestable divisions from the Court, which nevertheless, is but too well
acquainted therewith: Is it your design to publish your own Ignominy, and to
make not only your selves, but the whole Nation of the French ridiculous to the
Persians? At length they were so far reconciled, that one Room served them to
Feed, and consequently the same Furniture. For the Father's reproofs had put
them a little out of Countenance.

The Seventeenth of October, the Mehemander came to the Deputies Lodgings, and
brought five Royal Vests; The Richest, which was of Tissue of Gold, was for
Monsieur Lalin; the next, not altogether so rich, for Monsieur Boulaye; and the
other three of a lower price, for the Merchants; The value of the whole might
amount to 600 Crowns, for which the French Deputies most generously gave the
Officers that brought them 25 or 30 Crowns, as a Gratuity. The Officers of the
Stable also brought two Horses for the Gentlemen, for which they received six
Crowns in Gold, as a reward. I confess, I should have been ashamed of such a
poorness of Spirit, at such a time as that.

At length also the Ragan or Patent for the Company was delivered into the
Hands of the Deputies, faithfully Translated by Father Raphael to this Effect.

That whereas the Merchants of the Kingdom of France, who are favored by the
Favor extreemly Royal, and the Justice excessively Royal, being made constant
in the hope and participation in the time, have presented their Petition, which
is arrived at the Ear of the Ministers Commissioners for the Court of Grandeur
and high Fortune; Their Intentions and Demands have found the Visage of
Acceptance, and we have strictly commanded, that the Conservatours of Rights,
Tolls and Privileges, acknowledge them for exempt and priviledg'd, during the
space of Three Years; and that there be nothing demanded upon their Goods and
Factories, conformable to the request of the Deputies, etc.

The next day, the Mehemander Bachi, came early in the Morning to attend the
Deputies, and bring them with all speed to the Court: Where being admitted into
the Garden, they met the King a Horseback, and all the Court a Foot. The
Athemadoulet held the King's Answer to the King of France, in a Bag of Cloth of
Gold, Sealed with the Kings Seal upon red Spanish Wax. The Sieur Lalin then,
and the rest of the Deputies were ordered to go near and Kiss the Kings Boot,
who kept his Grandeur, without speaking a word. When they had so done, the
Athemadoulet calling them to him, there, said he, there is the Answer for the
Grand Cha, that is, for the King of the Kings of France. The Deputies having
made their Obeysances to the King, the whole Court took Horse; and the King
took the Road of Cachan; and within an Hour, that Campaign, which looked like a
thick peopled City, became as Desert as the most part of Persia.

The Deputies, having read over the Patent, began to find many defects, and
Marriage would fain have followed the Court for amendments, and would have
persuaded Lalin and Father Raphael to have gone along with him. But Father
Raphael over-persuaded them to retun first to their Lodgings at Zulpha, and
there to hear the Patent distinctly read over, and to consider better of it.
When they came to Zulpha, and that they had debated upon the mere Letter of the
Patent, then they were worse mad then they were before. Then there were so many
Cavils, so many Disputes, so many Exceptions, and so many Expositions put upon
the Words Conformably and Reasonably, that they must get a Horse back
immediately. Boulaye stopped this fury for a while; So that after many Disputes
and Consultations, it was agreed, that Marriage, as chief of the Negotiation,
and Lalin, should follow the Court; and that Boulaye, Breber, and Dupont,
should proceed forward to the Indies. The Sieur L'Estoile, and all the rest of
the Franks, were of opinion, that Lalin should forthwith depart for France,
with the King's Letter. But their Counsel was not followed, and so the Deputies
divided themselves: Lalin and Marriage to follow the Court, which was then
removed as far as Mazandran: And the other three to pursue their Journey to the
East Indies. The two former fain would have had Father Raphael have accompanied
them to the Court; but he fairly excused himself. Neither would L'Estoile
permit his Son, to whom he allowed 20 Tomans a Year, to return to the Court,
choosing rather to send him to Bander with the other three. Whereupon, the
Seventeenth of November, they set forward upon their Journey.

Du Pont, without doubt, was the most solid and judicious of all the Merchants,
but he took it so to heart, to see the disunion among them, that he fell into
a languishing Disease at Ispahan, and died not far from Schiras.

As for Lalin and Marriage, they left Ispahan the Fifteenth of December, and
arrived at Court soon after, where they lay a long time neglected, their
Divisions still continuing, which made them contemptible to the Persians, and
ruined the Affairs of the Company. One Evening, the Nazar sent them a Flower,
advising them, that as that Flower never changed; so it became them not to vary
in their Resolutions. After a long and tedious stay, Marriage obtained some few
impertinent Alterations in his Patent; and permission to make Wine at Schiras,
as the English, Hollanders, and Portugueses had.

With these Alterations they both leave the Court; and Marriage would certainly
have accompanied Lalin, who had an intention to see Ardevil, Tauris, and Kom,
had he not been solicited to return to Zulpha, by a Young Dalilah, that had
smitten his heart. For by the means of an old Woman, the Mother of one of his
Lacqueys, he had debauched a young Armenian Virgin, whom he kept privately to
himself; yet not so privately, but the noise thereof was quickly spread all
over Zulpha. All the Armenians were scandalized at it, and sent to seize the
Baud, to punish her, by their Laws, as she deserved. Marriage advertised
thereof, flew out of his Lodging to her assistance, and to protect her from
Justice. But seeing the People in an uproar, and finding the Stones to fly too
thick about his Ears, he was forced to mind his own safety, and to seek for
shelter in the next House where he could be admitted. But the Business was not
so put up, for the Armenians, wondering to see that a Deputy of an Illustrious
Company, who was come to the Court of Persia upon so serious an Affair, should
do so much wrong to his Nation, by publicly appearing in so shameful an
Action, and so unworthy of a Person in public Employment, that they resolved to
prosecute him all manner of ways. They were resolved, to that end, to have sent
into France an Express, to have Complained to the King of his ill Management
and bad Behavior. But Marriage at length restored the Armenian Girl which he
had kept close locked up; after which time the Armenians never looked upon him
but with scorn and contempt.

Lalin being returned to Ispahan, departed thence the 22th of November, 1666.
for Bander, with a Resolution, to Travel into the Indies. But he fell sick at
Bander, and thinking to return to Schiras, for the Air's sake, he died by the
way at a Village called Bend-Ali. A Gentleman endowed with noble Qualities, and
whose Gentile and Generous behavior was an honor to his Nation.

The Thirtieth of the same November, Marriage also left Ispahan, and departed
for Bander, with one Father Mercier, a Jesuit, whom he took along with him as
his Almoner, and Lewis L'Estoile, his Kalmachi, or Interpreter: There he stayed
four Months for the arrival of the Ships, but none coming, and the heats
increasing, he resolved to spend the rest of the Year at Schiras. As for the
Jesuit, and young L' Estoile, because there was no Converse but with the people
of the Country, they returned back to Ispahan.

Boulaye and Beber arrived at Suratte the first of April, 1666. Being come to
the Bar, they sent to Father Ambroise, chief of the Mission of the Capuchins,
who presently attended them with a Sloop, which he had obtained of the
Governor, and brought them home to the Capuchin's House, where they stayed
till they departed for Agra. Sometime before was arrived there a Merchant of
Aleppo, who had run himself out at heels, and of a Maronite Christian was
become a Roman Catholic, in hopes to patch up his broken Fortune, being in
truth a mere Counterfeit, and a Hypocrite: For these Levantine Christians
seldom change their Religion, but upon some motive of Interest; and when they
have got a good Sum together, they presently whip back again into their own
Country, and for a small piece of Money obtain absolution of their Patriarch.
Thus several of the Religious Franks that travel out of Europe into Asia are
often deceived, making a great noise of their Conversion of the Levantines,
when the Conversion, at the bottom, is only an outward Conversion, and a mere
piece of Gullery. Among many others that I could relate, I will only mention
one, of a Franciscan, called Paul Stella, who coming with 400 Crowns, or
thereabouts, in his Pocket, for his subsistence, a Maronite smelt him out, and
under the pretense of giving him the Honor of his Conversion to the Catholic
Religion, never left him till he had sucked him dry, and turned the Channel of
his Money. This Maronite Merchant before mentioned, whose Name was Chelebi,
showed himself very zealous for the Capuchins, and he had reason enough; for
the Capuchins of Aleppo had been very serviceable to him, and had helped him in
his Affairs when they were at the lowest ebb. They were overjoyed at his
arrival at Surat, and gave it out immediately that it was he that had given
them Money for the building their House and Church. But when I came to look
over my Accounts, I found that the Money that had paid for the Ground and a
good share of the building, came out of my Purse; Father Ambroise having
promised that I should be reimburs'd upon my return to Paris. But I never heard
more of my Money, nor indeed did I ever look after it.

The reason why the Capuchins were willing that the Aleppo Merchant, who never
had disburs'd a Penny, should own the Expenses of their House and Church, is
this; because no Frangui Christian is permitted in the Indies to enjoy the
propriety of Houses, or to make any reparations of those which they hire,
without the leave of the Governor of the place. Both the English and Holland
Companies are only Lessees to the Indians; the Great Mogul having suffered from
the Christians in several places, where under pretense of repairing or adorning
certain Houses, which they possessed by way of propriety, they have so well
fortified them, that when the Governors have come to require any Duties from
them, they have made them good so long, till they have forced the Governors to
yield to their demands.

So soon as the Deputies were landed at Surat, they presently spread abroad a
report, that there were seven or eight Ships belonging to the French Company
that would suddenly follow them. The Aleppo Merchant was overjoyed to hear the
News, and was in great hopes, that by the favor of the Capuchins, and the
advantage which he had of speaking several of the Asiatick Languages, that the
greatest part of the French Merchandise would pass through his hands. Upon
these hopes he made great Treats, and presented large Presents to the Deputies,
and maintained their Servants at his own Charges. He found the Deputies to be
sufficiently covetous, but he was still in great expectations, that his civil
Entertainments, and the Presents which they received from him, would oblige
them to acknowledge his kindness, and that one day he should find himself
repaid by the management of their business; but he was foully mistaken. For it
cost him above 1500 Rupies, part which he spent upon them himself at Surat, and
partly what his Nephew furnished them withal at Agra for their present
occasions.

Three or four days after their arrival at Surat, the English President sent to
visit them by some of his Council, and would have waited on them himself, but
that he lay then ill of the Gout. The Holland Commander did the same with his
Council, showing all the civilities and kindnesses that lay in his power; and a
few days after invited them solemnly to a great Feast, with as many as they
could bring along with them. In the midst of their Jollity the King's Health
was sent about, and after that, the Prosperity of the French Company; which
obliged Boulaye to begin another Health to the happy Progress of the Holland
Company. But when it came to Mr. Beber's turn to drink it, notwithstanding all
that Boulaye, and the rest of the Company could say to him, they could not
oblige him to pledge it. Nay, he did worse then this, for he threw the Glass,
Wine, and all at his Feet; and when he had so done, he rose in a heat from the
Table, and after a pitiful manner left the Company, and went home to his
Lodging, though without any attendance. The Hollanders were so discreet as to
take little notice of his folly, but remained very merry at the Table with Mr.
Boulaye till Midnight. But they could not forbear telling their Friends, that
they wondered, in regard there were so many discreet and ingenious Men in
France, that the Company should make choice of such a Fool for the management
of such an important Affair as he was sent about; and that they foresaw he
would do the Company no small injury.

While the Deputies stayed at Surat, the Governor of the place, at the request
of Father Ambroise, entertained them, and showed them all the respect that
could be showed to Strangers. One day that they were in Discourse together, he
told them, that if they would follow his Counsel, he adviz'd them not to go to
Court till their Ships were arrived. But seeing that they were resolved to the
contrary, he offered them Money, Horses, and Soldiers, to attend them, with
Letters of Recommendation to some of the Grandees of the Court. The Chabander,
or Provost of Merchants, made them the same offers that the Governor had done;
all which they refused very obstinately. More then this, they behaved
themselves very ill, in reference to the Presents which the Governor and the
Cha-Bander sent them, for they gave their Servants that carried them not a
Doight, which is looked upon as a very dirty action in the Indies. For the
Indians never give their Servants any other Wages, then what they get by
carrying Presents from their Masters. And the more they have given them, the
more Honor it is, both for him that receives, and him that sends the Present.

The Deputies then being resolved for Agra, hired their Waynes, and their Oxen
to carry their Luggage, and five and twenty Soldiers for their Convoy. They
likewise made a great noise, of their being honored from so Great a King, and
so Noble a Company. Upon which score, they ought to have had five or six Wains
for their Baggage, every one their Pallaquin and a Led-horse, and every one a
Flag with their Arms or their Ciphers, which is the gentile way of Traveling
in India, and as I was always wont to travel. But they took but five and twenty
Soldiers, whereas they ought to have hired an hundred and fifty at the rate
they talked.

But instead of so doing, three Days Journey from Surat, Beber began to quarrel
with Boulaye, that they had too great a Train at their heels, for which he
blamed the Advice of Father Ambroise and the Merchant of Aleppo: That for his
part he would pay for no more than four Soldiers, and that if he would not
send the rest back, he should pay them himself. Upon which, they agreed to send
back the six Soldiers which the Governor had ordered to attend them as far as
Brampour; upon their dismissment, not giving them so much as the Worth of a
Pipe of Tobacco.

When they came to Agra, the Nephew of Chelebi, the Aleppo Merchant, failed not
to wait upon them, and to offer them his service. There was at that time a
French Surgeon, whose Name was James, he spoke good Indian, and was married
in the Country to the Daughter of a Portugal: The Nahab, the King's Uncle and
Grand Vizier, had a great kindness for this Surgeon; and by his procurement
it was, that the Deputies had Audience of Giafer-Kan, for so was the Nahab
called. They requested of him, that by his favor they might present a Letter
from their King to the Great Mogul, as also that they might be admitted to
treat concerning the Settlement of a French Trade in the Country. The Nahab
told them, that he would speak to the King, and take care that they should be
admitted to their Audience in a little time. With that he ordered them to be
conducted to the Lodgings appointed for them, which they found ready furnished
with all necessary provision for the Belly; but their Lacqueys and Servants
were to cook it themselves; for it is not here as it is in Persia, where the
Meat is sent ready dressed out of the King's Kitchen to the Ambassadors Table.

The Nahab, who understood that they had brought no Presents, neither for him,
nor any of the Grandees of the Court, nor for the King himself, was not over
hasty to admit them to their Audience. So that it was above a Month before the
Deputies could set Eyes upon the Nahab again, though the Surgeon, and other
Franguis, used all their Interest in their behalf. Being very weary of this
Delay, they gave it out, that they could stay no longer at Agra, in regard they
were to be at Surat upon the Arrival of the French Vessels. Upon which false
Report, the Nahab sent to them for the King their Master's Letter, that he
might present it to the Great Mogul himself. Upon this Demand of their Letter,
they were quite blank, not being acquainted with the manner how the Kings of
India receive those Letters which are brought them by Ambassadors: For they
never receive any with their own hands, but such as come from the Grand
Signior: All other Letters, according to the Grandeur of the Kings that send
them, are put into the hands of the Grand Officers of the Court, who present
them to the King: And the more potent the King is, from whom the Letter comes,
through the fewer hands it passes before it is presented to the Great Mogul.
For the present State of Europe and Asia is very well known in the Court of the
Great Mogul, and the Difference between the Sovereigns of both, in reference to
their Grandeur and Puissance. Neither is there a Stranger that enters into the
Kingdom, of whom the Governor of the Frontier Province does not give advice to
the Nahab; and if he appear to be a person of Ingenuity, there is no help for it,
but he must go to Court, where he is caressed, on purpose to get information of
the Country from whence he comes.

But to return to the Deputies, they obstinately refused to send the Letter to
the Nahab: At which he was not a little troubled; fearing lest upon the Arrival
of the French Vessels, it might be the occasion of a Rupture, and hinder the
conclusion of the Treaty of Commerce. Moreover he was not a little jealous,
lest they should seize upon the Great Mogul's Vessels in their Voyage to Mecca,
as Hugh Lambert the Holland Pyrat did, who took all the Baggage belonging to
the Queen of Visapour, when she was going to Mecca and Medina. The Nahab having
made these Reflections to himself, so wrought with the King, that he consented
that the Deputies, contrary to custom, should be admitted into his presence,
there to give the Letter into the Hands of the Prime Minister, to be by him
presented to the King. This, as I said before, was an unusual favor; and yet
the Deputies were so obstinate, as to reject this Proposition, saying, that
they would rather return home, and carry back their Letters, then not present
them to the King themselves. This obstinacy of theirs, to maintain their own
conceited humor against the Custom of the Country, was very much blamed by
all people, that admired at the patience of the Nahab, who at length sent them
word, they might take their own course, since they refused the Honors which he
would have done them. After that, the Deputies staid ten or twelve days in the
City, flattering themselves, that the Nahab would comply with their Folly; but
they were deceived. For the Nahab offended at their idle carriage, took such
order, that not one person living, either Merchant or other, went to visit them
all the while. So that they resolved to return to Surat, in expectation of
their Ships.

When they left Agra, they went and lay two Leagues off from the City in the
Field, setting up one Tent apiece, (and those pitiful ones Heaven knows) to
serve for them and their Servants, whereas they might have lodged with more
security in a fair Inn that stood not far off. Now it is the Custom at the
Great Mogul's Court, that every Night some Prince or great Lord keeps Guard in
his turn for a Week together, having under him five or six thousand Horse, that
beat the Road for three or four Leagues round the place where the King
quarters. A Party of these Horsemen scouting by the Deputies Tents, and
enquiring whose they were, one of the Servants replied, that they were the
Tents of the French Deputies: of which the Horsemen gave immediate notice to
their Captain, at that time the Grand Provost of the Empire. A Person handsome,
well endowed, and a great Lover of Strangers, who had raised himself by his
Valor, as being an Abyssin by Nation. So s^n as he understood that they were
the French Deputies, he sent one of his principal Officers, with fifty Horse,
to desire them to give them leave to guard them that Night, because they were
in no security, and for that if they came to any mischief the Head of their
Captain must answer for it. But they very ill received the kind proffer of the
Provost, proudly answering, that they were strong enough to guard themselves,
and the first that came near them should know whether the French had Courage or
no, adding withal, that if their Captain were afraid, they would guard him,
with a deal of other scurrilous riffraff which very much surpised the Officers.

The next day they set up their Tents about a quarter of a League farther,
because they expected something to be brought them from Agra. The Conteval or
Grand Provost admiring they made such slow journeys, and that they had now
pitched in a more dangerous place then before, sent the same Horsemen with the
same proffer, or else that they would be pleased to lie in an Inn where they
might be safe. Boulaye was of the mind that so kind an offer should not be
refused: but Beber gave them nothing but bad language; reviling their Captain,
that he was afraid they should go and lie with his wives, offering if he
pleased to go and guard them. He spoke half Portuguese, half Italian, which
being a kind of Lingua Franca, some of the Horsemen made a shift to understand
him, and having made a report to the Grand Provost of his Insolent Answer, the
Lord was not a little nettl'd at it, and therefore resolved to be revenged.
About midnight fourscore or a hundred Horse came and cut all the Cords of
Bebers Tent, thinking to have let it fall about his ears. But he found a way to
quit himself by the assistance of his Servant; and endeavored to escape to the
House of a Dervich on the other side of a small Rivolet, nere the place where
the Tents were set up. But the Moon shining as bright as day, he could not hide
himself from the pursuit of the Horsemen, who shot at him, and with their
Arrows wounded him in three places, once in the thigh and twice in the
buttocks. Boulaye hearing the noise which the Horsemen made, peeped out of his
Tent, and seeing so many Horsemen in pursuit of Beber, was not a little
daunted. He was afraid of running the same risco; but not having long to
consider, he took his purse of Ducats, and fled till he got about half a
league off, where he lay all night under a great Tree. But by the consequence
he found that the Horsemen had nothing to say to him; being satisfied when they
saw Beber fall, as believing him dead. For had they not thought him so, they
would never have left him, till they had quite done his business. But to color
the business, that it might not seem a point of revenge they broke open all
Beber's Chests; that it might seem as if he had bin robbed; but they found very
little or nothing to enrich themselves.

So soon as Beber's boy saw that the Horsemen were gone, he ran to the Town for
a Pallanquin to carry his Master thither. Being brought to the Town they laid
him in the Jesuits house, where Boulaye also arrived not long after and took up
his Quarters, to the great consolation of the Jesuits, whose Revenues are but
small in those parts, where there are no devout people to leave them Legacies.
Their Ordinary was very sparing; but it was such as the Deputies must be glad
of. Though it were a feast for Boulaye, who was not wont to make better cheer.
For a Sheeps head, of his own purchase, usually served him two meals. Which
made him ridiculous to the Franks, who lived after a more splendid rate. At
Smyrna and Aleppo, when he was not invited by the Franguis, he had recourse to
his Sheeps tongues, or a cold piece of double Tripe, which he carried to the
poor Cabaretts of the Greeks, taking his Chopin of Wine to wash it down: and
such was his good husbandry that what was left was ordered to be set up for his
supper. One day he had drank a little more then he had bled, and the Franguis
found him a sleep in the street, about a hundred paces from the Cabaret. They
had so much charity for him as to remove him to his lodging, lest other Nations
should laugh at the choice which they had made of an Envoy to settle the Trade
of such a considerable Company. As for Beber, who loved good Cheer when it cost
him nothing, as being a true exemplar of covetousness, he complained of the
Jesuits entertainment, though they outrun the Constable to treat him like a
Deputy. His man who had more wit than he, and plainly saw what a trouble he was
to his Hosts, made them a merry relation of the Noble Table which his Master
kept for him, how he had made provision of a Barrel of Herrings; which when
Invitations failed, he warily fed upon, rubbing his bread with the tail to give
it a haut goust. For my part, said the Boy, I am but a poor Servant, yet I have
made a shift to spend an hundred and fifty Crowns which I had got in the
service of the Consul of Smyrna. 'Twas my misfortune to be inveigl'd out of his
service, for I was with a Noble Master where I got Money; but in this man's
service I have eaten all that I had got before. Two days after I arrived at
Agra, and heard of Beber's being wounded and where he lay, and went to give him
a visit. And as I never went unprovided in my travels with all things
necessary, I had some Ointments and Plasters, which were very serviceable to
him.

It was an easy thing to observe that Boulaye was glad of the opportunity of
Beber's being wounded, that he might have the sole honor of giving the Letter
to the King. For he pretended to be the true Envoy from the King of France, and
that Beber was only sent to bear him company. La Boulaye therefore believing
that the business would take effect, persuaded the Chyrurgion already mentioned
to solicit the Nahab who had a kindness for him, so close, that thereby the
Nahab permitted him to bring the Letter. But Boulaye who thought he should give
it himself to the King, was much surpised when he saw that the Nahab, who had
got the Letter into his own power, gave it to one of the meanest Officers of
his Court, who by the Prime Minister's order, gave it to another, and he to a
third, who brought it back to the Nahab, who at length presented it to the
King, but not in the presence of Boulaye.

And thus you see the Effect of the ridiculous pride of the Deputies, Boulaye
was forced to stay in an outer Court, having two more to pass thorough before
he came into the King's Quarter. Where, while he remained big with expectation,
word was brought him, that the King would return an Answer to the King his
Master, so soon as the Ships should be arrived; and so he was forced to go back
to his Lodging with the melancholy dissatisfaction of a frustrate hope.

The wounded Gentleman being new cured, but still very lame, desired Audience
of the Nahab, that he might have justice for the mischief done him by an
Assassination and a Robbery. The Nahab readily admitted him, limping when he
came into his presence worse then when he first left his bed. The first
Compliment he made was of the Wounds he had received, and then he demanded
satisfaction for the loss of his Blood, and the Goods which had bin stolen from
him. The Nahab promised him to inform the King of the business, assuring him
that he should have no wrong done him upon the highway within the Territories
where he had to do. Four or five days after, the Nahab sent to Beber to know
how much the Loss which he pretended to have received amounted to. Beber
brought in an account of four and twenty thousand Roupies, or 12000 Crowns, and
for the loss of his Blood, he left it to the Kings Generosity.

His Account he made out thus:

Imprimis. A Note for the value of six thousand Roupies which he had lent a
Merchant when he departed for Marseilles, which Note was among the Papers he
had lost. As to that, the Nahab asked him whether the Notaries in France did
not make an Entry of such public Acts as were signed before them* Beber made
answer, that he should never be paid, if he could not produce the same Paper
that had bin taken from him, and that he could not demand his Money without it.
The Nahab replying; that that was contrary to the Custom of all Nations, and
that he knew it could not be as he said, added withal, that he should take no
care for his satisfaction in that particular. After that he read on.

Item. Five thousand Roupies in Gold and Silver Money.

Item. Four thousand Roupies in Gold Lace and Galoon to trim his Clothes.

Item. Two Diamond Rings at two thousand one hundred Roupies.

Item. Two other Rings, a Topaz, and another of seagreen water, which cost
three hundred Roupies.

Item. His Clothes, his Linen, and for a Chest of Medicaments, which might be
worth 4000 Roupies; of which he had procured his Surgeon to give in a Bill.

Item. A Chain of Gold valued at 500 Roupies. In all amounting to 24000
Roupies, as I said before.

Two or three days after, the King caused an Order to be delivered to him for
the payment of his Money at the Treasury-Chamber. Upon which Order, he agreed
with a Merchant to be paid at Surat. And when he was ready to depart, the King
commanded 12000 Roupies to be paid him for the loss of his Blood. But that sum
he never received. For being in haste to be gone to Surat, and failing to
present the Treasurer, he drilled him out so long, that his patience was quite
tired, and so he was forced to go without it.

I could never understand the Policy of the Great Mogul to pay Beber the sum
which he said had bin taken from him; when the Nahab knew to a thread what he
had lost, and had given in an account thereof to the King; the whole not
amounting to 2000 Roupies. And as for the Franguis, so soon as they understood
that he had demanded 4000 Roupies for his Surgeons Chest, they all cried out
that it was a mere cheat. For a few days before Beber arrived at Agra, the
Surgeon had received 200 Roupies by the Charity of the Franks to return to
Surat, and he fell sick the next day that this Bill was presented to the Nahab.

After the Mogul had read the King of France's Letter, the Nahab by order of
his Master, ordered a Lodging to be provided for the Deputies, which overjoyed
the Jesuits, who were by that means rid of two very troublesome Guests. As for
Boulaye, in regard the King had signified his pleasure, that he would not
return any answer to the King's Letter till the arrival of the Ships, he never
troubled himself any farther* but staid till the waters were fallen, that he
might go to Bengale, and from thence to Golconda to settle a Trade in those
parts. But Beber moil'd like a horse, and did nothing but run to and fro, to
know the King's pleasure touching the settlement of Trade. But the Nahab either
laughed at him, or took little notice of what he said. For indeed by Beber's
outward appearance, and deportment, no man could make any other judgment of
him, but that he was a poor spirited fellow, and one that knew not what it was
to live. For all the Europeans that travel into Persia and the Indies are
always richly habited, nor would any of them keep Beber company, who by his
Habit looked rather like a Footman, than a Deputy of a Royal Company of Trade.
At length a whim took him to make himself a suit of painted Calicut, after the
French Fashion, the like whereof had never been seen in the Country; the whole
Suit not standing him in above 13 Livres and 13 Sous. For the trimming of his
new Suit he took off the Ribbands of his old Clothes, which he was two days
lathering, and smoothing with a Taylers Goose. When he had got this rare Habit
upon his back, he went to visit the Nahab, who was then attended by the
Principal Lords of the Court. Who when they saw him enter, fell all a gazing
upon him, and asked one another whether that Frangui were turned Faquir, or a
Dervich of Hossen Mamout, which they usually call the ragged Saint. For you
must know, that all the Faquirs or Derviches that are of this Order, never
apparel themselves but with such rags as they pick up in the streets, and if
they meet with any pieces better than other, they make of them a kind of Galoon
to trim the rest. They also carry half Pikes, with a great company of Tatters
fastened to the end of them, to make a show of their beggary. Beber's Habit
very much surpised the Nahab, and all others that beheld him so ridiculously
accouter'd. As he passed one morning by my window, I bid him good morrow,
telling him withal, that he looked more spruce and gay than he used to do. He
replied, that he had reason so to do, for that he had received Letters from
Surat, by which he had advice, that the Country people upon the Coast of Cape
St. John had decry'd four Vessels out at Sea, which they could not make to be
either English, or Hollanders, from whence he concluded that they were the
Companies ships; and that he was going to the Nahab with the News. But I
prevented him at that time, telling him that I had often observed that rascally
sort of people to come both to the English and Hollanders, with such kind of
Intelligence, on purpose to get Money; when indeed they had never seen any such
sight, and admonishing him not to believe Reports upon such slight foundations.
I asked him what date his Letters bore? he told me, thirty days ago. Then, said
I, if the discovery had bin true, the Nahab would have had notice of it in
fourteen; and then he would certainly have told you of it, or my self; for it
is but two days since I took my leave of him. Thereupon he took my counsel and
resolved for Surat in a few days.

Three days after that the Surgeon had given in his Bill for the Chest of
Medicaments that he had lost among Beber's Baggage, he was so touched in
Conscience, that he fell sick, and died in two days. Upon his deathbed he
asked pardon of God for the Cheat which he had consented to, to ask 4000
Roupies for that which was really worth but four hundred; 200 of which he had
received from the Charity of the Franguis, the rest upon the sale of a Horse.

For my part, finding that Beber was resolved for Surat, I made what have I
could out of Agra, to be quit of his company. But the second day after my
departure, having set up my tent by a Rivers side, just as I was going to
dinner I spied Beber coming, nor could I get rid of him afterward till I came
to Surat. So that we were forced to travel together, though he committed a
thousand Impertinencies by the way. Among the rest, he put one trick upon the
Chief of the Cheraffs or Bankers at Brampour, not to be passed over in silence.

In regard the ways were bad, and that he had but one pitiful weak Chariot, and
four weak Boys, which with the help of Oxen, were hardly strong enough to help
him out when he stuck in the mire, he seldom came to his journeys end till two
or three hours after me. Now upon the report that ran of the French ships being
seen out at Sea* and the general belief that Beber would be one of the
Principal Trustees of the Company, several, as I said before, courted him, and
sought to engage his Friendship. Being arrived at Brampour, the Chief of the
Cheraffs, attended by a dozen of his servants came to visit us. Upon the first
acquaintance Beber told him that he wanted a Pallaquin to go to Surat,
whereupon the Cheraff civilly offered him his, and caused it to be trimmed up
for his better accommodation. Beber thought that trimming would have bin
finished in one day, when indeed it required three or four. The next day I
ordered my Coach to be got ready, and ordered my Pallaquin to be carried away.
Beber, who verily believed that the Company's ships were already in the Road of
Surat, began to curse and bann the Cheraff, who presently came to him and
endeavored to appease him with good words. He told him, it could be no
prejudice to him to stay a day or two; for by that time the Roads would be
better, and he might travel the faster. But Beber, being transported with
passion, was so far from taking the Cheraffs reasons for satisfaction, that
snatching a Cudgel out of his Waggoners hands that stood next to him, he gave
the Cheraff three or four good Licks cross the shoulders. The Merchants and
other people that were in the Inn, were strangely surpised at such a piece of
rudeness, and ran out presently, some with Stones, and others with Cudgels,
making a hideous noise, and crying out, that they had never seen the like. They
took it for a most enormous Crime, to strike the Chief of the Cheraffs, above
fourscore years old, whose very age ought to have bin protection enough from
such an Affront. Good luck it was for Beber, after such a rash action
committed, that I was well known at Brampour, having been there ten or twelve
times, and in some of my Travels having dealt for above 200000 Roupies. There
were none of the Cheraffs with whom I had not dealt by Letters of Exchange, and
very few Merchants or Brokers who had not had some business or other upon my
account. They cried out, speaking of me; See there the Monsieur Franqui, with
whom we have dealt so often, yet never heard him give us an ill word. Another
good chance he had to meet there the Coutevall's Lieutenant, and three
Merchants of Surat; and thus between us, having disengaged Beber out of the
Brabble wherein he had so sillily bemir'd himself, we made him get into my
Coach, and so packt him out of the City. I followed him two hours after: for
had he staid longer in Brampour, I believe the Faquirs and Derviches would have
beat out his brains. For he was no sooner gone, but a great number of that sort
of rabble came to the Inn, crying out, Where was that Dog of a Cafer that had
beaten the Cheraff. Thereupon, seeing the Multitude increase, I stole out of
the Town, without saying a word, and rid on till I got three leagues from
Brampour, to an old Town called Badelpoura, where I overtook Beber, who had
hired a Coach made after the fashion of the Country. It was but reason, that I
should have my own Coach to sleep in in the night: For though in all places
where you come to lie in the night, the Indians will offer you a little bed to
lie on, yet in regard the rains were but just over, the bedsteads were so full
of Puhies, that there was no resting. These Punies are ingender'd by the
moisture which the rains, that fall for four months together, cause in those
Countries. Which being over, and the Sun recovering its wonted heat, the women
carry forth their beds every morning, and beating them, well with good big
sticks, never leave till the Punies fall to the ground, and there turning up
their bellies presently dye. These beds consist of four feet and four round
stays, as broad and as long as you please. To the staves are fastened girths
about four fingers broad, which are much more commodious than the bottoms of
our beds that are plank'd with Deal or other wood. Over the girths they only
lay a single Coverlet or Sheet, which is a manner of lying easy enough,
considering the heat of the Country.

The fourth day after our departure from Brampour, being near a great Town
called Semqueles, in a flat Country, we perceived all the Plain covered with
Tents. It appeared to be the Camp of one of the chief Kans, or Lords, whom the
Great Mogull had sent with 50000 men against the Rebel Raja Sevagi. This Lord,
understanding who we were, very civilly sent us Melons, and Mango's, and bid
his Officers tell us withal, that we were out of all danger, and might safely
pursue our journey. Whatever I could say to Beber, to persuade him that it was
but an act of civility and good manners, to wait upon the Prince, I could by no
means engage him. I seeing his impertinency, shifted my habit, and sent one of
my servants to the Camp, to learn whether the Kan drank Wine; and understanding
that he did, I took a bottle of Spanish, and another of Schirus Wine, and a
small pocket Pistol delicately embellished with silver; and with this small
Present away I went to wait upon the General. Being come into his Presence, I
excused Beber, as not being well, and immediately presented him the little
Pistol, which he took, and bid me charge, being desirous to try it. After he
had shot it off, said he to his Lords that stood by, Now must we confess these
Franqui's to be ingenious. This man sees that I am going to the Wars, and
presents me wherewithal to desend my life. Then casting his eyes upon the
little Hamper, where the Bottles were, he asked what it was? They told him in
his Ear. Oh, said he, looking at the same time upon two or three Mim Bachi's,
or Colonels that were present, This Franqui Gentleman has given me a bottle of
Wine, well we must drink it; for I find I shall please him in so doing. When
the Mollah's heard him talk of Wine, they slunk away; which made the Kan laugh
heartily. These are Agi's, quoth he; they have bin Pilgrims to Mecca, and never
drink Wine after they come home again. Having taken my leave, he sent me a
Pomere, which is a kind of Scarf that may also serve for a Girdle. It was made
of white Satin with flowers of Gold, and might be worth about a hundred
Roupies. He that brought it, told me, I should do the Kan a great kindness, to
send him another bottle of Wine: thereupon I sent him two of three, which was
all my store. He sent me six Horsemen to conduct us three days journey, till we
had passed a great River that flows from the Mountains of the South, which
washing the City of Baroche, from whence it takes its Name, falls into the Bay
of Cambay.

When we came to our last stage, which is a great Town, called Barnoli, from
whence it is but 14 Leagues to Surat, Beber sent one of his Hirelings to give
notice thereof to Father Ambrose. When the News came, the Father went with the
Aleppo Merchant, often already mentioned, to borrow the English President's
Coaches: and there were about 15 or 16 more Coaches all in a train, with
several Horsemen and Merchant Banians that made have to meet the Deputy. This
happened upon the first of November, 1666. They carried with them Provision
enough to make merry, and every Banian had his Present ready. For my part, I as
soon as I had saluted the Father Capuchin, I went directly to my Lodging, where
I had left two Servants to take care of a Sum of Money which I had received of
the King of Persia, unwilling to hazard it upon the Road. For in whatever part
of the Indies I came, I had credit enough to buy without Money. I only gave my
Bills for payment at Agra, Visapour, Golconda, or Surat, where I generally left
my Money, as having received it there for the most part of the Lords or Kings
of the Country.

As for Beber, he was no Changeling, the follies that he committed are too
numerous to be related: but how he began the year 1667, is not to be omitted.

M. Thevenot, upon his return from Madraspatan and Golconda, lodged in the
Capuchins house. Beber going to visit him, told him, that the Capuchins were
the Hollanders Spies, and that he had often advised Father Ambrose to break
with them, and not to go any more to their House. That while he frequented
their Society, the French Company would be sure to find some obstacle in their
Trade when the Ships should arrive; and that if the Hollanders had not been at
Agra, they might have done what they pleased with the King. That the hundred
thousand Roupies which they had presented to the King and Grandees of the
Court, had hindered them from obtaining what they designed. By which it
appeared, he understood not the humor of the Hollanders; for they are not so
liberal: nor would all their tricks, or presents have any thing availed them,
the Great Mogul being desirous that all Nations should be welcome to his
Dominions, especially Merchants, as well they that import little, as they that
bring in much. M. Thevenot told him, that he had never observed so much of the
Hollanders in all his travels; for if it were true, that they had such a desire
to hinder the Trade of other Nations, they would not afford them passage in
their Ships, or to put their Goods aboard, as they often did. Moreover, they
send away many times one or two Ships according to the quantity, laden all with
strangers Goods, from Maslipatan or Surat, in which Ships, there is not
ofttimes so much as one Bale belonging to the Company. And this, added he, is
farther observable, That they afford their Freight cheaper then the English, or
any other Nation, who have Ships in these parts. Thus Monsieur Thevenot
endeavored to convince M. Beber; who would have had Father Ambrose have fallen
out with the Hollanders. But he knew better things then to disoblige persons to
whom he was so much beholding as he was every day. For every week they allowed
the house a certain quantity of Bread and Meat, and upon Fast-days sent them
Fish, Eggs, Brandy, and Wine, which were no such unkindnesses to be quarreled
with. Monsieur Thevenot at the same time told Beber, that he should do well to
repay Father Ambrose the Money which he had borrowed to pay for the Coach which
he had broken to serve him, as also that which he had given the Seamen, for
trying if they could discover the Companies Vessels upon the Coast. But he
turned his deaf ear to that discourse, and would never be persuaded to
reimburse the Money which Father Ambrose laid out for him. Monsieur Thevenot
perceiving his unwillingness, and pressing him to do things handsomely, put him
into such a chase, that he fell a swearing after such a violent rate, in a
Parlour, that was parted only by a thin board from the place where the Mass was
said, that one of the Friars, just ready to go to the Altar, came forth to
desire him to leave his blaspheming. But Beber's insolence took his admonition
so ill, that he very rudely beat the Friar in Mr. Thevenot's presence;
swearing, That had it not been out of respect to him, he would have knocked him
of the head. The Capuchin being so injuriously used, came to Me, being hardly
able to stir his neck, by reason of one of the blows that Beber had given him.
I chaft his neck with Oil of Coco's, and wrapped it up warm: but we durst not
speak a word of Beber's idle action, for fear of exposing our selves to the
laughter of the English and Hollanders, who would have made good sport with it.
Besides these Enormities, he put away his Servant that had saved his Life, and
kept his Wages. After that he went to lie at an Apothecaries house, whose Name
was Mouillon, who came from Goa, with a good quantity of Portugal Wine, and
kept a Tavern at Surat. While he lay there he had a great Contest with the
Merchant, who received the 24000 Roupies, which the King had given him for the
loss which he alleged that he and his Chyrurgeon had sustained. For the
Merchant would acknowledge the receipt of no more then 23900 Roupies, the other
Hundred being deducted for Fees of the Treasury. He also maintained, That the
Merchant had received the 12000 Roupies which the King had allowed him for the
loss of his Blood: but it was known that the Grand Treasurer would never pay
that Money. Thus when he saw that his Cheats were discovered to all the World,
he began to bethink himself how to get away: and we observed, that he would
fain have quitted Surat without noise. But there is such good Order taken both
by Land and Sea, that no person can go away without the knowledge and leave of
the Governor. For as the Countrymen that come from the other side of the water
cannot return unless they show a mark in their hands made with red Earth at the
Custom-house; neither Horse nor Coach can stir without a Note from the
Chabander, and another for the Radars, who lie sometimes two or three Leagues
from the Town. Beber nevertheless had some assurance from his Vintner, that he
might get into a Boat, by bidding the Boatmen carry him to Reynel, a large Town
on the other side of the water. The Master of the Boat asked him for his
Ticket, but Beber answered him with his Cudgel, forcing him forward, and
telling him, he was not to demand Billets of such a person as he was. As he was
got half way the River a great number of Soldiers hollowed after the Boatmen,
to row the Strangers back ashore. But Beber laid his hand upon his Sword, and
compelled the Boatmen to go forward. That evening, Beber being returned, the
poor Boatmen were apprehended, and bastinado'd till they were almost maimed.
The people cried out, that it was the Frangui that ought to be so served, and
not the poor Watermen, who had done nothing but by constraint.

Thus did this Envoy behave himself both in Persia and India, to the great
hindrance of the French Nation. Now let us see what became of both Boulaye and
Beber after all their Extravagancies.

The Sieur de la Boulaye, according to the account given by the Hollanders that
were at Agra, left the Town five or six days after my departure. Knowing I went
to Surat, he had played his game so well with me, that he got a Hamper of twelve
large bottles of Wine for 138 Roupies, though they cost me more, for which he
gave me a Note of his hand, that I have still in my custody, to be paid at
Surat, upon the arrival of the French Companies ships. From thence he traveled
to Patna, where he staid nine or ten days, partly with the English, partly with
the Hollanders: from whence he departed for Daca, the Residence of the
Governor of the Province. The Governor of the Province of Bengale was then
the Great Mogul's Uncle, whose name was Cha-Est-Kan, a potent Prince, who has
always under his Command thirty or forty thousand men.

At Patna, Boulaye had a project, that from thence he might easily pass into
China, and to that purpose he there embarked with some Persian Soldiers, who
were going to list themselves under Cha-Est-Kan. But after that, to this hour,
it never could be certainly known what became of him: but by all probable
conjectures, it is verily believed, that the Persian Soldiers murdered him and
his little Slave, in hopes of some good booty. Of the truth whereof, the
Observation that follows was no small evidence. About a quarter of a mile from
Daca lies a Town, where five several mungrel Portugal Officers, belonging to
the Governor of Bengale, as Canoneers and Carpenters, and some of the same
Nation that serve in the Cavalry of Cha-Est-Kan. There they have also a small
Church very well built, where an Austin Friar officiates, to whom, about three
months after Boulaye's departure from Patna, a certain Persian in the Habit of
a Soldier, with two more companions, brought two large Books, the one in
Folio, and the other in Quarto to sell. The Friar, who was a mungrel also,
understood no Latin; but finding them not to be in the Portugal Language, would
have stopped the Books as stolen from the Hollanders, had not the Soldier been
too strong for him. These Books were thought to have been Boulaye's; who, to my
knowledge, had two Chests full, well bound; in reading whereof he spent the
greatest part of his time. His Avarice was his Ruin; for had he taken a Bark
by himself, as I did when I went from Patna, and had obliged the Watermen to
give him good security, he could have run no hazard. For my part I took one
with four and twenty men; and every one, knowing I never spared for cost, gave
me excellent security. These Barks are little Galliots, which will undertake to
carry you to your journey's end, and name your own day. If you will lie ashore
every evening, they will set up your Tents; and stop at any Town or City to
take in Provisions. I never made so pleasant a Voyage in my life, nor with less
trouble. For in these Barks, there is a Room where the Sun cannot come in,
where you may repose in the day time, and sit in the cool Air on that side from
whence the Breez comes. There is another place covered for your Kitchen; and
another little Garderobe for the private deeds of Nature. By the way I killed
great store of large Geese, Cranes, and Crocodiles, which I gave the Watermen,
who were very glad of them; for they sold them in the Towns as they rowed
along. The people in those quarters are very good natured and officious. Diet
is little worth, as being the place where you may buy a hundred Pullets for a
Crown: and for three or four Pence, you may buy a Fish of a prodigious length
and bigness.

Beber's end was no less sad. For when the French Companies Ships were arrived,
M. Caron, who commanded them, and M. Rambos, with an Armenian, who had the
management of the chiefest part of the business, had been acquainted with what
had passed at Surat, between Beber and the Capuchins. Presently Affections and
Interests parted. Caron and Rambos took Beber's part; the Armenian held for the
Capuchins, which was at length the ruin of Beber and Rambos. The Holland
Commander going aboard to visit the Sieur Caron, upon his return would not
permit the Captain to stir out of his Cabin; so that Rambos and the Armenian
took upon them to wait upon the Commander. Upon this Occasion the Armenian took
upon him to precede Rambos, and briskly threw himself before the Frenchman;
who being provoked at the Affront, gave the Armenian a swinging cuff of the Ear
before all the company. To be short, the Sieur Caron, Rambos, and Beber holding
all together, the Armenian found himself too weak to resist: and in regard he
had the Management of the Cash, he was accused of Misbehaviour, and was
condemned to be hanged. But because they could not execute the Sentence which
they had given at Surat, they sent him away to the Council Royal of the Island
of Madagascar, of which M. Mondevergue was chief; who was so far from
confirming the Sentence given at Surat, that he admitted the Armenian to
justify himself; and finding that he was not only innocent, but that he might
be very useful to the Company, he sent him back to Surat with more power then
he had before. This put Beber and Rambos into a fit of Despair, to see the
person whom they thought to have ruined, now above them. Thereupon they found a
way to get 12000 Roupies a piece for their Wages, which they pretended to be
due from the Company: and with that and 24000 Roupies which Beber had of his
own they Embarked both together for Goa. Where, being arrived, Beber died soon
after: But as for Rambos, he returned home again through Ispahan.

OBSERVATIONS UPON THE TRADE OF THE EAST INDIES.
THat Nation which has a design to settle a Trade in the East Indies, must be
sure in the first place, to possess themselves of a convenient place in that
Country, to carine their Ships, and shelter themselves during the tempestuous
Seasons. This want of a good Haven is the reason that the English have not made
those advantages which otherwise they might have done; because it is impossible
that any Vessel should remain in those Seas without being carin'd, or else
eaten by the worms.

Therefore, because it is a long way from Europe to the East Indies, it would
be requisite to have a retreating place at the Cape of good Hope, to take in
fresh Water and Provisions, whether going or coming; but especially in their
return, in regard that the Ships being then laden, cannot take in Water for any
long time.

The Road of the Island of St. Helen's, where the English have built a Fort, is
a very commodious place: and if the Water be not so good upon the North-side,
yet the Plain is an excellent spot of Ground to sow, with convenience of all
things necessary for human support.

This advantage the English and Dutch have deprived all other Nations of, by
their Forts upon the Cape of good Hope, and St. Helen's. And therefore some
River's mouth, near the Cape of good Hope, ought to be sought for, for the same
purpose, which would be far more convenient then the Dauphin Island, where
there is no Trade but that of buying Cattle for their Hides; which being a
Trade of so little consequence, would ruin a Company to follow it.

The reason why I make this Proposal is, because that in the year 1648, two
Portugal Vessels being bound from Lisbon to the East Indies, and resolving to
touch at the Cape, to take in fresh Water, mistook their just Depths, so that
the Sea running high, they fell into a Bay, 18 or 20 Leagues from the Cape,
upon the Coast that looks to the West. In that Bay they found a River, whose
Water was very good; and the Blacks of the Country brought them Refreshments of
all sorts of Fowl, Fish, and Bullock's flesh. There they staid above 15 days,
and before they set sail, they took two of the Negro's, which they carried
along with them to Goa; to teach them the Portuguese Language; on purpose to
try if they could discover by them any knowledge of the Trade of the Country.
The Dutch Commander at Surat desired me, to inform my self, when I went to Goa,
what the Portugals had learnt from those two Negro's. But one St. Amand, a
French Ingeneer, who was Supervisor of the Fortifications of Goa, told me, That
he could not make them learn one word of the Language; and that he could only
guess by their signs, that they had some knowledge of Ambergreece and Elephants
Teeth. The Portugals however made no question but to meet with Gold, if they
could find a way to trade higher up in the Country. The Revolutions of
Portugal, and their Wars with Spain have hindered them from making any more
particular discovery of the Coast. Which it were to be wished the French would
undertake, provided they gave no cause of jealousy to the Hollanders, of what
they were going about.

There is also a necessity of possessing, or at least having the liberty of
some place near Surat, to ride safe in, and to wash and tallow in, in case they
should be staid by the Rain-Seasons. The reason is, because that during that
ill season, at what time it is impossible to keep the Seas, the Mogul jealous
of his Fortress of Surat suffers no Foreign Vessel in the River, where
nevertheless, the Ships being unladen, may ride securely from the terrible
Tempests that last for five Months.

The only secure place for the Companies Vessels would be the Town of Dia,
belonging to the Portugals.

The advantage of the situation is considerable for several reasons. The
circuit of the City contains almost 400 Houses, and might be capable to receive
a greater number of people, where the Ships would find all conveniences during
their stay. It is seated upon the Coast of Guzerat, upon a point of the Gulf
of Cambaye, looking toward the South-east. The form of it is almost round; and
above half the Circle environed by the Sea. It is not commanded by any Hill;
and the Portugals have begun those Fortifications, which might be easily
finished. It contains several Wells of very good Water, and a River which falls
into the Sea near the City, whose Water is better then that of Surat, or
Souali, and the Harbor is very commodious for Shipping.

The Portugals, when they had first settled themselves in the Indies, kept
there a Fleet composed of Galleys, Brigantines, and other light Vessels,
whereby they made themselves Masters, for a long time, of all the Trade of the
Places we have treated of. So that no Ship could trade, without the Governor
of Dia's Passport, who made it in the Name of the Viceroy that lived at Goa.
The Imposition, which the Ships paid, was sufficient to maintain the Fleet and
Garrison, and to enrich the Governor besides.

When the Rain-Seasons are over, that the wind sits at North and North-east,
you may sail from Dia to Surat in three or four Tides with light Vessels; but
great Ships that are laden must fetch a compass about the Bank.

The City has no Land belonging to it, but what it stands upon, yet it would be
no difficult thing to agree with the Raja, or Govervour of the Province, and to
obtain as much as should be sufficient for the Inhabitants.

Neither is the Land about it very fertile, and besides, the people are the
poorest in the whole Empire of the Mogul. Nevertheless the Country is so well
stored with Cattle, that an Ox or a Bufalo will not cost above two Piasters.

The English and Hollanders make use of these Cattle to feed their People, and
to spare the Provisions of their Ships, while they stay at Souali.

But it is observable that the Bufalo's flesh in those parts causes frequent
Dysenteries, which the Bullocks flesh or Beef never does.

The Raja that commands the Country has only the Title of Governor for life.
Which is common to most of the Raja's in the Mogul's Empire, whose Ancestors
were Lords of Provinces, where now their Descendants only enjoy the Titles of
Governors.

Having thus got possession of a good Post; the next thing of Importance is to
choose out two men considerable for their Honesty Prudence, and Skill in Trade,
who are to be allowed the full of their Expenses.

These two persons are to serve the Company, the one in the nature of a
President, with a Council, consisting of a certain number of persons, to assist
him. The other in the quality of a Broaker, who must be an Idolater of the
Country, and not a Mahumetan, in regard all the Workmen he has to deal with are
Idolaters.

Civility and Faith of Promise are altogether requisite to gain Credit among
strangers. And these particular qualities are required in the particular
Broakers, who are under the Broaker-General in the Provinces where the
Factories are settled.

Good Intelligence is necessary for these two persons, to understand the
alteration of Manufactures.

This alteration happens either through the craft and subtilty of the Workmen
and the Merchants themselves, or by the correspondence of the Broakers and
Workmen.

Which alteration may cause so much damage to the Company, that the Broakers
shall gain ten and twelve in the hundred by it.

If the President and Broaker-General combine with the particular Broakers and
Merchants, it will be a difficult thing for the Company to avoid being
deceived; but if these two persons are but faithful and honest, the fraud may
be easily remedi'd by changing the particular Broakers.

The Officers of a Company may be unfaithful to their Trust in this respect:

When a Vessel arrives in Port, the President for the Nation receives the
Company's Letters, and the Bills of Lading; upon which he calls his Council,
sends for the Broaker, and gives him a Copy of the said Bills.

The Broaker shows them to three or four of the principal Merchants of the
Country, who are wont to buy by whole sale. If the President and the Broaker
hold together for their own profit, the Broaker instead of facilitating the
sale as he ought to do, advises the Merchants to be shie, and to offer only
such a price: Then the President sends for the Broaker and these two or three
Merchants; and in the presence of the Council he asks the Merchants what they
will give for the Goods in the Bills of Lading mentioned. If the Merchants are
resolute to give no more then so much; The President puts off the sale 15 days
longer, more or less, as he pretends himself pressed to sell. In the mean time
he sends for the Merchants several times for a show, and at length, to avoid
suspicion, and to discharge himself, he asks the advice of the Council, and as
they approve, orders the delivery of the Goods to the Merchant.

But though the Temptations be very great, to which these two Officers are
subject, by reason of their power, their frequent opportunities, and their
distance from their Superiors, the Company, besides their being wary in their
Election, may remedy these disorders by depriving them of that pretense, which
the Dutch Commanders and Broakers have, of being constrained to sell off
presently to the Merchants in gross, to avoid the expenses of delay.

The Error which the Hollanders commit in this respect is, That their Officers
bespeak every year upon Credit all the Goods which they have occasion for in
the Empire of the Mogul, according to the Orders which they receive from
Batavia.

The credit of this Advance costs them sometimes twelve, sometimes fifteen per
Cent; so that so soon as their laden Vessels are arrived in the the Port where
they are to be sold, they are obliged to sell them presently off at the
Merchants rate first offered to their Broakers, to make up a present stock to
pay off their credit for the Goods bespoke for their Ships to carry back again,
and to get more credit for the next year. This is that which cherishes that
confederacy between the President, the Broaker and the Merchant, who makes
advantage enough of this necessity of selling.

Whereas the better way were, for them that carry the same Commodities which
the Hollanders do, to carry Money also to pay the Workmen for the Goods
bespoken for the next year.

The Company making this advantage shall not be put to pay that great Interest
of 12 and 15 per Cent.: and besides, they shall have better Goods, and better
cheap. The Ships loading shall be ready before they arrive in Port; and being
quick laden they may return before the bad Season. Neither shall the Company be
put to sell their Goods at a low price; because their Broakers will have time
to stay for the coming of Merchants from other parts; or else because they have
time enough to send them to other places, where they are sure of a quicker sale.

Observe also, That it is far more profitable to carry to the Indies Gold and
Silver in Ingots, rather then ready coined; for being coined the Money is
valued only according to their Alloys; and there is always a defalcation made
for the charge of Coinage.

The Broaker also, if he be dishonest, may combine with the Master of the
Mogul's Mint, which is settled in several parts of the Empire, and put a lower
value upon the Gold and Silver then it deserves, by telling the President and
Council, that upon the touch it appears to be no more worth.

But it is an easy thing to avoid this deceit, provided the President be a
person of credit and prudence, by sending for one of the Refiners of Gold and
Silver, that live in the Country, who perfectly understand the Touch of Metals,
and to let him Essay the Gold and Silver before the Broaker's face.

This is that which the Sieur Walkenton did for the Holland Company in their
Factory at Casambazar, where he bought every year six or seven thousand Bales
of Silk. For by this Essay he found, that his Broaker being in confederacy with
the Master of the Mint, had cheated the Company of one and a half and two per
Cent. in the value of the Gold and Silver which was brought him from Japan, as
well coined as in bar, to a very considerable sum of Money.

The Broaker also may confederate with the Master of the Mint to cousen the
Merchant in weghing his Gold or Silver, by making use of false Weights or
Scales unduly poised.

But that fraud is easily avoided, if the President and his Council will be but
so patient as to see their Metal weighed themselves, and take care that the
Weights be right, and the Scales true.

One of the most important Observations in reference to the Trade of the
Company, and discipline of their Factories is this:

To prevent the Merchants or under-Merchants, Accomptants and
under-Accomptants, who officiate under the Commanders and Broakers, from
driving any particular Trade by themselves, for they having a familiarity with
the men of Manufacture, and finding by the Letters of Advice what Goods are
likely to be most vendible next year, buy them up upon their own accounts, and
find a way to lade them off in the Company's Vessels, to the great damage of
the whole, though to the great gain of particular people.

And this the President permits them to do, either for his own Interest, or by
connivance under the pretense of their small Wages. The Captain of the Vessel
also winks at what they do, because he has a spell for loading and unloading.
And because these people having no great Stocks, are desirous to put off their
Goods with the first opportunities, they give order to their Correspondents to
under-sell the Company ten or twelve in the Hundred, which is the absolute ruin
of a Trade.

To remedy this disorder there ought to be a Fiscal, or King's Proctor, in
every of the chief Factories belonging to the Company, to act in the King's
Name, and by his Authority.

He is to be independent from the President and the Broaker, in the Exercise of
his Office; so that he may have an eye, as well upon their behavior, as upon
the demeanor of the under Officers.

He ought to be a person of good Credit, resolute and vigilant; and he must
have a strength of men correspondent to his Employment, and a Deputy to act
under him.

He is to have good Information of the departure of all Ships when they are
once laden, and when they are ready to set sail for the Port whither they are
bound. When he hears of the Arrival of any Ship, he ought to go himself, or
send his Deputy with a sufficient Guard, to take an Account of the Ship's
Lading.

If it be a place near to which there are any small Islands, or by-Nooks, it
behooves him to take care that no Goods be privately conveyed ashore in those
private corners, where there are receivers a now ready: and whatever he finds
thus privately unladen he shall have power to confiscate.

He shall also confiscate whatever he finds not Marked with the Company's Mark.

He may also discharge any inferior Officers to whom any such Bales shall
belong; and for the superior Officers, he shall complain of them to the
Company.

He shall have power to open all private Letters, to inform himself of
Prohibited Goods, and Private Correspondencies.

This Prohibition of Private Trading cannot be too severely imposed, and it is
observed with so much exactness in Holland, that when one of the Company's
Ships is ready to set sail from Amsterdam, a Burgomaster gives the Captain and
all the rest of the Seamen their Oaths, that they shall be contented with their
Wages, and meddle with nothing of Trade.

All the Officers of the Factory should be advanced by degrees, so that a
sub-Accomptant may have hopes to be a President; that the hopes of Advancement
may oblige them to live with more credit, and cause them to study to make
themselves more capable of all the Intrigues and Subtilties of the Trade of the
Country.

It is of great importance not to show any favor in this particular of
preferment, unless he have passed through all particular Degrees and Offices
beforehand. And thus much concerning the Discipline of the Factories.

OF THE COMMODITIES WHICH ARE Brought as well out of the Dominions of the GREAT
MOGUL, as out of the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour, and other neighboring
Territories; And also of the Weights and Prices of the said Commodities.
Of their Silk.
KAsembasar, a Village in the Kingdom of Bengala, sends abroad every year two
and twenty-thousand Bales of Silk; every Bale weighing a hundred pound. The
two and twenty Bales make two millions and two-hunder'd-thousand pound, at
sixteen ounces to the pound. The Hollanders usually carry away six or
seven-thousand Bales, and would carry away more, did not the Merchants of
Tartary, and the Mogul's Empire oppose them: for they buy up as much as the
Hollander; the rest the Natives keep to make their Stuffs. This Silk is also
brought into the Kingdom of Guzerat, the greatest part whereof comes to
Amadabat, and to Surat, where it is wrought up.

In the first place they make Carpets of Silk and Gold, others of Silk and
Silver, others all of Silk: for the Worsted Carpets are made at Vettapour, some
twelve leagues from Agra.

In the second place they make Satins with streaks of Gold and Silver; others
plain: with Taffata's after the same fashion.

In the third place they make Patoles, which are a sort of Silk-stuff very
thin, but painted with all sorts of Flowers, the manufacture whereof is at
Amadabat. They cost from eight Roupies to forty the piece. This is a Commodity
wherein the Dutch will not suffer any one of the Hollanders to trade in
particular: for they transport it to the Philippine-Islands, to the Islands of
Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and other neighboring Islands.

The raw-Silk of Kasembasar is yellowish, as are all the raw-Silks that come
from Persia and Sicily; but the Natives of Kasembasar have a way to whiten it,
with a Lie made of the ashes of a Tree which they call Adam's Fig Tree; which
makes it as white as the Palestine-Silk. The Hollanders send away all their
Merchandise which they fetch out of Bengala, by water, through a great Canal
that runs from Kasembasar into Ganges, for fifteen leagues together; from
whence it is as far by water down the Ganges to Ouguely, where they lade their
Ships.

Of the Calicuts: and first of the painted Calicuts, called Chites.
CHites or Painted Calicuts, which they call Calmendar, that is to say, done
with a Pencil, are made in the Kingdom of Golconda; and particularly about
Maslipatan. But there is made so little, that though a man should employ all
the Workmen that understand the Art of weaving Calicuts, he would hardly find
enough to make three Bales.

The Chites which are made in the Empire of the Great Mogul are all printed;
and nothing so beautiful, neither for the figures nor the fineness of the
Linen. Those which are made at Lahor, are the coarsest, and consequently the
cheapest of all. They are sold by Corges, every Corge consisting of twenty
pieces, which cost from 16 to 30 Roupies.

The Chites which are made at Seronge, are sold from 20 to 50 Roupies the
Corge, or thereabouts.

These Chites serve for Coverlets for Beds, for Sofra's or Table-cloaths after
the Country-fashion, Pillowbears, Handkerchiefs, but more especially for
Wastcoats as well for the men as women in Persia.

The fine Calicut- Chites are made at Brampour; and are used for Handkerchiefs
by those that snuff Tobacco.

The women also, over all Asia, make Veils of these Calicuts, to wear over
their heads, and about their shoulders, which Veils are called Ormis.

The Basta's or Calicuts painted red, blue, and black, are carried white to
Agra, and Amadabat, in regard those Cities are nearest to the places where the
Indigo is made that is used in coloring. They cost from two Roupies to 30 or
40 a-piece, according to the fineness and the quantity of Gold at the ends, and
sometimes upon the sides. The Indians have a way to dip some of these Calicuts
in a certain water that makes them look like Water'd-Chamlets, which adds also
to the price.

That sort which is sold for two Roupies, and so onward till ye come to twelve,
is transported to the Coast of Melinda, and it is the greatest Trade the
Governor of Mosambique drives, who sells them to the Cafres, that vend them
again among the Abyssins, and into the Kingdom of Saba: for those people not
understanding the use of Soap, need no more but only to wash these Calicuts in
water. That sort which is valued from 12 Roupies upward, is transported to the
Philippine-Islands, the Islands of Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and other adjacent
places. Where the women wear no other clothes, then a single piece of this
Calicut. One part whereof, without cutting it, serves for a Petticoat; the
other they wind about their stomachs and their heads.

White Calicuts.
White Calicuts come partly from Agra, and about Lahor, part from Bengala:
some from Brouda, Baroche, Renonsari, and other places. They are brought out of
the Loom to Renonsari, and Baroche, where they are whitened by reason of the
convenience of their Meadows, and the great store of Limons that grow
thereabouts. For the Calicuts are never so white as they should be, till they
are dipped in Limon-water.

The Calicuts that come from Agra, Lahor, and Bengala, are sold by the Corge,
and they are of several prices, from seventeen Roupies to three or
four-hunder'd, as the Merchant will have them wov'n.

The Calicuts that come from Renonsari, and Baroche, are one and twenty cubits
long, new out of the Loom; but in the whitening they shrink to twenty cubits.

Those of Brouda twenty cubits from the Loom, and shrink in the whitening to
nineteen and a half.

All the Calicuts or Bafta's that come from these three Cities, are of two
sorts: for some are broad, some are narrow. The narrow are those I have already
mentioned, the prices whereof are various, from two Mamoudi's to six.

The broad Bafta's are a cubit, and one third part wide; the whole piece twenty
cubits long. The usual price of them is from five Mamoudi's to twelve: but a
Merchant being upon the place, may cause them to be made much more large and
fine, till they are worth five-hundred Mamoudi's a-piece. I saw two pieces sold
for a thousand Mamoudi's.

The English brought one, and the Hollanders another, each Piece containing
eight and twenty cubits.

Mahamed Alibeg returning into Persia out of India, where he had been
Ambassador, presented Cha-Sef the second with a Coco-nut, about the bigness of
an Austrich-egg, all beset with Pearls: and when 'twas opened there was taken
out of it a Turbant that had sixty cubits of Calicut in length to make it, the
Cloth being so fine, that you could hardly feel it in your hand: For they will
spin their thread so fine, that the eye can hardly discern it, or at least it
seems to be but a Cob-web.

Twisted-Cotton.
COtton twisted and untwisted comes from the Provinces of Brampour and Guzerat.
Untwisted Cotton is never transported into Europe, being too cumbersome, and of
little value; only they send it to Ormus, Balsara, and sometimes to the
Philippine-Islands, and the Islands of Sinde. As for the twisted Cottons, the
English and Hollanders transport a good quantity, not of the finest, but of
that sort which is pric'd from fifteen to fifty Mamoudi's: It serves for wicks
for Candles, for Packsaddles, and for the ground of Silk-stuffs.

Indigo.
INdigo comes from several parts of the Great Mogul's Empire; and according to
the diversity of the places it differs in quality, and consequently in price.

In the first place, it comes from the Territories of Biana, Indoua, and Corsa
a day or two's journey from Agra: which is esteemed the best of all. It is made
also eight days journey from Surat, in a Village called Sarquess, two leagues
distance from Amadabat. Here the flat Indigo is made. There is also Indigo
little inferior in goodness and price, which comes from the King of Golconda's
Territories. The Mein of Surat, which contains 42 Serre's, or 34 and a half of
our pounds, is valued from 15 to 20 Roupies. They make as good as this at
Baroche. That which is made up about Agra is made up in half Balls, and is the
most sought for in all India. It is sold by the Mein, which in those places
contains 60 Serres, or 51 and three quarters of our pounds. The usual price is
from 36 to 40 Roupies. There grows also Indigo some 36 leagues from Brampour,
about a great Village called Raout, and round about the neighboring Towns in
the road to Surat: Of which the Natives usually make above a hunder'd-thousand
Roupies.

There comes Indigo also from Bengala, which the Holland-Company transports for
Maslipatan. But they buy this Indigo, and that of Brampour and Amadabat,
cheaper by 24 in the hundred, then that of Agra.

Indigo is made of an Herb which they sow every year after the rains are over:
which when it is grown up, is very like our Hemp. They cut it three times a
year; first when it is about two or three foot high; and they cut it within
half a foot of the ground; the first cutting far exceeds the two latter. The
second cutting is worse then the first by ten or twelve in the hundred. And
the third worse then the second by 12 in the hundred. The difference is found
by breaking a piece of the Paste, and observing the color. The color of that
Indigo which is made of the first cutting, is a Violet-blue, but more brisk and
lively than the two others: and that which is made of the second is more lively
then the third.

When they have cut the Herb, they throw it into Pits which they make with
Lime, which becomes so hard, that you would judge it to be one entire piece of
Marble. They are generally fourscore or a hundred paces in circuit; and being
half full of water, they fill them quite up with the Herb. Then they bruise and
jumble it in the water till the leaf, for the stalk is worth nothing, becomes
like a kind of thick mud. This being done, they let it settle for some days;
and when the settling is all at the bottom, and the water clear above, they let
out all the water. When the water is all drained out, they fill several baskets
with this slime, and in a plain Field you shall see several men at work, every
one at his own basket, making up little pieces of Indigo flat at the bottom, at
the top sharp like an egg. Though at Amadabat they make their pieces quite flat
like a small cake. Here you are to take particular notice, that the Merchants,
because they would not pay custom for an unnecessary weight, before they
transport their Indigo out of Asia into Europe, are very careful to cause it to
be sifted, to separate the dust from it; which they sell afterward to the
Natives of the Country to dye their Calicuts. They that sift this Indigo must
be careful to keep a Linnen-cloath before their faces, and that their nostrils
be well-stopt, leaving only two little holes for their eyes. Besides, they must
every half hour be sure to drink milk, which is a great preservative against
the piercing quality of the dust. Yet notwithstanding all this caution, they
that have sifted Indigo for nine or ten days, shall spit nothing but blew for a
good while together. Once I laid an Egg in the morning among the sisters, and
when I came to break it in the evening it was all blew within.

As they take the Paste out of the Baskets with their Fingers dipped in Oil, and
make it into Lumps, or Cakes, they lay them in the Sun to dry. Which is the
reason that when the Merchants buy Indigo, they burn some pieces of it, to try
whether there be any dust among it. For the Natives who take the Paste out of
the Baskets to make it into Lumps, lay it in the Sand, which mixes with the
Paste, and fouls it. But when the Merchants burn it, the Indigo turns to Ashes,
and the Sand remains. The Governors do what they can to make the Natives leave
their Knavery; but notwithstanding all their care, there will be some deceit.

Saltpeter.
GReat store of Saltpeter comes from Agra and Patna; but the refined costs
three times more then that which is not. The Hollanders have set up a
Warehouse fourteen Leagues above Patna, and when their Saltpeter is refined,
they transport it by water by Ogueli. A Mein of refined Saltpeter is worth
seven Mamoudi's.

Spice.
CArdamom, Ginger, Pepper, Nutmegs, Nutmeg-Flowers, Cloves and Cinnamon, are
all the different sorts of Spices known to us. I put Cardamom and Ginger in the
first place, because that Cardamom grows in the Territories of Visapour, and
Ginger in the Dominions of the Great Mogul. And as for other Spices, they are
brought from other Foreign parts to Surat, which is the grand Mart.

Cardamom is the most excellent of all other Spices, but it is very scarce; and
in regard there is no great store in the place where it grows, it is only made
use of in Asia, at the Tables of great Princes. Five hundred pound of
Cardamoms, are pric'd from a hundred to a hundred and ten Rials.

Ginger is brought in great quantities from Amadabat, where there grows more
than in any other part of Asia; and it is hardly to be imagined how much there
is transported candited into Foreign parts.

Pepper is of two sorts. There is a sort which is very small, another sort much
bigger; both which sorts are distinguished into small and great Pepper. The
larger sort comes from the Coast of Malavare; and Tuticorin and Calicut are the
Cities where it is brought up. Some of this Pepper comes from the Territories
of the King of Visapour, being vended at Rajapour, a little City in that
Kingdom. The Hollanders that purchase it of the Malavares, do not give Money
for it, but several sorts of Commodities in Exchange; as Cotton, Opium,
Vermilion, and Quicksilver; and this is the Pepper which is brought into
Europe. As for the little Pepper that comes from Bantam, Afchen, and some other
parts toward the East, there is none of it carried out of Asia, where it is
spent in vast quantities, especially among the Mahumetans. For there are double
the Grains of small Pepper in one pound, to what there are of the great Pepper;
besides that the great Pepper is hotter in the mouth.

The little Pepper that comes to Surat, has been sold some years for thirteen
or fourteen Mamoudi's the Mein; and so much I have seen the English give for
it, to transport it to Ormus, Balsara, and the Red Sea. As for the great
Pepper, which the Hollanders fetch from the Coast of Malavare, five hundred
pound in truck brings them in not above thirtyeight Reals; but by the
Commodities which they give in Barter, they gain Cent. per Cent.

The Nutmeg, the Nutmeg-Flow'r, the Clove, and Cinnamon, are the only Spices
which the Hollanders have in their own hands. The three first come from the
Molucca Islands; the fourth, which is Cinnamon, from the Island of Ceylan.

It Is observable of the Nutmeg, that the Tree which bears it is never planted,
which has been confirmed to me by several persons that have lived several years
in the Country. They related to me, that the Nutmeg being ripe, several Birds
come from the Islands toward the South, and devour it whole, but are forced to
throw it up again before it be digested. The Nutmeg then besmeared with a
viscous matter, falling to the ground takes root, and produces a Tree, which
would never thrive were it planted. This puts me in mind of making one
observation upon the Birds of Paradise. These Birds being very greedy after
Nutmegs, come in flights to gorge themselves with the pleasing Spice, at the
season, like Felfares in Vintage time; but the strength of the Nutmeg so
intoxicates them, that they fall dead drunk to the Earth, where the Emets in a
short time eat off their Legs. Hence it comes, that the Birds of Paradise are
said to have no Feet; which is not true however, for I have seen three or four
that had Feet; and a French Merchant sent one from Aleppo as a Present to Lewis
the Thirteenth that had Feet; of which the King made great account, as being a
very lovely Fowl.

But notwithstanding all the Hollanders Projects, you may buy Cloves at
Macassar without purchasing them of the Hollander; in regard the Islanders buy
them of the Dutch Captains and Soldiers, which the Hollanders have in those
places where the Cloves grow, giving them in exchange Rice, and other
necessaries for the support of life, without which they would starve, being
very sadly provided for.

When the Natives of Macassar are thus furnished of Cloves, they barter them in
Exchange for such Commodities as are brought them; sometimes they give
Tortoise-Shells in exchange, and Gold Dust; by which the Merchant gains six or
seven in the hundred, being better than the Money of the Island, though it be
Gold, by reason the King ofttimes enhances the value of it. The places where
Cloves grow, are Amboyna, Ellias, Seram, and Bouro.

The Islands of Banda also, in number six, viz. Nero, Lontour, Poulcay,
Roseguin, and Grenapuis, bear Nutmegs in great abundance. The Island of
Grenapuis is about six Leagues in compass, and ends in a sharp point, where
there is a continual fire burning out of the earth. The Island Damme, where
there grows great store of Nutmegs, and very big, was discovered in the year
1647, by Abel Tasman, a Dutch Commander.

The Price of Cloves and Nutmegs, as I have known them sold to the Hollanders
at Surat, was as follows.

The Mein of Surat contains forty Serres, which make thirty-four of our Pounds,
at sixteen Ounces to the Pound.

A Mein of Cloves was sold for a hundred and three Mamoudi's and a half.

A Mein of Mace was sold for a hundred and fifty-seven Mamoudi's and a half.

Nutmegs for fifty-six Mamoudi's and a half.

Cinnamon comes at present from the Island of Ceylan. The Tree that bears it is
very much like the Willow, and has three Barks. They never take off but the
first and second, which is accounted the best. They never meddle with the
third, for should the Knife enter that, the Tree would dye. So that it is an
art to take off the Cinnamon, which they learn from their youth. The Cinnamon
Spice is much dearer to the Hollanders then people think; for the King of
Ceylan, otherwise called King of Candy, from the name of his principal City,
being a sworn Enemy to the Hollanders, sends his Forces with an intention to
surprise them, when they gather their Cinnamon; so that they are forced to
bring seven or eight hundred men together to defend as many more that are at
work. Which great expense of theirs very much enhances the price of the
Cinnamon. There grows upon the Cinnamon Tree a certain fruit like an Olive,
though not to be eaten. This the Portugals were wont to put into a Caldron of
Water, together with the tops of the Branches, and boiled it till the Water was
all consumed. When it was cold, the upper part became a Paste like white Wax;
of which they made Tapers to set up in their Churches, for no sooner were the
Tapers lighted, but all the Church was perfumed. Formerly the Portugals brought
Cinnamon out of other Countries, belonging to the Raja's about Cochin. But the
Hollanders have destroyed all those places, so that the Cinnamon is now in
their hands. When the Portugals had that Coast, the English bought their
Cinnamon of them, and usually paid for it by the Mein fifty Mamoudi's.

Drugs that are brought to Surat, and brought from other Countries, with the
price of every one by the Mein.
Salt Armoniack, according to the usual price, costs by the Mein twenty
Mamoudi's. Borax, comes unrefin'd from Amadabat, as does Salt Armoniack, and
costs by the Mein thirty-five Mamoudi's. Gum-Lack, seven Mamoudi's and a half.
Gum-Lack washed, ten Mamoudi's. Gum-Lack in sticks of Wax, forty Mamoudi's.
There are some of these Sticks that cost fifty or sixty Mamoudi's the Mein, and
more when they mix Musk in the Gum. Saffron of Surat, which is good for nothing
but for coloring, four Mamoudi's and a half. Cumin White, eight Mamoudi's.
Cumin Black, three Mamoudi's. Arlet small, three Mamoudi's. Frankincense, that
comes from the Coast of Arabia, three Mamoudi's. Myrrh, that which is good,
called Mirra Gilet, thirty Mamoudi's. Myrrh Bolti, which comes from Arabia,
fifteen Mamoudi's. Cassia, two Mamoudi's. Sugar Candy, eighteen Mamoudi's.
Asutinat, a sort of Grain, very hot, one Mamoudi. Annise-seed gross, three
Mamoudi's and a half. Annise-seed small and hot, one Mamoudi and a half.
Oupelote, a Root, fourteen Mamoudi's. Cointre, five Mamoudi's. Auzerout, from
Persia, a hundred and twenty Mamoudi's. Alloes Succotrine, from Arabia, twenty
eight Mamoudi's. Licorice, four Mamoudi's. Lignum Aloes, in great pieces, two
hundred Mamoudi's. Lignum Aloes, in small pieces, four hundred Mamoudi's.
Vez-Cabouli, a certain Root, twelve Mamoudi's. There is a sort of Lignum Aloes
very Gummy, which comes to, by the Mein, four thousand Mamoudi's.
Gum-Lake for the most part comes from Pegu; yet there is some also brought
from Bengala, where it is very dear, by reason the Natives fetch that lively
Scarlet color out of it, with which they paint their Calicuts. Nevertheless,
the Hollanders buy it, and carry it into Persia for the same use of painting.
That which remains after the color is drawn off, is only fit to make sealing
Wax. That which comes from Pegu is not so dear, though as good for other
Countries. The difference is only this, that it is not so clean in Pegu, where
the Pismires foul it, as in Bengala, where it grows in a heathy place, full of
Shrubs, where those Animals cannot so well come at it. The Inhabitants of Pegu
never make any use of it in painting, being a dull sort of people, that are in
nothing at all industrious.

The Women of Surat get their livings by cleansing the Lake after the Scarlet
color is drawn from it. After that they give it what color they please, and
make it up into Sticks for sealing Wax. The English and Holland Company carry
away every year a hundred and fifty Chests. The price is about ten Pence the
pound.

Powdered Sugar is brought in great quantities out of the Kingdom of Bengala;
it causes also a very great Trade at Ougeli, Patna, Daca, and other places. I
have been told it for a very great certainty, by several ancient people in
Bengala, that Sugar being kept thirty years becomes absolute poison, and that
there is no Venom more dangerous, or that sooner works its effect. Loaf-Sugar
is also made at Amadabat, where they are perfectly skilled in refining it; for
which reason it is called Sugar Royal. These Sugar-Loaves usually weigh from
eight to ten pound.

Opium is brought from Brampour, a Town of good Trade between Agra and Surat.
The Hollanders buy great quantities, which they truck for their Pepper.

Tobacco also grows in abundance round about Brampour; sometimes there has been
so much that the Natives have let vast quantities rot upon the ground, for want
of gathering.

Coffee grows neither in Persia nor in India, where it is in no request; but
the Hollanders drive a great Trade in it, transporting it from Ormus into
Persia, as far as Great Tartary, from Balsara into Chaldea, Arabia,
Mesopotamia, and the other Provinces of Turkey. It was first found out by a
Hermit, whose name was Sheck-Siadeli, about twenty years ago, before which
time it was never heard of in any Author either ancient or modern.

Deceits in Silk Wares.
PLain Silk Wares may be altered in length, breadth, and quality. The quality
shows it self when they are of an even thread, when the weight is equal, and
when there is no Cotton thread in the Weft.

The Indians not having the art of gilding silver, put into their stripped Wares
threads of pure Gold, so that you must count the quantity of Gold threads to
see whether the Silk have its due number. And this also you must observe in
your Silks wov'n with Silver. As for Taffata's, you are only to mind whether
the pieces be all of a fineness, and to see by unfolding some of them, that
there be nothing within to augment the weight, and then weighing all the pieces
by themselves, to see that they all agree.

The colors of those Carpets which are made in India, do not last so long as
the color of those which are made in Persia; but for the workmanship it is
very lovely. The eye of the Broaker is to judge of the largeness, beauty, and
fineness of those Carpets which are wrought with Gold and Silver, and whether
they be fine and rich. But whether they be Carpets, or other Stuffs mixed with
Gold and Silver, it behooves the Buyer to pull out some of the Gold and Silver
Threads, to see whether they be of the right value or no.

Deceits in the White Calicuts.
THe deceits usually put upon Calicuts, are in fineness, length, and breadth.
Every Bale may contain two hundred pieces; among which they will juggle in five
or six or ten, less fine, or less white, shorter or narrower than according to
the scantling of the Bale, which cannot be found out but by examining them
piece by piece. The fineness is discerned by the eye, the length and breadth by
the measure. But the Indians practice a more cunning way, which is to count the
number of threads which ought to be in the breadth, according to the fineness
of the scantling. When the number fails, it is either more transparent, more
narrow, or more course. The difference is sometimes so difficult to be
perceived, that there is no way to find it out but by counting the threads. And
yet this difference in a great quantity comes to a great deal. For it is
nothing to cosen a Crown or two Crowns in a piece that comes but to fifteen or
twenty Crowns. Those that whiten these Calicuts, to save charges of a few
Limons, will knock the Calicuts excessively upon a Stone, which does fine
Calicuts a great injury, and lowers the price.

As for their Calicuts died blew or black, you must take care that the Workmen
do not knock them after they are folded, to make them look sleek; for many
times when they come to be unfolded, you shall find holes in the creases.

As for your painted and printed Calicuts, which are painted and printed as
they come out of the Loom, the Merchant must take care that what he bespeaks be
finished before the end of the Rains, for the thicker the Water is where they
are washed, the more lively will the printed and painted colors appear. It is
easy to distinguish between the printed and the painted Calicuts; and between
the neatness of the work: but for the fineness and other qualities, they are
not so easily discerned; and therefore the Broaker must be more careful.

Cheats in Cotton.
THe cheat in the weight is twofold. The first, by laying them in a moist
place; and thrusting in the middle of every Skain something to add to the
weight. The second, in not giving good weight when the Broaker receives it from
the Workman, or Merchant that delivers it.

There is but one cheat in the quality, that is by putting three or four
Skains, of a coarser Commodity then that which is uppermost, into one Mein.
Which in a great quantity mounts high; for there are some Cottons that are
worth an hundred Crowns the Mein. These two cheats being often used by the
Holland-Company, there is no way but to weigh your Commodity in the presence of
the Dutch-Commander, and his Council, and to examine every Mein Skain by Skain.
When this is done, they who are ordered to be at his examination, are obliged
to fix to every Bale a ticket of the weight and quality: for if there be a
faileur, they who fix the ticket are engaged to make good what is wanting.

Deceits in Indigo.
I Have told you, that when the Workmen have made up the Indigo-Paste into
lumps, with their fingers dipped in Oil, they lay them in the Sun a drying. Now
those that have a design to cheat the Merchants, dry them in the sand, to the
end that the sand sticking to the Indigo, should increase the weight. Sometimes
they lay up their Paste in moist places, which makes it give, and consequently
renders it more heavy. But if the Governor of the place discovers the cheat,
he makes them severely pay for it: and the best way of discovery is to burn
some pieces of Indigo, for the sand will remain.

Indian Broakers.
THe Broakers are as it were the Masters of the Indian Families; for they have
all Goods at their disposal. The Workmen choose the most aged and most
experienced, who are to endeavor equal advantages for the whole Tribe they
undertake for. Every evening that they return from their business, and that;
according to the custom of the Indians, who make no Suppers, they have eaten
some little piece of sweet-meat, and drank a glass of water, the eldest of the
Tribe meet at the Broaker's House, who gives them an account of what he has
done that day, and then they consult what he is to do next. Above all things,
they caution him to look to his hits, and to cheat, rather then be cheated.

FINIS.
CATALOGUS LIBRORUM.
FOLIO.
CAtalogus Impressorum Librorum Bibliothecae Bodleianae in Academia Oxoniensi
per Tho. Hide. Oxonii e Theatro Sheldoniano, 1674. Charletoni (Gualteri) M. D.
Exercitationes de Differentiis and nominibus Animalium, quibus accedunt
Mantissa Anatomica and quaedam de variis Fossilium Generibus, deque
Differentijs and nominibus Colorum. ( Figuris) Oxoniae e Theatro Sheldoniano,
1677. Ferrarij (Jo. Bap.) Lexicon Geographicum, Vol. 2. Cum Additionibus Ant.
Baudrand. Isenaci 1677. Historia and Antiquitates Universitatis Oxoniensis,
Vol. 2. Oxoniae e Theatro Sheldoniano. 1674. Jamblicus (Chalcidensis) de
Mysterijs Aegyptiorum, G. L. Interpret and notis Thomae Galei T. C. C. S.
Oxonij e Theatro Sheldoniano. 1678. Marmora Oxoniensia ex Arundelianis,
Seldenianis, aliisque conflata; cum Comment. Humphredi Prideaux, Seldeni and
Lydiati annotationibus. Oxonij e Theatro Sheldoniano. 1676. Theatri Oxoniensis
Encoenia, sive Comitia philologica, Jul. 6. Ann. 1677. Celebrata. Aelfredi
magni Anglorum Regis Vita, a Dom. Johanne Spelman conscripta, and
annotationibus illustrata, Oxonij e Theatro Sheldoniano. 1678. Dr. Henry
Hammond's Sermons. 1675. A Table of Ten Thousand square Numbers, by John Pell,
D. D. 1672. The Commentaries and Life of Julius Caesar, with the Notes of
Clemens Edmonds. 1677. Pocock's (Edw.) Commentary on Micha and Malaohi. Oxf. at
the Theater. 1677. Tavernier (Jo. Bapt.) Travels through Turkey into Persia,
and the East Indies, ( with Cuts) Land. 1677. Charas (Moses) Royal
Pharmacopoeia Galenical and Chemical. Land. 1678. Webster (John) Displaying of
supposed Witchcraft. 1677. The Natural History of Oxfordshire, being an Essay
toward the Natural History of England, by R. Plot, L. L. D. Hugo. Grotij opera
Theologica, Vol. 4. 1679. Episcopij opera, 1678. An English Bible in Folio, now
in the Press at the Theater in Oxford. Judge Hales Origination of Mankind,
1677.
QVARTO.
HIstoria Jacobitarum in Aegypto, Lybia, Nubia, Aethiopia tota, and part Cypri
insulae habitantium, per Jos. Abudacnum, Oxonij e Theatro Sheldoniano. Votum
pro Pace Christiana, Aut. Andr. Sall, D. D. Oxonij e Theatro Sheldoniano, 1678.
Lightfoot (Jo.) horae Hebraicae and Talmudicae in Corinthios. Paris^^s 1677.
Joannis Bonae (Cardinalis) Opera Theol. 1677. Binchii (M. Joan.) Mellificium
Theologicum. Amst. 1666. Seldenus (Jo.) de Nummis. Londini 1675. Mercurialis
(Hier.) de Art Gymnastica, (cum Figuris.) Amst. 1672. Moses Maimonides de Jure
Pauperis and Peregridi apud Judaeos. Heb, cum Notis Humph. Prideaux Oxon, 1679.
Horroccii (Jer.) opera Astronomica, nec non Wallisii Exercitationes tres. 1678.
Paladius de Gentibus Indicis and Bragmanibus G. L. Londini 1665. Ferrarij
(Alex.) Euclides Catholicus. Londini 1676. Testamentum Graecum. Genevae.
Duporti Gnomologia Homerica. 1660. Bonham's ( Josua) Sermon at the Visitation
held at Leicester, April 29. 1674. Sermon Preached before the
Artillery-Company, by William Durham. Les Motiss de la Conversion a la Religion
Reformee Du Francois de le Motte. A Londres, 1675. Pharmacopee Royale,
Galenique et Chymique, par Moyse Charas. Paris. 1676. An English Bible, with
the Liturgy, Apocrypha, and Singing Psalms. Oxford at the Theater, 1675. and in
small 4o, 1679. Cook (John) Sermon before the Mayor, December. 19. 1675. on John
8. 34. 1676. Luzancy 's Abjuration-Sermon at the Savoy, July 11. 1675. on John
8. 32. 1676. Pell (John) Introduction to Algebra. 1668. Senault (Jo. Fr.)
Christian Man. 1650. A Sermon at the Marshal Turenne 's Funeral, December. 15.
1675. 2. Sam. 3. 32. 1677. Tillotson 's (Jo.) Sermon before the King, April 18.
1675. Psalm. 119. 60. 1675. Twisden's (Sir Roger) Historical Vindication of the
Church of England. 1675. Wilkins (Jo) Sermon before the King, March 7. 1669. on
Prove. 13. 16, 17. 1674. Sermon before the King, March 19. 1670. on Ecclesiastes
12. 14. 1671. Cole (Gilbert) Conferences against the Church of Rome. Oxford, at
the Theater, 1674. Allestrey's ( R.) Divine Authority of Scripture, a Sermon, 2 Timothy 3. 15. 1673. Character of the Last Day, a Sermon before the King, 2 Pet.
3. 3. by John Fell Lord Bishop of Oxford. 1675. Clarendon (Edward Earl) Survey
of Hobs's Leviathan. Oxford, at the Theater, 1676.
OCTAVO.
TEstament English for Children: Printed at the Theater, Oxon. 1679. Homeri
Ilias Graece Cum Scholiis Didymi. Oxonii e Theatro Sheldoniano. Archimedes
Arenarius cum notis Jo. Wallis. Oxoniae e Theatro Sheldoniano. 1676. Oughtred
(Guil.) Opuscula hactenus inedita notis Jo. Wallesii. Oxonii e Theatro
Sheldoniano. 1677. Eugalenus (Seres) de Scorbuto. Hagae-Com. 1658. Grammar
English and French, by the Messieurs of the Port Royal. 1674. Lydiati Canones
Chronologici. Oxonii e Theatro Sheldoniano. 1675. Mayern (Theod. Torq.) de
Arthritide. Land. 1676. Gregory's Nomenclator. 1675. Needham (Gualt.) De
Formato Foetu. Londini, 1667. Parei (David) Chronologia Sacra. Amst. 1641.
Ruarit, Gro^ii, etc. Epistolae. Amst. 1677. Rhetore, Selecti. Gr. Lat. per Tho.
Gale. Oxonii e Theatro Sheldoniano. 1676. Psalterium Graecum juxta M. S.
Alexandrin. cum versione vulgata. Oxonii e Theatro Sheldoniano. 1678. Sandii
(Chr.) Interpretationes Paradoxae Quatuor Evangel. Cosmop. 1670. -- Historiae
Ecclesiastae. Cosmop. 1669. Smith (Tho.) De Ecclesiae Graecae Hodierno Statu
Epistola. Londini 1678. Theocratus cum Scholiis Graecis, e Theatro Sheldoniano.
Georgii Diaconi Epitome Logices Aristotelis Oxonii. Art of Speaking, London,
1676. Boil (Rob.) against Tho. Hobs. Land. 1674. -- Of Effluviums. Land. 1673.
-- Of Gems. Land. 1672. Barbets (Paul.) Surgery (with Cuts.) Land. 1676.
Barnets (Gilb.) Mystery of Iniquity. Land. 1676. Basilius Valentinus of Natural
and Supernatural things. Land. 1670. Fourneil's Discourse, with the General
Systeme of the Cartesian Philosophy. Land. 1670.
FINIS.

