A True and Impartial NARRATIVE OF THE Eminent Hand of God that Befell A QUAKER
And his FAMILY, At the Town of Panton in Lincolnshire; WHO Affirmed he was
commanded of GOD to Pronounce Mr. Ralph James Preacher of the GOSPEL A LEPER
FROM The Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot: The same Judgment of
LEPROSY shortly after falling upon one of his Children; himself, Wife, and the
rest of his Children, being also Afflicted with a painful Distemper.

Attested under the Hands of several Credible Persons, Eye and Ear Witnesses.

As by the NARRATIVE will more at large appear.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle without Temple
Bar. 1672.

A True and Impartial NARRATIVE OF THE Eminent Hand of God, that befell a Quaker
and his Family, at the Town of Panton in Lincolnshire.
Courteous Reader,
IN February last, one Mr. Benjamin Morley, a Person well known to Thousands in
this City, and of good Repute, dwelling in the Town of Ravensthorpe, in the
County of Northampton, coming then to London, to give his Son, that is a Shop
keeper at the Kings Arms in the Market place in Southwark a visit, among other
passages of Providence that he had heard or observed of the Works of God, since
his last being in London, he took an occasion to speak of his being lately in
Lincolnshire to visit the Churches, and having there heard by some persons,
some Hints of a memorable hand of God, that had befallen a Quaker and his
Family in that County, and being unwilling (if Truth) such a mighty Providence
should pass, without the utmost Testimony of its Certainty, resolved with
himself, to ride on purpose to the Town of Northwillingham, some ten Miles
beyond Lincoln, and accordingly did, and there received the Substance of this
following Discourse, from Mr. Ralph James Elder of the Church, his own Mouth,
and was so satisfied in the truth of what is here attested, knowing the
Sobriety and Worthiness of the Testor, who with great Humility, ascribing the
Glory only to God, gave him an Account from first to last, of all material
Circumstances relating to this mighty Providence, which several Ministers in
London, and other Intelligible Christians, hearing an Account of, from the
aforesaid Mr. Benjamin Morley, were very desirous to have it Related more at
large, from the Eye and Ear witnesses of the Place where these things had
happened, desiring also, that it might be attested under the Hands of several
Inhabitants, that it might gain Credit in the minds of all that should hear of
it, answerable to its weighty worth; did therefore request one Mr. John Green,
now dwelling in the New Rents near Deadmans place in Southwark, whose Birth was
within two Miles of this Town of Northwillingham, and also that well knows the
Elder of the Church there, and had had the same Relation some time since from
his own Mouth, to write this following Letter.

Beloved Brother Ralph James,
I Am by several Worthy Christians in London, desired to entreat you, to send
us an Account in VVriting, as full and as clear as it is possible for you to
remember, of what passed between your self and Richard Anderson of Panton, that
was the Quaker, concerning the Leprosy that befell his Child, and that
Sore-Pain that befell himself, his Wife, and the rest of his Children; for in
truth, it is utterly denied by the Quakers in London, they say it is a false
forged Lie of the Independent and Baptist People; And indeed it is scarce
credited by any, that so visible a Handiwork of the Great God, to the Glory of
his great Truth, and for the Reputation of the Holy Scriptures, as being the
Rule for his people to walk and square their Lives by, could be concealed from
a Publication, under several Credible persons Hands, as were Eye and Ear
witnesses, that so the Truth may be vindicated, to the Praise of God, and their
Mouths stopped that do gainsay it, and by the good Blessing of Heaven, those
poor deluded people called Quakers that are not hardened, may take seasonable
advice from this Landmark of Providence, to repent of their Grand Sin, of
setting up a Light within for a standing rule, that Men and Women must walk
after, rather then give heed to the Holy Scriptures, calling that a dead
Letter, and the Ordinances it calls upon us, to be found till Christ's personal
coming in the practice of Carnal, Low, and empty Services; This is the
Substance of what I am desired at this time to write unto you, so with my
entire Love to your self and Family, begging your daily Prayers to God for me,
and entreating your speedy Answer, I rest

Your truly affectionate, though unworthy Brother John Green.
London, this 12 of Feb. 1671.
Here follows Mr. Ralph James the Elder, his Answer to this Letter;
Brother Green,
I Have received your Letter, wherein I understand you desire, that I would
send you a Copy of that Discourse, and the handy work of God that appeared
betwixt me and a Quaker, I cannot by this Post answer your desires, for I must
have a little more time; I will show you the Reasons; there was some time ago a
dispute betwixt the Independants and the Quakers, and I was desired by some of
the Independants to be present, and I did then amongst other things tell them,
of this that past betwixt the Quaker and me; and in the same Month I was at
Rason Fair, where I met with him that was the Quaker, namely Richard Anderson,
and so I desired him that he would go with me to one Peter Stacy, who was at
that Meeting at that time, and was in the Town at that day; he is an
Independent, and declare what past betwixt him and me, and the Handiwork of God
that was upon him, his Wife, and Children; I said to him, I had no end nor
purpose in what I desired of him to speak, but that God might be Honored, so
he did relate before Peter Stacy of Brigg, an Independent, and Thomas Kidd of
Donnington a Baptist, the whole Circumstance, as by the Blessing of God, I will
endeavor to give you an Account, as speedily as I can: my Reason that I could
not send it at this time is, because the Congregation where we sought to God
for his Restoration, and the persons that he related it to since, do live many
Miles distant one from another, so that I must have a little time to get their
Hands to it; no more at present, b^^ my Christian Love to you, I rest,

Your truly Loving though unworthy Brother in the Lord Ralph James.
Northwillingham, Feb. 26. 1671.
Here follows the Second Letter from London, by way of Answer to this
preceding Letter.
Beloved Brother Ralph James.
I Received your Letter Dated February 26 1671. and have Communicated the same
to several worthy Ministers, and other Christians, to their great satisfaction,
who now are persuaded, what was reported in London concerning the Leprosy, is
not an invented Fable, but will in due time, and with the good Blessing of God,
prove as useful a Truth, as indeed it is eminent: They look upon it to be such
a witness of God, and indeed so little less then a Miracle, that should you
hold your peace, it might prove your great Sin, especially considering God
himself has given such a Decision of that great Controversy now on foot,
between those poor deluded People called Quakers, and the whole Christian
Profession in England, namely, whether the Scriptures be the Standard to try
Spirits by, or whether the Spirit be the Standard to try the Scriptures by;
that such a Contention should be between yourself and the Quaker, you for the
Scriptures to be the Rule to walk by, he for the Light within, to be the Rule
to walk by; And that as he told you, the same Spirit or Light within, did
Command him to pronounce you a Leper, from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of
the Foot, for saying he was Deluded, and a false Prophet, and that the Quakers
Light within, was not the Truth or Rule to walk by, but that he and they, were
a poor Deceived people; that God in just Judgment should meet such Confidence,
with the same Measure he meted and pronounced against you, is a matter worthy
to be known, and Read of all Men, to the everlasting praise of Gods Grace, that
in this our day, has thus added strength to the weak Hands and feeble Knees of
his poor people, in the vindication of the Scriptures of Truth, that was more
to Job and David, then their necessary Food; but I shall not farther enlarge at
this time, yet give my hearty thanks for your Letter, and earnestly request,
that as speedily as is possible, you will send up a full Narrative, under the
hands of several that were Eye and Ear witnesses; I think meet also to tell
you, that several Quakers here in London say, they have since this Report has
been abroad writ into Lincolnshire, and can hear of no such Man or Thing, but
say it is a very false Story raised on purpose, to blemish what they call Gods
Truth, and that now there is a Quaker in London from your parts, to protest
against the verity of what is attested; but this does not in the least give us
doubt of the Truth of your Testimony, neither are we afraid of the Face of any
that shall dare to obscure so eminent a Finger of Heaven, but shall God
assisting, speedily make it Public for his Truths sake, and do from our hearts
account it our bounden Duty in every Prayer, to give thanks to his Name, for so
eminent a handiwork, to the strengthening our hands after a daily increase in
love, and estimation of the Blessed worth of the Holy Scriptures, as a Lamp for
our Feet, and the more sure word of Prophecy, unto which we shall certainly do
well, that we take heed as unto a Light, that shines in a dark place; But
before I conclude, I must make it my earnest Request, that you will give us a
few Lines of the Reasons why this great Handy work of God has been so long
Concealed from Publication, in which Service you may give great satisfaction to
many here in London, that much wonder it has not been much more talked of, and
openly spread in every place, to the Honor of God, and deterring of poor
ignorant persons, from running after those deluded people called Quakers: thus
with my poor Prayers to Almighty God for your assistance in this and all your
Services for his Name and People, I rest

Your truly Affectionate though unworthy Brother, John Green.
March 26 1672*
Loving Brother,
ALthough it has been very long, yet I could not help it, by reason some of
the Testors live many Miles distant. But here I have sent you a True Relation
of the Discourse, and in short what passed betwixt me, and the Quaker, the
Heads of every particular that I can justly remember; and as concerning your
desires, why so Eminent a thing was not made known sooner, it had been
published at that present, but that a Slavish Fear possessed me, thinking that
Friends and others that had seen it, would have thought that I had gloried in
it: for, when that it was come to light by Brother Stanley, as having some
account of it from one of my Men, and then questioning of me, I was very much
possessed with fear in the Telling of it, as if, that if I should tell it, I
should have it thought I gloried in it, and so has discouraged me, that when I
have been telling of it, I have told it but in part; so that as it was wrought
by the hand of God, so it is now brought to light by the same hand of God. As
for your desire for several friends hands to attest the truth of this Relation,
I return you this answer; First, you have Thomas Baldock, who was an eye and
eare-witness of every particular where we sought God, he has sign^d it with
his hand. And then you have Peter Stacy an Independent, who had the Relation
from the Quakers own Mouth, before several other Witnesses, and also John
Laming, whose Sick Child the Quaker said he had a Command from God to Cure; who
does attest that the Assertion is true: And, as for my Brother and my self, we
went to him the 29th of Febru^ry last, viz. Richard Anderson, and examined him
again, and he confessed what is in the Assertion to be true; as for the Man, he
never went to the Quakers more, but came to our Meetings, till a Warrant came
to break them up, and then he went away* his Wife and that Child that was all
over spotted is dead: since I received your Letter there has been two Quakers
at me to know the Truth of this Relation, and I told them it as it is asserted,
and they went away VERY SAD, and told me, That they believed me; and they
showed me A LETTER that they had from London, to inquire about it; I told them
the Man's Name, and the place of his abode: No more, but my Christian Love to
you, and to the Rest of our Friends, though unknown, I rest, expecting an
Answer,

Your unworthy Brother in the Lord Ralph James.
Northwillingham, April 27. 1672.
The Narrative.
RIchard Anderson of Panton, about Ten miles from Lincoln, came to our Meeting
at Northwillingham, to hear the Gospel Preached; who, when he had been a Hearer
for some time, was Convinced, and said, he did believe, that Baptism in Water
was an Ordinance of God: and that both Men and Women ought to be Baptized in
Water, as taking Jesus Christ for our Leader and Example, so he went away at
that time; but, before he came again, he met with the People called Quakers,
who told him (as himself Confessed) that he must not look upon those outward
Ordinances, for they were low, but that now he must mind the Light within, and
be guided by it, and not by the Scriptures, for they were A DEAD LETTER: To
which Light he gave such heed, that when he came to our Meeting again, he much
contended against the Baptism of Water, and said, that now they were to be
Baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit, and not with Water, for the Spirit
was to try the Scriptures, and not the Scriptures to try the Spirit. In Answer
to which, I said, that I believed that the Scriptures were to try the Spirit,
and not the Spirit to try the Scriptures: he seemingly made light of it, and
said, That now we must mind the LIGHT WITHIN; in answer to which, I said I was
afraid that the Quakers were deceived, and guided by a Spirit of Delusion, and
that it was my Judgment, that all the Sons and Daughters of Men ought to be
Guided by the Scriptures: very much Discourse was betwixt us at that time, I,
in the Vindication of the Scriptures as being the Oracle of God, and the Rule
for us to walk by; and he for the Light within, to be the Rule for the Sons and
Daughters of Men to be guided by: But, as for every particular of our
Discourse, it is out of my remembrance, so he went away at that time. And the
Light which the Quakers did tell him (as he said) he must be guided by,
Commanded him within a short time after, so that he came very early one morning
to my House, and enquired for me; so I went to him, and he told me that he was
Commanded of God to come and reprove me for Speaking against the People of God,
(as he said) called Quakers, and to Exhort me to turn to the Light within, or
else he was, as he said. Commanded of God to Pronounce a Judgment against me: I
told him that I thought him to be a False Prophet, and possessed with a spirit
of Delusion, (then he said) he was Commanded of God to Pronounce me A LEPER;
and he did, from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot. In Answer to
these words, I said to him, through Gods Goodness I am not discouraged at what
thou say, but do believe that thou art a false Prophet, and possessed with a
Spirit of Delusion, and that I am not to take any notice of what thou say;
but I do desire with all my heart that the Lord would be pleased to let thee
see thy Evil, and the Error of thy way, that thou may repent, and confess
thy Error, that the Name of God may honored, his ways and (...) ^ established
and confirmed in his ways and appointments: So we parted, and he went a little
way from me, but returned again, and said unto me, Thou say that I am a
false Prophet, deceived, and possessed with a spirit of Delusion, but it will
be known by me or mine, or thee, whether I be A TRVE PROPHET, OR A FALSE ONE,
and so he went home; but within a short time after he came home, the Lord was
pleased to smite one of his Children (as he said) spotted all over, Himself and
Wife, and his other Children with a restless Pain in their Bodies also, so
that he was forced (as he said) to come again, and CONFESSED he was Deceived,
and that he was a False Prophet; and the same Judgment he had Pronounced
against Me, was fallen upon one of his Children, and that Himself, and his
Wife, and his other Children were taken with a restless Pain in their Bodies;
and he said, That he and his wife did believe, that if I would Pray to God for
them, they might all be restored again to their former healths. In Answer to
his words, I told him, I could not at present give him an Answer, but if he and
his wife would please to meet me at Dunnington, where I am to be by Promise the
next Lords Day, it may please God that his desire might then be answered. He
being very sad at that time, I fell a speaking to him, and asking him some
Questions about the Light within, which the Quakers bad him mind, and be guided
by; and he told me, that that Light many times, would, when he had fat down to
eat his Meat, and had drawn his Knife to cut it, have commanded him to put it
up again, and so he said he had done for several times, and gone without his
Meat, and that Light also, (as he said) persuaded him to Fast, and told him,
That he should Cure the sick, in obedience to which persuasion he did Fast, and
come to our Town of Northwillingham, to the House of one John Laming, whose
Child was then sick and weak, and he told me, he went to Cure their Child, but
that Light and Persuasion did deceive him, for he now saw he could not Cure the
Sick. So according to my promise I went to Dunnington, and he and his wife met
me there amongst our Friends, and did both Confess what is here
beforementioned, who also desired our Prayers to God for them; and so I with
the Congregation there met together, did seek unto God, for the removing of
that Distemper and Affliction which he with his wife there Confessed, that they
and their Children were under; and the Lord was Mercifully pleased to hear our
poor Prayers for them, and to restore them all to their former health again,
which he himself Confessed when he came to our Meetings afterward, to the
Praise of God alone for ever be it spoken.

This Relation is True, Witness my Hand, this 27th of April, 1672 Ralph James
of Northwillingham, in the County of Lincoln.

Now Follows the Testimony of the other Witnesses specifyed in the Letter.
I Peter Stacy being in September the 14th at Rason-Faire, and by occasion of a
Dispute betwixt some Independants and Baptists with the Quakers at Rouby, the
Truth of this above said Relation our Friends there present desired to know,
and then did Ralph James bring Richard Anderson the aforesaid Quaker, on whom
the Judgment specifyed had been inflicted, who owned the Truth of this Relation
before them all.

Witness my Hand this 24 of February, 1671/2. Peter Stacy.

The next Testimony is that of John Laming, mentioned in the Letter.
AS touching what is asserted in this Paper by Ralph James, I attest it to be
Truth, and that Richard Anderson the aforesaid Quaker did come to my House to
Bless my Sick Child, and said, God Bless thee, for I was sent to Bless thee,
and stroaked him on the Head.

Witness my Hand this 18th of April 1672. John Laming of Northwillingham, in
the County of Lincoln.

Next is the Testimony of Tho. Baldocke, who was an Eye and Eare-Witness, and
present where Prayer was put up to God.
AS touching Richard Anderson a Quaker, and his Wifes coming to Donnington, and
desiring the Churches Prayers for the Recovery of that Great Judgment, that (as
they owned) God was pleased to lay upon them, I attest to be Truth.

Witness my Hand this 18th of April, 1672. Thomas Baldocke.

The next is the Testimony of Thomas James.
FEbruary 29, 1671/2. Then did Richard Anderson the Quaker Confess what is here
asserted to be Truth; and also that when he came home the first time from
Northwillingham, he and his Family were all affrighted with restless pain, and
that after they had been at the Meeting at Donnington, where Prayers were made
to God for them, they were all Quieted; and, that his Wife was never at such a
Meeting before.

Witness my Hand this 18th of April, 1672. Thomas James of Northwillingh^^
(...) County of Lincoln.

I John Green, borne in the Town of Walesby, within two Miles of
Northwillingham, in the County of Lincoln, now dwelling at the Sign of the
Last in the New-Rents, near Deadmansplace in Southwarke, do testify, that for
this Twelve years I have known Mr. Ralph James, and had this Testimony from his
own Mouth, now some Months since, and do certainly believe the Truth of it,
having knowledge of him to be a Man of Good Reputation in the World, and of
Blameless Conversation; he having been also an Elder of a Congregation for many
years.

Witness my Hand this 10th of May, 1672. John Green.

FINIS.

