A True and perfect RELATION Of the Apprehension of 5. Friars, one Pilgrim and
three Soldiers; who were all bound for Jreland but were stayed and taken at S.
Ives, in the County of Cornwall, by the Vice Admiral Master Basset, and from
thence brought up to London, with the Master of their Ship, and committed to
Newgate on Friday the ninth of April, 1642.

With the several names of the Prisoners, and an Order of Parliament
concerning the same.

Henry Elsinge, Cler. D. Parli.

woodcut of a ship

London Printed for John Wright, 1642.

woodcut of a ship

A true and perfect Relation of the Apprehension of five Friars, one Pilgrim,
and three Soldiers, etc.
NOt to trouble my Reader with any tedious preamble to little or no purpose,
but to come readily and truly to the matter in hand, which being such an
extraordinary passage, of Gods good providence toward this Land and Nation; in
preserving us from the daily Plots and wicked machinations of his and our
adversaries. It is not fit it should lie al together smothered up in the pit of
oblivion; but be divulged and spread abroad in each corner of this Kingdom,
that so all true hearted Protestants may know, and knowing, may understand how
infinitely they are engaged to bless God for such wonderful deliverances, and
with David extol his Name, from one generation to another.

It were needless to stand upon particulars in a point so plain and obvious
to the eye of every faithful Protestant.

If you ask who is our adversaries, the question is soon answered, who? But
the Jesuits, Friars, Papists Priests, and others of the wicked adherents to
the sect of Rome.

If you ask how this is manifested, daily experience proves it; how many
hellish Plots and Conspiracies has this infernal tribe hatched against these
his Majesty's Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, since the beginning
of reformation? When the Illustrious splendour of the Gospel first began to
shine in our British Horizon to this present, poor afflicted Ireland can
sadly witness the truth hereof, whose deplorable condition at this time, by
the cruel inhumanity and barbarous actions of the blood thirsty Papists,
against the faithful Professors of the Protestant Religion in that Kingdom,
would extract tears from a heart of flint, to hear that such tigers should be
coucht under the shapes of men, but the particulars of this their tyranny, is
well known to all men.

I shall not therefore insist upon that or any other discourse, but come
briefly to this last project, hatch by their grandfather the Devil, blessed by
their holy father the Pope, put in practice by his children, the Friars and
Jesuits; but discovered by God, whose never slumbring eye continually sees,
and seeing, derides all such foolish combinations against his Church and
people, and now brought to light, that all true Christians and subjects may be
thankful for the same, and praise the great Name of the Lord for ever and ever.

In March last 1642, a certain ship under the conduct of Patrick Sym^t who was
Master thereof, should have transported it into Ireland, with these passengers,
whose names are as follows, Thomas Fastell, Teage Bar, Patrick Carr, Richard
Birke, Francis Cauthon, Friars; Malathyn Gaggon Pilgrim; Thomas Moham, Bryant
Mackall Greahall, Daniel Brianon Soldiers.

This goodly company being minded to visit their traitorous Confederates in
Ireland, upon what enterprise is not yet known, until the wisdom of the
Parliament shall further examine the business; but being greatly suspected,
and not without good cause, both ship and passengers were stayed in their
journey at Saint Ives in Cornwall, by the Vice Admiral M. Basset, and
information presently given to the Parliament, who immediately made an Order,
directed to the Sheriffs of each County, to provide stron guards for their
safe conduct to London, which was accordingly performed, and they committed to
Newgate on Friday the 9 of April 1642, where now they remain expecting the
pleasure of that Honorable Assembly for their further trial.

A true Copy of which order is here inserted.

Die Veneris 4 die Martii 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that the Master of
the ship, and the five Friars, a Pilgrim, three Soldiers, and what others
prisoners soever shall be delivered unto him by the Vice Admiral or his
deputy, were bound for Ireland, and taken at St. I^ves in the County of
Cornwall, by the said Vice Admiral Master Basset, be forthwith sent for up,
and the several Sheriffs of every County (through which they are to pass)
are hereby required to provide strong and sufficient guardes for the conducting
of the said persons in safe custody through their several Counties to London,
And the Sheriff of Cornwall ordered to receive the said prisoners at the Town
of Redruth, where they now are.

H. Elsing Cler. Parl.

To the Sheriffs of Cornwall to all other Sheriffs of Counties through which
they shall pass.
The names of the prisoners.
Patricke Symot, master of the ship. Thomas Fastell, Friars. Theage Bar,
Friars. Patrick Carr, Friars. Richard Birke, Friars. Francis Ca^thon, Friars.
Malathyn Gaggon, Pilgrim. Thomas Moham, Soldiers. Bryant Mackall Greahall,
Soldiers. Daniel Brianon, Soldiers.
FINIS.

