A True and Impartial RELATION OF THE INFORMATIONS AGAINST Three Witches, Viz.
TEMPERANCE LLOYD, MARY TREMBLES, and SUSANNA EDWARDS.
Who were Indicted, Arraigned, and Convicted at the Assizes holden for the
County of DEVON at the Castle of EXON, Aug. 14* 1682 WITH Their several
CONFESSIONS, taken before Thomas Gist Mayor, and John Davie Alderman of
Biddiford in the said County, where they were Inhabitants. AS ALSO Their
SPEECHES, CONFESSIONS, and BEHAVIOR, at the time and place of Execution on the
Twenty fifth of the said Month.

LONDON: Printed by Freeman Collins, and are to be Sold by T. Benskin, in St.
Brides Churchyard, and C. Yeo Bookseller in Exon. 1682.

TO THE READER
Reader,
THis Relation was written by a faithful ^^^able Hand, employed in taking the
^^^minations and Confessions of Tem^ Lloyd, Mary Trembles, and Susanna Edwards,
who were Executed the 25th of August 1682. When I have told you, that it is the
only T^^^^, Authentic, and Exact Account; and that if any others creep
abroad, they are lame and imperfect; I need no other Argument to recommend it
to thy Perusal; only that it is the more remarkable, in regard we have had no
Conviction or Execution of any Witches for many years past.

If thou do not believe the being of Witches, study the Sacred Writ; consider
that the W^^^^^ of Nations have provided Laws against such persons: Read those
of King 19.30.
Alfred, and the Canons Editus sub 81.42.
Edgaro Rege. And that it has been the Judgment of this Kingdom, appears by
an Act of Parliament which has provided Punishments proportionable to the
quality of this Offense.

Thou may at leisure consult the Learned Monarch King James, in his
Daemonologia, fol. 91. and the late Trial of Witches before the Honorable
Judicious Great Man, Judge Hales. See also Dr. More's learned Discourse,
entitled Saducismus Triumphatus, where the Subject of Witches and Spirits is
handled at large.

A True and Impartial RELATION OF The CONFESSIONS of Three Witches.
The Information of Dorcas Coleman, the Wife of John Coleman of Biddiford
aforesaid Mariner, taken upon her Oath before Thomas Gist Mayor of the
Borough, Town, and Manor of Biddiford aforesaid, and John Davie Alderman, two
of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the same Borough, etc. the 26th
day of July, Anno Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford. ss.
THe said Informant upon her Oath says, That about the end of the Month of
August, in the Year of our Lord God 1680. she was taken in tormenting Pains, by
pricking in her Arms, Stomach, and Heart, in such a manner, as she was never
taken so before.

Upon which, she this Informant did desire one Thomas Bremincom to repair unto
Doctor Bear for some remedy for these Pains. And very shortly afterward the
said Doctor Bear did repair unto this Informant.

And upon view of her Body he did say, that it was past his skill to ease her
of her said Pains; for he told her that she was Bewitched.

And further says, That at the time of her tormenting Pains, she this
Informant did see her the said Susanna Edwards in her Chamber: And that she
this Informant would point with her Finger at what place in the Chamber the
said Susanna Edwards would stand, and where she would go.

And further says, That she has continued so ever since, more or less every
Week.

And says, That when the said Susanna was apprehended concerning Grace Barnes
of Biddiford aforesaid, that this Informant did go to see the said Susanna. And
that when the said Susanna was in Prison, she did confess unto this Informant,
that she had bewitched her, and done her some bodily harm by bewitching of her.

And thereupon she fell down on her Knees, and desired this Informant to pray
for her the said Susanna Edwards.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Information of Thomas Bremincom of Biddiford in the County aforesaid Gent.
taken upon his Oath before us, Thomas Gist Mayor of the Borough, Town, and
Manor of Biddiford aforesaid, and John Davie Alderman, two of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace within the same Borough, etc. the 26 day of July, Anno
Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Informant upon his Oath says, That about two years ago, Dorcas
Coleman the Wife of John Coleman of Biddiford aforesaid Mariner, was taken
very sick, and in her Sickness this Informant did repair unto one Doctor Bear
for some Remedy for these Pains. The said Mr. Bear being come unto her, and
upon view of her Body did say, that it was past his skill to ease her, by
reason that she was bewitched.

And further says, That after that the said Mr. Bear had left her, he this
Informant did see one Susanna Edwards of Biddiford aforesaid Widow, to come
into her Chamber to visit her the said Dorcas.

This Informant further says, That as soon as the said Dorcas did see the said
Susanna Edwards, she did strive to fly in the face of the said Susanna; but was
not able to get out of the Chair wherein she sat. This Informant, and John
Coleman the said Dorcas's Husband, did strive to help her out of the Chair:
Upon which the said Susanna Edwards began to go backwards for to go out of the
Chamber.

And further says, That when the said Susanna was almost gone out of the
Chamber, the said Dorcas did slide out of the Chair upon her Back, and so
strive to go after the said Susanna. But this Informant and her said Husband
seeing her in such a sad condition, did endeavor to take her up from the
Ground, but could not, until that the said Susanna was gone down over the
Stairs.

This Informant further says, That at the same time of her tormenting Pains,
and when she could neither see nor speak, by reason that her pains were so
violent upon her, this Informant has seen her, the said Dorcas, to point with
her Hand which way the said Susanna Edwards was gone.

And further says, That immediately after he has gone out at the Fore-door of
the House where the said Dorcas does live, and has seen the said Susanna
Edwards to go the same way that the said Dorcas did point with her Hand.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Information of John Coleman of Biddiford in the County aforesaid Mariner,
taken upon his Oath before Thomas Gist Mayor of the Borough, Town and Manor
of Biddiford aforesaid, and John Davie Alderman, two of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace within the same Borough, etc. the 26th day of July, Anno Dom.
1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Informant upon his Oath says, That Dorcas Coleman his Wife has been
a long time sick in a very strange and unusual manner; And he has sought far
and near for Remedy.

And says, that one Doctor George Bear being advised with concerning her
Sickness, in this Deponents absence, (whilst he was at Sea) the said Mr. Bear
has (as this Informant was told by his said Wife, and his Uncle Thomas
Bremincom, at his return) said, that it was past his skill to prescribe
directions for her Cure, because that the said Dorcas was bewitched.

This Informant further says, That about three Months now last past, his said
Wife was sitting in a Chair, and being Speechless, he this Informant did see
one Susanna Edwards of Biddiford aforesaid Widow, to come into the Chamber
under a pretense to visit her.

Whereupon this Informants Wife did strive to come at her the said Susanna, but
could not get out of the Chair.

Upon which, this Informant and the said Thomas Bremincom did endeavor to help
her out of the Chair; and the said Susanna did go toward the Chamberdoor.

And further says, That when the said Susanna was come at the Chamber Door,
she the said Dorcas (remaining speechless as aforesaid) did slide out of the
Chair upon her Back, and so strove to come at her the said Susanna; but was not
able to rise from the Ground, until the said Susanna was gone down the Stairs.

And further says, That the said Dorcas has continued in such a strange and
unusual manner of Sickness ever since unto this day, with some intermissions.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.
Examined with the Original whereof this is a true Copy.

John Hill Town Clerk.



The Information of Grace Thomas of Biddiford in the County aforesaid Spinster,
taken upon her Oath the 3d day of July, in the 34th year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. before us Thomas Gist
Mayor of the Borough, Town, and Manor of Biddiford aforesaid, and John Davie
Alderman, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the same Borough,
etc.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Informant upon her Oath says, That upon or about the 2d day of
February, which was in the year of our Lord 1680. this Informant was taken with
great Pains in her Head and all her Limbs, which Pains continued on her till
near or upon the first day of August then following; and then this Informants
Pains began to abate, and this Informant was able to walk abroad to take the
Air: But in the Night-season she was in much pain, and not able to take her
rest.

This Informant further says, That upon or about the 30th day of September now
last past, this Informant was going up the High Street of Biddiford, where this
Informant met with Temperance Lloyd of Biddiford aforesaid Widow, and she the
said Temperance did then and there fall down on her Knees to this Informant,
and wept, (saying) Mrs. Grace, I am glad to see you so strong again.

Upon which this Informant said, Why do thou weep for me? Unto which the said
Temperance replied, I weep for Joy to see you so well again, as the said
Temperance then pretended.

This Informant further says, That in that very night she this Informant was
taken very ill with sticking and pricking Pains, as though Pins and Awls had
been thrust into her Body, from the Crown of her Head to the Soles of her Feet;
and this Informant lay as though it had been upon a Rack.

And says, That these pricking Pains have continued upon her Body ever since;
and that her Pains are much worse by night than by day.

This Informant further says, That on Thursday the first day of June last past
in the night, she this Informant was bound and seemingly chained up, with all
her sticking Pains gathered together in her Belly; so that on a sudden her
Belly was swollen as big as two Bellies, which caused her to cry out, I shall
die, I shall die; and in this sad condition this Informant lay as though she
had been dead for a long space (which those persons that were in the Chamber
with her this Informant did compute to be about two hours).

And this Informant further says, That on Fridaynight last, being the 30th day
of June, this Informant was again pinched and pricked to the Heart, with such
cruel thrusting pains in her Head, Shoulders, Arms, Hands, Thighs, and Legs, as
though the Flesh would have been then immediately torn from the Bones with a
man's Fingers and Thumbs.

And further says, That she was even plucked out over her Bed, and lay in this
condition for the space of three hours (as she was informed by some of the said
persons then in this Informants Chamber).

This Informant further says, That upon the first day of this instant July,
as soon as the aforesaid Temperance Lloyd was apprehended and put in the Prison
of Biddiford, she this Informant immediately felt her pricking and sticking
pains to cease and abate.

And says, That she has continued so ever since unto this time; but is still
in great weakness of Body.

And further says, That she believes that the said Temperance Lloyd has been
an Instrument of doing much hurt and harm unto her Body, by pricking and
tormenting of her in manner as before in this her Information she has set
forth.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Information of Elizabeth Eastchurch, the Wife of Thomas Eastchurch of
Biddiford in the County aforesaid Gent. taken upon her Oath before us Thomas
Gist Mayor of the Borough, Town, and Manor of Biddiford aforesaid, and John
Davie Alderman, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the same
Borough, etc. the 3d of July, in the 34th year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord Charles the Second, etc. Anno Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Informant upon her Oath says* That upon the 2d day of this instant
July, the said Grace Thomas, then lodging in this Informants said Husbands
house, and hearing of her to complain of great pricking pains in one of her
knees, she this Informant did see her said Knee, and observed that she had nine
places in her Knee which had been pricked; and that every of the said pricks
were as though it had been the prick of a Thorn. Whereupon this Informant
afterward, upon the same 2d day of July, did demand of the said Temperance
Lloyd whether she had any Wax or Clay in the form of a Picture whereby she had
pricked and tormented the said Grace Thomas?

Unto which the said Temperance made answer, that she had no Wax nor Clay, but
confessed that she had only a piece of Leather which she had pricked nine times.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Information of Anne Wakely, the Wife of William Wakely of Biddiford in the
County aforesaid Husbandman, taken the 3d day of July, Anno Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Informant upon her Oath says, That upon the second day of July
instant, she this Deponent, by order of the said Mr. Mayor, did search the Body
of the said Temperance Lloyd, in the presence of Honor Hooper, and several
other Women.

And upon search of her said Body, she this Informant did find in her Secret
Parts two Teats hanging nigh together like unto a piece of Flesh that a Child
had sucked. And that each of the said Teats was about an Inch in length. Upon
which this Informant did demand of her the said Temperance whether she had been
sucked at that place by the black Man? (meaning the Devil).

Whereunto the said Temperance did acknowledge, that she had been sucked there
often times by the black Man; and the last time that she was sucked by the said
black Man was the Fridy before she was searched, (which was the 30th day of
June last past).

And this Informant further says, That she has been an attendant of the said
Grace Thomas about six Weeks now last past: And that on Thursday now last past
(which was the 29th of June last past) in the Morning, she this Informant did
see something in the shape of a Magpie to come at the Chamber-window where the
said Grace Thomas did lodge. Upon which this Informant did demand of the said
Temperance Lloyd whether she did know of any Bird to come and flutter at the
said Window.

Unto which Question the said Temperance did then say, that it was the black
Man in the shape of the Bird; and that she the said Temperance was at that time
down by the said Thomas Eastchurch's Door of the House where the said Grace
Thomas did lodge.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The like is deposed by Honor Hooper, Servant unto the said Thomas Eastchurch,
as appears by her Information, taken upon her oath the day and year abovesaid,
before the said Thomas Gist Mayor, and John Davie Alderman, two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the Borough, Town, and Manor of
Biddiford.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman

Temperance Lloyd her Examination, taken the 3d day of July, in the 34th year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, defender of the Faith, etc. before
us Thomas Gist Mayor of the Borough, Town, and Manor of Biddisord aforesaid,
and John Davie Alderman, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the
same Borough, etc.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Informant being brought before us by some Constables of the said
Borough, upon the complaint of Thomas Eastchurch of Biddiford aforesaid Gent.
and charged upon suspicion of having used some Magical Art, Sorcery, or
Witchcraft upon the Body of Grace Thomas of Biddiford aforesaid Spinster; and
to have had Discourse or Familiarity with the Devil in the shape of a black
Man: And being demanded how long since she had Discourse or Familiarity with
the Devil in the likeness or shape of a black man,

Says, That about the 30th day of September last past she met with the Devil
in the shape or likeness of a black Man, about the middle of the Afternoon of
that day, in a certain Street or Lane in the Town of Biddiford aforesaid,
called Higher Gunstone Lane: And then and there he did tempt and solicit her
to go with him to the house of the said Thomas Eastchurch to torment the Body
of the said Grace Thomas; which this Examinant at first did refuse to do: But
afterward, by the temptation and persuasion of the Devil in the likeness of a
black Man as aforesaid, she did go to the house of the said Thomas Eastchurch,
and that she went up the stairs after the said black Man; and confesses, that
both of them went up into the Chamber where she the said Grace Thomas was, and
that there they found one Anne Wakely the Wife of William Wakely of Biddiford,
rubbing and stroaking one of the Arms of the said Grace Thomas.

And the said Examinant does further confess, that she did then and there pinch
with the Nails of her Fingers the said Grace Thomas in her Shoulders, Arms,
Thighs and Legs; and that afterward they came down from the said Grace Thomas
her Chamber into the Street together; and that there this Examinant did see
something in the form or shape of a Gray or Braget Cat; and says that the said
Cat went into the said Thomas Eastchurch's Shop.

The said Examinant, being further demanded whether she went any more unto the
said Thomas Eastchurch's house, says and confesses, that the day following
she came again to the said Thomas Eastchurch's house invisible, and was not
seen by any person; but there this Examinant did meet with the Braget Cat as
aforesaid; and the said Cat did retire and leap back into the said Thomas
Eastchurch's Shop.

The said Examinant, being further demanded when she was at the said Thonas
Eastchurch's house the last time, says, that she was at the said Mr.
Eastchurch's house upon Friday the 30th day of June last past; and that the
Devil in the shape of the said black Man was there with her: And that they went
up again into the said Chamber, where she found the said Grace Thomas lying in
her Bed in a very sad condition. Notwithstanding which, she this Examinant and
the said black Man did torment her again: And says and confesses, that she
this Examinant had almost drawn her out of her Bed, and that on purpose to put
her the said Grace out of her Life.

And further says, that the black man (or rather the Devil) did promise this
Examinant that no one should discover her.

And further confesses, that the said black Man (or rather the Devil, as
aforesaid) did suck her Teats which she now has in her Secret Parts: And that
she did kneel down to him in the Street, as she was returning to her own house,
and after that they had tormented the said Grace Thomas* in manner as last
above mentioned.

Being demanded of what stature the said black Man was, says, that he was
about the length of her Arm: And that his Eyes were very big; and that he hopt
or leapt in the way before her, and afterward did suck her again as she was
lying down; and that his sucking was with a great pain unto her, and afterward
vanished clear away out of her sight.

This Examinant does further confess, That upon the first day of June last
past, whilst the said Mr. Eastchurch and his Wife were absent, that the said
Examinant did pinch and prick the said Grace Thomas (with the aid and help of
the blackman, or rather the Devil) in her Belly, Stomach, and Breast; and that
they continued so tormenting of her about the space of two or three hours, with
an intent to have killed her.

And further says, that at the same time she did see the said Anne Wakely
rubbing and chasing of several parts of the said Grace Thomas her Body:
Although the said Anne Wakely, being present at taking of this Examination,
does affirm that she did not see the said Examinant.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
Whereas the said Temperance Lloyd has made such an ample Confession and
Declaration concerning the said Grace Thomas, we the said Mayor and Justices
were induced to demand of her some other Questions concerning other Witcheries
which she had practiced upon the Bodies of several other persons within this
Town, viz.

SHe the said Examinant did confess, that about the 14 day of March, which was
in the year of our Lord 1670. she was Accused, Indicted, and Arraigned, for
practicing of Witchcraft upon the Body of one William Herbert, late of
Biddiford aforesaid, Husbandman: And that although at the Trial of her life at
the Castle of Exeter, she was there acquitted by the Judge and Jury then; yet
this Examinant does now confess, that she is guilty thereof, by the persuasion
of the black Man; and that she did prick the said William Herbert unto death.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
ANd whereas upon or about the 15th of May, which was in the year of our Lord
1679. she was accused before the then Mayor and Justices of the Town of
Biddiford aforesaid, for practicing Witchcraft upon the Body of one Anne Fellow
the Daughter of Edward Fellow of Biddiford Gent. And although her Body was then
searched by four Women of the Town of Biddiford aforesaid, and the Proofs then
against her not so clear and conspicuous, the said Mr. Fellow did not further
prosecute against her; yet this Examinant does now confess that the said black
Man or Devil, (or some other black Man or Devil) with her this said Examinant*
did do some bodily hurt to the said Anne Fellow, and that thereupon the said
Anne Fellow did shortly die and depart this life.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
WHereas we, Thomas Eastchurch and Elizabeth Eastchurch his Wife, Honor Hooper,
and Anne Wakely, upon yesterday, which was the 3d of July, 1682. did give in
and deliver our several Informations upon our Oaths, before Thomas Gist Mayor
of the Borough, Town, and Manor of Biddiford aforesaid, and John Davie
Alderman, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the same Borough,
etc. of Biddiford, against Temperance Lloyd of Biddiford aforesaid Widow, for
using and practicing of Witchcraft upon the Body of Grace Thomas of the same
Town Spinster, as by our several Examinations it does and may appear.

But because we were dissatisfied in some particulars concerning a piece of
Leather which the said Temperance had confessed of unto the said Elizabeth
Eastchurch, in such manner as is mentioned in the said Elizabeth Eastchurch's
Examination, and we conceiving that there might be some enchantment used in or
about the said Leather: Therefore upon this present 4th day of July, we, with
the leave and approbation of the said Mr. Gist the Mayor, did bring the said
Temperance into the Parish Church of Biddiford aforesaid, in the presence of
Mr. Michael Ogilby Rector of the same Parish Church, and diverse other persons,
where the said Temperance was demanded by the said Mr. Ogilby how long since
the Devil did tempt her to do evil.

Whereupon she the said Temperance did say and confess, that about twelve years
ago she was tempted by the Devil to be instrumental to the death of William
Herbert named in her said Examination.

And that the Devil did promise her that she should live well and do well. And
she did then also confess that she was thereupon an Instrument of the death of
the said William Herbert.

And as to the said Grace Thomas, she further said and confessed, that on
Friday was Sevennight, (which was the 23th day of June last past) she the said
Temperance came into the said Thomas Eastchurch's Shop in the form and shape of
a Cat; And fetched out of the same Shop a Puppit or Picture, (commonly called a
Child's Baby) and that she carried the same up into the Chamber where the said
Grace Thomas did lodge, and left it about the Bed whereon the said Grace Thomas
did lie; but would not confess that she had pricked any Pins in the said Puppit
or Baby-picture, although she were demanded particularly that Question by the
said Mr. Ogilby.

Also the said Temperance did then and there confess, that she was the cause of
the death of Anne Fellow, the Daughter of Edward Fellow named in her said
Examination.

Also she did then and there confess, that she was the cause of the death of
one Jane Dallyn the late Wife of Simon Dallyn of Biddiford Mariner, by
pricking of her in one of her Eyes, which she did so secretly perform, that she
was never discovered or punished for the same.

Also the said Temperance Lloyd did confess and declare, that she did bewitch
unto death one Lydia Burman of Biddiford aforesaid Spinster, because she had
been a Witness against her the said Temperance at the Trial for her Life and
Death at the Assizes when she was Arraigned for the death of the said William
Herbert, and had deposed that the said Temperance had appeared unto her in the
shape of a red Pig at such time as the said Lydia was brewing in the house of
one Humphry Ackland of Biddiford aforesaid.

Being further demanded again in what part of the house of the said Mr.
Eastchurch, or in what part of the Bed whereon the said Grace Thomas lay, she
left the Puppit or Baby-picture abovementioned, says, that she would not nor
must not discover; for if she did discover the same, that the Devil would tear
her in pieces.

And afterward the said Mr. Ogilby desired the said Temperance to say the
Lords Prayer and her Creed; which she imperfectly performing, the said Mr.
Ogilby did give her many good Exhortations, and so departed from her.

In Witness whereof, we have hereunto set our Hands this 4th day of July, in
the Four and thirtieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the
Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
defender of the Faith, Annoqque Dom. 1682. July 4. 1682. Sworn before us Thomas
Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Information of Thomas Eastchurch of Biddiford in the County aforesaid
Gent. taken upon his Oath before us, Thomas Gist Mayor of the Borough, Town,
and Manor of Biddiford aforesaid, and John Davie Alderman, two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the same Borough, etc. the 3d day of
July, Anno Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Informant upon his Oath says, That upon yesterday, which was the
second day of July, he did hear the said Temperance Lloyd to say and confess,
that about the 30th day of September last past, as she was returning from the
Bakehouse with a Loaf of Bread under her Arm, toward her own House, she the
said Temperance Lloyd did meet with something in the likeness of a black Man,
in a Street called Higher GunstoneLane within this Town, and then and there the
said black man did tempt and persuade her to go to this Informant's house to
torment one Grace Thomas, who is this Informant's Sister-in law.

That the said Temperance did first refuse the Temptation, saying that the said
Grace Thomas had done her no harm. But afterward, by the further persuasion
and temptation of the said black Man, she did go to this Informant's house; and
that she went up the Stairs after the black Man: And confessed that both of
them went into the Chamber where this Informant's said Sister-in-law was, and
that there they found one Anne Wakely, the Wife of William Wakely of Biddiford,
rubbing of one of the Arms and one of the Legs of the said Grace Thomas.

And this Informant further says, That the said Temperance did also confess,
that the black Man did persuade the said Temperance to pinch the said Grace
Thomas in the Knees, Arms, and Shoulders; intimating with her Fingers how she
did it. And that when she came down the Stairs again into the Street, she saw a
Braget Cat go into this Informant's Shop; and that she believed it to be the
Devil.

And this Informant did hear the said Temperance to say and confess, that on
Friday-night last (which was the 30th day of June) the black Man did meet with
her near her own Door, about ten of the clock of that same night, and there did
again tempt her to go to this Informant's house, and to make an end of the said
Grace Thomas.

Whereupon the said Temperance did go to this Informant's house with the said
black Man, and that she went into the Chamber where the said Grace Thomas lay.

And further did confess, that she did pinch and prick the said Grace Thomas
again in several parts of her Body, (declaring with both of her Hands dow she
did do it). And that thereupon the said Grace Thomas did cry out terribly. And
confessed that the said black man told her that she should make an end of her
the said Grace Thomas.

And further she the said Temperance did say and confess, that the said black
Man did promise her the said Temperance that no one should discover her or see
her.

And she also confessed, that about twelve of the clock of that same night the
black Man did suck her in the Street in her Secret parts, she kneeling down to
him. That he had blackish Clothes, and was about the length of her Arm. That he
had broad Eyes, and a Mouth like a Toad, and afterward vanished clear away out
of her sight.

This Informant further says, That he heard the said Temperance to confess,
that about the first day of June last past the said black Man was with her
again, and told her, that on that night she the said Temperance should make an
end of the said Grace Thomas; and confessed that she the said Temperance had
that night griped the said Grace Thomas in her Belly, Stomach, and Breast, and
clipped her to the Heart.

And that the said Grace Thomas did cry out pitifully. And that the said
Temperance was about the space of two hours tormenting of her. And that one
Anne Wakely (with several other Women) were then present in the Chamber, but
could not see her the said Temperance; and that the black Man stood by her in
the same Room also.

This Informant further says, That he supposed that the said Grace Thomas in
her Sickness had been afflicted thorough a Distemper arising from a natural
cause, did repair unto several Physicians, but that she the said Grace could
never receive any benefit prescribed by them.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Information of William Herbert of Biddiford in the County aforesad
Blacksmith, taken upon his Oath the 12th day of August, in the 34th year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. before
Thomas Gist Mayor of the Borough, Town, and Manor of Biddiford aforesaid, and
John Davie Alderman, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the same
Borough, etc.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THis Informant upon his Oath says, That near or upon the 2d day of February,
which was in the year of our Lord God 1670. he did hear his Father William
Herbert to declare on his Deathbed, that Temperance Lloyd of Biddiford
aforesaid Widow had bewitched his said Father unto death.

This Informant's Father further declaring unto this Informant, that he, with
the rest of his Relations, should view his Father's Body after his Decease; and
that by his Body they should see what Prints and Marks the aforesaid Temperance
Lloyd had made upon his Body. And further says, that his said Father did lay
his blood to the charge of the said Temperance Lloyd, and desired this
Informant to see her aprehended for the same; which was accordingly done: And
says, that she was accused for the same, but that she was then acquitted at
the Assizes.

This Informant further says, That upon the fourth day of July now last past,
he went to the Prison of Biddiford, where the said Temperance was, (she being
then in the said Prison concerning Mrs. Grace Thomas) and demanded of her
whether she had done any bodily harm or hurt unto the said William Herbert
deceased, this Informant's late Father; unto which she answered and said,
Surely William I did kill thy Father.

This Informant did demand of her further, whether she had done any hurt or
harm to one Lydia Burman late of Biddiford Spinster. Unto which the said
Temperance Lloyd answered and said, that she was the cause of her death.

This Informant demanded of her the said Temperance, why she had not confessed
so much when she was in Prison last time? She answered, that her time was not
expired; For the Devil had given her greater power, and a longer time.

And this Informant did hear the said Temperance Lloyd to confess, that she was
the cause of the death of Anne Fellow the Daughter of Edward Fellow of
Biddiford Gent. And also that she the said Temperance was the cause of the
bewitching out of one of the Eyes of Jane the Wife of one Simon Dallyn of
Biddiford aforesaid Mariner.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.
Examined with the Original whereof this is a true Copy.

John Hill Town Clerk.



The Information of John Barnes of Biddiford in the County aforesaid Yeoman,
taken upon his Oath before us Thomas Gist Mayor of the Borough, Town and
Manor of Biddiford aforesaid, and John Davie Alderman, two of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace within the same Borough, etc. the 18th day of July, Anno
Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Informant upon his Oath says, That upon Easter-Tuesday, (which was
the 18th day of May last past) this Informant's Wife was taken with very great
pains of sticking and pricking in her Arms, Stomach, and Breast, as though she
had been stabbed with Awls, being so described unto him by the said Grace, in
such manner, as this Informant thought that she would have died immediately;
and in such sad condition she the said Grace has continued unto this present
day, in tormenting and grievous pains.

And further says, that upon Sunday last, which was the 16th day of July
instant, about ten of the Clock in Forenoon, this Informant's said Wife was
again taken worse than before, insomuch as Four Men and Women could hardly hold
her.

And at that same time, one Agnes Whitefield, the Wife of John Whitefield of
Biddiford aforesaid Cordwainer, being in this Informant's House, and hearing
somebody out at the Door, she did open the Door, where she found one Mary
Trembles of Biddiford aforesaid Single woman, standing with a White pot in her
hands, as though she had been going to the common Bakehouse. And thereupon this
Informant's Wife did ask of the said Agnes Whitefield who it was that was at
the door? Unto which the said Agnes Whitefield answered and said, that it was
Mary Trembles. Then this Informant's Wife did reply and said, that she the said
Mary Trembles was one of them that did torment her, and that she was come now
to put her the said Grace out of her Life.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Information of Grace Barnes, the Wife of John Barnes of Biddiford in the
County aforesaid Yeoman, taken upon her Oath before Thomas Gist Mayor of the
Borough, Town, and Manor of Biddiford aforesaid, and John Davie Alderman, two
of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the same Borough, etc. the 2d
day of August, Anno Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford. ss.
THe said Informant upon her Oath says, That she has been very much pained
and tormented in her Body these many years last past, insomuch that she has
sought out for Remedy far and near, and never had any suspicion that she had
had any Magical Art or Witchcraft used upon her Body, until it was about a year
and a half ago, that she was informed by some Physicians that it was so.

And further says, That thereupon she this Informant had some suspicion of one
Susanna Edwards of Biddiford aforesaid Widow, because that she the said Susanna
would oftentimes repair unto this Informants Husband's house upon frivolous or
no occasions at all.

And further says, That about the middle of the month of May last past, she
was taken with very great pains of sticking and pricking in her Arms, Breast,
and Heart, as though diverse Awls had been pricked or stuck into her Body, and
was in great tormenting pain for many days and nights together, with a very
little intermission.

And says, That upon Sunday the 16th day of July last, she was taken in a very
grievous and tormenting manner; at which instant of time one Agnes Whitefield,
the Wife of John Whitefield of Biddiford, was in this Informants Husband's
house, who opening the Door, and looking out, found one Mary Trembles of
Biddiford Single woman, standing before the Door. And thereupon this Informant
did ask of the said Agnes Whitefield who it was that stood at the Door; who
answered, that it was the said Mary Trembles. Upon which this Informant was
fully assured, that the said Mary Trembles, together with the said Susanna
Edwards, were the very persons that had tormented her, by using some Magical
Art or Witchcraft upon her said Body as aforesaid.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Information of William Edwards of Biddiford in the County aforesaid
Blacksmith, taken upon his Oath before us Thomas Gist Mayor of the Borough,
Town, and Manor of Biddiford aforesaid, and John Davie Alderman, two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the same Borough, etc the 18th day of
July, Anno Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Informant upon his Oath says, That upon the 17th day of July instant
this Informant did hear Susanna Edwards to confess, that the Devil had carnal
knowledge of her Body; and that he had sucked her in her Breast and in her
Secret parts.

And further says, that he did hear her the said Susanna to say, that she and
one Mary Trembles of Biddiford aforesaid Single woman, did appear hand in hand
invisible in John Barnes's house of Biddiford aforesaid, where Grace the Wife
of the said John Barnes did lie in a very sad condition.

And further says, That he did then also hear the said Susanna to say, that
she and the said Mary Trembles were at that time come to make an end of her the
said Grace Barnes.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Information of Joane Jones, the Wife of Anthony Jones of Biddiford in the
County aforesaid Husbandman, taken upon her Oath before us Thomas Gist Mayor,
and John Davie Alderman, the 18th day of July Anno Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Informant upon her Oath says, That upon the 18th day of July
instant, she this Informant being present with Susanna Edwards of Biddiford
aforesaid Widow, there came in to see the said Susanna one John Dunning of
Great Torrington, which said John Dunning this Informant did hear him to demand
of the said Susanna Edwards how and by what means she became a Witch.

Unto which question the said Susanna did answer, that she did never confess
before now, but now she would.

And further says, that she did hear the said Susanna Edwards to confess unto
the said John Dunning, that she was on a time out gathering of Wood, at which
time the said Susanna Edwards did see a Gentleman to draw nigh unto her;
whereupon she was in good hopes to have a piece of Money of him.

This Informant further says, that the said John Dunning did demand of her the
said Susanna, where she did meet with the said Gentleman; she the said Susanna
did answer, that it was in Parsonage Close. And further says, that after the
said John Dunning was gone, this Informant did hear the said Susanna Edwards to
confess, that on Sunday the 16th of July instant, she with Mary Trembles, and
by the help of the Devil, did prick and torment Grace the Wife of John Barnes
of Biddiford aforesaid.

And this Informant further says, That she did hear the said Susanna Edwards
and Mary Trembles to say and confess, that they did this present day, being the
18th of July instant, torment and prick her the said Grace Barnes again.

And further says, That she did hear the said Mary Trembles to say unto the
said Susanna Edwards; O thou Rogue, I will now confess all: For it is thou that
have made me to be a Witch, and thou art one thy self, and my Conscience must
swear it.

Unto which the said Susanna replied unto the said Mary Trembles, I did not
think that thou would have been such a Rogue to discover it.

And further says, That the said Susanna Edwards did say and confess, that the
Devil did oftentimes carry about her Spirit.

And further says, That she did hear the said Susanna to say and further
confess, that she did prick and torment one Dorcas Coleman the Wife of John
Coleman of Biddiford aforesaid Mariner.

And further says, That she did hear the said Susanna Edwards to confess, that
she was sucked in her Breast several times by the Devil in the shape of a Boy
lying by her in her Bed; and that it was very cold unto her. And further says,
that after she was sucked by him, the said Boy or Devil had the carnal knowledge
of her Body Four several times.

And this Informant further says, That her Husband Anthony Jones, observing
her the said Susanna to gripe and twinkle her Hands upon her own Body, said
unto her, Thou Devil, thou art now tormenting some person or other. Whereupon
the said Susanna was displeased with him, and said, Well enough, I will sit
thee: And at that present time the said Grace Barnes was in great pain with
prickings and stabbings unto her Heart, as she did afterward affirm.

This Informant further says, That one of the Constables and her said Husband,
with some others, were sent by Mr. Mayor to bring the said Grace Barnes unto
the Town Hall of Biddiford aforesaid; which they did accordingly do: and
immediately, as soon as he with others had led and with much ado brought the
said Grace Barnes into the Town Hall, she the said Susanna Edwards turned about
and looked upon her said Husband, and forthwith this Informants said Husband
was taken in a very said condition as he was leading and supporting the said
Grace Barnes up the Stairs of the said Town Hall before the Mayor and Justices;
insomuch that he cried out, Wife, I am now bewitched by this Devil, meaning
Susanna Edwards; and forthwith leapt and capered like a Madman, and fell a
shaking, quivering, and foaming, and lay for the space of half an hour like a
dying or dead man. And at length, coming to his Senses again* her said Husband
did declare unto this Informant, that the said Susanna Edwards had bewitched
him.

And this Informant further says, that she did never know her said Husband
Anthony Jones to be taken in any Fits or Convulsions, but a person of a sound
and healthy Body ever since he had been this Informants Husband.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Information of Anthony Jones of Biddiford in the County aforesaid
Husbandman, taken upon his Oath before us Thomas Gist Mayor of the Borough,
Town, and Manor of Biddiford aforesaid, and John Davie Alderman, two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the same Borough, etc. the 19th day of
July, Anno Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Informant upon his Oath says, that yesterday whilst the said Susanna
Edwards was in the Town hall of Biddiford concerning the said Grace Barnes, he
did observe the said Susanna to gripe and twinkle her Hands upon her own Body,
in an unusual manner: whereupon this Informant did say unto her, Thou Devil,
thou art now tormenting some person or other. Whereupon the said Susanna was
displeased with this Informant, and said, Well enough, I will fit thee. And at
that present time the said Grace Barnes was in great pains with prickings and
stabbings unto her Heart, as the said Grace did afterward affirm.

This Informant further says, That one of the Constables and he, with some
others, being sent by the order of Mr. Mayor to bring the said Grace unto the
Town Hall of Biddiford aforesaid; immediately, as soon as they had brought the
said Grace unto the Town Hall, she the said Susanna turned about and looked
upon this Informant, and forthwith with this Informant was taken in a very said
condition as he was coming up the Stairs of the said Town Hall before the Mayor
and Justices; insomuch that he cried out, Wife, I am now bewitched by this
Devil Susanna Edwards.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Examination of Mary Trembles of Biddiford in the County aforesaid Single
woman, taken before Thomas Gist Mayor of the Borough, Town, and Manor of
Biddiford aforesaid, and John Davie Alderman, two of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace within the same Borough, etc. the 18 day of July, Anno Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford ss.
THe said Examinant being brought before us, and accused for practicing of
Witchcraft upon the Body of Grace Barnes the Wife of John Barnes of Biddiford
aforesaid Yeoman, was demanded by us how long she had practiced Witchcraft,
said and confessed, That about three years last past, one Susanna Edwards of
Biddiford aforesaid Widow, did inform her, that if she would do as she the said
Susanna did, that this Examinant should do very well. Whereupon this Examinant
did yield unto the said Susanna Edwards, and said that she would do as the said
Susanna did.

And this Examinant further confesses, that the said Susanna Edwards did
promise that she this Examinant should neither want for Money, Meat, Drink, nor
Clothes.

And further confesses, That after that she had made this Bargain with the
said Susanna Edwards, that the Devil in the shape of a Lion (as she conceived)
did come to this Examinant, and lay with her, and had carnal knowledge of her
Body. And that after the Devil had had knowledge of her Body, that he did suck
her in her Secret parts, and that his sucking was so hard, which caused her to
cry out for the pain thereof.

And further confesses, That on Tuesday in Easter-week, which was the 18th day
of May last past, she this Examinant did go about the Town of Biddiford to beg
some Bread, and in her walk she did meet with the said Susanna Edwards, who
asked of this Examinant where she had been. Unto whom this Examinant answered,
That she had been about the Town, and had begged some Meat, but could get none.
Whereupon this Examinant, together with the said Susanna Edwards, did go to the
said John Barnes's house, in hope that there they should have some Meat. But
the said John Barnes not being within his house, they could get no Meat or
Bread, being denied by the said Grace Barnes and her Servant, who would not
give them any Meat. Whereupon the said Susanna Edwards and this Informant went
away from the said John Barnes his house. And afterward on the same day the
said Susanna Edwards did bid this Examinant to go to the said John Barnes his
house again for a Farthings worth of Tobacco. Whereupon this said Examinant did
go, but could not have any; whereof this Examinant did acquaint the said
Susanna Edwards, who then said that it should be better for her the said Grace
if that she had let this said Examinant to have had some Tobacco.

And further confesses, That on the 16 day of this instant month of July, she
this Examinant, with the said Susanna, did go to the said John Barnes his house
in Biddiford aforesaid, and went at the Fore-door invisibly into the Room,
where they did pinch and prick the said Grace Barnes almost unto death; and
that she saw the said John Barnes in bed with his Wife on the inner-side of the
Bed.

The said Examinant being further demanded how many times the Devil had had the
carnal knowledge of her Body besides the time abovementioned; She says and
confesses, That the Devil has had the carnal knowledge of her Body three
other times; and that the last of the said three times, was upon the said 16th
day of July as she was going toward the common Bakehouse. And that at that
time she, with the help of the Devil, would have killed the said Grace Barnes,
if that she the said Examinant had not spilt some of the Meat she was then
carrying unto the said Bakehouse.

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.

The Examination of Susanna Edwards of Biddiford aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid Widow, taken the 10th day of July, Anno Dom. 1682.
Devon. ss. Biddiford. ss.
THe said Examinant being brought before us, and accused for practicing of
Witchcraft upon the Body of Grace Barnes, the Wife of John Barnes of Biddiford
aforesaid Yeoman, was demanded by us how long since she had Discourse or
Familiarity with the Devil; says, That about two years ago she did meet with a
Gentleman in a Field called the Parsonage Close in the Town of Biddiford. And
says that his Apparel was all of black. Upon which she did hope to have a pice
of Money of him. Whereupon the Gentleman drawing near unto this Examinant, she
did make a Curchy or Courtesy unto him, as she did use so to do to Gentlemen.

Being demanded what and who the Gentleman she spoke of was, the said Examinant
answered and said, that it was the Devil.

And confessed, that the Devil did ask of her whether she was a Poor woman?
unto whom she answered, that she was a Poor woman; and that thereupon the Devil
in the shape of the Gentleman did say unto her, that if this Examinant would
grant him one request, that she should neither want for Meat, Drink, nor
Clothes: Whereupon this Examinant did say unto the said Gentleman, (or rather
the Devil) In the Name of God, what is it that I shall have? Upon which the
said Gentleman vanished clear away from her.

And further confesses, That afterward there was something in the shape of a
little Boy, which she thinks to be the Devil, came into her house and did lie
with her, and that he did suck her at her breast.

And confesses, that she did afterward meet him in a place called
Stambridge-lane in this Parish of Biddiford, leading toward Abbottisham (which
is the next Parish on the west of Biddiford aforesaid) where he did suck blood
out of her breast.

And further confesses, That on Sunday, which was the 16th day of July
instant, she this Examinant, together with Mary Trembles of Biddiford
aforesaid, Single woman, did go unto the house of John Barnes of Biddiford
aforesaid, Yeoman, and that no body did see them; and that they were in the
same room where Grace the Wife of the said John Barnes was, and that there they
did prick and pinch the said Grace Barnes with their fingers, and put her to
great pain and torment, insomuch that the said Grace Barnes was almost dead.

And confesses, that this present day she this Examinant did prick and torment
the said Grace Barnes again, (intimating with her Fingers how she did it). And
also confesses, that the Devil did entice her to make an end of her the said
Grace Barnes; and that he told her that he would come again to her once more
before she should go out of Town. And confesses, that she can go unto any
place invisible, and yet her Body shall be lying in her Bed. And further
confesses, that the Devil has appeared unto her in the shape of a Lion, as
she supposed.

Being demanded whether she had done any bodily hurt unto any other person
besides the said Grace Barnes, says and confesses, that she did prick and
torment one Dorcas Coleman, the Wife of John Coleman of Biddiford aforesaid
Mariner. And says, that she gave her self to the Devil when she did meet with
him in Stambridge-Lane, as aforesaid. And says, that the said Mary Trembles
was a Servant unto her this Examinant, in like manner as she this Examinant was
a Servant unto the Devil (whom she called by the Appellation of a Gentleman as
aforesaid.)

Thomas Gist Mayor. John Davie Alderman.
Examined with the Original, whereof this is a true Copy.

John Hill Town Clerk.



The Substance of the Last words and Confessions of Susanna Edwards, Temperance
Lloyd, and Mary Trembles, at the time and place of their Execution; as fully as
could be taken in a Case liable to so much noise and confusion, as is usual on
such Occasions.
Mr. H. MAry Trembles, What have you to say as to the Crime you are now to die
for?


Mary. I have spoke as much as I can speak already, and can speak no more.


H. In what shape did the Devil come to you?


Mary. The Devil came to me once, I think, like a Lion.


H. Did he offer any violence to you?


Mary. No, not at all, but did frighten me, and did nothing to me. And I cried
to God, and asked what he would have, and he vanished.


H. Did he give thee any Gift, or did thou make him any Promise?


Mary. No.


H. Had he any of thy blood?


Mary. No.


H. Did he come to make use of thy Body in a carnal manner?


Mary. Never in my life.


H. Have you a Teat in your Privy-parts?


Mary. None. The Grand Inquest said it was sworn to them.


H. Mary Trembles, Was not the Devil there with Susan when I was once in the
Prison with you, and under her Coats? the other told me that he was there, but
is now fled; and that the Devil was in the way when I was going to Taunton with
my Son who is a Minister. Thou speak now as a dying Woman, and as the
Psalmist says, I will confess my iniquities and acknowledge all my sin. We find
that Mary Magdalen had seven Devils, and she came to Christ and obtained Mercy:
And if thou break thy League with the Devil, and make a Covenant with God, thou
may also obtain Mercy. If thou have any thing to speak, speak thy mind.


Mary. I have spoke the very truth, and can speak no more:


Mr. H. I would desire they may come by me, and Confess as I have done.


H. Temperance Lloyd, Have you made any Contract with the Devil?


Temp. No.


H. Did he ever take any of thy blood?


Temp. No.


H. How did he appear to thee first, or where in the street? in what shape?


Temp. In a woeful shape.


H. Had he ever any carnal knowledge of thee?


Temp. No, never.


H. What did he do when he came to thee?


Temp. He caused me to go and do harm.


H. And did you go?


Temp. I did hurt a Woman sore against my Conscience: he carried me up to her
door, which was open: The Woman's name was Mrs. Grace Thomas.


H. What caused you to do her harm? what malice had you against her? did she do
you any harm?


Temp. No, she never did me any harm: but the Devil beat me about the Head
grievously because I would not kill her: but I did bruise her after this
fashion laying her two Hands to her Sides.


H. Did you bruise her till the blood came out of her Mouth and Nose?


Temp. No.


H. How many did you destroy and hurt?


Temp. None but she.


H. Did you know any Mariners that you or your Associates destroyed by
overturning of Ships and Boats?


Temp. No; I never hurt any Ship, Bark, or Boat in my life.


H. Was it you or Susan that did bewitch the Children?


Temp. I sold Apples, and the Child took an Apple from me, and the Mother took
the Apple from the Child; for the which I was very angry: but the Child died of
the Small Pox.


H. Do you know one Mr. Lutteril about these parts, or any of your
Confederates? did you or them bewitch his Child?


Temp. No.


H. Temperance, How did you come in to hurt Mrs. Grace Thomas? did you pass
through the Keyhole of the Door, or was the Door open?


Temp. The Devil did lead me up Stairs, and the Door was open: and this is all
the hurt I did.


H. How do you know it was the Devil?


Temp. I knew it by his Eyes?


H. Had you no Discourse or Treaty with him?


Temp. No; he said I should go along with him to destroy a woman, and I told
him I would not: he said he would make me; and then the Devil beat me about the
Head.


H. Why had you not called upon God?


Temp. He would not let me do it.


H. You say you never hurted Ships nor Boats; did you never ride over an Arm of
the Sea on a Cow?


Temp. No, no, Master, 'twas she, meaning Susan.

When Temperance said 'twas Susan, she said she lied, and that she was the
cause of her bringing to die: for she said when she was first brought to Goal,
if that she was hanged, she would have me hanged too; she reported I should
ride on a Cow before her, which I never did.


H. Susan, Did you see the shape of a Bullock? at the first time of your
Examination you said it was like a short black man, about the length of you Arm.


Sus. He was black, Sir.


H. Susan, Had you any knowledge of the bewitching of Mr. Lutteril's Child, or
did you know a place called Tranton Buroughs?


Sus. No.


H. Are you willing to have any Prayers?


Then Mr. H. prayed, whose Prayer we could not take; and they sung part of the
40 Psalm, at the desire of Susanna Edwards: As she mounted the Ladder, she
said, The Lord Jesus speed me; though my sins be as red as Scarlet, the Lord
Jesus can make them as white as Snow: The Lord help my Soul. Then was executed.

Mary Trembles said, Lord Jesus receive my Soul; Lord Jesus speed me; and then
was also executed.

Temperance Lloyd said, Jesus Christ speed me well: Lord forgive all my sins;
Lord Jesus Christ be merciful to my poor Soul.

Mr. Sheriff. You are looked on as the woman that has debaucht the other two:
Did you ever lie with Devils?


Temp. No.


Sh. Did not you know of their coming to Goal?


Temp. No.


Sh. Have you any thing to say to satisfy the world?


Temp. I forgive them, as I desire the Lord Jesus Christ will forgive me. The
greatest thing I did was to Mrs. Grace Thomas; and I desire I may be sensible
of it, and that the Lord Jesus Christ may forgive me. The Devil met me in the
street, and bid me kill her; and because I would not, he beat me about the head
and back.


Mr. Sh. In what Shape or Color was he?


Temp. In black, like a Bullock.


Sh. How do you know you did it? how went you in, through the Keyhole, or the
Door?


Temp. At the Door.


Sh. Had you no discourse with the Devil?


Temp. Never but this day six weeks.


Sh. You were charged about 12 years since, and did you never see the Devil but
this time?


Temp. Yes, once before: I was going for Brooms, and he came to me and said,
This poor woman has a great burden; and would help ease me of my Burden: and
I said, The Lord had enabled me to carry it so far, and I hope I shall be able
to carry it further.


Sh. Did the Devil never promise you any thing?


Temp. No, never.


Sh. Then you have served a very bad Master, who gave you nothing. Well;
consider you are just departing this world: do you believe there is a God?


Temp. Yes.


Sh. Do you believe in Jesus Christ?


Temp. Yes; and I pray Jesus Christ to pardon all my sins.


And so was Executed. FINIS.

