A TRUE COPY OF THE PETITION OF THE CENTLEWOMEN, and Tradesmens-Wives in and
about the City of LONDON.

Delivered, To the Honorable, the KNIGHTS, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the
House of COMMONS in Parliament, the 4th, of February, 1641.

Together, With the Reasons why their Sex ought thus to Petition, as well as
the Men; and the manner how both their Petition and Reasons was delivered.

Likewise the Answer which the Honorable Assembly sent to them by Mr. Pym, as
they stood at the House-doore.

Whereunto is added the Prophecy of old Sybilla.

LONDON. Printed for John Bull, dwelling in Grubstreet. 1642.

TO THE HONORABLE Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the House of COMMONS
assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The most humble PETITION of the Gentlewomen, Trades-mens-wives, and many
others of the Femall Sex, all Inhabitants of the City of LONDON, and the
Suburbs thereof.
With lowest submission showing,
THat we also with all thankful humilty acknowledging the unwearied pains,
care, and great charge, besides hazatd of health and life, which you the noble
Worthies of this Honorable and Renowned Assembly have undergone, for safety
both of Church and Commonwealth, for a long time already past: for which not
only we your humble Petitioners, and all well affected in this Kingdom, but
also all other good Christians are bound, now, and at all times, to
acknowledge; yet notwithstanding that many worthy deeds have been done by you,
great danger and fear do still attend us, and will, as long as Popish Lords
and Superstitious Bishops are suffered to have their Voice in the House of
Peers, and that accursed and abominable Idol of the Mass suffered in the
Kingdom, and that Arch-enemy of our Prosperity and Reformation lies in the
Tower, yet not receiving his deserved punishment.

All these under correction, gives us great cause to suspect, that God is angry
with us, and to be the chief causes, why your Pious endeavors for a further
Reformation, proceeds not with that success as you desire, and is most
earnestly prayed for, of all that wish well to true Religion, and the
flourishing both of King and Kingdom; the insolences of the Papists and their
Abbettors, raises a just fear and suspicion of sowing sedition, and breaking
out into bloody persecution in this Kingdom, as they have done in Ireland, the
thoughts of which sad and Barbarous events, makes our tender hearts to melt
within us, forcing us humbly to Petition to this Honorable Assembly, to make
safe provision for your selves and us, before it be too late.

And whereas we, whose hearts have joined cheerfully with all those Petitions
which have bin exhibited unto you in the behalf of the purity of Religion, and
the liberty of our Husbands persons and estates, recounting our selves to have
an interest in the common privileges with them, do with the same confidence
assure our selves to find the same gracious acceptance with you, for easing of
those greevances, which in regard of our frail condition, do more nearly
concern us, and do deeply terrify our souls: our Domestical dangers with
which this kingdom is so much distracted, especially growing on us from those
treacherous and wicked attempts already are such, as we find our selves to have
as deep a share as any other.

We cannot but tremble at the very thoughts of the horrid and hideous facts,
which modesty forbids us now to name, occasioned by the bloody Wars in Germany,
his Majesty's late Northern Army, how often did it affright our hearts, whilst
their violence began to break out so furiously upon the persons of those,
whose Husbands or Parents were not able to rescue: we wish we had no cause to
speak of those insolences, and savage usage and unheard of rapes, exercised
upon our Sex in Jreland, and have we not just cause to fear they will prove
the forerunners of our r^ine? except Almighty God by the wisdom and care of
this Parliament be pleased to succor us, our Husbands and Children, which are
as dear and tender unto us, as the lives and blood of our hearts, to see them
murdered and mangled and cut in pieces before our eyes, to see our Children
dashed against the stones, and the Mothers milk mingled with the Infants blood,
running down the streets; to see our Houses on flaming fire over our heads: Oh
how dreadful would this be! we thought it misery enough (though nothing to
that we have just cause to fear) but few years since for some of our Sex, by
unjust divisions from their bosom comforts, to be rendered in a manner Widows,
and the children Fatherless, Husbands were imprisoned from the Society of
their Wives, even against the Laws of God and Nature, and little Infants
suffered in their Fathers banishments: thousands of our dearest friends have
bin compelled to fly from Episcopal persecutions into desert places amongst
wild Beasts, there finding more favor then in their native soil, and in the
midst of all the sorrows, such has the pity of the Prelates been, that our
cries could never enter into their ears or hearts, nor yet through multitudes
of obstructions could never have access or come nigh to those Royal mercies
of our most gracious Soverrigne, which we confidently hope, would have
relieved us: but after all these pressures ended, we humbly signify, that our
present fears are, that unless the bloodthirsty faction of the Papists and
Prelates be hindered in their designs, our selves here in England as well as
they in Ireland, shall be exposed to that misery which is more intolerable
then that which is already past, as namely to the rage not of men alone, but of
Devils incarnate, (as we may so say) besides the thraldom of our souls and
consciences in matters concerning God, which of all things are most dear unto
us.

Now the remembrance of all these fearful accidents aforementioned, do
strongly move us from the example of the Woman of Tekoa to fall submissively at
the feet of his Majesty, our dread Sovereign, and cry Help O King, help O
ye the noble Worthies now sitting in Parliament: And we humbly beseech you,
that you will be a means to his Majesty and the House of Peers, that they
will be pleased to take our heart breaking grievances into timely
consideration, and to add strength and encouragement to your noble endeavors,
and further that you would move his Majesty with our humble requests, that he
would be graciously pleased according to the example of the good King Asa, to
purge both the Court and Kingdom of that great Idolatrous service of the
Mass, which is tolerated in the Queens Court, this sin (as we conceive,)
is able to draw down a greater curse upon the whole Kingdom, then all your
noble and pious endeavors can prevent, which was the cause that the good and
pious King Asa would not suffer Idolatry in his own Mother, whose example if
it shall please his Majesty's gracious goodness to follow, in putting down
Popery and Idolatry both in great and small, in Court and in the Kingdom
throughout, to subdue the Papists and their abetters, and by taking away the
power of the Prelates, whose Government by long and woeful experience we have
found to be against the liberty of our conscience and the freedom of the
Gospel, and the sincere profession and practice thereof, then shall our fears
be removed, and we may expect that God will power down his blessings in
abundance both upon his Majesty, and upon this Honorable Assembly, and upon
the whole Land.

For which your new Petitioners shall pray affectionately.

The Reasons follow.
IT may be thought strange, and unbeseeming our sex to show our selves by way
of Petition to this Honorable Assembly: but the matter being rightly
considered, of the right and interest we have in the Common and public cause
of the Church, it will, as we conceive (under correction) be found a duty
commanded and required.

First, Because Christ has purchased us at as dear a rate as he has done
men, and therefore requires the like obedience for the same mercy, as of men.

Secondly, Because in the free enjoining of Christ in his own Laws, and a
flourishing estate of the Church and Commonwealth, consists the happiness
of Women as well as Men.

Thirdly, Because Women are sharers in the Common calamities that accompany
both Church and Commonwealth, when oppression is exercised over the Church or
Kingdom wherein they live; and an unlimited power have been given to Prelates
to exercise authority over the Consciences of Women, as well as Men; witness
Newgate, Smithfield, and other places of persecution, wherein Women as well as
Men have felt the smart of their fury.

Neither are we left without example in Scripture, for when the State of the
Church, in the time of King Abasuerus was by the bloody enemies thereof sought
to be utterly destroyed, we find that Ester the Queen and her Maids fasted
and prayed, and that Ester petitioned to the King in the behalf of the Church:
and though she enterprised this duty with the hazard of her own life, being
contrary to the Law to appear before the King before she were sent for, yet
her love to the Church carried her through all difficulties, to the performance
of that duty.

On which grounds we are imboldned to present out humble Petition unto this
Honorable Assembly, not weighing the reproaches which may and are by many cast
upon us, who (not well weighing the premises) scoff and deride our good
intent. We do it not out of any self conceit, or pride of heart, as seeking
to equal our selves with Men, either in Authority or wisdom: But according
to our places to discharge that duty we ow to God, and the cause of the
Church, as far as lies in us, following herein the example of the Men, which
have gone in this duty before us.

A Relation of the manner how it was delivered, with their Answer, sent by Mr.
Pym.
THe Petition with their Reasons was delivered the fourth of Feb. 1641. by
Mistress Anne Stagg a Gentlewoman and Brewers-wife, and many others with her
of like rank and quality, which when they had delivered it, after some time
spent in reading of it, the Honorable Assembly sent them an Answer by Master
Pym, which was performed in this manner.

Master Pym came to the Commons door, and called for the Women, and spoke unto
them in these words: Good Women, your Petition and the Reasons have been read
in the House; and is very thankefully accepted of, and is come in a seasonable
time: You shall ( God willing) receive from us all the satisfaction which we
can possibly give to your just and lawful desires. We entreat you to repair
to your Houses, and turn your Petition which you have delivered here, into
Prayers at home for us; for we have been, are, and shall be (to our utmost
power) ready to relieve you, your Husbands, and Children, and to perform the
trust committed unto us, toward God, our King and Country, as becomes
faithful Christians and Loyal Subjects.

The Prophecy of old Sybilla, Which secretly she told Tom Milla.
WHen Scotlands hundredth and ninth unconquered King,
The sixteen hundred, thirty and ninth year,
Into his age of thirty nine shall Reign,
Then shall the Papal overthrow appear,
Which all the Arts of Europe shall admire:
For Scotland shall that blessed work begin,
Then shall the Whore of Babell, we had here,
Be banished quite, which Bishops did bring in.
Then then brave England which was led so blind,
By their perverse Episcopapall pride,
And Irelands shameless superstitious sin,
Shall he suppressed, who cruelly have cride;
So thatt, hat sacred Prophetess Sybilla,
Shall shortly come to pass, she tells Tom Milla;
And Tom tells me, and I must tel't again,
Through Scotland, England. Ireland, France and Spain.
FINIS,

