ADVERTISEMENT.
SIr Thomas Morgan drew up the following Relation, at a Friend's desire, who
was unwilling, that Posterity should want an Authentic Account of the Actions
of the Six Thousand ENGLISH, whom Cromwell sent to assist the FRENCH, against
the SPANIARDS, and thought the Right they did their Country, by their
Behavior, might make some amends, for the Occasion of their being in that
Service. It had been printed in the last Reign, if the Authority of it had not
interposed, because there was not so much said of some, who were then in the
Spanish Army, as they expected; and is published now to let the World see, that
more was owing to Our Countrymen, at the Battle of Dunkirk, than either Part
II. p. 135.
Mons. Bussy Rabutin, or Part II. p. 561.
Ludlow, in their Memoirs do allow. The former, by his Manner of Expression,
seems contented with an Opportunity to lessen their Merit; and being in the
right Wing of the French, while this passed in the left, comes under the just
Reflection he himself makes, Part II. p. 139.
a little after, upon the Describers of Fights, who are particular, in what
they did not see; and whether the latter was misinformed, or swayed by his
Prejudice Part II. p. 496.
to those that were engaged to Support the new erected Tyranny, is left to the
Reader to judge. It may not be improper to add, that these Papers came to the
Publisher's hand, from the Gentleman, at whose Request they were wrote, and to
whom Sir Thomas Morgan confirmed every Paragraph of them, as they were read
over, at the time he delivered them to him; which, besides the unaffected
Plainness of the Style, may be urged for the Credit of the Narrative, since Sir
Thomas was entitled to so much true Reputation, that he had no need to grasp
at any that was false.

Jan. 24. School.
A True and Just RELATION OF Maj. Genesis Sir Thomas Morgan's PROGRESS IN FRANCE
and FLANDERS, WITH THE Six Thousand ENGLISH, In the YEARS 1657 and 1658: At the
Taking of DUNKIRK AND Other Important Places. As it was Delivered by the
GENERAL himself.

London: Printed for J. Nutt, near Stationers' Hall, 1699.

A True and Just RELATION OF Maj. Genesis Sir Thomas Morgan's Progress in FRANCE
and FLANDERS, WITH The Six Thousand ENGLISH, in the Years 1657 and 1658.
THE French King, and his Eminence the Cardinal Mazarine, came to view the Six
Thousand English, near Charleroy, and ordered Major General Morgan, with the
said Six Thousand English, to march and make conjunction with Marshall
Turenne's Army, who soon after the conjunction, The Siege of St. Venant.
beleaguered a Town, called St. Venant, on the Borders of Flanders. Marshall
Turenne having invested the Town on the East Side, and Major General Morgan
with his Six Thousand English, and a Brigade of French-Horse on the West, the
Army encamped betwixt Marshall Turenne's Approaches and Major General
Morgan's; and being to relieve Count Schomberg, out of the Approaches of the
West Side of the Town, Major General Morgan marched into the Approaches with
Eight Hundred English. The English at that time being strangers in Approaches,
Major General Morgan instructed the Officers and Soldiers to take their Places
by Fifties, that thereby they might relieve the Point to carry on the
Approaches every Hour. In the mean time whilst we besieged the Town, the Enemy
h^d beleaguered a Town called Ardres, within five Miles of Calis. In the
Evening Count Schomberg, with Six Noblemen, came upon the Point, to see how
Major General Morgan carried on his Approaches, but there happened a little
confusion by the Soldiers intermingling themselves in the Approaches, so as
there was never an entire Fifty to be called to the Point. Count Schomberg and
his Noblemen taking notice thereof, Major General Morgan was much troubled,
leaped upon the Point, and called out Fifty to take up the Spades, Pickaxes,
and Fascines, and follow him: But so it happened, that all in the Approaches
leaped out after him, the Enemy in the mean time firing as fast as they could.
Major General Morgan conceiving his loss in bringing them again to their
Approaches, would be greater than in carrying them forward, passed over a
Channel of Water, on which there was a Bridge and a Turnpike, and the Soldiers
crying out, Fall on, fall on, he fell upon the Counterscarp, beat the Enemy
from it, St. Venant taken by the Major General.
and three Redoubts, which caused them to Capitulate, and the next Morning to
surrender the Town, and receive a French Garrison; so as the sudden reduction
thereof, gave Marshall Turenne an opportunity afterward to march and relieve
Ardres.

The next place Marshall Turenne besieged was Mardike, taken in twice eight
and forty Hours by the English and French. Mardike taken, and the Major General
quartered there.
After the taking whereof Major General Morgan was settled there by the Order of
the French King, and Oliver, with Two Thousand English, and One Thousand
French, in order to the bleaguering Dunkirk the next Spring.

The rest of the English were quartered in Borborch. For the space of Four
Months, there was hardly a Week wherein Major General Morgan had not two or
three Alarms by the Spanish Army: He answered to them all, and never went out
of his Clothes all the Winter, except to change is Shirt.

The next Spring Marshall Turenne beleaguered Dunkirk on the Newport-side,
Dunkirk besieged by the French and English.
and Major General Morgan on the Mardike-side, with his Six Thousand English,
and a Brigade of French Horse: He made a Bridge over the Canal betwixt that and
Bergen, that there might be Communication betwixt Marshall Turenne's Camp and
his. When Dunkirk was close invested, Marshall Turenne sent a Summons to the
Governor, the Marquess de Leda, a great Captain and brave Defender of a Siege;
but the Summons being answered with Defiance, Marshall Turenne immediately
broke Ground, and carried on the Approaches on his side, whilst the English
did the same on theirs; and it is observable the English had two Miles to march
every Day upon relieving their Approaches. In this manner the Approaches were
carried on, both by the French and English, for the space of twelve Nights,
when the Marshall Turenne had intelligence, that the Prince of Conde, The
Prince of Conde, etc. coming to relieve it with 30000 Men.
the Duke of York, Don John of Austria, and the Prince de Ligny, were at the
Head of Thirty Thousand Horse and Foot, with resolution to relieve Dunkirk.

Immediately, upon this Intelligence, Marshall Turenne, and several Noblemen
of France went to the King and Cardinal at Mardike, acquainted his Eminence
therewith, and desired his Majesty, and his Eminence the Cardinal, to withdraw
their Persons into safety and leave their Orders: His Majesty answered, That he
knew no better Place of Safety than at the Head of his Army; but said it was
convenient the Cardinal should withdraw to Calis. Then Marshall Turenne and
the Noblemen made answer, They could not be satisfied, except his Majesty
withdrew himself into safety; which was assented to. Upon which the King and
Cardinal retire.
And the King and Cardinal marching to Calis left open Orders with Marshall
Turenne, That if the Enemy came on, to give Battle or raise the Siege, as he
should be advised by a Council of War.

The Enemy came on to Bruges, Marshall Turenne calls a Counil of War without
the English:
and then Marshall Turenne thought it high time to call a Council of War,
which consisted of eight Noblemen, eight Lieutenant-Generals, and six
Mareschals du Camp; but never sent to Ambassador Lockhart, or Major General
Morgan. The whole Sense of the Council of War was, That it was great danger to
the Crown of France, to hazard a Battle in that straight Country, Where 'twas
agreed upon not to fight.
full of Canals and Ditches of Water; and several Reasons being shown to that
purpose, it ran thorough the Council of War, to raise the Siege, if the Enemy
came on. Within half an Hour after the Council of War was risen, Major General
Morgan had the Result of it in his Camp, and went immediately to Ambassador
Lockhart, to know if he heard any thing of it: He said he heard nothing of it,
and complained that he was much afflicted with the Stone, Gravel, and some
other Impediments. Major General Morgan asked him to go with him the next
Morning to the Headquarters: He said he would, if he were able.

Next Morning Marshall Turenne sent a Nobleman to Ambassador Lockhart and
Major General Morgan, Maj. Genesis Morgan sent for to the second Council of War.
to desire them to come to a second Council of War. Immediately therefore
Ambassador Lockhart, and Major General Morgan went with the Nobleman to
Marshall Turenne's Camp; and, by that time they came there the Council of War
was ready to sit down in Marshall Turenne's Tent.

Marshall Turenne satisfied the Council of War, that he had forgot to send for
Ambassador Lockhart, and Major General Morgan to the first Council of War, and
therefore thought sit to call this, that they might be satisfied; and then put
the Question, Whether, if the Enemy came on, he should make good the Siege on
Newport-side, and give them Battle; or raise the Siege? And required they
should give their Reasons for either. The Mareschals du Camp ran away with it
clearly to raise the Siege, alleging what Danger it was to the Crown of
France, to hazard a Battle, within so straight a Country, full of Canals, and
Ditches of Water; farther alleging, that if the Enemy came upon the Bank, they
would cut between Marshall Turenne's, and Major General Morgan's Camps, and
prevent their conjunction. Two of the Lieutenant-Generals ran along with the
Mareschals du Camp, and showed the same Reasons: But Major General Morgan,
finding it was high time to speak, and that otherwise it would go round the
Board, rose up, and desired, though out of course, that he might declare his
mind, in opposition to what ^he Mareschals du Camp, and the two
Lieutenant-Generals, had declared. Marshall Turenne told him he should have
freedom to speak his Thoughts. Then Major General Morgan spoke, and said, That
the Reasons the Marschals du Camp, and the two Lieutenant-Generals had given
for raising the Seige, were no Reasons; for the Streightness of the Country was
as good for the French and English as for the Enemy: And whereas they alleged,
That if the Enemy came on the Bank between Turns and Dunkirk, And persuade
them to Fight.
they would cut between Marshall Turenne' s, and Major General Morgan 's
Camps; Major General Morgan, replied, It was impossible, for they could not
March upon the Bank above eight a Breast; and farther he alleged, that
Marshall Turenne's Artillery and small Shot, would cut them off at Pleasure:
He added, That that was not the way the Enemy could relieve Dunkirk, but that
they would make a Bridge of Boats over the Chanel, in an hour and half, and
cross their Army upon the Sands of Dunkirk, to offer Marschal Turenne battle.

Farther Major General Morgan did allege, what a Dishonor it would be to the
Crown of France, to have Summoned the City of Dunkirk, and broke Ground before
it, and then raise the Siege and run away; and he desired the Council of War
would consider, that if they raised the Siege, the Alliance with England would
be broken the same hour.

Marshall Turenne answered, That if he thought, the Enemy would offer that
fair Game, he would maintain the Siege on Newport side, and Major General
Morgan should march, and make Conjunction with the French Army, and leave
Mardike side open. Upon Marshall Turenne 's Reply, Major General Morgan did
rise from the Board, and upon his Knees begged a Battle, and said, that he
would venture the Six Thousand English, every Soul. Upon which Mareschel
Turenne consulted the Noblemen that sat next him, and it was desired, that
Major General Morgan might walk a turn or two without the Tent, and he should
be called immediately. After he had walked two turns, he was called in; as soon
as he came in, Marshall Turenne said, That he had considered his Reasons, and
that himself and the Council of War resolved to give Battle to the Enemy, if
they came on; and to maintain the Siege on Newport side, and that Major General
Morgan was to make Conjunction with the French Army. Major General Morgan then
said, That with God's Assistance, we should be able to deal with them.

The very next Day at four in the Afternoon the Spanish Army had made a Bridge
of Boats, crossed their Army on the Sands of Dunkirk, and drew up into
Battalia, within two Miles of Marshall Turenne's Lines, before he knew any
thing of them. Immediately all the French Horse drew out to face the Enemy at a
Mile's distance, and Marshall Turenne sent immediate Orders to Major General
Morgan, to March into his Camp, with the six Thousand English, and the French
Brigade of Horse; which was done accordingly.

The next day about eight of the Clock, Marshall Turenne gave Orders to break
Avenues on both the Lines, that the Army might March out in Battalia.
Major General Morgan set his Soldiers to break Avenues for their marching out
in Battalia likewise. Several Officers being with him as he was looking on his
Soldiers at work, Ambassador Lockhart comes up with a white Cap on his Head,
and said to Major General Morgan, You see what Condition I am in, I am not able
to give you any Assistance this day, you are the older Soldier, and the
greatest part of the Work of this day, must lie upon your Soldiers. Upon which
the Officers smiled, and so he bid God be with us, and went away with the
Lieutenant General of the Horse that was upon our left Wing; from which time we
never saw him till we were in pursuit of the Enemy. When the Avenues were
cleared, both the French and English Army marched out of the Lines toward the
Enemy. We were forced to march up in four Lines, (for we had not room enough to
Wing, for the Canal between Furnes and Dunkirk, and the Sea) till we had
marched above half a mile; then we came to a Halt on rising Hills of Sand, and
having more room took in two of our Lines.

Major General Morgan seeing the Enemy plain in Battalia, said before the Head
of the Army, See yonder are the Gentlemen you have to trade withal. Upon which
the whole Brigade of English gave a Shout of Rejoicing, that made a roaring
Echo betwixt the Sea and the Canal. Thereupon the Marshall Turenne came up
with above a hundred Noblemen, to know what was the matter and reason of that
great Shout. Major General Morgan told him, 'Twas an usual Custom of the
Redcoats, when they saw the Enemy, to Rejoice.

Marshall Turenne answered, They were Men of brave Resolution and Courage.
After which Marshall Turenne returning to the Head of his Army, we put on to
our March again. At the second Halt, the whole Brigade of English gave a Shout
and cast up their Caps into the Air, saying, They would have better Hats before
Night. Marshall Turenne upon that Shout, came up again, with several Noblemen
and Officers of the Army, admiring the Resolution of the English, at which time
we were within three quarters of a Mile of the Enemy in Battalia. Marshall
Turenne desired Major General Morgan, that at the next halt, he would keep even
front with the French, for says he, I do intend to halt at some distance, that
we may see how the Enemy is drawn up, and take our Advantage accordingly.
Major General Morgan demanded of his Excellency, Whether he would Shock the
whole Army at one dash, or try one Wing first? Marshall Turenne's Reply was,
That as to that Question, he could not resolve him yet, till he came nearer the
Enemy. Major General Morgan desired the Mereschal, not to let him Languish for
Orders, saying, That oftentimes Opportunities are often lost for want of Orders
in due time. Marshall Turenne said, he would either come himself and give
Orders, or send a Lieutenant General; and so Marshall Turenne parted, and went
to the Head of his Army. In the mean time Major General Morgan gave Orders to
the Colonels, and Leading-Officers, to have a special Care, that when the
French came to a halt, they keep even front with them; and farther told them,
if they could not observe the French, they should take Notice when he lifted up
his Hat (for he marched still above threescore before the Center of the
Bodies): But when the French came to halt, it so happened, that the English
pressed upon their Leading-Officers, so that they came up under the Shot of the
Enemies: But when they saw that Major General Morgan was in a Passion, they put
themselves to a stand. Major General Morgan could soon have remedied their
Forwardness, but he was resolved he would not lose one Foot of Ground he had
advanced, but would hold it as long as he could. We were so near the Enemy, the
Soldiers fell into great Friendship, one asking, is such an Officer in your
Army; another, is such a Soldier in yours; and this passed on both sides.
Major General Morgan endured this Friendship for a little while, and then came
up to the Center of the Bodies, and demanded, How long that Friendship would
continue; and told them farther, that for any thing they knew, they would be
cutting one another Throats, within a minute of an hour. The whole Brigade
answered, Their Friendship should continue no longer than he pleased. Then
Major General Morgan bid then tell the Enemy, No more Friendship; Prepare your
Buff-coats and Scarfs, for we will be with you sooner then you expect us.
Immediately after the Friendship was broke, the Enemy poured a volley of Shot
into one of our Battalions, wounded three or four, and one dropped. The
Major General immediately sent the Adjutant-General to Marshall Turenne, for
Orders, whether he should charge the Enemies right Wing, or whether Marshall
Turenne would engage the Enemies Left-wing, and advised the Adjutant-General
not to stay, but to acquaint Marshall Turenne, that we were under the Enemies
Shot, and had received some Prejudice already; but there was no return of the
Adjutant-General, nor Orders. By and by the Enemy poured in another volley of
Shot, into another of our Battalions, and wounded two or three. Major General
Morgan observing the Enemy mending Faults, and opening the Intervals of the
Foot, to bring Horse in, which would have made our Work more difficult, called
all the Colonels and Officers of the Field together, before the Center of the
Bodies, and told them, he had sent the Adjutant-General for Orders, but when he
saw there was no hope of Orders, he told them if they would concur with him,
he would immediately charge the Enemies right Wing: Their answer was, They were
ready whenever he gave Orders. He told them, he would try the right Wing with
the Blew Regiment, and the four hundred Firelocks, which were in the Interval
of the French Horse; and wished all the Field-Officers to be ready at their
several Posts. Major General Morgan gave Orders, that the other five Regiments,
should not move from their Ground, except they saw the Blew Regiment, the
White, and the four Hundred Firelocks, shocked the Enemies Right Wing off, of
their Ground, and farther showed the several Colonels, what Colors they were
to charge, and told them moreover, That if he was not knocked on the Head, he
would come to them. In like manner as fast as he could, he admonished the whole
Brigade, and told them, They were to look in the Face of an Enemy who had
violated, and endeavored to take away their Reputation, and that they had no
other way, but to Fight it out to the last man, or to be killed, taken
Prisoner, or Drowned; and farther, that the Honor of England did depend much
upon their Gallantry and Resolution that Day.

The Enemies Wing was posted on a Sandy Hill, The Battle of Dunkirk.
and had cast the Sand Breast high before them: Then Major General Morgan, did
order the Blew Regiment and the four Hundred Firelocks, to advance to the
Charge. In the mean time Major General Morgan, knowing the Enemy would all bend
upon them that did advance, removed the White Regiment more to the Right, that
it might be in the Flank of them, by that time the Blew Regiment was got within
push of Pike.

His Royal Highness the Duke of York, with a select Party of Horse, had got
into the Blew Regiment, by that time the White came in, and exposed his Person
to great Danger: But we knew no body at that time. Immediately the Enemy were
clear shocked off of their Ground, and the English Colors flying over their
Heads, the strongest Officers and Soldiers Clubbing them down. Major General
Morgan, when he saw his opportunity, stepped to the other five Regiments which
were within six Score of him, and ordered them to advance, and charge
immediately: But when they came within ten Pikes length, the Enemy perceiving
they were not able to endure our Charge, The Spanish fly.
Shak'd their Hats, held up their Handkercheifs, and called for Quarter; but
the Redcoats cried aloud, they had no leisure for Quarter. Whereupon the Enemy
faced about, and would not endure our Charge, but fell to run, having the
English Colors over there Heads, and the strongest Soldiers and Officers
Clubbing them down, so that the six Thousand English carried Ten or Twelve
Thousand Horse and Foot before them. The French Army was about Musket Shot in
the Rear of us, where they came to halt, and never moved off of their Ground.
The rest of the Spanish Army, seeing the Right Wing carried away, and the
English Colors flying over their Heads, wheeled about in as good Order as they
could, so that we had the whole Spanish Army before us: and Major General
Morgan called out to the Colonels, To the right as much as you can, that so we
might have all the Enemy's Army under the English Colors. The Six Thousand
English carried all the Spanish Army, as far as Westminster-Abby to Paul's
Churchyard, before ever a Frenchman came in, on either Wing of us; but then
at last we could perceive the French Horse come powdring on each Wing, with
much Gallantry, but they never struck one stroke, only carried Prisoners back
to the Camp. Neither did we ever see the Ambassador Lockart, till we were in
pursuit of the Enemy, and then we could see him amongst us very brisk, without
his white Cap on his Head, and neither troubled with Gravel or Stone. When we
were at the end of the pursuit, Marshall Turenne, and above a Hundred Officers
of the Army came up to us, quitted their Horses, embraced the Officers, and
said, They never saw a more Glorious Action in their Lives, and that they were
so transported with the Sight of it, that they had no Power to move, or to do
any thing. And this high Complement we had for our Pains. In a word, the French
Army did not strike one Stroke in the Battle of Dunkirk, only the Six Thousand
English. After we had done pursuing the Enemy, Major General Morgan, rallied
his Forces, and marched over the Sands where he had shocked them at first, to
see what Slaughter there was made. But Ambassador Lockhart went into the Camp
as fast as he could, to write his Letters for England, of what great Service he
had done, which was just nothing. Marshall Turenne, and Major General Morgan,
brought the Armies close to invest Dunkirk again, and to carry on the
Approaches. The Marquis de Leida happened to be in the Counterscarp, and
received an accidental Shot, whereof he died; and the whole Garrison, being
discouraged at his Death, came to Capitulate in few Days; Dunkirk taken.
so the Town was surrendered, and Ambassador Lockhart marched into it with two
Regiments of English for a Garrison; but Major General Morgan kept the Field,
with Marshall Turenne, with his other four Regiments of English.

The next Seige was Bergen St. Winock, six Miles from Dunkirk, which Marshall
Turenne beleaguered with the French Army, and the four Regiments of English,
and in four or five Days Siege, Bergen St. Winock was taken upon Capitulation.
Marshall Turenne did rest the Army for two Days after, and then resolved to
march through the Heart of Flanders, and take what Towns he could that Campagn.

The next Town we took was Furnes, several Towns taken.
the next Menin, after that Oudenard; and, in a word, eight Towns, besides
Dunkirk, and Ipres; for so soon as the Redcoats came near the Counterscarp,
there was nothing but a Capitulation, and a Surrender presently: All the Towns
we took, were Towns of Strength.

The last Siege we made, was before the City of Ipres, where the Prince de
Ligny had cast himself in before, The Siege of Ipres.
for the Defense of that City, with two Thousand five hundred Horse and
Dragoons: Besides there were in the City, four Thousand Burghers, all proper
young Men under their Arms, so that the Garrison, did consist of six Thousand
five Hundred Men. Marshall Turenne sent in a Summons, which was answered with
a Defiance: Then Marshall Turenne broke Ground, and carried on two Approaches
toward the Counterscarp: Major General Morgan went into the Approaches every
Night, for fear of any Miscarriage by the English, and came out of the
Approaches every Morning at Sunrising to take his Rest, for then the Soldiers
had done Working. The fourth Morning, Major General Morgan went to take his
Rest in his Tent, but within half an hour afterward Marshall Turenne sent a
Nobleman to him, to desire him to come to speak with him; when the
Major General came, there were above a Hundred Noblemen and Officers of the
Army walking about his Tent. And his Gentlemen had decked a Room for his
Excellency with his Sumpter-cloaths, in which homely Place there were about
twenty Officers of the Army with him; but as soon as Major General Morgan came,
Marshall Turenne desired all of them to retire, for he had something to
Communicate to the Major General. The Room was immediately cleared, and
Marshall Turenne turned the Gentlemen of his Chamber out, and shut the Door
himself. When this was done, he desired the Major General to sit down by him,
and the first News that he spoke of, was that he had certain Intelligence, that
the Prince of Conde, and Don Juan of Austria, Don Juan of Austria coming to
relieve it.
were at the Head of eleven Thousand Horse, and four Thousand Foot, within
three Leagues of his Camp, and resolved to break through one of our Quarters,
to Relieve the City of Ipres, and therefore he desired Major-Meneral Morgan, to
have all the English under their Arms every Night at Sunset, and the French
Army should be so likewise. Major General Morgan replied, and said, That the
Prince of Conde, and Don Juan of Austria were great Captains, and that they
might dodge with Marshall Turenne to fatigate his Army: The Major General
farther said, That if he did keep the Army three Nights to that hard Shift,
they would not care who did knock them on the Head. Marshall Turenne replied,
We must do it, and surmount all Difficulty. The Major General desired to know
of his Excellency, whether he was certain the Enemy was so near him; he
answered, He had two Spies came just from them. Then Major General Morgan told
him, his Condition was somewhat desperate, and said, that a desperate Disease
must have a desperate Cure. His Excellency asked, what he meant; Major General
Morgan did offer him, to attempt the Counterscarp upon an Assault, and so put
all things out of doubt, with Expedition. The Major General had no sooner said
this, but Marshall Turenne joined his Hands, and looked up through the Boards
toward the Heavens, and said, Did ever my Master, the King of France, or the
King of Spain, attempt a Counterscarp upon an Assault, where there were three
Half-moons covered with Cannon, and the Ramparts of the Towns playing point
blank into the Counterscarp: farther he said, What will the King my Master
think of me, if I expose his Army to these Hazards? and he rose up, and fell
into a Passion, stamping with his Feet, and shaking his Locks, and grinning
with his Teeth, he said, Major General Morgan had made him Mad. But by degrees
he cooled, and asked the Major General, whether he would stay to Dinner with
him: But the Major General begged his Pardon, for he had appointed some of the
Officers to Eat a piece of Beef at his Tent that Day. His Excellency asked him,
if he would meet him at two of the Clock, at the oppening of the Approaches?
The Major General said he would be Punctual; but desired he would bring none of
his Train with him (for it was usually a hundred Noblemen with their Feathers
and Ribbands) because if he did, he would have no Opportunity to take a View of
the Counterscarp; for the Enemy would discover them, and Fire uncessantly. His
Excellency said he would bring none, but two or three of the
Leiutenant-Generals. Major General Morgan was at the place appointed, a quarter
of an hour before his Excellency, and then his Excellency came, with eight
Noblemen, and three Leiutenant-Generals, and took a place to view the
Counterscarp: After he had looked a considerable time upon it, he turned about,
and looked upon the Noblemen and Lieutenant-Generals, and said, I don't know
what to say to you, here is Major General Morgan has put me out of my Wits, for
he would have me attempt yonder Counterscarp upon an Assault. None of the
Noblemen or Lieutenants made any Reply to him, but Count Schomberg, saying, My
Lord, I think Major General Morgan would offer nothing to your Lordship but
what he thinks feasible, and he knows he has good fighting Men. Upon this
Marshall Turenne asked Major General Morgan, how many English he would
venture. The Major General said, that he would venture six Hundred common Men,
besides Officers, and fifty Pioneers. Marshall Turenne said, that six Hundred
of Mounsieur la Farty's Army and fifty Pioneers, and six Hundred of his own
Army and fifty Pioneers more, would make better then two Thousand Men:
Major General Morgan replied, They were abundance to carry it with God's
Assistance. Then his Excellence said, he would acquaint the King and his
Eminence, that Major General Morgan had put him upon that desperate Design;
Major General Morgan desired his Pardon, for it was in his Power to attempt it,
or not to attempt it: But in the close, Marshall Turenne said to the
Major General, that he must fall into Monsieur la Ferte's Approaches, and that
he should take the one half of Monsieur la Ferte's Men, and that he would take
the other half into his own Approaches. Major General Morgan begged his Pardon,
and said he desired to fall on with the English entire by themselves, without
intermingling them. Marshall Turenne replied, he must fall on, cut of one of
the Approaches: The Major General replied, that he would fall on in the Plain
between both Approaches. His Excellency said, that he would never be able to
endure their Firing, but that they would kill half his Men before he could come
to the Counterscarp; the Major General said, that he had an Invention that the
Enemy should not percieve him, till he had his Hands upon the Stockadoes. Next
his Excellency said, for the Signal, there shall be a Captain of Monsieur la
Ferte's with twenty Firelocks, shall leap upon the Point, and cry, Sa sa vive
le Roy de France; and upon that noise, all were to fall on together. But
Major General Morgan opposed that Signal, saying, the Enemy would thereby be
alarmed, and then he should hardly endure their Firing. His Excellency replied
then, that he would give no Signal at all, but the Major General should give
it, and he would not be persuaded otherwise. Then the Major General desired his
Excellency, that he would give order to them in the Approaches, to keep
themselves in readiness against Sunset, for at the shutting of the Night he
would fall on: he likewise desired his Excellency that he would Order a Major
out of his own Approaches, and another out of Mons. la Ferte's Approaches to
stand by him, and when he should be ready to fall on, he would dispatch the two
Majors into each of the Approaches, that they might be ready to leap out, when
the Major General passed between the two Approaches, with the commanded
English. Just at Sunset Marshall Turenne come himself, and told the
Major General, he might fall on when he saw his own time. The Major General
replied, he would fall on just at the setting of the Night, and when the dusk
of the Evening came on. The Major General made the English stand to their Arms,
and divided them into Bodies; a Captain at the Head of the Pioneers, and the
Major General and a Colonel, at the Head of the two Battallions; he ordered
the two Battallions, and the Pioneers, each Man to take up a long Fascine upon
their Muskets and Pikes, and then they were three small Groves of Wood.
Immediately the Major General commanded the two Majors to go to their
Approaches, and that they should leap out, so soon as they should see the
Major General march between their Approaches. The Major General did order the
two Battallions, that when they came within threescore of the Stockadoes, to
slip their Fascines, and fall on. But so it happened, that the French never
moved out of their Approaches, The Storming of Ipre.
till such time as M. G. Morgan had overpowered the Enemy. When the Pioneers
came within sight of the Stockadoes, they slipped the Fascines down and fell
on; the Major General, and the other two Battallions were close to them, and
when the Soldiers began to lay their Hands on the Stockadoes, they tore them
down for the length of sixscore, and leaped Pell-mell into the Counterscarp
amongst the Enemy; abundance of the Enemy were drowned in the Moat, The
Counterscarp taken by the English.
and many taken Prisoners, with two German Princes, and the Counterscarp
cleared; the French were in their Approaches all this time: then the English
fell on upon the half-Moons, and immediately the Redcoats were on the top of
them, throwing the Enemy into the Moat, and turning the Cannon upon the Town,
thus the two half-Moons were speedily taken: after the Manning of the
half-Moons he did rally all the English, with intention to lodge them upon the
Counterscarp, that he might be free of the Enemies Shot the next Morning; and
they left the other Half Moon for Marshall Turenne's Party, which was even
before their Approaches.

Then the French fell on upon the other Half Moon, The French repulsed.
but were beaten off. The Major General considered, that that Half Moon would
gall him in the daytime, and therefore did speak to the Officers and Soldiers,
that it was best to give them a little help; the Redcoats cried, Shall we fall
on in Order, or Happy-go-lucky? The Major General said, In the Name of God, at
it Happy-go-lucky; and immediately the Redcoats fell on, and were on the top of
it, knocking the Enemy down, and casting them into the Moat. When this Work was
done, the Major General lodged the English on the Counterscarp; they were no
sooner lodged, but Marshall Turenne scrambled over the Ditches, to find out
the Major General, and when he met with him, he was much troubled the French
did no better, for indeed they did just nothing: Then his Excellency asked the
Major General, to go to his Approaches to Refresh himself, but the
Major General begged his Pardon, and said, he would not stir from his Post,
till he heard a Drum beat a Parley, and saw a white Flag over the Walls. Upon
that Marshall Turenne laughed and smiled, and said, they would not be at that
pass in six Days, and then went to his Approaches, and sent the Major General
three or four dozen bottles of rare Wine, with several dishes of cold Meats,
The Town beat a Parley.
and Sweetmeats. Within two hours after Sunrising, a Drum beat a Parley, and
a white Flat was seen over the Walls. The Major General ordered a Lieutenant
with a file of Musketeers, to go and receive the Drummer, and to Blindfold
him, and carry him straight to Marshall Turenne in his Approaches. Marshall
Turenne came immediately with the Drummer's Message to the Major-Teneral, and
was much troubled he would not receive the Message before it came to him. The
Major General replied, that that was very improper, his Excellency being upon
the place. The Message was to this effect, That whereas his Excellency had
offered them honorable Terms in his Summons, they were now willing to accept
of them, provided they might have their Charter, and the Privileges of the
City preserved: That they had appointed four of their Commissioners, to treat
farther with four Commissioners from his Excellency. Marshall Turenne was
pleased to ask the Major General, whether he would be one of the Commissioners,
but the Major General begged his Pardon, and desired that he might abide at his
Post, till such time as the City was Surrendered up. Immediately then his
Excellency sent for Count Schomberg, and three other Commissioners, and gave
them Instructions how to treat with the four Commissioners from the Enemy. Just
as Marshall Turenne was giving the Commissioners Instructions, Major General
Morgan said, that the Enemy were Hungry, so that they would eat any Meat they
could have; whereupon his Excellency smiled, and shortn'd their Instructions,
and sent them away. Within half an hour, the Commissioners had concluded, that
they Should have their City Charter preserved, and that they were to receive a
French Garrison in, The Conditions.
and the Prince de Ligny was to march out with all his Forces next Morning at
nine of the Clock, with one Piece of Cannon, Colors Flying, Bullet in Mouth,
and Match Lighted at both ends, and to have a Convoy to Conduct him into his
own Territories. Marshall Turenne was in the Morning betimes with several
Noblemen and Officers of the Army, and Major General Morgan attending near the
Gate, for the Prince de Ligny's coming out. The Prince having Notice that
Marshall Turenne was there, came out of his Coach. Marshall Turenne being
alighted off from his Horse, and Major General Morgan, at both their meeting
there was a great Acclamation, and Embracing one another. After a little time,
Marshall Turenne told the Prince, he very much admired that he would expose
his Person to a Garrison before a Conquering Army: The Prince de Ligny replied,
that if Marshall Turenne had left his English in England, he durst have
exposed his Person into the weakest Garrison, the King of Spain had in
Flanders; The Town delivered.
and so they parted, and his Excellency marched into the Town with a French
Garrison, and the Major General with him. So soon as the Garrison was settled,
Marshall Turenne writ his Letters to the French King, and his Eminence the
Cardinal, how that the City of Ipres was reduced to the Obedience of his
Majesty, and that he was possessed of it, and that Major General Morgan was
Instrumental in that Service, and that the English did wonders, and sent the
Intendant of the Army with his Letters to the King and Cardinal. Monsieur
Tallon the Intendant returned back from the King and Cardinal to the Army
within eight Days, and brought a Complement to Major General Morgan, that the
King and his Eminence the Cardinal did expect to see him at Paris, when he came
to his Winter Quarters, where there would be a Cupboard of Plate to attend him.
Major General Morgan, instead of going for his Cupboard of Plate, went for
England, and his Majesty of France had never the Kindness to send him his
Cupboard of Plate: So that this is the Reward that Major General Morgan has
had from the French King for all his Service in France and Flanders.

Killed at the Battle of Dunkirk,

Lieutenant-Collonel Fenwick, two Captains, one Lieutenant, two Ensigns, two
Sergeants, thirty two Soldiers; and about twenty wounded.

Killed at the Storming of Ipres,

One Captain, one Sergeant, eight private Soldiers, about twenty five Officers,
of thirty five; and about six Soldiers slightly wounded, after they were lodged
upon the Counterscarp. Sir Thomas Morgan himself slightly hurt, by a Shot in
the calf of his Leg.

The END.

