A TRVE AND PERFECT RELATION OF THE PARTICULAR Passages at YORK, on Friday the
third of JUNE, 1642.
HIs Majesty having summoned the Freeholders of the County of York, to
appear before him on Hewarth Moore, on the day above said, to satisfy them
concerning his intentions, many of them did appear together with a great
multitude of Laborers and poor people, as also diverse of the inhabitants of
the County of Lancaster, in all according to the estimate of my selse, and
diverse others of judgment) about the number of seventy thousand or upwards,
they came not in any warlike way, nor put themselves into any posture or order,
neither was the third part of the Freeholders, and Farmers of Yorkshire there.

His Majesty had appointed 800 foot completely armed to guard his Person, and
about eleven of the clock came to the Field or Moore accompanied with a great
number of Lords and Knights of great quality.

The Prince also led a troop of Horse consisting of 150. Knights, Esquires and
Gentlemen, some whereof had four, some three, and most two men a piece, which
made another troop.

As soon as his Majesty came near the Moore, the people did entertain him
with a very loud shout, and being come into the Moore, and as much silence
made as could be, his Majesty made a speech, therein declaring his constancy
in the Protestant Religion, and his great affection to that County, intimating
that he resolved to recide amongst them in those parts to keep the Country in
peace. His speech being ended, he rode round the Moore, and about the number of
65000 followed him, crying all the way (God bless the King) but the rest which
were about 5000 all Freeholders separated themselves to Petition to his
Majesty, and had their Petition ready to present to him the effect of it, was
to beseech his Majesty to come to the Parliament, etc. but their Petition was
intercepted by the Lord Savill, who carried himself very strangely in that
particular, and in a forcible manner, suffered them not to deliver the same;
His Majesty having rode round the field, all the people brought him off the
Moore with a great shoute, and there many left him, but 20000. accompanied him
to the Court gate, and saw him safe at Court, and with a great shoute left him.

A great multitude of the people never came at the Field, but staid in the
City, and others came but into the Moore, when the rest came out. And having
thus made their appearance about eight of the clock at night all were returned
out of the field.

FINIS.
Printed by A.N. for Humphrey Tucky. 1642.


