A TRVE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from a Gentleman of worth in Ireland, to a
special Friend of his, a Servant of great trust to the Kings Majesty.
Importing joyful News of a great overthrow given to the Rebels.
16. January, 1641.
TRedagh was relieved on Tuesday night last by the two Pinnaces sent from
hence, and in happy time, for they were almost at their last morsel: The
Pinnaces enjoyed so fair a wind and so full a springtide, that the Rebels
could not possibly prevent their coming in. That night, in conjecture that the
Defendants within the Town, would be overjoyed with their new relief, Captain
Fox undermined a part of the wall which was most weak, which Sir Henry
Tichbourn beheld all the time of their work, until the breach was made and two
hundred entered; and when as Sir Henry perceived as many as he could master, he
fell upon them and cut off all but eight men, who hardly escaped; their Captain
was killed, many were slain the day after.

Philip O-Reyley, an Arch-Rebell, and a man very mighty amongst them, is taken
and hanged.

The Lord of Dungarvon, has brought in Arms for five hundred foot, and one
hundred and twenty horse out of England into Youghall, and twenty Barrells of
powder, part whereof is sent to Duncanvon, to the aid of the Lord of Esmond,
who is beseiged, and suspected for a Rebel: That Fort is well stored with
brass Ordnance, and like to become the greater loss.

The Lord Dungarvon, the Lord Braughill, and Sir William Courtney, with a
convenient Force, adjoined to the Lord President of Mounster, who has fifteen
hundred foot, and four hundred horse at command, so as if the Lord the Lord
Roch stand firm, that yet stir not, there will be no fear of the Rebels in
that Province.

Sir Philip O-Neale, on Tuesday night came to Tredagh with one thousand foot,
and two hundred horse.

Our numbers yet are so few, till further aid out of England, that it will be
hazardous to adventure any part thereof, unless upon certain ground and good
advantages; for if we should receive a blow, the whole Kingdom might be
endangered.

The Towns near the Mountains, where Luke O-Toole and others kept their
rendevous, are all sacked and burnt: they fly at the voice of an Army in diverse
places. God granting peace in England, there is no fear of War in Ireland.


