Taxes no Charge: IN A LETTER from a GENTLEMAN, TO A PERSON of QUALITY.

SHOWING

The Nature* Use, and Benefit of TAXES in this Kingdom; and compared with the
Impositions of Foreign States.

Together with their Improvement of TRADE in Time of WAR.

LICENSED, Nov. 11. 1689.

LONDON, Printed for R. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXC.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
UPON the receipt of the following Letter concerning the nature of Taxes, and
levying of Money upon the Subject, I immediately resolved to commit it to the
Press; as conceiving that it might be instrumental toward the removal of that
popular Argument, which the Mal-contents of the Age are so industrious to
instill into the Minds of the common sort* viz. That frequent Taxes are an
ins^pportable grievance and oppression to the Nation; and this by so much they
the more successfully propagate, by how much it is a received Opinion among the
Populace, and such as either for want of parts, or not accu^^om'd to serious
reflections, have not thoroughly considered this Affair; whence it is come to
pass, that this vulgar Error has obtained so general a consent and approbation,
that it needs not to be much inculcated. This the disaffected Party to the
present Government are sufficiently sensible of, and therefore are not unactive
in the establishment of an untruth, which has the advantage of making a deep
impression upon such, whose biased and prejudicate sentiments render them fit
Objects of their design: Sed dato, and non concesso, allowing, but not
granting, that Taxes were really a burden to the Nation; yet if it be true
that e malis minimum, of two evils, the least is to be chosen. It will thence
follow, that it is better for the Kingdom to have purchased its redemption from
Popery and Arbitrary Power, though at the price of some part of the Estates and
Fortunes of the Subject; rather than to have lost all at one throw, by a
Tyrannical Invasion upon their Religion, Laws, and Liberties. I presume that
even some of those busy Agents who sow these seeds of Discord and Division
among us, would have been content to have bought their safety almost at any
rate, whilst the Storm was imminent; and now that it is happily blown over, and
nothing appears at present, but a s^rene Sky, and fair Weather: Why should
they either endeavor a reduction both of themselves and others to their former
danger, to which their turbulent devices do immediately tend; or strive to
create unreasonable dissatisfactions against so just an expedient, as each ones
discharging a few pence for an ensurance of the public Peace, and quiet
settlement of the Nation?

It Is surely very unaccountable, that those Men, who discovered so great an
alacrity and forwardness in opposing of Popish Tyranny and Arbitrary Power,
should now endeavor to enslave us under the same uneasy Yoke; but with this
additional aggravation to our former servitude, that whereas we were then
allowed some, we must now make Brick without Straw. This seems so wild a notion
of Obedience (the result of the Passive Doctrine) and that the chief Wheel in
that unaccountable Engine of absolute Sover^ignty, as is destructive of all
Government; inasmuch as it is utterly irreconcilable with the preservation, and
com^^n interest of humane Society. But these murmuring, seditious Spirits,
after shamefully retracting from their early officiousness, in their
encouragement of the late Expedition of the then Prince of Orange, are not
content with a complete enjoyment of their Properties, under the even steerage
of this great and skilful Pilot, who so justly manages the Helm of the present
Government, as not to invade the Rights of any Man; nor yet to retain their
particular sentiments within their own breasts, but they must needs vent and
divulge them to others, by which they become the public Incendiaries of the
Nation. But as I cannot enough admire both the folly and ingratitude of these
Men, who strive to disseminate so poisonous a Contagion; so have I not room
left for wonder and surprise, to observe diverse innocent well-meaning Persons
so unwarily caught and infected by it, when not many Months ago, their Lives,
Religion, Liberties, all that was dear or acceptable unto them, lay apparently
at stake. For which, I pray, do they account the more advantageous, whether
their ^roperties to be infringed, their Religion violated, their Laws
subverted, their Estates confiscated, and they, with their Wives, Children, and
Relations, to be exposed to the Fiery Trial, or to be seasonably freed from
these amazing terrors, ready to overwhelm them in a full carrere, when they
received a signal and miraculous, as well as a gracious deliverance, and that
as much above their hopes, as it has since appeared to be beyond their desert?

What would not every honest Man, or good Christian, have given at that time to
have had that security under his own Vine, and under his own Fig tree, the
liberty of his Religion, the full enjoyment of his Property, and an equal and
just administration of the Laws, which he now enjoys under the benign influence
and protection of the present Government? And then with what face can he deny
to contribute his respective share, and proportion, not only to the assuring of
his own particular right, but also that of the general interest, together with
what is infinitely preserable to either, the Protestant Religion in the three
Kingdoms.

All this, and much more, which might be offered, and insisted upon (were not
prolixity improper in a Preface, espe^ially to so small a Discourse, as is that
of the following Letter) seems exceeding reasonable upon the former Hypothesis,
if Taxes were really a burden and oppression to the Nation, which the
following Sheets do abundantly evince that they are not, by showing that they
are so far from being a diminution of, that they really add to the Trade and
Riches of a State.

This the Auth^r has fully proved from the opulent condition of those Countries
where Taxes are most numerous, and after several copious parallel instances
derived from Foreign Monarchies and Rep^blicks, showing their great advancement
by Tax^s, and frequent levies upon the Subject, he undertakes to demonstrate
the practicableness, as well as equal advantage of the same to these Kingdoms.
This I thought to be of such seasonable and public importance, in reference to
the present state of affairs, as well in order to the rectifying the before
mentioned general prejudice and mistake, as to silencing of all intemperate and
unreasonable murmurers against the proceedings of the Grand Council of the
Nation, in the methods taken for a supply of the Naval and Landforces, that I
thought fit to usher it into public view, as considering that if these Men who
most inveigh against Taxes, could be brought to believe, that they naturally
tend to the advantage and interest of the State, and do really conduce to the
enriching and improvement of it; they must needs cease from their Seditious
clamours against, and Satirical reflections upon the Government in this
respect; and that this would not be the sole advantage which would accrue from
the clearing up of this mistake, but that all honest and good Men will join
more cordially than ever in their unanimous and cheerful contributions to its
support, when they are made sensible, that not only the common duty of
Subjects, that indispensable Obligation of a perpetual gratitude which they owe
to their Deliverer, and the nat^ral instinct of self-preservation ought to
quicken and excite them thereunto; but besides all this, that they are really
gainers by this co^rse, and consequently what they expend upon that account,
does after a due circulation retu^n to them with a considerable improvement and
a^gmentation.

THE CONTENTS.
THE manner and use of Taxes among the Ancient Romans. Page 1, 2 Numerous Taxes
a great advantage to the Commonwealth of Venice. p. 3 -- And to the United
Provinces. ibid. The contrary shown to be a great occasion of Poverty, both in
the Empire and Spain. p. 4 Portugals exceeding them in Taxes, an occasion of
its greater riches, than either. ibid. The present state of France represented
as to this particular. p. 4, 5 The method of imposing Taxes in Germany, Spa^n,
France, Mo^covy, Florence, Swe^eland, Poland, Denmark and the Commonwealth of
Venice, compared with that of England, etc. p. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 The use and
employment of Taxes in other Kingdoms shown to be different from those in this.
p. 9 Taxes proved no Charge, but a Gain, both to the Public and Private
Interest, from Seven Particulars. p. 10 I. From the Persons who pay the
greatest share of them. ibid. II. From their use and circulation. p. 11 III.
From their improvement of Trade, and therein a description of the nature of
Trade. p. 11, 12 IV. From the Poors being employed by them. p. 13, 14 V. From
their making Men of no use in the Kingdom, profitable to the Commonwealth. p.
15 VI. From the^ us^fu^n^ss in time of War, for the encouragement of T^ade and
Manufactories within the Kingdom. p. 16 VII. From their dispersing as much
Treasure in the Nation in time of War, as T^ade d^es in Peace. p. 16, 17 A late
Paper Confuted, entitled [Proposals humbly ^ffered to the Consideration of this
present Parliament, etc.] p. 20 Of Taxes uneasy t^ the S^bject. ibid. 1. Such
as are levied by way of Fees in Offices. ibid. 2. By Poll Money. p. 21 3.
Benevolence. p. 22 4. Such as are imposed for liberty in Religion. p. 23 5.
Monop^lies. p. 23 6. Alterati^n in the value of Money. p. 24 7. Raising Money
from Travelers, as in Holland, etc. ibid. Of Taxes accounted most advisable
in other Kingdoms. p. 25 1. Excise. ibid. 2. Impositions on the Jews. p. 26 3.
On Play Houses, etc. ibid. 4. A Tax of labor upon such Malefactors as we
punish with Death: The reasonableness of this, and the severi^y and
unprofitableness of our own Law, in this respect. p. 26, 27, 28
Taxes no Charge: IN A LETTER from a GENTLEMAN, TO A Person of QUALITY.
Worthy Sir,
PUrsuant to my Promise, at our late Conference, I here present you with a
short Essay, concerning Taxes, which I su^mit to your private Censure, and
shall (...) limit you from sending it to the Press, if in your Op^^io^ it may
prove serviceable to the Public.

That T^i^ute, or as we now ca^l it, Customs, Taxes, and^. were Originally a
Mark of Servitude, is evidenced by the Interrogatory of an infa^ible Author, Of
whom do the princes of the earth take tribute?

But as Government became more humane, the Sav^ge Exaction upon Strangers was
less rigid, and the Romans, who were then Masters of Civil Government in the
World, sound it conducing to the Establishment of that overgrown, and
prodig^ous Empire, to mak^ every part of t^eir (...) easy to the People, and
that in point of Taxes they should be universally equal; which seems to be
confirmed by that of August^s, when he ordered all the World to be Taxed;
wherein we (...) no exemption of a (...) above ot^e^s. They were indeed
invested in diverse (...) pr^viledges, but in (...) Taxes, we find the Wisdom of
that Empire to make a distinction from any that were under their Conquest and
Government.

In imitation of whose equal, and prudent conduct, all su^ceeding Governments
have been guided in tempering of their co^q^ests, and not as in the first Ages,
making both Persons and Estates the (...) of Victory. By this means,
Civilities, Laws, and Christianity have been propagated in the World with that
advantagiou^ success, to which they could never have attained, if conquest had
been pursued, and employed as in former Ages, in all the i^humane acts of
Slavery, Violence and Rapine.

The Romans were the first we read of, that regularly paid their Armies: before
them, the Barbarians might sometimes divide the Spoil of their Enemies, and
other savage ways they had, to satisfy their Herds of Men, but no exact
payments were in use, until the Romans; and for the maintenance and
encouragement of so good a Government, they imposed Taxes, that so in intervals
of Peace, their Armies might not be exposed to the nec^ssi^y of committing the
like ravage, they did in times of War, and publi^k Hostility.

They soon became Artists in Taxing the People, inventing ways to bring in
Money. That of Augustus Caesar, in Taxing the whole Empire, seemed to be in the
manner of a Poll with us. There was also a Tribute imposed upon Passengers,
going from place to place, and a custom levied upon Goods and Merchandise.

They had also an Art of raising Money, from Aliens, upon the account of being
admitted to the privilege of Romans; and many other ways, and devices they had
to advance Money, which if duly considered, was the chief, if not only reason
why they were so famed in the World for good Government, because that they paid
their Army, and Ministers of State so well, that they lay not under the
temptation of Violence or Bribery.

I shall here come to a close in relation to Tax^s, and impositions, under the
Heathen Roman Emperors; and only in order to the making good my position, That
Taxes are no Charge, infer from this done by the Ro^ans, that 'twas none in
their days, inasmuch as it kept the People from violence, and ravage of the
Soldiers, and the worse Exactions and Corruptions of Civil Magistrates.

We will now make an Enquiry into the Taxes, and Impositions of Christian
Princes, and then compare them with those of these Kingdoms.

First, Then let us look into the Impositions of Commonwealths, the greatest
and most ancient is Venice. No^e will say that they are a poor State, though
all must own that they lie under heavy Taxes, insomuch that it is believed in
those Countries, that the C^ristians under the Turks are subject to less
Impositions, than such as live under the Venetians, where besides great Customs
upon all Merchandise, they pay Excise for every bit of Bread and Meat, nay for
the very Salt they eat; and after all thi^, the poorest Labourer pays his
Poll-mony: and yet where is there a Richer People? and no Government, either
Christian or Heath^n in the known World of such Antiquity, and without charge,
though pestered with continual Wars, at one time for the space of Seven Years,
had all the Christian Princes in Europe in a League, and War against them,
except England.

We will mention the next Commonwealth in Power and Riche^, the United
Provinces: I need not particularize their Taxes, few there are of our Kingdoms,
but know them, and that they are so great, that it is believed the poorest
laboring Man in Holland adds to their Intrado^ four pounds Sterling a Year, so
great is the Excise on every ^^ing they eat or drink: besides upon the occasion
of any War, it is usual to raise the fortieth penny upon th^i^ whole Esta^^s;
yet these People vye with all Nations in matter of Trade and Riches, and '^is
matter of Controversy which of the two, whether they or Venice, in proportion
to their extents of Land, are the Richer. They of Holland outdo them in their
Common People as to Wealth and Coin. Now then it must be allowed that Taxes
there do no harm, since the very Peas^nts ( Bores they call them) are so Rich,
as frequently to give a Tun of Gold, which is Ten thousand pounds of our Money,
in Portion with their D^ug^ters.

The naming of these Two Commonwealths may serve for all under that
distinction. I shall now come to Taxes under Monarchs. To nominate some few, as
instances to supply the r^st, (...) begin with the Empire, where Taxes are
generally low, and consequently the People poor: for it will be so (as I shall
hereafter demonstrate) wherever the Rich Gentry, and others have nothing to
fetch Money out of their Coffers, but their own expense; by which the Commonalty
can have little opportunity to i^prove themselves.

Spain follows much the steps of the Empire in their Taxes, and although there
are numerous causes assigned for the poverty of that part particularly under
the name of Spain; yet that of their irregular and uncertain Taxes do
powerfully contribute to the indigent State of that Kingdom; for that the
Country cannot be Planted by reason of the Armies living upon the Spoil of it,
not having a Penny pay for Six Months together; by which means the Country
feels little difference from the Conquest of their Enemies, and the Quartering
their own Forces.

Portugal is more craving in its Taxes, Impositions being heavy on Importations
which are of the worst sort; yet better than none: and seeing it raises a
considerable Reven^e, their Army and Officers of State are well paid, and their
Country much richer, and more populous than Spain, that borders upon them.

I shall put a period to that part of my Discourse referring to the Taxes of
Foreign Princes, with that of France, which is rather the abhorrence, than
example of any Christian Prince; his Tyrannical Impositions being grown to an
unlimited exaction upon all Men, both Sacred and Civil and yet so, if the
barbarity of the thing could have been separated from the effect, those
unbounded Taxes would not have impoverished the Country; if the Money had not
been spent out of his own Dominions in Foreign Conquests, which rarely prove
benefi^ial to the Country that invades.

If we consider France, in the beginning of their Invasions on their
Neighbors, we shall find them no^ so Rich as they were Sev^n years after,
notwithstanding that great part of their Taxes were sent out of the Kingdom to
raise Men, and more spent in paying the Army in the Enemies Country, and buying
of Towns. Now, at first view this may seem strange and unaccountable, That
Impositions upon a People, and a great part of them carried out of their
Country, should make them thrive: Yet, notwithstanding this seeming Paradox,
'^is a certain Truth, as in the sequel of the Discourse will be fully evident:
And, that France might have managed a War with all Europe, and not have
beggered the Kingdom, as now it is, if they had not destroyed it by their
fierce persecution of the Hugonots; for that has evidently been the Ruin of
that Kingdom. Whereas had the French ^rotestants been encouraged and maintained
in their Rights and Religion, they would have been their best and most loyal
men, both in Peace and War; for so they proved in the Minority of this King, in
the general defection of France; and had they been now possessed of their
Religion and Rights in France, it is to be feared, we had not so easily
commanded the Seas, most of the French Seamen being of that Profession.

We now come to compare the Taxes of these Kingdoms with those of Foreign
Princes; and to save multiplying of words, will reduce all under two Heads:
First, the Laws, and manner of imposing Taxes upon their Subjects; and,
Secondly, the quantum and duration of such Taxes.

For the First, the Laws and Manner of Imposing Taxes; that is as different as
the Climates which they are under. I shall not trouble my self, or the Reader,
with naming of all the Kingdoms in Europe, but shall only instance some of the
most considerable: in order whereunto, I shall begin with Germany* the
Impositions of which Country may be brought under two Heads; that of the Tenure
and Obligation of the Princes, Nobility, and Free Cities, to furnish a certain
number of Men in the Wars against the Turk.

The Second, by levying Money in the Dyets, neither of which, if compared with
those of England, can be thought easy. That of furnishing Men, is little
better than tyrannical in the Lords and Nobles, who arbitrarily force their
Tenants, and perhaps Neighbors to complete their numbers, without any relief
in the greatest abuse, having none to make complaint or application to, to
redress their Grievances and Violent Usage. Then, for their ^yets, they are so
few for the Commonalty, and so much influenced and overpowered by the
predominant Interest of their Grandees, that the Impositions can hardly be laid
with any ^qual or just regard to, or right consideration of the Poor.

Taxes in Spain are yet more arbitrarily imposed, the People having no Vote
there, but all the Duties laid in effect by the King and his Council: In some
Cases they will advise with the Nobility and other Communities, but it is no
more than mere Complement, or matter of form: for whatsoever the King and
Council enact, that they must acquiesce and agree to; and the truth is, it
appears so by their irregular, vexatious, and yet most unprofitable way of
Taxes, in which they are much short, and in^eriour to any Government in Europe.

France makes a fair show to the People, and yet makes a better market for the
King: He imposes Duties un^er the pretense of the Parliaments of each Province
laying it on the People; but at the same time, it is only the King's Word that
makes the Ordinance of Parliament: Not as here in England, where it comes last
to the King, for the Royal Assent: But there the King sends the Parliament
word, that he will have so much Money; and all the favor that they can obtain
from him, is, to place it on such Commoditi^s, or way^, as they think most
expedient.

And, it is not unworthy observation to remark, That these Parliaments of France
are in effect no more than Courts of Judicature, in Matters of Right betwixt
man and man, hearing and judging Causes, and their Places bought from the King,
not elected by the People. So that from such Parliaments nothing can be
expected but the King's Dict^tes.

The great Duke of Muscovia is above all tyrannical in his ^mpositions,
charging on the Subject what he pleases; and yet which is more oppressive to
his People, forestalls the chief Commodities of the Kingdom, or what comes from
others, and sets what price he thinks sit upon them, by which he destroys his
own Merchants and Dealers; and, where other Kings make themselves and their
Subjects rich, by raising Money on them, he makes himself Poor, and his
Subjects miserable Slaves, barring them all Industry, by shutting them out from
Trade, and agreeably to such Oppressions, his vast Dominions are thinly
planted, and poor to a Prodigy; and had they the liberty of seeing other
Countries, he would yet have a smaller Stock of Inhabitants: but he keeps what
he has, by making it Death for all the Kindred of such as go out of his
Dominions without his License and Permission.

Next to him in Arbitrary Impositions, is the Duke of Florence, who is not
bounded in his Taxes, and likewise ingrosses several Trades, and sets what
price he pleases upon his own Commodities; by which his Country would also be
made Poor, but that he has the opportunity of other Help, which the great Duke
of Muscovia is not assisted with, (viz.) a Country placed in the Garden of the
World; and by his making Legorn a Free Port, made it the Center of Trade, and
by that got the start of all Princes in Europe.

The Kingdom of Swedel^nd has many Advantages of raising Money from the
Country, rather than People, and yet they are not exempt from Taxes; all which
contributes to the enriching of that Kingdom, which has little of Arts or Trade
to improve it, only that which Nature produces: and She indeed has been liberal
to that great Kingdom, in Min^s of all sorts, though least of Gold or Silver,
but abounds in Copper, Tin, Iron, etc. of all which, the King has a tenth, as
also of Cattle and Corn; he has likewise the vast demeans of Bishops and
Church Lands, out of which he only allows a small Competency to his own
Bishops; and after all this, he has liberty, by the Laws of the Land, to raise
Money on the Subject, in case of War.

The King of Poland is restrained, and can do nothing but by the (...) of the
Dy^t; yet has by that, Power (upon occasion of sudden Straits and Emergencies
in War) to raise Money upon the People by his own Comman, without assembling
the Diet.

Denmark has a Provision for its support above any Kingdom in Europe, God
Almighty having (as it were) out of a particular Providence, supplied that
Kingdom out of its own production, seeing there is little in it either of Arts
or Nature.

The Toll of the Sound is a considerable Revenue to the Crown, and, as before
mentio^'d, such as no Prince in Europe has the like, for that in all other
Kingdoms* Taxes are raised on themselves; but this of the Toll front Ships
passing the Sound, is from Strangers, that only pass by his Country, and cannot
reimburse themselves there: Whereas Duties imposed on Foreigners, that bring in
their Commodities to another Country, is no more than laying it on themselves,
only with (...) diff^rence, That they make Foreigners the first Collectors of
it.

The other Duties on Denmark are not considerable; that on Ca^^el which they
sell in Germany, is of most value; as their Intrado is not great, so is their
Country poor.

I need not mention the manner of laying Taxes in Commonwealths, it is always
with the Consent of the People, who are too apt to censure their
Representatives, if they give not satisfaction to the popul^ce.

And, not withstanding that of Venice is A^istocratical, yet have they such
numbers in their Senate, that no Tax can be laid, but for the good of the
Commonwealth, there being, at least, two thousan^ five hundred Gentlemen of
Venice, which are all of the Senate; and although many of them are engaged in
the Wars, and Foreign Employments, yet there can never be less, if but one
quarter of them, than our great Council the Parliament.

Thus I have given but a succinct account of the nature and imposition of Taxes
in Foreign K^ngdoms, which now in as few words let us compare ou^s with, and we
shall see how happy a People we are above the best of our N^ighbour^.

And first, let us consider who it is that lay Impositions upon us; It Is Men
chose by our selves.

The difference indeed is great in the modus of our Taxes, from other Kingdoms,
and also in the use of them. For the Modus in other Kingdoms, they generally
consider only the Nobility and Gentry, that Impositions may not touch or affect
them, and care not how insupportable or grievous they are to the Commonalty:
But with us the Taxes reach every man in proportion to his Quality and Expense.

In other Kingdoms they place Taxes only to raise Money, and have no regard to
the Trade of their Kingdom, that so their Taxes may not prejudice their
Commerce. But in England care is always had, that Impositions may not impede
our Trade and Manufactories.

Now, as to the Use and Employment of Taxes in other Kingdoms, they also differ
much from ours.

In some Kingdoms (...) are imposed to enslave the People, and keep them poor,
as in Muscovy; in other parts Taxes are laid to enrich the Nobility, as in
Poland; in others, to fill the Coffers of the Prince, as in Florence.

Whereas none of these Uses take up our Taxes; they are with great Care and
Caution lain out, and by the same Law that raises them, appropriated for a
particular service, and last no longer upon the People, than the necessity of
the Nation requires; for that we never have Money raised, but for the defense
of the Kingdom; though as I shall show in the close of this Discourse, 'twould
re^ dound to the advantage of the Kingdom, if there were more Taxes raised, and
these assigned to public Uses in Peace as well as War.

I shall now come to the chief design of this Discourse, which is, to
demonstrate, That Taxes are no Charge either to the Kingdom in general, or to
particular Persons; but on the contrary a Gain to all.

But to render this matter the more plain and intelligible, I shall proceed
after the following method.

I. Show who in the Kingdom pay the greatest part of the Taxes. II. What Use is
made of these Taxes; and how they circulate in the Kingdom. III. How Trade is
improved by Taxes. IV. That the Poor are employed by them. V. That a Set of
Men of no use in the Kingdom, are by Taxes made profitable in the
Commonwealth. VI. That Taxes, especially when Trade is stopped by War, is the
only Remedy to keep the Trading and Mechanic hands of the Kingdom employed.
VII. That Taxes will enrich the Nation, and disperse in it as much Treasure,
when there is no Foreign Trade, as when it is open.
To begin then with the First Head, Who it is that pay most of the Taxes: They
are the worst Members in the Commonwealth (viz.) The Extravagant and
Debauched. The greatest Duties are, or should be laid upon Commodities for
Pleasure and Sumptuousness, as Silks, Gold and Silver Lace, etc. Now these are
wore in the greatest Excess, by the Extravagant of the Kingdom, both Men and
Women. A D^b^shee shall spend more out of an Estate of a Thousand pounds a
year, than a regular man will from the annual Income of five times that
proportion; and a Miss lay out more on Clothes than a Countess: So in the
Excess to indulge the Belly, as well as providing for the Back. The vast
consumption of Wines and strong Liquors, is by this sort of Men; nay, the
poorest Debauch, that can rise no higher than to Beer and Tabaco, pays ten
times as much in the year, in proportion to his Income, as the greatest Peer.
'Twill hardly gain belief, that there is many of the meaner People, Laborers
and Mechanics, that by their Expense, when they are (as too many be)
extravagant, pay to the public Taxes above one tenth of their daily profit:
As, supposing that a laboring man may earn Sixte^n pounds a year, he will
expend, though not very extraordinarily profuse, one half of it in Drink and
Tabaco, upon which, the Duty of Customs and Excise is, at least, two pounds of
the eight, which he lays out in idle Expenses. Now, it would be vehemently
decried and exclaimed against, as the greatest Oppression upon the Poor
imaginable, if by a Poll or Land Tax, this man, that vertually pays Forty
Shillings, should actually, and above-board, pay so many pence by the year.

Thus we see* that most of the Duties and Impositions on the Kingdom light upon
such as do least good with their Substance; and since they imprudently fling it
away upon their Extravagancies: it is certainly a Benefit to the Kingdom, that
there are Taxes, to catch something out of it, for the improvement of better
disposed men; as we shall see in the next Paragraph.

The Second Particular is, What use is made of these Taxes; and how they
circulate in the Kingdom: In order to which, there are but two ways, in which
they are employed; one is for the King's Court, the other for Provisions of
War, in the maintenance of Naval and Land Forces. Now, both these are as well
the Employment of Trade and Artizans, as they resolve into the Security of the
Kingdom, and the preservation of the Public Peace. There is no Money which
circulates so fast, as that which comes into the hands of Seamen and Soldiers.
Other men, that get Money, frequently lay it up, and so it becomes of no use or
benefit in the Kingdom; But, Men that live by their Pay, generally spend it
faster than it comes in, by which means the Money of the Kingdom, like the
Blood in the Veins, has its regular, circular motion, and every Member in the
Body is warmed and refreshed by it, which gives Life and Motion in the whole.
And thus I presume, this Second Instance of the Use of Taxes proves, That they
are of Advantage and Profit to the Kingdom.

Thirdly, How Trade is improved by Taxes. Upon this Head there is much to be
said; and first, It will be requisite to say something of the nature of Trade,
how it affects the Kingdom; for that Trade may in some Cases prejudice a
Nation, and make it poor; as the Trade of Spain does that Kingdom. Trade may
also effeminate and debauch a Country, as it does Italy.

Now, it is certain, that we are not free from both these public Mischiefs and
Inconveniences in England; though our Fortune is such, that being Islanders,
and Masters of one Commodity, which no Kingdom has in that perfection as our
selves, which is Wool that has put our People upon Manufactories, which is the
Treasure of this Nation, and keeps our Exports to a balance with our Imports;
otherwise this Kingdom would have been as Poor as Spain, and as effeminate as
Italy; but the Employment of our milder sort in Manufactories at home, and the
more robust at Sea abroad, keeps us a People in action, and so preserved from
the Luxury and Effeminateness of Italy, and the Poverty of Spain. I need not
spend time to prove how far we are tainted with the Mischiefs before mentioned.
Our Trade with France, in all Ages past, sufficiently proves, That a Kingdom
may be made poor by Trade; as we should have been by the vast treasure their
Linnens, Wine, Silks, Toys, and Salt, drew from this Kingdom, if our other
Commerce in the World, had not balanced our loss there.

Nor are we free from the Effeminateness of Italy, which I take to be the
Returns of our Gentry's travels, a mischief to be lamented, rather than
expected a Reformation of, since we are arrived to that height of Vanity, as to
think that man not accomplished who is not become Master of the Delicacies of
Italy, and extravagant Modes of France.

But to return to my Province, How Trade is improved by Taxes, for the Proof of
which Assertion it seems plain, That some Trade may impair a Kingdom, and such
Taxes and Impositions may abate by imposing such Duties as they cannot bear. So
far then it will be allowed, that they improve Trade, as we commonly say,
Saving is Gain; so, if we keep out a destructive Trade by Duties, we may allow
that an Improvement of our own.

But to come nearer to the matter; Taxes improve Trade by employing numbers of
idle Men in Naval, and Land-service, that would otherwise be of no use; but on
the contrary a Pest, and Charge to the Commonwealth. We seldom see any inlisted
into the Army, that are Men of Industry, or Labor; such persons are the Wens
and Excrescencies of the Commonwealth, that de^orm, but not strengthen the
Body; and these being paid by the Taxes of another sort of Creatures as (before
I mentioned) are of no use in the State; but to throw abroad the Treasure left
them by their Fathers, is virtually an improvement of Trade: for that all like
the Rivers in the Sea, terminate in the hands of Industry and Trade; and
perhaps, if duly con^idered, more Men, and with more certain profit make
Voyages within this Island upon this Fund, than there do to most of our Foreign
Trades. And in this place I must touch again upon the nature of Trade, to show
that private hands may raise their Fortunes by a Trade, that may yet be a loss
to a Kingdom, as in that of France, already insisted upon, many, I was like to
say, too many have acquired great Estates by. Now all the hands empl^y'd in
that Trade were no better than Robbers of the Kingdom, in carrying away our
Treasure, as we use the Moors, giving us Gold for Glass-^eads.

There is another sort of Trade, that though it may not immediately carry away
any of the Stock of the Kingdom, yet it does hurt in taking off Hands, that
might be employed to the advantage of the Kingdom. Now in both these the Trade
of Taxes, for so I will call it for the future, has the advantage, for that it
carries nothing out of the Kingdom, nor yet takes off hands that would be
better employed, but on the contrary takes away the disease of the Country,
idlers, and makes 'em at least so profitable, as to spend Money, which they
would not be able to do, if the Public Revenue were not their Stock.

Fourthly, The poor are employed by Taxes, and are by that means taken off from
being a Charge to the Kingdom; many Men of broken Fortunes are brought into the
Hospital of the Revenue, which may be so accounted, since it is generally filled
with persons that are reduced to such necessities, as qualify them for Charity.

This is one way, that Taxes employ the Poor, but not the main thing I mean;
which is, That the Trade of Taxes employs the poor Artizans, and Mechanics,
and that in a greater measure, than our Virginia, and Plantation-trade, we with
so little reason so much boast of, in these Kingdoms.

By the Observations I have always made in my Traversing the World, I find,
that those parts have been most opulent, and the People safest; that filled
their own Hives and kept their Swarms at home. That little Commonwealth of Luca
to me seems a pattern for all the Princes of Europe, and is as practicable in
the greatest Dominions, as that little Sp^t, whose Land and Cities (having Luna
joined to it) are all circumscribed within the limits of Six or Seven Miles
square; yet in that compass they are able to raise about Twenty thousand Horse
and Foot: a thing almost incredible, but known by all that have traveled that
way, and were curious into such Enquiries.

These People are of wonderful Industry, and enrich themselves by their
Manufactories, which they go not abroad to seek a Market for, but mind their
Work at home, and so become more considerable, than those that spend their time
in Travels, being by their settled living, able to afford their Commodities
they make, cheaper, than the Genoese and Florentines, their Neighbors.

When I see in Foreign Parts, how rich and powerful a little Siegniory,
Commonwealth, or State is made by husbanding their People, I often lament the
misfortunes of my Native Country, that might certainly abound with the
greatest, and most formidable People in Europe, if they followed their Steps. I
have taken up some of your time in this Discourse of Trade; which may seem
Foreign to my Subject of Taxes, yet I must be obliged to do it in all my future
Arguments, because Taxes both arise out of Trade, and maintain Trade.

To return then to where I left off, That the poor are employed by them in
their several Occupations: how many Thousands of Tradesmen have we, that are
supported by our Land and Sea-forces, which could have no vent for their
Commodities, if they were not taken off at home? Saddles, Bridles, Sword^,
Guns, etc. have no Foreign Market; yet these employ Thousands of Hands, who are
paid by Taxes.

Fifthly, There is a Set of Men, who like Rats in a Cieling, live upon Prey,
and do no good in a Commonwealth, which these Taxes ferret out of their Holes;
Those impositions, I mean, which our Parliament has, with great Wisdom, now
laid on Stocks by Pole: for nothing but Landtaxes will reach Usurers and
Misers, who spend nothing but for the supply of the necessities of Nature. Now
these Men are the Moths of the Country, it being more mischievous to the
Kingdom in general to hoo^d up Money, than for Robbers to take it by force; and
though the Law protects these silent Thieves, yet they are real Criminals, that
lock up the Tools of the Industrious, many suffering through want, that could
be profitable both to themselves and others, had they but Money to set them at
work. Usurers are by too many thought a Vermin in the Commonwealth; I cannot
but have a better opinion of them, and think that the Pest and Plague of the
Nation is a sort of pious Extortioners, who declaim against Usury as unlawful
Gain, but will Buy for half Value any thing they can meet with from a Person in
Extremity: and next unto these, are such as adore their Bags, and will upon no
Terms part with these Deities: their Bags are no Thoroughfair, only a way in,
but none out. These Men are by Taxes made against their wills small Benefactors
to their Country, and it were to be wished that our great and wise Council of
the Nation would yet pursue them farther, and lay a double imposition upon Money
locked up in Chests, more than what is out at Usury, which being employed, is
on the duty it was made for; but the other is in Captivity; and the Paltroon
should be punished for his Cruelty.

Sixthly, Taxes, especially in time of War, are the only preservation of all
Men employed in Trades and Manufactories; and perhaps not much inferior to
Foreign Trade, if in all respects considered: for as to what is spent in the
Kingdom, if it bring nothing in, yet it carries nothing out; and so far Taxes
are profitable, in that the Kingdom is not the poorer for Money so raised, and
so spent; and in times of War, and prohibition of Trade abroad, if Money were
not raised by Taxes, and that employed among our Mechanics and Manufactories,
Men would be forced to seek their bread abroad, and the loss of Men, is the
greatest misfortune that can befall a^ Kingdom. The practice of the Dutch in
burning their Spices when they have such quantities as would lower the Price,
might be something of direction in this case, and seems a better Government to
employ all our hands in time of War, as fully in their Manufactories, as ever
they were in a Free Trade, though when they were made, they were burnt, it
being of dangerous consequence to discontinue Trade. There is no adjourning
labor, and Mechanical Arts in a few Months will either lose the Men, or they
their Trade by some other course of Life.

Seventhly, That Taxes make the Kingdom rich, and in time of War disperse as
much Money in the Nation, as Trade does in time of Peace.

Here I must touch again upon Trade, and enquire what Trade brings us in
Bullion, Gold, or Coin; for we have some of all, though considering the Value
of our Native Commodities, it is wonderful that we should have so little; and
that of those numerous Trades, which our Navigation entitles us to, that we
should by carrying in our Ships, our own Manufactories, out of all those
advantages add so little to the Treasure of the Kingdom, and bring home no
Bullion, but by our Trade to Spain, and some little from the Levant, our Guinea
Trade, and for some years past, Buckaneers in the West Indies. But that which
is our best Fund, is the Trade of Spain and Portugal; the former is made
considerable to us by our East India Commodities, which fetch from Spain, more
than we send out in Specie, though some believe the East India Company does us
hurt, by carrying out the Gold of the Kingdom.

Now then if the greatest part of our Trade consists in bringing in Commodity
for Commodity, then all the benefit o^ that Trade is, That it gives employment
to our common People in their Mechanic Arts; and if we can do that by our own
expense at home, it is more the profit of the Kingdom, than by sending them
abroad; for that we avoid the hazard of the Sea, and other accidents abroad: it
seems then that Taxes do that, since they issue forth Money for payment of our
Artizans, and Mechanics, that are employed in making Commodities for our own
use, and at the same time enough for that Foreign Trade, which furnishes us
with Bullion: and by that it appears that we are much greater gainers by the
Trade of Taxes, than by all our Foreign Trade, which brings in nothing but
Commodity for our own expense. We see that the Care of our Parliament is, to
prevent the Importation of Foreign Commodities, and to encourage that Commerce,
which brings us in Money for our own. This then is the surest Trade I know for
that purpose, of laying such impositions as may fetch out the M^sers hoords,
which are as remote and foreign to the employments of the Kingdom, as those in
the Mines at the Indies; and I know no difference betwixt bringing Treasure out
of an Iron Chest by a good Law, and plowing the Seas by long and dangerous
Voyages; only the advantage seems greater, by getting it from an Enemy at home,
than a Friend abroad. But undoubted it is, that the Kingdom is as much
increased in its Common Stock, as is brought out from the Mony'd Men: it would
exceed the limits of a Letter to evince what I am morally sure of, that the
Pole and Land-taxes, passed this last Session, has actually brought into the
bank of Trade, more ready Money than came into the Kingdom, during the late
Kings unhappy Reign; and it is a vulgar error to believe that T^xes, even to the
meanes^ Man is a Charge, for that his Mite is with increase returned by the
expense of that, which would never have seen day, but by the force of a Law; so
that public Taxes, expended in our own Country, may be accounted the poor and
the M^chanick's bank, by which they are employed, and maintained: and as the
meaner Sort have advantage by Taxes, so have they of better quality: the
Landlord has his Rent the better paid by the quick returns of Money: the
Merchants, and other Traders, find it in their payments, and receipts; the
Country Farmer in the sale of his Corn and Cattle: for this is certain, that
most Men's expense either in Clothes or Food, is according to their Money or
Fortune, not Appetite or Vanity: many Men content, or rather confine themselves
to a Threepenny Ordinary, that would spend Twelve Pence, if they had it. So
that after all the noise and clamor that is made in the Kingdom, inveighing
literally against the heavy Taxes, which are on the Subject; this unreasonable
declaiming is made for them that no Man loves, the griping Misers, that hoord
up Money: for he indeed seems only aggrieved, that pays out to support Trade, in
which he never had the Heart to do good; and even this Man would be a gainer
too by Taxes, if he were not separate from humane Society, and trusted neither
God, nor Man; whatever he has to do in the World, is to see that he runs no
hazard in it, and whoever he deals with must be sure to him, though he cannot
be so to himself. And besides this extreme Earth-worm that hoords, there is
another Se^ of Men that do little good in the Commonwealth, and that is such as
have more Money by them, than they can employ, and perhaps would gladly put it
out to Interest, but cannot: These are less faulty than the former, yet should
be obliged to do some good with their Treasures, and the best way seems to lay
a round Tax upon that Money. It Is with reason believed that there is now ten
times the proportion of Money in the Kingdom, as was in the Reign of King James
the First; yet not more stirring in the Kingdom, but what is brought out by
Customs and Duties; then would it not be as beneficial to Trade by Taxes upon
the Misers and Hoorders of Money beforementioned, to fetch it out from them, as
with S^ips to get it from Foriegners: we have rich Mines at home that may keep
us in full Trade these Ten Years, if we had none abroad; and nothing but such
impositions as may supply the want of Trade, can keep our Artizans and
Manufactories together.

Thus I have huddl'd together a mixed Discourse, which I ^ear may be troublesome
to collect, and shape, for your apprehension; but your greater judgment will
unite its incongruities: I can only justify the matter to be in the main of
it, Collections from the practice and usage of other places; for what relates
to this Nation, you are a better Judge than I am, who am guided by the practice
of Trade, and that is, I doubt, too often exploded by Ministers of State.

I confess the Fatigues of Government, are above the Conduct of a Mercantine
head, and therefore I acquiesce without much enquiry in to them, only sit often
down with doubtful conjectures of the issue of our present Affairs.

I mean not of the present distractions which an inconsiderable number of Mal
contents fling among us, whose profession more immediately obliges them to the
Characters of Peacemakers, than it does other Christians: these will cease
with the Romish Interest, that masks it self under them; but that which I fear,
is, a distraction of the Trades, Manufactories, and Industry of the Nation,
because I see none concerned for it. The Tumor of the times, looks more like
the ris^ing of a Camp, than improvement of Trade and Commerce; most Men in
Court and City pursuing employments, Civil or Military, which I take to be an
ill Omen, and doubly to be blamed;

First, For Men of Fortune and Employment in Trade, to take away that which
should be bread for the decayed Man.

And then, Secondly, It is mischievous to the Commonwealth to have Men that can
employ themselves in it, to be taken off from promoting the public in their
proper Station.

Having thus run through the Nature and Use of Taxes, with the reasons that
seem persuasive, as to the great help they are to the support of this Kingdom;
you may perhaps expect I should say something of the way, how Taxes may be most
beneficially, and easily layn, but in that I am bar^'d by some impertinent
pens, who are every day printing their Follies; to which is added an
unaccountable boldness, not to say more, by their designing to direct the Great
Council of the Nation. I could name several that have taken pains in this
matter, but omitting others, I cannot but name a Paper I saw the other day,
Entitled, Proposals humbly offered to the Consideration of this present
Parliament, being a soft and easy way for raising of Money in order to the
prepetual maintaining, and defending of this Kingdom.

The Author there tells you, how the Nation shall be supported by a Miracle;
and if it were only so, I might not think it impossible: but as our Faith must
be above reason, yet not against it, so I think are miracles; but perhaps that
Gentleman has another fund for his Invention out of the Turks Opinion, That
Lunaticks and Idiots are inspired, and such may be thought so, that propose to
break the most ancient Tenure of England, and to raise up a Treasure, which, to
use his own words, No body ever thought of before; a Stock of honesty to pay
Fleets and Armies; he is only short in not proposing a way, how to make that
Treasure Sailable; for he that has it, will not part with it: and they who have
it not, are seldom in love with it, nor will take it in payment without the
Gentleman's token, that found out this unknown Treasure.

I beg pardon for this Digression, which I make only to show the cause, why I
am loath to crowd in among the Politics, as he that gives this advice to the
Parliament often mentions.

But though I dare not presume to direct the best and most pro^itable way of
Taxes; yet I will here name such as I think are not the most desirable, and
then mention such as in other parts of the World are thought most agreeable.

For, such as I take to be uneasy to the People, and not most profitable to
the State, are, First, Those that are levied on the Subject by way of Fees in
Offices. This, that in its original was either to be a profit to the Crown, in
bringing in Money to the King's Exchequer, or an ease to the Crown, in saving
the Charge of Salleries for Officers about the Law, etc. is now become neither.
Perhaps, if an Estimate was made, there would be ^ound some Millions Sterling
raised in this Kingdom on Offices, of which there comes not the Thousandth part
into the King's Treasury; nor, that which is more strange, not a Penny saved of
the King's Charge in maintaining those Officers. Some have thousands a year in
Fees and Perquisites, that yet have a large Sallary from the King.

Others have Offices, whose Fees, when first established, would but afford an
honest Livelihood to the Officer that o^^ficiated; but in process of time it is
advanced to ten times that value, and now is managed by a Deputy, perhaps for
less than a twentieth part of the profit of the Office. This seems a grievous
Tax, and would be thought so, if appropriated to any particular use of the
Crown: As for example; If the Parliament should give a certain Tax to the King,
for maintaining a War with France, and this Tax, contrary to expectation,
amounted to five times* the Charge of that War, would it be thought reasonable
for the King to demand a farther Supply from the People? Or rather, Would it
not be thought equal, to ease the Subject of so much of that Tax, as is surplus
to the Charge.

The Case seems Parallel in Offices, and if enquired into, there may be thought
almost enough there to save the Kingdom from other Taxes; but I would not be
understood to invade any Man's Property. The wisdom of the Nation might find
Expedients to do a general Good, without a particular injury to any man.

Secondly, Poll Money seems an unequal and unprofitable Tax; unequal, if it be
by a general way, all Heads to pay alike, the Cobbler with the Lord; and
unprofitable, if it be by distinction of Qualities: for that it gives great
opportunity of Frauds in Collection, and not without some in point of Estate
and Quality, broken men thinking it, and too often affecting a Credit, by being
returned in the Poll-book of that value, which in truth they may not be.

Thirdly, Such as are raised by Benevolence, are the worst of Taxes, and this
of Free Gift is of double consideration. First, as it is from the Subject to
the Prince, and then as it is from the People one to another.

Benevolence from the Subject to the Prince is dangerous, in that it brings men
under discrimination; he that gives not largely, perhaps beyond his ability,
will be looked upon as diss^ff^cted. And such is the unlimitedness of this way
of taxing, that Men have no Rule whereby they may be safe, but shall, it may
be, be compared to Men of twice their Estates, or that which is worse, with
Sycophants, Fools of the times, who are extravagant in their Contributions to
that Government, which refunds them equally to their Service.

That of Benevolence one to the other is a frequent Tax in the Kingdom, and in
my opinion one of the greatest Mistakes in our Government.

There is nothing more common than this, given by Authority, for Losses by
Five, and other general Calamities. I seldom see it for Losses at Sea, though
they are yearly much greater than those by Fire. But to return, this way of
raising Money by Benevolence to relieve one another, is a Tax on the best men,
and an impu^ity on the worst. Good men are apt to commiserate the Necessities
of their Neighbors, when bad men too often rejoice at them, and seldom give
any thing to relieve them; it is God only that can regulate the Affections; Man
can compel the outward Conformity. And there seems in nothing a greater want of
the aid of Government, than in this of Payments to any public use, the want of
which renders honest men a Sacrifice for uncharitable Misers.

I have sometimes (...) the Collection for the Poor at Church-doors no better;
for, till all men be alike virtu^us o^ (...), that can be no equal Levy that
leaves Men at liberty. The Government are best Judges of what the Poor should
receive, and the Rich pay; and if that were thought convenient, it seems to me
most equal, where every one should give to the Relief of his distressed
Neighbor, according to his Worldly Substance, not Christian Charity.

Fourthly, Impositions upon Men for their Religion, seems no good way of Taxes.
Indeed the truly conscientious Man will think that well bestowed which
purchases the Exercise of his Religion, but that is no warrant for imposing it.
We may say, under the Gospel, that which David could not under the L^w, That ^e
would not serve God with that which cost him nothing.

I so much doubt my Judgment in my own Province, that I dare not intrude into
that Sacred one of Divinity: but think it allowable to take any choice of
Opinions in this matter, and with those I join that think no Error in
Fundamentals should be allowed in a Christian Church, nor any difference in
Circumstantials purchased by Money.

Fifthly, Monopolies are an ill way of raising Money; for any Set of People to
have the particular selling of any Commodity, or using any Arts, though they
pay a great Rent to the Government, is yet a great Prejudice and Tax to the
People, where no Industry should be restrained.

Yet I am of Opinion against them that think the Turkey, Hamborough,
^ast-India, and other Companies, for Foreign Trade, a Monopoly. The Ca^e is
vastly differing, and so far from hindering a Public Good, that they preserve
those Trades in the Kingdom, which would be torn to pieces by a con^used and
general Trade: It was evident in the time, when the East India Trade was at
large; but this requires an ample Discourse of it self.

Sixthly, I take the Alteration in the value of Money to be a Tax, and no good
one. We are less afflicted with that than any People in the World; yet some
little touches we have had, rather by accident than design, so needs the less
to be said on them; but wherever it is used, the Subject is the Sufferer; for,
call Money what you will, it has its Standard in the World, and is no more than
what other Nations account it, according to its Intrinsic Value, not what Name
any King or Government gives it.

Now, if a Prince, as the French often do, raise Money in Name, the Landlord
and Officer, that receive Fees and Pensions, are the Losers. The Merchant and
Tradesmen lose but once, by as much as they have in their hands, at first
coming out of the Charge; but those men of real Estates are Losers, as long as
it lasts, for that they must take it for what the Government calls it; but the
Merchant and Tradesmen will not, because they put a value upon their
Commodities accordingly. If the Government makes twenty shillings three and
twenty, the Merchant will have three and twenty shillings for twenty shillings
worth of Commodities: So that he must value it according as it bears with the
Intrinsic Value; for in proportion to that he buys and sells throughout the
World, however Kings and Governments give Names to their several Coins. So we
see it in France and Holland, where they reckon their Cash by Livres or Crowns,
and in Holland by Gilders, and Pound Flemish; yet still the Merchant rules
himself by the Standard in England, which is thought the best in Europe.

Seventhly, Raising Money from Travelers and Passengers over Bridges and
through Cities, as they do much in Holland, seems an unequal Tax, and subject
to great Frauds. I take it to be unequal, because generally it is the poorest
and most industrious that are liable to it, and perhaps it often reaches those
that are travailing to find out Charity, or labor for a Living. Now, to exact
from them, before they have purcha^ed it, is a Severity equal to that of making
Brick without Straw or Stubble.

It Is liable to great Frauds, since '^is impossible to have a check; so that
the Gatherers are under great temptations, and the Collectors being men of mean
quality, are ap^er to be seduced.

Those Taxes seem most beneficial to the Government which pass through few and
most solvent hands. And, as it is secure for the State, so it is most easy for
the People; and the better that Impositions are collected, the more are the
People disburthened from new Levies.

I shall now come to show what are thought in other Kingdoms most advisable,
and they are these.

First, That of Excise, which is most used in the United Provinces, which we
should here think intolerable, to be laid on every Bit which we eat; but there
it is found useful, and time has made it natural to the People* so in Venice
and other parts. The great Duke of Florence does the same, by raising most of
his Revenue upon Consumptions in his own Dominions, which indeed seems of all
Taxes the most equal: for that no man by it can be said to be oppressed, he
being his own Assessor, and pays but what he pleases, according to his Expense:
But laying it, as they do in the United Provinces, upon the food of the Poor,
might be thought a Grievance. If that, and one Defect more, could be remedied,
there could be nothing said against this Tax; and that is, the Rich Miser (who
starves his miserable Body) goes most free; therefore, as to him, I have before
given my Opinion, how he might be reached.

Where this Excise is most used, Importations and Exportations are most eased,
by which means Trade is greatly improved, and at the same time, the Levies to
the King or State much augmented; for that the expense of those Merchants and
Seamen that repair thither, though they often sell nothing, but come to see a
Market, is considerable.

Secondly, In other Countries Jews are particularly taxed, and for which there
seems good reason, for that no Tax hardly reaches them, but like the Misers
before spoken of, they are indeed beyond them, for that Excise touches not
them; they neither eat nor drink with Christians; a few Eggs or Herbs are most
of their Food; live sordidly, and spend little; have no Lands or Rents to be
reached by any Tax: Nor is their Trade profitable to a Kingdom, or advantageous
to the Revenue, dealing most in Bills of Exchange, Jewels, and concealable
Commodities, that pay no Duty.

These men should be reached by a particular Tax, and so made profitable to a
Kingdom.

Thirdly, In some places the Government maintains Playhouses and Matters of
Sport and Recreation, paying the Actors Salaries, and taking the profit into
their Treasures: and in other parts, as in Holland, the Public have one that
takes part of what is given by Spectators; so that they make a Gain out of that
waste Money, for no better can I term it. If a Calculation was made of all the
Money spent in England, by such Diversions, it might be thought, a round Sum
might be raised to the King. Does it not seem an omission, That a Playhouse
which receives twenty thousand pounds a year, should pay nothing to the
Public; when a Coffeehouse, that receives not one thousand per annum, pays
twenty pounds? And so it is in Music houses, Bear-gardens, and Plays in Fairs,
etc.

Fourthly, In some parts of the World, as Italy, France, and Spain, a Tax of
Labor upon Malefactors condemns such as we here punish with Death, to the
Gall^es and Mines, which is a Punishment of greater terror and longer example
than Death, and at the same time, of profit to the Kingd^m I have often thought
upon this particular, and spent hours in debate with my self, and therefore
shall beg your patience, if I trouble you with a tedious Harangue o^ (...) part
of my Conceptions.

I have enquired first into the Law of God, then into that of other Kingdoms,
and find that we differ from both in our punishment for Felonies. The Law of
Muses, which is more severe than ours in many things, (as that of Adultery and
Disobedience to Parents, the latter of which is by our Law not so penal as a
broken Head) yet in Felonies not so extreme as we are; so far from making it
Death, as not to i^flict a Corporal Punishment. The restoring of fourfold was
directed by the Great Judge of Heaven and Earth; and if the Thief had nothing
to make satisfaction with, he was to be sold. But our Laws and Customs differ
much, when we punish the Kingdom for the fault of an evil Member. It will not
be denied, but that the Treasure of Men is of more value than that of Money.

Now, to take away the Life of a Man, is in its proportion, equal to a man's
cutting off a Limb, because it is sore. A Thief is a Diseased Member, better to
be cured than destroyed. 'T will be thought an extravagant fancy, yet to me it
seems a real truth, That a Thief is less mischievous to a Body Politi^k, than a
Miser; for he only makes a wrong transferring of Riches, the other (I mean the
Miser) keeps all buried, so that the Community is wronged by him, and only
particular Persons by the other; and, as the taking away the Life of a Man
weakens the Kingdom, so does it injure the person robbed; for that if the Thief
were not able to pay, then might he be sold, and kept at work in Mines, or
other Penal Labor, both for satisfaction to the Person injured, and Corporal
Punishment to the Offender: And, it may be thought to be of more terror, to
have a Spectacle for many years laboring with a shaved Head in Chains, than an
Execution of half an hour, that is oftentimes soon forott ^

I have named but these four Heads for all the Foreign Use in Taxes, because I
do not remember amongst the (...) ways they have, any other practicable and
profitable in these Kingdoms. The two later of these we do not use; but I
presume, if they were taken into the consideration of better Heads than mine,
they might find a way to make something out of them: forasmuch as I am able to
judge, a great Revenue might be made to accrue to the Kingdom, out of the
Vermin of the Nation, lewd Persons of both Sexes, which now pass as if
tolerated in their Enormities; and only one Set of them that the Law seems
severe against, punishing them with Death: which by so much appears to be the
worse, by how much we suppose nothing too rigo^ous for Offenses against our
selves, and nothing too little or indulgent for Crimes committed against God.

I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant.



