The true Copy of a LETTER SENT TO Mr. CARYL, In behalf of the poor Prisoners,
and Citizens of LONDON; Which was by Him communicated to the Members of
Parliament, and the rest of His Auditory at Christ-Church, on Thursday, October.
6. being the Day appointed for a Solemn Thanksgiving.

With Mr. Caryl's Commemoration, and Exhortation, for the restoring such to
liberty, who have a long time lain under the common and fatal Calamity of
Grates and Prisons.

As also, That they would speedily be pleased to show mercy to the Oppressed,
and to give Relief to the Distressed; That so none may have cause to say,
Whilst Great Men are Feasting, the Poor lie a perishing.

LONDON: Printed for G. TOMPSON, MDCLIX.

A Letter sent to Mr. Caryl, in behalf of many hundreds of Prisoners, etc.
SIR,
Were it not a Custom, and very suitable to your Function, to pray for those
who by the Symptoms of weakness are but adjudged to the Grave, we should not
at all break in upon your present and serious Engagement. But when we consider
our selves living men, and yet by an easy Metaphor continually buried before
God calls Us: This stirs us up; to add this to your Work of Thursdays Jubilee;
that before your Auditory stretch themselves upon their beds of Ivory, you will
exhort them to remember the Afflictions, not only of the very poor and
miserable, but of the very brave and useful man; who equally die and perish,
like Solomon's fools, under the common and fatal Calamity of Grates and Prisons.
Under the weight and shadow of which indigested Chaos, the Rich and the Poor,
the Prudent and the Prodigal, the just Man and the Knave, do equally shrink and
are covered. Were you seriously conversant with those Thousands of Persons of
Quality in misery thus confined; and of whom excellent use might be made in
their several degrees and stations (might they enjoy their Liberty, that great
Gift of God and Nature) you would need no other Monitor to mind you to exhort
your Hearers, and our Masters, to remember their often Remonstrances, and
Declarations, for our just Liberties: More we desire not; and less, as
Englishmen, we deserve not. The Parliament have at present, and long since
had, a Bill under their Commitment, for the just relief of Creditors and
Debtors. Both which having the convenience of Knavish and Juggling Practizers
at Law, to assist each others corrupt Interest, do by a mutual Reciprocation
ruin one another. These opposite Deceivers, like Sampson's Foxes, fire all our
good Corn, and bring so great a scandal upon our Common Defense and Bulwork the
Law, that in short time, should revengeful, mixing with passionate and
unskilful Reformers break in, it is possible we might exchange the substance for
the shadow; and in stead of our beloved Juno, embrace a Cloud. Sir, We who
subscribe these Desires, are Persons not merely known in, but who have served,
our Country; some in the Civil, some in the Military, some in both
Governments: where we were born, and lived as Gentlemen of no inconsiderable
fortunes. All we pray you then to inculcate is only this, that we may be
heard; and then, those who shall be found able, let them be constrained. Those
who are put in upon Design and Knavery of their Prosecutors, be repaired in
their Credits and fortunes. Those who are unable, be set at Liberty to earn
their bread: For we could never find by any Law, that the Flesh and Bone of a
poor and starved Prisoner, could ever pay off any Debt, but that of the Devil,
Malice and Revenge.

Sir, Our Imposition on Your Days Labor, has this to excuse us; It Is
seasonable, that Thankfulness for Gods Mercies to Superiors, should be
accompanied with their Mercy toward others, who are under Their Power and
Command: It Is just by the Laws of GOD, of Nature, of Nations, of England; and
it is very expedient, that it be not delayed, because diverse (who had set up
their rest and hopes in the Parliaments passing this Bill) finding or fearing
their Expectations abortive, have lately, and do daily die and perish. We will
press you no further; but if it shall please God at length to afford us the
sweet and blessed fruit of our hopes, and long Expectations, through your and
other men's pious Endeavors of this Nature, we shall not only praise you, but
praise God for You: And thus far requite Your Devotion for us, that God will
bestow the blessed influence of His Spirit upon You, as You desire the
Redemption of the Just from Captivity and Oppression.

Your affectionated Friends, and humble Servants.
From the Fleet, and our other several Prisons, October. 5. 1659.
Mr. Caryl having received the foregoing Letter, and performed the Duty of the
Day, was pleased to communicate a deep sense thereof to his Honorable
Auditory; Desiring, That as God had commanded strength for them, so they would
command strength for others; and speedily to look into Prisons, and give relief
to the Distressed, many being ready to perish for want of bread, that so no
Mouth might be opened, to say, That whilst they were Feasting, others lay
languishing. And for such as take Prisons, and have Estates, that a speedy
course might be taken about it, that their Creditors might not be defrauded by
them. Also, that their Honors would be pleased to look into Courts of Justice,
and to reform the abuses thereof. And that God having broken the Yoke from off
their Necks, that they would also break off the Yoke from the necks of the
Oppressed.

FINIS.

