A True and perfect CATALOGUE of the Nobility and Great Officers of State and
Court, Lords Spiritual and Temporal of the Kingdom of ENGLAND as they now
stand, Feb. 1683/4.
The Duke of the Royal Blood.
* JAMES Duke of York and Albany, only Brother to his Sacred Majesty.
Archbishops and great Officers who in respect of their Offices precede all the
Nobility except those of the Blood Royal.
William Sandcroft Doctor of Divinity, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of
all England. Francis North Baron of Guilford, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.
John Dolbin Doctor of Divinity, Archbishop of York, and Primate of England. The
Office of Lord High Treasurer is now executed by Commissioners. John Earl of
Radnor, Lord President of the Council. George Marquess of Hallifax, Lord Privy
Seal.
Dukes and Dutchesses, 15.
1 Hnry Howard Duke of Norfolk, Earl of Arundel, and Earl Marshal of England,
etc. 2 * Charles Seymour, Duke of Somerset, and Marquess of Hertford, etc. 3 *
George Villiers Duke of Buckingham, and Earl of Coventry, etc. 4 * Christopher
Monk Duke of Albemarle and Earl of Torrington, etc. 5 * James Scot Duke of
Monmouth in England, and Bucclough in Scotland, and Earl of Doncaster in
England and Dalkeith in Scotland, etc. 6 * Henry Cavendish Duke of Newcastle
and Earl of Ogle, etc. 7 Barbara Duchess of Cleaveland and Countess of
Southampton, for life; with remainder to Charles Duke of Southampton and Earl
of Chichester, her eldest Son, and for want of issue of him to George Duke of
Northumberland, her youngest Son, etc. 8 Lovisa de Querovalle Duchess of
Portsmouth and Countess of Farham for life, etc. 9 * Charles Lenos Duke of
Richmond in England, and Lenox in Scotland, and Earl of March in England, etc.
10 * Charles Fitz Roy Duke of Southampton and Earl of Chichester, etc. 11 *
Henry Fitz Roy Duke of Grafton and Earl of Euston, etc. 12 James Duke of Ormond
in England and Ireland, and Earl of Brecknock in England, and Ossory in
Ireland, etc. 13 * Henry Somerset Duke of Beaufort and Marquess of Worcester,
etc. 14 * George Fitz Roy Duke of Northumberland and Baron of Pontefract, etc.
15 Charles Beauclaire Duke of St. Albans and Earl of Burford, etc.
Marquesses, 2.
1 Charles Paulet Marquess of Winchester, Earl of Wiltshire, and Lord St. John,
etc. 2 George Saville Marquess of Hallifax, Baron Saville of Eland, and Lord
Privy Seal, etc.
Other great Officers which in respect of their Places precede all the Earls.
Robert Bertie Earl of Lindsey and L. Willoughby, Lord Great Chamberlain of
England. Henry Duke of Norsolk and Earl of Arundel, Earl Marshal of England.
The Office of Lord High Admiral is at present executed by Commissioners. James
Duke of Ormond, Lord Steward of the Kings Household. Henry Earl of Arlington,
Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household.
Earls and Countesses, 67.
1 * Aubrey de Vere Earl of Oxford, and Lord Bolebec, etc. 2 Charles Talbot
Earl of Shrewsbury in England Waterford and Weshford in Ireland, Lord Furnival,
etc. 3 Anthony Gray Earl of Kent, and Baron Gray of Ruthin, etc. 4 William
Stanley Earl of Derby, and Baron Strange, etc. 5 John Manners Earl of Rutland,
and Baron Ross, etc. 6 Theophilus Hastings Earl of Huntington, Baron Hastings,
etc. 7 * William Russel Earl of Bedford, and Baron Russel. etc. 8 Thomas
Herbert Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery, and Baron Herbert. 9 Edward Clinton
Earl of Lincoln, and Baron Clinton, etc. 10 James Howard Earl of Suffolk, and
Baron Howard of Walden, etc. 11 Charles Sackville Earl of Dorset and Middlesex,
and Baron Buckhurst, etc. 12 James Cecil Earl of Salisbury, and Viscount
Cranborn, etc. 13 John Cecil Earl of Exeter, and Baron Burghley, etc. 14 John
Egerton Earl of Bridgwater, and Viscount Brackley, etc. 15 Philip Sidney Earl
of Leicester, and Viscount Lisle, etc. 16 George Compton Earl of Northampton,
Baron Compton. 17 Edward Rich Earl of Warwick and Holland, and Baron Rich, etc.
18 William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire, and Baron Cavendish, etc. 19 William
Fielding Earl of Denbigh in England and Desmond in Ireland, and Vise. Fielding,
etc. 20 John Digby E. of Bristol, and Baron Digby, etc. 21 Gilbert Holles E. of
Clare, Baron Houghton, etc. 22 Oliver St. John Earl of Bolingbrook, and Baron
St. John of Bletsho, etc. 23 Charles Fane Earl of Westmerland, and Baron le de
Spencer and Burghersh, etc. 24 Charles Mountague Earl of Manchester and
Viscount Mandeville, etc. 25 Thomas Howard Earl of Berkshire, Viscount Andover,
etc. 26 * John Sheffield Earl of Mulgrave, and Baron Sheffield, etc. 27 Thomas
Savage Earl of Rivers, and Viscount Colchester, etc. 28 Robert Bertie Earl of
Lindsey and Baron Willoughby, etc. 29 Henry Mordant Earl of Peterborough, and
Baron Mordant of Turvey, etc. 30 Thomas Gray Earl of Stamford, and Baron Gray
of Greby, etc. 31 Heneage Finch Earl of Winchelsey, and Viscount Maidston, etc.
32 Robert Pierrepoynt Earl of Kingston upon Hull, and Viscount Newark, etc. 33
Charles Dormer Earl of Carnarvon, and Viscount Ascot, etc. 34 Philip Stanhope
Earl of Chesterfield, and Baron Stanhope, etc. 35 Richard Tufton Earl of
Thanet, and Baron Tuston, etc. 36 Thomas Weston Earl of Portland, and Baron
Weston, etc. 37 * William Wentworth Earl of Strafford, and Viscount Wentworth,
etc. 38 Robert Spencer Earl of Sunderland, and Baron Spencer, etc. 39 Robert
Leake Earl of Scarsdale, and Baron Daincourt, etc. 40 Edward Mountague Earl of
Sandwich, and Viscount Hinchinbroke, etc. 41 Henry Hyde Earl of Clarendon, and
Viscount Cornbury, etc. 42 Algernon Capel Earl of Essex, and Viscount Maldon,
etc. 43 Robert Brudnell Earl of Cardigan, and Baron Brudnell, etc. 44 Arthur
Annesley Earl of Anglesey, and Baron Annesey, etc. 45 John Greneville Earl of
Bath, and Viscount Lansdown, etc. 46 Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle, and
Viscount Morpeth, etc. 47 William Craven Earl of Craven, and Viscount Craven of
Ussington, etc. 48 Robert Bruce Earl of Alesbury, and Baron Bruce, etc. 49
Richard Boil Earl of Burlington in England, and Cork in Ireland, and Baron
Clifford, etc. 50 * Henry Bennet Earl of Arlington, Viscount Thetford, etc. 51
Anthony Cooper Earl of Shaftsbury, and Baron Ashley, etc. 52 William Herbert
Earl and Baron of Powis, etc. 53 Edward Henry Lee Earl of Litchfield, and
Viscount Quarendon, etc. 54 * Thomas Osborne Earl of Danby, and Viscount
Latimer, etc. 55 Thomas Lennard Earl of Sussex, and Baron Dacres, etc. 56 Lewis
Duras E. of Feversham, Visc. Sonds, etc. 57 Charles Gerard Earl of Macklefeld,
and Viscount Brandon, etc. 58 John Roberts E. of Radnor, Visc. Bodmin, etc. 59
William Paston E. of Yarmouth, Visc. Paston, etc. 60 George Berkley E. of
Berkley, Visc. Dursley, etc. 61 Elizabeth (Lady Dacres, Mother to the Earl of
Sussex) Countess of Shepey during her life. 62 Daniel Finch Earl of Nottingham,
Baron Finch of Daventre, etc. 63 Laurence Hyde E. of Rochester, Visc. Hyde,
etc. 64 James Bertie E. of Abingdon, Bar. Norreys, etc. 65 Edward Noel E. of
Gainsborough, Visc. Campden, etc. 66 Conyers Darcy Earl of Holderness, Baron
Darcy and Meynill, etc. 67 Thomas Windsor alias Hickman Earl of Plymouth, Baron
Windsor, etc.
Viscounts 9.
1 Leicester Devereux Viscount Hereford. 2 Francis Brown Viscount Mountague. 3
William Fiennes Viscount Say and Seal. 4 Thomas Bellasyse Viscount Fauconberg.
5 Charles Mordant Viscount Mordant. 6 Francis Newport Viscount Newport. 7
Thomas Thynne Viscount Weymouth. 8 Horatio Townsend Viscount Townesend. 9
Christopher Hatton Viscount Hatton.
Bishops, 24.
1 Dr. Henry Compton L. Bishop of London. 2 Dr. Nathaniel Crew L. Bishop of
Durham. 3 Dr. George Morley L. Bishop of Winchester. 4 Dr. Herbert Crofts L.
Bishop of Hereford. 5 Dr. Seth Ward L. Bishop of Salisbury. 6 Dr. Edward
Rainbow L. Bishop of Carlisle. 7 Dr. Anthony Sparrow L. Bishop of Norwich. 8
Dr. Peter Gunning L. Bishop of Ely. 9 Dr. Thomas Wood L. B. of Lichfield and
Coventry. 10 Dr. Guy Carlton L. Bishop of Chichester. 11 Dr. Peter Mew L.
Bishop of Bath and Wells. 12 Dr. John Pearson L. Bishop of Chester. 13 Dr.
Humphrey Lloyd L. Bishop of Bangor. 14 Dr. William Lloyd L. Bishop of
Peterborough. 15 Dr. Thomas Barlow L. Bishop of Lincoln. 16 Dr. John Fell L.
Bishop of Oxford. 17 Dr. Thomas Lamplough L. Bishop of Exeter. 18 Dr. William
Gulston L. Bishop of Bristol. 19 Dr. William Beaw L. Bishop of Landaff. 20 Dr.
William Lloyd L. Bishop of St. Asaph. 21 Dr. Robert Frampton L. Bishop of
Gloucester. 22 Dr. William Thomas L. Bishop of Worcester. 23 Dr. Francis Turner
L. Bishop of Rochester. 24 Dr. Lawrence Womock L. Bishop of St. David's. The L.
Bishops of London, Durham, and Winchester, precede all the other Bishops, the
rest take place according to their seniority.
Barons and Baronesses, 66.
1 George Nevill Lord Abergavenny. 2 James Touchet Lord Audley (and Earl of
Castlehaven in Ireland.) 3 Charles West Lord de la War. 4 Thomas Parker Lord
Morley and Monteagle. 5 Robert Shirley Lord Ferrers. 6 Charles Mildmay Lord
Fitz Walter. 7 Henry Yelverton Lord Gray. 8 Frances (Lady Ward) Baroness
Dudley, Granddaughter and sole heir to Ed. Sutton L. Dudley, Relict of Humble
late Lord Ward, and Mother to Edward the present Lord Ward. 9 William Stourton
Lord Stourton. 10 Conyers Darcy Lord Conyers. 11 Henry Sandys Lord Sandys. 12
Vere Cromwell Lord Cromwell (and Earl of Arglas in Ireland.) 13 Ralph Eure Lord
Eure. 14 Philip Wharton Lord Wharton. 15 Thomas Willoughby L. Willoughby of
Parham. 16 William Paget Lord Paget. 17 Francis Howard Lord Howard of
Effingham. 18 Charles North L. North, and L. Gray of Rolleston. 19 James Bruges
Lord Chandois. 20 Robert Carey Lord Hunsdon. 21 John Petre Lord Petre. 22 Digby
Gerard Lord Gerard of Bromley. 23 Henry Arundel Lord Arundel of Warder, (and a
Count of the Empire.) 24 The Lady Catherine O Brien, Baroness Clifton (Daughter
of the L. George Stuart, called L. D' Aubigny, Sister and sole heir to Charles
late Duke of Richmund and Lenox, and thereby sole heir to the Lady Catherine
her Grandmother, Daughter and heir to Gervaise L. Cliston) first married to
Henry Lord O Brien (Son and heir of the present Earl of Thomond in Ireland) and
since his death to Sir Joseph Williamson Knight. 25 Christopher Roper Lord
Tenham. 26 Fulke Greville Lord Brook. 27 Ralph Mountague L. Mountague of
Boughton. 28 Ford Gray Lord Gray of Warke. 29 John Lovelace Lord Lovelace. 30
John Paulet Lord Paulet. 31 William Maynard Lord Maynard. 32 John Coventry Lord
Coventry. 33 William Howard Lord Howard of Escrick. 34 Carles Mohun Lord Mohun.
35 Henry Herbert Lord Herbert of Chirbery. 36 Thomas Leigh Lord Leigh. 37
Thomas Jermyn L. Jermyn of St. Edmondsbury. 38 William Byron Lord Byron. 39
Richard Vaughan Lord Vaughan (and Earl of Carbery in Ireland.) 40 Francis Smith
Lord Carrington (and Viscount Carrington of Barresore in Ireland. 41 William
Widdrington Lord Widdrington. 42 Edward Ward Lord Ward. 43 Thomas Colopeper
Lord Colepeper. 44 Jacob Astley Lord Astley. 45 Carles Lucas Lord Lucas. 46
John Bellasyse Lord Bellasyse. 47 Edward Watson Lord Rokingham. 48 Robert
Sutton Lord Lexington. 49 Marmaduke Langdale Lord Langdale. 50 John Berkley
Lord Berkley of Stratton. 51 Francis Holles Lord Holles. 52 Charles Cornwallis
Lord Cornwallis. 53 George Booth Lord Delamer. 54 Thomas Crew Lord Crew. 55
Richard Arundell Lord Arundell of Treryse. 56 James Butler Lord Butler of Moor
Park (and Earl of Ossory.) 57 Hugh Clifford Lord Clifford of Chudleigh. 58
Richard Butler Lord Butler of Weston (and Earl of Arran in Ireland. 59 Susan
Lady Bellasyse Baroness Bellasyse of Osgodby (Daughter and coheir to Sir
William Ermine of Osgodby in Lincolnshire Baronet, Relict of Sir Hen. Bellasyse
Knight of the Bath, Son and heir of John L. Bellasyse) for life. 60 Richard
Lumley Lord Lumley. 61 George Carteret Lord Carteret. 62 John Bennet Lord
Ossuston. 63 George Leg Lord Dartmouth. 64 William Alington Lord Alington. 65
Ralf Stawel Lord Stawel. 66 Francis North Lord Guilford.
Note that those Persons before whom are Stars prefixed *, are of the most
Noble Order of the Garter.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Wilkinson at the Black Boy against St.
Dunstans Church in Fletstreet, 1684.


