The true Copy of A LETTER; Sent from Sir RALPH HOPTON. Col. ASHBVRNHAM. and
Sir JOHN BERKLEY. To Mr. Christopher Clarke, Major of the City OF EXCESTER, For
the laying down their Arms, raised for the Parliament, and the delivering up
the City to the KING

With the Answer which the Major returned to them.

Published by Command.

London, Printed for I. T. and R. R. 1642.

A Copy of a Letter received FROM Sir Ralph Hopton, by the Major of EXETER;
Mr. Major,
NEither your slight Answer to our last Letter, nor your no Answer to our
former, (in which we sent you a Copy of our Commission) nor your neglect of
the known Laws, in leavying Arms without his Majesty's leave, nor your
employing those Arms to the destruction of His Majesty's good Subjects, and
such as proceed by His (...) have that effect upon our minds, as to make us
with His Majesty's usual mercy and clemency any ways contracted with you; And
therefore (...) we may satisfy all goodmen, not only of the Justice and
Equity of our proceedings, but also of that charity, and compassion, (of which
there scarce can be any access in cases of blood) These are to require you
once more in His Majesty's Name (by virtue of our Commission) to lay down your
unlawful Arms, and to conform your selves to the duties of your Allegiance,
and to be no more a cause (by your obstinacy) of drawing those calamities upon
your Country, which even the hearts of strangers bleed to see, and foresee, in
case you shall think it fit to accept of your own safety, and the quiet of
your Country, at no greater price, then your returning to the Laws; These are
to assure your City, and every person in it of imdempnity for our part, but in
case you shall still continue in Arms without his Majesty's Authority, and
against it, These are to call God and man to witness, that it is you, which
have broke these Laws, which have hitherto kept this Kingdom in Peace, and
cannot but expect the bitter fruits of your own planting.

As for us, so may God bless us in our proceedings, as we have been far
from giving occasion to this unnatural War, and as we are, and ever have
been ready to embrace all just ways, of composing it, in which way we are
ready to approve, our selves,

Your very loving Friends, Ralph Hopton, W. Ashburnham, John Berkley.
Alphington, December. 30. 1642.
The Answer of the Mayor of EXETER.
Gentlemen,
YOu had no Answer to your first Letter, because your Commission, whereof you
sent me a Copy, I conceive, had no relation to our City. To the second Le^ter,
signed by Collonell Ashburnham, I thought it not fit to give a serious Answer,
the contents being as far from my belief, as your intention, for I cannot be
persuaded to find those friendly in this City, that have invaded the County of
Devon. with an Army, and used the Inhabitants as Enemies; And besides, this
City being committed (under our most gracious Sovereign) to my charge, and
government, I should falsify that trust very much, if I should receive into it
numbers of Power, to master both it, and me.

For our taking of Arms for our defense, even your approach in the manner you
came, is a sufficient reason, if there were no more, But the defense of those
Laws, and that Government by Parliaments, which has so long kept this
Kingdom in happy Peace, is the cause of our Arming, no more doubting of the
lawfulness of the Authority, then I do of my humble Duty, and faithful
Allegiance to his Majesty, the Oath whereof I have often taken, and ever will
keep.

To the Authors of this unnatural War, all Evil is wished by all good men;
I do not impute the beginning of it to you, because I know it not, I wish I
could acquit you of the prosecution, while we pray for a blessed
reconcilliation between his Majesty, and this Parliament, and do our best to
defend both; There are some that have most unfaithfully persuaded his Majesty
to bend his Royal face against that Court, to the destruction of the
fundamental Laws, and ruin of the Kingdom: That you are a partner in the
execution at least of that Design, is my confident belief, being manifest by
your practice; your discerting this unnatural and destructive War, and
joining with us of this City in prayers to God, and Petitions to his sacred
Majesty, to vouchsafe a concurrence with his faithful Lords and Commons in
Parliament, to give a speedy remedy to these bleeding miseries, would cause me
really to sign my self,

Your Friend to serve you Christopher Clearke, Major.

FINIS.

