A TRVE And Perfect Relation of a great and bloody Skirmish lately fought
before the City of WORCESTER Between ten Troops of our side consisting of
about 500. Horse, and the Troops of the Cavaliers consisting of 1800. Horse.
December. 8.

With the names of the Captains, and other Officers and Troopers, that were
slain, wounded and taken prisoners on both sides.

December. 13. Printed for J. Horton, 1642.

A trve relation of a great Battle fought before the City of Worcester.
TO give you some Testimony of my abilityes to do you Service, for your many
favors conferred upon me, I cannot otherwise for the present, then by the
relation of some exceeding true and remarkable passages, which after a tedious
march) happened between 10. Troops of our Horse, consisting of about 500. which
went before to the Town a day before the Army: And the Cavaliers Troop
consisting of about one thousand eight hundred Horse. The Skirmish began
between them, on Friday being the nine and twentieth day of November, about
four of the Clock in the afternoon; within a mile of the City of Worcester,
and within a flight-shot of the River Severne: The reason that our ten Troops
(being but a handful to the Cavaliers) fell on, was because that Cavaliers had
very cunningly sent a report to those ten Troops, pretending that it came
from the Lord General, the Earl of Essex, that his Excellency was within a
mile of the other side of the Town, and would fall on presently, and wished
them to fall on likewise^ which was a plot and a mere invention of the
Cavaleers, for those ten troops to fall on, where by they with all their Forces
intended to cut of these ten troops: His Excellencies Army being at that time
(which the Cevaleers knew very well) five miles distant from WORCESTER, and had
marched exceeding hard that day to come so nere, for had our army been then
within a mile of the town, we had taken all the Cavaleers.

But to give a perfect and true relation of this Fight, and what Commanders we
lost, I shall give you a perticualr of their names, which I had from some
Officers that were then in the Skirmish, and are very much wounded, and
therefore you may boldly take it for a true relation, Colonel Sunds troop
fell on first, where the Colenell himself was dangerously wounded in three
places, his Cornet slain, his Leivtenant dangerously wounded, Sergeant Major
Duglas a brave Soldier was slain, Captain Bery slain, his Cornet wounded,
Captain Astons Leivtenant slain, his Quarter master dangerously wounded, six
of troopers slain, his quartermaster dangerously wounded, his Corporal
slain, Two of Alderman Soames. men which were troopers, in this Skirmish, one
where of viz. Master Low was slain, and the other viz. master Tynne, taken
prisoner, and carried away by Prince Roberts Forces. Captain Burrell, Captain
Heal, and Captain Fynes were also in this Skirmish, but are come off well
with the loss only of some troopers. As for the number of our Common Horse or
troopers, which were that Evening slain, J cannot hear bnt of twenty three
and for the Cavaleers, it is credibly reported, that they lost some Commanders,
for they were seen to carry away four dead Corpse, and it is reported for
certain, that Prince Maurice brother to Prince Robert was dangerously hurt,
and for all the odds of the Caveleers. who having encompassed our men. as it
were in a half Moon, yet our Troops charged through their whole body, and
forct their passage, only with the loss of what is above mentioned, and so
made their retreat good.

And then the Cavaliers marched into the Town, and about twelve of the Clock
at night, ran quite away, and are gone to LUDLOVV, not daring to stay the
coming of our Army the next morning

For upon report of this Skirmish to his Excellency the Earl of Essex, the
Army being quartered in the feilds for that night, having marched that day about
Fourteen miles, and for fiveteene days together Exceeding hard, gave Order
to the whole Army to march the next morning by the Break of Day.

Whereupon the whole Army gave a great shout being overjoyed to hear that they
should Encounter with the Cavaleers; Insomuch that the sound of the Drums, at
that time could not be heard.

The Commanders encouraging the Soldiers, And the Soldiers Vowing to follow
their Commanders, Although a Report came into our Camp, that Prince Robert
would give us Battle the next Morning, which was but a bravado of theirs,

Yet our men were no whit danted, but rather Encouraged and stronger in their
former resolution.

And then every regiment returning to their quarters, and passing on their Duty
wishing every minute the morning Star to appear.

But before the time appointed for our Army to march, we were prevented of our
long hoped wishes, by reason of a Petition which was sent from the Major, and
Aldermen, of the City of WORCESTER, (by one Master Ray, one of the Captains
of the Trained Bands of WORCESTER) to our General the Earl of ESSEX,
certifying him that the Cavaliers were all gone out of WORCESTER, at twelve of
that night, desiring also in their Petition that the Earl would not be
offended with the Town, for what they did was merely through compulsion, and
fear of the Cavaliers, who had done the Town great injuries, as likewise most
places wheresoever they came.

Thereupon our General taking into consideration their Petition, committed the
bearer Master Ray to the custody of one Capraine Mathews a Captain of his own
Regiment, till his Excellency might be further satisfied concerning the truth
of this Petition, least it had, or might be some plot to ensnare the Army, but
within an hour after we found Master Rays Relation, and the Petition to be
very true, and so we marched peaceably into Worcester, where as yet we remain
until we hear from his Majesty: His Excellence our General having sent a
Post with some Letters to desire his Majesty to return to his Parliament, and
to leave those Delinquents to the Justice of the Law.

So for the present J can send you no other Relation, but when any further
occasion happens J shall take the boldness to present my service.

It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons assemled in Parliament, that
Richard Wright and Nathaniell Hall, shall be authorized by both Houses to
search in London, and the Suburbs and Towns adjacent, for Arms lent by the
City, and to seize the same, and to appoint Deduties for that purpose.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

