A True and Perfect Relation of the New Invented Way OF Persecuting the
Protestants in FRANCE.
TOGETHER With the Manner, Time and Place, when and where it first begun to
Act: As also an Exact Account after what manner it is pursued contrary to the
Privileges granted to them by King Henry the 4th. Lewis the 13th. and this
King now Reigning; viz.
BY the Edict of Nantz, on the 6th general Article, and the first particular
Act, Liberty of Conscience, without Let or Molestation, is there most expressly
promised to all Protestants that were then, or should be hereafter; and by the
7 h general Act is granted full Exercise of the Protestant Religion, and to
several Noblemen Liberty to Preach in their houses, and to have Churches in
their Buroughs. By the 37th Article it is said, That all the Protestants shall
enjoy all Offices and Honors in all places of the King's Territories; and that
they shall be no more charged nor oppressed with Impositions ordinary or
extraordinary, than the Catholics; and in order thereunto it is said in the
30,31, and 57 Acts, that the Protestants shall assist as Judges in the
Parliaments, and Chambers as Demy-parties; that is to say, half Papist, and
half Protestants to Judge, without Appeal, of all Differences that they might
have with their fellow subjects. Lewis the 13th confirmed it by his Declaration
of the 22th of May 1610. This King has also assured all Europe, by several
Authentic Declarations, that he would maintain the Edict of Nants, according
to the desire of his Grandfather, who had made it an irrevocable Law, in regard
of the faithful Service they did tender to the Crown, having testified an
inviolable Loyalty to him in all his troubles, it is notorious to all the
world, that they have freely spent their Lives and Fortunes to defend him, and
have continued the same for this King against the Prince of Conde, and all his
Enemies. Notwithstanding all that, the said King has taken away all the Civil
Offices from the Protestants, by a Declaration of the 6th of November 1679. and
of the 23d of August 1680. The 20th of November 1679. it is ordered by a
Declaration, That there shall be no Synod without the King's leave, and without
a Papist Commissary. March 1679. The 13th day a Declaration forbidding them
that are turned Papists ever to turn Protestants again, upon Confiscation of
their Estates, and other Penalties. 1680. June 25. Another Declaration,
forbidding Papists to turn Protestants 1680. August the 27th. Another
Declaration forbidding Protestants to have any Concern in His Majesty's Farms,
or any other Offices. 1680. November. 18. The King has Ordered, that Accounts
should be given of the Money that has been gathered in the Protestant
Churches, since the year 1670. they not knowing his design. At the same time
another Declaration which says, That any Protestant that will turn Papist,
shall not be compelled to pay any Debts during three years; which is for ever;
nor shall they have any increase in their Taxes. 1680. December. 2. Another
Declaration which orders the Justices to visit the Sick; and the said Justices
turn all the people out of their houses, and say what they please to the Sick,
and so report that he will die a Catholic; and if he dies, they take their
Children, and their Estates; so bring them up as they please. 1681; April 11. A
Gratification is published for them that will turn Papists, saying, They shall
have no Charge of Soldiers during two years, nor pay any Contribution. 1681.
May 3. It is forbidden by another Declaration, to all Protest. Tradesmen, to
take any Apprentice Protestant nor Papist. 1681. July 8. A Declaration that
gives leave to all Children seven years old, to turn Papists against their
Parents will. 1681. July 4. An Order to proceed against the Ministers, which
did not give a right Explication to the King's Declaration of the 19th of May
last. Several Colleges have been abolished; and it is not suffered to have any
Schoolmasters, but where there is Churches, and but one in every place. 1681.
July 9. The King did order there should be no more Academy at Sedan. 1680. Feb.
20. The Protestant Midwives are forbidden to make use any more of their
Employments. 1681. November. 4. A Declaration by which it is ordered, That
whereas several Churches have been demolished, and several Ministers of those
places have gone to other Churches to Preach, His Majesty, to lessen the
number, has declared, That Synods should not send any such Ministers to
Preach; and that there should be no more Ministers in the Churches that remain,
than there was before the Last Synod.

AT Poictiers, the Chief City of Poicton, several Priests and other Persons
were appointed to go to several Protestants houses to offer them Corn and Money
if they were willing to go to Mass: some did accept of it, others did not;
according to their bargain they were paid, and so turned Papists: this
continued about 3 weeks; then they set out Proclamations that such People that
would go to Mass, might come to such places, there they should be very well
entertained with money. Several People did scorn their proffers, others did lay
hold of them; this lasted 3 weeks more, and the People that employed themselves
about such work, had a Crown for their pains, of as many Persons as they got.

In April the Bishop of Poictiers took a Journey through all his Diocese, and
in every place he went, caused all the people that were Protestants to come to
him, telling them that the Kings intent was to have all his Subjects Papists,
their best was to do it in time, and that he had order to give them money. I
shall here mark the answer of a Country sellow, called Peter Fouet of Kouvres,
who said, truly my Lord, when I go to a market to Exchange a Horse, if I give
Boot, it is because I would have a beter than mine; therefore I think my
Religion better than yours, because you give money to Boot. However, many did
take money and left their Religion; the said Bishop using many words and
promises to them, beside the money he gave. About the Latter end of May the
Intendant of that Province took a Journey in most places where there were
Protestants. He did send for the people, as the Bishop had done before, but was
very harsh to them, saying, they must go to Mass, if they did not, their houses
should be well furnished with Soldiers: some did scorn his proffers and
threats, others did turn. At the beginning of June there went a Company of
Troupers to a place called Melle; they all Lodged at the Protestants houses,
and utterly ruined them, causing the Inhabitants to find abundance of
provisions more than they needed, making great spoil with Dogs and Horses and
Money every morning, some 20, 30, 40, Livres of their Landlord; they had
Feather-beds and clean Linen carried into stables to lay their Horses upon. At
the same time a Company of Troupers went to a great Borough called Exondun,
acting the same thing: some changed, others absented themselves. At the same
time they went to a place called Eschire, the Lord of that place is a
Protestant, Monsieur De La Taillee: They did proceed as in the places
aforesaid; the people did submit as long as they had moneys in hopes it would
not last long. But being no more able to entertain them at such Rates, some did
forsake their houses, others did turn; then they took to Ride up and down in
every Village, thereabouts, in several Protestant houses acting the same. The
Lord of Baisragen gave a visit to the Intendant, making complaints of the
Soldiers misbehaviours; his Answer was to him, That his Borough should have a
share; the said Lord told him, none should Lodge there without the King's
special order; the Intendant obtained the same, and withal, to take him
Prisoner, which was Executed and he was carried to Bourdeaux in Charteau
Trumpette, where he is, still and the Soldiers did utterly ruin the Place;
then they went to Cherneux, and St. Gallais, the Lords of them places are
Papists, and there acted as before in Protestant houses only. They went also to
St. Maxire to Villiers, to Mursay, and to a place called Bennet, six miles
distant from Niort, drawing toward Low Poicton; there the People after great
sufferings, fled into the Fields, and hid themselves night and day; the
Soldiers having notice of it by some Papist, hunted them poor People with
Dogs, misused them, and brought them to their houses again; some did turn,
others resisted. In July they went to St. Elemoy to Panpron, to Sansay, to
Bagneau, and Chenay, there acting the same things. They were also at a
considerable Town called Lusignan, there dealing as wickedly as in other
places; then they came round about St. Maixant, in all the Buroughs joining
the Gates, acting the same Cruelties, but went not into the Town. They went
also at Aigonnay and Chefboutowne, and other places which I name not here.
Several Gentlemen were appointed to go to Paris, to acquaint the King of those
wicked proceedings, (the Marquis of Venours and his Son, who have been great
sufferers for speaking the truth to the King: the rest of the Deputies were
sent to the Marquis of Rivigny, not being admitted to speak to the King.) The
Governor of Poicton called the Duke La Vien Villes, was ordered to go in his
Government, and there to hear the Complaints of all them that were molested;
upon that the said Protestants did rejoice at the Governors Arrival. Several
Complaints made to him, his Answer was, he could not believe there was so much
mischief done, and that in few days he would see Mon. Marilac Intendant; when
they had spoken together, the Intendant did send eight Soldiers where there
was but four before, and so jested, and asked if they had not good Justice of
the Governor.

In July the Bishop of Lucon gave the Governor a Visit; after that the
Governor did send his Guards, seven, or eight at a time in a house, dealing as
wickedly with the People in the Low Poicton as the Dragoons had done in other
places; this lasted about a month, then the Bishop of Lucon had a Jubilee, he
employed himself to draw the People to him. After that the Soldiers did return
again to Bennet, they finding neither Money nor Victuals in the Houses of the
People that was returned; they thinking the business over (the Soldiers
misused them, and caused many to turn;) the Soldier finding nothing to feed
themselves at the Houses of them that persisted did repair to the Chief
Commanders to acquaint them of the same, desiring other Quarters; their answer
was, That as long as there was any Movables in their Houses, they should have
no other quarters, but should sell it all for their subsistence. At a place
called Champdenie, a Market Town, many Families did forsake their houses, and
carried away the best goods they had, having notice the Soldiers were to come
there; whereupon the Intendant did proclaim, That all the Inhabitants of that
Province, that had absented themselves for fear of lodging Soldiers, should
forthwith return to their houses upon the Penalty of five hundred Livres; but
very few did obey.

In August the Soldiers had Liberty to go where they pleased, except in the
Cities, and had no other Orders but a Bill from the Priests of every Parish; in
which was written, such a man is an Huguenot, and so there lodged at
discretion, that did occasion many Laboring men to fly, and several did
forsake their Corn in the Fields, which never was cut down, but destroyed. They
did take some Peazants, and burnt their wooden Shoes, their feet being
therein. James Panon did suffer this, and did not change his Religion. The
Officers that are committed for the Taxes, called Elus, went about in every
Parish to take a Lift of what Protestants remained; also an account of what
means they had, to the end and purpose, as I shall tell hereafter in the New
Way of Persecuting.

In September the Soldiers went to Partenay, and the neighboring Places; and
because the People began to run away at their coming, they went no more in the
day, but in the night, and so did Catch the People in their houses, and keep
them in torments until they Changed, or made their Escape. In the same month
went a Company to a place called La Motte; the Lord of it is called Count
Parabelle, a Papist; they surprised the Protestants in their houses; that place
was thought full of Religious people, and that would sooner have lost their
Estates, than their Religion, but it proved otherwise; they stood but three
days, except twenty that absented themselves: They did also great Cruelties at
Coulonge; then the Soldiers took their March, where they had been before to
see if any were returned, and so continued their wickedness, which occasioned
many to turn and them that would not, did forsake the Kingdom.

The Priests all the Kingdom over, did forbid the People to buy any Goods of
the Protestants; so that if any was sold, it was by stealth; laying upon the
Buyers a great Charge, saying, These People have no Religion, their Means are
their Gods; to save them they will turn to us; and the want of Money will keep
them here; but if they have Money, they will return into the Heretics Country;
and you that buy such Goods must needs be damned, and suffer double pains,
because you are a help or instrument to convey those People from the true
Faith; upon that all manner of Goods were cheap; but several of them did buy
secretly such Goods as they did forbid others to buy. The Magistrates of every
place did also forbid to buy any thing of the Protestants upon great penalties.
From Niort a great Town in the said Province, several Gentlemen, Women, and
Children shipped themselves upon the River of Maran; the Magistrates of that
place having notice of the same, Commanded some Soldiers to follow them, and
they were taken at a place called LaRouseille, and plundered; they did undress
the Women and Children, and found Gold hid in their young Babes clouts, and
elsewhere, amounting to considerable Sums, and carried them back at Niort, the
Men put in Prison, the Women and Children at the Hospital: Complaint being made
to the Intendant, he ordered, that if they would not turn, they should remain
there until they had spent their money at the rate of six pence per day for
every Person, at several places the Soldiers made people sit up night and day,
without sleeping, taking by turn, drinking, and eating, making the People of
the House continually to wait upon them, and so caused the death of many. They
have carried old People in sheets to Church, and there made them say that they
were Roman Catholics, and if they recanted, to be hanged, as Apostates. They
have beaten many, and drawn about the streets by the hair:If a Papist owes to
a Protestant Moneys upon a petition, supposing the Protestant intends to
withdraw himself, the Papist shall obtain daley at his pleasure, A very great
volume might be made of all their Cruelties; the People being thus perplexed,
begun in July to draw toward Rochelle, to seek a retreit into the Protestant
Princes Countries, in England chiefly, under the Right Defender of the Faith.
The People were suffered at first to ship themselves with what Goods they had
to carry; it lasted so until September, then they did hinder them to carry any
thing, the Customers were forbidden to clear any manner of Household Stuff; but
the People were suffered to go in quiet, provided they carried nothing, not so
much as a Bed or Covering; that lasted until the middle of October. Then one Mr.
Thomas Tailor of Southampton was stopped within the Digue at Rochelle, with 200
Passengers, pretending to confiscate his Ship, by reason of his Shipping of
them; the Ship was brought in the Harbor, and a Messenger sent to the
Intendant of Rochefort, which did nothing in it, but said he would write to
Court; in the mean time a Merchant of Rochelle arrested the Goods that were
aboard, belonging to one Mr. Mesuire Frighter, to which he was indebted, but
the said Tailor has since been absolutely cleared of his pretended Crime.

The New Way of Persecution.
THE Officers for the Taxes called Elus, having informed the Intendant of every
man's faculty, he at his discretion lays Taxes upon the Protestants; several
that have not three hundred Livres per annum, are Taxed at a thousand Livres;
and the whole Taxes of a Town are jointly and severally upon the Inhabitants,
so that they may take one man for the whole payment, and let him recover it
when he can, and that in regard of Protestants only. They have imprisoned
several Ministers.

They take review of all the process that has been made within this 25 years,
and if they find any considerable, wherein a Protestant has had the best of
it, they recall it, and say, there was a mistake, and that it must be Examined
anew by the Intendant, and so cast the poor Protestant, unless he will turn
Papist. By a Proclamation set forth by the Intendant of Rochefort, it was said
that no ships should undertake to transport any of the Kings Subjects, upon
Penalty of 3000 Livres, and Officers set out to lay hold of all the Protestants
that had left their houses, calling them deserters, and several hundred taken
prisoners, which after many Sufferings have been let out; but having their
liberty, they did their endeavor to ship themselves, which several have done
in the night. The second of December there was a Scotch ship that took in about
100 passengers; at the last Boats coming off from a place called Point of
Minisme near the Digue at Rochel, there came several armed men who Commanded
the boat to return one the shore, and bring the people again, upon denial they
did discharge their ^^squets and shot one man through the body, belonging to Mr.
Martin (sloop) of La Flatte^ and wounded another in the head, belonging to St.
Martins in the Isle of Re. Those wicked Papists are so malicious, and inhumane,
that they are not contented withal the suffering; that they have had in
France, they follow them in England; they have acted, and do act every day many
unhandsome tricks, and strive to put it upon them, that they may be odious to
the People of England, to draw back their Charity from them* Therefore it is no
wonder at the Peoples coming so poor into this Country; considering how they
are persecuted; the Trades men will soon be able to get their living, but men
that lived by their Estates, that had Lands, and Houses, to farm to Tenants
cannot bring them, and many that Traded, and had considerable Sums of Money due
by them that are ruined, will be the greater Sufferers, unless some care be
taken to procure them some employment. It is the Condition of him that gives
this Relation; for the severity of that Government makes poor at best, and so
together with the Priest Menaces for none to buy, and the Persecution so
violent, no Protestants can bring any thing away.

Published by Richard Janaway. 1682.


