A true Copy of the Welsh SERMON Preached Before the two Princes, Prince RUPERT
and Prince MAURICE at Dover, a little before they embarked themselves with what
they had plundered out of England and Wales, to pass beyond the Seas.

Preached by Shon up Owen, Priest. His Text being 2. Esdras Chap. 7. Verse 15.

Now therefore, why disquietest thou thy self (Prince Rupert and Prince
Maurice,) being thou art but a corruptible Man? And why were thou moved (to
come into these parts) whereas thou art but mortal, etc.

Published according to Order.

London, Printed for Thomas Bates, at the Maidenhead on Snow-hill near
Holborne Conduit. 1646.

2 Esdras, 7. verses 15., 16. Now therefore, why disquietest thou thy self,
(Prince Rupert and Maurice) seeing thou art but a corruptable man? and why art
thou moved (to come into these parts) whereas thou art but mortal? etc.
HEr Text divides it self, or rather falls into three pieces of her own
accord; in which urds her shall find three general parts: her first part is
the Terminus ad quo; her second, Terminus ad quem; her third and last part is,
Terminus a quod. The Terminus a quo is meant you (Prince Maurice) in these
words: Now therefore, why disquietest thou thy self: that is, why come thou
into these her territories to disquiet us? Then the next or second part is, the
Terminus ad quem; that is, to know who sent for her thither; that is the
quaere: Then follows the third and last part, the Terminus ad quod, wherefore
and for what her is come for, now Prince Maurice, or cosen Prince Maurice and
Prince Rupert of Cumberland, which title her loves best that her desires her to
accept of: And now her having formerly brushed her own Country-mens and omens
coats and freeze jerkins, and told um of her faults soundly, for her will have
her caknow that her Countries podies are not troubled with many gowns, her will
with her leave, and her own privilege being a Preacher, rub and brush her
coats, also Prince Maurice and Prince Rupert, and first her will begin with her
habit, and tell her of her own faults and imperfections in her garments, or
arrayment; her cannot call her coat her wears now, nor give it no better a
term then even a smock of Room, a siding coat, a Cavaliarisme, or
Antiprotestatisme coat, full of Idolatrous Romanisticall buttons, so thick set
in a popish ceremonious way, that even it is an abomination to her sight; nor
is this all her must tell her good Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, for her
will be bold to inform her urship, that first the name of Maurice came out of
this true, ancient, honorable Principallity of Wales, and it took her first
original from Morice-dancers, or none that did rise and caper oftener then her
fellows, and so called Morice, or Maurice; be God, her country her can tell
her, never proved false, but were honest true Trojans faithful to her Kings
and Queens, and all her Princes, that is a credit for her own Country, for her
does remember when her was but a Bachelor of Art, there was a true proverb
went up and down her Country, that is this; Three Welch-men, 2. soldiers, 3.
Englishmen, 2. thieves, 3. Frenchmen, 2. Traitors, 3. Spaniards, 2.
Whore-masters, 3. Italians, 2. Juglers, 3. Dutchmen, 2. Drunkards: which
plainly shows that you being a Dutchman is most subject to be intoxicated,
ergo, overcome, or subject to her passions and humors; for let her but ask her
one question, nay, now her is in her Pulpit, her is in a place of Sanctuary,
and may boldly talk her pleasure; what a Tivell made her to come into the Welsh
Alps with her Troopers, and her Dragooners, and her Pioneers, and her
Ingineers? what, do her think to undermine her Mountains, and throw down her
huge p^g hills, and lay them levill like his Low Countries, no her warrant her;
so much shall serve for her Introduction to the Text, to her cosen Prince
Maurice, now suffer her to tell her a word of reproof, which is this; Terminus
ad quem, and last of all a word or two of admonition or advice, and then her
will have done: As her said before, what a Tivell made her come, first come
into England, secondly into her Kingdom of Wales: could her not be contented
to stay at home in her own Country, at the University of Leyden, a place her
have heard of, but indeed-law her was never there, Leyden should be a place of
dullness, or heaviness, like Lead, which word Leyden is taken from Lead, for
lead is the first syllable to Leyden, that is, one that is heavy heeled, or
has lead in her shoes; I say, why did not her stay there, who sent for her
hither? her says again and again, who sent for her hither? will her not
answer? then her will declare, that it was malice, and envy; two of the eldest
sons of the great Tivell; again, what moved her to come in this warlike manner,
had her any cause? was her not well used at Leyden, had her not good Apparels,
had her not good victuals, had her not good Hodg-boge mine-here there? had her
not good educations and instructions in all the liberal Sciences; had her not
there a school of war to exercise her valors in, but her must come into
England, and there spoil and plunder, burn and deface whole Towns and
Villages; and bring her brave Country of England to destruction, and to want
Bread corn, and Barley corn; Sirrah, sirrah, her have heard that most of her
victuals, as Beer, Corn, Mutton, Veale, nay even her apparels that her has
formerly worn has bin sent her out of England to relieve her and the rest of
her brethren when her was not able to help her self; but must have lived
meanly, and gone with many a hungry belly to bed, and rose again with as good
an appetite as when her laid her down and slept upon it: And her do thus
ungratefully require poor England, to kill her men and omens, her fathers and
her mothers, which often contribute out of her yearly means to help her, when
her was as low as the bowl that runs in the Bowling-alley, who meets with many
rubs by the way; I say poor England did help to succor her, when her was not
able to help her self, no not wipe her arse; her might have kept her as her
have said at Leyden in Dutch-land, and have made her self a Captain, and gone
against Jack Spaniard; there her should have found good causes and
considerations for taking up of her arms, and for killing of men, there her
says, her should have been honored of all the English Nation, who had heard
of her valors and her courages; or her should have gone with her sword into
Ireland, and with her dexterious hand and enchanted boby, have endeavored to
quell and refrigerate the hot Irish Rebels, whose cruelty and inhumanity no
British Chronicle her can find in her country, nor in her own library, can
parallel: There her must confess her had gone and steered a right and a good
course, even by the compass of Cristianity: but this course that he now takes
is Diabolical and Satanicall, and profane; nay her will tell her her own, and
tell Belzephon which is the third Tivell in hell, her faults if her meet her in
her way, and say her lies in her teeth, if it be a lie; So may her tell her
Maurice, that her is in a malignant and capital fault, in such a gross and
barbarous manner exercised, that if her had one of her chief Shudges here, her
would apprehend her, and bring a bill of Scandala Magnatum against her, and
issue out a Fieri Facias against her, and by that means forfeit all her goods
and lands by a pr^munire; So much shall serve for my first reproof for
England, sweet England, honey England, which is the Terminus ad quem; now
suffer another word of the reproof for her coming in Wales, in this her
posture and warlike manner, which is her Terminus ad quem. And first, what did
her mean to come into her borders, to spoil her brave orchards and gardens,
her Cider and her Perry trees, what did her mean to do, to mar and chang all
her very good Pippins and Pomwaters into crabs, and all her excellent
Hartichoaks into thistles, and all her leeks and onions into brambles and
thorns, and make it as barren as the place from whence her come; did her mean
by her guns and her cruelties to destroy all her cattels and her welsh
venisons, and fine plack Cows, that her should have no butter nor toasted
sheez, or Cows-bobby: her do think that her did mean to make all things so dear
in her Kingdom of Wales, as it is amongst your Butter boxes, as to make her pay
double or taxise for all her eats, or drinks, or wears, and that her shall in
Wales feed as her did in Holland upon roots, and Carrets, and onions, and
hodg-podg, that is, all sorts of hearps sod together, which fills the
Dutch-mans hungry belly very well, as a little whay does our hogs bellies in
our barns or stables, a turd is as good and far wholsomer for a Sow then a
Pan-pudding, No good Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, her was suffered, her
shall show her no such Hocus Pocus tricks; to do such ungodly deeds, and be
suffered to run on in her wilfulness, her has brave spirits in Wales left yet,
though her lost many brave soldiers at Kenton battles, and her have long poles
with pikes or welsh hooks at the end, such as can pull her to her, or put her
from her, for her will tell her Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, if her do not
go hence speedily, her soldiers will be beaten to pieces, and her self hugged
worse then the chiefest Tivell Beelzebub did hug the witch, which will make her
color the long seams of her hose, worse then new three penny ale does, or a
purge of nux vomica given in a potion: her tell her, her has valiant men in
Wales, such as shall firk her ^oby for her, and tickle her galligascoins, mark
her that now; her will warrant her shall make all her ords good; therefore her
say be gone, be gone her say young man to Holland, for her do hold her but a
monster, because her teeth is longer then her beard, be gone her advises her
with her page and paggage, and the rest of her lumbers; her cannot endure these
farting guns, nor these fifling pistols, nor this stinking powder which shoot
nothing but pullets, and kill her Countrymen 3. or 4. furlongs off; and then
her is dead before her knows who hurt her, or can say her prayers, or make her
wills: therefore her gives her fair warnings, Prince Rupert and Prince
Maurice, to be forthwith gone out of her Territories, and trudg home, and keep
her good Queen her mother company, as her elder brother the Paulsgrave did, so
her then may become an honest man, and it may be a good bowler. Her Countrymen
cannot endure to be plundered and robbed of her coods and parrels, nor of her
cattels and venisons; her believes her would kiss where her sat a Sunday, if
her had such fat coodly cattels, as her has in Wales, in your Dutch-land
Country, but her hopes her cattels have more wit then to range out of their
Country, or from their Masters house, then to be enticed over sea with her when
her goes; Cod sent her cood shipping; her cattle will her hope have more wit,
and find lead in her feet, rather then go to Leyden, if such a motion were
made, or such a patent granted to any projector: so her should have done with
Prince Rupert and Maurice if he had had any wit or money: But her shall be
cozened as her Grandams dog was: her will tell her plainly her has no money nor
plate in England or Wales, and her parish is very poor that her lives in, and
her is the Parson of it; for her cannot put up at the quarters end not above
ten groats at the most.

Do her but look how her lived when her was in Wales, her Parishioners were
not able to buy or allow her a new Cushion for her Pulpit then, how many holes
and rents were in her Cushion, how did her feathers fly about, and how did the
Cony wool fly about her ears: her was not able to afford her a new coat but
once in 2. or 3. years: what did her mean to come to Wales, by Cod, her whole
Country was very poor; and her was there in a very pad condition; if her had
not good store of tyth Pigs, Hens, Capons, Eggs, and such like, her should not
know how to subsist with her wives and children; so much shall be enough which
her has spoken for the Text, which is the Terminus ad quod; that is,
wherefore, and for what her did come for into Wales, which her has told her
sufficiently off, and her hopes will take notice and amend.

Now a word of Admonition, and so her will conclude, and that is this; her do
wish her Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice to go her ways home quietly into her
own Country, go her says young Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice home to her
good Lady and Mother, as her have said before, for every honest man will do as
her is bidden and comfort her, who is very sorry to her knowledge, to hear how
her doto abuse her self and her Country of England, her cood Lady and Mother
is very heartly sorry for her rashness, go home young Prince Rupert and
Prince Maurice, and be obedient to her dear Mother; her has sent for her two
times already, and if her do not go before the third time of sending, her will
tell her plainly, that Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice is a Canary-bird, and
her will send two Tivels, and bid her take him Tivels take him; and if her
Tivel^ has taken her they will so torment her p^dies, that her would have
wished her had never come into England nor Wales, to fire, (...) her meets,
and so her leaves her to her own considerations and consciences, to apply all
these sayings to her self; and her commits her P. Rupert and P. Maurice to
Dinner, because her smells the Roast meat and pyes piping hot, which stays for
her upon the Table; and so her will end as her at first begun, that is with her
Text; Now therefore, why disquiet est thou thy self, (P. Rupert and P.
Maurice) seeing thou art but a corruptable man? and why art thou moved (to come
into these parts) whereas thou art but mortal: And why have thou not
considered in thy mind this thing that is come rather then that which is
present, Esdras, 7. Verse 15, 16. Why have not thou P. Rupert and thou P.
Maurice obeyed to voice of her good Parliament, what a Tevill made you stay so
long in England? Do not you remember Prince Rupert, that for your part, you
made cood promise to the good Parliament to be gone a great while agone, when
you lost Bristoll Town, and you went to Worcester to get you Prince Maurice to
go along with her: What a Tevill made you so mad, as not to go then, but you
would stay volens nolens until you lost all, and now you must be enforced to
go, and carry your cruelties, your plunderings and all te mischiefs you have
done along with you, to make you the more welcome into another Country: All I
can say is to you Prince Rupert, England is heartily glad to see you so near
to be gone, and her does wish you never to come again, you may remember what
Mr. Lilly made a Prophecy of you. And for you Prince Maurice, her pray never
think of coming into Wales again, for if you do, all te plundered
Cows-bobby, all te Onions, Leeks, and Oat-Cakes in Wales will muster themselves
together, and rise up in Judgment against you.

FINIS.

