THE TRUE EFFIGIES OF THE Monster of Malmesbury: OR, THOMAS HOBBES IN HIS
PROPER COLORS.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1680.

TO THE READER.
I Desire thou should understand that the Author of the following Verses
against Mr. Hobbes, about Twenty Years since conceived that Indignation against
him, and that Hatred of his Illogical and Atheistical Genius which he has here
Expressed, and that he Avers that it is both the Effect of the DARKNESS of this
Man's Heart, and the Cause of the Increase of it, that he holds that there
cannot be an Idea of an Infinite Being. I cannot think of any other of his
wicked Conceits, but what has been abundantly confuted by one or other of his
Learned Adversaries; but I have not observed that this has been taken notice
of by any one except Des Carts; wherefore I shall desire the Ingenious Reader
to bestow his utmost Intention on these Words, which the Author of these Verses
delivered in a Discourse to a great Auditory about seven years since: But my
hardest Task is yet behind, viz. to Prove, as to a stubborn Atheist, that there
is a GOD. Many men declare that they have in their minds the Idea or Notion of
GOD, that is to say, of a Being Absolutely Infinite: I say many men declare
that they have the Idea of this Being, therefore certainly there is such a
Being. How, may some say? This is a fine Argument indeed; It is so, because
Many Men think it is so. Why may not that which you call an Idea of GOD, be
nothing else but a mere Conceit or Figment of the Mind. To this we answer, that
we undertake to Demonstrate that it is not a mere Conceit, etc. which we
apprehend under these Terms, A Being Absolutely Infinite. If it were a mere
Conceit, an Ens Rationis, or Empty Notion, then this Proposition would be True:
Some mere Conceit or Figment of the Mind is That which the Mind may Apprehend
under these Terms, A Being, etc. But that we Prove to be False, thus; That
which it is possible for the Mind to comprehend, and to know for certain that
it is nothing else but what it works or frames to it self, is not That which the
Mind may Apprehend under these Terms, A Being Absolutely Infinite:

Every mere Conceit, Ens Rationis, or Figment of the Mind is that which it is
possible for the Mind to comprehend, etc. therefore No mere Conceit, etc. is
That which the Mind may Apprehend under these Terms, A Being Absolutely
Infinite. By these Words it is possible for the Mind to comprehend, I mean, As
to the Utmost Extent of its Natural Capacity: not but that it may be Impossible
for the Mind by reason of some Accidental Defect to Comprehend its own
Operation: Absolutely Infinite plainly implies All Excellency and Perfection
that we can Understand, and That which Infinitely Transcends our Understanding.
We know nothing more cettainly than this, that Our Holy One is
Incomprehensible: (...), says that Incomparable Divine St. Gregory Nazianzen,

And now I shall demonstrate to All Christians that there is an Idea, or Notion
of God in the Minds of All men: And by this it will appear that it is very
Indiscreet (not to say Wicked) for any Christian to slight this Argument for
the Conviction of the Madness of Atheism. I do not wonder to see it slighted by
that Monster, the Father of the Leviathan, or by his Friend Gassendus, who has
such Abominable Gross Conceits of the Deity, that 'twould look like a kind of
Profaneness to mention them in English before such a Promiscuous Auditory. But
this I shall say in scorn of those Ugly things which this New Philosopher, and
New Divine has written in opposition to Des Carts; that it is not strange that
he who writes the Life of Gassendus, says of Hobbes, that he was Gassendo
charissimus, But let these men, and the Admirers of their rare Metaphysics
Prate what they please, we know and are assured that these words were dictated
to St. Paul by the Holy Ghost, Romans 1.15. Which show the work of the Law
written in their hearts. He speaks of the Gentiles, which have not the Law,
that is, (says the truly Learned, and Pious Doctor Hammond) which have not that
Revelation of Gods Will and Law which the Jews had. By the work of the Law we
understand That which the Law Requires to be done, which our Savior reduces to
these Two Heads, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc. And thy Neighbor as
thy self. What can be more evident than this, that in the work of the Law
written in the Hearts of Men there is implied an Idea, or Notion of God? since
the Principal work of the Law is, To Love God, which Pythagoras, and his
Followers declare to be Written in their Hearts by that celebrated Saying of
theirs (...), Follow God. What a shame is it for any Christian not to Reflect
upon the Brightness of his own Soul, Illustrated by this Splendid Notion of the
Deity, so as to despise All the Glories of this perishing World! But, alas, the
Perverseness of our Wills averts our Understanding from reflecting on its own
Light. Shine upon us, we beseech thee, O Father of Lights, in the Face of JESUS
CHRIST, the Brightness of thy Glory, that in thy Light we may see Light.

Here I shall mind you of those Two Sacred Arguments to Demonstrate the Deity,
which the Psalmist uses in Ps. 19. to wit, the Light of the Visible World, and
the Purity of the Law of GOD, that Spiritual Light that proceeds from the Sun
of Righteousness, the Sun of the Invisible world, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3, etc. The
Apostle says expressly, Romans 1.20. The Invisible things of him from the
Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead. And as for the Law of God, the Holy
Scriptures, whosoever reads them with All Diligence, and compares what he Reads
with what he Sees in the World, and what he often Feels in his own Soul, he
will certainly cry out with the Blessed Psalmist, Verily there is a Reward for
the Righteous; verily he is a God that Judges in the Earth.

And now I shall mention another of Mr. Hobbes's wicked Conceits, that thou
may more clearly perceive the Justice of that vehement Indignation I have
against him. In his late Pamphlet entiuled An Historical Narrative concerning
Heresy, p. 11. He shows that he would fain have this Doctrine go for a piece
of POPERY, viz. That a man's Will and Purpose to commit Sin, does not proceed
from God, but originally from himself or from the Devil. Unhappy man, who
endeavors so plainly and openly to stain the Glory of the HOLY ONE! and to
Reconcile us to Sin, the Only Absolute EVIL! For he can never Rationally
conclude that Sin deserves our utmost Hatred, who has a Conceit that it
Proceeds from GOD. The Spring and Original of all Sin is SELF-WILL, Sin being
an Aversion from GOD, whilst the Will of the Creature Affects It self, and not
the Will of the Creator, as the Prime Motive in its Tendency or Inclination.
Mr. Hobbes may call this Nonsense, or what he pleases; but he shall quickly
Know that it is a Truth of the greatest Importance. I grant that He has a very
Elegant Style both in English and Latin, Prose and Verse: But his Leviathan,
and other Books of his are so full of Madness and Folly, that it is impossible
they should be so Taking as they are, but that the Practices of so Many even of
them that have Named the Name of CHRIST, are so Agreeable to His Notions. But
the time draws on apace when He and his Followers shall Know that the LORD our
God will not be Mocked, and that he will Hear the Voice of his Church, crying
unto him, Arise, O God, plead thine own Cause, remember how the Foolish man
Reproacheth thee daily.

Mr. COWLEY's VERSES In PRAISE of MR. HOBBES, OPPOSED;

By a Lover of Truth and Virtue.

Idcirco Virtus medio jacet obruta coeno:
Nequitiae classes candida vela ferunt.
(...)
(...)
(...) --
-- (...)
-- (...)
Sint nunquam mihi tales
Mores Jupiter Pater: sed viis
Simplicibus vitae insistam --
Laudans Laudanda, Vituperiumque
Inspergen; Improbis.
PIND. NEM. ODE VIII. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1680.

To Mr. HOBBES
(1)
VAst Bodies of Philosophy
I often have seen, and read,
But all are Bodies dead,
Or Bodies by Art fashioned:
I never yet the Living Soul could see
But in thy Books, and thee.
It Is only God can know
Whether the fair Idea thou do show,
Agree entirely with his own, or no.
This I dare boldly tell,
It Is so like Truth 'twill serve our turn as well.
Just as in * Nature thy Proportions be,
As full of Concord their Variety;
As firm the parts upon their Center rest,
And all so Solid are, that they at least
As much as Nature, Emptiness detest.
(2)
What Bodies of Philosophy
You often have seen, and read,
I wish you had but mentioned,
We Would judge if they are alive, or dead:
We cannot judge before we Try.
The Morals of the Stagirite
Are Stars which to the Dark World gave Light,
But Hobbes by his would turn our Day to Night.
Great Zenophon, and Plato, who relate,
How Socrates embraced his Fate,
And all the Brave Socratick Race,
Whose Monuments Time cannot deface,
Shall live, when Hobbes shall have his Doom,
So Lie as dead, as does TOM THUMB:
Good Men his Knavery spy:
His Books contain some Truths, and many a Lie,
Some Truths well known, but strange Impiety.
* Stay! stay! where now fond Lad!
Thy Wit thus strained, You Are ten times worse than Mad.
What Is Nature but the Ordinary way
Wherein our Good Creator does display
His Power, and Wisdom in the things he made
For his own Goodness sake? Man's not a Shade,
But utter Darkness, whilst he acts alone,
Whilst his works are not natures; but his own:
What! Hobbes, and Nature thus to parallel!
What Is this but to confront Bright Heaven with Hell!
So does the Poets wit suit with his Theme:
He that will Hobbes Applaud must first Blaspheme.
(2)
Long did the mighty Stagirite retain
The universal Intellectual Reign,
Saw his own Countries short-lived Leopard slain;
The stronger Roman Eagle did out-fly,
Oftener renewed his Age, and saw that Dye.
Mecha it self in spite of Mahomet possessed,
And chased by a wild Deluge from the East,
His Monarchy new planted in the West.
But as in time each great Imperial Race
Degenerates, and gives some new one place:
So did this Noble Empire wast,
Sunk by degrees from Glories past,
And in the School-mens hands perished quite at last.
Then naught, but words it grew,
And those all Barbarous too.
It perished, and it vanished, there,
The Life and Soul breathed out, became but empty Air.
(2)
The Empire of the Stagarites sublime and piercing wit,
(Tho The Empire both of Greece, and Rome
Time did long since or'ecome)
Shall never decay, but men shall still to its vast Power submit;
For All well-ordered thoughts must go
Within the Compass of those Rules, which his great Art did show.
Our HARVEY, whose bright Fame
So Dazel'd Envies Eye, that she
could never see
The least Pretense to lessen his Great Name,
Even He commends the Stagirite
To all Posterity,
As one that had a Clear Insight
Into the Secret ways of Natures Majesty.
It Is true he failed in that he did not see
That things Successive could not be
From all Eternity:
But yet he saw
That this is Natures Law,
That all things must depend on him alone,
Who gives to all things Motion, though himself has none,
Who Is, and Was, and Ever shall Be ONE
In all Simplicity,
From Composition, and from Alteration free:
To whom may all true Praise be given
In Earth, as it is in Heaven.
(3)
The Fields which answered well the Ancients Plow,
Spent and out-worn return no Harvest now,
In Barren Age wild, and unglorious lie
And boast of past Fertility,
The poor relief of present Poverty.
Food, and Fruit we now must want,
Unless New Lands we plant.
We break up Tombs with Sacrilegious hands;
Old Rubbish we remove,
To walk in Ruins like vain Ghosts we love,
And with fond Divining Wands
We search among the Dead,
For Treasures Buried,
Whilst still the liberal Earth does hold
So many Virgin Mines of undiscovered Gold.
(3)
That in this Age Men don't their Thoughts confine
Within the Line
Of what Judicious Aristotle said;
Nor are his Works so commented,
As they were in those Days;
They don't hereby detract from his Great Praise.
Since they walk in those ways,
To which his mighty Genius led.
His Commendation was not this, that he
Did show the Truth of this, or that Particularitie;
But that he showed the way to clear our Thought,
That every Man might find that Truth, which should by him be sought.
(4)
The Baltic, Euxin, and the Caspian,
And slender limbed Mediterranean
Seem Narrow Creeks to Thee, and only fit
For the poor wretched Fisher-Boats of Wit:
Thy Nobler Vessel the vast Ocean tries,
And nothing sees but Seas and Skies,
Till unknown Regions it descries.
Thou great Columbus of the Golden Lands of New Philosophies,
Thy Task was harder much than his;
For thy learned America is
Not only found out first by thee,
And rudely left to future Industry;
But thy Eloquence, and thy Wit
Has planted, peopled, built, and civilized it.
(4)
It Is true, thy New Philosopher has left the Caspian,
The Baltic, Euxin, Mediterranean;
The Narrow ways to all that Verity
Which Mortals can descrie;
He Sails in the Ocean of the most Profound Impiety;
And from the Coasts of Hell
He brings those Wares, which he shall never sell
To any, but those dark'ned Souls, which lie, where Adam fell.
The Power of Earthly Princes he does foolishly pretend
By his fictitious Loyalty to extend
To larger measures; gives to Kings what is due to God alone:
Thus what he seems to make more great, he really makes none:
For sure on Earth there is No Monarchy,
If it consist in ABSOLUTE Sovereignty.
The King of Kings commands us to obey our King,
By cheerful Doing, or by quiet Suffering:
He that the Power of Kings would have much higher to arise,
His King Dishonours, and his GOD he does Despise:
Such Folk dwell in those Colonies,
Which Hobbes has planted in his Lands of New Philosophies.
I little thought before,
(Nor being my own self so poor,
Could comprehend so vast a store)
That all the Wardrobe of rich Eloquence,
Could have afforded half enuff
Of bright, of new, and lasting Stuff,
To cloth the mighty limbs of thy Gigantick Sense,
Thy solid Reason like the Shield from Heaven,
To the Trojan Hero given,
Too strong to take a mark from any mortal Dart,
Yet shines with Gold, and Gems in every part,
And wonders on it engraved by the learned hand of Art;
A Shield that gives delight
Even to the Enemies sight,
Then when they are sure to lose the Combat by it.
(5)
His Monstrous Thoughts may well be called Gigantick Sense,
To Heaven they fain would offer violence,
Like those Giants of old
Of which the Poets told.
Even like Goliath they Defy
The Armies of the Living God, and like him too they Die.
The Man with his Gigantick Sense, his mighty Spear and Shield
Comes forth into the Field;
And for some time he Boasted there
As if he had no Cause to Fear.
His Captive-Darkned Soul cannot see,
What it is to have our Souls set free
From the Black Chains of dire NECESSITY;
This and a Thousand Errors more
He strives to Land upon our Shore.
But then the Mighty BRAMHAL comes, and takes his Arms away,
Shows that this Painted Shield's not fit for Fight, but Play,
Strikes down the Monster, does to All his Ugly Shape display.
Then in another Field he is met by the Mighty WARD;
And here 'twas plainly seen, that he could neither guard
Himself from being Wounded, or give Wounds;
Down strait he falls, his Armor on him sounds,
What e're his Followers say, he never Rose again:
His Ghost is heard to Rave sometimes, but then Bold TOM was slain.
(6)
Nor can the Snow, which now cold Age does shed
Upon thy reverend Head,
Quench or allay the noble Fires within,
But all which thou have bin,
And all that Youth can be, you are yet,
So fully still do Thou
Enjoy the Manhood, and the Bloom of Wit,
And all the Natural Heat, but not the Fever too.
So Contraries on AEtna's Top conspire
Her hoary Frosts, and by them breaks out Fire.
A secure peace the faithful Neighbors keep,
The emboldned Snow next to the Flame does sleep.
And if we weigh like Thee,
Nature, and Causes we shall see,
That thus it needs must be;
To things Immortal, Time can do no wrong,
And that which never is to Dye, for ever must be Young,
TOM's grown Another Man, and now himself betakes
To Poetry, and Sonnets makes
Of Gods, and Goddesses, and such like things:
He Is now the Echo of what HOMER Sings.
If Versifying be a Sign of Youth,
The Man of Politics is youthful still:
He does not here Pretend to show the Truth,
On which Pretense how much Ink did he spill!
O that he had spent all the Time
In hard Translations, and in Rhyme,
Which he spent in Opposing Truths, by which to Heaven we climb.
No wonder, that Old Age, and Youth, AEtnean Cold, and Heat
Should Meet in Him, in whom long since such Contradictions Met.
I wish he may not Die too soon after so long a Life,
That he no longer would maintain his cursed Strife
Against That, which would make him repent of all is Impieties:
Least his Long Life bring him in the End to the WORM that Never Dies.
FINIS.

