A True DESCRIPTION OF JAMAICA, With the Fertility, Commodities, and
Healthfulness of the place.

As also The Towns, Havens, Creeks, Promontories, and the Circuit of the whole
Island.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. 1657.

A True DESCRIPTION OF JAMAICA, With the Fertility, Commodities, and
Healthfulness of the Place.
THis Island is situated West from Hispaniola, South from Cuba, which Columbus
heretofore called the Isle of St. James, but its now better known by the name
of Iamaica. The eighteenth Degree of Northern Latitude cuts the middle of it.
It is of equal distance from the two former great Islands, viz. twenty Leagues
from each. The compass or circuit of the Island is an hundred and fifty
leagues; its length from East to West is fifty leagues, the breadth is twenty,
or better. This Island excels the others for the goodness both of the Air, and
bounty of the soil, it is for the most part a plain and even Country, yiedling
in great abundance whatsoever is necessary for man's life. It breeds and
nourishes very great store of Horses, Bulls, Cows, and Hogs: The Yucam (whereof
Cassavi is made) is so plenteous, as that this Island (and most deservedly) may
be reckoned the Granary of the rest of the Islands; Cotton-wool grows very
frequently up and down the Island, which makes it to excel most in clothing;
also whatever fruits God and Nature have planted from the beginning, or have by
the industry and diligence of man been transplanted thither from any other
part, do thrive in this Land wonderfully. The Spaniards, when first they
arrived here, found the Island very well furnished with barbarous people, which
since are strangely decreased; partly through the cruelty of their Lords,
partly by reason of their own sloth and idleness.

The Towns here (considering the bravery and goodness of the Island) are but
few in number: at this day not above three, the chief of which is Sevil, upon
the North side of the Island, not far from the Sea. Here was an Abbaty, whereof
Peter Martyr, that famous Writer of the Indian affairs, was sometimes Abbot. The
next Town to this, at an eleven Leagues distance Eastward, stands Melilla,
famous for Columbus his Shipwreck, when in a tempestuous passage that he had
from Veragua, he would so gladly have put in thither. The third Town is
Oristan, upon the west side of the Island, fourteen Leagues from Sevil: But of
the City de la Vega, whence the Columbi had the Title of their Dukedom, there
is scarce at this time any memorial or remembrance.

A great part of this Island, with the chief City of it, was subdued in the
year 1596, by Sir Anthony Sherley.

The Sea shore, where it most vergeth and bends it self toward the East, has
the high Promontory Moranta upon it, from which the said shore goes back by
little and little toward the Southwest, taking in the Sea in certain Creeks,
then it goes directly forward toward the West so far as to the Promontory de
Falcon, whence it turns to the westward, till it come to the Promontory del
Negrillo, which lies outmost to the West, from thence again the shore turns in
toward the East: In the Northern quarter of it, it has many Stations and
Ports, the chief of which lies nigh to Sevil, the next to Melilla, ten leagues
from the former to the Eastward; the third Ianta, a like distance off, ten
leagues from the former, and as many from the Promontory of Moranta, toward
the west.

In short, this Island for the richness and goodness of the soil, for the
pleasantness of its woods, and the abundance of all good things, may very well
contend with any other of the American Islands whatever, and in this respect
excels them, that it has so convenient and advantageous a situation between
the greater Islands and the Western Continent of America: So as if our
Countrymen would but raise up their dull spirits, and seriously set themselves
to plant there, they would not only exceedingly advance the Public Interest,
and benefit their Native Country, but very much advantage and enrich
themselves, their children, and posterity; there being no Adventure or
Merchandise in any part of the world undertaken as yet by the English, that is
like to be of less hazard, and more certain profit, as evidently appears, in
that he that first discovered these Countries, and best knew to make his
choice, was only a Suitor for this Island; and when afterward he was asked by
the Portugal why he did not cause the mines there to be wrought; he made
answer, They would first go farther off, and when they had wrought out those,
they would return thither, being a place nearer home, and of great security. I
need not inform you of the great variety of Fish, and Fowl, nor the
healthfulness of the place, when a man has some little time been acquainted
with the Air.

And so my Countrymen, wishing such noble thoughts to possess your souls, as
may incline you to some gallant endeavor and undertaking herein, that after
times may say, this active Age has not consigned us to one poor corner of the
earth, but stirred us up to look upon that which the negligence of our
Ancestors did cause them so unhappily to foreslow and forsake, I recommend you
to the direction and Assistance of the Almighty.

FINIS.

