A true description Of a treacherous plot INTENDED against this Kingdom,

By the Lord Digby and his assistants, at Sherborne in the County of DORSET:

With the exact number of Arms, Muskets, Pikes and Barrels of Gunpowder, to
the number of two hundred, by him hid and contrived in an old Cellar belonging
to the Lord George his Father.

With the manner how and by what accident it came to be descried.

As also how the Steward of his House being exaamined and found faultring in
his speech, was committed to prison, where he yet remains.

LONDON, Printed for John Hammond. 1642.

A true description of a treacherous plot intended against this Kingdom.
THe wonderful and quotidiall mercies of God toward this Kingdom, has often
and universally appeared unto us by his so many and never to be enough admired
deliverances from both private and foreign enemies. I need not nominate any
particular, in respect there has been many so late, and others so exemplary,
as the memory thereof can by no means be extinct or blotted out. But this dire
and yet unknown example which I am about to treat on, which as it is
unparalleled, in respect of privacie; and the more contaminous in respect of the
party and author, being formerly a Parliament ment^an. And as it was dismal,
we the more bound in duty to praise God for his mercy in revealing the same
unto us. It is thus: The Lord Digby, a man whose vote has formerly been
accounted judicious, and for the benefit (or at leastwise so seeming) unto both
King and State, whose sedulity, vigilancie, and superior authority in State
affairs, has been much noted, whose continual labors and indulgent care for
the Parliament, has hidden it self under the cloak or shadow of loyalty and
duty toward the State, whose principal endeavors, though now thought
pernicious and infinitely nefarious, have carried with them a color or
elimination of the truth, prove now as clear contrary as the Poets style, Qui
color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo. For no sooner had he opportunity
offered him, wherein or whereby to vent his sp^eniall and malicious devices
against us, no sooner perceiving a combustion stirring, but like an invective
and opprobrious member, and enemy to the State, but he imploye his industrious,
nay most apprehensive and sedulous labors to cooperate our destruction by
joining his corroberature and strengthening of the enemy with his auxiliary
helps, and not only so, but he himself in person advancing, and is not
ashamed to appropriate to himself the ignominions title of D^^x omnium
malorum, the leader, inducer and producer of our malevolent and inauspitious
evils, through the profundity and inexorab^enesse of his deep invented
treachery.

No sooner could a Lunsford, or a deviating rebel embrace an op^rtunity of
evil, but he proffer^, nay chalenges to himself the primitive and most
specular place of ignominy, to be a leader and producer of their former
ill-intended mischiefs with this encouragment to his followers, Go you before,
and I Will follow; begin you and I will end: or as the Poet Terence has it, I
p^e, sequar.

This ensuing story will testify his reality and entire affection unto us, to
be but feigned, which you shall note in this sequel: for not only working
pernitiously here, but studying by all meares possible, to further and provide
for machination at home, to assist his confederates if occasion in that case
required, having caused to be laid up in a deep Cellar, diverse Barrels of
Gunpowder, to the number of two hundred, being over-layd and covered with
abundance of old Caskes, Faggots, and other lumber; and amongst the rest, some
Ferkins of wine drawn out, others full, to the intent the powder Barrels might
be taken for the like. In another place adjoining, being accounted a
Storehouse for wool, and such like things, were found three hundred Mu^kets,
ready fixed and expedient for service; as also fifteen hundred Arme^, with
Pistols, Carbines, and Harquebusse^, having nothing in them wanting to supply
so many able men upon service. Pikes there were, and Lance likewise, but the
number being of no validity, and therefore not expressed. What may be intended
by all this Ammunition, and marshall provision, cannot of a certainly be
expressed, although that the Steward or Keeper thereof being taken and very
strictly examined by diverse judicious and severe Justices of Peace, yet could
they get nothing out of him but this, That they were his Masters, things of
consequence, and committed to his charge: and what wa^ the use or intent
concerning them, if they de^ired to know, they should en^uire of the owner and
purchaser of them who was best able to give them an answer concerning the same.
Being further enquired and examined why they were hid^en and concealed, and not
admitted to pub^lick view as well as those Arms which were allowed for his
Lordships Honor and defense. He answered, that he never demanded the question
of his Master, and therefore was altogether unacquainted and unfit to give them
an answer; but if they were so extraordinarily and earnestly desirous to know,
they should have stayed until such time as they had been produced; whenas they
would be able to speak for themselves the intent of their concealing. Being
formerly suspected, and now almost convinced by his own words of disloyalty,
he was forthwith committed to prison.

I will now in the next place explain unto you the great and wonderful mercy
of God toward us, and his just and exemplary punishment showed unto our
enemies in the discovery of their wicked and pernicious designs and
intentions, who is able to work by weak means, without means, and contrary
to means, as in the discourse of the ensuing words palpably appears. There
was diverse little Boys in the Town of Sherborne, conjoined and united
together in their disport^; where (amongst their pastimes) they made Squibs,
and diverse Fireworkes, with powder: one of them dwelling in the house of my
Lord Digay, who supplied them with their Ammunition; insomuch that many of them
carried their works home with them. Whereupon on their Parents demanding them,
where they had their implements to compose them, they said, John Pellam, naming
the aforesaid Lad, had enough, and knew where was a Barrel full, and more.
Whereupon having just cause of suspicion before, they called a great many wise
and sage Protestants of the faid Town privately together, and motioned the
matter unto them: And upon mature consideration caused the Boy by flattery, to
show them the place where it was: And seeing many Barrels like that wherein the
powder was enclosed, opened one other, and found it full. So upon diligent
search made, being authorized by diverse Justices, the plot was discovered: For
which we are bound to praise and glorify the holy Name of Almighty God, who
has been pleased to conserve and keep us from all dangers. To whom be glory
and honor now and for ever.

FINIS.

