THE True Loyalist: Wherein is Discovered, First, The falsehood and deceit of
the Solemn League and Covenant. Secondly, That there is no Salvation out of
Christ. Thirdly, That the Pope is the Antichrist, the Man of Sin, or the Son
of Perdition. Cum multis aliis, etc.

By a True Loyalist.

1 Pet. 2.17. Fear God, and Honor the King.

1 Samuel 8.8. and 12.18. Quisquis Deum timet, etiam Regibus honorem habebit.

Calvin. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by John Crump at
the Three Bibles, at the Little North-door in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIII.

THE True Loyalist.
PROVE. XXIV. 21. My Son fear thou the Lord, and the King: And meddle not with
Heb. Changers.
them that are given to change.


KING Solomon, the Wise, having by woeful experience seen much folly and vanity
in all the passages of this life, even in humane wisdom it self Eccles. 1.
; is thought most fit by the Holy Ghost to become our Master of defense, and
instructor therein; to arm us against all their assaults, with many wise
Counsels, and wholesome instructions, in three Books, gradually: This his
Proverbs, his Ecclesiastes, and his Canticles; answerable to the three
remarkable Periods of man's Age; his Youth, his Manhood, and his Old age. 1. In
his Proverbs, or wise sayings, he has given us many bitter pills, to purge out
our amorous and youthful lusts; and many love-potions too, to allure us unto
good works, by that Beauty and Luster that is in virtue, and from the reward of
well-doing: That our new Vessels being seasoned with Wisdom when we are Ephebi
and Young, may not taste of the cask of folly when we are old Prove. 22.6.
. 2. In his Ecclesiastes, or book of the Preacher, he has discovered the
perilous and painted Beauty of the world, the deceitfulness and sophistry of
Riches and Honor, and all things therein, together with the brevity,
uncertainty, and evil of a man's days; that when we are adulti, more mature, and
confirmed in years, we may be moved thereby to despise and repudiate the one,
for its deformity and insufficiency; and get the more solidity, by a serious
reflection upon the vanity of the other. 3. In his Canticles, Epithalamium, or
mystical Love-song betwixt Christ and the Church, from the consideration of
natural and earthly things, he ascends to the speculation and contemplation of
things Supernatural and Divine: That when we are Old, Aged, and well stricken
in years, we may not grow the more earthly, the more we grow to the earth; but
have our minds there in a special manner, possessed with Metaphysical and
Heavenly meditations, and fixed upon God and Christ, where the Soul (like Noah's
Dove) can only find rest and tranquillity. For as St. Bernard in Canticis.
Bernard has taught us, in primo, pellitur superfluus amor Sui: in secundo,
vanus amor mundi: in tertio, praescribitur castus amor Dei. The Proverbs
dissuade us from Philautia, the foolish and superfluous love of our selves: The
Ecclesiastes disswades the vain and worthless love of the Vicious World: The
Canticles persuade the pure, chaste and perfect love of God.

So that these Books of Solomon being adapted to the three grand periods of
man's age, none may think themselves unconcerned, and plead want of direction:
But all even from the days of their youth may remember their Creator Eccles.
12.1.
, and as they grow in years grow in grace, always ascending up higher and
higher upon Jacobs Ladder, 2 Pet. 1.
from one virtue to another, till they come to glory.

And accordingly, the Wise man has directed this Proverb to all both young and
old; to instruct the one, and remind the other of their duty of subjection and
obedience to the Lord, Analogia numeri, the singular number for the Plural, by
a Synecdoche membri.
and the King, under a sweet compellation, but indefinite title, fili mi, my
Son; whereby are meant all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, without
discrimination.

And, Secondly, as this Proverb is universal in its direction: so it contains
a duty no less necessary to be performed by all. For it is observable, that our
Master uses this familiar and insinuating title, fili mi, my Son, only here,
and two and twenty times besides in all his Proverbs; to show that though his
other Proverbs which only suppose this title, are in their proper Spheres very
excellent for Wisdom and instruction: yet those Proverbs that are enforced
immediately with this winning and alluring compellation, fili mi, My Son, are
of nearer concern, and more important Lessons for us to learn in his School of
Wisdom, or Righteousness. And I may add too, that this Proverb, which we are
now upon, does seem (in regard of its great comprehensiveness) to have an
eminency above them all; as including in it ((...), Ecclesiastes 12.13.
by way of excellency) the whole Duty of Man, all the ingredients of a
Christian, to constitute the Essence or Being of a true Loyalist.

This will most clearly appear in the opening of its parts, which are these
two, in general.

1. A Precept; My Son fear thou the Lord and the King. 2. A Caution; and meddle
not with them that are given to change.
1. For the Precept; My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King. And therein two
things are very worthy our consideration.

1. A Conjunction of the Lord and the King. 2. An Injunction of fear to them
both. In the handling of which, order requires me that I first speak of the
Conjunction of the Lord and the King.
And they are very fitly and wisely joined together, in three things.

1. In regard of their Headship and Sovereignty; for Deus magnus and immortalis
est Rex, and Rex parvus and mortalis est Deus. God is a great and immortal
King, and a King is a little and mortal God Ps. 82.6.
. Monarchy is Gods own Government, he has his Throne in the Heavens; and his
Kingdom rules over all the Kingdoms of the World Ps. 103.19. Isa. 66.1.
; where he has ordained terrene Monarchs for his Deputies, and Viceroys, to
rule his Church externally, in his stead; as he himself rules it internally by
his Holy Spirit. And from hence he is emphatically styled the King of kings,
and Lord of lords 1 Timothy 6.15.
: And Kings nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers to his Church Isa.
49.23.
.

2. In regard of the Prerogatives, which are annexed to their Headship and
Sovereignty. The first whereof is Power and Authority; God in proportion to his
Grandeur and Headship over all the World, has absolute and Independent power
in himself. In which respect he is here called by his proper name Lord, (...),
in the Original, the name of his Essence, and Majesty; deduced ab (...), fuit,
as being a Being before, and the Original of all Beings: The same with (...),
ero qui ero, I will that I will; or as in the English, I am that I am Exodus
3.14.
, to show the Sovereignty of his authority, and the incontroulableness of his
will and power: So in like manner has he given to earthly Monarchs power too
Romans 13.1. John 19.11.
over his Church or people, in their particular Dominions, in proportion to
their Vicegerency under him, as their Master and Lord paramount. The Lord is
absolute both in power and supremacy, he is higher than the highest
Ecclesiastes 5.8. Ps. 89.27.
, and who shall say unto him, What do thou Job 9.12. Isa. 45.9. Dan. 4.35.
? and the King is next him, he has no superior but the The very Heathens, by
the light of nature, did acknowledge this Doctrine, Marcus Aurelius says in
Dion Cassius, (...), of Imperial Authority, God only may be Judge: In excerptis
Dionis Cassii. and vid. Herodotum l. 3. etc.
Lord himself, to whom he is bound to give an account; he does whatsoever
pleases him. Where the word of a King is, there is power: and who (but God)
may say unto him, What do thou Ecclesiastes 8.3, 4.
? And therefore King David said unto God, Against thee, thee only have I
sinned. Ps. 51.4.

3. As the Lord and the King are very fitly and wisely joined together, in
regard of their headship and prerogatives, Supremacy and power, etc. so also in
regard of their Election to their Kingship. The Lord to demonstrate his
absolute Power and Supremacy, will be the Author both of his own Election, and
his Vicegerents too. 1. Of his own he Elected himself King over 1 Samuel 12.12.
Israel. The Israelites were Gods own chosen inheritance Deuteronomy. 9.26. Ps. 105.43.
, and therefore he chose to be their King, to govern all their affairs, both in
Church and State in a special manner. It Is true, he had even then his Viceroys
under him; but they did not rule like the Kings of other Nations; the Lord
himself did by them rule his peculiar people, after a peculiar manner, as their
King; till the days of Samuel; where all the Elders of Israel gathered
themselves together, and by a wilful, saucy, Traitorous, Rebellious, Disloyal,
ungrateful and obstinate demand of a King, to judge them like all the Nations 1 Samuel 8.5, 19.
, rejected him from ruling over them 1 Samuel 10.19.
. For though in that wicked Act they cast off Samuel also 1 Samuel 8.8.
, as being their Judge, and the Lords Prophet and Viceroy; yet it was the Lord
indeed, that therein was chiefly rejected, as being their only King and
Sovereign, as well as the Lord their God: As Samuel told them before, to stop
them (if he could) from being obstinate in desiring a change; and the Lord
himself confirms it, when he said to Samuel, they have not rejected thee, but
they have rejected me that I should not reign over them 1 Samuel 8.7.
. For which cause, that they might perceive and see that their wickedness was
great, which they had done in the sight of the Lord, in asking them a King;
Samuel called unto the Lord, and the Lord sent such terrible thunder and rain
upon their Harvest, that they were afraid it would have destroyed even them
themselves. And therefore all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy
Servants unto the Lord thy God, that we die not: for we have added unto all our
sins, this evil, to ask us a King 1 Samuel 12.17, 18, 19.
. This you see (without repentance) is the love God has for them who fear not
him, nor his Viceroy 1 Samuel 12.18.
, but desire a Change.

Yet since their mind was still for Monarchy, (which all the Nations about them
had chosen by the light of nature) the Lord granted them a King according to
their Petition 1 Samuel 8.7.
, but only he would not grant them the liberty of Electing him themselves; The
people cannot remove Kings, and set up Kings, without usurping the Lords
Prerogative. Dan. 2.21.
for that is a Prerogative so annexed to his Headship, that he could not
possibly do it without intrenching upon his own Royalty, and Supremacy, as he
is King of Kings. We should think it very unreasonable if any should desire
(without our appointment) to have the choice of him that is to be our servant;
how much more then is it unreasonable for any to desire to have the choice of
him that is to be Gods Deputy and Viceroy? Whenas the distance between God and
man is so great that it is beyond Comparison. Therefore the Lord would not
suffer his King to be the peoples Elect, but as at first he was the Author of
his own Election: so now, 2. He would be the Author of his Vicegerents too: For
though it be said, Behold the King whom ye have chosen 1 Samuel 12.13.
. Yet that choice was only in regard of their wills to have a King, and the
Election of him, if they could; and therefore it is added in the same Verse,
and whom ye have desired: For behold, the Lord himself chose him 1 Samuel 10.24.
, and appointed Samuel to anoint Saul for their King 1 Samuel 10.1. and 12.1, 13.
. But though the Lord chose them a King, yet he was such a King as might be a
Curse to them, for their desiring a Change; as is expressed in the manner of
his Reigning over them 1 Samuel 8.11. etc.
. And indeed though they might foolishly imagine, that if they had had a King
of their own Election, (as they also wickedly desired) he might be the more
pliable to their humors, it belonging to them, with as much right to remove him
when they pleased; yet since they went so unadvisedly to work in asking a King
(under the pretext of Samuels old age, and the male administration of his Sons
1 Samuel 8.5.
) without desiring Gods choice and consent, they could not expect (if they had
believed God) that their King should prove any better than a Tyrant 1 Samuel 8.18.
, for God foretold them by his servant Moses, thus, When thou art come into the
Land which the Lord thy God gives thee, and shall possess it, and shall dwell
therein, and shall say, I will set a King over me, like as all the nations that
are about me: Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy
God shall choose: (that is, in the sense of the Targum of Ben. Vzziel, Ye shall
seek instruction of the Lord, and after that ye shall set a King over you.) One
from among thy Brethren, shall thou set King over thee: Thou may not set a
stranger over thee, which is not thy Brother, Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15.

But to this precept (you see) they had no regard; they would not take Gods
choice and advice, nor stay his time and pleasure, till David had changed his
Sheephook into a Scepter; who being a man after Gods own heart 1 Samuel 13.14.
, was the fittest to succeed him in the Government 1 Samuel 16.7.
, but they most arrogantly and presumptuously assumed unto themselves a Power
of Electing whom and when they pleased: Because they were the Elders of Israel,
and particulary of that chief Council of them, called the Sanhedrim,
(instituted by God at the request of Moses for his assistance) they thought
they might do any thing: For which cause, the Lord again complains of them in
the Prophet Hosea, mentioning their Crime in the Plural Number, for the clearer
example to all Nations under the Sun: They have set up Kings, but not by me;
(or according to the Arabic Version, they have Reigned from themselves, and
not from me.) They have made Princes, but I knew it not, Hosea 8.4. that is,
contrary to my Will, allowance, and approbation.

Thus (you see) that it is absolutely unlawful for any, either Elders,
Sanhedrim or Parliament men, upon any pretense whatsoever, either to choose, or
be chosen a King without Gods leave, counsel and advice, as he has appointed,
and directed in his word: How much more then is it unlawful to set up any other
form of government besides Monarchy, Gods own, both by Order, Precept and
Example? Yet many (in this latter age of the World, now iniquity does abound,
and get the upper hand Mat. 24.12.
) have presumed to do it. I need not trouble you with an instance of this, out
of any History, for its illustration; you know we have had a more eminent
example of it already in Cromwell, that Arch-Traitor, and Usurper; and those
Phanaticks and Changers, that set up the Idol, and worshipped it, than all the
Histories in the world can afford besides, being put all together.

But if the Ruler be not Tyrannus titulo, a mere Usurper like him, and
illegally chosen; but one that having a just Right and Title to the Crown,
enters into his Throne by the right door, and climbeth up not some other way;
the same is no Thief, nor Robber Joh. 10.1, 2.
, but may be said to be as directly from God, as Monarchy is it self; though he
be otherwise never so much Tyrannus exercitio, as grand a Tyrant in practice as
King Saul, or as much a Heathen as King Cyrus Isa. 45.1.
: It Is by God that Kings Reign, as well as by him that Princes decree Justice.
Proverbs 8.15.

There are no judgments, nor evil of punishments in any Nation or City under
the Sun, but the Lord has a hand in them all Amos 3.6. 2 King. 33.
. Therefore to bring about those ends without putting himself to the expense of
a Miracle, he not only (sometimes) takes away Religious Princes, and in their
room permits Usurpers; but also anoints bad Vicegerents under him, as well as
good: As is evident, by the examples of Saul, Nebuchadnezzar, Jehu, and others
Jer. 25.9. 2 King. 10.30.
, whom (though as such) when they have once accomplished the ends for which
they were ordained, he either takes away in his Wrath, as at first he gave them
in his Anger Hos. 13.11.
, or else reserves them for a greater judgment to come; yet as they are his
Vicegerents, appointed to execute his Wrath and pleasure upon Offenders, he
has invested them, both with a Sovereign Title to rule, and a Sovereign Power
to maintain it. Headship and Prerogatives are so firmly united together in the
Lord, and the King, that the one cannot possibly subsist without the other.

1. From hence we may see the great absurdity of Cromwell the Usurper, (that
Notorious Changer, Cursed Hypocrite, and Deceiver) in separating Sovereign
Title from Sovereign Power, which the Lord in himself and the King has thus
firmly joined together. The guilt of his Conscience would not suffer him to
assume the name of a King, No, nor his Diabolical policy neither; lest he
should seem to favor that Kingly Government which he had destroyed: But to
maintain his Usurpation of the Royal due, and the favor of his Fanatics, he
would change the name and be called their Protector: yet his ambition would not
suffer him to neglect the usurpation of the Kings Power: For which cause he and
his, most abusively granted the King to have the name of a King still, if so be
he would be so contented without the power; because they knew, without that,
the King would be (as was said of Pompey) but magni nominis umbra, the shadow
of a King without the substance; yea, to be a titulary Josep. Antiq. l. 15.
tells us, that Marcus Antonius being urged by his Dalilah, Cleopatra, to call
Herod to an account, replied, that it was not fair, (...), to demand of a King
an account of what was done in his Government; for so he would not be a King.
King, would be a King no more in reality, than a King in a Play. Therefore it
is observable, that Mephibosheth (like a True Loyalist) called David not only
by the name of King, to show his Sovereign Title to rule; but also by the name
of Lord (saying My Lord the King) to show his Sovereign Power to command, 2 Samuel 19.30.

2. From hence it also is, that (by our most wise and Royal Master) we are here
enjoined to fear the Lord and the King; because power, the foundation of fear,
belongs to them both: To the Lord as God the greatest Supreme, and to the
King as his Minister and Vicegerent. Romans 13.4.
Therefore St. Paul joyneth fear and power, saying, Will thou then not be
afraid of the power? Romans 13.3.

And to speak all in a word, The reason wherefore the fear of the Lord, and the
fear of the King are here joined and enjoined together, is, for an exegesis or
exposition one of the other; to show that he that is truly Godly, and fears the
Lord, is also a True Loyalist, and fears the King; and that he is only a True
Loyalist and fears the King, who is truly godly and fears the Lord: True
Godliness and Loyalty, the fear of the Lord, and the fear of the King, like
Hippocrates's Twins live and die together. Godliness without Loyalty is not
true, but Pharisaical; and Loyalty without godliness is only nominal, false and
adulterate.

Now as the fear of the Lord, and the fear of the King is the same in kind,
though not in degree; because the fear of the King is terminated in the fear of
the Lord: So it is meant not of any legal, or servile fear, derived from the
lower spring of Nature; (which it would be, if it were grounded only upon their
Power:) But of a pure filial and Evangelical fear, derived from the upper
spring of grace; grounded not only upon power, but upon cordial love and duty.
As the true Godlilist fears to disobey and dishonor the Lord, not legally,
only for the sake of his power; but filially, out of pure love, as an obedient
child fears a kind Father Deuteronomy. 10.12. Gal. 4.7. Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 9.
so the true Loyalist fears to offend his King, not slavishly, only for the
sake of his power, as the nominal Loyalist does for fear of punishment; but
Evangelically, out of a filial fear and perfect love to God. Which (as St. John
says) casts out all slavish and tormenting fear 1 John 4.18.
. In a word, the true Loyalist looks upon his King, not humanely, as one that
has only power and authority to terrify and punish him, if he do evil; but
spiritually, and abstractedly, as he is Gods Minister and Vicegerent, ordained
for that very end: And therefore he fears and subjects himself to him of
necessity, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake Romans 13.4, 5.
.

Thus you see the nature and quality of fear; which makes the difference
between the true Loyalist and the false.

But now we must consider, that as a filial and Evangelical fear, (being as it
were the Royal Head, the primum mobile, or first mover in all the Spheres of
Religion Pro. 9.10. Job 28.28.
,) does in its progress produce, 1. True honor to the King, and that both of
esteem and maintenance; and, 2. With true honor, all the parts of obedience
Ecclesiastes 12.13.
: So these duties and commandments are counterfeited by the Devil, Gods Ape;
either by corrupting the hearts of his Children with a servile fear, or by
changing himself in them into an Angel of light: In all which the True Loyalist
will also be discovered from the false, by the difference of their originals.

For your better understanding whereof, take this for a general Rule: That the
True Loyalist makes the fear of God the groundwork of all duties to his King;
he eyes God in all, and does all for his sake, and to his glory: Whereas the
counterfeit Loyalist does in all only eye, either humane powers, or his own
safety, sinister ends, or vain glory.

As, 1. The True Loyalist is one that honors his King, not only for the fear
of his power and authority, and the Penal Laws of the Land, as the nominal
Loyalist does; but out of love and fear to God, because so is his will and
Commandment 1 Pet. 2.15.
, in which respect St. Peter has joined them both together, saying, fear God,
honor the King 1 Pet. 2.17,
.

2. Though a Kings Majesty and Grandeur be the foundation of humane honor, as
well as his power is of a servile fear; yet the True Loyalist honors his King,
not for the sake of them alone, merely as they are humane, as the Carnal
Loyalist does; but as his King receives them from God, (his only Lord and
Master) and in that respect are impresses of the Divine; Yea, and (in regard of
his supremacy) Prerogatives too annexed to his headship.

3. The True Loyalist honors his King, not for any self-interest, or byend
of his own, as the time-serving, self-seeking, Jesuitical Loyalist does; but
still only for the Lords sake, because he is his Minister and Vicegerent.

Lastly, The True Loyalist honors his King, not in word only, as lip-holy
and heart-hollow Pharisees honor the Lord Mat. 15.8, 9.
, but ex animo, sincerely, from his very heart, in deed and in truth, 1 John
3.18.
for duty and Conscience sake; because God has commanded him to give honor to
whom honor is due Romans 13.7.
.

And no marvel; for thus the True Loyalist honors all his other Governors,
both in Church and State.

1. He highly esteems in love all his spiritual Governors, both Bishops and
Pastors of the Church; not for their persons Rom 2.11. James 2.9. Jud. 16.
, but for their works sake; not because they have the rule over him, but
because they are over him in the Lord; and are Ambassadors for Christ, to
admonish, and beseech him in his stead to be reconciled to God 2 Cor. 5.20. 1
These. 5.12, 13. Phil. 2.29. Heb. 13.7, 17. Romans 10.15.
.

2. He much honors too all Magistrates and Civil Governors (according to
their several orders and Degrees) whom his King has put in authority under him
in the State; not for their powers sake, but still for the Lords sake, because
they have received their power from him, to execute his wrath upon evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well Romans 13.4. 1 Pet. 2.14, 16.
.

How much more then does he honor his King, who is a person not only Civil,
but Sacred too; Civil, in respect he is not to intermeddle with the Holy
Function of a Minister, any more than King Vzziah was to invade the holy Office
of a Priest 2 Chronicles. 26.18.
, or we are to meddle with them that are given to Change: But Sacred, in
respect he is Gods Deputy and Vicegerent; ordained under him Supreme Head and
Governor over all both in Church and State; as well the highest of the Clergy,
as the lowest of the Laity; God himself always held the Scepter above the Miter
to defend it; and therefore King David calls himself expressly the Lord of Zadok
the High Priest 1 King. 1.33.
.

Yea in a word, the True Loyalist considers that as his Lord God himself is the
common Father of us all Mal. 1.6.
, so has he appointed the King his Vicegerent to be Pater patriae, the Father
of his Country: And therefore he respects him accordingly above all, as an
obedient Son does his Father; that so he may neither stand in the light of his
own honor, by dishonouring his Lord God, in contemning in his King the Image
of his authority 1 Samuel 2.30.
; nor withstand his promise of long life, either in this World, or the World to
come, or both; by breaking the fifth Commandment.

This is enough to let us see that True godliness and Loyalty, True Loyalty and
goldiness, the fear of the Lord, and the fear of the King go hand in hand
together, both in the Affirmative, and in the Negative. 1. The consequence a
majori ad minus is undeniable in the Affirmative, He that does the greater duty
in Religion, will not stick to do the lesser; quisquis Deum timet, etiam
Regibus honorem habebit, 1 Pet. 2.17. 1 Samuel 8.8. and 12.18.
(says Calvin) he that fears God, will also honor his King. And, 2. The
consequence a minori ad majus is as undeniable in the Negative, He that refuses
to do the lesser duty in Religion, to be sure will not do the greater; he that
will not fear and honor his King, no man can be so sottish to think that he
fears God. Therefore what St. John says concerning our love to God and our
brother 1 John 4.20.
, I may as truly say of our fear to God and our King: If a man say I fear God,
and dishonors his King, he is a liar, no less than a Quaker; for he that
honors not his King, who is visible; how can he fear God, whom no man can
see and live Exodus 33.20.
?

From hence are justly condemned two sorts of men amongst us.

1. Those that dare presume to style themselves the Godly Party, and yet refuse
all Loyalty to their Prince: That pretend very much to fear the Lord, and yet
are not afraid to dishonor their King. And who are such, but only our
Pharisaical Puritans and Fanatics? Time was (we know) when those Godly-gulls
and Holy-cheats made the deluded people of this Kingdom to believe that he did
fear God the most, who did the least honor his King; that he was the most
godly who would offer the most affronts and indignities to his Prince: Nothing
was counted with them a greater piece of Piety, than to stir up the people
against their Sovereign; by raising jealousies, and casting abroad rude and
scandalous Pamphlets almost every day to libel and disgrace him: Which (as that
Holy Martyr, King Charles 1. Himself says in his Divine meditations, EIKON
ASILIK
that Golden Manual) like sparks in great conflagrations, did fly up and down
to set all places on Fire. Yea he was thought to be the most Religious, who was
the best Incendiary to set a well ordered Kingdom in a Flame; Hist. of Indepen.
Complete. Part. 1. p. 55.
and could cheat the giddy multitude the most into Rebellion: no Ambassador to
him that was the greatest Herald of War, and like a Geneva Bull, could roar
out loudest from the Pulpit, Up ye Fanatics, Arm, Arm; ye are the only Godly
party, who have as much right to Rob the King and his Loyal Subjects, as the
Israelites had to spoil the Egyptians Exodus 3.22.
, all that you can find is your own. But only you must not think that you (like
ravening Wolves) can make a prey of their possessions, unless you hide the
designs of your pride and covetousness under Sheeps clothing Mat. 7.15.
. If therefore you have any lingering mind after the wages of unrighteousness 2
Pet. 2.15.
, as we know you have, as any Balaams of us all; then you must deal wisely
Exodus 1.10.
, imitate our Language and behavior to the life; know no other godliness but
your espoused gain 1 Timothy 6.5.
, and make Religion but a stalking Horse to Rebellion: regard not the voice of
Conscience, lest it interrupt you; but yet be sure to carry it always about
you, that it may be ready to further your sinister ends and proceedings, with
its outward shows and varnish: Be ye as Hypocritical in raising a Rebellion
against your King, as ambitious Absalom was when he raised a conspiracy against
his Father 2 Samuel 15.
; though like David he be a man after Gods own heart, yet pretend ye that there
are some grievous abuses in Church and State, which if you were made Rulers and
Judges, your integrity would quickly remedy: that so your Godly party being
strengthened by the stolen hearts of others, you may accomplish your ambitious
and covetous ends the more assuredly, to the temporal ruin and downfall of your
King and Country.

O! Tell this not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Askalon: lest the
Daughters of Philistines rejoice; lest the Daughters of the uncircumcised
triumph 2 Samuel 1.20.
. For time was then too, when these cursed Cains and Amalekites did all of them
combine together, and were not afraid to stretch forth united hands to destroy
the Lords anointed ver. 14.
. And yet forsooth, they pretended that it was out of fear to God, to promote
his Cause, and his Glory. Yea, they thought they did God good service to kill
their King, and make him a glorious Martyr, for God and his Country; as Christ
our Prince of peace foretold his Disciples of the like that was to happen unto
them, to make them stable in their persecutions John 16.1, 2,
. For as these Rebels did this Barbarous, Villainous, and unparalled act,
because they had no saving knowledge of God the Father, and Christ God-man the
Son ver. 3.
: So our Martyred Sovereign, like King David in all his troubles, (though both
had their failings) demonstrated himself to be a true Disciple of Christ
indeed; for notwithstanding all the various modes whereby these proud and
impudent wretches had him in great derision, yet he declined not from Gods Law
Ps. 119.51.
.

But the guilty Consciences of these Parricides (the true seed of Corah and his
Accomplices, two hundred and fifty Princes of the Assembly, all of them
Parliament men, of their own Election Numb. 16.
,) told them that the murder of their Sovereign was not enough to keep those
Places, Dignities and Power, which before they had usurped from him, unless
they barred all his Heirs from succeeding: Therefore though they consisted of
two juntoes, and were divided into two adverse Factions, (the one
Presbyterians, who (to use their own distinction) murdered the King in his
Political Capacity; and the other, Independents, who murdered him in his
natural:) Yet they most firmly agreed in making an Act Hist. Independ.
Complete. Part 2. p. 140. and p. 241. and Part 4. p. 22.
for the Dethroning of his Highness James Duke of York, and all the Royal
Family, not sparing so much as the Kingly Office it self: Especially therein,
they united themselves together against the next Heir to the Crown, (our now
most gracious Lord and King) as unanimously, and as solemnly as those two
deadly Enemies, Herod and Pilate, were made friends against Christ Luke 23.12.
: They hunted him from place to place for his life, as Saul King David, like a
Partridge upon the Mountains 1 Samuel 26.20.
, most inhumanely saying (like the Husbandmen in the Parable Luke 20.14.
,) this is the Heir, come let us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours.
Yet they had the impudence to pretend that all was but expedient for the good
and welfare of the whole Nation, the Glory of God, the safety, and liberty of
the people. Salus populi, is the common pretense of all Rebels; Caiaphas
pretended the same for Crucifying Christ, it is expedient (says he) that one
man die, (meaning Jesus) and that the whole Nation perish not John 11.50.
. And Cromwell too pretended the like for the murder of our Sovereign, unless
he die, the whole nation must perish: but as that which was pretended to be so
much for the safety of the Jews, brought a fearful destruction upon them: so
this which was pretended to be so much for the Glory of God, and the Liberty of
the People, has been seen by woeful experience for twelve years together to
have been the very bane and ruin of the Nation: When was there ever more
slavery and bondage in the State? And when more Anarchy and confusion in the
Church? Munster it self saw but the Prologue to our Tragedy.

But to maintain this their Usurpation, they still persisted in their old
Hypocritical zeal, and reinforced it too, with such wonderful shows of
godliness, that if it were possible they would have persuaded the very Elect
themselves that they were really a Godly Party, true fearers of God indeed Mat.
24.24.
, the more they had a mind to dishonor the King, the more they pretended to
fear the Lord: How many Pharisaical prayers, and superstitious Preachings were
made to devour the Possessions of all True Loyalists, even to the houses of
poor Widows and the Fatherless Mat. 23.14.
? How many sad Countenances and Bulrush necks, to trumpet out the praise of
their Saintship? And how many Hypocritical sighs and groans too, to blow up all
Royalty and Loyalty, and cheat the people into Rebellion? All which, either
more or less, was evident in most, but especially in Cook, that Famous or
rather Infamous Preacher, sigher and groaner, and in Cromwell too, the Head of
their Rebellion, Boscobel: or the Complete History of his Sacred Majesty's most
miraculous preservation after the Battle of Worcester, 3 Sept. 1651. Part. 1.
p. 18.
who (when at Worcester fight) he had marched over Powick Bridge a considerable
number of his men, to fight against his King; said, (in his Hypocritical way)
The Lord of Hosts be with you: That so the poor ignorant and credulous Rabble
(who knew no other cause but their pay, why they were gathered together, any
more than the followers of Demetrius Acts 19.40.
, or those two hundred that followed Absalom out of Jerusalem in their
simplicity 2 Samuel 15.11.
; thinking that it was Gods cause which they were engaged in, might be the more
animated in their Rebellion.

But it is no wonder that these Rebels and Whetstones of Rebellion should, thus
dishonor the King, when as (for all their specious pretenses) they were not
afraid to dishonor the Lord himself; not only indirectly, through the sides of
his Vicegerent; but immediately and directly in himself: for time was then
also, when they did most impudently profane Gods Sanctuary, the House of
Prayer, the place where his honor dwells Ps. 26.8.
, they set up the abomination of desolation in the Holy Place, where it ought
not to stand Mat 24.15. Hist. Independ. Complete. Part. 1. p. 170.
. Sir William Brereton, Colonel General for the Cheshire Forces, having given
him the Archbishops House and Lands at Croiden (with Cashobery, and other
Lands of the Lord Capels worth 2000 l. per an.) for service done and to be
done, against the King and Kingdom, reformed the Chapel (there) into a Kitchen.
This was a goodly reformation, fitting with his Stomach as well as his
Religion. But O. Cromwell Hist. Independ. Complete. Part. 2. p. 34, 35.
(in proportion to his sublimity) therein went beyond him, when he and his
reformed St. Paul's from the Church of God, to a Den of Thieves, Stable of
Horses, and Brothel of Whores: out of envy (I suppose) to the King, because it
was the Head and Royal Church of the Kingdom. And to cover his Profaneness, he
would most ridiculously say his Prayers amongst his Horses: And Lambert and his
crew did not come far behind him, when he threatened to pluck down Churches for
Edification, as they actually did the Kings house at Holmby. And I may add too
(what hereafter I shall have better occasion to speak of in their changing)
that they then also thought it a great piece of Reformation, to dishonor God
publicly, not only by doing their Carnal and Worldly business in his
Sanctuary; but also by being most irreverently and unmannerly covered (even
before their betters) in his Holy Ordinances. And O! that I could not say, that
even now time is, that this sin of Profaneness is still extant in some, too
many amongst us; which without all doubt plainly declares (nothing more than)
that they are still infected with their old Commonwealth principles. They are
apt to complain of the relics of Popery, because they want Wisdom to discern
the precious from the vile Jer. 15.19.
. But I wish we had not juster cause to complain of the relics of Fanaticism;
there be too many dregs of it lie at the bottom of this Nation, which if they
should be once stirred, before they be refined, it is much to be feared, that
they would quickly discover themselves on the top: We have Church Fanatics as
well as Church Papists amongst us.

You therefore, that are infected with the gangrene of Fanaticism, with the
leven or doctrine of these Phanatical Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 16.6, 12.
, it is behoofeful that you be very careful to purge it out from your
Consciences, by a timely true and unfeigned repentance; that you may not
corrupt others with evil manners, but become a new Lump your selves 1 Cor. 5.7.
, to win and confirm those in the truth that want it Luke 22.32.
. As Doctor Lee, Colonel Richard Boscobel: Or the Complete Hist. of his Sacred
Majesty's most miraculous preservation after the Battle of Worcester. Part. 1.
p. 16.
Ingolsby (who since his Conversion was created Knight of the Bath, at his
Majesty's Coronation) and other real Converts have done in the same
reformation. This is a thing not to be dallied with, but to be seriously
considered in time, and the rather because evil habits are as hardly forsaken
as easily taken; unless you take it for a thing indifferent (as some of your
Predecessors have done) whether you are for ever happy or miserable: Lukewarm
Christians, partly Fanatics and partly Loyalists and Conformists; that like a
trembling Needle between two Loadstones incline to both and neither, are as
loathsome to God as the Laodiceans Revel. 3.14, 15, 16.
. You have sometime taken an Oath to be constant to true Loyalty and
Conformity, and what will you not fear your Oaths Ecclesiastes 8.2.
? O remember therefore from whence you are fallen, repent and do the first
Works, that God may have nothing against you Revel. 2.4, 5.
. You cannot complan of any want of means for your recovery and restoration.
You have the Scriptures, where the same God that has taught you to fear him,
has also (in the same breath) taught you to fear and honor the King: and what
will you not believe him? who is so much truth it self by nature that he cannot
lie Tit. 1.2.
? and there he has also taught you, that his worship cannot consist without
honor, nor the Churches of the Saints without peace and order. And what should
I mention what means you have also had from the examples of well ordered
Churches, both Clergy and Laity, when as the King himself, Gods Minister and
Vicegerent, your head and Sovereign, has not only established the same
according to his Lords commandment; but has also taught you by his own pious
example, how to reverence Christ your Head by uncovering your heads in his
Church, Holy House or Sanctuary. And what will ye be worse than all the World
besides? Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. The whole world strives who
shall the most follow the example of Kings. I know indeed that the major part
of men in the World, are more apt to follow them in bad examples than in good,
because they are not of God, but of the world, which lies in wickedness 1 John
5.19.
. But I could heartily wish (if it were Gods good pleasure) that even the whole
world would imitate our King in this pious example, and accordingly those that
are of his Dominions, show their subjection to him, as he therein shows his
subjection to the Lord.

Not but the mode of paying reverence to God is indifferent (according to the
various States, customs, and manners of Nations) before it be ordained in the
Church as it would be indifferent whether we pay revevence to God by putting
off the Glove, etc. (if there were any such custom) or whether by putting off
the shoes, as the Jews; or whether by putting off the Hat, as we Christians. It
is free for every Nation to do what they think fit in such cases, so long as
they keep to Gods general rule of order and decency 1 Cor. 14.40.
(which binds now to uncover the head, and is therefore ordained) but as for
the reverence it self, it never was indifferent, but is always necessary to be
expressed by some Rite or other, as being that without which Gods honor cannot
subsist, which (as his word) is more durable than Heaven or Earth Mat. 24.35.
.

Quorsum vero haec? from whence then is this disobedience and profaneness of
theirs? You may quickly guess it; that it is either because they read not the
word of God at all; or if they read it, read it but cursorily in a canting
tone, out of vain glory: Or suppose some think themselves as learned as the
Jesuits themselves, yet that will but aggravate their torments in Hell Luke
12.48.
, and so much the more manifest their blindness and want of faith: For surely
had they the eye of Faith, to behold God in his Temple, who is invisible, they
could not choose but reverence and honor so great a Majesty, and if their great
knowledge in the Scriptures (which they pretend to) were sanctified unto them,
then they would never persuade their seduced proselytes to believe that that is
Gods service wherein he is the most dishonored, and that that is true Religion
which consists in the contradiction of his Laws and Ordinances: For what
says St. James, If any man among you seem to be Religious, and bridleth not
his tongue, but deceives his own heart, (that is, speaks against his own
knowledge and Conscience) this man's Religion is vain. But pure Religion, and
undefiled before God and the Father, (says he) is this (not to make any,
especially your Queen a Widow, and her Heirs Fatherless, but) to visit the
Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the World. James 1.26, 27. Religion does not license men to speak and do what
they list; it has its name a religando, from binding, quod hoc vinculo Deo
religati sumus, says Lactan. Because by it, as by a bond we are bound to God:
Whereby all our members are bound to their good behavior: Our hands from being
stretched forth against the Lords anointed 2 Samuel 1.14.
, our tongues from despising, or speaking evil against him; the Spirit of God
puts the brand of the Sons of Belial upon them that presume to do it 1 Samuel
10.27.
, either by reproaching his footsteeps, or proceedings Ps. 89.51.
, or by controuling him in any of his ways or actions, who may say to a King
(says Solomon) what do thou Ecclesiastes 8.4.
? And is it fit (says Job) to say to a King, thou art wicked? And to Princes,
ye are ungodly Job 34.18.
? and what should I say more? our very hearts are bound by our Religion from
cursing or wishing evil to the Lords Vicegerent: Curse not the King, (says
Solomon) no not in thy thought or Conscience Ecclesiastes 10.20.
.

Yet the Prophet Isaiah speaks of a desperate generation of men, that Curse
their King and their God, and look upward Isaiah 8.21.
. Of whom the Prophet speaks this I dare not positively affirm: But this I
may safely say, the words agree so exactly with these that style themselves the
Godly Party, as if they were the very men pointed at in this Prophecy; for who
have been more infamous than they, for Cursing their King and their God, and
for looking upwards withal, to cover their wickedness with the vail of
Hypocrisy? They are not only that proud and supercilious generation (which
Solomon speaks of) that have lofty eyes, and eyelids lifted up Prove. 30.13.
. But also that Rebellious Generation (which he speaks of too) that curses
both their Natural Father, and the King, the Father of their Country; and does
not bless their Mother, nor their Queen ver. 11.
. Yea, and finally, that Hypocritical generation, (which follows next) that are
pure in their own eyes (from whence they are called Puritans) and yet are not
washed from their filthiness ver. 12.
.

But O, ye Puritans, be not righteous overmuch, neither make your selves
overwise, why should you destroy your selves Ecclesiastes 7.16.
? I know a man cannot be too Righteous, or too wise, so long as he lives
according to the rule of Gods word; but Omne nimium vertitur in vitium, every
extreme degenerates into a vice; if a man shoots at rovers in his Religion, too
much on the one hand by profaneness, or too much on the other by superstition,
he will never hit the mark: Much less if he be pure only in his own eyes, and
make himself over Righteous, and over wise; out of spiritual pride and vain
glory, or on purpose to advance his own ends by deception: For so he will
demonstrate himself to be a perfect Emissary of Satan, who when he intends to
deceive the most, appears not as a Devil, but as an Angel of light 2 Cor.
11.13, 14.
.

In a word therefore, Let him that thinks he stands, (or in more fullness of
sense, (...), he that seems to himself to stand) take heed lest he fall 1 Cor.
10.12.
, and you that have a name that you are alive, and yet are dead, as having been
formerly seduced by their seeming sanctity, and yet are still infected with the
leven of their Phanaticism, let me advise you once again (before it be too
late) that ye purge it out by a true and timely repentance: And that ye be
watchful for the future to strengthen those good and Loyal principles, which
yet remain, and are ready to die; that your works may be found perfect before
God Rev. 3.1, 2.
. Have a care that you do not withold from God his due of reverence, lest he
destroy you for defiling his Holy Temple 1 Cor. 3.17.
, much rather beware that you do not mock him Gal. 6.7.
by withholding from the King his due of fear and honor, under a pretense of
fearing him, lest your portion at length be the same with the Hypocrites Mat
24.51. Job 8.13.
. But as you have been taught by St. John in the beginning, concerning the love
of God and our brother, forget not to fulfill this Royal and Loyal commandment
in the Text, that he who fears God, fear and honor the King also 1 John 4.21.
. For as they that despise God, shall be lightly esteemed, so he will honor
them that honor him 1 Samuel 2.30.
.

2. Those are here condemned also, that would (forsooth) be counted great
Loyalists, and yet are notorious Rebels against the Lord himself, the King of
Kings: That pretend to be highly for the King, great honourers of his Majesty;
and yet plainly show by as highly debaucht lives and examples that they have no
fear of God before their eyes Ps. 36.1. Romans 3.18. Genesis 20.11.
. They never boast of their Loyalty more, than when they are elevated into so
many petty Kings in their esteem, or rather are really the greatest Lords and
Masters of mis-rule: They never pretend more strongly to be for the King, than
when they are most mighty to drink Wine, and men of the greatest strength to
mingle strong drink Isa. 5.
: If a sober man chance to come into the company of these Ranters and Ruffins,
they will straight censure him for a Roundhead; and if he refuse to drink the
Kings health so deep and so often as they would have him, they will as readily
cry out, God damn them, he is a Fanatic, though they see he does not refuse it
in a sober way as the Kings health, because he honors the King; but only as a
cup of excess, because he also fears the Lord. These are those of whom St.
Peter speaks, who hold it not sufficient that they have heretofore wrought the
will of man, when they were Gentiles; but still walk in lasciviousness, lusts,
excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings, etc. wherein they think it strange
that you (who accomplish the end of Christ's sufferings, in walking according to
the will of God) should be such enemies to your own present enjoyments, as not
to run with them to the same excess of Riot, and therefore speak evil of you 1
Pet. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.
.

Where then is their great Loyalty which they so much boast of? You see what
goodly Loyalists they are: they have only the name of the Loyalists, and that is
all; they want all the ingredients of a Christian, which (as you have heard)
constitute the being of a True Loyalist: The fear of the Lord and the King
always go together in the True Loyalist, as well as the True Godlilist: It is
vain for men to pretend to fear God, without honoring the King; and it is as
vain too, to pretend to honor the King without fearing God. The Loyalty of
these proud Huffers and Hectors consists only in Hypocrisy: That by the
pretense thereof, they may either the better gain, or the more securely hold
some maintenance that they have by the Kings benefit. Or rather they pretend
Loyalty, as the Hypocrite pretends the name of Christ Mat. 7.22.
; and the Fanatic his Conscience, that it may be a rise for their sins, and a
vail for their impieties.

And no marvel: for it is impossible (we see) that their Loyalty should consist
in reality, any more than the Godliness of those that style themselves the
Godly party. The very Heathens, though some of them (I mean the wiser sort)
seemed to be very Loyal and true to their King; yet their Loyalty cannot be
said to be absolutely true and firm, any more than their Religion: How much
less then may we term the Loyalty of these swearing swaggerers true and firm,
when as they profess themselves to be Christians, yea, and Protestants too; and
yet live more diametrically opposite to the Doctrine of Christ's Gospel, than
the very worst of the Gentiles: Is it likely (think you) that they should be
such great friends to their King, as they would make you believe, who are such
grand enemies to the Cross of Christ Phil. 3.18.
? No, certainly, they are as arrant enemies to their King, as any he has: And
that both in Prosperity, and in Adversity.

1. In prosperity, when the King sits most peaceably upon his Throne, and they
themselves are in the very height of their mirth and jollity, even then they
become his enemies, by provoking, sharpning and augmenting his adversaries
against him, through their evil examples: What do they but draw a Sword for
Fanatics to fight with against his Majesty, by bringing a scandal upon
Loyalty, through their debauchery and profaneness? Christopher Love in his
Rebellious Sermon (in the year 1644.) made this his only objection to withstand
the Treaty of Peace (made by our Martyred Sovereign) at Vxbridge. Yea, as mere
formalists by living contrary to the doctrine they profess, they bring a
scandal upon Religion, whereby the Conversion of the Churches enemies is
impeded: So these profane Loyalists by living contrary to the Loyalty they
profess, do (even now adays) not only harden Fanatics in their error, and make
them the more to glory in their shame; but also give them occasion childishly
and tauntingly to object, that they dare not turn Loyalists for fear of
profaneness. And not only so, but others too, as they are drawn into
Fanaticism by a form of Godliness: So they drive them from Loyalty, by laying a
stumbling block before their weaker brethren Romans 14.13.
.

2. In adversity, the Trial of True Loyalty and friendship; as they do their
King much injury in the Tavern: So they do him as little service in the Field;
for as soon as they see his power (the foundation of their Loyalty) to be once
removed (or likely to be so) by his enemies; then (for all their former
bravado's) instead of assisting him, and sacrificing their dearest interests
for his life and preservation, (as King David's True and worthy Loyalists did
for his 2 Samuel 18. and 21. 1 Chronicles. 11.
;) they will either most Traitorously, Barbarously and inhumanely take part
with his enemies, and insult upon him, like the Frogs upon the block in Aesop's
Fables; or else in his greatest need most dastardly forsake him. This was too
evidently seen in our late times of Rebellion, against our Martyred Sovereign,
when some even of his own sworn servants, and familiar friends too, (of a
seemingly sober deportment, in whom he trusted) did (like Judas against our
Savior Joh. 13.18. Ps. 41.9.
) most traitorously lift up their heels against him. Neither was his Son (our
now Most Gracious Lord and King) served much better at Worcester fight by such
friendly gulls, and Loyal-cheats, when (for all their former great pretenses to
Loyalty) out of a slavish fear of Cruel Usurpers, and Oppressers, they most
Cowardly sneak't in a corner, and forced his Majesty (for want of assistance)
to fight with a handful (as it were, and some of them disloyal too) against a
multitude.

1. Therefore, O ye Profane and ungodly Loyalists, (though God forbid any such
sad times should come again to try your Loyalty in; yet) it is behoofeful that
you (as well as those that call themselves the Godly Party) purge out all your
sins by a true, timely, and unfeigned repentance, and holy resolutions of
better obedience, that your Hypocrisy and deception may also vanish, as well
as theirs: Mat. 12.41, 42.
Unless you mean to have the very Gentiles rise in judgment against you, for
being under the light of Nature better Loyalists than you, under the glorious
light of the Gospel: For all men are obliged even by Nature it self, to venture
their dearest blood for the safety of their King: Our Savior himself (who came
to fufil the Law of Moses, and perfect the Law of Nature Mat. 5.17.
) has confirmed it for a never dying Maxim: If my Kingdom (says he) were of
this World, then would my Servants fight, etc. John 18.36.

And no marvel that it should be thus; for the King (as he is Gods Vicegerent,
and our Supreme head and Governor) is (as the men of Israel said of King
David) worth ten thousand of us 2 Samuel 18.3.
; yea, more than us all, the very light of the Nation 2 Samuel 21.17.
. This proves that the King is, Major Vniversis, contrary to that false,
Childish, Fanatical, and Antimonarchical distinction, that he is, Major
Singulis, Minor Vniversis. Be ye then as Loyal in your resolutions as you are
in your professions, and as careful of your Kings preservation, as Abishai and
the men of Israel were of King David's 2 Samuel 21.17.
: Lest for your neglect of a duty of so high a concern, the greatness of your
Talent bring upon you a greater Curse than that of Meroz, Luke 12.48.
Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) Curse ye bitterly the inhab^^^nts
thereof: Because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the Mighty, Judges 5.23.

2. Though no pretense at last shall excuse any Gainsaying and Rebellious
people Romans 10.21.
, but all that despise dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, must without
discrimination perish in the Gainsaying of Core Jud. 8. to the 22.
; yet be ye wary how ye offer any occasion to your weaker brethren to be
Revolters from their Loyalty, or obstinate in their Fanaticism, by mixing your
Loyalty with profaneness; lest you aggravate your Torments in Hell, by making
your selves guilty of their sin and punishment, as well as your own.

You have seen in, or from our late times of Rebellion, what confusion and
destruction our Old profane Loyalists brought upon their King and Country, by
shaming so good a Cause which they owned: How they filled our Land like Rama
with mourning, by their Cursing and Cursed Oaths Jer. 23.10. Mat. 2.18.
; even bitter mourning, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of
Megiddon Zech. 12.11. Mal. 3.5. Ecclesiasticus 23.11.
: And finally, what Egyptian Bondage and darkness they enwrapped the whole
Nation in, both Church and State; by moving Fanatics (as was pretended) with
their drunkenness and debauchery, to extinguish the light of England.

In a word therefore, take ye warning in time, and follow their pernicious
examples no more, lest you find death in your Pots indeed 2 Kings 4.40.
, the death of your Souls to all eternity 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
. But manifest your Allegiance, by adorning your Loyalty with holy lives
answerable to your professions; Tit. 2.10.
that thereby you may both remove all objections, and colors of Rebellion from
any that watch for matter of advantage and exception against you; and offer
them as great an occasion to embrace True Loyalty (if they will accept it) as
they have from all True Loyalists, (if they were not wilfully blind and
obstinate) that so the more hearts being united to the Lord and the King, we
may get the more strength to resist our Enemies, and the more securely enjoy
Peace amongst our selves, both in Church and State.

Now, 2. As the True Loyalist, when he is in the place of a True Conformist,
honors God not only with reverence, but with his substance Prove. 3.9. Mic.
4.13.
; so the True Conformist, when he is in the place of a True Loyalist, honors
his King not only with due respect and esteem, but also with maintenance: The
same man in one respect renders unto God, the things which be Gods; and in the
other, he renders unto Caesar, the things which be Caesar's Luke 20.25.
. Prayer and thanksgiving he pays to God, as his immediate Rents and dues,
Tithes and offerings mediately in his Stewards and Ministers: But Tribute or
Taxes, etc. he renders unto his King, or Caesar in a more special manner, as he
is Gods Minister and Vicegerent, and next under him his supreme Head and
Governor. Therefore it is very remarkable that our blessed Savior (who paid
Tribute himself, which his pretended Vicar refuses to do) to show the great
necessity of this duty, Dr. Boys upon the dominical Epistles and Gospels. p.
163.
never did any miracle about honor or money, except this one, of giving
Tribute unto Caesar, Mat. 17.27.

The consideration of this, moves the True Loyalist to pay his Tribute and
Taxes, etc. to his King, freely and voluntarily, out of love and fear to God
and his Commandments. Whereas the Nominal Loyalist, though he also pays Tribute
and Taxes, etc. to his King, as well as the True; yet he pays them unwillingly,
and by constraint; out of fear of the Kings authority, and the Penal Laws of
the Land: But the True Loyalist (I say) considers that his King is Gods
Minister and Vicegerent, appointed by him for the good of his Church; both as a
rewarder for the praise of them that do well, and as a revenger to execute his
wrath upon them that do evil: And therefore (as the Apostle has taught him
Romans 13.3, 4, 5, 6.
, he pays his Tribute and Taxes, etc. with all subjection, not only for Wrath,
but also for Conscience Sake.

By this you may perceive, that though the True Loyalist and the nominal agree
in this, that both of them pay Tribute and Taxes, etc. to their King; yet in
the mode and ends of their paying, they differ as much as a servile fear and a
filial, yea, a Humane fear and a Divine; the fear of God, and the fear of man.

How much then are Quakers and such Godly gulls to blame, who (thinking they do
God good service in resisting the higher Powers) choose rather to suffer
imprisonment, or any affliction in the World, than to pay any Tribute or Taxes,
etc. at all? And glory in it too, and plead Conscience for the same; as if God
(the jealousy of whose honor burns like fire) was the Author of Rebellion
against himself, and his own Laws. How great the judgment of these blasphemers
and Rebels against the Lord and the King shall be, I cannot determine, because
it is unspeakable. St. Peter says, If the righteous scarcely be saved, where
shall the ungodly and sinner appear 1 Pet. 4.18
? Where then (say I) shall these appear? That fall so far short of Nominal
Loyalists, that in Statu quo, in the condition they are in, fall far short of
Heaven. The nominal Loyalist has something in him that is good, more than his
Essence or being; his profession is good, (if his life were answerable) but the
profession of these is as Diametrically opposite to Religion, as their Loyalty;
which consists only in Rebellion. Moreover the nominal Loyalist, though he
pay his Tribute and Taxes, etc. only out of a servile fear; yet by his outward
conformity and obedience he declares himself to be a member within the Pale of
the Church, where he has the means (which God has ordained) to make him (if
he be not wanting to himself) a True Christian, and a True Loyalist in time:
And not only so, but he also helps to preserve the public peace and safety of
the Nation, whereby he peaceably enjoys many temporal blessings, or at least
keeps himself secure from temporal punishments, as Ahab averted the temporal
wrath of God, by outwardly humbling himself 1 Kings 21.29.
. But these Rebellious wretches are good for nothing; they are no better than
the very Heathens and Publicans Mat 18.17.
, they are good neither for their Souls, nor for their bodies; they are Sots as
well as sinners, not only spiritual fools, but natural and inconsiderate fools
in the deepest Grain; they not only excommunicate themselves from the ordinary
means of True Loyalty and salvation, and break peace and unity both in Church
and State by their divisions, but they also disturb even their own quiet in
this life, by bringing punishments upon themselves, by and for their Rebellion.

And how much are those Publicans and Tax-gatherers to blame too, that make no
more Conscience to empty the Kings Exchequer, that they may fill their own
Coffers; or some ways or other build up themselves out of the ruins of the
Kings Tribute, than these Holy-cheats do to pay it? Touch not mine Anointed 1 Chronicles 16.22.
, is a prohibition to hurt the King, not only in his Body, but in his Estate
too: It is theft to steal the goods of any; but to cheat and rob the King of
his Tribute, etc. is a sin no less than Sacrilege: For Tribute, etc. belongs
to the King, not as he is a person Civil, but Sacred, Anointed with Holy Oil to
be Gods Minister and Vicegerent Romans 13.4, 5, 6.
. And therefore to rob Gods Clergy of Tithes, etc. is also the cursed sin of
Sacrilege, because the High Priest the Representative of them all, Romans 11.16.
was also Gods Anointed, Anointed with Holy Oil to his Sacred Function, as well
as the King. Zech. 4.14. These are the two anointed ones (or Sons of Oil) which
stand by the Lord of the whole Earth. This Targum expounds of Joshua and
Zorobabel, who were anointed, (the one for the Princely Government, the other
for the Priesthood) with the self-same Oil Numb. 35.25.
, and accordingly God himself (with relation to the days of Christ) does call
this sort of theft, Sacrilege. Will a man rob God, (says he) yet he have
robbed me: but yet ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? ('it is answered) in
Tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse: (that is, surely and greatly
cursed) for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation, Mal. 3.8, 9. 1 Cor. 9.14.

It Is Sacrilege then, (the cursed and damnable sin of Sacrilege) to rob God
in the Ministers of his holy word and Sacraments: But how much rather to rob
God in the King, his Minister and Vicegerent? Surely, if nearness of relation
will make any distinction, (as touch not mine anointed, goes before do my
Prophets no harm 1 Chronicles. 16.22.
) it must needs be the greatest Sacrilege of all, next to the robbing God in
himself, of his immediate Rents and dues of prayer and thanksgiving. Render
therefore to all their dues, (especially to God and Caesar) Tribute to whom
Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom
Honor, Romans 13.7.

But, 3. and Lastly, The falsehood and deceit of the Solemn League and
Covenant discovered.
as the true Loyalist is obedient to his King, in paying of him Tribute and
Taxes, etc. so also in all his other Laws and Ordinances: he still considers
that his King is appointed by God to be his Minister and Vicegerent, for the
External government of his Church; and therefore out of love and fear to God,
and obedience to his Laws, (in serving of whom the people have only perfect
liberty James 1.19. and 2.12. 2 Cor. 3.17. Romans 8.21.
) he most freely swears fealty to him, to be true to him, and obedient: And
accordingly he rejoices when the Oath of Allegiance is imposed upon him, and
the whole Nation; because it is for confirmation of Loyalty and subjection;
that thereby there may be an end of all strife, and all both in Church and
State may enjoy Peace the more securely Heb. 6.16, 17
: In which respect says Solomon, I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment,
and that in regard of the Oath of God Ecclesiastes 8.2.
. The True Loyalist, though he would obey his Kings Commandment, (either
actively or passively) without an Oath, his Conscience being bound before by
the Law of God; yet because God wills such an Oath for confirmaon of the
lawless in outward obedience with the just and Loyal 1 Timothy 1.9.
, he the more willingly takes and keeps it, that so there may be an end of all
strife; for certainly he must be a notorious Rebel indeed, that will not keep
his Kings commandment, in regard of his Oath, if he had no other obligation;
for an Oath, if it be only in such things which are not contrary to the will of
God, is so Sacred and obliging a thing, that it brings the wrath and
vengeance of God upon him that breaks it Joshua 9.20. Numb. 5.21.
, and therefore says Solomon, it is a snare to the man who devoureth that
which is holy: (to wit, who takes an holy Oath upon him) and after vows to
make enquiry Pro. 20.25.
. (to wit, whether his Oath, or Vow be any ways prejudicial to his Body or
Estate, or not Ps. 15.4.
:) For which cause, when Joshua and the Princes of the Congregation had made a
Peace with the Gibeonites upon Oath, they durst not break it; though it were so
disadvantagious, that the Israelites murmured against them, and their enemies
had obtained the League by guile and craft Joshua 9.
: and when King Saul in a battle against the Philistines, had adjured the
Israelites not to eat any food until the evening, etc. they were no less
careful to keep the Kings commandment in regard of their Oath; for
notwithstanding the rashness of the adjuration, the greatness of their distress
with hunger and confination; and the greatness of their temptation too, by the
dropping of honey in a private wood: Yet no man would put his hand to his mouth,
because they feared the Oath 1 Samuel 14.
.

Now if an Oath be so Sacred and blinding, when it is only in things
indifferent, not contrary to the will of God: How much rather is it Sacred and
obliging, when it is for confirmation of such holy things, which the word of
God has (before) bound us to observe Nehemiah 10.29.
? Let all be judge that have not shook hands with their rationality: I am sure,
these obligations are more firm, than Solomon's. threefold Cord, which cannot
quickly be broken Ecclesiastes 4.12.
.

But, 2. If the Oath be rashly taken in such things that be contrary to the
word of God, I know then that there is none, (except he be more Infidel than
the Devils themselves James 2.19.
) but will readily acknowledge that it is absolutely unlawful Numb. 30.5, 8.
, and consequently the obligation to keep it, as absolutely taken away: Yea, by
the Law of contraposition, (if we will but allow Affirmatives and Negatives to
include or suppose one another) a man is as much obliged to break an unlawful
Oath, as he is to keep one that is lawful in all things according to the word
of God; because as he cannot keep an unlawful Oath, without making his sin
exceeding sinful: so by breaking of it, he manifests his repentance; whereby,
he makes a re-entry into Covenant with God, by a new stipulation.

How much then was Herod (that Fox Luke 13.32.
) to blame when he promised upon Oath to give the Daughter of Herodias (for
pleasing him in a Dance) whatsoever she would ask; and she (being before
instructed of her Mother) said, give me here John Baptist's head in a Charger?
For instead of putting her off, by telling her that his Oath supposed only such
requests as were lawful, he added sin to sin; for though the Hypocrite said, He
was exceeding sorry; nevertheless for the Oaths sake, (as he pretended) and
them which sat with him at meat, he commanded it to be given her Mar. 14. Mar.
6.
.

But how much more was Cromwell (that Fox) and his Park of Presbyterians and
Independents to blame, when (to satisfy the having desire of Mrs. Avarice, for
pleasing them with a dance, in the great Parlor of their large Consciences)
they bound themselves each to other by a Solemn, yet damnable League and
Covenant, to destroy our Nation and her Religion, and to root out all order and
Government both in Church and State? Herod played only the Tyrant; but these
were not only Tyrants, but Usurpers too: besides, though they agreed with him
in several circumstances of their cruelty and Hypocrisy; yet they much
out-ballanced him in the mode and hainousness of their Oath and Villainy: For
whereas Herod's Oath consisted only of a plain piece of cruelty against a single
person, their Covenant was taken for the destruction of a whole Kingdom; and
like the Turkish Alcoran, consisted of a Hoch-poch of principles, not only bad,
but some seemingly good too to cover the bad, and their evil designs with the
vail of Hypocrisy. And accordingly, herein it was notoriously contradictory to
its self; it pretended great Loyalty to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's
Person and authority; and withal to extirpate Episcopacy, and Church
Government: Which could not possibly be, without destroying the Kings
Authority; because they were upheld by the Kings Authority. This was so
evident, that they preceived it themselves, and therefore were resolved to
contradict themselves further, and also destroy the Kings Majesty's person too:
The Presbyterians Preached him upon the block, and the Independents beheaded him
and the whole Nation. And accordingly, when it had once strengthened them (the
end for which it was taken) by tying the Populacy fast to their parties, under
the terror of perjury; then they quickly Hist. Independ. Complete. Part. 1. p.
139.
cast it aside, and called it an Almanac out of date. Yea, and punished too
many for attempting to keep it. And no marvel, for their Covenant (which they
had so rashly and unadvisedly taken) pretended so much for the honor and
happiness of the Kings Majesty, and his Posterity; that they saw they could not
possibly keep it, without its contradicting them in their pulling down of
Monarchy, and the establishing of their Oligarchy or Tyranny: For Hist.
Independ. Complete. Part 1. p. 113.
which cause, their Grandees, that they might also the better hinder their
Vote, that they would not alter the ancient form of Government by King, Lords,
and Commons, from taking effect, caused the Antimonarchical book written by
Parsons the Jesuit, 1524. (under the feigned name of Doleman) to be published,
though they knew it was condemned by Act of Parliament, 35 Eliz. But it is no
wonder that they should not care for former Acts of Parliment, when as they did
so lightly esteem of their own, as well as of their National Covenant: Wherein,
though they also pretended to be great Reformers from Popish superstition; yet
you see (as the same Author observes) that they can join interests with France,
Doctrine with the Jesuits, to carry on their design, and reduce us to the
condition of French Peasants and Slaves, under the Kingdom of the Saints.

And the truth is, though the greatest part might do what they did, not out of
malice, but rather (as our Martyred Sovereign charitably speaks of them, in his
EIKON ASILIK) out of misapprehension of things, or misinformation; yet it is
notorious that most of the Chief and Heads of them acted against their own
knowledge and Conscience, no less than Herod did in beheading of John the
Baptist; for as Herod knew and acknowledged that John was a just man and an
holy, and had done nothing worthy of death; but only a spleen he had against
him, for telling him that it was not lawful for him to have his Brothers Wife,
whom he had married: So these Covenanters knew not only that they had bound
themselves by a solemn Oath (with hands lifted up to the most high God) to
preserve and defend the King, but also that he was so just a man and an holy,
that they could find nothing of any moment to stuf out their black charge
against him: They knew that he comported Hist. Indedend. Complete. Part 2. p.
218.
himself in his afflictions with such admired temper, prudence and constancy;
that many even of his engaged Enemies themselves became his Converts thereby,
speaking Panegyricks in his praise: Particularly, Harry Hist. Independ.
Complete. Part 2. p. 15.
Martyn making a speech in the House upon the Debate, touching Kingly
Government, whether a King, or no King? gives this judgment of him, that if
they must have a King, he had rather have had the last than any Gentleman in
England; he found no fault in his person, but in his Office.

And yet for all this, like Herod too they could pretend to do what they did
for their Oaths Hist. Independ. Complete. Part 2. p. 242. etc.
sake: Especially, in their compliance with the bloody Irish Papists; though by
their Oath they were engaged so much to the contrary, to defend the King and
his posterity, and to root out Popery. But their minds were so bent to ruin
Monarchy, and the Protestant Religion, merely to raise themselves, and support
their own faction; that they did not consider what they said or did: And their
Oath besides was so intricate, and full of contradiction, that they could not
tell what to make of it: And therefore they sometimes rejected it, and
sometimes pretended it, in their Hypocrisy, for the sake of those parts in it
which they thought the most favored their designs, according to their own vain
whimzies, and Fanatical imaginations; as Hist. Independ. Complete. Part 1. p.
79 and 80.
Marshal that Turn-Coat Priest, (having always a special care to side himself
with the prevailing Party) in a Sermon at Margarets Westminster cried up
Presbytery and the Covenant, whenas before (to ingratiate himself with the
Independents) he had as much slighted both in the Army: for otherwise, their
facinorous acts showed that they feared an Oath no more than Herod did in
beheading John the Baptist: If they had feared an Oath, their Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy, (as they ought to have done) yea, and their own
Covenant too; then instead of murdering their King, they would have kept his
commandments: But the truth is, as Herod perpetrated his wicked act, not for
his Oaths sake, but for Herodias sake; or rather for his and her envy, and
their lusts sake: So these silly Reformers did what they did, not for their
Oaths sake, but for their Oligarchy or Tyrannies sake; or rather for their
Pride, their Envy, their Covetousness, and all their lusts sake.

Now, what should I spend time in confuting these unworthy men, in their
contemning and despising the holy orders of Episcopacy and our Church
Government; by joining them in their Covenant, with Popery, Superstition,
Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine,
and the power of Godliness? When as the Burton of the Wars in England, Scotland
and Ireland. p. 65.
Bishops. (not only) imposed an Oath (as an Anti-Covenant) called etc. ( Et
caetera) against the introduction of any Popish Doctrine into the Church, and
the subjection of it to the Usurpations and superstitions of the Sea of Rome;
but also you have seen already how they contradicted themselves therein, by
joining interests with the Papists, and Doctrine with the Jesuits, to root out
Monarchy and Protestancy, giving them a toleration of their Religion, and the
possession of the English Protestants Estates for their Hire. Yea, and you have
seen too, how the God of order himself has confuted them in the Text;
commanding all to fear the Lord and the King, together; he that fears the
Lord, (let him pretend what he will) will also fear and honor his King.

Yet notwithstanding all this, they want not Disciples and Followers to this
very day; (as well as other Sects and Schisms;) there be too many amongst us,
that have took no heed to the Leven of these Scribes and Pharisees; not only of
the Laity, but also of the Clergy. Which is a thing much to be admired at, that
men that profess so much learning and Religion too, should betray so much
weakness in their judgments, and perverseness in their wills; as to be zealous
of keeping that Covenant, which they know is so contradictory in its self, that
a man cannot possibly keep it without breaking of it. I know you would scorn to
be called fools; but I am sure that your Masters (if they had meant honestly)
showed far more wisdom, when (upon the consideration of its contradicting them
in pulling down of Monarchy) they cast it aside, and called it an Almanac out
of date; and punished too many for attempting to keep it. And what will you
follow your Masters only wherein they were vicious, and not in their
repentance? Though God forbid but that yours should be real and serious: For
then others need not, Tit. 3.1, 2, 3.
you would call your selves fools a thousand times over and over, yea, mad,
that you should ever be so wicked, rash and unadvised, as to justify the
abominable proceedings of those Covenanters we read of Psalm. 83. Who although
like your Masters, they were men of several Interests and Religions; yet bound
themselves each to other by the like solemn, yet damnable League and Covenant
against God and his Church: Or like the Kings of the Earth and their Heathenish
Subjects against the Lord, and against his Anointed Psalm. 2.
.

But thanks be to God, Dr. Lees recantation Sermon, or his Corhumiliatum and
contritum, for taking the solemn League and Covenant. Printed 1663.
some have considered themselves already, recanted and conformed; as the
forementioned Dr. Lee, etc. And others too like Agrippa, have been almost
persuaded; but their Oath they say, sticks in their consciences; they are
afraid to conform, for fear of that. I would to God their Oath of Allegiance,
obedience, and Supremacy, had stuck in their Consciences as much before: then
they would have been True Loyalists, and True Conformists still, and not so
shamefully have broken the commandments of the Lord and the King: But such is
the deceitfulness of sin, (the greatest mystery in iniquity) that men by nature
do easily forsake the good, and cleave to the evil; where they stick so fast,
that they cannot possibly return from thence to the good again, without the
concurrent help of Gods grace, and the Omnipotent hand of a Deity. Yet our hope
and desire is, that God (in his good time) will open their eyes, and loose them
from this bond of iniquity; that they may be not only almost, but altogether
such as St. Paul was, except his bonds Acts 26.28, 29.
.

And lastly, as all ought to have a special care how they sin against the light
of their Consciences, (and yet pretend Conscience for the same) lest they incur
the greatest Damnation: So let none be so wicked and absurd to reject
Repentance and Conformation for fear of shame; (as proud persons are too apt to
do.) For that is another great deceitfulness of sin, and collusion of the
Devil, for men to think that to tend to their shame and disgrace, which
purchases them the greatest honor and esteem. St. Aug. got more honor by his
confessions and retractations than by all his other writings besides. Nor did
this learned Doctor get so much esteem by any thing that ever he did, as by
this his Sermon of recantation. Whereas if he had been still obstinate in so
wretched an Oath, and had scorned to conform, he knew he should but increase
his shame and dishonor; and that not only temporal, but eternal too: for
Christ himself says, that as he that confesses him before men, shall be
confessed of him before his Father which is in Heaven: So he that denies, or is
ashamed of him, and of his words, in this adulterous and sinful generation; of
him also will he be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his father, with
the holy Angels Mat. 10.32, 33. Mark 8.38.
.

The True Loyalist considering this, sticks to his Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy, the more steadfastly; and in regard thereof is the more afraid to
break his Kings commandment; because it is made, not for man and his lusts
sake, but for the Lord and his sake 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
. Therefore (as Saint Peter has exhorted him) he freely submits himself to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake: Whether it be to the King, as
Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well; yet he
willingly submits himself, (either actively or passively) because so is the
will of God, that with well doing he may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15.


1. Actively, by obeying his King, not only in such things which are already
commanded by the Lord, in his word: but also in all other things which are not
contrary to it: Let things be never so indifferent in themselves, neither made
simply good or bad by the command or prohibition of God, but hang merely upon
the State of times, and the various customs, and manners of Nations; yet when
they are once commanded, and made the Laws of the Land, he pays obedience to
them, as to things not indifferent; because otherwise his Kings Power and
Prerogative would in effect be nullified, contrary to the Law of God, and
destructive to Christian Government and Magistracy. Wherefore (left in the very
act he should disobey, not man, but God himself 1 These. 4.8.
) He is necessarily subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake
Romans 13.5^.


And indeed those things which in themselves are indifferent, must needs become
good and necessary, when they are once made the Laws of the Land; because
therein they also tend to our good and welfare, both in Church and State.

1. In the State, if there were no Laws, there would be no living; the weakest
then would always go to the Wall. Yea, men would then be like fish in the Sea,
the greater would evermore devour the less, the strongest arm and the longest
Sword would always carry it; the passions of men would then set them in as
great a combustion, as when Phaeton rode the Sun: happy therefore is that
Nation that has binding Laws in it, to curb our corrupt and irregular
passions; but thrice happy is that Nation that has Governors in it endued
with such a spirit, as makes them willing to execute those Laws: for otherwise,
were there never so good Laws, and the King or Supreme Governor should have
never so great a desire to have them executed; yet seeing with other eyes, and
handling with other hands than his own, he cannot always have his will
fulfilled, (excepting only in Supreme causes, where he sits as immediate Judge
himself) without the concurrent help of inferior Governors: For which cause,
though the Israelites in the Wilderness were a more collective body than other
Nations, yet Jethro, Moses Father-in-Law (seeing how he toiled in judging them
alone) advised him to choose inferior Governors, to judge the smaller matters,
and to bring the greater unto him: and not only so, but such men too, as were
rightly qualified for their Office; able men, such as fear God, men of truth,
hating Covetousness Exodus 18.


2. In the Church, if there were no ordinances, there would be no order; and if
no order, no unity in Gods service, nor stedfastness in the Faith Col. 2.5.
. Yea, though there must be Heresies, or Sects among us, (as our Apostle
speaks) 1 Cor. 11.19.
yet if men should have no Ordinances to contain them in order, but be
permitted to live as they list themselves, as they were when there was no King
in England, like as when there was no King in Israel Jud. 17.6.
: There would be so many the more Divisions and Confusions in the Church,
whereby the more Tumults and Troubles would be raised in the State. For the
welfare of the State is embarked in the welfare of the Church; no Christian
State can possibly be sound and well, when the Chuch is sick and shattered into
Schisms, any more than Hippocrates's Twins can live or die asunder. This has
been too evident in all ages of the Church, especially in these latter times,
now so many false Prophets have risen among us; and love (which is the bond of
Peace) is waxen so cold, that iniquity does abound, and get the upper hand Mat.
24.12.
, particularly, in our Independent Congregations, and other Schismatical and
Heretical Assemblies among us; who under pretense of serving God in their
private Meetings, have many times and often made secret Conspiracies, and
Treacherous Combinations against the State; that they may the better serve
themselves, and ruin the Church. Wherefore Authority being warned by their
former mischief, has since most prudently (especially in times of apparent
danger) took order for the suppression of Conventicles and divisions in the
Church, that there may be no more such evil consequences in the State; but that
all things being rightly ordered according to Gods prescription 1 Cor. 14. ult.
, we may have only peace, which God is the Author and approver of, as in all
the Churches of the Saints ver. 33.


2. Passively, by suffering his Kings will to be done on him, if it be
unlawful, and may not be done by him. For the true Loyalist knows that as
obedience to God, must be preferred before obedience to man Act. 4.19.
: so he is commanded to be subject to the higher powers Romans 13.1.
, which in such a case cannot be without suffering: and therefore he is
obedient, not only Actively, by doing his Kings Commandment when it is for the
truth; but also Passively, by enduring it patiently when it is against the
truth: as is evident in the example of Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, who did
obey King Nebuchadezzar, not only actively, when he had given them Rule over
the Province of Babylon; but also passively, (without the least show of
Rebellion) when he commanded them to fall down and worship the Golden Image
which he had set up Dan. 3.
. And indeed where did you ever read of any Godly Martyrs or Martyr, that when
he might not obey his King actively, yet refused to submit himself to him
passively? I am sure the examples of the Apostles will teach you the contrary,
and all the persecutions of the Church. Luther therefore (that great Reformer
of our Religion) when in his Reformation he was opposed by Authority, would
say, That he had rather obey than work Miracles, if it were in his power: for
obedience is due to Kings, not as they are men, but as they are powers ordained
of God, to be his Ministers and Vicegerents. And so accordingly, Julian the
Apostate's Soldiers, though they would not worship Idols at his command,
because God will not give his glory to another, nor his praise to Graven Images
Isa. 4.8.
; yet when he led them against an enemy, they obeyed him most readily:
Distinguebant dominum temporalem a domino aeterno, and tamen subditi erant
propter dominum aeternum, says Augustine; August. in Psalm. 124.
they had understanding in them to distinguish their temporal Lord from their
eternal, and Religion too, to subject themselves to their temporal, for the
sake of their eternal. All power is from God, and also for God: let the Prince
invested therewith abuse it never so much for himself, as if it were his own;
yet God can extract the greatest good out of the greatest evil, and order it to
his glory: and therefore the True Loyalist never uses a Sword against his King,
but a Buckler; never resists the Power, but is always submissive (either
actively or passively) not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake.

If St. Paul indeed had said, Let every soul be subject to Christian and
virtuous Powers, there might have been some Plea for Rebellion; but (to take
away all scruple) he says, to Powers indefinitely, in that they be Powers, as
St. Peter expressly, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward 1
Pet. 2.18.
.

Since then we are obliged by the Doctrine of St. Peter, and St. Paul, to submit
our selves to all Powers indefinitely, let them be never so wicked and
Tyrannous; how much rather ought we to fear and obey those that are Peaceable
and Religious, Defenders of the Faith, and Nursing Fathers to the Church?
Whenas to such there does belong a double honor; an honor as they are Gods
Ministers, and Trustees, and an honor as they are fearers of God, their Lord,
and Sovereign Ps. 15.^
. This is the glory of a Nation, this gives Virtue free scope, and makes True
Loyalty the more operative.

Yet we must remember that obedience and subjection is a thing so highly
necessary, that it is enjoined to all Powers indefinitely, not only the good,
but the bad too. 1. In regard of the Predicate, because obedience unites men
together, and makes them Victorious; it is the very strength and bulwork of a
Nation. 2. In regard of the Subject, because wicked and Tyrannous Princes serve
no less for our Trial, than good ones for our Consolation: and who would not be
happy, eternally happy? Blessed is the man (says St. James) that endures
temptation: For when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, which the
Lord has promised to them that love him James 1.12.
.

And accordingly, to show the great necessity of this duty, the Lord himself
(by his Apostle) has here enforced obedience to it, with two such moving
arguments, as they eminently comprehend all.

The first may serve for an use of terror, to fright all Fanatics from
Rebellion; for it is taken from the exceeding great danger of them that resist
the Powers: because the Powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever
therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and they that
resist, shall receive to themselves damnation Romans 13.1, 2.
; in the vulgar Latin it is, acquirunt sibi damnationem, they do acquire or
purchase to themselves damnation, to show that Rebels above all Malefactors do
the most worthily receive damnation; for what can a man receive into his
possession more worthily, than that which he receives by purchase? Moreover to
show the great interest and propriety they have in damnation, they are said not
only to receive it, but to receive it to themselves: they shall receive to
themselves damnation; and that both Temporal and Eternal.

1. Temporal, the very provoking a King to anger, incurreth death, without his
mercy and Clemency. The fear or Wrath of a King (says Solomon) is as the
roaring of a Lion: he that provokes him to anger sins against his own Soul:
That is, offends against his own life, hazzards and jeopards it Pro. 20.2.
and 19.12.
. Yea, the Wrath of a King (says he) is as the messengers of Death, without
the wisdom of the Wise to pacify it Pro. 16.14.
How much rather then does that Cursed Traiter deserve Death, (even that
terrible and ignominious death the Laws of England have assigned him,) that
has so little fear of God before his eyes, as not to be afraid to stretch
forth his hand to destroy the Lords anointed? Murder is a crying sin, it cries
for vengeance, vengeance Genesis 4.10.
; but Regicide, what shall I term it? it is a Roaring sin, it roareth louder
than all the Diabolical voices in Plutarch did together, for the Cessation of
their Oracles, upon the coming of our Savior; for by Murder one single person
may be destroyed only, but by Regicide, the murder of a King, many times a
whole Nation, even all the Members of a body Politic perish in his ruin; as
the body Natural does by the loss of the Head, from whence the Metaphor is
drawn.

2. Eternal, and that most proper in this place; for though the word (...) here
for damnation, make no difference between that condemnation which is Temporal,
and that which is Eternal; the judgment of man in this life, and the judgment
of God in the life to come Romans 2.2. Compared in the Orig. with Luk 23.40.
; yet the reason wherefore damnation here, is pronounced against them that
resist the Powers, being because in resisting them, they resist the Ordinance
of God, does plainly show that it is chiefly meant, (...), of eternal judgment.
Scripture and Order requires that a sin against God, be punished with damnation
eternal, and a sin against man, as man, only with Temporal; and a Rebel sins
against both: He sins against man, in that he resists the power of his
King, as he is a man: He sins against God, in that by resisting the Power of
his King, he resists the Ordinance of God. And therefore (as the word
signifies) he is guilty of both sorts of punishment, not only Temporal, but
chiefly Eternal; as is evident in the example of Corah and his Accomplices, who
because in being gathered together against Moses, and against Aaron, they were
gathered together against the Lord; they were not permitted to die the common
death of other men, but the Lord made a new thing, caused the Earth to open her
mouth, and swallow them up quick into Hell Numb. 16.
.

The 2. is an use of comfort, both to draw Rebels to Loyalty, and to encourage
True Loyalists therein; for it is taken ab utili, from the great good that
flows from the Ministry of the King, to the bodies and souls of them that are
obedient and do good: he is the Minister of God to thee for good Romans 13.3, 4.
; be thy Prince good or bad, (there is no exception in this respect) he is
still the Minister of God to thee for good; Si honus, August. Sermon. 6. de
verbis Dom. secundum Mat.
nutritor est tuns; (says St. Austin) si malus, tentator tuus est; if thy
Prince be wicked and Tyrannous, he is thy temper to exercise thy patience;
whereby he becomes the cause of thy eternal good, by thy temporal evil: But if
he be good and Religious, a true defender of the Faith, he is thy Nurse, yea, a
nursing Father to the whole Church; whereby he becomes the Minister of God to
thee for thy greater good, both Temporal and Eternal.

1. For thy praise, do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the
same Romans 13.3.
. Governors are sent by the King, not only for the punishment of evil doers,
but for the praise of them that do well 1 Pet. 2.14.
. Yea, if thou be good and obedient, thy King, by the influence of his good
Government, will not only promote his own honor 1 Samuel 2.30.
, but will be the Minister of God to thee for thy praise in all: fear thou the
Lord and the King, and thou shall have no need to praise thy self; the lips of
others, even strangers shall give thee praise enough Psa. 15.4. Pro. 27.2.
: Yea, thy very enemies shall be at peace with thee Pro. 16.7.
.

2. For thy profit, both in Church and State. 1. In the State, to protect thy
body and estate, from the rage of enemies and adversaries, both within and
without the Commonwealth; that thou may enjoy thy Meum and Tuum with the
more peace and security. 2. In the Church, to defend thy Faith in its
integrity; both by the assistance of godly Preachers, and learned Antagonists
in the cause of Christ; and by a strong fence of right Order and Discipline;
that thou having no letts nor hindrances in thy Religion, may not only have
temporal happiness, but also eternal: Therefore St. Paul exhorts us very
earnestly to make supplications, Prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks,
not only for all men in general, but for Kings in a special manner, and for all
that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet, and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty: for this is good (says he) and acceptable in the sight
of God our Savior: Who will have all men to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
: To wit, by the means of wise and Religious Princes, such as was Constantine
the Great, that great Favourer of Religion, and Defender of the Faith.

No Salvation out of Christ. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings: be instructed ye
Judges of the Earth Psa. 2.10.
. Consider, that as you have your power, not from your selves, or from your
Subjects, but from God: so not for your selves, to satisfy your own lusts,
carnal ends and interest; but also for God, to rule his people, nurse his
Church, and contain it in order. This is the end for which all Kings are
ordained; the care of the Church is their great Depositum, the very burden of
their charge Isa. 44.28. and 49.23.
.

But alas! all have not obeyed the Gospel of Christ Romans 10.16.
: The Turks and Jews do yet stand out, and the fullness of the Gentiles is not
yet come in Romans 11.25.
: though no people are found so Barbarous, but they will have some form of
Religion or other to acknowledge a God by; as all India, East and West,
shows: Yet many Kings of the Earth, and Heathen Rulers are so far from
embracing Christ and his Gospel, that they still set themselves, and take
Counsel together, against the Lord, and against his Anointed, saying, Let us
break their Bands asunder, and cast away their Cords from us Psa. 2.2, 3.
.

Ecclesiastical History will inform you, that almost all ages of the Church
have felt the rage of their persecution Acts 4.
. But let them go on, they are left without excuse; all have heard the glad
tidings of Salvation; the sound of the Gospel has gone out into all the Earth,
and the words of it unto the ends of the World Acts 2. Romans 10.18. Psalm. 19.4.
. Neither let them dream that Salvation can be had in any thing out of Christ
and his Gospel. They indeed seeing through the glass of their punishments, the
cursed nature of Original sin to be ebullient in their members, do with much
Zeal and Devotion worship God ignorantly in some Idol or other Acts 17.23.
, thinking by their childish Idolatry, and vain Incense and Oblations, either
to expiate their sin, and the sad effects thereof, or to win Gods favor unto
them 1 Kings 18.
. But alas! they are so far from doing of that, that robbing God of his due
honor by their Idol-worship, they so much the more provoke him to anger
against them Jer. 11.17.
: It is as vain a thing for them to imagine that they cane be saved by the works
of their own hands, as to conceit that they were made by them, or are
preserved; common reason teaching them (if their understanding were not darkened
Ephesians 4.18.
) That the former is as impossible to be done as the latter, without the
Omnipotent hand of a Deity: for Gods infinite justice being wounded by sin,
deliverance from it is a new Creation, and a Resurrection from Death and
Damnation to life again; and therefore cannot possibly be effected by any
thing, but by Christ, God, as well as man; and man too, as well as God; for
both those Natures, Divine and Humane, must necessarily be in the person of him
who is our Redeemer, or else a peace could never have been concluded between
God and man: If he had not been God, he could not have satisfied the infinite
justice of God, by fulfilling all righteousness for man Mat. 3.15.
, which man as man (by reason of his finiteness, and imperfect holiness) could
never do for himself: And if he had not been man, the satisfaction could not
have been made in the same nature which sinned, without which the satisfaction
had been null, for want of mutuality.

You see then that Salvation from the Wrath of God, cannot possibly be obtained
by any vain and Anger-provoking worship, which you perform, but only by Christ
and his Mediatorship; God dwelling in our flesh, perfect God, and perfect man.
And therefore the Word of God (than which there is nothing so rational,) does
impute our Salvation only to Christ, neither is there Salvation in any other,
for there is none other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved Acts 4.12.
. And St. John says, He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: and
he that believes not the Son, shall not see life: but the Wrath of God abides
on him John 3.36. and 17.3. Heb. 2.3. 1 John 5.10.
.

O therefore as you tender your everlasting Peace, delay no longer to kiss the
Son of God, Christ Jesus our only Lord and Savior Psalm. 2.12.
, not with a Judas's kiss to betray him Mat. 26.48.
; but with the mouth of Faith and obedience in token of homage 1 Samuel 10.1.
, that he was Anointed to be your Lord and King by God the Father Psa. 89.27.
Revel. 1.5. Phil. 2.8, 9.
; lest by your infidelity ye perish from the Way, the Truth, and the Life John
14.6.
.

And you O Christian Kings that are already established in the Faith, and
embrace Christ and his Gospel, (the only means of your Salvation) accomplish ye
the end of your Ordination: be ye true defenders of the Faith, and Nursing
Fathers to the Church; that Christ may defend you from your enemies, and nurse
you in your Kingdoms: manifest your wisdom by scattering the wicked in
judgment, and bringing the Wheel over the ungodly, that the Lord may establish
your Thrones in righteousness Pro. 20.8, 26. and 25.5.
; Let Christ rule in your hearts by Faith Ephesians. 3.17. Col. 3.15.
, that you may rule his people the more faithfully: Pay ye True Loyalty and
subjection to Christ your Lord and Master, that your Subjects may the more
cheerfully pay you yours: In a word, have a care of increasing your accounts,
by negligence in your charge Luke 12.48.
: But crown your Sacred Office with Christian examples, that at last you may
exchange your corruptible Crowns for Crowns of glory.

But Lastly, we must not forget, that if a King should be wanting in his duty
to fear the Lord; yet our duty is nevertheless to fear the King: let him be
what he will, that can be no excuse to us; we must not forsake the Lord, for
his sake; but still be subject unto him, for the Lords sake. Wickedness in a
King may bring destruction upon himself, but we know (from what has been said
before) that it can be no plea for Rebellion. Yea, suppose a King should be a
notorious enemy, not only to the Lord, but to our selves too; yet for all that,
we must not Rebel, but still be subject and obedient: David (a man after Gods
own heart) when he was a Subject to King Saul (that remarkable Tyrant and Rebel
against God) gives us in this a very fair example; for when the evil spirit of
King Saul rose up against him, and that so violently, that he sought to smite
him even to the Wall with his Javelin; and though afterward he declared his
malice to be as great as David's innocence, both by hunting him from place to
place, like a Partridge upon the Mountains; and devising all the ways he could
besides to take away his life 1 Samuel 19.9, 10, etc.
; yet (when he had him at his mercy, even at such times when he came to attach
him 1 Samuel 24. etc. 26.
) he would by no means Rebel, lift up his hand or his heel against him; no, nor
suffer those that were about him to do it; though they much incited him
thereunto, alleging that the day was come, in the which the Lord said he would
deliver his enemy into his hand. But alas! they savoured not the things that be
of God Mat. 16.23.
, the Lord delivered him into his hand, not that he should kill him, but only
to try his Loyalty, whether he would kill him or not; and so the words
following interpret it, that thou may do to him as it shall seem good unto
thee 1 Samuel 24.4, 5.
. And so accordingly he proved himself a True Loyalist indeed, the more he
feared the Lord, the more he feared the King; he cut off but the skirt of Saul's
Robe, and his heart smote him, much less durst he kill him Psalm. 4.4.
. Satan for all his great policy could not prevail with him to do that; he said
unto hismen, The Lord forbid, that I should do this thing unto my Master, the
Lords anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the
Anointed of the Lord: With these words David staid his servants, and suffered
them not to rise against Saul 1 Samuel 24.5, 6, 7.
. And when Abishai (for the same reason) would have killed him in the
Wilderness of Ziph; David was astonished at his boldness and impudency, and
forbad him with great indignation, saying, Who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless 1 Samuel 26.
? But behold! instead of satisfying a revengeful nature upon his enemy, he so
pacified his wrath by yielding, that he even enforced tears from his eyes 1 Samuel 24.16, 17, etc.
: made him promise him that he would do him no more harm, yea, confess his own
folly, and bless him 1 Samuel 26.21, etc.
.

This is so exactly according to what his Son Solomon has taught us,
Ecclesiastes. 10.4. that he may seem to have borrowed his Wisdom and Counsel
therein, from this very story: the words are these, If the Spirit of the Ruler
rise up against thee, leave not thy place, for yielding pacifieth great
offenses. If the Spirit of thy Ruler rise up against thee, let it be for what
cause it will, yet for all that, thou must not leave thy place and rebel, to
make him yield by constraint: but keep thy order and station still 1 Cor. 7.20,
24.
, and endeavor to pacify him by yielding. This is the duty of us all, how
great then is the sin of them that leave their places, and rise up against
their Ruler, when his spirit is calm and sedate? and by their Rebellion enforce
him aftewards to rise up against them, and yet refuse to pacify him by
yielding, though themselves have been the cause of his provocation? Fanatics
themselves may be Judge, but withal let them repent, lest by their pride and
obstinacy they also provoke Gods anger against them. And in a word, let us all
be as careful always to discharge out duty to the Lord and the King, that we
may not make our selves for ever miserable by Rebellion; but that as Kings on
Earth dye like men, so we in heaven may live like Kings Psalm. 82.7. Revel. 5.10.
.

Part II.
NOw Secondly, that we may obtain this heavenly and Royal inheritance of the
True Loyalist, and avoid the everlasting perdition of Rebels, Solomon also
gives us a seasonable caution, to meddle not with them that are given to
change; for by Changers here are meant Rebels, such as neither fear the Lord
nor the King, but under an hypocritical pretense of being great Zelots in
Religion, pride themselves in nothing more than to rebel, and change the Laws
and Ordinances of them both. And so accordingly, the Jews Weems Christ. Synag.
Of Civil persons, parag. 1. cap. 6. Sect. 7. p. 1 59.
termed them Shonim, Rebels; because they varied from the commands of the Lord
and the King. And hence came that Sect called Hashonim, who taught that no King
should be acknowledged upon earth but God only. Such were the degegenerate
Essens, who thought it impiety to be subject to any man: and to come home to
our selves, such are our degenerate Papists, and Fanatics too, they both make
division between the fear of the Lord and the fear of the King; as if these
Changelings were wiser than the wifest who has joined and enjoined them
together. Yea, and that which is worse, they are not afraid to make the fear of
God, the reason of their Rebellion against the King. O what must one day be the
judgment of these Brothers in blasphemy, Vox faucibus haeret, it is
unexpressible! Yet we may guess at it by that terrible one, which befell Cora
and his rebellious fraternity Numb. 16.
; for they resemble them exactly, who under a pretense of being an holy
assembly, men that greatly seared the Lord, gathered themselves together
against Moses, and against Aaron Ver. 3.
: and yet did most shamefully contradict themselves therein, for in the very
act they were gathered together against the Lord Ver. 11.
; because in resisting them, they resisted his Ordinance: For which cause the
Lord made a new thing, caused the Earth to open her mouth, and swallow them up
quick into Hell: Ver. 30.
and commanded his Servant Moses too, to speak unto the rest of the
Congregation, who were not Confederates with them in the rebellion, to depart
from the tents of these wicked men, and to touch nothing of theirs, lest they
were consumed in all their sins. Ver. 26.


Now, for this very reason it is, that Solomon has here joined and enjoined
the fear of the Lord and the King together; that considering by this example,
that it is impossible for them to fear the Lord, without fearing the King, they
might no more be so impudently wicked, to rebel against their King, and yet
pretend Religion for the same, and the fear of God.

And, 2. For the same reason, he also gives us this seasonable caution, to
meddle not with them that are given to change, or not to be of their party who
enterprise any alteration from Kingly Government, and vary from the Laws and
Statutes of the Lord and the King; lest (by confederation with them in their
Rebellion) we be also consumed in all their sins: for their calamity (says he,
in the verse following) shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them
both? Both Changers from the fear of the Lord, and Changers from the fear of
the King.

And both the Papists and Fanatics are notorious Changes from them both; for
though it be true, they do as unbrotherly dash one against another in their
opinions, as Manasses and Ephraim: Yet they are as firmly agreed together
against the King, or rather the Lord and the King, as they were against Juda;
Isa. 9.21.
for their Combination against the King, is only that in his destruction, they
may the better build up themselves out of the ruins of Gods Government and his
Church: And therefore it comes to pass, that as Christ, the Head of the Church,
Ephesians. 5.23.
was crucified between two Thieves; Mat. 27.38.
so the King, his Vicegerent, for the sake of his Church, is Crucified between
these two Malefactors: by the Papists on the one hand, and by the Fanatics on
the other.

I begin with the Papists, not only because they are thought to Witch ride the
Fanatics into Rebellion; but because they are the most ancient Changers: They
were the first, that changed the Truth of God into a lie. 2 These. 2.
How often has Antichrist and his Satanical Emissaries attempted to change our
Religion into their abominable Idolatry, and to warp it again from its
primitive rule of reformation, with their superstitious vanities, and how often
too have they attempted to bring our Necks again, under the yoke of their
intolerable Tyranny; that they might make a prey of the sat of our Land, to
feed the unsatiable appetites of their Avarice, Pride, and Luxury? They that
have read Fox's Acts and Monuments, and other Ecclesiastical Histories, cannot
be ignorant of what doleful Tragedies they have acted upon this Theater of
England: How often the Whore of Babylon and her brood have endeavored to drown
our Church with the blood of Martyrs: though (contrary to their expectation)
God made their blood to fructify more Flowers in his Garden, Cant. 4.1^. etc.
than the wild blood of the Danes is said to have bred Weeds These weeds (they
say) having (at some time in the year) a bloody juice in them, (like the Indian
Tree Anatardion) and being mostly sound in such places where the Danes are
thought to be slain, are said by the vulgar to have sprung from their blood,
and accordingly called Danes Weed. Howsoever, Sanguis martyrum Semen est
Ecclesiae.
in this Nation. Nor how many desperate stabs they have made at the breast of
our Princes; nor deadly blows at the heart of the State; nor how much life and
vigor they have put into many Insurrections and Rebellions in the bowels of the
Kingdom: Their desperate design in Eighty Eight to cut us all off, root and
branch, from being a Nation, that the name of a reformed Church in England
might be had no more in remembrance, Psalm. 83.4.
did not a little proclaim their inveterate malice against us: But their
Treachery in the Gunpowder Plot, to blow us all up at one blow, did manifest it
to the very life; for that (as one observes) was the very Masterpiece of all
the Policy of Rome and Hell. O merciless cruelty! No Treason like to that,
unless it were the Treason of Satan against the State of man in Paradise, to
blow up all mankind in Adam, the representative of it, at once.

But I am not a renewing any History, to make them the more famous for infamy;
neither need I, they are famous enough for that already: my business is only to
remind you of some chief remarks of their hellish Treasons and Massacres, that
you may be the more wary for the future how you meddle with these Changers; for
notwithstanding all their former frustrations and disappointments, their malice
against us is as incapable of disheartning, as Balaam was in his attempts of
cursing Israel: Let God appear never so often against them, let the Angel of
the Lord stand with a drawn Sword in his hand, they will on yet again. Numb.
22.2 Pet. 2.15, 16.
This was but lately An. Dom. 1678.
too apparent in their horrid Treason, and murderous attempts against the
Sacred person of our now most gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second,
of ever blessed memory, next under God and his Christ our Savior and Prince of
peace.

And as their malice begets cruelty; so their cruelty seldom of never goes
without crast: The Churches enemies are Serpentina Soboles, the seed of the
Serpent. And as the way of a Serpent upon a Rock is unknowable, Prove. 30.18, 19.
so are their ways too of undermining the Church, Neh. 4.11. Exodus 1.10.
craft and cruelty are their chiefest Engines of mischief, not one, but both;
they exercise craft for the sake of their cruelty, that it may wound the deeper
and the more assuredly: ingenium superat vires, Policy makes the Sword of
malice cut keener than strength does: Therefore as the Devil when he intends to
be the greatest Abaddon or Apollyon, a destroyer, Revel. 9.11.
ever joins Reynolds tail to his Lions skin: Ephesians. 6.11.
So his Auxiliaries, those that fight under his Banner, when they intend the
most mischief against the Churches peace and welfare, ever add craft to their
cruelty. And so accordingly these Emissaries of Satan and Antichrist did in
their forementioned plot against his Sacred Majesty, when they murdered The
Trial of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's murderers, at the Kings-Bench-bar, at
Westminster, on Monday the 10th of Feb. An. Dom 1679. Where, upon full evidence
they were convicted, and received sentence accordingly, on Tuesday the next day
solloveing. Printed 1679.
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, one of his Majesty's most Loyal Justices; for they
perpetrated that crying sin lest their hellish Treason should be discovered by
their own confessions, which that worthy Magistrate had lately taken from them:
and the rather, because they did as greatly hate him for his great sincerity in
the True Protestant Religion, as for beng so active and industrious in the
discovery of their Plot. O man! or Prophet shall I term thee, (for thou did
foretell that thou should be the first Martyr, and I hope thou shall be the
last though our Religion will not suffer us to be so wicked, silly and
ridiculous to worship thee as a Saint; yet thy name is to be ever honored for
thy True Loyalty and Fidelity to the Lord and the King. Neither was their craft
less seen in the mode of his murder: One while they dogged him into the fields:
Another while they sent people to spy when he came abroad, that they might
follow him into some dark Alley, or other obscure and unfrequented place, and
there dispatch him. And though their expectation was split in that, yet their
craft and cruelty was still the same; for as he was coming from about St.
Clements Church toward his own house, near Charing Cross, (about 7 or 8 a
Clock at night,) notice being given them of his approach near to
Sommers^t-house, they met him at the back gate, and that under a pretense of
parting a fray, (a counterseit scuffle being made between two of them, a Priest
and another, for the purpose,) for knowing that he was a man always careful to
keep the peace, and punish them that broke it, they thought it a very apt means
to train him into the yard, where (the fray parting of its self) they most
cowardly strangled him, on a sudden, before he had time to put himself into a
posture of defense lest through his valiantness he should have put them all to
the rout. And now having killed his body, in the next place (to wave suspicion
from themselves) they endeavor to kill his reputation, and lay the blame of
this foul murder upon himself; for as soon as opportunity had given them the
convenience to carry him forth, they cast him into a Ditch; where they left
him, with his Gold and Silver in his pocket, and his own Sword thrust through
him: But laid his Glvoes, Stick, and other things upon the bank; that so the
world might conclude, that he was male-contented, and had laid violent hands
upon himself; and his relations to save his Estate, had run him through. Though
all that knew him, knew that he was not at all troubled in mind, or
discontented, but only at their villainy; for fear their hellish treason should
not be discovered soon enough, before it had taken effect to the ruin of his
King and Country. Yet when this was first noised abroad, there was such
strangeness in the report, that (till such time as providence had discovered
their treachery) it filled the whole Nation with wonder, and amazement, and set
all True Loyalists at a stand. O how did the Lord for a while seem to favor
the proceedings of these bloody Assassinates! The children of this world (says
our Savior) are in their Generations wiser than the Children of light. Luke
16.8.
But alas! their greatest wisdom is but foolishness with God: 1 Cor. 1.8.
for thanks be unto his mercy, he quickly frustrated the tokens of these Liars,
and made these Diviners mad he turned their wisemen backward, he destroyed
their wisdom, and made their knowledge foolishness: Isa. 44.25.
He caused these Changers to bring up birds Dr. Oats Mr. Bedlow, and Mr.
Coleman.
to peck out their own eyes. He suffered Satan to delude them with pride They
were so far from contrition, that they made a Narrative of the murder, and
gloried in it as a most Conscientious, Charitable, and Heroic act, etc.
pursuant to the Decrees of the Council of Lattran.
and selfconceitedness for a while, that he might change their glory into the
greater shame, Hosea 4.7.
he took them in their own craftiness like Haman, Esther 7.10.
and made their Counsel to carry them headlong, like Achitophel's to the
Gallows. 2 Samuel 17.23. Job 5.13.


The Pope the Antichrist.
But this punishment was but temporal, which they did most deservedly receive
as they were Changers from the fear of the King; there is a sadder behind, an
eternal one, as they were also Changers from the fear of the Lord: not only in
that they resisted his Ordinance, in resisting the power of his Vicegerent; but
also in that therein they sought the subversion of all his other Doctrine and
Discipline, in this his Church of England, as well as others: For these
Changers were the Emissaries of the Pope, the Lords greatest Adversary and
Opponent; and therefore not unfitly termed (by our Apostle) the man of Sin: 2
These. 2.3.
Nor by St. John the Antichrist. 1 John 2.18.
There be indeed (says he) many other Anti Christ's in the World; every Heathen
is such an Antichrist; he confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh. 2 John 7.
The Turk, every false Religion, and every Heretic is also such an
Antichrist; for though many of them do Historically, and Diabolically confess
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. Mat. 4.11. James 2.19.
Yet they doctrinally deny him Mat. 10.33.
by being ashamed to confess, Mark 8.38.
or by believing in him contrary to his word, the saving of the Soul: Heb.
10.39.
but there is a great deal of difference between these Antichrists, and the
(...). The Antichrist, the man of Sin, and the Son of perdition: This great
Antichrist does not only resist Christ in his Doctrine, like these
Antichrists, but he goes beyond them; he is empatically the Liar, he denies
both the Father and the Son, 1 John 2.22.
and resists them also in their Divine and incommunicable headship and
prerogatives. 1. In their headship, he sits in Christ's Chair, Ezekiel. 37.22.
John 10.16. Ephesians. 4.5, 6.
and makes himself his universal Vicar, and Bishop; another head with him to
oversee the government of his Church, Which is a thing repugnant even to common
reason it self, it inferring both redundancy, and defect in his headship. 1.
Redundancy or superfluity, there being heads sufficient already, besides the
Pope, for external polity. 2. Defect because an humane head is too little for
so great a body, as the universal Church; for it is impossible (as Bishop Jewel
speaks in his Apology) that any mortal should conceive or comprehend in his
mind the whole Church, to govern it; it being of so large extent, and divided
by Seas into so many Countries, therefore the Scripture makes Christ alone the
Head of the Church. Ephesians. 5.23.
Head over all things, (not some things only, but all things) to the Church.
Ephesians. 1.22.
Yet, 2. under this poor and groundless pretense, this deceiver of Nations does
resist him also in his Divine and incommunicable prerogatives, that are
inseparably annexed to his headship. He usurpeth all Christ's power and
Prerogatives over his Church: he as God, sits in the temple of God, showing
himself that he is God; 2 These. 2.4.
and what mortal is there but the Pope that does all this? He most proudly,
impudently, and absurdly unites two distinct Offices, the Kingly and the
Priestly, in himself, which is his due alone, who is first a King, then a
Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedeck, Heb. 7.
he opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; 2 These. 24.
he makes himself King of Kings, he takes upon him to set them up, and put
them down at pleasue. And he usurpeth Christ's Priestly Office too, he also
makes himself the Prince of Pastors, the Bishop of Bishops, yea, the great
Bishop of Souls: He equalizeth his humane traditions to the word of God; he
pleads infallibility, and makes his word de fide in Controversies; and he takes
upon him too to forgive sins, and produce a Pardon. All which (every one
knows, that knows the Scriptures) are the Royal and incommunicable
Prerogatives of the Father and the Son. And what should I say more? Panormitan,
one of the Popes hired Proctors, (as Bishop Jewel Defense of the Apol. Part 2.
p. 95.
observes) says, Christus and Papa faciunt unum consistorium, and excepto
peccato, Papa potest, quicquid Deus ipse potest. Christ and the Pope make one
Consistory, and keep one Court: and sin only excepted, the Pope can do,
whatsover God himself can do.

Now consider this, and then judge whether the Pope be not the (...), the very
Antichrist, the man of Sin indeed? for what is more (...) to Christ than sin?
I am sure that he of all sinners is the greatest Changer of the sear and
Ordinances of the Lord and the King. I be not afraid to publish this; for
before the great and terrible day of the Lord do come, (which cannot be long,
God knows when) the man of Sin must be revealed: 2 These. 2.2, 3.
His pride which at first raised him, shall in the conclusion give him a fall
as low as perdition. The King of France (as we hear) The London Gazitte,
Published by Authority, Paris. March 28. A. D. 1682.
has begun lately to effect it; he has by a perpetual and irrevocable Edict
(which was registered in Parliament the 23 instant) approved and confirmed the
opinion of his Clergy against him, in four very important points. 1. That the
King is Independent in things Temporal; that he cannot be Deposed, nor his
Subjects Absolved of their Allegiance for any cause whatever. 2. That a General
Council is above the Pope, pursuant to the Decrees of the Council of Constance.
3. That the Power of the Pope is to be limited by the Ancient Canons; and that
he cannot do any thing to the prejudice of the Ancient usages, and the
liberties of the Gallican Church. 4. That the Decisions of the Pope in points
of Faith; are not infallible without the consent of the Church. By this he has
showed a most excellent example, for all other Kingdoms and Principalities to
demolish the Popes pride, and supremacy. Whereby without all doubt, he has
purchased more honor, than all his Predecessors have done before him: And we
hope in God, who has the Kings heart in his hand, Prove. 21.1.
that he will persevere, and purchase to himself yet more and more, by a
gradual Reformation of all his Antichristian Doctrines, according to the
Primitive pattern of our Church of England.

For 3. Antichrist deformed the Church by degrees; and it is not likely he
should be reformed without degrees: had a time to fall away, he was not formed
all at once; the mystery of iniquity did at first only begin to work. 2 These.
2.3, 7.
Yet he will tell you that he had his beginning from the Holy Apostle St.
Peter, but marvel not at that, for he is the man of Sin, he treads in the steps
of his Father Lucifer, Isa. 14.13, 14.
he was devoid of the truth from the beginning: And accordingly by St. John (as
you heard before) he is called a Liar. 1 John 2.22.
Nor marvel that his followers have credited him in that report for his coming
is after the working of Satan, with all Power, Signs, and lying Wonders, to
deceive them into unrighteousness: To whom, because they received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved, the Lord has sent strong delusion,
that they might believe a lie, to their damnation. 2 These. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.
For the truth is, from the first Plantation of Christianity in Rome, till the
time of Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, (not Antichrist, but St. Gregory)
when John bishop of Constantinople usurped the title of Universality, there was
no such thing as the name of an Universal Bishop heard of to be in Rome, (and I
suppose no where else in the World) as plainly appears by an Epistle which this
St. Greg. sent to this John Bishop of Constantinople, to reprove him for
usurping that proud and wicked title of Universality; his words are these,
Nullus Gregory lib. 4. Epist. 36.
unquam praedecessorum meorum hoc tam prophano vocabulo uti consensit: There
was never any of my predecessors that would be called by this profane title.
And in another Epistle Gregory lib. 4. Epist. 38.
(having resembled him to Lucifer) he says thus unto him, Tu quid Christo,
Vniversalis Sanctae Ecclesiae capiti, in extremi judiciies dicturus examine,
qui cuncta ejus membra tibimet conaris Vniversalis appellatione supponere: What
answer will thou make in the Trial of the last judgment, unto Christ, the Head
of his Universal Church; that thus by the name of Universal Bishop, seek to
bring under thee all the members of his body? No wonder then, if Antichrist
and his Crew, have endeavored to suppress his works. But to come nearer home,
Eleutherius Fox's Acts and Monuments, p. 146. And Isaacsons Appen. of the
Plantation and Increase of Christianity, in the Isle of Great Britain.
(who became Bishop of Rome A. D. 177.) in a Letter to Lucius, the first
Christian King, (who began his Rule over the Britains, A. D. 170.) upon his
pious request for instructions in Christianity, acknowledges him to be Gods
only Vicar in his own Kingdom. And indeed if no such Testimonies could have
been produced, it must needs be a very Antichristian thing, so much as to
conceit that the holy Apostle St. Peter should be so wicked, as to break any
Canon of the Apostles, who made ont, Canon 36.
that no Bishop under pain of deprivation, should dare to intermeddle beyond
his own bounds, in another Province, as being no ways subject to him.

St. Peter then is free from giving beginning to Antichrist, nor will the
Primitive Bishops allow him his Supremacy: Where then will he fix? What, in
Lucifer? His coming is after the working of Satan, from him he derives his
Pedigree. The times were pure at first, Antichrist then only began to work, he
rose in his mystery f iniquity by degrees; first above Bishops, then above
Patriarchs, then above Councils, then above Kings, then above Scriptures; then
at last, seeing he could mount no higher, he as God, sits him down in the
Temple of God, showing himself that he is God.

I need not plead that time cal's me away to other things, this is enough to
convince any rational man, that the Pope is really the (...), the very
Antichrist, the man of Sin, and the Son of perdition. Who then would be a
Papist? surely none, but those whom the God of this World has blinded: 2. Cor.
4.4.
I know that there is no Religion in the World, has so great a Decoy in it, to
make Carnal men to profess it, as Popery has; it is more self pleasing, and
gives fuller reins to flesh and blood, than any other; but nothing mor does
manifest it to be from the man of Sin. Richard Burton of the Wars in England,
Scotland and Ireland. p. 49.
Mervin Lord Audly and Earl of Castlehaven does give us a very remarkable
instance in this: He was educated in the Protestant Religion, but turned
Papist, to have the more liberty to commit wickedness: in which he grew to so
great an height, that (in the year 1631.) being condemned by his Peers for Rape
and Sodomy, etc. he impudently declared in the presence of some Lords, that as
others had their several delights, some in one thing, some in another; so his
delight was in Damning Souls, by enticing men to such acts as might surely
effect it. And marel not, that some of them have more art to hide their
wickedness; for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light. 2 Cor.
11.13, 14, 15.


1. Therefore let us beware of these false Prophets, and deceitful workers,
that are thus notoriously give to change from the fear of the Lord and the
King; lest we be also inserted with them into the family of Antichrist, and
adopted the Sons of perdition.

2. Let us remember to render unto God, due praise and thankfulness for all his
former benefits, Psalm. 103. Psalm. 68.19.
wherewith he has continually loaded this undeserving Nation, in many
wonderful deliverances of our King and Country from their restless and
unwearied Craft and Cruelty; lest our ingratitude hold his hand from blessing
us with future mercies: For qui non est gratus datis, non est dignus dandis; He
that is not thankful for benefits already received, is not worthy to receive
any more.

Lastly, Let us not forget to pray unto God most earnestly, that he will still
confound all their plots and stratagems, and maugre all their malice, still
protect his Majesty under the shadow of his Wings; Psalm. 57.1.
that he our King may enjoy a long, and prosperous Reign over us; and we his
Subjects may lead a quiet and peaceable life under him, in all godliness and
honesty: For happy is that people that is in such a case: Yea, happy is that
people, whose God is the Lord. Ps. 144.15.


2. For the Fanatics, they bring up the Rear; yet they march not far behind:
Yea, time was when they went before; and disquieted the Nation with this evil,
(the greatest under the Sun) Folly was set in great dignity, and the Rich and
Honorable were detruded into low places: Thinkers and Cobblers, and such like
heaved themselves upon the Horses of their Princes, and made them walk as
servants upon the earth Ecclesiastes 10.6, 7. Pro. 19.10. and 30.22.
. Neither was this the height of their ambition; they fulfilled Mother
Shipton's Prophecy before the time: they called a Parliament of High shoes, to
raze the Palace with Hob-nails; and tread down all Royalty and Loyalty: They
plucked the King from his Throne, and set upon it no better than a Brewer. Yea,
they were tickled so much with pride and Covetousness, that they did not only
attempt as the Papists did, but they actually made their King a Martyr. Et quid
non mortalia pectora cogis Auri sacra fames? And what wickedness is there, that
the love of money does not tempt the hearts of men unto? Covetousness is
rightly styled the root of all evil; the King being gone, they quickly changed
Monarchy (Gods own Government) into Oligarchy; whereby they made the Common
wealth our Commonwoe; both by changing the order of nature into Anarchy and
Confusion, and giving reins to their licentiousness to play Rex's both in
Church and State.

As, 1. Having cantonized Hist. Independ. Complete. Part 1. p. 89.
the Kingdom amongst themselves, ( Prideaux the Postmaster being King of the
West Saxons) and murdered their King to maintain their unjust possessions, they
make a re-entry (as it were) upon what they had formerly usurped, to lay the
faster hold: and make new divisions too of the best places and preferments in
the Nation: They imprisoned the Gentry, and reduced Hist. Independ. Complete.
Part 1. p. 65.
them to the condition of conquered Slaves, they plundered, and left them
almost quite naked, and enforced free quarter from all, and would not suffer
any to be Master, so much as of his own Family. Yea, these Harpyes, these
Lycanthropi possessed themselves of the inheritance and Estates of all, whom
they at pleasure would make a Delinquent, not sparing so much as the Dead Hist.
Independ. Complete. Part 1. p. 128, 129, 130.
from Sequestration; as it fares with the head, so with the members; when they
had once destroyed the King, they make all true Loyalists both Clergy and Laity
take up their Cross, and follow him, as he did his Savior. Not unlike the
savage Tartars, who when their great Cham dies, cast many of his dearest
friends after him.

For, 2. These Lord-Danes, (with the vulgar Lurdanes,) killed their King, not
only for the sake of his Inheritance, and his Nobles, etc. but also for the
sake of the Churches Patrimony. For all their fine words and fair speeches,
they served not the Lord Jesus, but their own belly Romans 16.17, 18.
. The Presbyterians have much to answer for this: For though they knew They could
not choose but know it, (if Envy and Covetousness had not blinded their eyes) it
being not only evident by Gods general rule, 1 Cor. 14.40. the perpetual Law of
Order, which says Aristole is ipsa ratio, reason it self: but also thoroughly
proved (over and over) both by other Scriptures, and Antiquity.
that Episcopacy was the Primitive Government, yet they made the world believe
that they could not endure the order and title of a Bishop. And why so? The
reason is, because it was not suitable to their changing; they must have some
hypocritical pretense or other, or else they could not have changed. Oliver
Cromwell taught them an example, he (as you have heard) would not be called a
King, no, by no means; yet he would be more than a King: So these; though they
would not have the name of a Bishop, no, by no means; yet they would have been
more than Bishops, if they could: for as soon as the King (their Protector) was
once removed, they actually took possession of as much lands and livings of
theirs as they could. No Bishop, no King, was the wise saying of King James:
and no King, no Bishop, has been seen to be as true as that. But the torrent
of their Covetousness did not stop here, it also wafted them over into the
fairest Vineyards of the inferior Clergy; which (if they, the right owners,
demonstrated themselves to be True Loyalists, men that feared the Lord and the
King, by refusing to take their unreasonable, and abominable League and
Covenant) they took into their possession, as readily and as jollily, as Ahab,
when he took possession of the fair Vineyard of Naboth 1 King. 21.19.
.

But 3. The licentiousness, Anarchy and confusion of these Changers is most
perspicuous in the subversion of the Churches Discipline, and all Gods Laws and
Ordinances therein; for as disorder in the first Wheel of a Watch or Clock,
makes confusion in all the rest: so Monarchy (Gods own Government) being once
changed into Oligarchy and Tyranny, there quickly followed a change of all Gods
other Laws and Ordinances in the whole sphere of Religion and Government: uno
errore concesso, mill sequuntur. As when Cain had once killed Abel, the
wickedness of the Old World began to flow in apace, like so many Waves one upon
the neck of another Genesis 6.
: So these Blunderbuss Zamzummims Deuteronomy. 2.20.
, when they had once destroyed the Lords Anointed, grew desperate, over Shoos
over Boots, (as they say) they did not care what they did; they became men of
Gigantick-like wickedness, Rebels against Heaven, (...), fighters against God;
they turned themselves in the next place directly against the Lord himself, and
his Church: they took as much delight to oppose God in the order and government
of his Church, as Satan does to fish in troubled Waters. Their new modelled
Commonwealth must have a new fashioned Religion to uphold it.

As, 1. They opposed God in his order, by changing the primitive Government of
his Church by Episcopacy, into a new invented one of their own, called
Presbytery: English Athenians all for novelties; they thought themselves such
perfect workmen in Gods Vineyard, that they scorned to be guided by Gods
general rule of decency and order 1 Cor. 14.40.
; they made a Lesbian rule of their own, called a Directory, for the public
worship of God, appointed (contrary to their knowledge Marshal, (one of
Cromwels Journey-men Priests,) declared against all use of Common Prayer by
others, and yet married his own Daughter with the same Book, and a Ring, and
gave for reason, that the Statute Establishing that Liturgy was not yet
repealed, and he was loath to have his Daughter Whored, and turned back upon him
for want of legal marriage. Hist. Independ. Complete. Part 1. p. 80.
and conscience) to be used instead of our Common Prayer, in opposition to Gods
command to glorify him with one mind, and one mouth Romans 15.6.
. And (as our martyred Sovereign observes in his 'EIKON ASILIK) they also set
forth old Catechisms, and Confessions of Faith new dressed: importing as much
(says he) as if there had been no sound and clear doctrine of faith in this
Church, before some four or five years consultation had matured their thoughts
touching their first principles of Religion. Moreover, as Jeroboam (answerable
to his Idolatry,) made Priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of
the sons of Levi 1 Kings 12.31.
: So these Changers from the fear of the Lord and the King, (answerable to
their confusion,) silenced the true Clergy of God, and chose the very scum of
the Nation to preach in their room; in opposition to the Lords Decree and
Ordinance, that no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called
of God, as was Aaron Heb. 5.4.
. Yea, they hated Gods Clergy so vehemently, that they contradicted them even
in their very appearel; they preached in Cloaks, etc. in opposition to their
orderly and Canonical vestments. And what should I say more? They slighted Gods
Ordinances so much, that they first caused the Banes of Marriage to be cried in
the Marketplace, and then the parties to be married by Justices of the Peace,
in private houses; in opposition to Gods Ministers, at Church. O what must one
day be the judgment of these hare-brain'd wretches! That set no more by Gods
Ordinances; especially, that contemn the holy State of Marriage, so honorable
in all Heb. 13.4.
, instituted by God himself in Paradise Genesis 2.24. Mat. 19.5, 6.
, the emblem of Christ and his Church Ephesians. 5.32. Rev. 19.7.
, yea, honored by Christ, our Savior with his first miracle John 2.11.
. Vzziah, for all he was a King, a person not only Civil, but Sacred too; yet
came (we know) to a very fearful end, for invading the Priests Office 2 Chronicles.
26.
. Judge ye then, what must be the end of inferior Magistrates.

But this is not all, they did also most irreverently receive the Sacrament,
sitting, in opposition to St. Paul's most reverent gesture of kneeling Ephesians. 3.14.
. Though even common reason teach them, that so great a duty, and sublime a
mystery must in proportion have the humblest gesture: Especially, when as every
man that expects to be exalted with Christ to glory, must bow the Knee at his
very name; in Commemoration, that God for his wonderful humility upon the
Cross, has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name Phil.
2.8, 9, 10.
. But alas! Their minds were so bent upon their malice and changing, that they
had not the least regard to Scripture, or reason: Or if they had, it was only
to Crucify them, as the Jews our Savior, because they judged them to be
against their profit; or at least to rack them, till they spoke the sense of
their own vain and foolish imaginations.

And therefore these Enthusiasts run on desperately, without any fear or wit in
their changing; they proceed farther, and despise God next in his Church, his
holy-house or Sanctuary; which, though it be a place commanded him to be
separated, (as his day) from all common usages, and appropriated to him by a
solemn dedication Exodus 25.8.
: yet they put no difference between it and their own common and profane
dwellings, as we are commanded to do 1 Cor. 11.22.
. They changed their private houses into public meeting places, under a
pretense of godliness, and turned the house of God into a place of merchandise,
and a Den of Thieves, with their carnal business: in opposition to Gods Laws in
the Old Testament Dut. 12.4, 5. Levit. 19.20.
, and in opposition too to Christ's Laws in the New Mat. 21.13. John 2.16.17.
; who both by precept and example has confirmed the relative holiness of the
Temple under the Law, and the reverence due unto the same, to be in our
Churches, to all succeeding Generations, now, and for ever, Mark 11.17. Is it
not written, my house shall be called of all Nations the house of Prayer? but
ye have made it a Den of Thieves. Mark the words: Christ does not say, my House
(in the present tense) is called of all Nations the house of Prayer; for that
could not be, because the Gentiles were not then converted: But behold! Is it
not written, my House (in the future tense) (...), shall be called of all
Nations the house of Prayer? not only of the Jews, but of the Gentiles too,
when they are once converted, and established in the Faith: When the hedge of
separation between Jew and Gentile is broken down, and God shall be worshipped
in all places, or Nations, even now, and for ever, in all circumstances, and
varieties of time and Nation, to the end of the World.

Yet notwithstanding this, they would justify themselves in their
profanation, most impudently and blasphemously affirming that the Church, or
house of God has no more holiness in it than a Barn or a Stable. And for
confirmation, these blind Pharisees would therein also dishonor God in his
holy Ordinances, both in prayer, and preaching. For, 1. though in the time of
Divine service, they would seem to honor God by being uncovered in prayer; yet
at other times they would despise it, and prefer preaching above it. And, 2. in
Preaching they did no less contradict themselves, for though they did so much
extol it above prayer, yet as soon as the Text was delivered, they would most
irreverently put on their Hats, and be covered: as if Preaching or Prophesying
were not Gods Ordinance, as well as Prayer; because that Prayer is the
principal Though preaching may seem to be more principal than prayer, in regard
that in preaching God speaks to man, and in prayer man to God; yet prayer is
the princpal, in two respects: 1. In regard that in prayer man speaks to God by
the mediation of God, Christ, God-man; whereas in preaching God speaks to man,
only by man, like our selves. 2. In regard of the frequency of the duty
commanded: wherefore Gods house is called the house of prayer, not of preaching.
. I am sure St. Paul has taught us to honor Christ our Head, by uncovering
our heads in both, Prayer or Prophesying or Preaching 1 Cor. 11.3, 4.
. For the word for Prophesying in the Original does signify either Prophesying
or Preaching indifferently; Prophesying is but a miraculous Preaching, and
Preaching an ordinary Prophesying: and no marvel, for God is especially present
in all his Ordinances, in one as well as another; all are his, without
exception. Be not deceived, God is not mocked Gal. 6.7.
: He will not be served by piecemeals, he will have all, or none Mat. 23.23. 1
These. 5.23.
; he that honors God in one duty, and not in another, dishonors him in all
James 2.10.
. Yet for all this, these proud Clowns did therein add profaneness to
profaneness; they would not stick to dishonor even man himself, for the Lords
sake: For while the Sermon was in delivering, they would be covered before
their Betters, though in the very act their Betters themselves were uncovered:
But as soon as the Sermon was ended, then they would put off their Hats, and do
obeisance to their Superiors; as if man were to be respected more than God; or
as if God (the jealousy of whose honor burns like fire) was best served
when he is the most dishonored: Or else perhaps also for joy that the Sermon
was ended, for many times they would depart, before the Blessing was pronounced.

But from whence came this blind devotion of theirs, this prophanenessin the
very abstract? You have heard it already, from infidelity: God is a Spirit
invisible, and can only be seen by the eye of Faith Heb. 11.1, 6.
. Which eye these wanting, it is not to be admired, that they should neglect
the honor of his infinite and adorable Majesty, which they could not see, but
only Historically: Especially, being seduced therein, by the pernicious
doctrine and examples of Old Olilivers Journey-man Priests; who captivated
their judgments, teaching them by an implicit faith, jurare in verba magistri,
to pin their opinions upon their sleeves.

And as they taught these this, and other hellish lessons how to change from
the fear of the Lord and the King: So they boasted Hist. Iudepend. Complete.
Part 2. p. 149. and p. 150.
that they had many Agents in France, who under color of Merchandise, vented
their Anti-Monarchical and Anarchical Tenets among the poor Peasants and
Hugenots, which they also bragged, prospered well there, etc.

O what must one day be the judgment of such profane men! the judgment of
these blind guidesfor fanatacizing the blind multitude, must without all doubt
be very much the greatest, as having not only their own sins to answer for, but
the sins of their Auditors Mat. 5.19.
: yet their judgment shall be alike in this, they shall both fall into the
Ditch Mat. 15.14.
: They both dishonored the Lord here, both in his Sanctuary, and in his
Ordinances; therefore neither of them both shall have the honor at last, to
come within the true Sanctum Sanctorum, the seat of the blessed 1 Samuel 2.30.
.

But I must remember, that my business is not to stand upon the confutation of
the errors of these Changers: neither need I, they are so notoriously bad, that
they confute themselves: but only to give you some instances of the sad effects
of their changing, that ye may be as cautious for the future how ye meddle with
these Changers, as the former: for you have seen how they first opposed the
Lord in the King, and how they next opposed him, in almost all his other Laws
and Ordinances; shuck the very foundation of our Church, and put all things
therein out of frame. Yea, they banished and contemned even the Lords-Prayer it
self; because (as our Martyred Sovereign says in his divine meditations EIKON
ASILIK
) it is the warrant and Original pattern of all set Liturgies in the Christian
Church. And what should I say more? They taught for doctrines the commandments
of wicked men, besieging God (as it were) with affronts and indignities, merely
out of spite to the True Loyalist and Conformist, because they had used those
Divine Laws and Ordinances before out of love and fear to the Lord and the King.

Now, that they might uphold this new Religion of theirs, (answerable to their
new fashioned Commonwealth) from being cast down, by the great visibility of
those evils which they committed in their changing, they covered them so
artificially with a form of Godliness, that the rude multitude were so far from
discovering them, that they believed all that they said to be Gospel: And
accordingly, they were as obedient unto them, as that rabble of the Essens
among the Jews were to Judas of Galilee Acts 5.36, 37.
, or rather as many others among them also were to the Old Scribes and
Pharisees; for the truth is, these pretended Reformers, though in some things
they do far exceed the Pharisees in hypocrisy, yet in many things (which
occasion offers to speak of now more fully and together) they do resemble them
so exactly, that you would think that the souls of the Pharisees were entered
into their bodies, by a Pythagorean Transmigration. The Pharisees were the most
strict and precise Sect of the Jews, they desired to be counted more holy than
any, the only Saints upon earth, and did accordingly separate themselves from
the rest of the Church, and from thence they were called Pharisees. Yet they
were only outwardly so, their inward parts burnt altogether with deceit and
hypocrisy; they were like unto whited Sepulchers, beautiful without, and
within full of uncleanness Mat. 23.27, 28.
. They were great Zealots in Religion, yet they were blind, their zeal was
without knowledge, it consisted chiefly in persecuting Christ and his Church
Phil. 3.6.
: They were great pretenders to righteousness, the only Puritans of that age.
They were men of a sad Countenance, they would fast often, and show great
Austerity. And sometimes too they would seem very charitable, and give much
Alms to the Poor: but their evil ends robbed their holy actions of their
reward: for they did not do them for conscience sake, that they might glorify
God, and lay up for themselves Treasures in heaven; but only in policy, for
their covetousness, and vain glory's sake; that they might have the better
excuse at other times to lay up for themselves the more Treasures upon Earth,
and get the greater applause in being seen of men, Mat. 6. They were also great
Enthusiasts; like Cromwell, When Cromwell (contrary to his vows and
protestations made to the King) kept him close prisoner in Carisbrook Castle;
he affirmed the spirit would not let him keep his word. When contrary to the
public faith, they murdered him; they pretended, they could not resist the
motions of the spirit. Sua cuique Deus sit dira libido. This Hobgoblin serves
all turns, etc. Hist. Independ Complete. Part 3. p. 23.
and the five lights Hist. Independ. Part 2. p. 152, 153.
of Walton, they pretended (especially such of that Sect as were Scribes) to
have great skill in the Scriptures, and new revelations of the Spirit. And like
Sunday after Easter Day, six Preachers militant at White Hall tried the
patience of their hearers, one calling up another successively; at last the
Spirit of the Lord called up Oliver Cromwell, who standing a good while with
lifted up eyes, as it were in a Trance, and his neck a little inclining to one
side, as if he had expected Mahomets Dove to descend and murmur in his Ear; and
sending forth abundantly the groans of the Spirit, spent an hour in prayer, and
an hour and an half in a Sermon. In his prayer he desired God to take off from
him the Government of this mighty people of England, as being too heavy for his
Shoulders to bear: An audacious, ambitious, and hypocritical imitation of
Moses. It is now reported of him, that he pretends to inspirations; and that
when any Great or Weighty matter is propounded, he usually retireth for a
quarter or half an hour, and then returns and delivers out the Oracles of
the spirit: surely the spirit of John Leyden will be doubled upon this man.
Hist. Independ. Complete. Part 2. p. 153, 154.
Cromwell too they were much for preaching, but they said and did not; they
would not undergo any burden of self-denial, themselves, but they made them to
hang very weighty and grievous to be born, on the shoulders of their Auditors,
Mat. 23. Moreover, they lenghtened out their prayers with vain repetitions,
thinking to be heard for their much babbling: And made long prayers too, both
out of vain glory, to be seen of men; and for a color, to hide their
oppression, in devouring the Houses or Estates even of the Fatherless and
Widow. For prevention of which our Savior teaches his Disciples and us how to
pray, in a short pithy and set form of Prayer, Mat. 6. and Luke 11. Besides,
they were superstitiously zealous in keeping the Sabbath, and often quarrelled
with our Savior for breaking it, though it were only in works of mercy and
necessity: And yet they were as great prophaners of the Temple, they made Gods
house a house of Merchandise, and a Den of Thieves; for which they were as
sharply reproved by our Savior, in that they would offer to mock God in his
Law, which joyneth them together, commanding us to reverence his Sanctuary, as
well as to keep his Sabbaths Levit. 19.30.
. And they made a conscience too of smaller matters, as of Ceremonies; but
omitted the weightier matters of the Law, as judgment, mercy, etc. And what
should I add more? they were also Proud, and Censorious, great justifiers of
themselves, and condemners of all others Luke 18.10.


With these, and such like specious and hypocritical shows of holiness, they so
blinded the rude multitude, that their word was to them of as great authority,
as Aristotle's ipse dixit among his Scholars: and therefore when the Officers
were sent to attach Christ, though they were convinced by his invincible
sayings that they ought to become Christians, yet they durst not follow him
without the approbation of the Pharisees; for that was the rule given to
restrain them, have any of the Pharisees believed on him John 7.48.
? And no marvel, for Satan himself when he would bewitch, puts on Samuels
Mantle 1 Samuel 28.14.
; he is transformed into an Angel of light, when he would deceive the simple:
Therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the
Ministers of Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works, 2 Cor.
11.14, 15.

But First, before God made their end answerable to their own works, he used
them as a Rod to scourge us for ours: We were a sinful Nation, a people laden,
and hardened with iniquity; God did strive to win us by all means and mercies,
no less than he did with the Old Word 2 Pet. 2.5.
, but nothing would serve the turn, therefore being weary (as it were, with
striving Genesis 6.
,) he that can bring the greatest good out of the greatest evil, seeing that
our sins were now fully ripe, finished, and come to an height by an horrid
Regicide and Rebellion, made use of these Changers to execute his wrath and
Vengeance upon us; that so (as our martyred Sovereign says most piously, and
judiciously in his Divine Meditations EIKON ASILIK
) he might reap that glory in our calamity, which we robbed him of in our
prosperity. 1. By suffering them to martyr our King, (as the good King Josiah
was taken away by a violent death, for the sins of Judah Lam. 4.20. (in the
vulgar Latin it is captus est in pec catis nostris) compared with 2 Chronicles.
35.25.
: that so his servant and Vicegerent being removed, (who like Moses stood in
the Gap between the sins of his people and Gods judgments) he might the more
freely power out the vials of his wrath upon us: Therefore we find that the
want of a King, (especially such a King as ours) is threatened by God as a
grievous calamity, and inflicted for the punishment of a peoples wickedness.
Now they shall say, we have no King, because we feared not the Lord; what then
shall a King do to us Hos. 10.3. 1 Samuel 12.25.
? The remotion of our King was but the beginning of our sorrows; for, 2.
Behold! then the Lord, the Lord of Hosts did also take away from three
flourishing Kingdoms the stay and the staff, the whole stay of Bread, and the
whole stay of Water; all our Lands and livings; our Mighty Men, and our Men of
War, our Judges, our Clergy, our Prudent and our ancient; our honorable men,
our Counselors, our cunning Artificers, and our eloquent Orators. And then
also he gave Children to be our Princes, and Babes to rule over us. And then
too he suffered us to be oppressed, every one by his Neighbor; and our
childish Rulers to behave themselves proudly against the Ancient, and the Base
against the Honorable Isa. 3.
. And what should I say more? Our Mount Sion was also then desolate, and Foxes
walked upon it. And finally, all our joy too was then turned into mourning; so
that then well might be renewed that lamentation which the Church made for
Josiah, the Crown is fallen from our Head: Woe unto us that we have sinned!
Lam. 5.15, 16, 18.

But now Secondly, God having (for twelve years together, suffered them (as our
Martyred Sovereign prophetically speaks in his Divine Meditations EIKON AS
ILIK.
) to be deluded with the prosperity of their wickedness, made their end
according to their own works indeed; for (blessed be his mercy) having (for so
long time) used them, as a rod of correction to humble us for our sins, in the
School of his severe judgments, Psa. 89.32. Prove. 22.15.
that we might be sure to learn Righteousness Isa. 26.29.
; out of indignation to see his Laws so trampled upon and despised, he straight
throws the rod into the fire, and in despite of all their malice, post varios
casus, post tot discrimina rerum, stretches forth his hand of Providence upon
our now most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, (the same hand,
which before had preserved him in all his various troubles and misfortunes) and
brings him in again, (and that in peace, both as a manifesto of his own good
pleasure, and of his Vicegerents being a Prince of Peace) and restores him to
his own inheritance, his fathers Crown, Throne and Scepter: That he might
execute his wrath upon these rebellious Changers; restore us to our ancient
Laws, and Liberties; and set all things to rights again, both in Church and
State.

All which (thanks be to God) by his good Government he has accordingly done.
And in order to the latter, (which was the principal end of his Restoration)
he has most justly punished some of the chief offenders with Death, for
example to the rest, whom he did not utterly destroy; but in obedience to his
Lords commandment Prove. 20.26.
, most wisely scatter up and down the Nation, for a greater Curse Mat. 15.14.
Hos. 4.17.
: as Cain for murdering his brother Abel, became a Fugitive and a Vagabond in
the Earth; and driven from the face or presence of God, or ( Buxtorf. (...)
as the Original words for Vagabond and Fugitive do signify) accurfed, or
Excommunicated from the society of his Church Genesis 4.12, 14.
. Or as the Jews (who were Typified therein) for Crucifying Christ, the Lord of
Glory, are to this day accursed and scattered abroad (as so many Vagabonds)
over the face of the Earth Mat. 27.25. James. 1.1.
: so these rebellious Changers, and Fanatics, e for murdering his Vicegerent,
King Charles the First, our glorious Lord, are Accursed and Excommunicated from
the society of Gods people, or his Church; and justly dispersed into several
parts of the Nation, according to their various Factions, Sects and Schisms.

And, 2. As they are thus scattered up and down the Nation, for a Curse and a
Judgment unto themselves: so they are suffered to dwell amongst us, no less for
a blessing unto us. 1. To set us off, and make us shine the brighter, as the
Foil does the Diamond; for the manifestation of the True Loyalist and
Conformist; there must be heresies among you, (says the Apostle) that they
which are approved may be made manifest among you 1 Cor. 11.19.
. 2. To try and prove us, as the Canaanites were left with Israel in the Land
of Promise, to be Pricks in their Eyes, and Thorns in their Sides, to make them
stick the closer unto God Numb. 33.55. Josh. 23.13. Judge. 2.3.
. Finally, to make us savor our peace with perpetual delight and complacency;
that as the peace which we now enjoy, was at first ingratiated Desiderata diu
magis place^t.
unto us by a long desire: so it may still continue in the same perfection, by
having such examples among us, to remind us of our former bondage and
tribulation.

Well then, since we have such a perfect peace, and order in all things both in
Church and State, that I may say (with a safe conscience) that our condition
(as far as I can possibly under stand;) is more happy than any Nations under
the Sun; let us be wise, and keep our selves well, while we are well, (if we
know when we are well) in the fear of the Lord and the King: and no more
disturb our own quiet, by meddling with them that are given to change.

In which words we must observe this difference, that it is one thing to
change, and another thing to be given to change: the first denotes only a
single act, and if it proceed no farther, it is most commonly a remarkable sign
of a mutation from the worse to the better; our Lord himself, (who changes not
Mal. 3.6.
) did thus change the Law into the Gospel, legal Types and shadows into good
things to come Heb. 10.1.
. And with the Law, he also changed the customs which Moses delivered, into the
customs of the Gentiles 2. Cor. 17. Rev. 21.5.
: as for example, he not only changed the Judaical custom of falling down to
worship, into ours of bowing, but (to show the sublimity of the Gospel above
the Law, the earthliness of the one, and the heavenliness of the other Gal.
4.9. Col. 2.14.
: He also changed their custom of discalceation or putting off the Shoes, or
Sandals in token of reverence when they went to the house of God Ec lesiastes
5.1. Exodus 3.5. Acts 7.33.
, into ours of putting off the Hat, or uncovering the head, in token of honor
to Christ, our Head 1 Cor. 11.3, 4.
.

For these words (which are too often mistaken by the weak) do clearly express
Christ's will in this change, though St. Paul did then only begin to effect it;
(as all Reformations are wrought by degrees) for there was no such custom as
this, of uncovering the head, established as yet among the Corinthians, nor in
any of the Churches of God Ver. 16.
: the only custom then extant, to pay reverence by, to God in his Sanctuary and
Ordinances, was that of discalceation among the Jews; from whom the Corinthians
(they being then in St. Paul's absence frequently among them, to supplant the
new founded truth,) had without all doubt learned this custom to put off their
Shoes, whilst their heads at the same time were covered in their holy
Assemblies. Wherefore St. Paul (to make way for a thorough Reformation) as
before he had commended them for keeping Christ's Ordinances, as he delivered
them Ver. 2.
: so now having reproved them for dishonouring of Christ their Head, in being
covered, etc. in their holy Assemblies, lest he should mar all again by his
severity, does endeavor to remove from them all matter of contention, by
leaving them to their own choice of these customs, Whether they would give God
reverence by the custom of uncovering the head, which was to take place; or
whether by the custom of discalceation, or putting off the Shoes, which as yet
was not laid aside, he left them to their own freedom: he had rather indeed
that they would have accepted of the former, yet as the case now stood, he did
not much matter whether, so long as God as yet had his due honor in either.
And for the same reason too he took Timothy and Circumcised him, because of the
Jews Acts 16.3.
. And so also, though he was free from all men, yet (the Church being but yet
in its Infancy) he became servant to all, both Jew and Gentile, that he might
gain the more unto Christ 1 Cor. 9.19. to ver. 24.
. But now the Church is settled, and grown to a perfect man, we must stand fast
in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and not be entangled again
with the yoke of Bondage: We must no more use the Judaical custom of
discalceation, and cover our heads in Gods house and Ordinances, nor any more
be Circumcised; if we do, behold, (as the same Apostle has also taught us)
Christ shall profit us nothing Gal, 5.1, 2.
: For so we shall be debtors to the whole Law Verse. 3.
, and consequently concluded under its Curse, eternal wrath Gal. 3.10.
. This change therefore was good, superlatively good to those that have
interest therein 2 Cor. 3.6.
: God is to be ever blessed, in that the Priesthood being changed, there was
made of necessity a change also of the Law, Heb. 7.12.

And, 2. Time was too when we changed the Romish Religion into ours, according
to the Primitive rule of Reformation Mat. 19.8.
, because they had first changed it from the unerring rule of Gods word:
Therefore there was a necessity of this change also; lest otherwise by not
coming out of her, we partake of her sins, and receive of her Plagues, Rev.
18.4.

But the second, to be given to change, is always a true sign of a mutation
from the better to the worse: Neither does it at any time denote a single act
only, but always an evil habit or disposition of mind: it is a product of the
natural man, which is always greedy of novelties. And such were our Changers:
they were taken with novelties (as our martyred Sovereign EIKON ASILIK.
again most wittily observes) like Children with babies, very much, but not
very long: they were possessed with the evil spirit of Fanaticism, and
therefore must needs be restless in their condition: as a man distempered with
a Fever, is always desirous to change his place, though it be never so soft and
easy, till by his tumbling and tossing, he has made it hard indeed: So
Fanatics are never satisfied with their condition, let the times be never so
good, till they have made them as bad as may be, with their changing: We have
lately seen that they did as much injury both in Church and State by their
frantic zeal and curiosity, as an Ape in a Glass shop, move and remove till
they had marred all. And how often too, since our last blessed Reformation,
have our old Fanatics or their spawn troubled Authority to suppress their
Conventicles, from rising and seeking a change.

Most wisely therefore has Solomon given us this seasonable Caution to meddle
not with them that are given to change, viz. not only, (though chiefly) to
meddle not, or have any hand at all with them in their changing, but also (to
that end) to have as little society Evil communication (you know) corrupts
good manners; have a care therefore of making any your familiar friend, but
them that truly fear the Lord and the King.
with them otherwise as in prudence we can, unless it be to reprove them; lest
by their good words and fair speeches they at length deceive us, as they
themselves are deceived Romans 16.18. 2 Timothy 3.13.
: turn our hearts from fearing the Lord and the King: decoy us into their
Faction, under the pretense of a godly party; and so make our folly (in
stirring up strife and contention) as manifest to the world, as their own.
Whence Solomon also tells us, that it is an honor for a man to cease from
strife: But every fool will be meddling Pro. 20.3.
. The effect for the cause; It is an honor for a man to cease from such
Changers and changing, because that cannot be without strife and contention;
with whom to meddle is therefore a great argument of folly, as it is in them to
be given to change Prove. 10.23.
. They are such Sots as well as sinners, that Changelings themselves (whom the
world counts fools in the deepest grain) do seem to take their name from them.
I know some will tell you that Changelings are so called, from children being
changed by Fairies in the time of Popery; but that at the best is but a vulgar
error, or an Old Wives story: It is more likely that Changelings, (to
demonstrate the greatness of their folly and childishness) do borrow their name
from these Changers, that are given to change; because they resemble them so
much in natural folly and childishness. And accordingly the Apostle compares
those that meddle with them (which is in effect the same, as to be given to
change) to Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait
to deceive Ephesians. 4.14.
And semblably too, St. James (to show their weakness and great want of wisdom)
compares them to Water, (than which there is nothing less apt to keep its
bounds) he that wavereth (says he) is like a wave of the Sea, driven with the
wind and tossed James 1.6.
, yea a double-minded man (says he) is unstable in all his ways Verse. 8.
.

Since then, a man cannot meddle with these Changers, without betraying much
weakness, folly, and childishness, ye a madness in stirring up the fire of
contention about his ears, till his own peace and honor be consumed in the
flame; we ought in prudence to be so much the more wary how we meddle with them
any more, especially, when as they lie in wait to beguile unstable souls, (as
the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty 2 Cor. 11.3.
) that they make them as cursed children as themselves 2 Pet. 2.14.
. Ye cannot be too wary of them; they will compass Sea and Land to make one
Proselyte, and when he is made, they make him (if it were possible) twofold
more the child of Hell than themselves Mat. 23.15.
. Yea, they will use all means both fair and foul to win you to their party:
sometimes they will speak great swelling words of vanity 2 Pet. 2.18.
; and sometimes again they will flatter you with their deceitful tongue Psalm.
52.4.
. But believe them not, for it is but to devour you, and make your end as woeful
as their own Prove. 26.25, 28.
: They will promise you as great honor and preferment as Balack did Balaam
Numb. 22.37.
, if you will but join with them in defying, and working mischief against the
True Loyalist; but yet (I say) believe them not, for it is but to Curse you
with as much shame and confusion, as they are blessed with true praise that
fear the Lord and the King. And finally, if nothing will serve the turn, they
have one pretense still in reserve, which they think will never fail them,
(their greatest Decoy to Rebellion) they will tell you, (with much confidence
and boasting) that they are Custodes Libertatis Angliae, Keepers of the Liberty
of England: and if you will be sure to meddle, or have a hand with them in
their changing, you shall not fail to be made partakers thereof, and have as
much liberty as you can possibly wish or desire. Whenas behold, O ye Fanatics!
even some of you your selves have seen by woeful experience, that it is but the
easilier to overcome you, and bring you under the greater slavery and bondage.

Ye therefore beloved, (...) (Says Hesiod in his Book Opera and Dies) even a
Fool will bewise, when by his suffering he has felt his folly. What fools then
must they needs be, whom experience it self cannot teach wisdom?
seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away with
the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness 2 Pet. 3.17.
: This caution of the Wisemans, to meddle not with them that are given to
change, is a duty (you see) of no small concern, when as Gods will is to have
it fastened in our memories with so many a precept. We must therefore follow
what the Wiseman again advises us unto, meddle not with him that flattereth or
enticeth with his lips Prove. 20.19.
. And the Apostles Counsel is no less to be observed: He does pour out his very
bowels in this respect, Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause
divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them Romans 16.17
. It Is true, Changes, Divisions and Offenses must needs come; God (that
changes not) sometimes changes the times and the seasons: he sometimes
removes Kings, and sometimes sets up Kings Dan. 2.21. Ecclesiastes 3.
. To what end? for the punishment of a sinful Nation; for the trial and
probation of the True Loyalist; and for the manifestation of his own supreme
power and authority: yet ye must have a special care that ye be not any Authors
of or in them, for there is a woe pronounced (by our Savior) unto him through
whom they come Mat. 18.7. Luke 17.1.
.

O therefore stand to your Principles, be ye steadfast in the faith: let the
times change as they will; yet be sure to have no hand in them: But know the
right way of your Salvation, and be unmovable therein, as constant as a Die,
which ever falls upon a firm basis. Gad no more about to change your ways, lest
God bring you again into Egypt, and change your glory into shame Jer. 2.26.
. Let not the Papists beguile you of your reward, in their voluntary humility,
and worshipping of Angels Col. 2.18.
, nor the Fanatics, with their Satanical and Parisaical delusions: But in as
much as they have only a form of godliness, and deny the power thereof both in
their lives and doctrine, from such turn away. And in all your passage through
the Waves of this troublesome World, swim ye directly between them both, right
down the Silver Stream of Orthodoxness and True Loyalty; that ye may not split
your felves upon any of those two dangerous Rocks, the Scylla of Popery, and
the Charybdis of Fanaticism; but arrive safely at last into the haven of
everlasting peace.

And, O that the Papists, and Fanatics themselves too, would but consider in
this their day, the things that belong unto their peace, (before they be hid
from their eyes Luke 19.42.
;) then certainly they could never so much as desire a change any more: for
when had we the purity of Religion more entire? when was the Nation better
settled? and the Church more primitively governed? when had we more liberty and
property? and when did we sit under our Vines and Figg trees more peaceably? O
fortunatos nimium bona si sua nossent Anglicolas! Thou art so fortunate, O
England, if thou would but know it, that many are surfeited even with their
own happiness: the Papists envy at thy prosperity, and the Fanatics are so
glutted with thy temporal blessings, that like Jesurun they begin to kick, and
forsake the Lord and the King Deuteronomy. 32.15.
. God has so loaded them with his benefits Psa. 68.19.
, that they are restless like sick folks, and desire nothing more than a
change, that they may return into Egypt, to lighten them again Numb. 14.4.
.

But O ye foolish people, and unwise! What, do ye thus requite the Lord Deuteronomy.
32.6.
? know ye not, that the sin of ingratitude does so eminently comprehend all
wickedness, that it is able to change your Blessings into Curses Deuteronomy. 28.
; your Peace into War; your plenty into penury; and your fruitful lands into
barrenness Ps. 107.34.
?

O therefore (I say again) consider in time, before your change comes Job 14.14.
, in this your day, the season of Gods love and mercy Ezekiel. 16.8.
, the things that belong unto your eterneal peace: Be ye heartily sorry for all
the changes that ye have made, or have intended, either in Monarchy, Gods own
Government, or in any of his other Laws and Ordinances: and let your minds be
changed so, as that you can resolve with duty, never to seek a change any more;
but for the future be united to the body of True Loyalists and Conformists,
that we may all as Brethren dwell together in unity, and with one heart and one
mind demonstrate true gratitude and wisdom, by giving to God due thanks and
praise for all his goodness and wonderful works that he has done for this
stiff necked and undeserving Kingdom; for so ye will be a means, not only to
continue his loving kindness still unto us, but also to procure your own
eternal happiness and Salvation.

But however though some of them, (God forbid all) whether Papists or Fanatics
or both, should be so hardened in their sins, that (notwithstanding all means
and mercies) they will be as far from Conversion and Reformation, as the
Ethiopian is from changing his skin Jer. 13.23.
: yet we that are already established in the present truth, let us by no means
forget to render unto the Lord due thanks and praise for all his favors and
benefits Psalm. 103.2.
. Especially for his late reminding us of our duty, and ingratiating our peace
unto us by little interruptions: Be sure, let us not cease to pray for the
peace of Jerusalem Psa. 122.6.
, the peace of the whole Kingdom, both Church and State; humbly imploring his
Divine Majesty, that he will always come upon these waters of strife, and
command the Waves and the Winds thereof to be hush and still; that we may still
have as great a calm, as there was when Christ entered into the Ship of St.
Peter Mark 6.
. And finally, for our more assured enjoyment of our Halcyon days, and
peaceable seasons, let us be unchangeably resolved, to meddle not with them
that are given to change; but express by holy lives and Loyal actions, that our
intent is always to fear the Lord and the King.

Vivat Rex.

God save the King.

(...).

FINIS.

