GODS GLORY IN Man's Happiness: WITH The freeness of his Grace in ELECTING us.
TOGETHER WITH Many Arminian objections ANSWERED. By Francis Tailor, B. D.
Preacher at Christ's Church Canterbury.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for G. and H. Eversden at the Gray-hound in
Pauls-church-yard, 1654.

The Analysis, or Resolution of the Text.
In the Words note 1. The Coherence, For. 2. The matter, and therein. 1 S.
Paul's compellation, Brethren. 2 His application in which 1 His exhortation Look
upon your calling. 2 Gods vocation wherein observe 1 The persons called, set
out 1 Negatively, by Their condition wise according to the flesh, great, noble.
The limitation of it, not many.
2 Affirmatively, wherein see Gods thoise, and note 1 The chuser God. 2 The
chosen The foolish, weak, base things of the world, and things despised yea
and things that are not.
The end of it, To confound and bring to naught the wise, the mighty, and
things that are.

2 The impulsive cause, That no fles^ should glory in his presence.





To the HONORABLE his real Friend Mr. Walter Strickland, one of the Council
to his Highness the Lord Protector.
LUdovicus Vives reports of the Storke, Ciconiae hic mos est, ut unum e pullis
relinquat ei domui, qua est nidulata: The Storke uses to leave one of her
young ones to the house where she builds her nest: Symbol. 86. A pattern of
thankefulness for kindness received. And Symbol. 81. Accipe oculatus; Receive
kindnesses with thine eye. Though the giver should not much eye them, lest he
should seem to upbraide the receiver, yet should the receiver often view them,
that he may be mindeful of the giver: yet most receivers are blind in this
kind. Nihil citius senescit, quam gratia. Nothing grows old sooner then a good
turn. Other crimes (says an Historian) may be hid with many colors;
ingratitude not with any. It was so hateful to the Egyptians, that they used to
make Eunuchs of ungrateful persons, that no posterity of there is might remain.
Barnab. Rich. descript. of Ireland, Chap. 6. The Earth we tread on upbraids
them,

Inquit amicus ager Domino; sere, plurima reddam:
Si been mi facias, memini tibi reddere grates.
The friendly field the Lord bespeaks,
Sow, I will render store:
If good you do me, thanks I will
Remember to restore.
Aulus Septimius Severus.
Bethinking my self how to rid me of this crime of ingratitude, and finding
nothing worthy of your Noble favor to me and mine, in assisting us mere
stangers to you in procuring the payment of our public stipends: I remember
what Thales ( called by Julian, Sapientum facile princeps, one granted
generally to be the principal of the wise men, Paneg. 2. in Eusebiam Imp.)
answered to one that asked him, How great a reward he should give him for what
he had learnned of him? If thou will (says be) confess, that thou have
learned of me, thou have paid me. I hope to find the same courteous mind in
you, that confession shall be accepted for satisfaction. I present you with
Gods glory in Man's happiness. The Lord make you a great instrument of his
glory, and the good of his Church, in all your public employments, and in the
end, remember you with the favor that he bears unto his people, and visit you
with his salvation; that you may see the good of his chosen, that you may
rejoice in the gladness of his Nation, that you may glory with his inheritance,
Psalm 106.4, 5. So prays he that is

At your Honors service in the Lord, Francis Tailor.

1 COR. 1.26, 27, 28, 29. For ye see your calling brethren, how that not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called.

But God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise: and
God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are
mighty:

And base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosed,
yea and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are,

That no flesh should glory in his presence.


ERasmus the greatest clerk of his age, Aeternum illud naturae miraculum
Desiderius Erasmus. Eras. vita vol.
styled by his followers the miracle of nature, left us no greater monument of
his wisdom then that small book which he wrote in commendation of folly. The
wise Apostle of the Gentiles brought up at the feet of Gamaliel; nay more,
inspired by the Spirit of God, in this present Chapter commends unto us many
kinds of foolishness. Verse. 21.
First, there is the foolishness of Preaching; and no wonder if Preaching be
counted foolishness, for what do we preach but Christ crucified? V. 23.
and behold the foolishness of the Cross of Christ also in the judgment of the
learned Grecians. Nay, he stays not at the foolishness of the Cross of
Christ, but goes forward to the foolishness of God, V. 25.
if the world may be judge, that has appointed remission of sins by the Cross
of Christ to be preached to the world. Lastly, if God be counted foolish that
will have it preached, V. 27.
they that will be believe it must pass for fools, and there ye have the
foolishness of believers.

The preaching of the Cross of Christ is esteemed foolishness in the judgment
of the flesh. For what can seem more foolish then to look for eternal life
from a man, a dying man, a man crucified among Thieves, a man (as his
adversaries judge) not able to save himself from temporal death, and much
less able to give us eternal life, Let him now, say they, Mat. 27.42.
come down off the Cross, and we will believe in him. It seems a foolish
thing for an unarmed Minister in a Pulpit to lay down laws for Princes and for
people, to prescribe the way to heaven, who has no sword to compel them to
obedience, that come to hear him, but is subject to their sury if they do
resist him. Neither is it strange that the Ministers are counted fools, where
God himself that imployes them, is accused of foolishness. Yet the comfort is,
that The foolishness of God is wiser then men. V. 25.
That is to say, where God shows least wisdom in any of his works (for God
forbid any should blasphemously imagine any folly to be in God) in those very
actions he shows more understanding, then the wisest men do in the choiseft of
all their works. The least Fly does more commend the wisdom of the Maker,
then the most curious picture of the greatest Elephant. But if ye desire a
choice pattern, take Gods choice for a pattern; there ye have it. The world
esteems them fools whom God has called, but Gods wisdom appeared more in the
choice of these fools, then if he had chosen the wisest of the world. For by
this means the glory of his choice is not eclipsed, but shines through all the
world unto the infinite and eternal praise of God. And thrrefore the Apostle
knits this unto the former, For ye see your calling.

Not to trouble your patience with any longer coherence, I proceed to the
exposition of the words.

Ye see.
Some read it indicatively, (...).
Ye see; others imparetively, See, or look upon your calling. They that read
it the first way, may urge these reasons:

First, the coherence; it seems scarce to be good English, For look upon your
calling.

Secondly, it seems more fully to prove what the Apostle intended, to read it,
For ye see your calling; that is to say, ye know the truth of what I spoke
already, and have had experience of Gods wisdom in choosing you before many
wiser men, and therefore I need not to prove it to you. But the other reading
is more consonant to the Original and native signification of the Greek word;
which is not barely to see, but to fix ones eye upon a thing, (...).
or to look wishly upon it, and with consideration. Now for the Apostle to say,
ye do view or look well upon your calling, peradventure might be more then was
true of many of them, for no doubt but there were diverse amongst them that did
not thoroughly consider of it: It therefore may seem more fitting to bid them to
do so, then to presume they did so already. And this latter reading the Syriack
translation follows, reading it thus, (...)
For my brethren look upon your calling also. Neither is the speech
incongruous, but very emphaticall, and very fit for the Apostles purpose. As if
the Apostle should have said, If ye doubt whether the foolishness of God be
wiser then men, I will not send you abroad to look for an example to prove it,
only I advise you to look inward into your own condition, and see if God have
not sufficiently proved it in calling you to the hope of eternal life, when he
neglected many wiser men. For thus has God so provided for your good, that he
has not failed his own glory. Poor men are most glad of riches, and most
thankful for them.

But what is it that the Apostle would have the Corinthians to view?

Calling. (...)

Whereby he puts them in mind, that there was nothing bred in them by nature,
nor gotten by art or labor, that could advance them to this high honor, but
they had it only from Gods calling them.

Next observe whose calling he bids them look into: not other men's, but their
own.

Your calling. (...)

But what does the Apostle mean? Does he call his beloved Corinthians fools?
Had he no other example in the world of simple men called to be Saints but the
Corinthians to whom he writes? Surely he did it not to discredit them, but to
credit God that had called them. They could not so well tell what God had done
for others, as what he had done for themselves. The Apostle therefore pulls down
them that he may set up God. The Apostles were despised by the Philosophers,
and the Corinthians by the Gentiles among whom they lived. Yet had both the
Apostles and Corinthians obtained that which neither the Philosophers nor
Princes of the Gentiles could attain unto, to be called of God.

Consider next what title the Apostle gives them.

Brethren. (...) et (...), i. e. (...), Fratres uterini.

This name of kindness qualifies the former example, and makes the Corinthians
to take it kindly and to hearken to what else the Apostle should say to them,
because it came from a brotherly affection and unfaigned love. For what
stricter name of familiarity could the Apostle have bestowed upon them then
this of Brethren?

Now what manner of calling is this which the Apostle calls upon them to
consider of?

How what not many wise men. (...).

The Syrian translation adds, Among you, (...):
well expressing the Apostles meaning, as if he should have said unto them,
Consider your selves and consider them that daily join themselves unto you;
Que vous n' estes point beaucoup de sages selon le chaix Gall. Transl. That ye
are not many wise according to the flesh.
you shall find that few men noted for learning join themselves unto you, but
many of mean capacity are daily added to your number.

And lest the Apostle should seem to discommend wisdom, he qualifies the
matter in the next words.

After the flesh. (...).

That is, such wisdom as is pleasing to the flesh, or rather such as is born
and bred in the flesh, or gotten by the strength of natural wit and by our own
labor, as Philosophy, and other natural Sciences, and artificial inventions.
Yet the Apostle does not say not any of these wise men, but not many, for
though God more freequently call the simpler sort of men, yet does he not
wholly pass by the wiser, but sometimes makes use of them also. Else had St.
Paul been in a worse condition then the Corinthians to whom he writes. So that
as they stand for examples of ignorant men called, so he stands for a pattern
of a learned man reclaimed.

If the Kingdom of heaven cannot be taken by craft, yet peradventure flesh and
blood will imagine it to be like the kingdoms of the earth that are often
carried by the sword. That we may think that force has no stroke in this
business, the Apostle proceeds:

Not many mighty. (...) a (...) possum.

Meaning such as are able to do more then other men are; for so the Greek word
imports. Gods wisdom is too great to be overreached, and his power too mighty
to be compelled to calany, and that he shows by his common calling, in that for
the most part he sides with the weakest.

Further it may be thought, that Noble men may by their birth make some
challenge to Gods kingdom, because they are born of greater parents and to
greater means then other men. To prevent this conceit it follows in the text:

Not many noble. (...).

Not many that are born of a good stock, as the Greek word signifies, or of a
great kindred, (...)
as the Syriack translation reads it. They may be borne to great possessions
upon the earth, but not to the kingdom of heaven, unless they be twice born
as well as meaner men. Joh. 3.3.
And that happiness falls not upon many of them, unless the text be mistaken.

The wise God then that has refused these; whom has he chosen? Has he
refused all? Or will he choose the worst when he has put by the best? Surely
God is as wonderful in his choosing as in his refusing. He has not refused
the chief to rid his hands of all, or to discourage the meanest to come unto
him. But rather to make way for the meanest, and in them for his own glory,
has God put by the greatest. See his choice.

But the foolish things. (...).

The Apostle alters his phrase, he says not the foolish men of the world, but
the foolish things, that is, the most foolish men and such as are scarce
esteemed men sometimes, because of their simplicity. (...), non videre; vel a
(...) et (...) non cura vel nulla providentia, Etymol.
Men that the world will not vouchsafe to look upon, or men that have no manner
of forecast to provide such an honorable condition for themselves by their
foresight and providence. And therefore must needs have it cast upon them by
the providence of God. So low does God descend in his choice among the sons of
men, that he may advance his own honor.

Peradventure may some man say, God chose the foolish things, because there
were no wiser to choose. The Apostle stops this gap in the next word,

Of the world. (...).

No doubt but the world had choice of worldly wise men. It has its name from
ornament and neatness in the Greek and in the Latin. (...), Gr. ornatus et
mundus. Mundus, Lat. orbis et purus.
As in the heavens then there are bright stars as well as dark clouds, and
in the earth there are sweet flowers, as well as noisome weeds; so
questionless in the world there are wise men as well as fools. Gods choice
therefore is the more admirable because he chooses not foolish men for lack of
wise, but rather then the wise, that not they but he might have the greatest
honout.

But who has made this choice, this strange choice the Apostle here mentions?

God. (...).

And no marvail, for it is not like the choice of men. If a man were to choose,
he would take a wise friend rather then a foolish, a powerful favorite,
rather then a weak one, a wife of a honorable stock, rather then of a mean.
God who is wiser then all men does otherwise: they choose like men, he chooses
like a God: they make choice of such as may be helpful to them; he makes
choice of such as he may be helpefull to, and not they to him.

The next thing considerable is the action of God.

Has chosen. (...).

God is in the world as in his orchyard, he gathers one apple of a tree and
leaves the rest; or as in his garden, where he crops one flower and leaves the
rest where he found them. So God chooses some foolish men, and omits many wiser
then they.

The choosing which the Apostle here speaks of, may be taken for Gods eternal
choice before the world was made. And then the Apostle gives (...) a reason why
God calls not the wise, but the foolish for the most part, because he had
chosen them from all eternity. And God is no changeling. It may be taken also
for Gods selecting in time, rather then for his electing before time, and then
the Apostle confounds calling and choosing, and takes them for one and the same
thing; even for a work of Gods Spirit in our souls, bringing mean men to true
faith in Christ, which many greater never attain unto for all their greatness.

Come we now to the end why God prefers the foolish before the wise,

To confound. (...).

The Greek word signifies to make a man ashamed by putting some disgrace upon
him, so that he blush or hold down his head for shame. And well may wise men be
ashamed to show their faces, when they shall see very idiots learn the way to
true felicity, which they having studiously sought after, and spent many hours
in disputing; about the chiefest good, could yet never attain unto with all the
wisdom and learning the world could afford them.

The persons confounded come next into our consideration.

The wise. (...).

It were no great wonder for God to confound a fool by a wise man. It were
strange to confound one wise man by another. It were stranger to confound one
fool by another. But it is strangest of all to confound a wise man by a fool.
In the former, men have some share in the commendation: in the latter all the
praise must needs be Gods. For there is nothing in fools to procure it, but
there is much in wise men to hinder it. Thus God takes the wise in their
subtilty, and robs the proud of all their glory.

Thus then has God chosen the foolish rather then the wise. But he has
refused the mighty as well as the prudent.

Whom has he chosen in their room?

And God has chosen the weak things of the world. (...) et (...) non possum.

Those that are able to do least. God has chosen. So the word signifies such
as are of no force or can do nothing, to wit, in comparison of such as God has
refused.

To what end God has chosen these weakest ones, the Apostle declares unto us
in the words following.

To confound the things which are mighty. (...).

Hereby God shows us the vanity of all worldly power and force, when those
that are mightiest are through his overruling hand confounded and brought low
by such as are weakest, and have most need of strength to do it.

We see how ill the wise and mighty speed, fares it any better with the noble?
no surely, for as God has rejected many of them, so he has chosen base and
mean men (...) their room, for so it follows,

Ad base things of the world has God chosen. (...) sine genere.

That is, such men as are bred of so mean a stock, that there are no Chronicles
of their predecessors, nor no pedegrees to be found for them upon record; for
it is the fashion of the world to keep account of the genealogies of Princes
and Noblemen: but other meaner men scarce know any thing of their predecessors.

These men then whom God chooses in the room of nobles are men without stock,
that is, such whose genealogies are not observed. (...)
Or, as the Syriack Testament reads it, whose kindred is small or of no
reckoning in the world. That he may the better express their meannesse, the
Apostle adds:

And things which are despised. (...).

Such men as go for nobody in the world, and are despised, as esteemed worthy
of no account. Nay that he may bring them as low as may be, he proceeds
further, as if no words were sufficient to express their former baseness,
except he should put them quite out of the world, and says of them,

Yea and things which are not. (...).

Men that are so mean and so vile, that they are as much slighted in the world
as if they had no being at all, nor never had any. Behold how low a foundation
God has laid to raise so high a building. See how deep he digs in the earth to
find out heirs for the kingdom of heaven. And why does God make choice of
these things that are not? The words following give an answer,

To bring to naught. (...).

This is somewhat more then confounding, or making ashamed. He does it to bring
them to desperation in themselves, (...) reddo^
to make them give over working and studying, for so the word imports. And what
can wise men do less, and great and noble, but cast away all their natural
and carnal studies and labors and privileges, and despair of attaining
heaven by them, when they see foolish, weak and mean persons attain to Gods
favor without them? Thus the word used elsewhere by the Apostle, (...), etc.
Romans 3.31.
Do we their make void the Law, or idle, through faith? God forbid; that is, we
do not take away the operation of the Law, when we preach faith in Christ, but
leave it a work still fit for it. So in the text, by choosing base men, God
makes idle the labors and prerogatives of great men, even in their own
account, which when they perceive, they either give over all seeking for
heaven, or see themselves forced to seek it another way. But who are they whom
God intends to confound by calling these contemptible people?

Things that are. (...).

By things that are, the Apostle means things that are in price in the world,
and greatest estimation. Things of no reckning in the Scripture phrase are
called things that are not: and such as are of greatest account, are called the
things that are. 1 John 2.16.
So St. John reckons the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride
of life to be all that is in the World; meaning, all that is in greatest
account amongst wordly men. St. Paul then by Gods bringing to naught things
that are by things that are not, intends his overthrowing the vain hopes of men
of greatest reckning, by such as are accountlesse in the world. Now to what end
and purpose is all this, say the great ones of the world? Wherefore does God
refuse us to choose such as these be? Does he envy at our prosperity? Or is he
like to the men of this world, that compassionate the poor, whether their cause
be right or wrong? Surely no, says our Apostle, God does not envy your
greatness, for he need not fear any evil you can do unto him; neither does he
want any thing that he need be beholding to your greatness to procure. He does
it not on the other side out of too much pity to the poor, as if he respected
their persons because they are poor, but the main reason that moves him to his
choice is his own glory.

That no flesh should glory. (...).

That is, that no man should boast himself of his wisdom, his power, or his
honor. He says not, no man, but no flesh; that he may show us what little
cause we have to be proud or to boast, that are but flesh. Mortal we are and
corruptible; our worser part is here put for the whole man, that we may not be
lifted up. Thus when we with the Peacock spread our feathers, the Apostle gives
us just cause to look down to our black feet. The wisest are but flesh as well
as the foolishest of the sons of men: the greatest as well as the weakest: the
noblest as well as the basest. Thus the Prophet pulls down that confidence which
the Jews put in the horses of Egypt; Their horses are flesh and not spirit.
Isa. 31.3.
And so the Apostle warns us by the weakness of our nature, not to glory in our
selves.

Another Argument to keep us low the Apostle takes from Gods greatness opposed
to our weakness in the last words.

In his presence. (...).

Great men must remember that they are in Gods presence, and comparing their
weakness with his power they have little reason to be lifted up, but much to be
humbled. The word may be passed a little further; Before him, that is, over
against him, or in opposition to him. (...) dicuntur parietes domus, qui sunt e
regione januae, vel, ad utrumque ejus latus. Hom. ll. th et Od. chapter
And so the phrase in the first Commandment may well be understood, Thou shall
have no other Gods before me, that is, over against me, or to set in opposition
against me. We must not then advance our own good parts and set them in
opposition to God, as if our happiness came from our selves, and not from him.
This were to set God on the one side, and our selves on the other; to derogate
from God, that we may attribute to much to our selves. And this is the final
reason why God chooses the meanest and basest, passing by the greatest that all
may give him the glory of their salvation, and not rob him of it to magnify
themselves.

Thus ye see the sense of the words, as if the Apostle should have said, God
has showed his wisdom wonderfully in his choice. Ye Corinthians are lively
patterns of it; ye see how few wise, or mighty, or noble personages; how many
simple, feeble, and base men in the worlds account, daily join themselves to
your Congregation. This cannot come to pass without Gods wonderful work, who
by this means humbles the great men of the world by preferring the meanest
before them: and gives cause to all flesh to see their own weakness, that they
may not set themselves in opposition to God, nor glory in their prerogatives;
but give to God the whole glory of all their felicity. And thus the text
justifies the title, and shows us what we must drive at in all this discourse,
Gods glory in Man's happiness.

Now that we may the more orderly proceed in the handling of the words, we may
well observe Two parts, 1. St. Paul's Compellation. 2. St Paul's Application.


In the first he bestows a loving title upon his beloved Corinthians;

In the second he produces them for patterns of Gods favor in choosing mean
persons before great ones.

The title our Apostle bestows upon them is a very loving and amiable title.

Brethren.
There are in the Scriptures diverse kinds of Brethren mentioned.

First, there are Brethren in the flesh. These are not only such as are borne
immediately of the same parents, but all our kindred also. Thus Abraham and Lot
are styled, Genesis 13.8.
Let there be no strife between me and thee, for we are Brethren. So the
kinsfolks of our Savior Christ are called, Mat. 12.47.
Thy Brethren stand without desiring to speak with thee.

Secondly, there are Brethren in evil: Genesis 49.5, 6. and 34.25.
Such were Simeon and Levi; who are called Brethen not because they were born
of the same parents, but because they conspired in the same wicked act, to wit,
in murdering the Shechemites.

Thirdly, there are Brethren in office: And so Ahab and Benhadad are Brethen.
Is Benhadad yet alive? 1 King. 20.32.
says Ahab, he is my Brother; meaning that he was not his servant (though he
were overcome by him, and the messengers to flatter Ahab called him so) but a
King as free as himself, and by office Ahabs brother. So do Kings yet in their
Letters call other Kings Brethren.

Fourthly, there are Brethren in friendship, 2 Samuel 1.29.

Fifthly, in Spirit: Such are Christ's Disciples, Mat. 23.8.
All ye are Brethren. The same title is elsewhere given to them by the beloved
Apostle, Joh. 3.16.
We ought, says he, to lay down our life for the Brethren. By St. Paul's
doctrine then in the text, all the members of the true Church ought to account
one another for Brethren. Thus are they called by the same Apostle, Gal. 1.2.
All the Brethren which are with me. Thus are they saluted by him in the end of
the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, ^ Cor. 13.11.
Finally Brethren farewell. This spiritual fraternity, because it is so
frequently mentioned in the Scriptures, requires of us so much the more labor
in explication of it.

In the prosecution of this Spiritual and Christian fraternity, four things I
have to commend to your serious meditations:

To wit 1. The proof of it. 2. The Original. 3. The Extent. 4. The Continuance.


And first for the proof of it. Proof of Spiritual kindred.
This new affinity is proved many ways. We have the same Mother: and who knows
not that they that come out of the same womb are Brethren? The Church of God
is the Mother of us all, a better Mother then the ancient Jerusalem: so the
Apostle tells us, Gal. 4.26.
Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the Mother of us all. As we have
the same Church for our Mother, so have we the same God for our Father: 1 Pet.
1.3.
God has begotten us again unto a lively hope. So that we are not half
Brothers by the Mothers side alone, but Brethren in the strictest sort, having
the same Father, and the same Mother. Our diet and allowance prove us to be
Brethren, we all sit at our Fathers table; as Joseph's brethren did at his, They
sat before him, Genesis 43.33.
the first born according to his birthright, and the youngest according to his
youth. Servants use to attend at their Masters table, children are admitted to
sit down. So is it with us, God disposes of us as of Brethren among our
selves, and children to him. He gives us the same spiritual food in the Word
and Sacraments. Lastly, the portion that we have in our Fathers possessions
shows us to be Brethren. It fares with us, not as with Country Gentlemen, whose
Lands go to their eldest Sons, and the rest are left poor enough, though they
be children of the same Parents. But we are used like the children of Citizens,
who all have a share of their Fathers goods. Our tenure is the freest tenure:
not like those that were brought in by the Conqueror, but rather answerable to
the titles that men had in England, before the Conquest; or that which yet they
use in Kent; Gavel kind. quasi Give all kin. Lambart. Perambul. of Kent.
we all hold in Gavell kind, every one has a share in his Fathers Lands. So
then our portion shows that we are Brethren, every one shall have a share in
his Fathers kingdom. Heaven is a common possession prepared for all the
children of the King of heaven. Romans 8.12, 16, 17.
Thus is the kindred proved. Let us now proceed to the Original of it.

This fraternity has a fourfold beginning. Original.


1. In regard of God our Father. Look what title we have to be the Sons of God,
the same title makes us Brethren. Now we are Gods children by a double right.

The one is by regeneration; God has renewed his image in us. Col. 3.10.
And as Adam was the Son of God at first, because God had marked him for his
own, and stamped his image on him: so are we made to be Gods own when he renews
his image in us. Then do we put on the new man which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness; Ephesians. 4.24.
and having put on this image of God, God takes us for his own.

The other right is by adoption, God chooses us for his own: Gal. 4.5.
God sent his Son, that we might receive the adoption of sons. We were unworthy
servants, Digne fratres habentur qui unum patrem Deum agnoverunt, qui unum
spiritum biberunt sanctitatis, qui de uno utero ignorantiae ejusdem ad unam
lucem expiraverunt veritatis. Tert. Apol. c. 39.
nay which is more, we were perverse enemies; but now we are the adopted sons
of God. Rich men use to take the children of poor men for their own, and to
bestow an inheritance on them, whose parents can leave them none: So God
chooses us that by nature have no inheritance to expect but his wrath, and
makes us his children and the heirs of glory. As children begotten by the same
parents are counted Brethren, so are they that are adopted by the same parties.

2. In regard of our selves we are the children of God by faith, and so
Brethren by consequence among our selves; Joh. 1.12.
As many as received Christ, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God,
even to them that believe on his name. For faith puts us into Christ, it knits
and unites us to him, and through him it makes us Gods children and brethren
one to another. Fructus quidem primogenitus in multis fratribus qui unigenitus
erat, adsciscet cos fine dubio in haereditatem, quos vocavit in adoptionem. Si
enim fratres et cohaeredes. Ber. de annunciat. Domini.
And surely the first begotten fruit among many brethren, says Bernard, who
was the only begotten before, will out of question call them into part of the
inheritance, whom he has called to participate of the adoption. For if we be
Brethren we are coheirs. Thus do we begin to be Gods children by faith in
Christ in regard of our own selves.

3. We become Brethren in regard of those without the Church, in that by one
Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. wherein all without distinction of sex or state partake, 1
Cor. 12.13. being a type of the new birth, Joh. 3.3. Tit. 3.5. were declared to
have been bred and born within the pale of the Church, in that family whereof
God the Father is paterfamilias, Ephesians. 3.14, 15. and have therefore as his
children, his livery put on us, and his mark set upon us, Gal. 3.26, 27.
Whereby we are to be distinguished from Jews, Turks and Infidels.

4. We are completely Brethren in regard of other members of the Church, when
we are first admitted to the Lords table. It is true that children baptized are
our brethren, because they belong to Gods covenant, yet they are in a degree
below such as are admitted to the Lords table; as a child that sucks, though he
be a brother, yet does not enjoy the comfort of his being so, till he come to
the use of reason. The Lords Supper at least declares us to be Brethren one to
another, if it do not make us to be so. Hence it is called a Communion, because
there all true believers do truly communicate of the body and blood of Christ.

The extent of our Spiritual kindred offers it self next to our consideration.
Extent.
It does not extend it self to matrimonall cases. Spiritual kindred is no
impediment to marriage. They are the kindred of our flesh that no man must come
near by the Law of God. Levit. 18.6.
There is a question among the Papists, whether spiritual kindred be an
impediment to marriage; that is, whether Godfathers, godmothers, and their
god-children may be married one to another. If such persons may not marry
because of that spiritual kindred that is between them; then Christians must
all marry Heathen wives, for they are all of this spiritual kindred, all
Brothers and Sisters in Christ. So then, spiritual kindred does not hinder
marriage, nay it furthers it, for we are commanded to marry only in the Lord.
Cor. 7 39.
The nearer the kindred of the flesh is, the more unlawful is the marriage:
the nearer the spiritual fraternity is, the marriage is the more commendable.
Moreover, this spiritual affinity extends not it self to hereditary cases: if
a Brother dye without children, his brother requires his inheritance as heir at
the common Law. But it is not so in this fraternity of the Spirit. One cannot
expect another inheritance: it must go to the heirs according to the flesh.
So much our Blessed Savior teaches us, when he shows, that his Kingdom is
not of this world, and though men look for honor or wealth from the favor or
kindred of Princes, yet it must not be so with us. Mat. 20.26. Luke 12.13, 14.
Our spiritual kindred affords us no such privilege. Our Savior Christ
himself, the top of this kindred, would not divide inheritances between
brethren, but left it as a work for worldly Judges. Spiritual kindred then
has nothing to do with temporal inheritances. But it extends it self first to
conjunction of spirits and hearts; so St. Luke testifies that the primitive
Christians were affected, Act. 4.32.
The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one soul. Such
were they in the days of the persecution. They were of one heart at liberty,
of one mind in prison, of one soul in the fire. Cecilius the Heathen man
pleading against the Christians, and speaking of their troubles, mentions the
affection that they bare to one another at first sight, yea though they never
met but in prison, Amant mutuo pene antequam noverint. Min. Fael. Octav.
They love one another before they well know one another. And Minutius Felix
gives a complete pattern of this affection in himself and Octavius, Crederes
unam mentem in duobus esse divisam. Ibid.
He that had known us, would easily be drawn to believe, that we had but one
mind divided in two bodies: Dilectionis operatio notam nobis inurit penes
quosdam; vide, inquiunt, ut invicem se diligant^ Tert. Apol. c. 39.
such is the strength and force of this spiritual fraternity.

Furthermore, this kindred extends it self to the communication of all good
things spiritual and temporal, to the good and comfort of one another. He
that is wise thinks himself bound to advise such as are simple; and he that is
rich thinks himself tied to relieve such as be poor. Brotherly love is not
forgetful to entertain strangers: Heb. 13.1, 2, 3.
It remembers them that are in bonds and in adversity. Exsubstantia familiari
fratres sumus, quae penes vos fere dirimit fraternitatem. Quia animo animaque
miscemur, nihil de rei communione dubitamus. Tert. Apol. c. 39.
We are Brethren, says Tertullian, in regard of outward substance, which among
you does well-nigh break all fraternity: we that are joined in mind and soul,
make no question at all of communicating of our goods to one another. So free
were the former Christians of their purses to them whom they had first set up
in their hearts, that they would not suffer such to want as suffered
persecution for the cause of Christ, although they did not formerly know them.

The last thing is the continuance of this spiritual kindred. 4. Continuance.
And herein it excels all other kindred. The kindred of the flesh cease when
the flesh dies. It has nothing to do in heaven. It had his beginning from
marriage. But in heaven they neither marry nor give in marriage, Mat. 22.30.
but are like the Angels of God. Death then ends carnal consanguinity. It
stretches no further then this life. Whereas spiritual kindred is not
dissolved by death, but perfected. It is begun in grace here, it is consummated
in glory hereafter. Earthly affinity ends with the earth, but heavenly kindred
lasts for ever and ever.

Paul himself, if he were alive, should pass under the reproachful name of one
of the Brethren. That word which in his mouth sounded out honor and affection,
now sounds in the mouth of profane persons hatred and infamy. Indeed we do not
carry our selves like Brethren. Every man lives to himself, no man to his
Brother. The world is grown to that pass, that they are counted the wisest
men, who by privy strains of inbred policy are able to circumvent their
Brethren with least observation, and to accomplish their own ends to the
infinite prejudice of others with the closest conveyances. All which shows that
we count not our selves to be Brethren in our hearts, what ever we profess in
our mouths. It is with us as it was with the Jews when the Romans besieged
Jerusalem, They fought together against the common enemy, and when they had
done, they slew one another within the walls. We all speak against Turks, Jews,
and Papists, yet we carry not the affection of Brethren one to another. And
what wonder is it, if they that are not acquainted with the nature, scoff at
the name of Brethren?

Deuteronomy. 17.20.
It is a precept that concerns Kings, Sit dives humilis: plus gaudeat, quia
Christianus est, quam quia dives est. Non infletur: non extollatur: attendat
pauperem fratrem: non dedignetur frater pauperis appellari.

Quantumcunque enim dives est, ditior est Christus, qui fratres suos voluit
esse pro quibus sanguinem fudit. Aug. de Temp. ser. 212.


their hearts must not be lifted up above their Brethren. Great is their power
on earth, yet are they Brethren in Religion, and must remember that others may
be as great as they in heaven. The rich man must not be proud, because he
releeves others, but remember that they are his Brethren: Let the rich man,
says Augustine, be humble; let him more rejoice that he is a Christian man,
then that he is a rich man. Let him not be puffed up: let him not lift up
himself: let him have an eye to his poor Brother: let him not think scorn to
be called the poor man's Brother. For let him be as rich as he can, yet Christ
is richer, who would have them to be his Brethren, for whom he shed his blood.
It is too much to insult over an enemy, but too too much ambitiously to triumph
over a Brother, whose honor should be accounted our reputation, whose disgrace
should be esteemed our proper infamy.

Abraham's case. He yields to his nephew Lot for avoiding of quarrels, Let there
be no strive, I pray thee, Genesis 13.8.
between me and thee, for we be Brethren. Yet we rather justify the proverb,
then follow Abraham. Fratrum quoque gratia rara est. Ovid Met.
For as with natural Brethren, so with us, Brethren seldom agree. Whence come
so many suites about syllables, about words and trifles, but that we forget
that we are Brethren? Contention may become enemies rather then Brethren,
though indeed it become no man.

Justus ac sapiens nemini injuriam facit. Scit enim cunctos ab eodem Deo, et
eadem condition generatos jure fraternitatis esse conjunctos. Lact. l. 5. c.
23.
It becomes not Brethren to oppress one another, that they may enrich
themselves. The just and wise mon, says Lactantius, does wrong to no man. For
he knows that all they who are brought forth by the same God and in the same
condition, are joined together by the right of fraternity. It is an unnatural
cruelty for one Brother to oppress another. Helpin^, not hindering, beseems
Brethren.

Luke 10.31.
and leave pity for the Samaritane. We know not how to pity others, but all our
compassion terminates in our selves. When will he have pity on his brethren,
Quando compat^etur frat^^, qui in propria voluntate nes^^^ compati ni si sibi?
Ber. de res. Dom. ser. 2.
who by his own good will knows not how to pity any body but himself? says
Bernard. The Divine should pity other men's afflicted consciences, as he would
pity his own. The Lawyers should be as tender over other men's causes, as if
they were their own; and plead with as much earnestness in other men's suites,
as if their own inheritance lay at the stake. Fratribus nostris inter quos
vivimus, ipso jure fraternitatiset societatis humanae, consi^i^ sumus et
auxilii debitores. Ber. de advent. Domi. ^er.
The Physician should have a fellow-feeling of other men's pains, and cure their
diseases with as much tenderness, as he would cure his own: For we are
brethren. To our brethren among whom we live we owe both counsel and help by
the very right of brotherhood and humane society: this was Bernards judgment.
In our Brethren we have the image of God to behold. Have thou thou seen thy
Brother? says Clemens, (...). Clem. Alex. Str. l. 1.
thou have seen thy God. And would any man suffer his God to want? Our Savior
presses us to compassion with this argument, Mat. 25.40.
In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye
have done it unto me. Brethren we are then in Christ, and Christ accounts what
pity we show to others, to be showed to himself. And what stronger
encouragement can any man have to commiseration?

David's affection to Sion, Psalm. 122.8,
For my brethren and companions sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee. By
this means the house of Austria grew to their greatness. They did all with
joint forces seek to maintain the glory of their house. So must we. The
Magistrate must remember that his subjects are his Brethren, and may be right
dear and precious in the sight of God; and so must guide them in a pleasing and
cheerful fashion. The Ministers must not be flatterers of great men to sooth
them in their oppressing of meaner persons: but studious of Gods glory, and
seek for the public benefit of the Church. The people must be obedient to the
Magistrate, as to one of their own race set up by God for the raising of the
whole house. They must also be persuaded by the Minister, as by an elder
Brother appointed by the Lord, for the instruction of the whole household. They
that throw stones in at the windows strike at the master of the family. They
that oppose superiors Ecclesiastical or Political, strike at God himself,
who has committed their authority to them. They seek not the good of the
family, but the ruin of it, while they go about to disjoynt it.

aspersions they can upon the Church their Mother, wherein they were begotten
to God, even themselves being Judges: yet since they have forsaken and reviled
her. Others are false to their Brethren, as Hypocrites, who bear a great show
of zeal to God, and love to the Church, but seek underhand to pull down the
forwardest of their brethren. Such were the Pharisees, who seemed zealous to
the people: but sought underhand to pull down Christ and his Apostles. St. Paul
concludes with these as with the most perilous of all his perils, 2 Cor. 11.26.
I have been in perils among false Brethren. Such the Church of God has ever
had upon earth, and will have ever till it come in heaven.

David's delight was in the Saints: these he accounts the excellent of the
earth. Psalm. 16.3.
This Brotherhood will last when the other will decay. These we shall find
faithful upon earth. These we shall have for companions in heaven. Greater and
better is that fraternity, says Austin, Major et melior est fraternitas
Christi, quam sanguinis. Sanguinis enim fraternitas, similitudinem tantummodo
corporis resert: Christi autem fraternitas unanimitatem cordis animaeque
deinonstrat. Illa interdum sibi mimica est, Christi antem fraternitas sine
intermissione pacifica est. Illa inter se communia cum aemulatione dividet:
haec etiam cum gratulatione communicate. Illa in consortio saepe despicit
germanos: haec assumit frequenter alienum. Aug de verb. Apost. ser. 25.
which we have in Christ, then that which we have in blood. The latter carries
only some bodily resemblance: the former shows forth consent of heart and
mind. The latter sometime is at enmity with it self: but the former is
peaceable without intermission. The latter divides things that are common to
them with emulation: the former communicates with gratulation. The latter often
despises brethren, and refuses their society: the former often admits the
stanger. To conclude the point. Brethren in religion are to be preferred before
Brethren in blood, kindred in spirit, before kindred in flesh. A lasting
consanguinity is to be prized above a vanishing: an eternal affinity far above
a temporary.

Thus have I done with St. Paul's compellation: And now I come to St. Paul's
application. Wherein I observe

Two things; 1. Paul's exhortation. 2. Gods vocation.


St. Paul's exhortation is contained in these words, For look upon your calling.
Wherein our eyes must first be cast upon the coherence; Gods foolishness is
wiser then men; for men choose the greatest, but God chooses the meanest. Where
we may see plainly that Gods ways are contrary to our ways.

So much the Lord teaches us by his Prophet, Isa. 55.8, 9.
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says
the Lord. For as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher
then your ways, and my thoughts then your thoughts. This the Lord made good in
the choice of David before all his elder brethren, contrary to the expectation
of Samuel himself, whose error in preferring Eliab, God corrects, and tells
him, 1 Samuel 16.7,
The Lord sees not as man sees; for man looks on the outward appearance,
but the Lord looks on the heart. The Apostles some of them were poor
fishermen, and followed Christ, looking at no further end, but the salvation of
their own souls: But Gods ways are above theirs. He has a further reach then
they could aim at: an higher strain then they could aspire unto. His purpose
is to make mean fishermen great Apostles: Joh. 1.40, 41. Mat. 4.19.
and those that would have been fully satisfied with the salvation of their own
souls, to be the means to save many thousand more. Thus are they made the
pillars of the Church, and the fillers of heaven, who before were abundantly
satisfied if they might but fill their nets with fish, and their souls with
grace. This one example were sufficient to make every one of us to cry out with
St. Paul, O the depth of the riches, Romans 11.13.
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearcheable are his judgments
and his ways past finding out! Gods wisdom does infinitely exceed ours. There
is a greater disproprotion between them, then between a fountain that never
dryes up, and a standing pool whose waters are dried up by the heat of Summer,
and fail when there is most need of them. The wisest men have need of the
counsels of others, and therefore Kings have their privy Councels. One man's
head, though it were Solomon's could not reach to all occurrents of State: If it
could, yet must it have much time to plot and to consider which is the best way
to bring things to pass. Angels themselves doubtless accomplish not Gods will
without some kind of meditations. But Gods wisdom goes beyond Men and Angels.
He needs no counsel of others to direct him, nor no meditations of his own to
fish one thing out of another. His wisdom is always ready. Nothing can happen
so difficult, but he knows what to do without counsel or study. For he knew
before what would be done, and had determined what he would bring out of it.
Look now upon a wise man, and see what difference is between his ways, and the
ways of a fool: He tunrnes and winds the fool which way he please. He
overrules him in his own actions. What the fool intends for his own credit, he
turns to his discredit. Yet he knows not certainly what the fool intends. Only
out of his wisdom he guesseth by words and gestures. No marvel then if God
who knows all our purposes before we know them our selves, can turn our actions
to other ends then we entend, nay to contrary ones. For as his wisdom and
ours, so his ways and ours have an infinite disproportion, and are further
distant then the highest heaven from the center of the earth. Gods power also
goes far beyond ours. Men may be potent: God is omnipotent. Their power is but
weakness compared unto his. God does what he will: Men do what they can. When
they have done what they can, God goes on with the work. He begins where they
end, and turns all to a new end which they never dreamed of. He subverteth the
ways of men by his power when he please: but all the world cannot hinder him
in his purposes. The greatest power that men have, is but a rivulet let out of
the Ocean of Gods omnipotency. How often has he clean altered the course of
things? How often has he crossed the undaunted expectations of the proudest of
the sons of men? He has sent deliverance when natural reason has set nothing
but destruction before men's eyes. He has defeated proud Tyrants, who in their
own hopes and hearts have undoubtedly eaten up, and swallowed down his people
like bread. Thus does God as it were play with the great affairs of the world.
He brings light out of darkness; darkness out of light. He raises such as
think themselves ruined, and ruins them that think themselves firmly rooted.
Our ends are reeds: he shakes them when he please. His ends are cedars: we
cannot reach to the top, nor dive to the bottom of them. His power and wisdom
do conspire to show strong men their weakness, and wise men their folly by
chocking their actions in the blade. Gods ways differ from ours, because they
are secret, and unknown unto us. He gives his Commandments to men, but reveals
not his ends and purposes to them. His revealed will we have in his word to
direct us; his secret purpose concerning the event of all things he locks up in
heaven, and keeps the key himself. Men that use the counsel of others, are
often disappointed of their ends, because their plots are revealed by them
whose heads they were forced to make use of. But no man knows Gods ends, that
he may reveal them. He knows ours, and can disappoint them. We know not his,
and therefore must submit unto them: for we cannot (if we would) prevent them.
A Mine may be prevented by a Countermine, if it be known or suspected.
Otherwise no man knows how to work underground to disappoint it. Gods works are
like Mines. No man knows where he works, what he intends, nor how to cross it.
Yet he knows how to countermine the secretest of our actions, because all
things are open to him.

To conclude, the event in all Gods actions, answers to the intent. He never
was, nor can be disappointed. It is far otherwise with us. Other things arise
out of our actions then we intended. Many evil things and crosses happen which
we could not prevent: many good things betide us which we could not expect,
because the success of our actions is unknown unto us. We judge of the
success of our courses by likelihoods, God only knows certainly what will be
the event. We deal altogether by guesses, God proceeds out of a certain
prescience. No wonder then if his ways be contrary to ours, and his counsels
do exceed ours, to the disappointing of our hopes, and the curing of our fears.
This have I pressed ^he more, because in the greatest occasions of our life it
is very useful. Many things happen to us besides our expectation, not out of
any worldly reason, but out of Gods ^erruling hand, who aims at deeper ^nds.

Gamaliel wisely ^dvises the Pharisees, when they were ^oubled to see that
religion grow which they would fain have sup^ressed, to rest quiet, For, says
he, (...) it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, Act. 5.39.
lest apply ye be found even to fight against ^ed. A hard lesson it is for men
to ^est satisfied when their ends are ^rossed. Achitophel forsakes David, and
leaves to Absalom, that he may be the Oracle of Israel, and King and State
guided by him. When he sees his counsel neglected, and Hushai's followed, all
his wisdom cannot satisfy him, 2 Samuel 17.23.
He puts his household in order, and hangs himself. Cato the emblem of
morality, yet had so proud an heart, that when he saw his ends crossed, and
himself likely to become subject to Caesar, he kills himself. They that aim most
at their own ends, leave no stone unrowled, that may help to accomplish them.
But God sets himself against them, and pulls down their ends to set up his. They
never look up to see who crosses them, but in a passionate discontent turn
Achitophels, and for want of other, prove their own executioners. Religion
teaches us to attribute all to Gods providence. It shows that his purposes
often differ infinitely from ours. It persuades us that his drifts must stand,
and therefore ours cannot. Upon these sure grounds it brings us to patience in
the greatest^ crosses. We breed children for comfort, and they prove crosses.
We trade for profit, and our trading undoes us. This is marvailous in our eyes,
yet we bear it patiently, because it is the Lords doing.

Pharaoh, Exodus 9.16.
And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in thee my
power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth. The highest
Towers have the greatest falls. Low shrubs outstand the fury of the winds, when
tall and aged Oaks are tumbled down. Gods hand lights heavy upon the greatest
oftentimes, when the meanest escape. Great ones act a part in the Tragedy of
Gods anger, when mean men are but spectatours. Mighty ones fall with their own
weight. Gods lightnings light upon the hardest things, and pass by the softer.
David in the height of his prosperity, Psalm. 30.6, 7.
upon Gods turning away his face, is troubled. He that lifts up, can pull down.
God keeps the reins of our prosperity in his own hand; he lets them out, and
pulls them in at his own pleasure. If therefore unexpected prosperity fall upon
us, let us be sober and temperate in the use of all worldly comforts, lest God
do but fatten us like the Ox to destruction, and make us an high example of
his mercy, that he may make us a deep president of his power and justice.

Thus have I done with the coherence, and come to fasten my meditations upon
the matter observable.

It is not their riches, nor their wisdom, nor any thing in themselves that
the Apostle bids them look upon, but their calling.

Gods calling of his servants is worth observing and looking into.
It is reckoned by the Apostle as a special privilege even in Rome, and
greater then the freedom of the City, Among whom, Romans 1.6.
says he, ye also are the called of Jesus Christ. It is St. Paul's wish, that
God would give to the Ephesians the Spirit of wisdom, and enlighten the eyes
of their understanding, that they might know what is the hope of his calling,
Ephesians. 1.18.
and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints. Worth
inspection is this heavenly calling, were it but for Gods sake, who is the
caller. His works contain far more within them, then the outside promises.
Nutshels are but trifles, yet the kernels give contentment to the eater.
Oistershels are cast to the dunghill, yet the fish is meat for curious palats.
Many men have but little-promising countenances, that have deep-reaching
understandings. The ceremonies of the Law are but trifles to look upon, yet
were there deep mysteries contained under them. Men judge of works not ^o much
by the outside, as by the fame ^f the workman. Books are often sold upon the
Authors credit. Gods works ^re of such a value, as whatsoever they promise at
first sight, we are sure much good matter is to be observed in them, and from
them. Now we are not cal^ed by any mortal Prince, but by the ^mmortall God,
whose ends are often ^r different from mortal men's.

Our calling is the more considerable because of our former misery, out of
which Gods calling delivers us. So David's preferment was the greater when he
was made a King, because he was taken from following the Ewes with young. Psalm.
78.70, 71, 72. Genesis 32.10.
Jacobs two bands were the greater riches, because with his staff only he went
over Jordan. The mercy of the caller is the greater, because of the misery the
called did endure before. Our condition was obscure before; now it is famous.
It was servil before; now it is free. It was full of impiety formerly; but now
God has planted piety in us. It was laden with impiety at first; yet now our
hearts are set upon equity and righteousness. This promotion of ours calls for
the more inspection, because of the high honor and great riches we are called
unto. What greater honor then to be Gods children? What greater riches then
the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven? 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.
Walk worthy of Go^ who has called you unto his kingdom^ and glory. Great
disproportion there i^ betwixt darkness and light, Ephesians. 5.8.
Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye ligh^ in the Lord. No less
difference between life and death, 1 John 3.14.
Yet we know that we have passed from death to life. Every man is willing to
understand his own honors. And we count them but bad husbands that dive not
into their own Estates, and are ignorant of their own Possessions. Look then
how far spiritual honors and treasures go beyond temporal, the soul beyond
the body, immortal possessions beyond mortal; so much the more reason have we
to pry carefully into our vocation, and all the circumstances of it, and
dependences upon it. Lastly, consider we the way which God calls us by, and that
is his word. Great is the power of Gods word, and worthy to be looked into. By
it God made the world, and all the creatures in it. By it he brought all things
out of nothing. By it he brought light out of darkness. Yet has Gods word a
very different operation in calling of sinners. The same Sermon reclaimes one,
and offends another. One man obeyes it, and another resists. This diversity of
operation proceeds not out of the diversity of the soil, for we are all
naturally corrupted. But it comes from the assistance of Gods Spirit joined to
the Preaching of the Word, or restrained from it. And are not all these things
worthy of admiration?

her self, but neglect to take to pieces and view the several parts of our
divine vocation.



One thing more ere we leave St. Paul's exhortation, offers it self to our
meditation. He bids them not look upon other men's calling, but their own; Look
upon your calling. Remember how mean ye were once, and how miserable, whom God
by his calling has now made so high and glorious.

Such as be exalted by God must often call to mind their former meann^sse.
Such a meditation it was that made David a King to cry out, Who am I O Lord
God, 2 Samuel 7.18.
and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? And St. Paul a
glorious Apostle remembers himself, and leaves it written for others to read,
that he had been a blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.13.
a persecutour, and injurious. A low meditation for an high Apostle, yet very
profitable to himself, and exemplary to others.

Many and great are the commodities that arise to the highest of men from such
low meditations as these. Benefits of remembering our low estate.


First, Thankfulness.
it breeds thankfulness to God that has preferred them. As for general favors
that are common to us and others, they do not so much affect us, much less
make us thankful to God, as those peculiar mercies which are proper to us, and
which others have no share in. Thus the remembrance of our own particular
baseness, first affects us with joy, and then stirs us up to thankfulness
toward God.

Secondly, Admiration of Gods providence.
it breeds admiration of Gods providence in us, who raises up the poor out of
the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill; Psalm. 113.7, 8.
that he may set him with Princes; even with the Princes of his people. The
changes that are wrought in others, do not commend Gods providence to our
cogitations, so much as those that are wrought in our selves. Gods providence
then, which though it work many strange things for others, and it may be more
strange then it works for us, is slighted and neglected by us, by calling to
mind our former lowness is highly wondered at by us and admired.

Thirdly, Patience.
it brings forth patience in all adversities, that can happen unto us. There
can nothing happen to such as are exalted from a low to an high estate, but the
same or the like they have had experience of before. If poverty fall upon them,
they have been poor before. If want trouble them, they have been in want
before. Experience makes a man better able to bear any calamity. These things
may be strange to such as never knew what want meant: that were nobly borne and
richly provided for by their parents. But to him that has been in a Sea of
wants and tempests of troubles before, though he have had a calm of plenty
between, these second storms are far more portable then to the other
freshwater Soldiers.

Fourthly, Sobriety.
it produces sobriety in them. They have learned by experience, what it is to
want flesh and food, and apparel, and other comforts; and therefore will not
abuse Gods gifts and blessings, lest God take them away, and reduce them to
their former necessities.

Fifthly, Humility.
it makes them humble to remember how low they have been before either in their
spiritual or temporal condition. They that always have been rich, or great, or
civilly good, are easily puffed up. But such as have tasted of poverty, or been
scandalous in their courses, are more easily humbled. Thus Abraham humbles
himself before God by calling to mind his beginning, dust and ashes. Whereupon
Basil of Seleucia infers, (...). Basil. Seleuc. Orat. 28.
There might you have seen an unusual thing, a tongue made of earth talking of
heavenly things. When Abraham set it as a preface before his speech, I am dust
and ashes, then did he by the acknowledgment of his nature most of all exceed
the bounds of nature in worth and dignity. So also Moses, Abraham's successor
in manners, being made more honorable by his conference with God, cast down
himself as a vile person, saying, I am slow of speech and of a slow tongue. For
look, how much he pulls down high-mindnednesse, so much does he draw grace unto
himself: and the power of humility is the measure of increasing grace.

How great the benefit is that arises out of the remembrance of our former
condition, Magnus esse (...) a minimo incipe. Cogitas magnam fabricam
construere celst^udinis? de functarnemo prius cogita humi^itat^s. De verb. Dom.
ser. 10.
and how great a furtherance it is to true humility, Augustine very well
understood, and therefore prescribes it as the road-way to exaltation: Would
thou be great? says he, begin at the least. Do thou intend to build a great
frame and an high one? think first of the foundation of humility. Now of all
thoughts that can come into a man's mind, there is nothing more fit to humble
him, then the remembrance of his low estate before God exalted him.

Sixthly, Charity.
it works in us Charity to those that are in a mean condition. They that have
never felt poverty themselves, know not how to pity others. Such as were never
afflicted in mind themselves, esteem light of other men's pangs. But they that
have been low, know how to commiserate such as are mean, though they be now
advanced.

upon God in an humble and lowly manner, and to say with the prodigal, Luke
15.21.
I am no more worthy to be called thy Son. In his praises it will make him ever
to slight his own, and to magnify Gods goodness, saying with Jacob, I am not
worthy of the least of all thy mercies and of all the truth which thou have
showed unto thy servant. Genesis 32.10.
It is a special work of grace, to make a man humble that has grace. Nature
would teach him to be puffed up and to contemn all others, that are beneath
him, yea to condemn them for reprobates and naturalists; but grace teaches
him to remember what he was of himself, and what he is, it tells him, comes of
Gods grace. His own meannesse then must humble him, but Gods goodness must not
make him proud.

and liberality in them, although it be displeasing to the pride of nature.
Meekness and lowliness of heart become Godly men, though they grow great in
the world. Pius in eo quod mitis est, nulla adversitate frangitur: in eo autem
quod humilis est, nulla prosperitate, vel gloria elevatur. Aug. ad frat. in
eremo. ser. 16.
A godly man, says Augustine, because he is meek, is broken by no adversity:
and because he is humble, he is not lifted up by any prosperity of glory. It is
no shame for the greatest in the world to remember that they have been mean. It
is profitable to remember it, but very prejudicial to forget it.

Paul puts the Corinthians in mind of what they had been, after they were
washed. Having spoken before of Thieves, and Covetous and Drunkards, and the
like, he adds, 1 Cor. 6 11.
And such were some of you. The Colossians he admonishes more largely, For
these things sake comes the wrath of God on the children of disobedience, Col.
3.6, 7.
in the which ye also walked sometime, when ye lived in them. But most largely
of all he rubs up the memory of the Ephesians; Remember that ye being in times
passed Gentiles in the flesh, Ephesians. 2.11, 12.
who are called uncircumcision by that which is called circumcision in the
flestirmade by hands, That at that time ye ^^ere without Christ, being aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise,
having no hope, and without God in the world. And have not we as much need to
be put in mind of it as they? Let us then hear and ^ear it with patience.

Thus much for St. Paul's exhortation.

Now follows Gods vocation. In which we are to note:

1. The persons called or chosen.

2. The impulsive cause.

The persons are described two ways.

First, Negatively.

Secondly, Affirmatively.

Negatively in these words. How that ^^t many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called. In which words observe,

1. The condition excluded.

2. The limitation.

For the condition of men that are excluded, they are called wise according to
the flesh, mighty and noble.

The natural good things of soul, body and estate prove more often impediments
to salvation, then furtherances.
Rich men are often the greatest enemies of Religion and religious persons.
This St. James acquaints us withal, Do not rich men oppose you, Jam. 2.6, 7.
and draw you^ before the judgment-seates? Do not they blaspheme that worthy
name by the which ye are called? The rich Citizens of Jerusalem, the wise
Scribes, the chief Priests, the noble King Herod, all oppose themselves against
our blessed Savior. So we are taught by the Evangelist, Mat. 2.3.
When Herod the King had heard these things, he^ was troubled and all Jerusalem
with him, And in the verse following he imploye^ the chief Priests and Scribes
to find ou^ the Messiah that he may destroy him* So far were they from seeking
salvation from him. This point that it may sink the deeper, we will take it
(...) pieces, and show what impediments (...) salvation

Are 1. Natural wisdom, 2. Riches and Greatness, 3. Nobility and honor


First for knowledge and natural wisdom. 1 Cor. 8.1.
It puffes up those that have it. It is like boyles and swellings that grow
upon the body, which make the bulk of the body the greater, but yield no
benefit to the body at all. Thus knowledge often puffes up the mind, but does
not edify it. And thus Ambrose glosseth upon the text, they are called wise
according to the flesh, because they are rather puffed up with the wisdom of
the world, then truly learned. Mundi rationibus instati magis quam eruditi
sunt. Ambrose on the text. Mat. 11.25.
Now what little acquaintance God has with these wise and proud persons our
Savior teaches us, Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent. And
that made Augustine to cry out, Behold, Austin said thus in a Sermon, Ecce ipsi
idiotae rapiunt coelum, ubi nos sapientes in inserno mergimur. Pierce Plowm.
vision. Pass. 10.
the very idiots snatch the kingdom of heaven, while we wise men are
overwhelmed in hell fire. Neither does knowledge make men proud only, but also
curious. That excellent natural capacity that God has given them to enquire
after necessary things, they use it to dive into unnecessary questions. The
grounds of Religion they despise, as common things fit for vulgar capacities,
and table-talke for shallow brains. Curious things they pry into, and such as
neither God has revealed, nor man can comprehend. Thus while they spend their
choicest thoughts, and chiefest times about needless niceties, like the men of
Sodom while they seek the door, Genesis 19.11.
they lose their eyes. While they seek to be wiser then others, they lose the
felicity that meaner wits through Gods grace attain unto. 1 Samuel 6.19.
And as the men of Bethshemesh pry into the Arc, and lose their lives: so do
these curious Masters dive into quiddities, while they lose their souls. Hence
it is that none of these want their rare inventions, which they magnify
themselves, while other men laugh at them, as idle crotchets. They do te upon
those opinions that meaner men upon better grounds explode, and like Lucifer
sink down into hell, while their thoughts mount up above heaven. By these means
knowledge becomes the bane of many great Clerks, while simple men attain
eternal happiness.

Secondly, Discommodities of Riches.
Riches and greatness prove the ruin of many.

1. Pride.
Because they lift up the soul. He that wants nothing, knows not what need he
has of God or Man. Now as the sense of want humbles the soul; so the contrary
exalts and lifts it up. The great man and rich, has for his coin the use and
command of the best of Gods creatures for food and apparel, and other
necessary uses. Yea men like himself, and choice ones too, are fain to attend
upon him. This lifts up his heart within him, and so hinders him from the care
of saving his poor and miserable soul. Omnibus nobis ut res dant sese, ita
magni aique humiles sumus. Ter. Hec.
The Heathen man could say, that our minds ebb and flow with our means, and we
grow higher or lower in our own conceits, as riches offer themselves more o^
less unto us. Salvian counts pride the richmans inheritance, Taceatur superbia
et tumor, tam p^^uliare hoc divitem re^rum est, ut ^liquid forsitan de tur^ suo
(...) p^^ent p^^dere, (...) hinc sila alius quicquam veluerit vendicare. Salv.
de gub. Dei. lib. 7.
as if poor men that were proud did him open wrong. To say nothing, quoth he,
of pride and swelling, which is the rich man's peculiar kingdom, so that perhaps
they would imagine, that they had lost some part of their own right, if any man
else should challenge any part thereof from them. So hard a thing is i^ for a
rich man to be humble, and much harder for a proud man, between whom and his
Creator there is such an antipathy, to come to the Kingdom of heaven.

2. Because riches delight the soul, Delight.
and afford many pleasures to it, which poor men cannot reach. And the soul
when it is delighted, grows secure, like Peter upon the mount, concluding,
Master it is good to be here. Mat. 17.4.
Thus riches steal away the hearts of men from Religion. It is an hard thing
for a man to pass from delights on earth to delights in heaven.

3. Trouble.
Because they fill the soul with cares, fears and griefs. The rich man vexes
himself with his own prosperities. He is more dejected oftentimes with fear of
loss, then comforted with possession of plentiful means. They are like
passengers in a ship in the midst of a storm; when the wind blows stiff upon
them, they are hardly able to keep the hatches: So do fears and cares blow so
stiffely on the soul, that every moment it is in danger of perishing. Every
morning affords new cares. What shall I do with my money? Luke 12.17.
My barns are too little for my corn? Shall I turn Merchant? Every wind will
make my heart ache. Pirates will get in a moment what I have labored for many a
year. Shall I buy Lands? I may spend half the price of the purchase in trying
the title. Shall I put my money to use? Besides the unquietness my own
conscience may afford me, and the scandal of the Church, I may lose my
principal while I study the Table of Interest. These are the rich man's cares
and fears. The rich man's labor (says Bernard) is in plotting inwardly, Sudat
pauper in opere for is, sed numquid minus anxie dives^nt us in ipsa sua
cogitatione laborat? Bern. de obed. pat. et. sap.
while the poor man sweats in laboring outwardly. One sweats in body, the
other in mind. One toils to get to supply his wants, the other toils and
cares to dispose of his goods to the best advantage. These cares keep the rich
man from caring for heaven. The farm, Luke 14.18, 19.
the oxen must not be neglected, though the soul be famished and deprived of
her part of the heavenly banquet. Mat. 13.22.
These are the thorns in the parable, that choke the good seed and make it
unfruitful. Whereupon Ludolphus elegantly, Divitiae spinae sunt, quia sicut
spinae suis punctionibus corpus laniant, et cruentant, ac saedum in oculis
h^minum red dunt^sic divitiae curis suis vulnus animae infligunt, et miseram
^coram oculis Dei faciunt. Ludolph. de vita Christ. Part. 1. c. 64.
Riches are thorns, because as thorns with their prickles, tear the body, and
wound it, and make it bloody and filthy in the eyes of men: so riches with
their cares wound the soul, and make it filthy in the sight of God. Yet many
count it a pleasure to be under these thorns, and as soon as they begin to
think of spiritual affairs, by and by thrust themselves into worldly cares
again. So great impediments are worldly riches to heavenly happiness.

4. Neglect.
Riches make men neglect and slight the means of salvation. What cares he for
prayer, or for hearing Gods word, that has his God in his purse? What care
takes he for his soul, that has his body so pampered that he knows not what
belongs to inward or outward necessities? Or if some slight thought of another
world run through his mind, yet it passes away like a travailer. So many
accounts are to be taken, so many reckonings to be cast up, so many servants to
be looked after, so many businesses to be ordered, that the Preacher may speak
to poor folks, Sicut ovis conversans inter spinas semper ibi de lana dimittit:
sic vacans curis temporalibus et mundo multa bona spiritualia amittit. Lud. de
vit. Ch^. p. 1. c. ^4.
that have little else to do: they are otherwise employed. As the sheep rubbing
against the thorns, leaves always some of his wool behind: so be that
attends upon worldly cares, loses many spiritual comforts. Thus grow men rich
in state by trading in the world, and poor in soul by neglecting to drive a
more profitable trade, which tends to a better world.

5. Wickedness.
Riches provoke the heart to many unlawful things. Without these sin wants her
wings: Drunkenness, Gluttony, Wantonness, Pride, require a stock to maintain
them, for vices are more costly then virtues. Virtue observes a mean, but vice
knows none. They do enlarge our skore, and make our reckoning the greater at
the day of judgment. Seldom do servants run in arrears with their Masters,
Pierce Plowmans Vision. Pass. 10.
but Stewards often. The former is betrusted only with their work; the latter
with their goods. So rich men run further into Gods books then poor. Thus
strangely do we alter the nature of things, and make goods evils. We know not
how to enjoy the comfort of a plentiful estate, Facimus rem bonorum operum
materiam tantum esse vitiorum. Mutamus naturas rerum iniquitatibus nostris.
Salv. de gub. Dei. l. 6.
without overflowing and running into wickedness. We make, says Salvian, the
substance of good things to be only matter of vices. By our iniquities we alter
the very nature of the things themselves. So those things that are good in
themselves prove hurtful to us, as the same Father gravely elsewhere
admonishes, saying, Impediment a sunt haec, non adjumenta, onera, non
subsidia. Bona appellantur, cum sint causae malorum aeternorum. contra avar. l.
2
These things are hinderers, not helpers, burdens they are, not aides. They are
called goods, but indeed they prove the causes of eternal evils. Too many may
lament this in themselves, which this good man compassionately bewailes in
others. The luxury and prodigality of rich men gives too plain an evidence of
this truth. So that we may boldly affirm with Clemens, (...). C^m Al^x. live.
2. cap. 3.
Riches ill administed are the magazine of mischief The heathen man could
inform us, that Riches are even as the mind of him that possesses them. To
him that knows how to use them, they are good: to him that uses them amiss,
Haec per inde sant ut Illius animus, qut ea p^ssi let. Qui u^t sent, ci hona^
illi qut non uti tur ^ec^e, mala. Ter. Heaut. Act. 1. Sc. 2.
they are evil And how hard a thing it is to use them a right, appears by the
daily abuse of them, which arises out of natural corruption, and
carelessness. So are we judiciously informed by I eo, There compass us about
on every side dangers of innumerable sins, and we pass through the lawful
use of things to immoderate excess: Circumstant undique puricula
innumerabili^um d^li^^^rum, et per licit^^ usus ad immoder^atos transi^ur
excessus, dum per curam salatis obrepitdel^ctatio volunt^^is, et non sufficit
c^n^up^s^emiae, qued p^te^t satis esse naturae. Leo de quadrag. ser. 11.
for delights and pleasures creep into us under the title of care of our
health: neither can those things suffice concupiscence, that might give nature
comentment. So easy a thing is it to pass from use to abuse. So hard a thing
to moderate the sails of our affections, when the winds of riches drive us to
the quicksands of unlawful pleasures.

6. Hardness of heart.
Wealth hardens the heart in unlawful courses, and keeps it in impenitency.
Luke 15.
Poor men are with the prodigal child brought home sometimes by want.
Sometimes the shame of the world affrights them, because they want means to
hide their offenses. Sometimes the execution of good laws drives them from
evil. But rich men know how to prevent all these means of reclaiming. They can
for coin make other men father their Bastards, and stop the wheel of
execution, that good laws may not bruise them. The threatenings of Gods law that
break poor men's hearts, do but harden rich men's; as the sunbeams which soften
the wax do nevertheless make the clay harder. We threaten death, and they
live. We threaten poverty, and they are rich. We threaten want, and they
abound. Long enough may we threaten ere they amend. If we seek by fair means to
reclaim them, what care they for promised happiness, who think they have
attained present selicity? All these things considered we must needs conclude,
that the wealth of the world, however it be in great request here, and of
special use to command such worldly comforts, as time and place afford, yet is
it oftentimes a great impediment to the serious seeking of the kingdom of
heaven.

Now for the third member of our division. The damage of Honor.


Nobility and honors are no little lets and pul-backs in the paths of piety.

First, it lays them open to much flattery. As the Crows flutter about
carrion, where there is hope of food, so flatterers prove good trenchermen at
great men's tables. Carneades in Plut. Com. de adulat. et amico discern.
The Philosopher being demanded the reason, why great men's sons learn nothing
so well as to ride, answered, because the horse would not flatter. If they
cannot ride well, they must fall. Other things they cannot learn so well,
because their friends and servants flatter them, being either afraid to offend
them, or hoping to get by them.

Secondly, it makes them liable to luxury. They do not conceive themselves
subject to laws so much as other men. Their inbred corruption is the fire.
Their wealth is the fuel, that ^akes it burn more fiercely. Their at^ndants are
the bellows that blow the ^re. Salvian complains, Servilibus vitiis etiam
nobiles polluuntur. Illa quae in servis peccata puniunt, ipsi quasi licita
committunt. Quotus n. quisque est connubii sacramentum conservans? cui non
demus ac familia sua scor tum sit? Salv. de gub. Dei. l. 4.
that Noble ^r sonages were polluted with servile vices. and that, Those vices
which they punished (...) their servants, themselves committed as ^wfull
things. Who is there among them, ^ith he, that keeps his promise in marriage?
Who is there whose house serves not for a ^rumpet to him?

Thirdly, it makes them impatient. They are greater then other men, and
therefore know not how to bear crosses that come from God. They consider what
men owe them, but they consider not what they owe to God. And much less can
they bear rebukes from men; no not from Gods Mini^ters. Their greatness makes
them so ^lind, that they cannot see their own ^rrours, and so deaf, that they
cannot ^ear others with patience reveal them, although they seek not to
disgrace nor destroy them, but to amend and save their souls. They think that
infericurs should be silent, and suffer their superiors quietly to go to
hell, and say nothing to the contrary.

Fourthly, honor and greatness often breeds oppression of meaner persons. For
great men look not upon a superior law of God or Man, nor upon a future
account, but upon their present power, and the weakness of their neighbors.
This we may see in wars, in robberies, in covetous persons that have power
over others how forgetful they are of law and right, how far they stretch
their own power and greatness. Too much honor or greatness put upon one man,
proves often hurtful to a whole nation as in the body the overflowing of one
humor endangers the life it self, and threatens the ruin of the whole. He
that is on the top of an hill, forgets how he came up, and overlooks all the
country about him: so great men easily forget their common original, and
trample inferiors under their feet. For fear of this Moses enjoynes the future
King of Israel, whosoever he should be, to write him out a copy of the law, and
to read therein daily, Dent. 17.20.
That his heart be not not lifted up above his brethren. Great men that are
Covetous or Luxurious, no bands of nature can keep them from oppression, as
Basil of Seleucia comments upon the story of Herod, O the ^^^e fetches, says
he, of Satan's fury! (...). Bas. Seleuc. in Hero^aden.
He ^akes the King his executioner upon John. ^^e saw indeed that Herod was a
Lord of ^^en, but a slave of passions. He saw the ^^ing a servant of
intemperance, and a Ruler ^^deed in the show of his power, but over^^led by the
weakness of his soul. Look ^^ell upon the sleight of the Devil, how he ^^aws
him from slighter errors to impiety. first he makes him a violatour of his
Bro^ers bed, that he may from the pit of adul^^y make him venture upon the
slaughter of ^ohn the Baptist. Now this mischief in time ^eing bred up grew
into all licentiousness. He ^akes his brothers wife his own, while the bro^er
lives and looks on, using the authority ^f his royal power for an helper to his
intempe^ency, while he couples his lawless purpose ^ith his inbred boldness.

This hurt does honor and great^nesse often bring to a man: it makes ^his
skore of oppression to be much the ^onger. For honors, says Ludolphus, are as
certain logges which increase the fire i^ the torments of hell. Honores n. sunt
quasi quaedam ligna ad augmentandum, ignem in futura po^na. Lud. de vit. Chr.
p. 1. ^. 68, f. 5.
So that althoug^ wit, honor, and riches be Gods goo^ gifts, and might be so
used that they might further our salvation, yet such i^ the strength of
corruption within us, that they prove great impediments to grace, and often
shut up the gates o^ heaven against us, and increase our otherwise deserved
condemnation.

To bring home all that has bee^ spoken in this point. I must divide the
sons of men into several stations, as God has divided them in their means.
I may rank them all in the three degrees of Comparison. In the Positive, I may
put the poor: in the Comparative, the mean sort of men: in the Superlative, the
rich. Some lessons o^ profit I may hence read to them all, and as the order of
the division requires, I will begin with the poor, because as they have least,
so I have least to say to them.

The mouths of the poor are ever open against the rich. The consideraon of
their own wants, and comparing them with the abundance of other men makes them
foul-mouthed, because they want grace as well as money. Let these envious
complaints cease. What if rich men have the wind always prosperous? yet have
they it so violent withal, that it oftener overturnes them in the sea, then
brings them safe into the haven. Envy them not then, but labor to be richer in
grace then they are in wealth. So may thou be happyer. Lazarus envied not
the rich man, for he was happyer himself. Sine domo, non sine Domino: sine
vest, non sine fide: sine cibo, non sine Christo: canibus expositus, sed
Angelorum socius. Fulg. Ep. 2.
He was bouse-lesse, says Fulgentius, but not Lord^esse: without apparel, not
without faith: ^e wanted food, but wanted not Christ to feed upon: he was
exposed to the dogs while he lived, but received for a companion of Angels when
he dyed. Consider well their troubles and dangers with their riches, and the
happiness that thou may have without them, and then, Fret not thy self
because of evil doers, Ps. 37.1, 2, 3, 4.
neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity. For they shall soon
be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb. But do thou trust
in the Lord, and do good: so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou
shall be fed. Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the
desires of thine heart.

Secondly, as poor men's thoughts are often envious, so their defires are for
the most part boundless. They think none happy but richmen and great men: and
the more rich, the more happy. This conceit makes them swallow an ocean of
riches in their wishes. Let them learn for time to come to moderate their
desires of those things that may prove great impediments to the saving of their
souls. Let them pray with Agur the son of Jakeh, Prove. 30.8, 9.
Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me; lest
I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor and steal,
and take the name of my God in vain.

Now for men of middle condition that are neither so rich as to give much, nor
so poor as to ask, but have a convenient portion to bring them through the
world; Here is for them:

1. A lesson of Thankfulness to God, who has placed them in the safest
condition in the world. Let them look down upon poorer men, and behold the
manifold wants which those poor souls and pined bodies daily do endure: They
want apparel and fire in the Winter, meat and drink in the Summer, houses to
dwell in, beds to lie on, and what not? All which men of middle rank enjoy.
Then let them look up ward, and number, if they can, the manifold cares that
attend upon rich men in the world. They are afraid of all men, friends and
foes, acquaintance and strangers, yea of wives and children, lest they should
embeazle their estate, or diminish their treasures. Their losses fetch more
tears from their eyes, then their wealth brings smiles into their faces. All
which fears and griefs men of middle condition are free from and exempted.
Then let them lift up their heart with their hands unto God that has freed
them from the rich man's cares and fears on earth, and from his sighs and groans
in hell: And yet has exempted them from Lazarus tears on earth, Luke 16.
and will give them of his joys in heaven, if they serve him faithfully in
their generations. Let them not henceforth praise the rich man's plenty: let
them rather extol their own security.

2. Let them rest contented and abundantly satisfied with their own condition.
As they have not the tide of the world flowing in abundantly upon them, so they
have not the winds of penury blowing stiffely against them. Their journey
requires more labor in rowing, yet they pass with less danger. While poor
men are bewailing their wants to such as are images rather then men, that know
not how to pity them; and rich men are numbering their Cattle, viewing their
Lands, telling their Coin: they may with quietness work in their shops, or
study in their closets, and often between while commend themselves and their
labors to Gods benediction. There is no happyer state on earth for them to
envy. If they will aspire, let them in their meditations mount up into heaven,
where they may enjoy felicity with eternity.

The greatest part of my persuasions are yet to come, for I have yet to do with
the greatest men. What Rhetoric shall I use to persuade these men? Shall I
tell them that Bees have stings as well as honey? That riches have
discommodities as well as commodities? How careful and cautelous had they need
to be in the use of them, that they may not exclude them from greater riches?
Shall I tell them that Jezabel was the daughter of a King, 2 King. 9.34.
yet was she devoured with dogs? Shall I show them the wisdom of Achitephel,
that could not keep him from hanging himself? 2 Samuel 17.23.
Shall I set before them the rich man, Luke 16. in his gorgeous apparel and
dainty fare, and then bring him in groaning and lamenting in hell torments?
Their worldly cares dead heavenly affections within them. The common tenet is,
that while the heavens move, the earth stands still. Copernicus made the earth
to move, and the heavens to stand still. But never any man made both moveable.
Rich men are often of Copernicus sect: the earths motion in them, makes
heavenly affections unmovable. The heathen men, as Fulgentius notes, called
the Peacock Juno's bird who was esteemed the Goddess of riches, Junonis in
tutelam ponum pavum, quod om^ nis vitae petentia petax in aspectum sui semper
quaerat ornatus; sicut pavus stellarum caudae curvamen concavans anterius
faciem ornat, posterioraque turpiter nudat. Fulg. Myth. l. 2. Fab. de Jun.
because as the Peacocke while he stretches out his tail to show the stars of
it, adornes his fore part, but shows the deformity of his naked back-parts: So
do rich men while they set out their bravery, lay open their infirmities. The
wiser sort of men among the heathen were so well acquainted with this, that
some of them refused great treasures offered; as Phocion, who refused the
talents offered him by Alexanders Ambassadors as a present from their Master.
And when they pressed him to receive them, telling him that their Master sent
them to him, because he conceived him to be a worthy man, (...). Isid. Pel. l.
2. Ep. 146.
he answered, If he think so of me, let him suffer me both to seem and to be
so. Others when they had riches, gave them away: as Crates who gave his goods
to the Senate with this Motto, (...). Ibid.
as Isidore delivers it, Crates sets Crates of Thebes at liberty: Or as Nonnus
delivers it better, alluding to the name of Crates in the Greek (which the
English phrase will not bear) Crates sets the goods of Crates at liberty,
(...). Non. Synag. Histar. in Naz. Stel. 1.
that the goods of Crates may not overcome Crates. I speak not this to bring in
Monkery, or to persuade men to give away their goods to maintain idle drones,
but to make men wary in the use of their riches: For I think with Augustine,
Vilius terrena opulentia humi liter tenetur, quam superbe re^inquitur. Pros.
Aug. sent. 319.
that Worldly riches are better humbly kept, then proudly cast away. For want
of moderate use of them, honors and riches do many men harm. Which makes the
same Father to exclaim, O cursed nobility, which through pride makes it self
ignoble and base in the sight of God. Mala nobilitas, quae se p^r superbiam
apud Deum reddit ignobilem. De Temp, ser. 127.
And many men have suffered many losses for their possessions as Isidore
complains, Riches have hur^ many, and having whetted the sword against hem
have fled into the power of their enemies. But authority and kingly power,
(...). Isid. Pel. l. 3. Ep. 154.
that all men contend for, has often deprived the owner not only of a happy
life, but even of life it self. They that pass over the Humber when the Sea
comes in, seldom see the shore. They that in tempestuons seasons pass over
the Irish Seas seldom escape. So rich men are so puzzled with the thorny cares
of wealth, that they seldom attain to the true treasure. I know, the fault is
not in the riches, but in the men's ill using of them, yet I take it to be a
difficult thing to do otherwise, and say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.18.
Surely thou have set them in slippery placces. Edward I. was a renowned
Prince, he dyed at Borough upon the Sands, to show how weak a foundation all
worldly honor is built upon; Dan. coll. Hist. Angl. p. 171. Hayw. 3. Nor.
Kings p. 63.
as one of our best Historians collects. Riches, says another, are like
hangmen: they hide men's faces with a covering, that they may not see their own
end, and then they hang them. The mounting up to honor is very pleasing, but
the downfall is terrible. We are ^ver-joyed, says J^rom when we mount up:
Laetautur ad ascensum: timeamus lapsum: non est tanti gaudii excelsa tenuisse,
quanti terror is de exceisis eccidisse. Hicron. in Ezech. 4.
but let us rather fear the fall: it is not a matter of so great joy to have
been at the top, as it is of terror to fall from the top. The hurt of the fall
remains, when all the benefit of the rise is gone. Damo^les commended the
condition of Dionysius the tyrant of Sicily. To show him his error Dionysius
invites him to a plentiful feast sets his servants to attend on him, and gives
him music into the bargain: Val. Max. lib 6. et Polychr. l. 3. c. 21.
but he had caused a sharp sword to hang over his head by a horschair; which
made Damocles for fear to forbear both meat and laughter. Such, says
Dionysius, is that life of mine, which thou deemest a pleasant life. O happy
soul then, says Leo, which runs through the days of herpilgrimage with chaste
shbriety, Brata men's, (...) su^e tempora casta (...), et in iis per quae
necesse estream ambala^e, (...) remanct, ut (...) magis quem domira terrerorum,
(...) affections sit im^ixa humanis, (...). promissionibus desit (...). Leo.
ser. 11. de qua^reg.
and abides not in these things through which of necessity she must walk: and
as a guest rather then a Mistress of earthly things, neither leanes upon man's
afflictions, nor falls short of Gods pronuses. The reason is truly delivered by
the same Author elsewhere. We have undertaken, says he, a famous warfare, and
a discipline of a great profession. Magni nominis militiam, magnae professionis
suscepimus disciplinam. Sectatores Christi a regia discedere via non licet, sed
dignum est temporalibus non occupari ad aeterna tendentes. Leo ser. 2. de pass.
Dom.
The followers of Christ may not depart out of the Kings highway. For it
beseems not them to be taken up with temporal affairs by the way, that
travail toward eternal happiness. If we be rich in our estates, let us carry
our selves so moderately, that we may be rich in our souls to. Let us take one
pill of St. Austins prescription, Dives in couseentia securior dermit, quam
dives in purpuva. Aug. de Temp. ser. 212.
He that is rich in conscience, says he, sleeps more soundly, then he that is
richly clothed in purple. There are some whom the Apostle calls rich in this
World, 1 Timothy 6. and some rich to another World. Would you know the difference?
Let the same holy man inform you: If you should see two bladders, the one
filled, Vtres duos si vide^s; ugum plenum, alterum inplatum: in utroque cadem
est magnitud^; sed non in utroque cadem pl^nitudo. St attend^s, fallerts: si
app^ndis, invenies. Qui plenus est, difficile (...): qui infiatus est, (...)
Ibid.
the other blown up: there is (...) both the same greatness, but there is not
in both the same fullness. If thou book upon them, thou may be deceived: but
if thou weigh them, thou shall easily find the difference. The full blad^er is
hardly moved: but the blown bladder is quickly t^ssed away. Such is the
dinerence between those that are rich in the World, and those that are rich in
Grace. The former are blown up, the latter are filled: the former are soon
turned upside down, the latter remain firm and unmovable. Be thou then so
temperate in the midst of worldly riches, that thou may be much richer in
grace and godliness.

Another lesson here is for rich men, not to content themselves with their
worldly prosperity: but to be earnest suitors to God to add to their temporal,
eternal felicity. God divides his gifts diversely, Genesis 25.5, 6.
as Abraham did his substance: Isaac had the inheritance; others were sent away
with gifts. Some there are that have their portion in this life only, Luke 16.
as the rich man in the Gospel. Others that have it in the life to come only,
as Lazarus. Other cross children there are whom God disinherits, as poor men
that are both wicked and wretched, that are neither happy here, nor hereafter.
Others there are that are Gods darlings, that are both here rich and in heaven,
as Abraham, and David, and many other. Pray then that thy riches here, may be
no let to thy happiness hereafter. Luke 15.
Do not with the prodigal child take thy estate here for thy whole portion,
and then spend it, and become a companion for swine: but let these worldly
comforts mount up thy thoughts to try Gods bounty a little further, and to
become a beggar of eternal happiness: He that has given the lesser, will
give the greater if thou desire it. For God is as free of heavenly as of
earthly comforts, if men would seek them as earnestly.



Jonahs mariners; Jon. 1.
when the tempest ^as upon them, they cast out the goods ^ut of the ship, and
every man prays ^his God. Go thou and do likewise. ^ the ship of thy trading
be too heavi^y laden to the danger of thy soul, ^ghten it of as many wares as
thou well can, and pray to God for help. In a word, do less, pray more. Art
thou rich? thou art subject to the more temptations. Thou have the more need of
Gods help. Pray for it then the more often. It goes hard when weakest folk take
fewest cordials. Art thou great? God is greater: yea, and thine enemies may be
greater then thou art. Seek Gods help against them. Art thou wise? Satan is too
subtle for thee. Thou had need to pray to God to keep thee out of the Devils
slavery. Earthly felicity cannot last always: it will bring a miserable end,
if men build upon it. The conclusion of temporal felicity without Gods favor
is eternal infelicity. Prayer is the^ means to procure Gods favor. Se^ all
businesses then apart, and pray daily to God, that thy happiness may no^ end
with thy life, but thy death may be a passage from a transitory to a lasting
felicity.

Thus much of the condition excluded. Now follows the limitation.

The Apostle does not say, not any but, not many wise; rich and noble There are
so few that the Scripture sometimes calls them none. Mat. 11.25.
Thou have ^idden these things, says our blessed Sa^iour, from the wise and
prudent, without naming any exception. The wisdom of God, says St. Paul, was
^nown to none of the Princes of this World. 1 Cor. 2.8.
Yet must we not exclude all great men from the kingdom of heaven, for the
text does not. The Scripture sometimes speaks in general, though it speak not
of all, but of the most part. So John the Baptist accuses all, No man received
his testimony, Joh. 3.32, 33.
yet in the next verse mentions some receivers, He that has received his
testimony has set to his seal, that God is true.

The sum is, that rich men are not wholly excluded from the Kingdom of
heaven. Else where should we look for Abraham the father of the faithful?
Where for Isaac the son of the promise? Where for Israel that prevailed with
God? Where for David a man after Gods own heart? All these were rich in this
world, yet never any good man questioned their happiness in a better world.
God is no accepter of persons. All men naturally pity the poor, whether their
cause be right ^or wrong; and condemn the rich ere their cause be discussed.
God does not so. His commiseration is not so great as to save all the poor: nor
his austerity so great as to condemn all the rich. Though he be a friend to the
poor, yet is he not an enemy to the rich. Though the poor more commonly find
his ear open, yet is he not hard to be entreated by the rich and wealthy. It
were the way to make rich men despair, if God had rejected them. Who should
receive them to favor whom God had refused? Who can make them happy, whom God
had devoted to eternal misery? Without Gods favor there is no salvation. It
is a hard thing for rich men to be saved, yet is it possible to God. It were
the way to make poor men to insult, and almesmen ingratefully to despise their
benefactous, and to trample their persons under feet, by whose purses they are
maintained.

Lastly, it might be a means to bring Gods good gifts and temporal blessings
into contempt: and to make men cast away their goods, that they might not damn
their souls. Who would keep those treasures that must necessarily bring him to
eternal confusion? Who would thank God for those riches that must needs keep
him from heaven? Who would count that a blessing, that ^infallibly brings an
everlasting curse upon him? No man in his right wits. Some have been so far
from hurting themselves with their riches, that they have helped others. So far
from increasing their pain in hell by the abuse of them, that they have through
Gods mercy increased their reward in heaven, by the right use of them. They
have built houses for Gods worship. They have maintained Ministers. They have
settled Schools. They have founded Hospitals. Many other good things have they
done pleasing to God, and profitable to the world. They have sown their seed
liberally in this world, and received a plentiful harvest in the Kingdom of
heaven: They have not laid up treasures upon earth, but sent them before to
heaven. Shall I say that these men's riches are perished with them? God forbid.
They were rather wings to mount them toward happiness, and ladders to clime by
to a greater degree of glory.

urge them to the praising of God, that has not clean refused them. Although
he have given them a more liberal portion then others upon earth, yet has he
not deprived them of all hope of the Kingdom of heaven. Those great men that
have been good, have been very thankful to God, because they have perceived
Gods special love to them in their double portion. But it suffices them not
to acknowledge Gods bounty to them, unless they make use of it. Their earthly
portion must not satisfy them, nor make them negligent in seeking after an
heavenly. Salvation is a matter of great consequence, and is not attained
without hard labor and much diligence: worldly wealth cannot be gotten with
looking about, much less can heavenly, which is of far greater estimation. If
there were no hope at all of obtaining heaven for great men, them needed they
not labor for it. It is invain to wash a Blackmore. But the difficulty of
obtaining it, should not discourage, but encourage noble natures to endeavors
beseeming so great happiness. None but a mad man besieges a Town that cannot
possibly be taken. But if the town be hard to be taken, yet if it be rich, the
warlike Governor will not give over the siege ^till he be Master of the Town:
He knows that the labor is great, and ^he cost not small, but the spoils will
pay for all. So should great men ^eckon for heaven. It will cost them more
pains then poorer men to attain ^o it, but the glory and happiness thereof will
make a full amends. Let them ^hen pursue it with courage, and they shall not
miss of it.

So far have we waded in the Negative description of Gods called ^nes.

Now it is time to come to the Affir^ative. Wherein the Apostle,

First, sets out their Election. And

Secondly, the end of it.

In their Election, note,

1. The Electour.

2. The Elected.

The Electour is God, But God has ^osen. Where the Apostle informs us ^at
Man's salvation depends upon Gods Election.

Gods choice is the true ground o^ our happiness. Hence it is that in
Scripture they have that honorable title of Gods Elect. Luke 18.7. Romans 8.33.
Shall not God avenge his own Elect? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect? When the Jewe^ were cast out, and the Gentiles received in their
room, yet was there among the Jews a remnant according to the election of
grace. Romans 11.5, 7.
And this election has obtaine^ that which Israel could not. The free dome of
Gods election, and foundation of man's felicity, appears in Ja^^ and Esau, born
of the same parents lying in the same womb, at the san^ time, yet one received,
the other refused: not for any thing in themselves for it was before the
children had do^^ good or evil; Romans 9.11.
but for Gods choice, the the purpose of God according to election mig^stand.
God has endued us with a^ spiritual blessings in heavenly thing in Christ,
Ephesians. 1.3, 4.
says the Apostle: but it is according as he had elected us. So the every
where the beginning of our ha^ pinesse is ascribed to the same fountain, even
to Gods choice alone an^ to nothing besides. For our case a^^ and condition in
nature is alike. I^ Adam we are all dead. We are children indeed, Ephesians. 2.3.
but it is but children of Gods wrath as well as others. This is our greatest
title in Gods sight, whatsoever titles else we be born to in the world. At Gods
beck we escape or perish. His mercy may save us: his justice may condemn us.
What happiness then can we look for, but from his election? The price of our
redemption is the blood of Christ. Joh. 1.29.
He is Gods Lamb, that must take away the Worlds sin. Him God would not give
for the Angels that were fallen. Him he did give for men that had offended him.
What is the reason why Men are more happy then Angels? Why Christ dies for Men,
not for Angels? Gods choice. And is not that the reason why one man rather then
another shall be saved by his death? Questionless it is so. When Christ is
dead for us, how comes the merit of his passion to be applied to us? We are
dead in sins, and cannot stretch out our hand to take it, nor open our mouth to
feed on it. As men in a trance must have their mouths opened, and hot water put
in by others: so must we have Christ's passion applied unto us by Gods Spirit.
And how comes Gods Spirit to apply it to one soul and not to another, but
because God has chosen the one and not the other? This kind of proceeding does
much illustrate the glory of God. Had God chosen all, election had been a
common favor: And common favors are lightly set by, when peculiar privileges
are highly rated, as betokening more love in the giver, and bringing more
profit to the receiver. If there were any thing in those whom God chooses, more
then in others, the choice would not tend so much to Gods glory as to Man's. The
honor would not be the Electors, but theirs that are elected. But that favor
that proceeds from pure election, redounds altogether to the glory of the
Electour. Thus is Gods glory most promoted by the freeness of his own choice.

But why should this free choice of God offend the sons of men? What means the
lowing of the Oxen and the bleating of the Sheep? Many things are objected
against Gods liberty showed in his choice.





Furthermore, God considers both ^orrupt in Adam, fallen from their in^egrity,
and liable to his wrath, and eternal condemnation; so that he might ^^stly
have rejected both; and how ^^en can he do wrong in rejecting one? When
Pharaohs servants had both de^erved death, what wrong could he (...) to him
that was hanged in pardo^ing his fellow? A malefactor has no ^use to complain
of his deserved pu^^shment whatsoever favor be showed others. It is free for
God to show mercy, (...) execute justice.

Secondly,



1. We say, that Gods mercy is sufficiently showed in saving those whom he
chooses. He might in justice have condemned all men, and therefore it was
abundant mercy in him to choose any to eternal happiness.

2. We say further, that if God should have had pity upon all, and taken all,
it had been no election at all. He that refuses none, chooses none. It is one
thing to pick and choose: another thing to take all, and put by none.

3. We say God is just as well a merciful. Now if God should have elected all,
he had lost the occasion o^ showing his justice upon the sons o^ men, which
could never have been redeemed again, unless God should a^^ter his resolution
and change his decree, which is impossible.

Lastly, why do not these objecto^ consider, that if this reason taken from the
extending of Gods mercy to the uttermost bounds were good, they must be forced
with Origin to bring in the Devils too into heaven, to leave hell empty, and to
make our Savior false of his word: who affirms expressly, that there are
some sins which shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, Mat. 12.32.
nor in the world to come? Well may Gods mercy then be sufficiently showed,
though some be left for patterns of his justice.



Why do they not conclude, I shall recover of my sickness, if God have so
appointed; and what need I take Physic? Unless they think that he without
whose providence not a sparrow falls to the ground, take no care what becomes of
men's lives or estates. Yet because this stopping of gaps in Divinity is but
half satisfaction: We answer further, that our salvation depends primarily upon
Gods choice, but not upon it alone. God that has chosen us, has kept his
counsel to himself, but has appointed certain subordinate means to bring us
to the assurance of our salvation. Even as in our temporal states God does not
acquaint us who shall be rich, and who shall be poor, but appoints us to
labor, and to commit the success to him: so for our souls, God keeps his
determinations to himself, but wills us to use the means, and to commit the
event to him, not doubting of his favor, if we be not failing to our selves.

need he to pray, or watch, or forbear evil, that cannot but be saved,
whatsoever he do, because he is chosen to eternal life?

Act. 27.24, 31.
Paul in a like case reasons, that although God had promised him the lives of
all that were with him in the ship, yet they could not be safe, if they let the
mariners go. Gods decrees may be comfortable to us, if we can by any means come
to know, that God has determined good unto us. But Gods laws, not his degrees
are the rule of our lives. Was David wicked, because he was sure of a Kingdom?
Or St. Paul careless, because he was sure that a Crown was laid up for him in
the heavens?

2. We say, that such as know that God has chosen them are freed from this
base disposition and careless humor. For they cannot know it but by the
testimony of Gods Spirit given unto them. And the same Spirit which brings this
comfortable assurance to them, makes them careful to please God; for he is a
sanctifying, as well as a comforting Spirit.

Non est amici, sed se amantis. De Consol.
This is not the part, says he, of a friend, but of one that loves himself:
The same may be said of such a choice. It is not the choice of a friend, but of
a self-lover. To choose a wise, a loving, an able servant before an unfit one,
is not properly to choose, but to take one chosen by his own fitness before.
Look how much there is in, or may be hoped of from the person elected, so much
less is the grace and favor of the Electour. The Apostle therefore opposes
grace and works in this matter of choice, Romans 11.6.
If it be of grace, it is no more of works; or else were grace no more grace:
but if it be of works, it is no more grace; or else were work no more work. By
this means therefore they overthrow Gods grace and Gods choice at once, while
they seek to give a reason of it, and to establish man's works.

Lutherans, who make Gods choice to depend upon the foresight of our faith, and
so by consequence our happiness to depend upon the use of our own will. But
this is not to choose neither, but to declare who have made themselves fit to be
chosen. This is not to put a difference between man and man, but to see who
would distinguish themselves. If St. Paul should ask again, Who has separated
thee, by this opinion; the believer might answer fa^ otherwise then St. Paul
expected, and might say, I separated my self, for God saw that I would beleeve^
when others would not, and therefore chose me. But St. Paul might well reply,
Then did not God choose thee nor separate thee, and therefore thou may not
expect the happiness of Gods elect. Seeing we have no power in our selves to
believe, how can God foresee that we will do it, unless he determine to give
us grace to do it? Regeneration does not work upon our Understanding only to
show us what we are to do, but upon our Will also, and principally to, too
alter and reform it; which which it is done, our affections are altered
withal, and we have not a power to believe put into us, but do actually
believe. So that here is no room at all for faith foreseen. There are two
beggars that want means to live. Who can soresee that one will build an
Hospital, and the other will not, unless he determine to give him means to do
it? So neither can there be any foresight of faith in us, who are destitute of
all power of believing.

cry out with St. Paul, God has chosen. When he chose us, we were not, and
therefore he could see no good in us. As soon as we had any being we were
altogether corrupt, and therefore he could not foresee any good in us. What if
we be able to give no reason of Gods choice? No more could St. Paul that had
been rapt up into the third heaven. And shall we think our selves wiser then
St. Paul? So may we come within the censure that Prosper gives of some of his
time, We are not ignorant, Non ignoramus esse quesdam tam inconsideratae
praesumptionts et tam superbae arragantiae, ut quod praecepuus Magister
gentium, non ab homintbus, neque per hominem, sed divinitus cruditus supr a
mensuram scientiae sitae long et alt^^ remotum esse confessus est, audeam
falsi n^minis temerare doctrina; et nihil ill^c occultum, nihil velint esse
secretum, u^^ Apostolus ^^n quid sentiendum esset, aperuit, sed quid non
serutandum esset, estend^t. Pro^p. de voc. Gent. l. 1. c. 21.
quoth he, that there are some so inconsiderately presumptuous, and so proudly
arrogant, that what the chief teacher of the Gentiles, who was neither taught
of men, nor by man, but of God, confesses to be far remote from, and high
above the measure of his knowledge, they dare rashly to style a false Dectrine:
and would have nothing hidd^n, nor nothing secret there, where the Ap^stle did
not lay open what was to be beleev^d by us, but showed us what was not to be
sought after. Though we cannot then give a reason of Gods choice, yet it
becomes us not to deny it, nor the freeness of it, because there are many
things true, which yet we cannot understand: so that the reason may appear to
be not want of truth in the things, but want of capacity in us, or of
revelation from God. Yea things may be true of which no reason can be given,
and so may Gods choice of one, and not another. Sweetly does the Father
conclude, Those things which God would have to be hidden, Quae D^^s acculia
esse volu it, non sunt sor utanda; quae aurem manifesta fecit, non sunt
neganda: ne et in illis illicite curiosi, et in istis damnabiliter inveniamu
ingrati. Prosp. de voc. Gent. l. 1. c. 21.
are not to be dived into: yet those things which he has made manifest are not
to be denied, lest we be found in the former unlawfully curious, and in the
latter damnably ungrateful.

Revel. 4.11.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power; for thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created.
Otherwise we are unworthy of our vocation, and deserve to be numbered among such
as are refused, if we be unwilling to acknowledge the liberality of Almighty
God in choosing us. So great was this favor, and so little was there in us to
move God to do it, that no thanks should be thought too much, that either our
hearts could invent, or our tongues utter. It is fit in our praises not to
begin at the conclusion with the happiness we hope for, nor at the middle with
the comforts of soul and body we have here, but at the beginning of all
comforts, which is placed in Gods free choice. Thus may we rightly descend to
the rest, when we have begun at the first and chiefest.

We have mounted up on high to find the Elector, and now we must dive as low to
find the elected. The chuser is not so great, but the chosen are as mean.
Hitherto I may fitly apply that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 113.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens. Who is
like unto the Lord our God: who dwells on high: Who humbles himself to
behold the things that are in heaven and in the earth? He raises the poor ^ut
of the dust: and lifts the needy out of the dunghill: That he may set him
with Princes; even with the Princes of his people. Thus you have their
meannesse in the words of the Psalmist: take it now in the words of the
Apostle. The foolish things of the world, the weak things of the world, the
base things of the world, and things which are despised, yea and things which
are not. The Apostle would not have any man to be mistaken in them, nor to
think better of them then they did deserve, and therefore thinks no words
sufficient to set out their meannesse. The foolish things of the world, that
is, Stulta munde, i. quos potentes et Pholosophi stultos aest mabat. Haymo in
textum.
says Haymo, Those whom great men and Philosophers esteemed fools.
Philosophers counted them fools: Great men counted them weak: Noble men counted
them base and despised, yea and mere nothings: yet God makes choice of them.
Those then whom God chooses to prefer, are lightly the lowest. So our Savior
confesses to the praise of God, Mat. 1.25.
I thank thee O father Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. St. James
confirms it, and that with a proclamation, Hearken my beloved brethren, Jam. 5
5.
has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the
Kingdom which he has promised to them that love him? The auditors of our
Savior Christ were for the most part poor: The poor have the Gospel preached
unto them. Mat. 11.5.
We find at his Sermons not the Scribes nor the Pharisees, unless it be to
entangle him in his talk. There we find Joseph the Carpenter, and Mary his
wife; Peter and Andrew, James and John fishermen, and others of this rank. One
ground of Gods proceeding this way is ^o cross the world. His wisdom is counted
foolishness by the world, and the wisdom of the world is foolishness to God:
Luke 16.15.
That which is highly esteemed a^ongst men is abomination in the sight of God.
Wise, Rich, Noble personages ^re deep in the worlds books, but least ^n Gods.
On the contrary, those which are least in the worlds account, ^s the foolish,
the poor, the meanest ^en; these are often in greatest repuation with God.
Another ground is kind of equity, which though God ^e not always tied unto,
yet for the ^ost part he does observe. Such as ^re miserable in this world, are
made ^appy in another world. And such as ^e happy here, are made miserable
there. They are rare spectacles tha^ are happy here and hereafter: and they are
as rare that are miserable in both Abraham gives this sentence to stop the rich
man's mouth in hell. Luke 16.25.
Son remember, that thou in thy life time receivedst the good things, and
likewise Lazarous ev^^ things, but now he is comforted, and th^^ art tormented.
The birds that hide their heads in the winter, sing most merrily in the Summer:
so those that through poverty and meannesse lie hid and unregarded in this
world, lie closest with Lazarus in Abraham's bosom. A thir^ ground may be taken
from civil policy. Princes use to raise the lowest that they may depend upon
the^ alone, by whom they are raised, an^ be faithful to them. So the great
Turk has his officers, that in a^ coasts of his dominions take up hopeful
young children, and bring them up t^ make Janissaries to attend upon him These
he supposes must be faithful to him, because they know no country, nor
kindred, nor father, nor mother; but all their welfare depend upon his favor.
So may God we^ expect faithfulness from mean men^ that have no wisdom to
shift for them selves, no wealth to rely upon, no friends to trust unto, nor
any comfort but what they must expect from his mercy. And these he chooses.
These will promote his kingdom, only that they may rise with it. As it is
noted of Leo the first of that name of the Bishops of Rome (though otherwise a
good man) that he mounted up the sea of Rome to the skies, Rainolds and Heart.
that himself might rise up with it. The last ground of this choice of the
meanest may be Gods glory, which is much illustrated by the promotion of mean
persons. God knows that by the choice of base men, who are destitute of all
means of help and safety in themselves, his glory will be more manifested, then
by the electing of famous men, who look for all felicity from themselves, and
attribute all good things received from God, to their own wisdom, or their own
deservings. And therefore he makes choice of the weaker. These will not commend
themselves, or set out their own good parts, who have no wit to plot for
preferment: no power nor wealth to make steps for a ladder to clime up upon: no
nobility for which they should be honored. It is manifest both to themselves
and others from whence their glory comes: namely from Gods liberality in
electing them. If God should set his mind upon great men, they should not
submit to many mean offices that God calls them unto. Their spirits are too
great. But mean men have not such high spirits nursed within them: but are more
easily humbled. So that no particular reason can be given of Gods choosing one
man rather then another, yet there may be many grounds of preferring the meaner
before the mighty. For it does much more set out the glory of God. Gods order
is sweetly noted by Bernard, Regnum Dei conceditur in praedestinatione: promit
titur in vocatione ostenditur in justificatione: percipitur in glorificatione.
I^ praedest. est gratia, in vocat. potentia, in justaf. laetitia, in glorif.
^loria. Be^n. de verb. lib. sap.
Gods Kingdom is granted in predestination: it is promised in vocation: it is
showed in justification: it is received in glorification. In predestination
there is grace, in vocation power, in justification joy, in glorification
glory. But if God had chosen the great ones, he had not showed so much grace in
choosing, nor power in calling, neither had they received so much joy in being
justified, nor so great addition of honor in being glorified. They would have
thought their condition somewhat bettered, but not clean altered. The mean
therefore are Gods choice. So says Basil of the Apostles who were sent to
publish Gods choice, and to call such as he had chosen. O counsel truly high
and wisdom immortal! (...). Basil. Sell. in illud, Venite post me.
When Christ did intend to teach mortal men a strange matter, and a new
opinion, and an heavenly doctrine, and sought for fit dispensers of such
instructions, he despised the Cities, he made no reckning of po^ular states, he
refused the governors of Kingdoms, be detested the power of ^ich men, he
hated the ^loquence of orators, he wished not for the tongues of Philosophers:
he passed through the nations, and neither chose their war^ke preparations, nor
the ^exterity of their hands, ^or the swiftness of their ^eet. But why do I
reckon ^p humane helps? Suf^ering the ranks of Angels to enjoy a perpetual
rest, he goes about the havens and rivers and shores, determining to take from
thence ministers of his heavenly doctrine, and standing by exhorted them
saying, Follow me and I will make you fishers of men. I come, says he, to fish
for you: I seek for fishermen, not for Princes: I persuade mariners, not
Potentates. Thus God made the great ones of the world, that afterward should
be converted, indebted to poor and simple men, by whose Ministry God brings
them to the knowledge of his truth, which they by all their greatness and
wisdom could not attain unto. Dominus noster Jesus Christus volens super borum
frangere cervices, non quaesivit per oratorem piscatorem, sed de piscatore
lucratus est imperatorem. Magnus Cyprianus orator; sed prius Petrus piscator,
per quem postea crederet non solum orator, sed et imperator. Aug. in John Tract
7.
And this St. Augustine wonders at, Our Lord Jesus Christ, says he being
willing to pull down the pride of highminded men, did not seek the fisherman by
the Orator, but gained the Emperor by the fisherman. Cyprian was a great
orator: but Peter was first a fisherman, by whose means afterward might
believe not only the Orator, but also the Emperor. That which is true of the
choice of these men to their Apostleship, is as true of Gods choice of men to
heavenly happiness. And therefore the same Father elsewhere brings in God as
it were fitting upon his throne, and making his choice out of all sorts of men
standing before him. If I should choose the Senator, the Senator would say, Si
eligerem Senatorem, diceret Senator, dignitas mea electa est. Si eligerem
divitem, diceret dives, opulentia mea electa est. Si eligerem imperatorem,
diceret imperator, potentia mea electa est. Si eligerem oratorem, diceret
orator, cloquentia mea electa est. Si eligerem Philosophum, diceret
Philosophus, sapientia mea electa est. Interim differantur superbi isti. Da
mihi prius istum piscatorem. Veni tu pauper, sequere me. Nihil habes: nihil
nosti: sequere me. Idiota pauper, sequere me. Aug. de verb. Dom. ser. 59.
My dignity is chosen. If I should choose the rich man, the rich man would say,
My wealth is chosen. If I should choose the Emperor, the Emperor would say, My
power is chosen. If I should choose the Orator, the Orator would say, My
eloquence is chosen. If I should choose the Philosopher, the Philosopher would
say, My wisdom is chosen. Put these proud ones aside a little. Give me that
same fisherman first. Come thou poor man, follow thou me. Thou have nothing:
thou know nothing: follow thou me. I say thou poor Idiot, follow me. The
same is delivered more briefly elsewhere by the same Writer, Potest Senator
gloriari de semetipso: potest Orator: potest Imperator: non potest nisi de
Christo Piscator. Aug. de. ver. Ap. ser. 27.
The Senator may glory in himself: so may the Orator: so may the Emperor:
but the poor fisherman can glory in none but in Christ.



First, It concerns the Ministers, and teaches them not to be servile to
great men. Adulation becomes not them: Flatery should be far from them. God
respects the poor most. Their safety is not to be neglected, whom God cares
f^r. Gods Ministers must not regard earth more then heaven. Worldly pomp must
not affect them. The meanest in their charge must be tended by them, as well as
the greatest. Revel. 4.8, 10.
The four living wights in the Revelation are taken for the Ministers: and the
four and twenty Elders for the people. The four living wights have between them
four and twenty wings. The Minister must have a wing for every member of the
Congregation. The shepherd is so far from neglecting the meanest sheep, that he
puts no difference: nay, he is most tender over the sick and weak. So must the
Ministers bend their labors that way where there is most hope of success,
even to the meanest among whom God has most choice. Hope of preferments and
by-ends, may tempt the Ministers as well as other men to look after great men:
but piety teaches them not to neglect the meanest. To such I may give
counsel, as Jeremiah did to Baruch in his dumpes, Jer. 45.5.
Seek thou great things for thy self? Seek them not. Gods Ministers must be
like God himself: no respecters of persons. Where they may exspect most fruit,
there they must be most painful. So shall their labors not be spent in vain,
but much comfort will arise out of them.

Jam. 2.4.
and give place to the rich, Luke 14.12, 13.
is to be partial in our selves, and to be judges of evil thoughts. He that
will be recompensed in the resurrection of the just, when he makes a feast,
must not invite the rich, but the poor. These are our brethren, as Augustine
observes, even by our own profession in the beginning of our prayers, when we
say, Our Father. Rich men, says he, and Noble men according to the flesh are
here admonished, when they become Christians not to insult proudly over poor
and mean persons, Admonentur hic divites, vel genere nobiles secundum seculum,
cum Christiani facti fuerint non superbire adversus pauperes et ignobiles,
quoniam simul dicunt Deo, Pa^er noster; qu^d non possunt vere ac pie dicere,
nisi se fratres esse cognoscant. Aug. de sermon. Dom. in Monte. l. 2. c. 8.
because they say both to God with one breath, Our Father: which they cannot
truly and religiously say, unless they acknowledge themselves to be Brethren.
Those whom God has chosen, and advanced, men must not contemn. Such as are
bred of poor parents, when they are preferred by the favor of Princes, are not
contemned by subjects, but as highly honored, as if they had been nobly born.
Neither must we contemn those whom God prefers, how mean so ever they be in
birth or in condition. They may be greater in Gods books then we. O gravis
nimirum et lugenda conditio! Pauper Beatitudinem emit m^ndicitate, dives
supplictum facultate. Salv. contra avar. lib. 3.
O heavy and lamentable condition! says Salvian. Poor Lazarus purchased
happiness by his beggerlinesse: the rich man procured punishment by his riches.

exaltation absolutely considered requires as much: but much more being
compared with the rejection of them that are rich. This made the Virgin Mary
the more affected with Gods goodness toward her, because he had neglected
many greater: Luke 1.52, 53.
He has put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.
He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty
away. Their poverty brings no profit unto God: but his election is very
profitable to them. God has kept the glory of his choice unto himself: but all
the benefit of it he has afforded to them. They have no reason to envy him
this glory, from whence comes so great riches unto themselves. The honor of a
peaceable government belongs unto a King: but the profit of it is divided
amongst the subjects. They were utterly unworthy of the benefit, if they should
deny their Prince the glory of it. Our benefit which comes to us by Gods
choice, is far greater then any temporal privileges or commodities, and
therefore we are worthy of the severest censure, if we grudge God the glory of
it. See David's affection: When God had called him from following the Ewes with
young to be King of Israel, see how he admires at it, 2 Samuel 7.18.
Who am I O Lord God? and what is my house, that thou have brough^ me hitherto?
He thought no praise too great for God that made a Shepherd (...) King. What
praise then should w^ think too great for God, that has made silly sinners
glorious Saints? Ou^ hearts, our tongues, and all we have are too little to
acknowledge so great (...) kindness.

God did not choose, sai^ Augustine, Rich men, nor powerful, Non elegit divites
Deus, non potentes, quibus verbi sui secreta committeret: sed aut opoliones,
sicut Patriarchas et beatum David, aut piscatores, sicut beatum Petrum, vel
reliquos Apostolos. Aug. de Temp. ser. 225.
to com^it the secrets of his word unto them; but ^ither shepherds, as the
Patriarchs and happy David, or fishermen, as blessed Peter, and he rest of the
Apostles: These men God ^ade of mean ones great in grace: and not only means of
good to the ^ges wherein they lived, but of comfort to future ages. We fare the
better for such things as God revealed un^o them. We know not how much ^ood the
poor among us may do, both ^o the present and future ages. They ^ave often rich
gifts of mind that are ^oor in purse. The Magistracy and ^inistery can show
many worthy ^ghts that came out of Cottages. It ^ecomes us then to make much of
the ^oor, because God picks most out ^f these, and much good may come ^y them,
both to us and to others. and thus much for the election of Gods ^osen ones.

Now follows the end that God aims ^in such an election.

The end is set out largely by the ^postle. To confound the wise. To con^und
the things which are mighty. To bring (...) naught things that are. How can it
be ^therwise but that rich men and wise men should be confounded when they
shall see poor and ignorant men partakers of eternal happiness; and
themselves deprived of all hope of that happiness which they have long and
studiously sought after? Hence are w^ taught that by means of the lowest o^ men
God uses to overthrow the power and wisdom of the greatest. Go^ did confound
the power and wit o^ Pharaoh and all Egypt by lice and suc^ other vermin, as
the ten plagues (...) Egypt can testify. He confounds the army of Benhadad, 1
King. 20.14, 16.
and the two an^ thirty Kings that were with him, b^ the servants of the
Princes of the provinces. Genesis 3.1.
Thus a Serpent that creeps upon the ground deprives Adam and al^ his posterity
of all their happiness^ Which had been utterly lost, if Go^ had not sent the
seed of the woman to break the head of the Serpent. Thu^ Serpents kill and slay
the host (...) Israel, Number. 21.
whom the enemies could no^ hurt. Thus a brazen serpent heal^ thoses that were
stung, whom all the Physicians art could not cure. Thu^ Moses rod divides the
furious se^ Thus spittle and clay do that which neither skill of Surgeons,
Exodus 14.
nor power ^f Kings could do; yea which was never done before from the
beginning of ^he world; Joh. 9.
they open the eyes of one ^orn blind. Judge. 9.
Thus a poor woman speeds ^bimelech a mighty King, and sends ^im going with a
piece of a millstone, whom armed Soldiers feared to come ^eer. 1 Samuel 17.
Thus a stone flung out of a sling ^y the hand of a youth kills Goliath ^he
Champion of the Philistims, and ^he terror of Israel. Josh. 6.
Thus the sound ^f Rams horns blows down the walls ^f Jericho. Act. 4.16.
Thus poor fishermen make ^hief Priests and Scribes almost at their ^vits end
by their own confession, so that they know not what to do. Thus Moses a poor
sheep-keeper troubles Pharaoh and all the Kingdom of Egypt: and brings out
Israel in despite of Pharaoh and all the power of Egypt. A glorious work
wrought by a mean man, which a great Army could not have done. This was the
finger of God. Genesis 14.
Thus Abraham a stranger on ^arth, a sojourner, and one that dwelt ^n tents,
overthrows four Kings and their Armies. Josh. 12.
Thus Joshua the ser^ant of Moses overthrows a multitude of Canaanitish Kings
in a little space: and takes their strong cities and overruns their countries,
and gives them to the people of God in possession. So easily does God expel
the Idols and Idolaters out of Canaan, that none but God himself might be
served in the holy Land.

Gods preparations are like his proceedings. He has planted some qualities in
the meanest which do exceed the strength of the greatest. These he has planted
for rods to scourge the greatest withal and the proudest. A little vermin
carries a sting to kill a mighty man withal. He need but touch him, and he
dies. A little arrow a great way off murders a hugh stagge: and there is no
flying from it. He may fly from men, from dogs, from horses, but not from
death. His wound runs with him. In many things the brute beasts go beyond
reasonable men. Whose sight can reach so far as the Eagles? Whose nose so far
so as the bloud-hounds? No wonder if God scourge wise men by fools, and
confound great ones by mean, that can do it by dogs, Act. 12.24.
and by filly vermin if he please. Herod in all his pride and royalty cannot
fly from silly worms. These eat him alive, that use not to ^evour others
till they die. Where are ^ow his Physicians? Where are his Surgeons? Where
are his men of ^ar? Can none of these by skill nor ^rce drive away a few worms
from ^^e carkase of a King? So it seems. ^or Herod must be a quick coarse.
Where is man's nobility? where is is policy? where is his greatness, ^^at
cannot free him from those crea^ures that man's foot could consume (...) a
minute, if it could come at ^^em?

But besides the natural and imbred ^alities of weak creatures, when ^od
purposes to make use of the mea^est to confound the greatest, he can ^crease
their natural quality mira^lously. As the corn that goes single in(...) the
earth comes forth with a happy ^^d plentiful increase: so the qualities (...)
meanest men, yea of meanest crea^^res, of molehils are made mountains, ^hen God
has some great work to (...) by them. Thus by way of blessing, ^hen God
purposes to reward Jacob (...) his hard service, and to translate ^^bans
cattle with his children to ^^^obs possession, how slight a matter ^^th it? A
few pilled rods cast before the sheep in the gutturs make the cattle bring
forth speckled sheep i^ abundance: Genesis 30.38, 39.
and by virtue of a forme^ contract made Laban poor and Jacob rich. Nature
peradventure might have done something, working upon the fantasy of the
Cattle, but God^ blessing strangely increases the power of nature and Jacobs
portion. And thu^ by way of cursing, 2 King. 9. and 10. chapt.
a mad fellow esteemed by the Captains, whispering something in the ears of
Jehu procures a^ strange alteration in the Kingdom o^ Israel, as the deposing
of Joram, the death of Jesabell, the slaughter of seventy o^ Ahabs sons, and
all his kindred, the murder of two and forty of Ahaziah^ brethren, the
destruction of all the worshippers of Baal, and the rooting o^ Baal out of
Israel. It was much tha^ an uproare should rise on so light (...) ground: but
almost incredible to find^ so many alterations.

Besides the natural and encrease^ gifts of the meanest creatures, when God
has a purpose to pull down the strength and pride of great ones, h^ lessens
their force, and pulls down their spirits, that they may easily be tro^ under
foot of the weakest. When Go^ purposes to scourge Samson by those Philistims
whom he had often conquered before, he takes his strength from him, Judge. 16.
and then Samson becomes a prey to his enemies. His wit was overcome by a filly
woman, and his strength by those that had been conquered by it. The men of
Jericho that had strong walls to enclose them from the Israelites, yet when they
had heard of the great things that God had done for them in the Countries
about, their hearts melted, Josh. 2.11.
and there remained not any more courage in any man. God dismayes the men of
Jericho, that the Israelites may have the more easy victory. That this is Gods
doing appears by Moses swanlike song, who was best acquainted with Gods
courses, How should one, Deuteronomy. 32.30.
says he, chase a thousand, and two put ten ^housand to flight, except their
Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up? Strange it is to see how
weak great men ^^re, and how foolish wise men are, when God has a purpose to
confound them. He that gave them wit and strength, can take them both away,
when they abuse them, and he intends to bring some great judgment upon them to
the utter desolation of their estates, and destruction of their souls and
bodies. And if God do none of all these, yet he has many sudden accidents at
command to inflict upon men in the midst of their jollity, which neither their
wisdom can foresee, nor their power prevent. And this is done lightly by the
meanest of the creatures. The Popes themselves that insult so proudly over
Kings and Princes, have had woeful experience of this conclusion, and have
sealed it with their unexspected ruin. Bal. de vit. Pont. Romans
Pope Adrian IV. was killed with a fly which got in his throat. None of the
Physicians could get it out again. So a small fly makes an end of a great
Pope. Serres French Invent.
Urban VI. escaped no better, who in his malice had tied up some of his
Cardinals in sacks, and cast them into the sea to feed fishes. This tyrannous
Pope caught a^ fall off his mule, as she stumbled in the street, and took his
deaths wound, whereof he dyed within 27. days. So little an occasion as the
trip of a mul^ lays the glory of an insolent Pope upon the ground. 2 Samuel 18.
Absalom the proud and rebellious son of David riding under an oak is hanged by
the hair o^ the head: none of his followers offer^ to take him down, till Joab
and his youngmen make an end of him. 1 King. 22.
Ahab the wicked King of Israel, the bane of Naboth, and the usurper of his
vineyard, is killed by an arrow shot by he knows not whom, coming from he knows
not whence. So that his disguised apparel though it saved him from the sword
of the Syrians, yet it could not save him from an arrow shot by one that little
dreamed of killing of a King.

whereby they are fitted to be executioners of Gods wrath against mighty
Princes. Great men thing themselves safe in their palaces. But how soon can God
set fire on them? They think no man dare make known their secret sins, nor
reveal their hidden wickednesses. But often does God bring their works of
darkness to light by the meanest of their servants, and the most contemptible
of their attendants. Let not them trust to their walls, nor to their wealth, nor
to their power. God fears not their greatness: and he can stir up mean men to
courage, so that they shall not fear the frowns of the mighty, but shall lay
open their secret crimes unto the world, when God will come into the lists and
execute judgment upon the mighty.

Pharaoh the mighty King of Egypt, and come into his bed-chambe^ without the
Kings leave, but sent by a greater and a divine authority. No shift had Pharaoh
to rid his Kingdom, nor himself from these incombrances. And indeed there is
no shift that great men have to avoid the fury of mean things but by turning
away the anger of the most high God, who is Lord of hosts, and in his
displeasure serves himself of the lowest things to pull down the greatest men.
For as in a clock or a jack, the first wheel moving moves all the rest; and if
it stand still, the rest move not: so in the world, if God stir not against us,
the creatures are quiet; but if he once pitch his tents, and set himself in
battle array against us, then all the creatures, even the least, are up in
arms, ready placed in their ranks to confound those whom God determines to
ruin. But if they be once truly reconciled to God, then need not the least to
fear the power of the greatest: much less need the greatest to fear any
mischief from the least. Otherwise the least Be has a sting to anger a King;
and the poorest must not be set light, for by them can God confound the mighty.

and wise confounded by such as are of no reputation. Or when they find great
impediments removed and taken out of the way by little things, and such as men
make no account of. Peradventure some great disease that threatens not only
pain and grief, but death it self to the whole body, is taken away like
Hezekiahs sore, 2 King. 20.7.
with a lump of figs. This is Gods doing. Peradventure some great Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.
challenges and terrifyeth the whole host of Israel; and some David contemned
by him, overthrows him. Let God have the glory of it. Peradventure some evil
members in a Kingdom great in estate and policy, seek the ruin of it: and God
prevents their designs by the means of men of low degree, and far beneath them
both in estate, and understanding. God looks for the honor of it, and that the
safety of the Kingdom should be attributed to him. Peradventure in the Church
some great Clerks may prove great heretics or Schismatics; and raise factions
and divisions, which may endanger the Church it self. If God by others of
meaner learning and parts, overthrow their heresies, reason good that God
should have all the glory. God does often make choice of weak instruments to
work by, that he may be known to be the author of the good work, and that his
power may appear in the weakness of the instrument, and the homage and honor
of every glorious action may be attributed unto him who is the King of glory.

great difficulty. Without this dependence there is no fafety to be had in the
world. There is no man so wise in his own conceit, but another may overreach
him. There is none so great, but another may prove greater then he. But suppose
a man that were every way both the wisest and the greatest in the world, yet
were he far from a sure estate; because he falls infinitely short of Gods
wisdom and strength, who can put matter enough into such weak and simple ones,
as he skorns to look upon, utterly to overthrow all his prosperity. Happy is he
then, whether great or small, wife or foolish, that depends on God alone, for
he shall be safe in the fall of the mighty ones.

Hitherto we have passed through the the sea of Gods election: now we are to
come to the haven of Gods glory. We have heard the persons largly described,
and find them for the most part to be the meanest. Now let us touch upon the
impulsive cause, which might move God to make choice of such, as it is
delivered in the conclusion of the text: That no flesh should glory in his
presence.

That they who glory in their power, or in their policy, may perceive their own
weakness, and may be driven to acknowledge, that without God they have
nothing, they can do nothing, when they see the Kingdom of heaven opened by
God to weak and simple persons, and shut against them. Neither ^oth the Apostle
say, That these great ^nes may not glory in his presence; but, that no flesh
may. And surely by this means all glorying is excluded from all men in the
world. The great and wise ones have no cause to glory, because though they have
great portions in ^his world, yet they are not often called ^o glory in the
world to come. The ^oor and simple have no cause to glory, because though they
be called to happiness in heaven, yet they are but foolish and mean persons
here. The former could not attain happiness by their wit. The latter could not
attain ^o it of themselves for lack of forecast. Thus is all occasion of
boasting in the fight of God taken from all flesh, and all the glory of our
happiness left for God, by whose grace alone, and not by any thing in us we are
brought to eternal selicity. So are we taught by Fulgentius, God, Vnus Deus
est qui gratis et ^ocat praedestinatos, et justificat vocatos, et glorificat
justificatos. Fulg. de praed. ad Mon. lib. 1.
says he, alone is he that freely both calls such as are predestinate, and
justifie^ such as are called, and glorifies such as are justified. All power of
creatures is bu^ weakness, that God may have all the glory who has all the
power. For a^ the same Father affirms, Fullness of power is to be found in
none but in God alone. Plena potestas quae est, nisi sola divinitas? Fulg. de
pass. Dom. ad Tral. lib. 3.
To draw this particular then to a generall^ here the Spirit of God by the
mouth o^ St. Paul informs us, that God by his providence so rules all things,
tha^ the glory of all in the end shall return (...) God.

He is the first mover of all, and there fore will move all to his own honor
at last. This course God observes in the particular promotions of particula^
persons. He raises David from a sor^ shepherd to a mighty King. And David i^
his generation exceedingly honour^ God, and promoted the cause of relig^ on.
God rent the ten tribes from Reh^boam, and gave them to Jeroboam. A^ though
Jeroboam had no care to honor God, yet by this rent did God honor his justice
in plaguing Solomon's idolatr^ with the loss of many subjects up^ his
posterity, fulfilling the cur^ threatened against idolaters in the se^ond
Commandment in punishing the ^ins of the parents upon the children. God
raises Jehu, and of a Captain in ^srael, makes him King over Israel. By this
means God honors his name, and ^ids Israel of two enemies, Ahab and all ^is
posterity, and Baal and all his wor^hippers. Jehu at Gods command riddes them
all out of Israel. Whatsoever be the means of our preferment, all the glory of
it belongs unto God. As it is in ^ome men's peculiar preferments, Luke 12.24.
so ^s it in common favors. Consider the ^avens, says our blessed Savior,
for they neither sow nor reap, which neither have store^ouse nor barn, and God
feeds them. Neither does God feed the ravens alone, but ^ll other creatures
also, Ps. 104.27, 28.
as the Psalmist ^cknowledgeth, These wait all upon ^hee, that thou may give
them their meat ^n due season. That thou give them, they ^ather: thou openest
thine hand, they are fil^ed with good. Though men will not ^cknowledge it, yet
their Corn, and Wine, and Oil, Hos. 2.8.
their silver and gold are ^f God. Neither is it otherwise in ^oliticall
affairs. God takes the main ^roke in all popular mutations unto himself. The
Egyptians must become subject to the Assyrians, Isa 20.4.
but the glory of i^ must not be given to their strength, for God himself has
foretold it, and appointed it. Jerusalem must be burned with fire, and the
Citizens made slave^ to the Caldeans, but it is by Gods determination. Jer.
34.2.
Thus says the Lord, Behold (...) will give this city into the hand of the
Kin^ of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.

Lastly, so it is in Ecclesiastical occurrents. The Ark of God must b^
carried into captivity, but not because of the power of the enemies, but
because God gives it into their hands for the sins of his people. Psalm. 78.61.
God delivered hi^ strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemies
hand. The Arc must be brough^ back again from the enemies, but not b^ the
force of the Israelites. For God send judgments on the Philistines, 1 Samuel 6.9.
and force them to send back the Arc, and b^ directing it into his own coasts
with out a driver, manifests his own power and glory. So might the enemies s^
that without Gods permission the^ could not have taken the Arc being compelled
by him to send it back again^ Much more then in disposing of spirit tuall
graces and eternal favors dot^ God procure everlasting glory to himself, as
well as perpetual felicity to his chosen. And therefore does he choose the
meanest, not only to confound the mighty, but also to bring all the honor to
himself, and in the Apostles ^anguage, That no flesh may glory in his ^resence.
God can do what he list, when he list, without man's help, against all man's
power and wit. It is all one to him whether he work with in^truments, or
without instruments. It ^osts him never the more pains: nor ^he work is never
a whit the more ^ifficult to his divine Majesty and Almighty power. The glory
therefore of ^ll good and glorious actions belongs ^ot to the instruments, but
unto God. ^n warlike victories the Captain has ^ot all the glory due to him,
because ^e cannot fight without Soldiers and Weapons. But God can do that
without means, which he does do by means. He can convert men by the Ministry of
the word: and he can do it without. So that all the glory of it must of
ne^essity be Gods. It was not the diligence of Abraham's servant, Genesis 24.7.27.
nor the forecast of Abraham, that brought Rebecea to Isaac, ^ut Gods
overruling hand and providence. His Angel directs Abraham's servant to the
place appointed. Reason it is then that he should refer all things to his own
honor, that disposes of all things at his own pleasure. And so much the
rather because no profit comes unto God out of his actions* All the benefit of
them is ours. We may be made happier by them, he cannot. The greater glory
therefore is due to him, because all his works tend unto our benefit. His love
to us requires that he be glorified by us. Nothing can be added to him to make
him more happy. What can be expected less the^ but that that happiness and
perfection which he has already, be declared and manifested some way or other
in all the courses of his creatures?

This meditation pulls down the pride of all the world, have accomplished.
Another triumphs ^n prosperity, because of his magna^imity and courage in
adversity, which ^e has outworn by his patience and ^ast behind him. All these
are inju^ious to God. They may boast as long ^s they will, but God will lay
their honor in the dust, and set up the ^rophies of his honor in their
confu^on. Such as will not give glory to God, shall find none themselves in
the and. God will take from them what ^hey arrogate to themselves, and turn ^ll
to his own praise.

The conclusion of all shall be this, (...) teaches us which is the true
reli^ion. It must needs be that which aims ^ost at Gods honor, and refers all
to Gods glory. It must needs be that re^gion, that pulls down all pride of man,
and attributes all the good that is in ^an to God the giver. It cannot be the
^ligion of the Church of Rome, that attributes a great deal to man's merits. It
^nnot be our new Pelagianisme, or ^rminianisme, that ascribes too much (...)
man's will, and makes his eternal appinesse to hang upon the doubtful and
slippery turning of his own incli^ation. It must needs be ours, which subjects
all to God, that reduces every thing that good is, or comfortable to God, as
the fountain. This religion suits best with St. Paul's words, and permits no
flesh to glory in Gods presence. In this Religion let us live; in this Religion
let us die, that we may be found in the number of Gods chosen, and join his
glory to our everlasting felicity.

Amen.
GODS CHOICE AND MAN'S DILIGENCE: IN WHICH Is explained the Doctrine of free
Election, and Vocation answerable to it. Both of particular persons: yet may be
uncertain to them for a time. And the way of making both certain upon Scripture
grounds DISCOVERED. Deliverd in diverse SERMONS at Christ's Church Canterbury. By
Francis Tailor, B. D. And Preacher there.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for G. and H. Eversden at the Gray-hound in
Pauls-church-yard, 1654.

To the HONOUABLE his real Friend Colonel John Dixwell.
SAlvian one of the holiest of the ancient Writers, tells us, Liber est quispiam
beneficiorum foenore non gravatus: coguntur autem omnes ipsa conscientia sua ad
repensationem vicissitudinis, postquam esse coeperint debitores. Contra Avarit.
lib. 4. Every man is free, that is not bound to pay interest for benefits
received: but all are compelled even by their own conscience to requite
benefits with the like, after they once become debtours. But like for like I
cannot give: What shall I then, what can I less do, then give a cordial and
verbal acknowledgement, where I cannot render a real recompense? I am
encouraged by that of Heliodorus, Gratitudo viro sapienti pulcherrimum munus;
multosque novi, qui hoc donum, tanquam thesaurum, in animo reposuerunt. Lib.
Aethiopic. altero. Thankfulness is a most beautiful gift to a wise man; and I
have known many, who have laid up this present in mind, as a treasure. True it
is, the greatest praise for favors received by men is due to God, in whose
hands are the hearts of men. Yet though the fountain be most to be eyed, the
rivers are not to be slighted. David's care spurs me on to gratitude, who
acknowledges Jonathans love in his kindness to his posterity, 2 Samuel 9.3, 7. I
should be very ungrateful then, if I should not acknowledge your kindness not
only to me and mine, but also to many other godly Ministers in encouraging of
us, and them in the work of the Ministry. Our concord in Canterbury in driving
on the work of the Gospel, though we differ about Government, and our stout
consent to maintain purity of Doctrine, as it may be exemplary to other places,
so it is thoroughly known to you. And I must acknowledge in the name of my
fellow Laborers, that while you were employed in the Honorable house of
Parliament, you were the main instrument of settling and paying our means. I may
say with Ennodius, Lib. 1. Epist. 7. Quamvis non in me ad florem venerit matura
facundia, et pressus onere gratiae solvendi ^eserar facultate; comnitto tamen
cymbam ^heam placido mari; quia ^arum ab ingratitudine ^iffert muta gratitudo.
Although I have not at^ained to the height of loquence, and am over^ressed with
your kind^esse, so that I want ^ower to requite; yet I ^ave adventured to put
any slender boat into the ^alme sea; considering, that a dumb gratitude
differs little from ingratitude. I set before yo^ Gods Choice, and sha^ pray to
God to give yo^ grace to use diligence to make your calling and election sure.

And so desiring you t^ accept kindly of the small token of love an^
thankfulness, I commend you to God, an^ to the word of his grace which is
able to buil^ you up, and to give yo^ an inheritance among all them which are
sanctifyyed, Act. 20.32. So pray^th he that is

At yours Honors service in the Lord, Francis Tailor.

2 PET. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.


IT is an infallible rule in the Schools (dearly beloved in our best beloved
Lord and Savior) ^at the end which is ever last in ^xecution, is always the
first in in^ntion. The happy end of this unhap^y life, is the happiness of a
better ^ife. This is the last, this is the lasting ^^licity of Gods elect. This
is the fi^all, this is the perpetual beatitude, that God has chosen us to
before the world, that God has called us to in be world, that God will crown
us ^ith after the world. As it is the last (...) Gods execution, so let it be
the first (...) your intention.

Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.
In this little world the Isle of Man the external ornaments of the body are
lively pictures of the internal indowments of the soul. The eye of the soul is
the Understanding: it guide all the faculties of the soul. The foo^ is the
Will: it carries all the soul whi^ther it please. The hands of the sou^ are the
Affections: these bring fort^ as many several actions in the life as the hands
can show artificial operations in the world. The great worl^ is like the
little world. The variet^ of men's natural estates is an eviden^ expression of
their different spiritual^ conditions. The world may be mustre^ in three
ranks. The vantguard consists of such as are poor: this is a di^ease that most
men complain of. The main battle brings forth those tha^ have riches, but vex
themselves as (...) they had none, and live in want, the might live in plenty.
The rerewa^ holds those that are rich, and kno^ they are rich, that live
plentiful and bountifully according to their ^iches. Such is the variety of
men's several conditions in the Church. ^ome have no riches at all, but are
pretched and miserable, poor and blind, Revel. 3.17.
and ^aked, mere lukewarm Laodiceans, ^ime-serving formal Hypocrites. These
^re born in fin, and live in sin, and die (...) fin. The riches of Gods grace
they ^ave no share of, they are but baptized Simon Magusses. Act. 8.21.
They have neither part ^or lot in this matter: for their heart is not ^ight in
the sight of God. Others have ^pirituall treasure, but they know it ^ot. They
vex themselves for want of ^pprehending that favor which they ^ave. They live
as uncomfortably in ^he midst of grace, as covetous men in ^he midst of riches.
These say with ^saph, Has God forgotten to be gracious? Psalm. 77.9.
^ath he in anger shut up his tender mercies? These pray with David, Psalm. 51.8.
Make me to ^ear joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice. Others have the riches of Gods grace, and ^now they have it. These are
full of ^by, as well as grace, examples of ^heerfulnesse and carfulness,
patterns ^f piety and alacrity. These sing with David, Psalm. 4.8.
We will both lay us down in peace and sleep: for thou Lord only make u^dwell
in safety. These ride in triumph^ over all worldly things with St. Paul, We are
perswad^d, Romans 8.38, 39.
that neither death, n^^ life, nor Angels, nor principalities, n^ powers, nor
things present, nor things t^ come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus ou^ Lord.

The first condition is miserable.

The second is uncomfortable.

The third is admirable.

To those of the first condition, I say no more, but let them pray to be
delivered out of their unhappiness.

Those of the third sort I advise to praise God for their happiness.

But those of the second estate whos^ comfort is the scope of these
meditations, I must endeavor to perswad^ to the fruition of spiritual
contentedness. Set before your eyes some worldly Nabal, whose inheritance is
called in question. See how he plots in hi^ mind, goes to the Scriveners,
consult with the Lawyers, spends his money wastes his time to amend those error
that have tainted his Evidences. Suppose in me you hear St. Peter exhorting you
to use the same diligence to assure your eternal inheritance.

We are Gods laborers, Cor. 3.9.
we are Gods building.

The builder first lays a foundation: then raises the walls, and lastly
secures the whole building against all tempests with a roof. So must I lay a
foundation in explication, build up the walls with observation, and secure all
with application.

Use diligence.
The Greek word is originally derived from a word that signifies to make haste.
(...).
Diligence is neither slow nor slothful. The weight of the matter requiring
have commands diligence. The cure of spiritual distractions is ^ot to be
deferred. No time is to be ^eglected, when the rents of the soul ^re to be
repaired. Scruples of con^cience must be suddenly removed. They are not worth
house room. (...) green wound is easily healed, but ^ime alone is sufficient to
make it in^urable. Those scruples that at first ^ight have been easily blasted,
in pro^^sse of time may grow to such a flame, that no water can quench them.
Health increases by labor, but wounds and sickness grow by idleness. Haste
therefore and diligence are requisite, where pangs of conscience are to be
removed.

To make your calling.
Calling puts us in mind, how w^ come by all our happiness. We a^^ born
miserable, our preferment come from heaven. Judges are men by birth^ and Judges
by calling: men from their parents, Judges from their prince. So we have our
natural part from our parents, our spiritual grace from God.

And election.
This word not only notes an accepting, (...).
but also a picking or chusin^ of some out of the midst of others (...) the
same nature. So the gardner pick one flower to smell to, and leave many as
good. So the Gentleman walking in his orchyard gathers o^^ apple to eat, and
leaves many growin^ on the same tree. So God freely pick^ out some vessels for
honor, and leaves others of the same stamp in that earthly and miserable
state wherein he found them.

Sure.
Make it firm or established. The house that totters must be ripped up and
repaired, till it stand fast against all winds. So must the soul that wavers be
established with Gods promises against all assaults of Satan. There must be no
room left for doubting in time to come.

Let us now paraphrase a little the words of St. Peter. Imagine you heard him
speaking thus, I know you are men as well as Christians. You have many worldly
cares for this life, but let your greatest care be for the life to come. The
Devil will set fiercely upon your vocation, and plant his greatest Ordinance
against your election. Neglect you no opportunity to make up the breaches, that
Satan may not reenter. Leave not the work begun, till it be finished. Leave no
place for doubting God has elected you and called you to grace and glory.
Labor to assure your title to the end. And thus much for exposition.

The builder that has reared up his house without, comes after to look within,
and proportions it unto diverse rooms for the pleasure of the beholder, and the
profit of the dweller. So must I lead you from the outside of my text to view
the several chambers within this spacious building for the profit and the
comfort of your souls. This beautiful tree affords unto us these fruitful
branches for heavenly meditations.

1. That there is an election.

2. That there is a vocation depending upon it, and answerable to it.

3. That this election and vocation are of particular persons.

4. That both of them may be uncertain to them, that have interest in both.

5. That they may be made certain.

6. That the way to make them certain is by diligence.

Who would not then use all diligence to make his calling and election sure?

For the first.

There is an election.
The Scripture mentions the elected, and the Elector hand in hand in many
places. Our Savior Christ joins them, Shall not God avenge his own elect?
Luke 18.7.
St. Paul follows his Masters steps, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods elect? Romans 8.33.
The like testimony he gives the Thessalonians as well as the Romans, Knowing
brethren beloved your election of God. 1 Thessalonians. 1.4.


The book of God affords unto us a twofold divine election. Some God chooses
to glorious offices in this world: some to eternal glory in the world to come.
Judas was chosen to be an Apostle on earth, but not to be a Saint in heaven.
Christ puts him into the one, but shuts him out of the other, Have not I chosen
twelve of you, Joh. 6.70. 1 Thessalonians. 1.4.
and one of you is a Devil? The Thessalonians are ordained to heavenly glory,
not to earthly Apostleship. Peter and Paul are elected to be Apostles in this
world, and Saints in a better. This difference I mention by the way, that such
as are not elected to honorable employments in Church or Commonwealth, may
not be discouraged; they may be elected to eternal happiness in heaven. In
the wars all that are chosen to be Soldiers, are not chosen to be Captains.
In the Church, all that are chosen to be Saints in the Churches, are not chosen
to be Angels of the Churches. Revel. 2.1. (...), etc.
Each Church has many Saints, yet but one Angel. All that are chosen to be
golden candlestickes, are not chosen to be stars. Revel. 1.20.
The builder among many stones chooses one to be a corner stone, Video etiam ex
electis seligi aliquos ad aliquid majus atque praestantius, sicut in militia
cum tyrones electi fuerint, ex his quoque cliguntur ad opus aliquod majus
armorum. Et cum eliguntur in Ecclesia, qui fiant^ praepositi, non utique
caeteri reprobantur, cum omnes boni fideles electi merito nuncupentur.
El^guntur in aedificio lapides angulares, non reprobatis caeteris qui
structurae partibus allis deputantur. Eliguntur uvae ad vescendum, nec
reprobamus alias, quas relinquimus ad b^ bendum. Aug. de civ. Dei. lib. 7. c. 1.
but lays by many first, not to shut them out of the building, but to reserve
them to a convenient place. The bunch of grapes that is not pulled with the
hand of the passenger to eat, is not cast away by the Master of the Vineyard,
but kept to make wine to drink. In Gods Vineyard many that are not preferred
before, may expect their preferment at the vintage.

Those that are not rulers of the Church, may be members of the Church: If the
ear shall say, 1 Cor. 12.16.
Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body, is it therefore not of the
body? It often happens in the Church, as it does in the body, 1 Cor. 12.23.
that less honored members have more abundant honor put upon them, and find
it by experience in the end, that election to eternal goes beyond all
temporal honors.

But what have I to do with uncertain offices upon earth, my thoughts must
follow St. Peter, and mount up to election, that leads to everlasting
happiness. Such an election there is, and it is well for them that are
elected, that there is such an one, how ere it go with others. Kings, Princes,
Judges upon earth, have offices and honors to bestow upon their favorites.
These they bestow upon whom they please, they deny to whom they list, and no
man calls them to account for either. Shall that liberty be denied to God, that
is granted to Gods deputies upon earth? Shall any man question God for giving
or denying, that sees men give and deny every day without a reason? When I look
upon the face of such as are elected, I know not how to deny an election. They
are foolish, they are mean, they are feeble. The world chooses the wise, and
refuses the foolish, takes the great, and puts by the mean, accepts the
strong, regards not the weak. Surely such as these could never be so highly
advanced, were it not for Gods choosing them before greater personages. Where is
their nobility? Where is their dexterity of apprehension, and deepnesse of
understanding? Where is their martial fortitude, and rare exploits of war?
They that have these are refused: they that want these are received. This
cannot be without an absolute and free election. Cast your eyes aside now a
while: look off Gods elect, and view their children. Compare Ishmael with
Abraham, Esau with Isaac, Absalom and Ammon with David. How unlike are these
children to these parents? If their parents bad got their free dome by their
service, they would have pleaded the custom of the City to make their children
free. Their children are partakers of their nature, but not of their grace. The
purest wheat cast in the ground brings forth corn full of chafe and darnell.
He that considers the corn mingled with trash, and compares it with the pure
seed cast into the ground, must needs conclude, the seed was not so clean by
nature, (else would this have been so too) but it was purifyed by the sowers
labor. In like sort he that sees the wickedness of Absalom, and compares it
with the goodness of David, will be forced to confess that David's good came
not from Ishaies seed, but from Gods election.

Lastly, consider the corrupt estate of all men by nature, and see if any man
can come to God without election. We are the best of us too much corrupted by
nature to repent of our selves. Gods choice therefore must make the difference.
Man is a creature that wanders from his Creator, Quid est homo? Aberrans a
creat^re creatura: nisi creator ejus memor sit ^ius: et eligat cum gratis, et
diligat gratis: quia non potest eligere vel diligere, nisi prius electus
d^l^ctusque curetur, qui cae^itate eligenda non cernit, et languore diligenda
fastidit. Aug. de Temp. ser. 223.
unless his Creator be mindful of him, and choose him freely, and love him
freely, because be can neither choose nor love, except he be first elected,
beloved and healed, who by reason of his blindness discernes not what is to be
chosen, and by reason of his weakness loathes what is to be beloved. Truly
and deeply observed by St. Augustine. Deo duce venitur ad Deum. Pros. de. voc.
gent. l. 1. c. 24.
Prosper sutably, God must be his guide that comes to God. I conclude the point
with his authority, that goes beyond both Augustines and Prospers, John. 6.44.
No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him.

Mark this I beseech you, you that scoff and deride at election, and at those
whose greatest comfort is, that they have the eternal testimony of Gods
Spirit, that they are elected. Your scoffs may keep you from sanctification,
but cannot deprive them of their expectation. This is their greatest comfort.
Take life and goods and all, only let them quietly enjoy the persuasion of Gods
election, and they are well. No marvail if men scoff at election, when they
are taught a mock-election. Many maintain an^ election, that is no election,
and teach a choice without choice. What did it profit Saul to boast, 1 Samuel
15.14.
I have performed the commandment of God, when the sheep and oxen open their
mouths and stop his? What will it profit these men to crack of election, when
they ^verthrow all absolute and free choice? (...) may be this charge is too
loud to ^me out of my mouth, it will sound ^tter in the words of Augustine, and
^oid the imputation of novelty. those that acknowledge no other ^ection but out
of works or faith ^reseen, let them hear St. Augustines ^om, You have not
chosen me, says our ^viour) but I have ^^sen you. Non vos me elegistis,
inquit, sed ego vos ^legi. Quid ergo eramus, nisi iniqui, et perditi? Neque
enim jam credideramus in eum: ut eligeret nos. Nam si jam credentes elegit,
electos elegit. Cur ergo diceret, Non vos me elegistis, nisi quia miscricordia
ejus praevenit n^s? Hic certe vacat vana illorum ratiocinatio, qui
praescientiam Dei defendunt contra gratiam Dei: et ideo dicunt nos electos ante
mundi constitutionem, quia praescivit nos Deas futuros bonos, non se ipsum nos
facturum bonos. Non h^c dicit, qui dicit, Non vos me elegistis, quoniam si
propterea nos elegisset, quia bonos futuros esse nos praesciverat, simul etiam
praescisset, quod eum nos fuiss^mus prius el^cturi. Aug. in Joh. tract. 86.
What were (...) when we were chosen, (...) wicked and casta^es? For we had not
(...) believed in him, that (...) should choose us. For ^e chose believers, he
^se such as were chosen ^ore. Why should he ^n say, You have not ^sen me, but
because his ^ey prevented us? This ^ly overthrows the vain ^soning of such, as
de^d the foreknowledge of ^d against the grace of ^d, and say, God has before
chosen us before the creation of the ^ld, because he knew beforehard that we
^ld be good, not because he would make us good. He says not so, that says, Ye
ha^ not chosen me, because if he had therefore chosen us, because he foreknew,
that (...) would be good, he would withal have fore known, that we would have
chosen h^ first. Et paulo post. Audi ingrate, ingrate audi. Non vos me
elegistis, sed ego elegi vos. Non est ut dicas, ideo electus sum quia jam
credebam. Si enim credebas in cum jam elegeras eum. Sed audi. Non vos me
elegistis.
And not far after, Hearken O i^ grateful person, O ungrateful person
hearken. Ye have not chosen me, but I ho^ chosen you. There is no reason for
thee (...) say, I was therefore chosen, because I d^ believe before. For if
thou did believe (...) him first, thou had first chosen him. B^ hear, ye
have not chosen me. So that i^ St. Augustines judgment an election o^ of faith
or works foreseen is either (...) election or a self election. And the that
teach it, give occasion to pr^phane persons to scoff at Go^ election. Let Gods
elect not on^ not be discouraged by scoffers, n^ daunted by false teachers, but
let the acknowledge a divine election, as t^ foundation of all their holiness
a^ happiness.

What were you before God cho^ you, but unholy, unhappy? Wh^ would ye have been
yet, if God h^ not chosen you, but what you w^ before? Let Augustine answer the
question, What shall we then say, wh^ ^^e hear, Ye have not chosen me, Quid
ergo dicturi sumus audiendo, non vos me elegistis, nisi quia mali eramus, et
electi sumus, ut boni per gratiam nos eligentis essemus? Aug. in Joh. tract. 86.
but that ^e were evil, but are elected, that we ^ight be good through his
grace that has ^lected us? In all the Scripture there (...) no higher action
then Gods electi^n. Acknowledge this therefore for ^he fountain, from whence
spring the ^wo pleasant streams of grace and glory. and thus much for the first
and top ^ranch of this most glorious tree. We ^ave climed up to the highest,
now let ^s go downward by degrees, slowly and safely for fear of falling.

2. There is a vocation depending upon this election, and answerable to it.
That vocation depends upon electi^n, and goes hand in hand with it, ^t. Paul
instructs the Romans, Romans 8.30.
Whom he ^d predestinate, them he also called. He ^^viseth the Corinthians not
to marvail (...) the meannesse of such as were called, ^r they are the very
same that were ^re-elected. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27.
Ye see that God has ^lled foolish and mean persons to be ^irs of glory,
because he had chosen ^ch before he made the world. We ^e called to faith, and
what is that, ^^t the faith of Gods elect? Tit. 1.1.
St. Augustine observes that in the beginning of bot^ St. Paul's Epistles to
Timothy, there is (...) Trinity of blessings, not found so linked in the
beginning of many other (...) the Canonical Epistles, Id verbum interposuit,
quo plane a peritur atque ostenditur non meritis operum priorum, sed secundum
misericordiam Dei nobis dari spiritum sanctum. Aug. expos. epist. ad Romans
inchoatae. lib. 1.
Grace, merey and peace. The Apostle, (says he) (...) Mercy between Grace, and
Peace, that (...) might plainly show that the Spirit of Go^ is given us, not
for the merits of our for^ mer works, but according to Gods mercy And indeed
what can come betwee^ Gods grace of election, and our pea^ of justification, so
fitly, as Gods mer^ in our vocation? Before we mention^ a twofold election, now
we must mention a twofold vocation:

The one outward, in the Ministry (...) the Word.

The other inward, in the operati^ of Gods Spirit.

The former depends not up^ election. Many called, few chosen, Mat. 2 16. There
are some so called that (...) not elected, Mat. 13.47, 48.
as Judas and Simon Mag The net takes many things, that af^ are cast away at
shore. The Gospel c^ many outwardly that after perish et^nally. Jud. v. 5.
Moses word brought many (...) of Egypt, that fell short of Canaan, a^ perished
in the wilderness. The into ^nall vocation is the subject I am now ^to treat
of, and that always depends upon eternal election. For vocation is nothing
else but the execution of election. Grace is ordained to be given by the one,
and grace is actually given by the other. Romans 9.13.
The purpose of God according to election is perfected by God that calls.
This made Augustine to call predestination an hidden vocation. Aug. lib. 83.
quest.
And we may as well call vocation a manifest election. Gods consails eternally
precede the execution, and the execution follows in time just according to the
precedent determination. The persons called must needs be the same that were
elected. Otherwise Gods counsel may be deluded; and his conclusions may be
altered. Yea the determinations of God before the world must be subject to the
actions of men in the world. If they please his purpose shall stand; if they
please not, it shall be altered. Thus shall Gods omnipotency stoop to man's
infirmity, and man's mutability overruled Gods immutability.

Here may we behold the downfall of natural preparations, and meritorious
dispositions consisting of the good use of natural endowments, whereby our
calling should be furthered, and without which it cannot, as some think, be
attained. Our vocation depends upon Gods election, not upon our preparations.
How was Paul disposed and affected, Act. 9.
when Christ calls him? How does he use the strength of natural principles, and
the great knowledge of the Law? Does he not notwithstanding all these carry a
bloody mind against Christ members at that very time, when the head calls him
to be a member? Had not Paul's calling depended on Gods choice at that time, for
any will or inclination of his own, he had never been called. The scope of the
Apostle Romans 9. Aug. ad Simplic. lib. 1.
is to be noted, which was, that no man might glory of their well deserving
works, which the Jews were wont to boast of. The Jews were better prepared
then the Gentiles by the Law. Yet were the Gentiles called in more abundance,
because a greater number of them were elected. St. Paul gives us an example of
two brethren Jacob and Esau born of the same parents, lying together in the
same womb, born at the same birth, Aug. ad Simplic. lib. 1.
that we might not dream of any different preparations of their own, or diverse
dispositions of their parents at several times: Yet is one of these brethren
effectually called, the other not. The Apostle gives the reason, Romans 9.11.
because God had elected the one and not the other, and his election produces
Jacobs calling. So that our vocation depends not on our preparation, but on
Gods election.

Here also the confidence of Gods servants finds an anchor to rest upon. If our
vocation depend not upon our actions, but upon Gods election, then will it
stand firm. Our enemies may as soon alter the course of Gods election, as
deprive us of the benefits of our vocation. This made St. Paul presently after
the doctrine of election and vocation so pathetically to exclaim, Romans 8.31.
What shall we say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us?
Take Augustines comment upon St. Paul's exclamation, and see now sweetly it
sounds, God is for us in predestinating us: God is for us in calling us: God is
for us in justifying us: God is for us in glorifying us. If God be thus for us,
Deus pro nobis, ut praedestimaret nos: Deus pro nobis, ut vocaret nos: Deus pro
nobis, ut justificaret nos: Deus pro nobis, ut glorificaret nos. Si Deus pro
nobis, quis contra nos? Praedestinavit antequam essemus: vocavit, cum amissi
essemus: justificavit, cum peccatores essemus: glorificavit, cum mortales
essemus. Si Deus pro nobis, quis contra nos? Praedestinatis a Deo, vocatis,
justificatis, glorificatis qui vult adversari, paret se, si potest, bellare
adversus Deum. Vbi enim audivimus, Si Deus pro nobis, quis contra nos, nisi qui
Deum vincit, non laedit nos. Et quis est, qui vincit omnipotentem? Aug. de
verbis Apost. ser. 16.
who can be against us? He has predestined us, before we were: He has
called us, when we were averse from him: He has justified us, when we were
sinners: He has glorified us, when we were mortal. If God be thus for us, who
can be against us? He that will be an adversary to them, whom God has
predestined, called, justified, glorified, let him prepare himself, if he be
able, to fight against God. For seeing we have heard, If God be for us, who can
be against us? no man can hurt us, but he that can overcome God. And who can
overcome the Almighty? Wicked men may hurt themselves, but not hurt us, unless
they can prevail against God. They do, with Saul, but kick against the pricks.
Let the madman kick never so fiercely against them, he does but hurt his own
seet. The opposition of wicked men does but further their own damnation, not
interrupt our vocation, unless they can annihilate Gods election.

The time requires now, that we should come from generals to particulars. What
good can election or vocation do to us, unless we have a part therein? Thus
are we come down one step lower to the appropriation of Gods election and
vocation.

3. This election and vocation are both of particular persons.
It is your calling, (...), The calling and election of you.
it is your election, therefore study to make it sure. Election and vocation
are not in general of some qualities in men, or of some conditions of men, but
of some particular persons. St. Paul tells his Thessalonians, that all men have
not faith. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
Timothy is more fully inftructed in this mystery, that he may instruct others
in it, 2 Timothy 2.19, 20.
The Lord knows them that are his. The similitude of a great house
illustrates it, that has vessels of honor and dishonor within the same walls:
so in Gods house, his Church, there are vessels of mercy, and vessels of anger.
There are chosen Israelites, and refused Israelites. Romans 11.7.
The election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded. In one verse there
are the elect, and the rest: the elect obtaining righteousness, the rest
missing it. Election is delivered as the cause why they obtained it, for the
Apostle says not, the elected, but the election, noting that they obtained
righteousness not by their own disposition, but by Gods election. Romans 9.11,
13.
In Rebeccas womb at one time there was an elected and a rejected brother.
Luke 17.34, 35, 36.
No marvail if at that day two men shall be in the field, the one taken, and
the other left: No marvail if two women be grinding at the mill, the one taken
and the other left: No marvail if of two lying in one bed, one be taken and
another left; when of two unborn lying in one womb, that never saw the light
of this world, one may be taken and another left. Election necessarily requires
a separation and distinction to be made where there was no difference before.
He that takes all, chooses none. We call not the gathering of fruit an
election, but a collection, because all is taken and nothing left. So that a
common or general election is a contradiction. If it be general, it is no
election. If it be an election, it cannot be general. Vocation also uses to
be particular. Men have their several callings. All are not Nobles. Every man
is not called to be a Judge. Our Savior himself refuses to divide an
inheritance. Who made me a Judge? Luke 12.14.
All are not teachers. Some are called to these several honors, not all. So
in spiritual preferments, some are called to be the sons of God; others are
left the children of Satan, subject to that misery, they have brought on their
own souls.

There are a sont of moderatours in the world, that go about to reconcile the
business between God, and such as scoff at his particular election and
vocation. These say that God has not primarily chosen any particular persons,
but has chosen faith, or good works, and by consequence those whom he foresees
these in, those he chooses. On the other side he has rejected infidelity and
wickedness, and those whom he foresees these things in finally, those he
refuses. In a word, he has chosen the means, and not the persons to the
means. To these we may say as Job to his friends, Job 13.7.
Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? These deprive
God of that boasting, that St. Paul uses to his Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.14.
I seek not yours, but you. The Scripture contradicts this opinion in direct
words. Romans 9.11.
Gods clection is not of works. And lest any man should reply, yet it may be of
faith, the Apostle says not, but of faith; No, he speaks thus, Not of works,
but of him that calls. He proves it by an undeniable example. Jacob had no
more faith nor works then Esau in the same womb; yet Gods election lays hold
on the one, and leaves the other. The end is always determined before the
means. Men are first appointed to live, and then to eat: First to be saved,
then to believe and to do good works. Ephesians. 1.4.5.
God has chosen us that we should be holy, having first predestined us to
the adoption of children. Election is the root, Aims. Coron. collat. Heg.
part. 1 cap. 12.
faith is the tree, sanctification is the fruit, both which come out of the
root. So then election is of particular persons, not of means. Some there are
that Christ never knew, never approved of, (...). Mat. 7.23. Phil. 4 3. Luke
10.20.
and doubtless they are they whom God never chose. All women's names are not in
the book of life: some are. The seventy disciples what singular cause of joy
had they that their names were written in the book of life, if all men's names
be there? Romans 8.29, 30.
Why does St. Paul extol so highly the privileges of the elect, if there be no
particular election? 1 Thessalonians. 1.4.
Why does he puff up his Thessalonians with vain hope of I know not what acry
preferment above others in being the Elect of God, if God have no particular
choice?

Let us leave the opposites to true election, and turn our speech to Gods
chosen. Great is the pre-eminence, much is their comfort they may gather from
these two sweet flowers of particular election, and singular vocation. 1 Pet.
2.9.
They are Gods peculiar people, a chosen generation, a royal priesthood. God
has chosen them and refused others: he has called them out of the midst of
others. They are his, he is theirs. This is the triumph of the Church, My
beloved is mine, Caut. 2.16.
and I am his. Upon which place Bernard elegantly, Behold what a pure heart,
and an unfeigned faith, and a good conscience dare say! His care is for me, O
quid audet cor purum, et conscientia bona, et fides non ficta! Mihi, inquit,
intendit. Itane huic intenta est Majestas illa, cui gubernatio pari^er, et
administrato universitatis incumbit? et cura seculorum ad sola transfertur
neg^tia (imo etia) amoris et desiderii bujus? ^ta plane. Ipsa est enim ecclesia
electo um, d^ quibus Apost lus, 2 Timothy 2. Omnia inquit, propter electos. Et cui
dubium, quod gratia et misericordia Dei sit in sanctos ejus, et ^espectus in
electos illius? Ergo providentiam caeteris creaturis non negamus, curam sponsa
vendicat sib^. Ber. in Cant. ser. 68.
says she. Is it so indeed? Is that Majesty careful of her, upon whose
shoulders the government and administration of the whole world lies? And is the
care of all ages transferred only to the businesses (or rather to the
treasures) of love and desire of this woman? It is even so. For this very woman
is the congregation of the elect, of whom the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 2. All
things, says he, are for the elect. And who doubts, that Gods grace and mercy
is to his Saints, and his respect unto his elect? We do not then deny his
providence to the rest of the creatures, but his care the spouse challenges to
herself. Let other men object unto you the meanness of your birth. Bid them go
pull Lazarus out of Abraham's bosom. If they cast the wickedness of your
former lives like dirt in your faces, turn them over to St. Paul. Let him tell
them from heaven, I was a bloody persecutor, now I am a glorious Saint. You are
not Gods children by your parents nobility, nor by your own virtues, but by
Gods peculiar election and particular vocation. He has a special right to
you: you have a peculiar interest in him. Make good the honor of your
vocation, as Jertullian did the glory of your creation against all gainsayers.
To what purpose is it now, says he, Quid nunc facit ad infuscandam originem
carnis nomen terrae ventilare, ut sordentis, ut jacentis elementi? Cum et si
alia materia excudendo homini competisset, artificis fastigium recogitari
oporteret, qui illam et eligend^ dignam judicasset, et tractando fecisset.
Tert. de Res. Christ. cap. 6.
for the defiling of the original of our flesh, to east upon it the name of
earth, as of a base, as of a contemptible element? Seeing although there had
been other matter fit to have framed man of, yet we ought to think upon the
Majesty of the workman, who by choosing earth had judged it worthy to frame man
of, and by handling it had made it worthy. So may you answer your accusers.
Though we have been base, though we have been vile, yet God has counted us fit
for glory in electing us, and has made us fit by calling us. Datum est esse
aliquid origin g^nerosius, demutatione felicius. Nam et aurum terra, quia de
terra: hactenus tamen terra: ex quo aurum, long alia materia splendidior atque
nob lior de (...) matrice. Tert. Ibid.
Many things grow better then their original by a change. What is gold a first
but earth? It is taken out of the the earth. Yet after it is gold, no man calls
it earth. It is a more noble and glorious matter then the base earth, out o^
which it was taken. So it is with you^ God that changes earth into gold, has
changed you into Saints. Never therefore part with your interest in God for the
scoffs of all the world.

We have descended from election t^ vocation, from vocation to the
particularnesse of both.

Now must we go one step lowe^ yet to the uncertainty of both, tha^ may be in
such as are both elected an^ called, and then we shall mount u^ back again to
the apprehension an^ assurance of both unto our own souls.

4. Both election and vocation may be uncertain to them, that have interest i^
both.
We confess that in regard of God our election and vocation are always
certain. 2 Timothy 2.19.
The foundation of the Lord is sur^ always, but that is, to the Lord, a^ i^
follows, The Lord knows them that ^re his. Men may alter, Romans 11.29.
but the gifts and ^alling of God are without repentance. God cannot be
deceived, nor his decrees cannot be changed. Yet to us both our ^lection and
vocation may be uncertain, and they that have both may ^oubt, whether they have
either of ^oth. Yea they may be brought so ^ow, that they may affirm, that
they ^ave neither. This a Prophet may be ^rought to. What could Jonah think ^f
himself when he was buried alive, (...) such a Sepulcher, as never man lived
(...) before? Let him speak himself, and ^eclare his own fears, Then I said,
Joh. 2.4.
I am ^^st out of thy sight. Nay, a King and a ^rophet too may be brought to
this ^oubtfull condition, and cry out with ^avid, Psalm. 13.1.
How long will thou forget me (O lord) for ever? how long will thou hide thy
^^ce from me? Election is a secret acti^n of God before the world was ^ade,
which we can know only by ^ertain consequences delivered to us (...) the book
of God. Now it is an easy ^^ing to doubt, where a thing is to be ^^ched from
far by consequences, and ^^mes not immediately into our knowledge. Thus the eye
that can well distinguish an object hard at hand, i^ easily mistaken in remoter
things. An^ what things more remote either in ti^^ or in dignity, then Gods
sure an^ glorious election and our uncertai^ and low apprehension? The Sun ca^
not be looked upon, unless a clou^ come between. Names written in God secret
book cannot be read by the that owe them, but with the spectacles of
consequences afforded to (...) in the book that God has s^ open for us.
Vocation is a work (...) Gods Spirit in our own hearts neer^ home: yet may we
well be deceiv^ in the apprehension of it, because it an inward work, and man's
heart (...) very deceitful. It will not only d^ceive others, but him also that
ow^ it. The Physicians are often deceiv^ in internal diseases for all their
a^^ Yea the patient himself, that feels the pain, yet cannot tell what is the
di^ease, if it be within. Thus is it oft^^ in man's soul. His heart is so
deceitful that he cannot easily gather whether (...) be effectually called or
no. There such a resemblance between comm^^ graces, that accompany illuminatio^
and special ones that attend upon regeneration, that many are deceived,
^istaking the one for the other. The ^^prehension of our vocation is a
sepa^^ble fruit of it. It may sometimes be ^arted from it. The trees bear not
ap^^es all the year. The shadow follows ^ot the sun, except it shine clear.
Neither ^th our apprehension follow Gods ^vour, but where it does most
mani^^stly reveal it self. These doubts of ^ur calling proceed sometimes from
^norance, because we rightly under^^and not Gods mark or his seal, that ^^e
sets upon those whom he has effectually called. Sometimes negligence (...) the
cause, and God for our neglect ^f him neglects us. We withhold from ^od the
public or private service, ^^at we owe to him, and he hides the ^^ght of his
countenance from us. ^ometimes they come from pride, and ^hen we are lifted up
with those gifts ^e have, God withdraws his hand ^om giving more. The father
when ^e sees his son proud of his fine ^othes, bestows no more upon him, ^ut
lets him wear them to rags, that ^e may humble him. So does God ^ith us, gives
us over to doubt of his ^^vour, when we grow proud of his gifts. Sometimes
presumption bring^ this mischief upon us. When we presume to sin against God,
he like (...) wise father changes his countenance upon us, though he take not
away his love quite from us. There is a tim^ for parents to hide their
affection when the showing of it may make their children worse. So is it high
time for God to withhold the declaration of his affection, when his children
grow bold to offend him.

This first calls for thankfulness o^ them, that have a well grounded
persuasion of their choice and calling. Upon these the favor of God shine^
like the Sun, and enlightens their souls. It is not so well with all men^ nay
it is not so well with all godly men. Many hang down their heads for sorrow,
because they stand in doubt o^ Gods favor. They have no comfor^ in praying, no
contentment in hearing no satisfaction in receiving, no joy i^ living. And all
because they wan^ that which you have, the sweet sense o^ the love of God in
Christ. If we have with them felt but the force of God indignation, and the
hellish torture^ of a distressed conscience, we would ^hen be heartily
thankful to God for ^he heavenly comforts of a pacifyed mind, that fully
assures us, that God ^oves us. Nothing more comfortable ^an happen to us in
this world, and therefore nothing should more provoke us to thankfulness unto
God. The more joy we receive from any of Gods gifts, the more praise we owe to
God the giver.

Secondly, It teaches them watchfulness, lest by their carelessness the
precious persuasion of Gods love be ^ost for a time. Though God cannot change
his love into hatred, yet he can hide his face from you in anger. Then may you
sigh with others, and weep, and mourn for the want of that comfort, which now
ye enjoy. Yet may you sigh and weep in vain for a long time; for this is a
favor, that is not easily recovered. Psalm. 51.
David's bones are broken before they do rejoice again, after God humbled him
for his treble wickedness. All men are careful to keep their treasures. They
hide their silver, they lock up their gold from the eyes of beholders, that it
may not be pilferd from them. This is our greatest treasure. Lose the sense of
Gods love, and lose all. Without this we do not enjoy our own happiness. Our
best actions afford no matter of consolation to us. Our least sins afford
matther enough to dash our greatest comforts. All the contentments of the world
are not able to appease the pangs of our distressed minds. Nay heavenly bliss,
which we may have hereafter, affords no comfort to us here, because we think
God is angry with us, and will never bestow it upon us. Take heed then of all
occasions, that may alienate Gods face from you.

Thus have I brought you as low as I can, now must I lead you up again by the
hand to the sense and fruition of your election and vocation.

5. Our election and vocation may be made certain to us.
All doubts and scruples may be removed out of our hearts, and we may come to
be assured, that we are chosen and called by God. Thus are the Galatians
taught, Gal. 4.6.
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts crying, Abba,
Father. And what is that but Gods proclamation to our souls, that he has
chosen us. This was good doctrine at Rome also, Romans 8.16.
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God. St. Peter's coherence intimates so much unto us, that there is away to
put all out of question. He told us before of a chain of grace tokens of
salvation. Wherefore the rather (says he) give diligence to make your calling
and election sure. As if the Apostle should have said, I would not persuade you
to this diligence to make your election sure, if I did not know, there were
certain and infallible tokens of election, whereby it may be known: but now
seeing there are such certain notes, though otherwise you might be negligent;
yet let me now persuade you the rather to diligence in making your election
sure. Next the Apostles command in the text to make it sure, shows that there
is a way for such as have grace, to be assured of it. The Apostle writes by the
Spirit of God, to whom all Spirits ought to be subject. He urges it also as a
matter very necessary for our own profit and comfort. Doubtless then there is
a way to secure it. Add unto this the promises of God elsewhere made by the
mouth of our blessed Savior, Mat. 7.7.
Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall
be opened unto you. Now what have we more need to ask, then the confirmation
of our eternal election? What have we more reason to seek for, then the
persuasion of our internal vocation? What have we more to knock at heaven
gates for, then assurance to be let in there, when we are shut out here? So
that Gods promise assures us a way to make our calling sure.

Lastly, consider the examples of those that have attained to this assurance.
Take St. 2 Timothy 4.8.
Paul for one, Hencefore there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. But
St. Paul was an Apostle, had been rapt up into the third heaven, and might very
well know by revelation, what would become of him. So were not they whom St.
John writes unto, and yet they knew their own happy condition also, 1 John 4.13.
We know that we dwell in him, and he in us. And presently after, V. 16.
We have known and believed the love that God has to us. And in the Chapter
before, 1 John 3.14.
We know that we have passed from death to life. St. John joins the rest with
him in this assurance. Heb. 6.9. (...), That have salvation; or, are joined to
it.
The Hebrews had in them things that accompany salvation, and could not be
divided from it. Take the testimony of Macarius also, They that are anointed
with the spiritual oil of gladness have received a sign of that
incorruptible Kingdom, to wit, Qui spirituali exuliationis oleo uncti sunt,
signum regni illius incorruptibilis recepere, sc: spiritum sanctum arrhabonem.
Secretarti sunt regis coelestis, ac freti siducia Omnipotentis palatium ejus
unpred^untur (abi sunt angeli et spiritus sanctorum) quamvis adhuc sint in hoc
nundo. Licet enim integram haereditatem sibi in illo seculo praeparatam nondum
adierint, certissimi tamen sunt ex arrhabone, quem modo receperunt, ac si jam
coronati essent, et regni clavem tenerint. Macar. Hom. 17.
Gods Spirit for an earnest. They are the Secretaries of the heavenly King, and
relying confidently upon the Almighty, they enter into his palace (where the
Angels and the Spirits of holy men are) although they be yet in this world. For
although they be not yet come to the entire inheritance, which is prepared for
them in that world, yet they are most sure of it by that pledge, which they
have newly received, as sure as if they were already crowned, and had the key
of the Kingdom in their own possession.

I will conclude the point with the testimony of an Emperor: Constantine in
his oration to the Fathers assembled in the Council of Nice, as Gelasius
reports, (...). Gelas. Act. council. Nic. lib. 2. cap. 7.
speaks thus, The hope of the happiness to come we do not only expect, but as
it were in some sort, we have it hear already. Worthily spoken and as became a
Christian Emperor.

Woe then to the careless worldling, who seeks to make sure the possession of
his lands, and goes to the Assurance office for his goods at Sea, he hides his
wealth, and carefully lays up his treasure, that it may not be stolen, but
takes no care at all to assure his election or calling to eternal happiness.
If they could not be made certain, he were to be excused; but seeing there is a
way to do it, his negligence is inexcusable. He has preferred his wealth before
his soul, earth before heaven, gold before God, misery before happiness. He
must expect Simon Magus doom, Thy money perish with thee. Act 8.20.
He has neglected his soul while he lives, and God will refuse it when he dies.

The great mercy of God to us here also appears. We had deserved eternal
condemnation. It had been abundan^ mercy in God to bring us to heaven, though
we had gone through a kind^ of hell here. We had been happy in the end, though
we had been miserable in the way. But God has been pleased to give us not only
heaven after this life, but the assurance of it in this life: Thus are we happy
here under the certain hope of happiness hereafter. Our joys are begun in
this world, that will be perfected, but never be ended in the world to come.
Praise God then for thy happiness begun on earth, till thou enjoy thy endless
happiness in heaven.

We must now ascend one step higher to the means to assure us of our election
and vocation, and then we are at the highest, till we come to heaven.

6. The way to make our calling and election sure is by diligence.
It is no easy labor to assure so great happiness. There is need of much
diligence to settle us in a full persuasion of our election and vocation. Heb.
6.11.
We desire that every one of you do show the same diligence to the full
assurance of hope unto the end. There is no growth in any art or science
without great diligence, and growth is our study, and the end of our labor. So
in the conclusion of this Epistle, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18.
Beware ye fall not from your own steadfastness, but grow in grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

There is need of diligence.
1. To know.
Ad sciendum. For the signs of election are many, and are not easily known.
Much diligence must be used to understand the Scriptures, where these tokens
are scattered. None of them can be spared, though they be many, because we have
many temptations to unsettle us. A ruinous house the more props it has, the
faster it stands. The more notes of election the soul understands, the better
it holds out against Satan's wiles.

2. To examine.
Ad examinandum. All examination requires diligence. Else will not that be
found that we look for. The Shepherd that has lost but one sheep, leaves ninty
and nine in the wilderness, Luke 15.4.
and goes after that which is lost, until he find it. The woman that lost her
piece of silver lights a candle, V. 8.
and sweeps the house, and seeks diligently till she find it. The Judge that
searches out a murder, examines all the circumstances of the fact. So must we
ransacke all the powers and faculties of soul and body to find out what God
has wrought in us and by us, to assure us of our vocation. The former reason
required much reading, to find the notes of election in the Scriptures; this
requires many meditations to find the same notes engraved by the Spirit of God
in our own souls.

3. Ad augendum. To augment.
Diligence is required to increase the graces of Gods Spirit in us, when we
have found them. Without fuel the fire will decay rather then increase.
Without food the strength of the body diminishes. Without the constant use of
religious exercises the sense of Gods favor will be diminished in us. The
Sacraments the seals of Gods favor, the one must be often thought upon, the
other often received. The sight of his Evidences confirms a man in his hope of
the quiet possession of his Lands. The right use of the Sacraments assures us
of Gods favor. As the Sacraments must be our food, so Prayer must be our fuel
to make the persuasion of Gods love to flame in us. The more we seek Gods
favor by fervent prayer, the more will he assure us of it.

4. To Act.
Ad agendum. Without action all the meditations in the world cannot assure us
of Gods favor. For whom God loves, them does he inspire with the fire of good
affections which flames forth into good actions. Now there are many impediments
of good actions. Some lets we meet withal abroad in the world. Others we find
within in our own souls. All these must be removed: and this remove cannot be
done without diligence. Add hereunto the manifold varieties of good actions to
be done. There are duties of Piety, and duties of Sobriety, duties of Equity,
and duties of Charity. And can all these duties be done without diligence? No
certainly, it is impossible.

Thus are we freed from Popish and Arminian cavils. They exclaim against us
for teaching, that we may be assured of our election. They call it a doctrine
of security, of liberty, and of profaneness. They say we teach men to live as
they list, because they are sure of Gods favor. We teach men with St. Peter,
that their election and calling to eternal happiness may be certainly made
known to themselves. But we teach them withal, as the Apostle does in the
text, that it cannot be done without labor and diligence. We demonstrate to
them indeed, that Gods favor cannot be lost, for God sunchangeable. This we
acquaint them with for their comfort in the world. But we show them withal,
that the sense of Gods favor may be lost by negligence, and then shall they
live as uncomfortably as if they never had had it. This we do for their caution
against the temptations of Satan and provocations of the World. Yea to make
them the more careful, we tell them, that the sense of Gods favor cannot be
had, nor being had cannot be kept without much labor and di^igence. For the
Devil has many ^aetes to beguile us of this principal ^illar of our
spiritual comfort, and ^ively provocation to cheerful obedience. Thieves have
not so many devices to cheat our rich men of their gold and silver, as Satan
has to be^uile us of the feeling of Gods love. Thus do we give to God his due,
and to Gods elect theirs. Thus do w^ maintain Gods constancy, and keep Gods
people from security.

Now let me urge every one tha^ hears me, according to the scope o^ the text,
to be diligent to make hi^ calling and election sure. Whatsoeve^ become of thee
in the world, make sur^ thy happiness in another world. Thi^ cannot be done
without pain and peril, but this must be done, else wi^^ thou never live with
comfort. Tho^^ hear the Merchant discourse of the many storms he has
endured at sea^ how often the sea beneath opened he mouth to devour him: how
often the heaven above frowned upon him as if it would give him over to the
fury of the seas: how often the eart^ denied him the sight of her, as if s^^
would never be trod upon more b^ him: how often the winds blew fierce ly upon
him, one crossing another, as (...) they contended whether should fin^ him. And
all this he endured for gai^ Thou have read the Soldiers trouble^ how he
stands in sight of the enemy that seeks his ruin: the bullets o^ while whisk
by his ear: the swo^ another while would shorten him by the head: sometimes
hunger bites him in the day, and sometime cold strikes him in the night. And
all this he endures for gain. Thou see the Physician toil and endanger
himself: one while he visits the pox, another while he trades in Spotted
fevers, yea sometimes he looks the Plague in the face. And all this he endures
for gain. And wilt not thou endure any labor, or run through any perils to be
sure of heavenly treasures, which no thief can steal, which no mouth can
corrupt, which no fire can consume, of which no death can disappoint thee?

Look upon the rich and great men of the world. I mean not those humane
Monsters, inhumane Mahometans, that leave not a brother alive for fear of
injury. But look on Christian and Religious people, what care they have to make
good their titles, to settle their inheritances upon theirs. And all this care
is but for temporal riches. Wilt not thou then be more careful to settle
thine interest to eternal glory? If thou be quiet now, yet the Devil will
find a time to try thy Evidence, and call thy title into question. Sickness
and death are times of weakness to thee, wherein he like a subtle enemy
displayes all his art and strength. Provide thee arguments now, that may uphold
thy hope when thou art at the weakest. Consider the misery of doubting persons
at their death. Think upon the anguish that their souls endure. They apprehend
God angry with them, the Devil accusing them, earth leaving them, heaven
refusing them, hell clayming them, soul and body parting, friends weeping, and
themselves hopeless, going they know not whither. What would they not give
that they had made their election sure in the time of their strength, or that
they might be strong to do it yet? Be thou warned by their folly. Make thou all
sure beforehand. As worldly men get riches in health to cherish them in
sickness: and as the Bees get in Summer honey to feed on, when storms keep
them within their hives: so do thou in time of health get good grounds of the
assurance of Gods favor that may uphold thee within against outward
afflictions and spiritual temptations, when thou art set, as it were, between
heaven and earth. So may thou live in joy, die in peace, rise in perfection,
reign in happiness.

Me thinks the worldly man should say now, Sir, you have pleaded our cause
well, and persuaded us to mind our own happiness. Be pleased to guide us. The
well is deep, Job. 4.11.
and we have nothing to draw withal. Whence then shall we have this living
water? Gods election is so high that we cannot reach it; and our vocation is so
secret, that we can hardly discern it.

I answer in the words of Lactantius, It is an absurd thing to go about to
overthrow that which is certain, Absurdum est ex incerto certum velle
subvertere, cum promptius sit de certis incerta firmare. Lact. de ira Dei. c. 5.
by that which is uncertain, seeing it is more easy to confirm uncertain
things by those that are certain. God goes downward from the causes to the
effects, we must go upward from the effects to the causes. The web that God
has weaved, we must unweave. He goes from election downward, we must go from
regeneration upward. Thus shall God and we meet in the middle way. We must
prove our selves to be called, and he will acknowledge us to be elected. When
his spirit and ours meet, Romans 8.16.
then is there good testimony that we are the sons of God.

The work we have to do is twofold:

First, to get title to Gods love.

Secondly, to get assurance, that we have a title.

The first is done by action.

The second is done by examination.

The actions (among many other) are principally four.
1. The shortning of worldly business, so much as may be without injury to our
calling, or neglecting any necessary duty thereunto belonging. Oxen, and
farms, Luke 14.18, 19, 20, 21.
and household businesses are the three impediments that make heaven empty,
unless the the poor and blind, the halt and maimed, that cannot follow the
world, come to help fill it. Mat. 13.22.
The cares of the world are the thorns, that choke the good seed of the word,
that it cannot be fruitful. So foolish are we, that while with much care and
labor we go about to make those things certain, which are most uncertain; we
make those things uncertain, which might be made most certain. He that has two
irons ^n the fire at once, spoils one, while ^e attends the other. Heaven and
earth are too great, and too far distant to be cooped up in one breast. They
that study Divinity, or Law, or Physic in the Universities, they take no care
for their diet, much less for worldly businesses, they leave this care unto
their friends. We that look for a portion in heaven, must free our souls so
much as may be, from the cares of the world. Although these cares did ^ot bring
with them occasions of many evils, yet it is sufficient that they deprive us of
many opportunities of seeking the salvation of our own souls. He dies though
more slowly, that is starved, and he can but die that is poisoned. He goes to
hell that lives in gross sin, and he does no less that follows his
business, and neglects the salvation of his soul. Do less then for the world,
and do more for thine own soul.

2. Moderation in the use of worldly pleasures is very needful for him, that
will make his calling sure. Pleasures are Sirens, they entice the Passengers to
security, that they may overturn the boat. While we are sure of these, we look
after no other comforts. They that live in pleasures are dead to the world.
They neglect their business: they lose opportunities to enlarge their estates:
their shops are not acquainted with them: their servants want a Master: their
children lack a Father: their wives have los^ their husbands: and they have
los^ themselves. They are much more dead to the world to come. They that waste
their temporal patrimony, while they follow their pleasures, how will they
seek to settle their eternal inheritance? The want of contentment in the world
makes a man to seek for satisfaction in a better world, but the enjoying o^
pleasures here, makes him negligent of seeking perpetual joys. If the wings
of the fowl be never so nimble, yet birdlime keeps it from mounting upward, and
makes it tumble on the ground: So the quickest spirits being glued to delights
of the world, wallow in them, and never fly up in their affections toward
heaven. Religion is not a recreation to be used at spare times, nor recreation
is not Religion to be pursued upon all occasions with eagerness. God will
answer such, as Abraham does the rich man, Luke 16.25.
Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, now must thou
be tromented.

All things must be done in their seasons. Occasions are not to be lost,
because they cannot be redeemed. He that makes not his election sure here, shall
not be happy with Gods elect hereafter. Let me press this with Isidorus
arguments, (...). Isid. Pelus. lib. 3. Epist. 60.
He that betrayeth the opportunity of doing things, shall never receive the
profit of them. For can any approve of the husbandman, who, when is it time to
plow and sow, that he may after receive a plentiful ^rop, is lasie and idle,
and ^its still at his door? Who can like of the vinedresser, who, when he may
dress his vine, that ^e may have it full of ^apes, and a plentiful ^mepresse,
lays snares for the labors of other men? Lastly who can like of that Mariner,
who, when the wind serves him fitly to make a very gainful voyage, tarries in
the haven, and tumbles in the taverns? Surely no body. Seeing these things are
so, who can approve of that Christian, who requires to be crowned in the time
of the battle? The affairs of this world are occasions of skirmishes, not of
crowns: but those of the world to come afford honors and rewards. Wherefore
let us not betray the commodious occasion of things, lest otherwise we be vexed
with unprofitable repentance in the life to come. The seasons must not be
confounded. Spring is not harvest. The wind that carries a man out of his
country, will not bring him home again. God affords us abundance of pleasures,
(...). Isid. Pelus. lib. 2. Epist. 179.
but it is in another world. Here he expects labor and pains of us. So says
the same Father, The reward of our labors is no^ to be had here: but here are
the skirmishes, and hereafter the rewards. Let no^ men then seek for rest, and
pleasure of mind in the time of wars, nor confound the seasons.

Let us then be content with ou^ labors here, and so much pleasure, a^ may
enable us to go through with them and when we have made our election sure,
expect fullness of pleasure hereafter.

3. Repentance is necessary, before a man can have interest to Gods favor, and
much more, before he can know his interest. The eye that is full of dust can
never see well, till it be cleansed. The soul that is full of sin, can never
discern it own condition, till repentance empty it. A man cannot believe in
Christ for remission of his sins, unless he repent of them. Much less can he
persuade himself, that he does believe. When we endeavor to assure our
election, we combat with Satan for eternal happiness. (...). Isid Pelus. lib.
2. Epist. 161.
The beginning of the Olympian combats was the putting off of their garments.
If we go to strive with Satan and put not off the rags of our sins, we shall
be derided by others, foiled by Satan, and not only lose the crown we strive
for, but also be led away to eternal torments. Justification differs from
sanctification, yet is it a work of our sanctification to discern our
justification. The unregenerate man is not justified, and therefore cannot see
that that is not. The more full then our sanctification is, the plainer is the
sense and more comfortable the apprehension of our justification. Neither is
this to be done at first only, when we turn from wicked ways to Godliness,
but continually in the whole course of our lives. The true reason why the
consciences of many men are not clear, is because they are foul; they are not
peaceable, Psalm. 51.1.
because they are not pure. David's pangs of conscience are after he had gone
into Bathsheba. The love of some principal corruption keeps many from the
sweet fruition of Gods favorable coutenance. Ransacke thy soul daily, and
cleanse away the filth of sin thoroughly by repentance, and the guilt of it
will not look so grimly upon thee to affright thy conscience.

4. Faith or full confidence in Jesus Christ alone is needful to be had,
without which there can be no assurance of our election. Between the top and
bottom of the Ladder there are certain steps to clime. Between election and
justification there must come faith in Jesus Christ. If the sick man forsake
all the world, and leave the counsel of all his friends, and cast himself into
the hands of some one Physician, he will not fail him, if he have any spark of
humanity in him, because his life lies in his hands. Neither will our Savior
fail them, that being soulsick forsake their own merits, and all mediations of
Saints and Angels, despair of salvation by any other, and trust in him only
for it. He knows not their life, but their soul lies in his hands alone to save
it or condemn it. He that came to seek the lost sheep, will not refuse the
returning one. Two blind men by the way side cry out to our Savior for help.
The people rebuke them. They cry out the more. Our Savior is so pleased with
these loud echoes of two confident souls, that he calls them, gives them their
choice, offers them any courtesy, Mat. 20.32.
What will ye, that I shall do unto you? Much more will he be affected with a
troubled soul, that rests on him alone for eternal life. Our fathers trusted
in thee: Psalm. 22.4.5.
they trusted, and thou did deliver them. They cried unto thee, and were
delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. The house built upon
the rock is free from fall, no storm can overthrow it, Mat. 7.24.
but sandy foundations are easily overturned. Mat. 16.18.
Souls built by confidence upon Christ, the gates of hell cannot overcome, but
the light foundations of the power and merits of mere, though excellent
creatures, uphold no soul in the time of an heavy temptation. Christ is the
surest anchor, that upholds the souls of men in the sea of this world against
all waves of temptations whatsoever. Romans 5.1, 5.
This faith never sails him that has it, for it has that hope at command,
that makes not ashamed.

Thus have I showed you the way to the title.

Now for the assurance of the title.

The title is gotten by action, the knowledge of this title is gotten by
examination. The principal notes of Gods elect must be known. And by them must
we search out our own condition. Because I will not be so long, I will insist
but on a few.

1. The love of God in us, is a sure token of the love of God to us. God
scorns to be endebted to any man for his love. His affection ever goes before
ours: 1 John 4.19.
We love him, because he first loved us. I cannot certainly and infallibly
tell, whether another love me, but I can certainly tell, whether I love another
or no. His love to me is in his heart, which I know not: My love to him is in
my heart, which I know, and no creature else. Then may I know, that God loves
me, if I know that I love him.

But it may be objected, My heart is deceitful, and I may be deceived by it. I
may think I love God, when I do not. Who lives, and thinks not he loves God, if
he hear of God? Tell me therefore some sure notes of the love of God in me.

I answer, The best way to know our love to God, is by the properties of love.

First, those whom we love, we often think upon, our thoughts fasten on them
when we are awake, our dreams run on them when we are asleep. How precious are
the thoughts of thee unto me O God, how great is the sum of them? Ps. 139.17,
18.
If I should count them, they are more in number then the sand: when I am
awake, I am still with thee. Behold David's love to God, sleeping and waking his
mind runs upon him. There needs no arguments to bring them to our remembance
whom we love. We neglect our selves to think upon them. A man in love wastes his
spirits, Animus ubi amat, non ubi animat.
vexes his mind, neglects his meat, regards not his business, his mind still
feeds on that he loves. When men love that they should not, there is more need
of a bridle to keep them from thinking of it, then of spurs to urge them to
it. Try thy love of God by this. If thou think not often of God, thou love
him not. If thou can not satisfy thy self with profits, pleasures, friends
and other worldly objects, but thou must turn other businesses aside, that thou
may daily think of God, then thou love him.

Secondly, those whom we love, we will by no means be persuaded to offend. No
bands are so strong as love. Sooner will the servant offend his Master, the son
his father, the wife her husband, the subject his prince, then a friend him
whom he truly loves. Friendship binds faster then any authority. 1 Samuel, 20.
Genesis 39.
Jonathan will offend his father rather then his David. Joseph will offend his
Mistress that dotes on him, rather then his God. Try thy love to God by this. If
thou can easily sin without any great sense or sorrow, thou love not God.
But if thou had rather offend all the world then God, then thou love him:

Thirdly, Those whom we love, we do any thing to please. Nothing can be so
hard, but a friend will adventure on it, if he know that his friend require it,
or perceive that it will be pleasing to him. The Merchant will not run through
so many storms for gain, as a friend for love. If thou be ready to do any
thing that God requires of thee, though it be never so cross to thy perverse
nature, then thou love God. Genesis 22.
God acknowledges Abraham's love to him, because he was ready to kill his son at
Gods command. If Abraham had loved himself more then God, he would have kept
his son, and not given him to God, he would have thought with himself, Will no
meaner sacrifice serve God then my Son? Will none of my cattle, nor my
substance serve the turn? But Abraham reasons not with flesh and blood, his
love to God is greater then his love to his son. And that it might appear so,
God put him in mind of his love to his son, Take thy son whom thou love,
that his love to God might appear to be greater: Accordingly Abraham shows it,
and God from heaven pronounces it to be greater. If thou will know thy love to
God, be as ready to obey him.

Fourthly, Those whom we love we can bear any thing that comes from them. We
can endure their reproofs, and in some cases their corrections. The child can
be contented to be struck by the father, that would not take a blow of another.
The friend can bear a sharp reproof of a friend, that cannot bear an harsh word
from an enemy. The wife can bear with the waspishnesse of her sick beloved
husband, and the husband can bear with the infirmities of his well beloved
wife. Thus David showed his love to God in his weakness, Psalm. 39 9.
I was dumb, I opened not my mouth because thou did it. If thou fret at
troubles, and look not at God, whom they come from, where is thy love to God?
But if thou acknowledge his hand, and be therefore patient, then thou love
God.

Fifthly, Those we love, we are most willing to endure any thing for. We are
content to suffer for their sakes any inconveniences. Genesis 29.20.
Jacob endured a tedious service for Bachel; and it seemed but a few days, to
him, because he loved her. Thus St. Paul loved Christ. He fears not the
troubles foretold by Agabus. He regards not the passionate speeches, nor
affectionate tears of his friends. He loves Christ more then either them, or
himself. Act. 21.13.
What mean ye to weep, and to break mine heart? for I am ready not to be bound
only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. Have thou
St. Paul's affection to die in the cause of God, if the times should require it?
then out of question thou love him.

Sixthly, Those whom we love, we acquaint with out miseries, lay open our
griefs to them, count it some ease to discharge some of our sorrows into
their bosoms, their counsel we ask, and from them we look for help. So Haman
beginning to fall before Morde^^ goes to his wife, Esther 6.13.
and his friends to bemone himself and to ask counsel. Jehoshaphat opposed by
his enemies, 2 Chr. 20.12.
to whom comes he to complain? to none but to God. 2 King. 19.14, 15.
To whom comes Hezekiah to complain against Rabshaketh and Sennacherib? to none
but unto God. To whom went David to complain of the bitter words of Cush the
Benjamite? to none but unto God. O Lord my God, Psalm. 7.1.
in thee do I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute me, and
deliver me. Affliction shows men whom they put their trust in. A very easy
friend will serve in posperity. If so soon as adversity come upon thee, thou
run presently to God, and lay open all thy grief to him expecting relief only
from him, then certainly thou love him.

Sevently, Those whom we love, we take any small token wonderful kindly from
them, whereas we not only slight, but refuse and suspect far greater gifts, if
they come from enemies. The Jews refused the proffered service of their
enemies for the building of Gods Temple. Ezra 4.2, 3.
God cares not for Cains sacrifice, because he cares not for Cain. But a sheep
or lamb from Abel, whom he loves, pleases the great God of heaven and earth.
Genesis 4.4.
The Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering. A pin from a friend is
more esteemed, then a pound from an enemy. He that is thankful to God for his
meat, for his rest, for every comfort, that God gives him, he loves God. He
that eats, and drinks, and labors, and sleeps, and never looks up to God, he
loves him not at all.

Eighthly and lastly, those we love having been long absent from them, how do we
long to go home unto them? How glad is the husband at the East Indies, when he
may return to his dear wife, his beloved country, and his ancient friends? Me
thinks I see Jacob triumphing at the sight of Joseph's charriots sent to carry
him into Egypt, It is enough, Joseph my son is yet alive: Genesis 45.28.
I will go and see him before I die. He that loves God, will be glad to go to
God. There is his home, there is his best friend. What though death be terrible
for the present, yet the end is pleasing. St. Paul wishes for it, I desire to
depart, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ. What can better testify thy affection to God, then thy
earnest desire to be for ever with God? If by these notes well weighed, it may
appear, that thou love God, then need thou make no question of Gods
affection toward thee.

2. The love that we bear to Gods children is a sure token of Gods love to us.
The contrary is delivered as a note of the children of the Devil. 1 John 3.10.
He that loves not his brother, is not of God, but the child of the Devil.
The possession of this brotherly love is made an undeniable note of the heirs
of glory, and so plain a note, that they themselves may perceive it in their
own consciences. 1 John 3.14.
We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren:
he that loves not his brother, abides in death. 1 John 4.7.
And again, Every one that loves, is born of God: spoken of the love of the
brethren, as appears by the beginning of the verse, Beloved, let us love one
another. This love is not that affection, that drunkards bear one to another,
because they are brethren in evil. It is not that affection that Merchants
bear one to another, which has gain for the father, and hope of more for the
mother. It is not that affection which children bear to their parents, for
nature is their schoolmaster, and chains of natural affection are the bands of
it. This love comes not from vice, or gain, or nature. Nay all these plead
against it. Vice opposes it mainly, for it opposes all fellowship in evil.
Cain cries out against it, for it cuts off many occasions of gain. Nature it
self sometimes opposes it, because it is above nature, and hence are the bands
of natural affection sometimes disunited. The father shall be divided against
the son, Luke 12.53.
and the son against the father. This our Savior foretold should follow upon
change of Religion. So then neither vice, nor gain, nor nature plead for this
love, but the first ever, and the other two often against it. This love is a
good affection to Gods children, because they are Gods. None of the former
reasons persuades us to it, but only the goodness that is in them. The image
of God is graven in them. And they that love God, love those images of him that
himself has stamped, and the liker they are to God, the more they love them.
The heathen did admire at that affection, that the persecuted Christians bare
one to another. Amant mutu^, pene antequam noverint. Minut. Fael.
They loved one another before they well knew one another, says Cecilius the
heathen man, and wonders at it. Yea they themselves admired at it. So says
Minutius Faelix of himself and Octavius, Crederes unam animam im duobus esse
divisam. Ibidem.
You would have thought that one soul had been divided between us two. The
Scripture testify as much, The multitude of them that believed, were of one
heart, Act. 4.32.
and of one soul. It not only makes it a mark that we our selves may discern,
but also, that others may know by, that we belong to God, if we do not
dissemble. Joh. 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to
another. They have not this love, that deride at piety and laugh at
austerenesse of life. That do not love men for their goodness, but hate them.
Neither have they this love, that suffer better men then themselves to perish
for want of means, 1 John 3.17.
and have plenty and yet relieve them not. Who so has this worlds good, and
sees his brother has need and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him,
how dwells the love of of God in him? These are not called by God. But such
as love them that are good, merely because they are good, they love God, and
God loves them.

3. An earnest desire of the coming of Christ to judgment is a good token of
Gods elect. There is a crown of righteousness laid up not only for St. 2 Timothy
4.8.
Paul, but for all those, that love the appearing of our Savior Christ. They
that are guilty fear the coming of the Judge, but they that are innocent, fear
it not. They that are in their sins, are afraid of the coming of our Savior
Christ to judgment. But they that are reconciled to God through the blood of
Christ, wish for it, that they may be freed from sin and misery. Rev. 22.17.
It is the voice of the Bride, it is the voice of the Spirit in the Bride,
Come. V.20.
It is the voice of the penman of the Apocalypse, Come Lord Jesus. V.17.
It should be the voice of every hearer, Come. This is the general voice of all
Gods elect, although at some particular time they could wish, that Christ would
not come yet. As when they are overcome with some temptation, they could wish,
that he might not come at that moment of time, till they have repented and
humbled themselves, that they may give up their account with more comfort. Even
they that doubt of Gods favor would give all they have if they belong to God,
that Christ would come to judgment, so they were sure, that he would but
acknowledge them for his own. Try then thy affection to the coming of Christ,
and if thou find it willing, doubt not of Gods favor.

4. The care of keeping a good conscience is an undeniable prove of Gods love
to us. Justification cannot be parted from sanctification. But sanctification
is more easily perceived, then justification, and by it is justification
apprehended. Sanctification is a work of God in us: justification is a work of
God concerning us. Now we do more easily perceive those things, that are
wrought in us, then those that do otherwise belong unto us. This was St. Act.
24.16.
Paul's exercise, Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void
of offense toward God, and toward men. This is that God requires of us. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7.
For God has not called us to uncleanness, but unto holiness. And therefore it
is a true note of our calling. They that have not this care, cannot know they
are elected. They that have it, need not at all to doubt of it.

These and other tokens may we learn out of the book of God, and by experience
seek to find them in our selves. So shall we come to be most certain in our
old age, when we have most need of assurance. Senectus ipsa aetate sit doctior
usu certior, processu tempor^s prudentior. Ber. form. hon. vitae.
Old age it self is made more learned by age, more certain by use, more prudent
in process of time, says Bernard. Let us go forward to fight in this combare
against Satan to the end of our lives. That which we strive for is no temporal
but an eternal inheritance. (...). ^lem. Aley. Admon. ^d G^ntes.
So says Clemens Alexandrinus, It is no small matter that ye strive for, it is
no less then immortality. Let us not then suffer Satan to wring our evidences
out of our hand, but rather according to the sweet counsel of the blessed
Apostle in the words of my text, by these and other marks,

Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.
Which that we may do, he gives us grace that has elected us from eternity to
eternal happiness, and called us from misery to immortality, to whom with the
Son our Savior, and the holy Ghost our Comforter, be all glory, honor,
praise, and dominion now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. line 13. chosed, read chosen. marg. vol, r. par. vol. p. 4. l. 24.
spoke, r. speak. p. 5. l. 3. wishly, r. wistly. p. 8. marg. chaix, r. chair. p.
9 l. 13 calany, r. call any. p. 17. l. 26. Thus, r. Thus is. p. 20. l. 28.
passed. r. pressed. p. 28. l. 21. were, r. we are. p. 35. l. 11. no strive. r.
no strife. l. 26. mon. r. man. p. 36. marg. end ser. r. ser. 3. p. 42. marg
11.13. r. Rom 11.33. p. 54. l 17. mystery, r. ministry. p. 72. adminested, r.
administed. marg. puricula. r. pericula. p. 86. marg. affectionis, r.
affectibus. p. 114. l. 6. should, r. would. p. 123. opoliones, r. opiliones. p.
124 l. 26. thoses, r. those. p. 126 l. 22. for so as. r. for as. p. 132. thing,
r. think. l. 15 Add in the margin, Use 2. p. 161. l. 3. we are Gods building,
r. ye. p. 170. l. 13. eternal, r. internal. p. 175. l. 12 consailes, r.
counsels p. 178. amissi, r. aversi. p. 184. l. 12. treasures, r. leasures. p.
195. marg. impediuntur, r. ingrediuntur. tenerint, r. tenerent. p. 199. end God
favors, r. Gods favor. p. 201. l. 22. baets, r. baits. l 26. our rich, r out
rich. p. 203. l. 14 mouth, r. moth. p 209. l. 4. tromented, r. tormented. l.
17. is it. r. it is l. 27. vinepresse. r. winepresse. marg. (...), r. (...).

A Catalogue of Books Printed for G. and H. Eversden, and are to be sold at the
Gray-bound in Pauls-church-yard.
AN Exposition of the whole book of the Canticles by John Robotham Preacher at
Dover in Kent, in 4o

A tabernacle for the Sun, or an Idea of Church discipline, by John Rogers
Minister at St. Thomas Apostles London, in 4o

The life of Sir Thomas More sometimes Lord Chancellor of England, by J. H.
Gent. in 8o

The natural man's case stated, or an exact map of the little world Man, in 17.
Sermons by Mr. Christopher Love, late Minister of Lawrence Jury London;
together with a Sermon preached at his funeral by Mr. Tho. Manton, in 8o

As also the Doctrine of Mortification, with the Hearers duty, by Mr.
Christopher Love, in 8o

A Comment on the 11. first verses of the fourth Chapter of St. Matthew
concerning Christ's temptations, by Tho. Fuller, B.D. and Minister of Waltham
Abbey in Essex, in 8o

A Comment on the first and second Chapters of Ruth, by Mr. Tho. Fuller. B.D.
and Minister of Waltham Abbey in Essex, in 8o

The Lords prayer unclasped, or a vindication of it against all Schismatics
and Heretics, by James Harwood B.D. in 8o

The Mystery of the two witnesses un^ veiled, by John Robotham Minister (...)
Gods word in Dover, in 8o

The Christian Diurnal, or daily (...) ties to be practiced toward God, (...)
neighbors, our selves, by Anthony M^^^^gan, D.D. in 12o

Sion and Parnassus, or divine Epigrams on several texts of Scrpture, b^ J. H.
Gent. in 8o


