The true London Prophet.
OR, Comical Remarkes, and Predictions for the future part of this Year, 1699.
Infalibly fortelling What will Certainly happen (whither the Stars will or no)
both in Court, City and Country, betwixt this and Whit-Sunday next, To which
is added A Discovery of many pretty Intrigues that will be used among the noble
Society of Distilers, and other Traders. Also some brief touches upon the
Humors, and Conversations of the Town Beau's, and City Misse's, with varity of
other merry and pleasent Circumstances respecting these Times. Being very
diverting to all, and hurtful to None.
London, Printed for the Author, next Door to the Sign of the want of Money in
Dull-Trade-Yard.

To the Courtuous, (not Carping) Reader.
Here Is no Speaking Dragon, or Weather-Cock-Steeple,
Nor talkative Monkeys to frighten the People,
No Tygars, nor Wolves that do speak without reason,
Such words as some Folks do count damnable Treason
Nor no barking Bull-Doggs to put us in fear
But the plain Naked Truth that will happen this Year,
You may Read the Book over for no Factions are here
Here Is nothing of Chamberlins going to the Dutch,
What Money he Carried 'em little or much.
Nor Nothing of state affairs here will I write,
For fear of the Plague of a Damned Jacobite.
But hold? I Will no longer keep you at Door,
Peep into the House, and so view it all over,
If you do but buy it I care for no more.
Yours R. B.

Predictions for the Year, 1699.
AS sure as Knavry has got the start Honesty, Poverty and Pride this Summer will
Hand in Hand; and many will terribly pinch their Bellies to adorn their Backs,
and other tumble with great willingness on their Backs to pleas their Bellies.

Whoreing will be much railed against in our Churches, but never more practiced
in Chambers; and many London Prentices will be forced this Year to eat Suffolk
Cheese, to advance their Master Daughters to the Boarding-School. Honesty will
be reduced to a very low Condition, and be forced tug many a Knave by the
sleeve to put him in mind of his promise, (but in vain) and Virtue in plain
dress will be force'd to pin up Vices fine Gown for a Livlihood. Justice will
be in many Men's Mouths, but in few Men's Hearts, we shall hear often of her
name, but know not where to find her, and where she ought to Dwell, we shall
not dare to look for her.

This Year will a rise sharp disputes among Prentice Boys, Chamber-Maids and
Cook Maids about Gypsies and Astrologers, which of them tells Fortunes truest,
and after a great many nice Arguments, pro's and cons, etc. it will be decided
in favor of the Saffron colored Deviners, because they dispatch their
Business soonest and for less Money.

The Malice of Law Adversaries will be pretty well aswaged when the Term's
over; the long Bills of Attorneys and Petty-foggers will make them agree to
call themselves Fools, and their Lawyers Knaves, and will make a promise to
renounce the Law for the future as good Christians do the Devil and all his
Works.

Those Sparks who cuold not purchase new Choathes at Easter, will be glad to
have them at Whitston tide, and if they miss of 'em then (as I am sure a great
many will) Especially Women, they will go near to bear them in their minds, nine
Months after; a great deal of Money will this Summer be vainly flung-away on
Wine and Women, and such like alluring Commodites, by many boisterous
Youngsters, who have a bundance more Wealth than Wit, but they ^ll in a little
time so order the matter, that they will bring them both to an equal Balance.

Many a hopeful and pretty Young Maid will go a mile, or two out of (...) own
in the Hollydays, and forgetting herself will lose that in few minits which
she will never find again as long as she Livers.

Lotteries and loose Lives will multiply exceedingly this Year; till they both
become the only Pick-pockets of this Age tho with this difference, the former
will do it with your Consent and the latter without it.

Every Gardener will shortly be as busso as Father Adam in Paradise, to turn
Horse-Dung into Raddshies, and Ram's Horn's, into Sparrowgrass, Ay and will be
verry angry too if any of the Family shall presume to lay a sirs R -- ce ^ut of
his own Ground insomuch that abundance of Dung-hills a'rather side the ^ater
will be mightily improved, to raise a Summers feast, but the first of their
course must be sauce for my Lady.

Many Citizens with Jealous hearts and horned-heads will this Summer be
tormented with Curtain Lectures for New Gowns, Petticoats and other fine
Nick-knacks, and if there Wives request be not granted, they shall be lead as
bad a Life, as a sturdy Beggar in the House of Correction.

Those who have bucksom Young Daughters, must this Year take care to provide
them Husbands, or else Guide them with a very strit rein, otherwise the active
motion of the Spirits, this Spring season will beget such an itch in their
Tails that will make them Door on your Apprentices, or (which is much worse)
suffer their heels to be trip^t up by their serving Men the first oppertunity.

Punks that are poor, will begin to dread the Approaching dismal Summer, for
Consequently an Empty Town soon produces Emty Purses, and want of Money the
worst of in fam; for she that had the Honor to be Debauched by a Duke may in a
little time (except the kind influence of her Stars prevent it) be kick't by
his Footman, or be glad to be kissed by a Porter. For many a topping Lass (now
at Guinea purchase) will dwindle from her Veluet-Scarff into Rusty Lute-string
and will willingly be at a Coach-Man's service for a cast of his Ofice and a
Quarten of Brandy, and think it a good Eveing work.

We shall certainly hear of great strife between the Pawn-Broker and Tally-Man,
about their Honesly tho both in th^is Dealings (according to Custom^) will
strive who should run first to the Devil Headlong

Farmers, like their Corn, now begin to prick up their Ears, tho they Labor
between the passion of hope and fear; and pray as often for a dry hirvest as
the just Man Sins in a day, and when he has it in his Born, he will choose
raither to let the Mice, and Weavells, eat it than the poor should have it at a
reasonable price.

More Trades Men will be seen playing in the fields, (espcinlly Weavers) then
working in their Shops, he that has Money may spend it, with much pleasure,
and he that has none, may sleep under a Hedge without any danger of having his
Pocket pick^d.

Weavers, as well as Jouray men Tailors, will be glad to make many a meal of
Cucumbers this Summer, or else go to Lambs-Cunduict, and Drink a health to Duke
Humphrey, and entreat Providence upon their bended Knees to take a way their
Stomachs, or send them a shower of Bread and Cheese, for tho (perhaps) meat may
be pretty Cheep, yet money will be scarce, that if an Ox re^d-roasted could be
for a Penny, if he wants both coin and Credit, if he is too proud to Beg and to
Honest to steal, is in the midst of Plenty in a very likely condition to go
with out a Dinner.

Journey-Men Shoe-makers, Notwithstanding the raging distemper of Poverty among
tham, yet they will be so proud as scorn to work on a Monday, that they may
return to their work with clear Pockets, and safe Conscences, and I Will say that
for 'em the best of Christians cannot be more thoughtful on their Last, their
Lives 'its true are but dangerous Examples for the Righteous to follow, yet by
the Doctrine of the Hammer they will make more good Souls in one Twelue-Month,
than the Clergy do in Seven. This year Distillers will turn Negromances (alias
Conjurers) and raise a bundance of Evil Spirits. not only from allsorts of
Corn, but out of Carrots, and Turnops too which will possess the People, as
the Devil did the Herd of Swine, to the utter destruction of those who fall
under their Enchantments, or are Bewitched by 'em, which, will be the only
occasion of advancing Hogwash to the great Injury of Islington Swine:herds, as
well as the Damage of Bartholomew-Fair Porky if they are not suddenly Conjured
down, or at least carefully bound in Fetters of forbearance by the Wisdom of
our great Assembly, to prevent poisoning the Subjects.

Churchwardens will be accounted grand Knaves, by the rest of their Parish,
let them look to it as well as they can, for those Sinners who fall into there
Clutches for answer the end of the Creation, will wish he had been Gelt; for
indeed its something hard to pay for taking their own Wives Linen up: Those
players who not long since lived by playing to Fool, must now linch out of
these Eliment, and set their wits to work, otherwise they will find little else
the do, but to ly a Bed and studdy their parts against next Micheal-Mass to
play the Knave.

There will be more Religions this Summer than ever, and yet never less Piety;
Chlistians will prefer their ease before their devotion and think the Weather
too hot to serve God in Crowds, for which reason the Church will have but thin
Congregations.

There will certainly also be a great Quarrel between Rooks and Jack-Daws,
about which of them are fairest, which will occasion abundance of Chattring on
both sides to little purpose, till the Eagle under takes to decide the
Differance.

Strange things will be reported this Year without truth, and belived with
reason, and all sides will Expect miracles to be wrought, but if nothing come
on it, they must sit down (tho not contented)

Swines Flesh and Whores Flesh will be as Common as Beef and Mutton at
Leaden-Hall-Market; Especially about the latt end of August, but he that wants
Skill to Choose will Certainly be Cheated if he meddles with Either, for the
one will be very incident to the Pox, and the other to the Measles, at which
time a great many Strong. Beasts will be there to be seen, and a great many
worse Creaturs to be felt. And for Deseases the Pox and Poverty, above all will
be the most em^idemicd, and will as often meet together, as the Ague and Fever.

Virtue and Villainy are like to meet with equal Encouragement, For as many
will be Starved for the^e Honest ashang'd for their Rogeury, only with this
differance Poverty shall take away the Life of the former without a manifest
Crime, whilst the Law shall require Evidence to prove the latter.

All sorts of Rogues will be now very Industerous in their several stations
to get Money, even from the the Lottery Man to the the Common Pick-pocket, and
all sorts of fools as busy in spending on it, and Many a Jilt will play the
part of a Queen in a foul Smock, and many a Knave ^epresent a states Man.

Leacherous Bullies, vvil this Year be so busy in Robbing Young hansome Women
of their Honesty, that in order to be revenged on 'mand to prevent it, many
will be so subtle as never to carry ^ne Dram of it about 'em for the future,
and by that means the Bully's will be plaguly disapointed.

About Christmas Hollidays next the Fanatcks will begin to Preach against
supersticions, Minch-Pyes, and Abominable Plomb-Porridge, etc. While on the
other Hand the Church of England w^^^ as Stoutly Stand up for Christmas
Hospitality, In short and for a Conclusion, the Church and Dissentrs, the Rich
and the poor the Clergy, and the Laiety, Winner and the Looser, Williamite and
Jacobite, the Planitive and Defendant will not agree; For Mankind below, like
the Elements, above are at vareance one with another, And a Horse that has a
biger Head than I, know's not when they will be reconciled.

FINIS.
London, Printed in the Year, 1699.


