A TRUE DISCOVERY OF THE GROUND OF THE IMPRISONMENT OF Francis Ellington,
Thomas Cocket, and Edward Ferman, whose outward dwellings is in
Northamptonshire, who are cast into the Common Goal in Northampton, by the men
that are now in Commission to do Justice, who never read us any Law, or any
evidence came against us, showing our transgression as the following lines make
manifest. He that has an eye to see let him see, and he that has an ear to
hear let him hear.

And Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands a far off, for
Truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter; yea Truth fails, and
he that departs from evil makes himself a prey. Isaiah 59. 14, 15. verses.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-Spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's, 1655.

A true Discovery of the ground of the Imprisonment of Francis Ellington,
Thomas Cocket, and Edward Ferman, etc.
I Francis Ellington, living in Wellingborough in the County of Northampton,
about the 9. day of October 1654. being in my Calling and employment at a Fair
at Harborough in Lecestershire, and hearing that there was one Willing Dewsbury
a Yorkshire man at a friends house there; and he was that day to declare the
word of the Lord to the Consciences of the people; and being free in my spirit
to go to hear him, I went to the friends house, and heard him declare the word
of life to my Conscience, which raised the witness of God in me, that did own
what he spoke to be the Word of the Lord; which my understanding did enlighten
to see the way to eternal life, which I had long sought in my imagination of
the Saints condition. Then was I moved of the Lord to desire his servant, who
to me declared His word, when he was free in his spirit, to come to my house,
which he did upon the 27. day of the 10. Month called December, and a friend
with him whose name is Joseph Storre, who stayed at my house that day and
night; and on the morrow Richard Denit Constable of the Town, came to my house
with a warrant from Thomas Pentlow called Justice, and said, that he came to
apprehend one of those two that were at my house; I asked him if he had a
warrant, he said he had: I desired him that he would let me read his warrant:
which he did, and I reading it, and finding no name, in the warrant, of him he
should apprehend, but for one he called Quaker; I replied, that I could not see
how he could apprehend any of those two in my house by virtue of that Warrant,
seeing there was not any name in the Warrant, but the Constable laid hands on
William Dewsbury, and said, that he was the man, and that he should go with him
before the Justice, which he did the same day, and Joseph Stor was moved to go
with him to Thomas Pentlow's house in Wilby; then I being free in my spirit,
did with other friends go along with them to Thomas Pentlows house, and there
hearing the examination of William Dewsbury and Joseph Stor, and after that
Thomas Pentlow had made their Mittimus, and gave the Constable charge of them,
the said Thomas Pentlow came forth of the room into another room whete I and
other friends were, and asked me, and one Richard Smith what we did in his
house, and who gave us leave to come into his house? and threatened us to make
us answer onr affronting him in his house at the next Sessions. Then I, and
Richard Smith told him* that we came not to affront him in his house, neither
could he prove it by our carriage since we came into his house; but the
occasion of our coming thither at that time was to require of him to do us
Justice. He asked for whom would you have justice against? We replied for one
Bridget Makernes of Findon, which was at that instant in his house. He asked
us, what she did to us? We answered, that about two weeks before, the said
Richard Smith and my self, and another friend with us, went to Findon, and the
said Briget Makernes (as we were peaceably passing through the street in
Findon) did abuse us in throwing water at us, and stones, and dirt, and calling
us rogues, witches and Devils; yet we gave her no cause, not spoke not to her,
but left her; and for this abuse and affront done to us, we come to thy house,
to desire justice of thee against the said Bridget. Thomas Pentlow answered,
that she had served us right for ought he knew, and further said, that hewould
not do any thing for us against her; but charged us, to be forthcoming* and he
would send a Warrant to the Constable before the Sessions to bring us to answer
for the coming into his house. We replied and said, that he might do his
pleasure, and so departed.

About three days after, I was moved of the Lord to write these following
lines, and sent them privately sealed up, to the hands of Thomas Pentlow.

The Letter.
THus says the Lord God* Be wise ye Kings, be learned ye that are Judges (or
Justices) in the earth; serve the Lord in fear, stand not in your own will when
you judge between man and man; but stand in the will of God, and execute true
judgment; for you must all give an account to him of your deeds done in the
flesh, whether good or evil; and now the Lord begins to roar out of Sion, and
to utter his voice from Jerusalem, and woe to all the inhabitants of the earth,
says the Lord God; and now the time is come that we shall no more say, the
Lord lives that brought the children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt; but
the Lord lives that has brought up, and led the seed of Israel out of the
North Country, and from all Countries where I have scattered them, and they
shall dwell in their own Land, Jer. 23. 7, 8. and now the Lord has made the
tidings out of the North to trouble the inhabitants of Babel, and it will more
trouble them yet: it will make them gnaw their tongues for sorrow, and
blaspheme the God of Heaven; for their plagues shall be exceeding great. Now to
the light in thy conscience which Christ Jesus has enlightened thee withal, am
I commanded to speak these words, that with it thou may examine, and see how
thou executest Justice; and how thou did execute Justice upon those two
faithful servants of the living God that thou have committed to prison; the Law
of God in thy Conscience says, that he that preaches the Gospel has a lawful
Calling, and is no vagabond though he have no outward habitation, and the
Spirit of truth made it manifest in the person of Christ; and he that says he
abides in Christ, ought so to walk as he himself walked: and he that is
commanded of the Lord to preach the Gospel, though he be a Judge* Justice, or
whoever, must when God Calls him, leave Father and Mother, Wife and Children,
and all, and must go preach; for whoever he be that sets himself down in a
Parish, and there to stay during his life to preach (as he calls it) to a
people, I affirm that Person was never sent of God to preach, but is a false
Prophet; for there is not one such example in all the Scripture, and Christ's
Commission is contrary to it; but blessed be the God of Heaven, the Lord has
now raised both Justices, Colonels, Captains, and many hundreds of others in
the North, that go hundreds of miles preaching the Gospel, as those thou have
sent to prison did: Now I do tell thee, the light of Christ in thy conscience
would not have had thee to have been offended at me, and others that did not
put off our hats, and bow to thee; but it was thy will, and the will of man is
the Beast spoken of in Revelation* that ascended out of the bottomless pit.
Thou should have put a yoke upon thy beast, for it belongs to him, and not
have desired honor, for that belongs to God: thy will is the Beast, the Beast
is the Serpent, and dust shall be the Serpents meat; therefore look for no
other meat for him of the servants of the living God, and the light of Christ
in thy Conscience tells thee, thou should not have been offended at me, and
others for speaking to thee, in the language of Thee and Thou; but here thy
will, thy Beast, thy Serpent having not his yoke on, began to be unruly, and
would have had flattering speeches, as yes forsooth, and I pray you Sir, and I
thank your worship, Sir; but the language of the Spirit of truth, and of God
himself, was that I and others spoke, to thee which was Thee and Thou, and if
thou be offended, thou may, I will ask thee, did thou ever put up any
petition, or request to the God of Heaven in all thy life time? and di'dst thou
not desire it in the language of Thee and Thou? speak, and blush for shame, and
cover thy lips that thou should be so prond to desire more of thy
fellow creature than thou will give to the God of Heaven thy self. Besides,
thou art in a begging condition, when thou speaks Thee and Thou to God; but I
and others came not a begging to thee when we spoke Thee and Thou to thee;
therefore look to the light Christ has given thee, it will learn thee to put a
yoke upon this unruly beast thy will, and to give thy Serpent dust to eat, for
childrens bread must not be given to dogs. I know I speak a mystery to thy dark
mind, and the whore that sits upon the scarlet colored Beast thy will, which
is thy imagination, and carnal wisdom, shall never understand me; but to the
light of Christ in thy conscience I speak, and that bears me witness, I speak
truth, and it understands me; the light of Christ in thy conscience tells thee,
that there was never any persecution of the truth, but a Priest had a hand in
it, and he gets the wicked powers of the earth, to carry him to do his
mischief; for as the carnal wisdom, and imagination cannot do any thing without
the will: (which is the Beast that carries them) no more could never the wicked
Priest (which is the whore) do any thing in persecuting the righteous seed, but
by the help of such Magistrates as are evil, and corrupt in all ages, (which is
the beast to carry them) and these in all ages joined together; But the Beast
was taken, and with him that false Prophet, and cast into a Lake. Now I am
commanded of the Lord to speak a word to thee concerning thy family; for I see
unfruitful works of darkness acted by them; and therefore I give them a word or
two of reproof, I see diverse of them when I was at thy house laughing at the
servants of the Lord; and Solomon says of laughing, that it is madness and
folly, and they gave out in my hearing jeering words, and scornful words, and
those that sit in the seat of the scornful, read what will become of them: and
I see them given to pleasures, and he that lives in pleasure is dead while he
lives, and bodily pleasure profits little, but godliness is profitable unto
all: their tongues are all unbridled, and when the tongue is unbridled, it is
an unruly member, and it is set on fire of hell. I charge thee and them to
repent, and Fear the living God; for the Lord is now arisen in England, and you
must be purged; for the haughtiness of man He will bring down, and lay low: and
though you prison the servants of the living God, yet God will bring up others
amongst us that will be faithful in doing his message, in crying out against
the sins of high and low, Priest and people, in City and Village, Markets, and
Steeple Houses: and they cry, repent and fear the living God, and return to the
light of Christ in your own Consciences, which convinces you of sin, and of
evil deeds: and for this the wicked world persecutes them, to fulfill the
Scriptures; but a body God has prepared them, and they can suffer more then
the wicked world can inflict upon them; and when the wicked have punished what
they can, they will forgive them and pity them and when they are beaten they
resist not, when they are cursed they bless; and thus the seed that the Lord
has brought out of the North Country is grown to a thousand, and ten thousand
in all parts of England: and the high Cedars begins to fall apace in England,
to this mighty power of God; for the Lord is very terrible before the Northern
Army, that the scornful world call Quakers; yet not one of these Soldiers has
so much as a stick in their hands; but they have a sword in their mouths, and
with it they slay the Nations; therefore you that are called Justices, you may
put them in prison, but you cannot take away their Swords; for they can slay as
well in prison as without: and one of them through the power of God, dare
encounter with a thousandi, and overcome them; him whom thou have cast into
prison, with his sword slew two mighty men, and their families in Bedfordshire
this last week; and he has slain me, and hundreds more in these parts: and now
thou have sent him to slay some in Northhampton with this sword in his mouth;
and I am sure the slain of the Lord will be many thereabouts: and happy had
thou been if he had slain thee when he was at thy house; for thou must be slain
with the sword, or else thou shall never see thy Savior; therefore look to the
light of Christ in thy Conscience, and with that light bring all thy evil deeds
to light, and to the sword of the Lord, and wait in this: light for the power
of Christ, to cross thy will and imagination, and that power will lead thee up
to Christ, and then thou will take up thy cross to thy will, and until thou
do it thou art no Disciple of Christ, profess what thou will; for if thou
do profess more than thou do possess, thou art an hipocrite. Thus in love
to thy poor soul, I am moved of the Lord to write this to thee; and if thou
have an ear to hear thou will hear it: so I remain a friend to that which is
pure of God in thy conscience, called and known to the world by the name of

Francis Ellington.
The Superscription was, This to be delivered to Thomas Pentlow called Justice
of the Peace, in Wilby.




I Being free in my spirit to go to the general Sessions holden at
Northampton, the 10. day of the 11. Month called January 1644. to hear the
trial of the two friends William Dewsbury, and Joseph Stor, which were
committed by Thomas Pentlow; the men called Justices, which sat to have done
Justice, hearing I were there, called me into the Court, and read this foresaid
Letter, that I were moved to write to Thomas Pentlow, as a charge against me;
and asked me, if I would find sureties for my good behavior; but I replied,
and desired them to read me a Law, wherein any thing writ in that letter were a
transgression of; but they denied to read me any, and forthwith commanded the
Jailer to put me in Prison, which was accordingly done. It were Ordered
afterward that I went forth of Prison upon Bail for appearance at the next
Sessions; and according to my engagement I did appear upon the 24. day of the
second Month called April 1655. at the Castle in Northampton, where the
Sessions were then holden; And at that time there sat upon the Bench, John
Clark Sergeant at Law, George Benson, Henry Bartlet, John Brown, John Thornton
and John Mansfield, who sat there to have done Justice; and when I were called
in, not any accuser appeared to my face, nor any Charge was read; but the men
that were in Commission required of me, to find sureties for my good behavior
till the next Assizes. I desired them to read me a Law which I had
transgressed, before they required Bond, and here I am present to answer what
the Law required. But they no Law would read me; but commanded the Joaler to
put me in prison, where I am in the low Goal amongst those arraigned for
felony and murder, waiting on the Lord, until he Judge my Cause, and establish
righteousness in the Land.

Francis Ellington.

To that of God in all Consciences, I lay this before which is formerly
written, to Judge between me and those that proceed against me, who has twice
cast me into prison, and never read me any Law I had transgressed; but has
separated me from my Wife and five Children, and my outward calling, and
employment I had in the world. Here, by their fruit they are made manifest
whose children they are; for to satisfy their wills, they acts contrary to the
righteous Law of God, and the Law of the Nation in what they have done; but to
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who pleads the Cause of the innocent, and
will arise in his mighty power, and deliver his people forth of the hands of
all that oppress them, on whom I wait, and will me deliver out of the hands of
these unreasonable men, that in their dark minds do, they know not what.

Therefore be warned ye Rulers of the earth, and take heed of abusing the power
put into your hands to satisfy your wills in oppressing the innocent, as the
late King and his adherents did, whom the Lord has cast out in his wrath, and
consumed in his displeasure; and if you who has acted in your wills contrary
to the Law of God, do not speedily Repent, and turn to the light of Christ in
your Conscience, to guide you in obedience to the will of God, to do as you
would be done unto; The Lord God of Heaven and Earth will cut you off, as he
has done, and will do the evil doers: and Peace shall be upon the Israel of
God.

F. E.

A true Declaration of the Ground of the imprisonment of Edward Ferman, in the
County of Northampton.
I Being moved of the Lord the 15. day of the second Month called April to go
to Farndon Steeple-house; and Samuel Glover, who the people calls their
Teacher, being there speaking to the people, I went to the place, and there
stood peaceably, and the Priest seeing of me called to the Officers three
several times, to take me out of the house, which they did: and forced me forth
out of the door; and there I stood until the Priest had done, and was come down
out of his high place, and the people were some of them departed; then I was
moved to go in again, and spoke some word unto the people: and the Priest
seeing me went up again into his High place, and named a text of Scripture, and
called to the people to keep their places, but they would not; and then he came
down, and commanded the Constable to keep me in his custody, which he did; and
the next day Samuel Glover procured a Warrant from John Mansel of Thorp,
wherein it were expressed, that I were a wanderer, and an idle person; yet I
lived within four miles of that place, wrought hard for my living with one
Thomas Cocket of Dingley in Northamptonshire, Shoemaker. The Constable the next
day had me before John Mansel, and John Brown, who then was at Thorp aforesaid;
and when I came before them, they told me I were there accused for disturbing
Mr. Glover; Answer to them was made, that before I spoke Samuel Glover had
done, and came down, and he was the disturber in going up again, and named a
text: which it was declared to him before the men that there sat to have don
Justice that what he did it was for a snare, and he answered that he would do
so to all that came thither; then John Mansel, and John Brown a Mittimus made,
and sent me to the Common Goal in Northampton, where they say I must lie for
three months, where by the power of the Lord I in patience wait, until the Lord
plead my Cause in his righteousness.

Edward Ferman.

A true Declaration of the Cause of the imprisonment of Thomas Cocket in the
County of Northampton, that no lie might rest upon the truth: for the simple
sake I am moved to give it forth.
I Meeting with a friend that walked honestly, and soberly in the truth; about
two weeks after, I hearing this friend were in bonds, I went to visit him at
one William Steel's in Kettering, and desired to speak with him; Answer were
made, that he had an order from Justice Brown that none might speak with him; I
went away, and afterward could find no rest in my spirit, until I writ the
following lines, which was sent to John Brown.

The Letter is as follows.
JOhn Brown, I went to William Steel's house, where there were a friend
prisoner, and desired to speak with him; he told me he had order from thee,
that none might speak with him. Is this to do as thou would be done unto?
thou have a light of Christ in thy Conscience, which bears witness with the Law
of God, and tells the thou should do as thou would be done unto: In
persecuting one of Christ's little ones thou have done it unto Him; and woe is
thy portion. A lover of that which is pure of God in thy Conscience,

Thomas Cocket.


This is the substance of what was writ, which was about the 4. day of the
first month called March.

ANd on the 16. day of the second Month called April, I heard that Edward
Ferman my servant, were apprehended with a Warrant for a wanderer, and idle
person, and carried before John Mansel, and John Brown, who is in Commission to
do Justice: I went to John Mansels house to justify that he was no wanderer
nor idle person; but with me wrought painfully with his hands. John Mansel
seeing me there, required Bonds for my behavior, for writing the aforesaid
lines to John Brown: and John Brown being there, I desired of them to show that
Letter I writ, and a Law which that Letter had transgressed: but they refused
both, and told me if I would not find men to be bound, I should go to prison:
so no Law they would me read, but a Mittimus made, and sent me to the Common
Goal in Northampton, and a copy of the Mittimus I am denied by John Snart
Keeper of the Goal. And at the General Sessions holden at Northhampton the 24.
of the 2. month called April, I was brought before John Manssil, Henry Bartlet,
and John Thornton, who was in Commission to do Justice, and the Mittimus was
read as a charge against me, and the substance in it was, for writing the
foresaid lines to John Brown, I desired them to read me the Letter, and a Law
that any thing writ in the Letter was the transgression of; but they denied to
read any Law, and they required bond for my behavior, before they proved me a
transgressor of the Law: so sent me back to prison, where I had been, and am in
the dungeon amongst those arraigned for felony and murder, so am separated
from my wife, children, and family; yet through the power of God, I am kept in
measure, to stand as a witness against the unrighteous practices of men, and am
made to wait patiently, until the Lord Judge the Cause of the innocent.

Thomas Cocket.

FINIS

