The Counter-Rat, OR OATS Sifted and Sacked up in the COUNTER, And since
Removed to the KING'S BENCH, In a Letter to W. C. Esquire
YOU have heard, since the last Nipping Frost, how the Rate of Corn goes in
England; the Wheat being withered in the Stalk, and the Barley blasted in the
Blade, begins with the warm Sun to peep out again, all sorts of Grain begin to
Flourish but Oats, which dare not show his Head above ^^ound.

Hearing he was absconded, I made (according to your Request) the ^arrowe^^
search I could, viz. by Hue and Cry; Bell, Book, and Candle; ^blication,
Proclamation, Narrative, and Remonstrance. I searched the ^arkets and the
Coffee Houses, for fear they should Roast him instead of ^offee Berries, the
Black Box and the Meal Tub, least he should like another ^hoenix, raise a new
Plot out of his own Dust. I searched the new King of ^lands, where he used to
Resort, and his Neighboring Tavern, the Dog, (...) Drury Lane, for fear the
Hound Bowman should hang him at his Sign^st for a Bush, or the Tories keep him
for a Bonfire the next general Club: searched the Cabals and Conventickles,
least the Saints should gather him up as Joseph did the Corn in Egypt) for fear
of a Famine of the Gospel. I searched the L. Peter's Magazine, and the L.
Powis's Stables, least he should (...) stored up to feed the Subterranean
Troops of Horse that lay invisible un^^^ ground, against the next Invasion of
Spanish Pilgrims Visible only to himself. For this, Mephistophilus has an
Invisible Familiar that renders very thing Visible to him, which no Man besides
himself can discern with a ^^ospective. As Black Bills, Blank Commissions,
Armies of Pilgrims, etc. (...) the same Nature where his Baptism and degrees at
Salamanca, which no ^an Living was ever Witness to but himself; for from this
so famed Sala^^^ca, came this so infamous Oats, this seed of the Serpent, to be
planted (...) England, as the Plague from Paris, or the Pox from Naples.

But for the better Grace of the matter. As Barley is called Sir John
Barleycorn, Wheat, Sir William Whitebread, and green Pease in the Cod, young
Hastings, so for Distinction sake, hereafter we will call our Oats, doctor, or
Salamanca, which you please.

Now after all my search above and under Ground, where the Devil do you Imagine
at last I should find my Reverend Doctor but in the Counter, where he was
carried on Saturday Night for a Rat.

And now I know you will be ready to ask the Cause why this Darling o^ the
People, this Savior of the Nation, should be so ill Rewarded for al^ his
Services?

This Devil of the People, and Firebrand of the Nation; This Counter-Rat, this
Vermin of the Crown and Court, this Poison of the State, and Pestilence of the
Church, is justly Committed for words more Malicious than Colt, the Hereford
Member; and Misdemeanors higher than Sir Samuel the Ignoramus Foreman. His
Accusations are Numberless, his Crimes of the deepest Scarlet, and his
Countenance of Brass. It is as Impossible to tell them, as to find a Punishment
answerable to his Desert.

Besides, his Murders, Perjuries, Blasphemies, etc. He would pretend to set up
for a Mountebank, and instead of Orviotan impose Poison upon the People, by
which many have been betrayed out of their Lives. Nay, by this Means, under
pretense of Preservation, be sought to Destro^ his Native Sovereign, and had
almost purged his Royal Brother out of the Kingdom.

This not taking Effect, and his Cheats, by which he had Imposed on the
Credulous Multitude, being at last Detected, the Insolent Rat begins with Open
Mouth to Ruil against the Lion, King of the Forest, because he would not Call
an Assembly of the Beasts to Rule in his Place, and Divest him of his Regal
Authority. He took it very ill, that the Rat did not Reign over the Castled
Elephants of the Court; would have all about the Lion Removed, that the
Leopards and Panthers might have a Tug for the Sovereignty, and was very Angry,
that there was not a Toleration Granted to the Wolves and Tigers, by Lawless
Usurpation, to Prey upon the Harmless Sheep, and Glut their Ravenous Jaws with
Innocent Blood.

The Generous Lion, Disdaming the Reproaches of this Mean and Infamous Rat,
lest him to the Mercy of his Brother Lion, who Bore a long time with his
Insolences; till being at last Provoked by his Inveterate Venomous Tongue, and
Scandalous Invectives, Clapped him into the Pound for Trespass and Damage of a
Thousand Innocent Sheep Worried by him, and his Accomplices, for which, its
said, he must Pay so many Pounds before he come out

Next to the Lion King of Beasts, and his R. Brother, this Poisonous Rat Spit
his Venom against the Jackcall, who was Serviceable to the Lion upon all
Occasions, and Asserted his Rights and Privileges against all his Enemies.

This Jackcall was an old Observer of all the Doctors Insolences, and had ever
an Antipathy against the Counter-Rat, for which Cause, he went often to the
Court with Venomous Complaints against the Jackcall; and sin^ that took not
Effect, went always Armed with a Protestant Flail, and a^^per of Poison, to do
his Business at any Rate. But the Old Observator (...) no other Weapon then an
old Goose-Quill, with which he did so Thrash (...) Oats, Sift and Fan him
about, that there was nothing at last but the very Chaff to be seen, which
(cause it might not be lost for want of House-Room,) was Gathered and Sacked up
in the Counter, as you have heard.

The next Remove was over the Water, where he will Serve in a Double Capacity,
Oats to Feed the Furious Colt, while he lies at Rack and Manger; the Doctor, as
Chaplain, to Hold Forth to the Brethren in Tribulation, where (unless Jack give
'em the last Remove,) that they may long Continue, is the Hearty Wishes of

Your Devoted, Humble Servant, M. ^.

LONDON, Printed for J.S. 1684.


