A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the three Prisonrs at
TYBURN On Friday the 20th of this Instant July Viz. Capt. Thomas Walcot, John
Rouse, Willing Hone.
All three Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, for High Treason, against his Majesty,
and conspiring the Death of the Duke of York.
ON Friday the 20th of July 1683, The three Traitors William Hone, Thomas
Walcot, and John Rouse, were, in order to their Condemnation drawn upon
Hurdles to the place of Execution, to receive the punishmerts ordered for them,
for their Hellish Conspiracy. Captain Walcot who was of a surly and resolute
Temper, seemed not to be concerned at, or troubled for his most dismal
undertaking, or Diabolical Stratagem, pointed at by the finger of Heaven, and
Odious to the Eyes of the whole Earth, but rather obstinately, and obdurately
seemed to justify himself in this bloody design' thaogh neither he, nor any of
the other two can deny but that they were concerned in the Plot, though not
so deeply as they were accused. But take an Ac^ount of their trials first.

It is strange to consider the impudence of some dissatisfied persons, who
cannot be contented to live under the civil Government of a Gracious Prince:
But on the contrary Hellishly and Maliciously contrive and conspire the Death
of their Sovereign, the Ruin of the Nation, and without Gods great Mercy, their
own everlasting overthrow. How many hundreds were there, that at first would
hardly believe that there was a Plot, but now I hope they will believe what
these persons we have to insist upon have owned and confessed: and it cannot be
imagined that they would acknowledge more against themselves than the truth.
But great pity it is, that Man the very Image, of God himself, should so
degenerate from all other Creatures, as to study the overthrow of his fellow
Creature but much more of a Princely Monarch; ordained and anointed to rule
over us by the especial providence of the Almighty and not only against his
Gracious Majesty was this accursed not contrived, but also against his Royal
Brother James Duke of York, and indeed the whole Land, as it would have proved,
had not the everlasting love of the everliving God miraculously prevented the
bloody designs of the intended Regicides by the happy discovery of this
unparaleld cruelty designed.

And now to begin with my Lord Russel, who on Friday the 13th Instant, 1683.
was condemned to die, for having a Confederacy in this Conspiracy, but he only
owned that he was several times with the Conspirators, who were called by the
name of the Council, but was not of the Consult.

But Colonel Rumsey, swore that the Lord Shaftsbury told him that the Lord
Russel was one of the Consult, which with other Evidence caused him to be
condemned. And upon Saturday the 14th. of July was conveyed from Newgate to the
place of Execution, and during his time after his Condemnation, he Mournned
exceedingly, continually alleging that he was drawn in by that spawn of policy
Shaftsbury, who was without all doubt the Father and Contriver of this Damnable
Plot, to the great loss and ruin of so many men's lives as are likely to suffer
for, and through his accursed Treason.

My Lord was reported to be a person Excellently qualified and of wonderful
parts, but too much adhering to the Seditious contrivances of those
Machivilians, whose policy was only used to bad ends and purposes, as in the
conclusion it will prove to be to them.

My Lord does not seem to disown his Charge, but much laments that he should be
so ensnared. And great pity it is that a gentleman of his descent; and so
adorned by the gifts of nature pretences' of a Politic Statsmau: whose Aim
without doubt, was, by the ruin and extirpation of the Royal Famely, to advance
himself and his Posterity, by bringing in schismatic Laws and customs,
answerable to the maggot of his never satisfied humous. But the great God of
heaven, who has at several times and by several means apparently manifested,
his great and unspeakable kindness to our shvereign, has yet once more put a
period to, and utterly confounded the wicked contrivanees, and bloody
stratagems of these wicked wretches, whose endeavors were to compass, what
heaven in mercy has forbid,

Thomas Walcot, John Rouse, and William Hone, besng all Indicted for High
Treason, as conspiring and contriving the death of his most sacred Majesty, and
his Royal brother, and endeavoring to Levy War, and by force of Arms to
subvert the government of the Nation, by involving the subjects thereof into a
labyrinth of unspeakable trouble, could make but slender defense for themseves.
Williaem Hone, aforementioned, was very desirous to make his trial, by
confessing to part to the Indictment, but my Lord Chief Justice Pemberton,
answered that what he had there confessed was sufficient to convict him, but
yet for popular satisaction he should take a fair trial in the face of his
Country, and accordingly so it was, so that in a little time he was brought in
guilty of High Treason, and so was remanded to Prison from whence he came with
a conscience as full of guilt as the world full of wonder at the Audacitie of
such Vilains.

Captain Walcot, he was charged with High Treason, also he could not flatly
deny his charge, but owned that he was in the conspiracy, yet denied that he
was any way concerned in the Assassinating his Majesteys Royal person, but
did acknowledge that he was engaged to fight the Guard, which acknovvledgment
was sufficient to do his business; and the Court thereupon brought him in
Guilty.

The next was John Rouse, against whom one Lee swore that he had several
times contrived the Death of the King, and that an Army was to be raised, for
the carrying on their design of subvertion, and that he was to be Play Master
thereof.

All which was strongly opposed by Rouse, and on the contrary he alleged
that such proposals were moved to him by Lee, but he flatly denied them.

One Corbin made Oath, that in 1681. Rouse told him that the King had forfeited
his Crown, and Mr. William Richardson swore that when he went to take
Rouse, he disovvned his Name, and called himself by the name of Johnson.

All which being sum'd up, the Jury without going out of Court brought him in
Guilty.

But when they came to the place of Execution, where they were to part with
their fainting Breath, Oh! what Consternation appeared in their Countenances,
what Horror seemed to surprise them, and what dread afflicted their drooping
Souls, I leave it to the Judgment of those, who ever looked Grim Death in the
Face? how did they lament their ill deeds? how did they recall their misspent
time? What an Ocean of Calamities, did at that minute encompass them, and even
drovvn them in Seas of sorrovv. But for perfect Testimony of their unfeigned
repentance, they gave good advice, and Christian admonition, to all persons of
what Age or Sex soever, to abominate such evil designs, and wholly to depend
upon God for a timely deliverance from any thing that shall trouble them, and
not go indirectly, to vvrap themselves into endless troubles, by seeking their
own Ruins, by unadvised, and inconsiderate means. Thus did they for a short
space signify their sorrovvs, and lament their deplorable ends.

LONDON Printed for G. P. 1683.


