A True LIST of the Names of the Good Men of the County of Middlesex, summoned
to be of the Grand Jury in the Quarter Sessions, begun at Westminster the sixth
day of October, 1681.
THE Jury was called over at Westminster, where Forty of them appeared, and
were from thence Adjourned to Hicks's Hall, before they were Sworn upon
pretense of frivolous and untrue Objections (not sufficient in Law) to their
incapacity of serving upon such Juries; where they have been since several
times Adjourned, without being Sworn, upon the same pretenses, and upon many
untrue Suggestions of their mean Condition, as men of Obscurity, and such as
have been picked up on the Highway, and are returned to serve a turn, as the
Chairman Sir George Jefferyes has been pleased to declare.

Their Names are as follow, and their Characters upon the severest Scrutiny
will be found true, and such that have none will appear honest Men.
1. Sir Peter Colleton, of the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields, Baronet. 2.
Sir Michael Heneage, of the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, Knight. These
two Gentlemen, their Estates and Integrity are so well known, that any body may
justly wonder at Mr. Chairman's expressions.

3. Francis Charleton of the same, Esquire A Gentleman of 2000 l. per. ann. whose
Loyalty and Honesty no Man can justly Tax. 4. Edward Clark of Westminster, Esquire
has at least 1500 l. per. ann. and of as good Reputation as any Man. 5.
William Farnborough, of St. Martin in the Fields, Glass-seller, over against
Church-Alley in the Strand, has been a Trader about five years there, and is
well known in the Neighborhood, to be a Person of no mean Character. 6. Robert
Breedon of the same, Brewer, Brother to Alderman Breedon, a Man of a
considerable Estate, as is well known all over the Liberty of Westminster. 7.
William Horsley of the same, Cheesemonger, Citizen and Draper of London, who
has been a Trader there fourteen years, and is well known amongst all the
Neighborhood, and has served in several Public Offices in the Parish, and is
of unspotted Credit. 8. Clement Halsey of St. John Street, Brewer, has lived
12 years by Hicks's Hall, and has served three, times upon the Grand Jury, and
several Public Offices of the Parish of St. Sepulchers, and is unspotted in
his Credit. 9. William Rapier of Westminster, of good Credit and Sufficency,
and well known. 10. Tracey Panceford of the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields,
is a Citizen and Leather-seller of London, late dwelt in St. Clements Parish,
has been a Trader 7 years, of very good Reputation. 11. Matthias Hatton of
White-Chappel, Citizen and Draper of London, has been a Trader at
White-Chappel 7 years, in no wise tainted in his Reputation or Credit. 12.
Philip Norway of the same, Citizen and Glasier of London, has been a Trader
there 20 years, born most Offices in the Parish, and served in his Company, and
may be summoned upon his Countries Service out of his Shop, without seeking him
upon the Highway. 13. Daniel Tracey of the same, well known upon the Exchange,
without exception. 14. Thomas Floyder of the same, Citizen and Bricklayer, has
been a Trader three years, of known substance in the Neighborhood, and has
born several Public Offices. 15. William Floyder of the same, Citizen and
Plaisterer of London, late of Aldgate Parish, where he has served
Churchwarden, has been Master of his Company, and a Trader 30 years, and well
known in the Neighborhood to be of sound Reputation. 16. Thomas Harris of St.
Giles in the Fields, is now Churchwarden there. 17. Nicholas Moor of the same,
of good Credit. 18. Thomas Bickerstaff of the same, Citizen and Skinner of
London, has been a Trader 12 years, has fined for all Parish Offices, and is
well known in his Neighborhood. 19. Joseph Burgin of the same. 20. William
Purdham of the same. 21. James Frank of the New Exchange. 22. James Dobson of
the same. 23. Richard Horsley of the same. These three last are noted Men in
the Parish of St. Martins where they dwell, have considerable Estates, and of
unspotted Reputation.

24. John Stych of Covent Garden, an honest and Substantial man. 25. Robert
Wyat of Stepney. 26. William Bromfield of the same. 27. Stephen Cleave of
Cripplegate, is both honest and able. 28. Richard Collins of Clerkenwell, is a
considerable Brewer and of good Reputation. 29. Richard Sheppard of St. Giles
in the Fields; he lives near little Turn-Style, is wellknown, and of good
Reputation. 30. John Ward of White-Chappel, Citizen and Goldsmith of London,
has been a Trader there 5 years, has served his Company and Parish in several
Offices of undoubted Credit. 31. Daniel Bynyon of the same, Deal Merchant at
Wapping, has been a Trader there or thereabouts, ever since the Fire, is
publicly known in the Neighborhood, and is of great Credit. 32. Richard Angel
of Stepney, a Master of a Ship, and well known upon the Exchange. 33.
Bartholomew Heart of Aldgate. 34. Henry Crispe of White-Chappel. 35. John Lynne
of Westminster. 36. John Archer of the same. 37. Joseph Witteridge of the
Parish of S. Giles in the Fields. 38. John Chapel of St. Andrews Holbourn,
Vintner. 39. Thomas Grimes of Stepney. 40. William Keech of the same. 41.
Willi^^ Madde^ of White-Chappel. 42. Thomas Reeves of Stepney. 43. Joseph
Patrickson of the Parish of St. Sepulchers. 44. Francis Blewet of Clerkennel.
These 12 last are honest and substantial men, and well known in their several
Neighbourhoods.

45. Charles Peter's of St. Martin in the Fields, he is a Chyrurgion of eminent
Practice, has been a Housekeeper there this 9 years of known Substance, and
High in Reputation. 46. Thomas Mascal the Younger of Westminster. 47. John
Davis of the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields. 48. John Freeman of St.
Andrews Holbourn. And 42. Charles Cawley of Westminster. The four last
mentioned are honest, able, and well known.


To Vindicate in the Face of all mankind this Grand Jury, the late Sheriffs
(who returned them) and the Undersheriff from the foul Aspersions cast upon
them, I have thought fit to give the World this Account in Print, which upon
Inquity will be found true, and that all indifferent Men may judge, whether
it is more probable that these men who are of very good Quality, and untainted
in their Reputations, should be now returned to (...) or whether those (...)
against them, and would without any just cause put others in some of their
plates, have any other design than what they object to them.

Now as to the Reasons that are insisted on for this alteration, they are such
as the Law takes no notice of. The Precept Commands the Sheriffs (...) honest
and lawful men, which he having done, is all can be reasonably expected from
him. Notwithstanding the fierceness of the Bench, that upon Color of an Act of
Parliament made in 3 H. 8. to prevent the Indictment of the Innocent and the
Acquittal of the Guilty, would put men of nothing like so good Reputation upon
the Jury, which if the Sheriff refused out of a sense of the design in hand,
and has thereby hazarded the loss of 20 l. besides attracting the malice of
several, I doubt not but that he will the rather be held excusable, for that he
is likely to lose by the bargain, which he has made for no other ends than
only the service of the public and preservation of the Innocent.

I would not willingly be instrumental to put any indecency upon the Bench, but
this, I (being one of the Jury) may without vanity say, that a dozen of us have
as good if not better Estates than any dozen of them that were on the Bench on
Wednesday the 12th of October. Instant, notwithstanding it has been said we
were of obscure and mean Condition, and picked up on the Highway.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for R. Harbottle, 1681.


