THE True Englishman's Choice OF Parliament Men. IN Answer to a Paper
Entitled, THE DANGER OF Mercenary Parliaments.

WITH Short Observations what Persons ought chiefly to be avoided in Elections.

LONDON: Printed for A. Baldwin at the Oxford-Armes in Warwick Lane. School.

THE True Englishman's Choice OF Parliament Men. In Answer to a Paper
Entitled, THE Danger of Mercenary Parliaments.
THAT the well Meaning People of England may not be imposed on, by the
Treacherous Disguises of Men of Foriegn Allegiance, either to the Shadow of a
King, or the Idol at Rome; 'twill be requisite to detect that Specious Address
to 'em, which, with pretense of cautioning them against Mercenary Parliaments,
would make way for such Persons as lost their preferments upon the Revolution,
or expect greater by a Change: As if these were more fit to be Trusted than
they, who are now possessed of any Places and Preferments depending upon the
Gift and Pleasure of His present Majesty; Page 1.
whose Gift and Pleasure must be supposed, though not named.

What is the Nature of our Parliaments, and the Interest of England in the
following choice, I should think not to be well understood by one, who is no
better acquainted with the Proprieties of the English Tongue than to suppose,
that new Laws are necessary among other ends, Page 1. And Abrogating such as
were found burdensum and obsolete.
for Abrogating such as were Obsolete, and so fell of themselves; who thinks
he is very Rhetorical in talking of the Oppression of those devouring Harpies,
who would tear of the yet green and flourishing Laurels from King William's
Majestic Brows; Page 8.
and, to use his own Phrase, whose diligence to support his Party, Does infer
their thoughts, that the Majority, etc.
Infers his thoughts, that the Majority of Electors are capable of being
imposed upon in such a Gross and Unexampled manner, as to take measures for the
preserving their Religion, Lives, Liberties and Estates from them, who have an
apparent design to destroy that Government, which by God's wonderful
Providence, and Favor to it, has secured those invaluable Blessings,
notwithstanding the almost insuperable Difficulties, from Domestic Divisions,
the visible effects of the old Popish Plot in the Corruption of the Coin; and
the mighty force and artifices of an Enemy, against whom, none but His present
Majesty, with an English Parliament and Soldiers, could have made Head.

When so great a number of the Gentry of this Land were bribed by their
Expectations of Rewards for joining with the Enemy, or not opposing him; that
Ninety odd of the House of Commons, and some Men of considerable Estates,
refused to enter into a Voluntary Association for Mutual Defense against an
impending Invasion; 'twas certainly happy for the Nation, that many were by
Places under this Government obliged, not only in Gratitude, but by immediate
Interest, to secure to themselves those advantages for which others gaped, and
which they expected to gain by Sacrificeing their Religion, and their Country,
to a fond Ambition of making up the Train of a Conquering Invader.

Whoever considers impartially, will find, that 'twas as fortunate for England,
that numbers had Places and Preferments depending upon the Pleasure of this
Government, as it has been, that the Church Lands were, upon the Dissolution of
Religious Houses, falsely so called, distributed among the Nobility and Gentry;
without which, in all probability, England would before now have Groaned under
a Popish Yoke: The Restitution of which, we may well take to be his desire, who
plainly Insinuates, that all Persons, without distinction, who are now
possessed of any Places and Preferments depending on His Majest'y pleasure,
Page 1.
are to be refused upon the Competition for Members of the ensuing Parliament.
But what Rule inf^rs this his thoughts, that all these are Writers Delinquents,
I cannot understand, Page 2.
unless he will have it to be a Crime to accept of any Reward for passed
Services to the present Government, or Engagement to future.

Any Man may judge, whether he has not a strong Affection for the late King
James's Reign, Page 3.
who seems wholly to forget what Encouragement Yet cannot we say, that his
mismanagement is to be asc^i^ed to the corruption of any Parliament Sitting in
his time.
his Parliament gave to those arbitrary proceedings which were to make way for
Popery, by their Slavish Silence after his illegal raising of Taxes, though the
Grant of them had expired: And however, he shows a Manifest dissaffection to
this Government, in running a false and malicious parallel between the
Parliaments of King Charles II. of most Pious Memory, and those which have
concurred with His present Majesty, in preserving that Constitution, which they
in that Debauched Reign Labored by all means possible to destroy.

While all Englishmen justly abhor those, who received Places or Pensions to
sell their Country; they cannot but look upon advantages under his present
Majesty, as so many Ensigns of Honor and Recommendations to their Choice; and
surely they cannot be forgetful of the bold steps in late Reigns toward
advancing Popery, by the making Laws to ruin the Dissenters only in the first
place; the open Threats and Violence, to deprive Men of that freedom of
Elections, which is an essential part of our Constitution of the main Security
for the rest; and that Traiterous Surrender of Charters, which look all choice
from the People, and placed in a Popish-Court.

Are these the Men to be preferred before those, who have merited Officers, by
signalizing themselves in the War; those particularly, who at the Siege of
Namur, raised the English Glory to a greater height under King William, than
ever it was before under any of our most Victorious Kings? And to me it seems,
that no less praise and retribution is due to them, who in Counsels have Fought
and Conquered Crafty Leaders, exercised in all the Frauds and Tricks of former
Reigns, and have given convincing Proofs, Page 3. It Is this has changed the
very Nature of English Men, and of Valiant, made them Cowards of Eloquent Dumb.
Page 7.
that the Nature of Englishmen is not changed in them, but that their Native
valor, and unforced eloquence, have distinguished them in the preservation of
England, and thereby Entitled them to his Majesty's favor.

Very few I dare say, will agree with this Gentleman, that whoever should Vote
for any one Person so qualifyed, as much as in him lies makes a Complement of
all the Liberties of England, to the insatiable Avarice and Ambition of
Statesmen and Court Ministers: Nor can he be thought a Friend to England, who
would make opposing the present Court and Ministry, the Characteristic of a
true lover of his Country, because 'twas so when the Court was in a Foreign
Interest, and had designs which could not be brought about, but by the
subversion of the Constitution; whereas the very being as well as security of
this Court, depends upon the Restoring and Supporting the Fundamental Liberties
of the Nation; and above all the rest, that of free Elections.

The false Colors in his Comparison are so gross, that there is the less need
of exposing those, with which this warm Writer would deface the proceedings of
the last Parliament, to which it may seem not improper to apply that of our
Savior, for which of their good deeds would he Stone them?

The whole House of Commons he charges with Eating their own Words, Page 4.
and Countervoting what they had just before resolved on: but the instances are
left to imagination. Supposed Mercenary Members are said to have Voted their
fellow Criminals innocent; but the Persons, and Proofs of their Crimes, are to
seek. The not passing a Bill for incapaciating Members of Parliament to bear
Offices, is one great aggravation; as if either to have an Office, or to be a
Parliament Man in King William's Reign, were an offense, to be punished by a
new Law. While the Vote of an House of Commons, or Bill there, is by him
Exalted to an Act of Parliament, their applauding His Majesty's Bounty to a
Person, who has eminently served the Public, is made a Criminal approbation of
the misapplying what had been set apart for the public Service; though 'twill be
difficult for him to show, that the Grant was of any thing so much as intended
to be appropriated; and though in the intention declared, there was an Express
Reference to His Majesty's Pleasure, to Reward such as he should judge
deserving. And yet if his powerful Art of perverting can succeed, the Vote of
the House of Commons upon this occasion, shall stand recorded in their own
Journals to the never-dying Infamy of that Mercenary Assembly, as he calls
them. The Men of Peaceable Dispositions and considerable Estates, Page 4.
who were for a sufficient force to maintain the Peace, and their Estates,
against Foreign and Domestic Enemies, are supposed to have turned Villains for
pay. The Admirals are accused for their commendable Impartiality, Ib. Of Honest
Men Villains.
in confessing, that the Nation could not be defended without Land as well as
Sea Forces, knowing from Divine Authority, that the Eye can-cannot say to the
Hand, there is no need of you.

This is the substance of the Arguments, Page 4.
that barefaced and openly avowed Corruption, had infatuated our Prudence,
staggered our Constancy, Sullied our Repulation, and Introduced a Total
Defection from all rue English Principles.

Which Imputation will more justly fall upon those Common-Wealths-Men, or other
pretended Patriots, who, to use some of this Gentleman's Elegancies, From their
Infancy had Imbibed no other notions than what conduced to the Public Safety,
whose Principles were further improved and confirmed, by the Advantages of a
suitable Conversation; And yet are now become Renegades to King James's Party,
as if the Restoring him were the most proper means Conduceing to the Public
Safety: But surely all that wish well to England, will apprehend Mischief to be
at the Bottom, when Herod and Pilat lay aside their old Enmyties.

Nor can the People of England, be unmindful of the fundamental Maxim of
Authors, now cried up by the Jacobites, as well as the Commonwealths Men, that
the Balance of Power follows the Balance of Property: And therefore they will
be glad to find His Majesty to secure the Balance to his Side, by disposing
the Offices of the Kingdom, to His and the Nations Friends: Their main Trouble
in this matter, is to observe the Opposition to the National Interest, to be
strengthened and encouraged by them, who with their false Politics, pretend,
that they who are in a Plot against this Government, are to be bought off.

If any one numerous Family can render themselves so formidable by their Union,
as to make it seem His Majesty's Interest, to give them the Choice of the most
profitable Places; how strong would our present Establishment be, if none were
admitted into any Employment, who had not given clear Proof of his Zeal for the
Public; and 'twere evidently known, there could be no Temptation of that kind
to disserve it?

But methinks this Gentleman, shows as mean an opinion of the understandings of
Englishmen, as he does of His Majesty's, while he hopes to wheedle them into a
persuasion, that Courts have been the same in all Ages; and His Majesty into a
confidence of his Zeal for his Majesty's Honor and Service, the plain drift of
whose paper is to persuade Men, that the only danger to the Constitution is
from them, who are interested in the Preservation of His Majesty's Person and
Government: Nor does he Scrupple to assert, that this is the last Struggle and
effort the People of England have left them for their Properties; as if
Property had been notoriously invaded by the King and his Ministers: But in
Truth the Struggle which this Person must mean, can be no other, than for a new
distribution of Property upon the Change, either of the form of the Government,
or of the King: Whose Reign is as much reflected on as King Charles's, which he
calls Profligate and Villainous: Page 2. Page 7.
And since he is Positive, that one Session more of the last Parliament, would
infallibly have ruined our Constitution; it is no Question whose Consent would
(according to this Suggestion) infallibly have contributed to it is Ruin.

Though the Deliverance from King James and Popery, is much more than a Pretense,
it cannot but be understood who is included in his Reflective Opinion, Page 6.
In this Sense, I am of their Opinion that, etc.
* That we are not quite delivered from the fear of King James, who must be
made the Instrument of our Slavery by those very Persons, who pretend their
greatest Merit to consist, in delivering us from him.

But if his opinion were no more dangerous than his reasoning, it would do no
great Hurt; it is certain many cannot be wrought up by his warmth to believe,
that King James was a mere Bugbear, while his pretended Title was supported by
the Arms of France; Page 6. Is it the Fear of King James that makes us content
he should Live so near us.
because little danger is now apprehended from his living under the Protection
of that King; which cannot be extended further than his Person, but by a
Violation of that Peace, which all Europe is concerned to maintain.

But he who represents the former use of the just fear of King James, as a vile
Art and Practice to Rack the Nation with Taxes, cannot but be thought
deservedly to incur the Name of Conspirator, which he so freely bestows upon
those Members of the last Parliament, who truly merited of their Country, by
making others sensible of the Danger they were in, while King James had hopes
of Landing upon us, with great part of the force of France.

Though it is evident who have been the Conspirators; I must confess the Word
Apostate, cannot be applied with much certainty, till it is known from what
Principle or Party they are fallen: I should be glad, it 'twere possible, that
such a Parliament were chosen, wherein every Member were, as he expresses
himself, under no Temptation; and acted by no other Motives, but the real and
true interest of his Majesty, and his Dominions.

But can he expect to be thought sincere, in his pretended desire, that their
united Interest should thrive, who takes such pains to divide them, and to
disable those who have given Proof of their Abilities and Zeal, to serve the
King as the Common Parent of their Country?

Against this few can be thought more openly to conspire, than they who are so
free in Calling others Conspirators, Page 5. These Apostates pretend to value
themselves upon that most destructive project of ^^^quer Bil^^^^
and Apostates; for being eminently instrumental in Supplying the Necessities
of the Public, and in effect increasing the Species of money at a time, when
so much could not but lie Dead in the Mint: nothing is more certain, than that
this Expedient was very beneficial to the Public; though the exorbitant avarice
of moneyed Men, turned it to the prejudice of many particular Persons.

But this Gentleman must have a great opinion of the Power of his Rhetoric, if
he thinks his Invectives against His Majesty's faithful Subjects and
Servants, can Charm the Citizens and Burgesses into a forgetfullness; who were
the Men that, before the discovery of the Assassination Plot, advanced so far
toward the total Subversion of that Part of the Constitution, which Preserves
the Balance of the Government, by a truly Popular Interest, in that Freedom
which Cittes and Boroughs have had, from Ages long since passed, for Chuseing
fit Persons of their own Bodies, without Confineing them to the Landed Gentry.

It Is well kown who were so vain as to make their boasts, that they should keep
out the Green-Apron Men: Therefore 'twill be but a just return, for the
Green-Apron Men to keep them, from the like Power of Insulting over them: Nor
is it to be doubted, but they will, in the most proper Method, express their
Gratitude to Mr. Montague, Sir Thomas Littleton, Mr. Clerk, Sir Joseph Tily and
others, who, if Reason could have prevailed with Men obstinately bent upon
Destroying the Constitution; would have Argued them out of their Pernicious
Attempt, for a Form of Government more near an Oligarchy, to bring it by
degrees to a French or Turkish Monarchy.

Since Mankind cannot be thought wholly Disinterested, and is subject to
Temptations of several kinds; the short Question to be Considered upon this
Election is.

Who are to be Chosen as most likely to Answer the End, which this Gentleman
would be thought to Propose, The true and real Interest of His Majesty and His
Dominions; they whose Principles or Expectations Bias them toward the Late
King, or other Change of the Established Government; or they whose Value for
that Constitution which King William Restored, that Religion which he Rescued,
and their own share in the Benefits of His Reign, Incite them to a Vigorous
pursuit of the ends, for which they are Chosen by English Protestants.

The Choice will be obvious, when Men have duly considered who ought to be
refused; and I doubt not but these Persons will generally be Rejected with
Scorn.

1. They who were for the Commonwealth of a Regency. 2. Non-Associators, 3.
Non-Jurors, or, Late Swearers to this Government; after the Battle at the Boyn,
or the Peace which France, had wrought Hipocritical Conversions. 4. The
Instruments of the Tyrany and Usurpations of former Reigns. 5. Persons justly
suspected to have been in the Plot against this Government; or assisting to it,
or conniving at it. 6. Such as have lost Places for adhearing to the late King.
7. They who have manifested a desire of getting Places, or otherwise improving
their Fortunes, upon the letting in of Popery, or Popish-Powers. 8. They who
were for Depriveing the Cities and Boroughs, of the Fundamental Liberty of
Chuseing Representatives from among themselves: And for defeating Elections in
the Counties, after they had been made; by new contrived Qualifications, of
doubtful construction.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3 Line 20. Read Majesty's, Ib. l. 22. r. this Writer's d. his, l. 23. d.
Writer's. p. 4. l. 9. r. true Englishmen, l. 19. r. and the main, l. 20. r.
took, l. 21. r. placed it, l. 24. r. Offices.


