THE FAITH OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND CONCERNING GODS WORK ON MAN'S WILL.
PVBLIKELY CONFIRMED BY THE SVBSCRIPTIONS OF ALL the Famous Martyrs, and Divines
thereof.

Faithfully gathered out of the Authenticke Records of the CHVRCH.

By Francis Tailor B. in D. and Rector of CLAPHAM in SVRREY.

LONDON. Printed by I. L. for Nicholas Bourne at the South entrance to the
Royal Exchange. 1641.

TO Sir EDWARD DERING, of Surenden-Dering, in the County of Kent, Knight and
Baronet; and one of the Knights chosen by that County to serve in the Commons
House of Parliament.
SIR,
THat little interest I have in Kent, was the first motive that incited me to
desire your worships acquaintance. And the report of your zeal, for the
establishing of Religion, and our lawful liberties, increased this desire. The
courteous entertainment and familiarity you have since vouchsafed me, has made
me bold to present this ensuing Treatise to the view of the world under your
protection, whom God has enabled to judge truly of it and to defend it. The
truth is, that of late years, the Law and the Gospel have bin so dressed, both
in the Pulpit and in the Press, that we neither knew what we believed, nor
what we had. Our interest in heaven and in earth, were like to be both alike
unknown unto us in a little time. The Proverb is, Evil manners beget good
Laws. So our good God can bring good out of will. The Mystery of Babylon has
wrought among us by upholding the Arminian tenets under color of pulling down
Puritanes, to take away the faith of Protestants. Andrews, Bilson, Whitakers,
Perkins, Calvin, Beza, have been strange names. Peter Lumbard, Thomas Aquinas,
Bonaventure, have bin too familiar in our Universities and Pulpits. The silence
enjoined in Pulpits and Presses, has burst out on the wrong side, while the
right side might neither speak nor write. Our hope of correcting these
disorders next under our great God, and our most gracious Sovereign, is in the
two Honorable Houses of Parliament, Of one of which your Worship is a member.
My suit then is, that your last works may be better then your first, and that
as you have been a means to discover our bypath; so you will be an
instrument to reduce us to our first love. Let us know what we have believed,
that know not what we do believe. If you please to move the Honorable House,
that the Records of our Church may be searched by certain grave Divines, and
the writings of our elder and soundest Writers now out of date, may be
reviewed, and a sum of our Religion ever since the reformation professed,
collected out of these; I suppose it will be a great means to quiet our
troubles, and appease our differences at home, and to regaine us a good opinion
with other Churches abroad; Some of which have thought so ill of us, as that
they have forbidden their young Students to come into England, as I have heard
from a young man of excellent parts, who adventured to come hither, being sent
from Berne into Holland: I have endeavored to give some light to this
business in this Treatise, wherein I show the judgment of our Church in one
maine point, upon which, all, or the most part of Arminianisme depends. I could
wish I might be a shoing-horne to draw on men better able to do the like,
against all new opinions of Arminianisme, Socinianisme, and Popery, which are
thought to grow secretly among us, and show themselves by fits in Preaching and
Printing. I beseech Almighty God to incline the hearts of all to whom he has
given parts, to further this great work, of settling the grounds of our Religion
by a sweet Harmony. This will be for Gods glory, the honor of our Church, the
good of our posterity, and the stopping of the mouths of our Adversaries, who
trumpet out our dissentions for their own advantage. Sir, my request is, that
you would favorably accept this small Present, and that God would bless it to
the furtherance of the public good. So praying for the true welfare of you,
and all yours, I rest,

Clapham Febr. 20. 1641. At your Worships service in the Lord, FRANCIS TAILOR.

Fourteen books publicly allowed, out of which all these proofs are taken.
1. The Book of Common Prayer. 2. The Book of Ordination. 3. The Book of
Articles with the Commenmentary of Mr. Thomas Rogers Chaplain to Archbishop
Bankcroft. 4. The first Book of Homelies. 5. The second Book of Homelies. 6.
The Catechism allowed by authority. 7. Prayer on August. 5. 8. Prayer on
November 5. 9. The thanksgiving for the ceasing of the plague, 1604. 10.
Prayers for ceasing of the rainy weather, 1613. 11. Prayers on the Kings day,
March 27. 12. Prayers in the Fast, 1625. 13. The thanksgiving for the ceasing
of the plague that year. 14. Prayers in the Fast, 1626.
Fourteen heads to which all the proofs in this Treatise are to be referred.
1. Our own insufficiency to any good. 2. Gods omnipotency showed in our
conversion. 3. Gods special grace. 4. Gods working in infants. 5. The giving
of internal grace to men. 6. The receiving of grace. 7. The internal effect
of grace. 8. The purification of the heart. 9. The external effect of grace.
10. Gods governing us. 11. Gods preserving us in godliness and from sin. 12.
The progress of the regenerate. 13. The prayers of holy men. 14. Gods grants.
To the Reader.
WOnder not (Christian Reader) that so much pains has been taken to search
the authenticke records of this our famous Church of England, for the work of
God upon the will of man. That over-large power given by the Adversary to the
will of man has been the navell-string, whereby the misbegotten bratts of
Arminianisme have been nourished, while they lay lurking in the womb of
nature. It is in vain to talk of predestination out of faith foreseen, if
there be no power in man's will to believe. It is as if a Physician should
foresee, that a man mortally sick would of himself recover, but give him
nothing to recover him. How can God foresee, that such a man mill believe who
has no power to do it, unless God give it him? Gods general intention to
save all men by Christ will not serve the turn, unless there be in every man
a power to apply Christ's death unto them. Otherwise it is like Physic
prepared for a dead man that cannot take it. To say that faith is wrought in us
only by Gods moral swasion, is ridiculous if it be not in our power to do as
we are exhorted in all things. To teach that Gods work in man's conversion is
such as may be frustraed of the saving effect by man's will resisting, when God
has done as much as he nseth to do in regenerating men, is absurd, unless it
be left every way indifferent to man to believe or not to believe, and he have
power indifferently to do either. It seem as strange to affir me that the
regenerate may totally fall from grace, unless he be left altogether to his
own will, and made his own only keeper. To dream of attaining to a perfect
keeping of Gods law here on earth without a great power in man's will, were to
set a man quite beyond the Cape of all good hope. It is not then an unnecessary
labor to play the midwife and to cut this navell-string of free will, and send
these Arminian impes abroad into the wide world to cry for food. Undermining
was ever held a more sure and less dangerous way to overthrow cities; then the
tempest of Canons. If the foundation of Arminianisme berased by the plain
doctrine of our Church, the walls of it must with Dagon fall down before the
Arc. The proofs are all upon record. The words are therefore set down, least
the Adversary should complain of forgery, or the reader be to negligent to
search them out himself. The Lord guide us all to the knowledge of his truth,
dispell the mists of errors, confirm his servants in love and peace on earth,
and bring us to glory in heaven.

Thine in Christ Jesus, FRANCIS TAILOR
Clapham.
The faith of the Church of England concerning Gods work on man's will.
The Preface.
IN all disputations the first thing to be done, is to set out the right state
of the question. Which if it be misunderstood, men fight with their own
shadows. We agree often in words, when we differ in the sense. Our conclusion
that we must drive at throughout the whole work must be this, that God works
always powerfully and effectually upon the will of man in the regeneration of
a sinnner. Nothing is difficult but the term of effectual working, whereby we
do not understand only in a general sense, that some effect or other follows
upon Gods work: nor yet that regeneration follows after Gods work oftentimes,
for so it may though it be not an effect of it. Neither do we intend, that God
so takes advantage of the time, place, affection, and disposition of a man,
that he offers grace to him in such a point of time, as he knows that man's
will is inclined to receive it, for this were to commend Gods wisdom in
regenerating of us, but to deny any work of his power in it, and to make
regeneration not Gods work, but the work of man's will. Our meaning plainly
is, that in the work or regeneration, God works so powerfully upon man's will,
that regeneration infallably follows, as an effect of it, and that this kind
of working powerfully is only found in such as are elected before, and all in
whom God works thus, are by that powerful work of his regenerated. So that the
cause of their regeneration is not any way their own will, but Gods powerful
working in them by his spirit. Neither does God work thus in any other, but
such as prove converts, for if he did work so powerfully in others, they would
have been regenerated also. In a word there is a particular powerful work of
Gods Spirit in his elect only, whereby they all, and only they are truly
regenerate. In others there may be illumination, and some weak motions to
goodness in their wills, but always in effectual, because they are left to
man's will, and God does not so work in them, as he does in his elect. Where God
powerfully works, there regeneration necessarily follows, where he does not,
there it cannot follow. We will reduce all to fourteen heads, all which
confirm the former conclusion against the power of man's will, and demonstrate
Gods powerful work. The proof of each is the words of the records. Sometimes
we shall make use of the title in some prayers given to God, because we doubt
not, but the wisdom of the Church in her prayers would give such titles to
God, as were most answerable to the things in those prayers desired of God. The
conclusion is, let the Reader well weigh the heads themselves, and the
arguments brought to prove them, and conclude in his own soul, which is the
doctrine of the Church of England.

CHAP. I. Of our own insufficiency.
WE will begin with our own insufficiency to any good, and show what matter the
books allow us to set it out, so far forth as arguments may be taken from
thence to prove an effectual work of God upon the will of man in the work of
regeneration. Where in general I observe, that the books put no difference in
unregenerate men, but make all their wills alike dead in sins and trespasses,
unable to believe until they be quickened by God. Which takes away the new
Arminian conceit, that where the Gospel is preached, there is a power given to
all that hear it even before regeneration, to believe if they please, by the
use of which power some do believe, and others that have as much power will not
use it to believe in Christ. The books that make all alike dead in sins, auke
to goodness, till they be actually regenerate acknowledge no such difference.
This is but a trick to avoid the odious names of natural power in the will,
and Pelagianisme. It is a monstrous opinion in nature, that a thing should have
a natural inbred motion wrought in it, before any life be wrought in it, so is
it in grace, that their should be a power wrought in man's will, whereby of it
own free inclination it should be able to live spiritually, or not to live as
it list, yea which is more absurd, be able to move it self in the highest
spiritual action that can be, before it be actually regenerate, or have in it
any true spiritual life. Now let the words of the book declare man's
insufficiency, and let every one collect from thence Gods-powerfull operation
in man's conversion.

FAith gives life to the soul, Sermon of good works. Part. 1.
and they be as much dead to God that lack faith, as they be to the world,
whose bodies lack souls.

Sin is come into the world, Sermon two of the Passion.
and so come that it cannot be avoided. It cannot be chosen, but we must needs
fall often.

That which is born of the Spirit, Hom. for Whitsunday Part. 3.
is spirit: as who should say; Man of his own nature is fleshly, and carnal,
corrupt and naught, sinful and disobedient to God, without any spark of
goodness in him, without any virtuous or godly motion, only given to wicked
thoughts, Sermon for Rogat. week. Part. 1. 2 Cor. 3.5. Sermon of Repentance.
Part. 1.
and evil deeds.

Paul brings in his belief, we be not (says he) sufficient of our selves, as
of our selves once to think any thing: but all our ableness is of Gods
goodness.

We must beware and take heed, that we do in no wise think in our hearts,
imagine, or believe, that we are able to repent aright, or to turn effectually
unto the Lord by our own might and strength. Ioh. 15.5.
For this must be verified in all men, without me ye can do nothing. 2 Cor. 3.5.
Again, of our selves we are not able as much as to think a good thought.

We are all by original corruption of our nature, Now. Cat. quest. 69.
of such blindness, wickedness and frowardness, that we can neither
understand, nor are able or willing to do our duty required by the law.

We by nature are so unwary to foresee, Now. Cat. quest. 224.
and so weak to resist temptations, that we cannot but be overcome, unless God
do assist us with his grace, and arm us with his strength.

The corrupt inclination of man was so much given to follow his own fantasy,
Sermon of good works. Part. 2.
that all the admonitions, exhortations, benefits, and threatenings of God could
not keep him from his inventions.

Neither could the notablenesse of the place being the beginning of Gods law
make us to mark it, Hom. against peril of idolatry. Part. 1.
nor the plain declaration by recounting of all kind of similitudes cause us
to understand it, nor the often repeating and reporting of it in diverse and
sundry places, the often reading and hearing of it could cause us to remember it,
nor the dread of the horrible penalty to our selves, our children and
posterity after us, fear us from transgressing of it, nor the greatness of
the reward to us, and our children after us, move us any thing to obedience and
the observing of the Lords great Law against idolatry.

So that if either the multitude or plainness of the places might make us to
understand, In the same Hom.
or Gods earnest charge that God gives in them, move us to regard, or the
horrible plagues threatened to idolaters; might engender any fear in our
hearts, we would forsake this wickedness.

When God leaves us to our own wit, will, Sermon of falling from God. Part. 1.
Part. 2.
and strength, then he begins to forsake us.

When God gives us over, he suffers us to bring forth such fruits as we will,
all naughtiness and vice, and that so abundantly, that they shall clean
overgrow us, choke, strangle, and utterly destroy us.

They that live not after God perceive not this great wrath of God toward
them, Part. 2.
that he does let them alone to themselves.

When thou art called to repentance, Hom. of Repentance. Part. 3.
neglect not the good occasion, that is ministered to thee, least when thou
would repent, thou have not the grace to do it. Sermon for Rogat. week. Part.
1. Hom. of information of them, that take offense at some places of Script.
Part. 2.
For to repent is a good gift of God.

In the power and virtue of the holy Ghost we are made meet and able to receive
Gods gifts and graces

Godly men when they fall into sin, through Gods great grace and infinite mercy
rise again, and fight against sin.

CHAP. II. Of Gods Omnipotency showed in our Conversion.
THis Argument is one of the strongest: for if God use his omnipotency in
converting of a sinner, then there is no question, but God does more then
persuade, and that the work must needs be effectual, unless any man's will can
resist Gods omnipotency. Let us therefore hear the books pronounce sentence
and agree to it.

God which declarest thy Almighty power most chiefly in showing mercy and
pity, Collect. 11. Sunday after Trinity.
give unto us abundantly thy grace, that we returning to thy promises may be
made partakers of thy heavenly treasure through Jesus Christ our Lord.

From Satan's rage and filthy band, Lords prayer. By D. Coxe. Sermon. of
Sacrament. Part. 1. Hom. for Whitsunday. Part. 1. In the same place.

Defend us with thy mighty hand.
We are marvellously incorporated into Christ, by the operation of the holy
Ghost.

It is the office of the holy Ghost to sanctify, and regenerate. Which work
the more it is hid from our understanding, the more it ought to move all men to
wonder at the secret and mighty working of Gods holy Spirit, which is within us.

Did not Gods Spirit miraculously work in David, Matthew, Peter, and Paul? Such
is the power of the holy Ghost to regenerate men, and as it were to bring them
forth a new, so that they shall be nothing like the men that they were before.

The Apostles rejoiced, In the same place.
that they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ. This was the mighty work
of the Holy Ghost, who because he gives patience and joyfulnesse of heart in
temptation and affliction, has therefore worthily obtained this name in holy
Scripture to be called a Comforter.

Let us humbly beseech God so to work in our hearts by the power of his holy
Spirit, In the same place.
that we being regenerate, and newly borne again in all goodness,
righteousness, sobriety, and truth may in the end obtain eternal life.

To new create a man from a wicked person to a righteous man is a greater act
(says S. Augustine) then to make such a new Heaven and Earth, Sermon. for Rogat.
week. Part. 1.
as is already made.

God is able to do abundantly beyond our desires and thoughts according to the
power working in us. Part. 3.


Almighty God give us grace that we may cast away the works of darkness, Coll.
1. Sunday in Advent.
and put upon us the armor of light.

Lord of all power and might graffe in our hearts the love of thy name. Coll.
7. Sunday after Trin. Coll. on All Saints day. Song before Even. prayer.


Almighty God which have knit together thy elect in one communion and
fellowship in the mystical body of thy Son Christ our Lord.

Praise ye the Lord which gives all grace, for he is a Lord of great might.

CHAP. III. Of Gods special grace.
THe doctrine of Gods special grace overthrows the foolish conceit of some
common grace wrought in all those that hear the Gospel, whereby they may
believe if they will, yet often do not. It is a special and effectual grace,
that works in our regeneration, that works not in others, that are not
regenerate. Hear therefore the words of the books.

BY thy special grace preventing us thou do put into our hearts good
desires. Coll. on Easterday. Exhort. to such as come negligently to the
Communion. Article. 10.


These things if ye earnestly consider, ye shall by Gods grace return to a
better mind: for the obtaining whereof we shall make our humble petitions,
while we shall receive the holy Communion.

The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such that he cannot turn, and
prepare himself by his own natural strength, and good works to faith and
calling upon God, wherefore we have no power to do good works, pleasant and
acceptable to God without the grace of God preventing us, that we may have a
good will, and working with us, when we have that good will.

Adversaries unto this truth, Mr. Rogers commentary on it. Prop. 2.
ere such as hold that men believe not, but of their own free will: and that
it is in a man's free will to believe or not to believe, to obey or disobey the
Gospel of truth preached.

They which be endued with so excellent a benefit of God (that is
predestination) be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in
due season, Artic. 17.
they though grace obey the calling, they be made like the image of Christ.

In Christ Jesus of the mere will and purpose of God some are elected, Mr.
Rogers comment. Prop. 5.
and not others unto salvation.

Adversaries unto this truth.

Hereby is discovered the impiety of those men, Mr. Rogers in the same place.
which think that God beheld in every man, whither he would use his grace well,
and believe the Gospel or no, and as he saw a man affected, so did
predestinate, choose, or refuse him.

Such as be ordained to everlasting life, Expos. of Prop. 6.
if they live long in this world, they one time or other be called unto the
knowledge of salvation by the preaching of Gods word: they obey that calling
through the operation of the Holy Ghost working within them.

The predestinate are both justified by faith, Prop. 7.
sanctified by the Spirit, and shall be glorified in the life to come.

Diverse be the effects of man's predestination, Expos. of Prop. 7.
but chiefly it brings to the elect justification by faith in this life, and
in the life to come glorification, etc. as testify all the Churches in their
confessions.

The word of God is the savor of life unto eternal life unto all those, Hom.
of inform. of such as take offense at some places of Script. Part. 2. Hom. of
alms deeds. Part. 2.
whose hearts God has purified by true faith.

God of his special favor toward them whom he has appointed to salvation,
has so offered his grace especially, and they have so received it fruitfully,
that the spirit of God mightily working in them now unto obedience to Gods
will, they declare by their life and good deeds (which cannot come, but of the
Spirit of God, and his especial grace) that they are the undoubted children of
God appointed to everlasting life.

All spiritual gifts and graces come specially from God. Sermon for Rogat.
week. Part. 3.
Faith is the gift of God, and by his power we are kept through faith unto
salvation.

We shall never be able to avoid sin without the special grace of him,
Sermon of Repentance. Part. 2. Ioh. 15. Now. Cat. quest. 150.
that does say, without me ye can do nothing.

All those whom God has chosen, he has restored unto holiness of life and
innocence.

CHAP. IIII. Of Gods work in infants.
IT is evident out of the first Chapter, that men are as dead to God by nature
as infants, and as unable to repent and believe: Now children are not
spiritually quickened by power of any moral swasion, but by an effectual
divine operation, as the books in sundry places affirm.

Sanctify these children and wash them with the holy Ghost. Public Baptism.
Prayer. 1.


We call upon thee for these infants, that they coming to thy holy Baptism,
Prayer. 2.
may receive remission of their sins by spiritual regeneration.

O merciful God grant, The short prayers after the promise made by the
sureties.
that the old man in these children may be so buried, that the new man may be
raised up in them.

Grant that all carnal affections may die in them, and that all things
belonging to the Spirit, may live and grow in them.

Grant that whosoever is here dedicated to thee by our office and ministry, may
also be endued with heavenly virtues.

CHAP. V. Of the giving of internal grace to men.
THose places that affirm, that God gives grace, as faith and repentance and
the like, prove that God does more then persuade externally, or give some
power, that men may believe or repent, because they say, that God gives the
things themselves. God is not the giver of that which we attain to only by his
persuasion, nor chiefly to be commended for it, but he that attains to it: as
on the contrary, the devil was not the author of Adams sin, nor chiefly to
be condemned for it, because he did but persuade him to it, Adams own will did
it, and himself was most to be blamed for it. So in all Logic and Law the
actour is the principal, the Counselors are instruments and accessaries. And
Kings were ever held above their Council, and more praise worthy for doing
well, then they for advising. Now that God gives us those graces, let us hear
out of the Records.

Lord from whom all good things do come. Collect. 5. Sunday af-Easter.
Collect. 7. Sunday after Trinity. Sunday 23. Prayer. 1. in Matrim. Lords prayer
by D. Cox


Lord which art the author and giver of all good things.

God the author of all godliness.

O eternal God giver of all spiritual grace the author of everlasting life.

Thine Holy Ghost into us pour with all his gifts most plenteously.

See more to the same purpose in the Homily for Rogation week, Part. 1.2.3.
Now. Cat. quest. 249.

O God from whom all holy desires, Even. pray. Coll. 2.
all good counsels, and all just works do proceed.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility with grace. The Letany The Letany Also, Coll. 13. after Trin.


That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace to hear
meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit.

Thou in thy gifts art manifold, Come holy Ghost eternal God.

whereby Christ's Church does stand:
In faithful hearts writing thy law,
the finger of Gods hand.
We beseech him to grant us true repentance. Absolution. Short prayafter the
Creed. Coll. Quin. sunday. Coll. 7. sun. after Trin. Prayer for Church mil.
Reason 2. of Confirm.

Indue thy Ministers with righteousness.
Send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift of
charity.

Graffe in our hearts the love of thy name.

Inspire continually the universal Church with the Spirit of truth, unity and
concord.

Confirmation is ministered to them, that be baptized, that by imposition of
hands, and prayer they may receive strength, and defense against all
temptations to sin, and the assaults of the world and the devil.

Arm and make strong thy feeble host, Lords pray. by D. Coxe.

with faith, and with the Holy Ghost.
Every good and heavenly gift, as faith, hope, Hom. of fast Part. 2.
charity, comes only, and solely of God.

God give us grace to follow Christ's example in peace and charity, in patience
and sufferance. Pass. Ser. 1.


Thou have received Christ's body to have within Resur. sermon.
thee the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost for to dwell with thee, to
endow thee with grace to streng then thee against thine enemies.

By the assistance of Gods holy Spirit we be replenished with all
righteousness, In the same place.
by his power we are able to subdue all our evil affections.

God is present in his chosen all whole in Majesty together with all his
power, In the same place.
wisdom, and goodness.

From God as from a giver, In the same place. Hom. for Whitsunday.
come these graces and gifts, kindness, meekness, patience.

Some men will say, How shall I know, that the Holy Ghost is within me? As the
tree is known by the fruit, so is also the Holy Ghost.

The fruits of the Holy Ghost are love, Part. 1.
joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness,
temperance.

Of our selves we be crabbe-trees, Hom. of man's misery. Part. 2.
that can bring forth no apples. We be of our selves of such earth, as can but
bring forth weeds, nettles, brambles, briars, cockle and darnell. Our fruits be
declared, Gal. 5. We have neither faith, charity, hope, patience, chastity, nor
any thing else that good is, but of God, and therefore these virtues be called
there the fruits of the Holy Ghost, and not the fruits of man.

We ought first to crave things that properly belong to the salvation of the
soul, Hom. of prayer. Part. 3.
as the gift of repentance, the gift of faith, the gift of charity and good
works, patience, lowliness, hope, joy, love, peace, which things God requires
of all those that profess themselves his children.

This holy company (of Saints in heaven) confesses constantly, Rogat. sermon.
Part. 1.
that all the goods and graces, wherewith with they were endued in soul, came
of the goodness of God only. It is meet therefore to think, that all
spiritual goodness comes from God above only.

We must needs agree, In the same place.
that whatsoever good thing is in us of grace, nature or fortune, is of God
only, as the only author and worker.

Let us confess that of our selves comes all evil and damnation, Hom. of
man's misery. Part. 2. Rogat. sermon. Part. 2.
and of God all goodness and salvation.

If we confess that all grace of the soul is of God, and is his gift only,
it will teach us to thank God for them: it will abate our pride, when we
perceive, that nothing comes of our selves, but sin and vice: it will keep
us from despising such as have fewer gifts: it will make us to have recourse to
God for all grace.

CHAP. VI. Of the receiving of grace.
IF by another special grace of God, we do receive the grace and favor, that
God offers us in his holy word, then there is no question, but God does work
effectually, where he does regenerate. Let us therefore hear, what the Church
teaches us in that behalf.

ALmighty God give us the grace, Coll. Sund. 2. after Easter. Coll. S. Andrews
day.
that we may always most thankfully receive that his inestimable benefit, to
wit, of the death of Christ.

Almighty God which did give such grace unto thy holy Apostle S. Andrew, that
he readily obeyed the calling of thy Son Jesus Christ, and followed him
without delay: grant unto us all, that we being called by thy holy word, may
forthwith give over our selves obediently to follow thy holy commandments
through the same Jesus Christ our Lord.

Grant us grace to follow thy son Jesus Christ. Coll. S. Matthews day. Prayer
for Church militant. Prayer 3. in Confirm.


To all thy people give thy heavenly grace, and specially to this congregation
here present, that with meek heart and due reverence they may hear and receive
thy holy word.

Let thy fatherly hand we beseech thee, ever be over these children, let thy
holy Spirit ever be with them, and so lead them in the knowledge and obedience
of thy word, that in the end they may obtain the everlasting life.

Send thy heavenly blessing so upon these thy ministers, Prayer last in ord. of
Priests.
that thy word spoken by their mouths may have such success, that it may
never be spoken in vain. Grant also that we may have grace to hear and
receive the same, as thy most holy word.

By faith given us of God we embrace the promise of Gods mercy, Sermon. of
Salvation. Part. 3. Hom. for Whitsunday. Part. 1.
and of the remission of our sins.

Let us humbly beseech God so to work in our hearts by the power of his holy
Spirit, that we being regenerate and newly borne again in all goodness,
righteousness, sobriety, and truth, may in the end obtain eternal life.

God of his great mercy so work in all men's hearts by the mighty power of the
Holy Ghost, Part. 2.
that the Gospel may be truly preached, truly received, and truly followed
in all places.

By the work of the Holy Ghost we receive this grace of God, whereunto we are
restored. Now. Cat. quest. 149.


CHAP. VII. Of the internal effect of grace.
THE books attribute the internal effects of grace to God also. For howsoever
that grace that is given us in regeneration have some power to produce
spiritual thoughts; yet because our spiritual life is not so complete, as our
natural life, and is much hindered from good inclinations by the corruptions of
our flesh remaining, so that it cannot do that good it would without a fresh
supply of Gods assisting grace, therefore the help of God is still implored,
and the praise of the effect given to him. Now if in a man regenerate there be
need of more grace to help that act, which he has already, then certainly the
first work of grace, whereby a dead man is made alive spiritually, must needs
be the only effectual work of Gods Spirit. For if he cannot think what he
would, now he has grace, at all times without further help, then certainly
before he had grace, he could do nothing pleasing to God. This head of the
internal effects of grace is the largest of all the rest. We will therefore
divide it into two parts. First, we will treat of the internal effect of Gods
grace in general in the regenerate. Secondly, of the particular effects of it.

For the First.

The effect of grace in general is set down in these places.

O God from whom all holy desires, Collect. 2. Even. Pray.
all good counsels and all just works do proceed.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Counsel, Letany.
and all the Nobility with grace.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, Letany.
to hear meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring
forth the fruits of the Spirit.

O God from whom all good things do proceed. Coll. Sund. 5. after Easter. Sund.
7. after Trin. Sunday 13. after Trin. Coll. Sund. 23. after Trin. Prayer 1. in
Matrim. Veni Creator.


O God the Author and giver of all good things.

Almighty and merciful God, of whose only gift it comes, that thy faithful
people do unto thee true and laudable service.

God our refuge and strength, which art the author of all godliness.

O eternal God giver of all spiritual grace, the author of everlasting life.

Thou in thy gifts art manifold,
whereby Christ's Church does stand:
In faithful hearts writing the law,
the finger of Gods hand.
Thine holy Ghost into us pour, Lords pray. by D. Coxe.

with all his gifts most plenteously.
Whatsoever is good proceeds from God as from the principal fountain, Rogat.
Ser. Part. 1.
and the only author. All good things come down to us from above from the
Father of light.

The Title of the Sermon is,

That all good things comes from God.

In Christ God the Father does bless us with all spiritual and heavenly
gifts. Part. 3.


God is the giver of all good things. Now. Cat. quest. 249.


The particular effects of grace are seen either in mortifying of vice, or
exercising of virtue in the heart. I will begin with those places that speak
of mortifying of vice.

Almighty God mortify and kill all vices in us. Coll. Innoc. day. Cat. in the
Common Prayer book quest. 15.18 Complaint of a sinner.


A Sacrament is an external and visible sign, of an internal and spiritual
grace given unto us. This grace in Baptism is a dying unto sin, and living
unto righteousness.

Now let those drops most sweet
So moist my heart most dry,
That I with finne replete
May live and sin may dye,
That being mortifide
This sin of mine in me,
I may be sanctifide
By grace of thine in thee,
So that I never fall
Into such mortal sin,
That my foes infernal
Rejoice my death therein:
But vouchsafe me to keep
From those infernal foes,
And from that lake so deep,
Whereas no mercy grows.
Make us to follow the doctrine of John the Baptist, Coll. on S. John Bapt. day.
Prayer 1. added to Set. Fast. 1625. Prayer. 4. Thanksg. for ceasing plague,
1604.
that we may truly repent according to his preaching.

Give us thy heavenly grace, that we may truly and earnestly repent.

As thou gave the Ninivites repentance through thy grace, so now visit the
hearts of thy people in this land with thine heavenly grace and holy Spirit,
that they may speedily and soundly return unto thee from all their wicked
ways, in true repentance and a living faith in Jesus Christ.

See the like in the Evening prayers set forth in the rainy weather, 1613.
Homily of falling from God. Part. 2. Homily against wilful rebellion. Part. 1.
Collect. 1. in Thanksgiving. November. 5. and the next prayer there:

Grant us the true circumcision of the Spirit, Collect. on Circumcis. of Christ.
that our hearts and all our members being mortified from all worldly and
carnal lusts, may in all things obey thy blessed will.

Grant us so to put away the leaven of malice and wickedness, Coll. on Easter
tuesday.
that we may always serve thee in pureness of living and truth.

Grant that we forsaking all worldly and carnal affections, Coll. on S. James
day.
may be evermore ready to follow thy commandments.

To withstand Satan's invasion
Give power and strength to every age. Lords Pr. by D. Cox. Prayer to the holy
Ghost before the Sermon. Coll. before Epis. Fast. 1625. Thanksgiving following.
Coll. 1. Prayer. 2. There after the Gospel. Prayer against rebel. in the Hom.
Cain Com. Pray. book. quest. 24.

O holy Ghost visit our coast,
Defend us with thy shield:
Against all sin and wickedness,
Lord help us win the field.
Create and make new hearts within us O Lord.
Give unto us such effectual grace, that every one of us beholding the plague
of his own heart, we may abhor our corruptions, and turn our selves away from
our evil ways.

Give us grace that we may not any more provoke thine indignation against us by
our transgressions.

Make soft and tender the stony hearts of all those that exalt themselves
against thy truth.

Our souls are strengthened and refreshed with the body and blood of Christ,
as our bodies are with bread and wine.

By the strength of the holy Ghost sinful flesh is subdued and tamed, Now.
Cat. quest. 144.
and corrupt desires are brideled and restrained.

We pray that God will with the moving of his holy Spirit, Quest. 208.
so change and fashion all the wills of us all to the will of his Majesty, that
we may will or wish nothing, that his divine will misliketh.

Thus much for the effects of grace in mortifying of vice, now follow those
that belong to the executing virtue in the soul.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, Letany.
and diligently to live after thy commandments.

By thy special grace preventing us, Collect. on Easter day. Sund. 4. after
Easter.
thou do put into our hearts good desires.

Almighty God which do make the minds of all faithful men to be of one
will, grant unto thy people, that they may love the thing, which thou
command, and desire that which thou do promise.

Grant us thy humble servants, Coll. Sund. 5. after Easter. Sund. 3. after
Trinity. Sund. 6. after Trinity.
that by thy holy inspiration we may think those things that be good.

Lord to whom thou have given an hearty desire to pray.

O God pour into our hearts such love toward thee, that we loving thee in all
things may obtain thy promises.

That thy servants may obtain their petitions, Sund. 10. after Trinity.
make them to ask such things as shall please thee.

Grant we beseech thee, Sunday 13.
that we may so run to thy heavenly promises, that we rail not finally to
attain the same.

That we may obtain that which thou do promise, Sunday 14.
make us to love that which thou do command.

Grant thy people grace with pure heart and mind to follow thee the only God.
Sund. 18.


Grant we beseech thee unto thy Church to love that he believed. Coll. on S.
Barthol. day. Coll. on Sim and Iudes day. Prayer at begin. of Commandments.
Prayer after each command. After the last commandment. Prayer of the Priest in
the name of the communicants. Prayer. 2. after receiving the communion. Prayer.
2. in the short ones after the communion. Prayer. 3.


Grant us so to be joined together in unity of Spirit by their doctrine, that
we may be an holy Temple acceptable to thee.

Cleanse our hearts that we may perfectly love thee and worthily magnify thy
holy name.

Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Lord write all these thy laws in our hearts we beseech thee.

Grant us therefore gracious Lord so to eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus
Christ, and to drink his blood, that our sinful bodies may be made clean by
his body, and our souls washed through his most precious blood.

We most humbly beseech thee O heavenly Father so to assist us with thy grace,
that we may continue in that holy fellowship.

O Almighty Lord and everliving God, vouchsafe, we beseech thee to direct,
sanctify, and govern, both our hearts and bodies in the ways of thy laws,
and in the works of thy Commandments.

Grant we beseech thee Almighty God, that, the words which we have heard this
day with our outward ears, may through thy grace be so graffed inwardly in our
hearts, that they may bring forth in us the fruit of good living.

Sanctify and wash these children with the Holy Ghost, Prayer. 1. in Baptism.
that they being delivered from thy wrath may be received into the Arc of
Christ's Church, and being steadfast in faith, joyful through hope, and rooted
in charity, may so pass the waves of this troublesome world, that finally they
may come to the land of everlasting life.

I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, Cat in common prayer book quest. 13.
who is the giver of all goodness, to send his grace unto me, and to all people
that we may worship him, serve him, and obey him, as we ought to do.

Daily increase in these thy servants, Prayer. 1. in confirm.
thy manifold gifts of grace, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel, and ghostly strength, the spirit of knowledge and true
godliness, and fulfill them, O Lord, with the spirit of thy holy fear.

Almighty and everliving God, Prayer. 3.
which make us both to will and to do those things, that be good and
acceptable unto thy Majesty.

The Lord so fill you with all spiritual benediction and grace, that you may
so live together in this life, The Blessing in marriage.
that in the world to come, you may have life everlasting.

Send thy blessing upon these thy servants, Prayer. 2. in Matrim.
that they obeying thy will, and always being in safety, under thy protection,
may abide in thy love to their lives end.

Grant that this man may love his wife according to thy word, Prayer. 4.
and also that this woman may be a follower of holy and godly Matrons.

Almighty God pour upon you the riches of his grace, sanctify and bless you,
Prayer. 5. in Matrim.
that ye may please him both in body and soul, and live together in holy love
unto your lives end.

Give this thy servant grace so to take thy visitation, Prayer 2. in visita. of
the sick. Prayer 3.
that after this painful life ended, he may dwell with thee in life
everlasting.

Renew in this thy servant (most loving Father) whatsoever has been decayed by
the fraud and malice of the Devil, or by his own carnal will and frailenesse.

Thou most worthy Judge eternal, Sentence. 4. in the burial. Last prayer in
burial.
suffer us not at our last hour for any pains of death to fall from thee.

We meekly beseech thee (O Father) to raise us from the death of sin unto the
life of righteousness.

O Holy Ghost
Visit our minds and unto us, Veni Creator Spiritus.

thy heavenly grace inspire:
That in all truth, and godliness,
we may have true desire.
To us such plenty of thy grace, In the same bymne.

good Lord grant we thee pray:
That thou may be our comforter,
at the last dreadful day.
Grant we pray not with lips alone, Lords pray. by D. Coxe. Prayer last in
order Deacons.

But with the hearts deep sigh and grove.
Make these Deacons to be modest, humble, and constant in their ministration,
to have a ready will to observe all spiritual discipline, that they continuing
ever stable and strong in thy Son Christ, may well use themselves in this
office.

Almighty God our heavenly Father, Prayer. 2. in Consecr. of Bishops.
who has given you a good will to do all these things, etc.

Govern us by thy holy Spirit to frame in us a newness of life therein to
laud and magnify thy blessed name, for ever, Prayers in the fast. 1625. Coll.
1.
and to live every one of us according to the several state of life, whereunto
thou Lord have ordained us in godly fear, and trembling before thee.

Grant us grace, and true repentance, steadfast faith, Prayers in the fast.
1625. Coll. 1.
and constant patience, that whither we live or die, we may always continue
thine, and ever praise thy holy name, and by thy great mercy be pertakers of
grace in this life, and eternal glory in the life to come.

Grant us a due care and conscience in our selves to use all good means of
recovery: Prayer. 6. added to the Letany.
that neither we tempt thy Majesty by presumption in contemning of the
contagion; or neglecting of the means of avoiding, removing and repressing the
same: neither despair of thy goodness, or murmr against the providence (if
we be not so soon eased and delivered as we desire) but that we may
(submitting our selves, in all things to thy good will and pleasure) seek thy
merciful favor for our release and succor, by true faith and repentance: use
the means for ease, which thou give us with care and diligence: help the
afflicted and preserve the whole with compassionate pity and charity: and
finally depend upon thy providence, and wait for thy gracious deliverance with
constant hope and patience.

Send us light in our understanding, Prayers in the fast. 1626. Pray. 1. added
to Letany. Art. 10.
readiness and obedience in our will.

We can do nothing pleasing to God without Gods grace through Christ
preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us, when we have
a good will.

In the man that is born again the understanding is enlightened, Rogers on that
Art. Prop. 3.
and the mind wholly changed, and the body is made able to produce good works.

They that are predestined are both justified by faith, Prop. 7. on Art. 17.
and sanctified by the Spirit, and shall be glorified in the life to come.

Grant that the King may through thy grace in all honor, Prayer for March
27.1. Pr. added to Letany. Last prayer save one.
virtue, and godliness, continue his glorious reign over us many years.

Bless the Kings royal alliance with the dew of thy heavenly Spirit, that
they ever trusting in thy goodness, and protected by thy power, may after
death obtain eternal glory.

The Scriptures have power to turn through Gods promise, Hom. of exhort. to
read Script. Part. 1. In the same place. Part. 2.
and be effectual through Gods assistance.

In reading Gods word he profits most, that is most turned into it, that is
most inspired with the holy Ghost.

Read not the Scriptures without daily praying to God, that he would direct
your reading to good effect. In the same place. Ser. of Salu. Part. 1. In the
same place. Sermon. of Truth. Part. 1. Sermon against adultery. In the same place.


Let us pray to God, that we may speak, think, believe, live, and depart hence
according to the wholesome doctrine of the Scriptures.

True faith is not ours, but by Gods working in us.

A true and lively faith is the gift of God.

God gave the Fathers then grace to be his children, as he does us now.

We are sanctified and made holy by the blood of Christ through the holy Ghost.

God grant that these words against adultery may not be spoken in vain.

God by his holy word indueth his people assembled in his Church, Hom. of right
use of Church.
with the effectuous presence of his heavenly grace.

God does indue his people assembled in his Church, Hom. against peril of
idol. Part. 1.
with the effectual presence of his grace by his word and promises to the
attainment of worldly commodities, and all heavenly gifts, and life everlasting.

God vouchsafe to purify our minds through faith in Christ, Hom. of inform of
such as take offense at some places of Script. Part. 2.
and to instill the heavenly drops of his grace into our hard-stony hearts to
supple the same, that we be not contemners and deriders of his word, but that
with all humbleness of mind and Christian reverence, we may endeavor our
selves to hear and to read his sacred Scriptures, and inwardly, so to digest
them, as shall be to the comfort of our souls, and sanctification of his holy
Name.

Man is first made good by the Spirit and grace of God, that effectually
works in him, Hom. of Almsdeeds. Part. 2. Hom. of Almsdeeds. Part. 2. In the
same place. In the same place.
and afterward brings forth good fruits.

The grace of God works all in all.

Whatsoever can be named good and profitable for body or soul, comes only of
Gods mercy and mere favor, and not of our selves.

God attributes that unto us, and to our doings, that he by his Spirit works
in us, and through his grace procures for us.

God grant that we may always show our selves thankful for Christ's death,
Passion. Sermon. 2.
abhorring all kind of wickedness, and applying our minds wholly to the
service of God, and the diligent keeping of his commandments.

It is Gods Spirit which ingendreth a burning zeal toward Gods word. Hom. for
Whitsunday. Part. 1. In the same place. In the same place.


Nicodemus knew not the power of the holy Ghost in this behalf, that it is he
which inwardly works the Regeneration, and new birth of mankind.

It is the holy Ghost and no other thing that does quicken the minds of men,
stirring up good and godly motions in their hearts, which otherwise of their
own crooked and perverse nature they should never have.

The fruits of faith, In the same place.
charitable and godly motions, if man have any at all in him, they proceed
only of the holy Ghost, who is the only worker of our sanctification, and
makes us new men in Christ Jesus.

The Spirit of Jesus is a good Spirit, Part. 2.
an holy Spirit, a lowly Spirit, a merciful Spirit. If any man live uprightly,
he has the holy Ghost within him.

If the Saints in heaven were asked, Sermon. for Rogat. week. Part. 1.
who should be thanked for their regeneration, justification, and salvation,
they would answer with David. Not to us Lord, but to thy Name give all the
thanks.

If they be asked, In the same place.
whence came all their glorious works, they would say with Esaias, O Lord it is
thou of thy goodness, that have wrought all our works in us, not we our selves.

They be justitiaries and hypocrites, In the same place.
which rob Almighty God of this honor, and ascribe it to themselves.

Let us confess, Sermon. for Rogat. week Part. 2.
that all spiritual graces behoveable for our soul come from God, without
whose goodness no man is called to faith or stayed therein.

God grant us all grace so to hear his word that we may fulfill it. In the
same place.


God give us grace to know those things, Part. 3.
and to feel them in our hearts. This knowledge and feeling is not in our
self: by our self it is not possible to come by it. Let us therefore meekly
call upon the Holy Ghost, that he would assist us and inspire us with his
presence, that in him we may be able to hear our salvation. For without his
lively and secret inspiration we cannot so much as name Christ. Much less
should we be able to believe.

In Gods Spirit shall we be meet vessels to receive the grace of Almighty God:
In the same place.
for it is he that purges and purifieth the mind by his secret working. He
sits in the tongue of man to stir him to speak his honor. He only
ministers spiritual strength to the powers of our soul and body. It is Gods
Spirit, that makes us to hold the way, which God has prepared for us, and to
pray boldly to God. If any gift we have, whereby we may work to the glory of
God, and profit of our neighbor, all is wrought by this Spirit.

The holy Spirit will confirm us in all things. In the same place. Hom. of
Matrim.


Married persons must crave continually of God, the help of his holy Spirit so
to rule their hearts, and to knit their minds together, that they be not
dissevered by any division of discord.

It is God that works in us both the will, Sermon. of Repen. Part. 1.
and the deed. Phil. 2. For this cause although Jeremy had said before, If thou
return O Israel, return unto me, says the Lord, yet afterward he says,
Turn thou me O Lord, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord try God.
Ier. 6. And therefore that holy writer and ancient Father Ambrose does plainly
affirm, that the turning of the heart to God is of God. Ambros. de vocat.
gent. lib. 8. cap. 9. As the Lord himself does testify by his Prophet,
saying, And I will give thee an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they
shall be my people, and I will be their God, for they shall return unto me
with their whole heart.

God vouchsafe by his holy Spirit to work a true and unfeigned repentance in
us. In the same place.


If we repent, Hom. against wilful rebel. Part. 1. Next pray. after Coll.
Nove. 5. Now. Cat. quest. 43. quest. 128.
God will either take away evil Princes, or of evil make them good.

Make us now and always truly thankful in heart, word, and deed, for all thy
gracious mercies, and this our special deliverance.

We must on the Sabbath rest from our own works, and yield our selves wholly to
Gods governance, that he may do his works in us.

From Christ's resurrection comes unto us an endeavor, virtue, and strength to
live well and holily.

Christ indueth us with strength by the virtue and power of his resurrection to
rise from the deadly works of sin, quest. 129.
and live to righteousness.

The Spirit of God is called holy, quest. 142.
for that by him the elect of God and the members of Christ are made holy: for
which cause the scriptures have called him the spirit of sanctification.

It is only God which strengthens man and by whose grace the sinner
conceives this hope, quest. 164.
mind, and will.

Christ with the inspiration and virtue of the Holy Ghost does regenerate and
newly form us to the endeavor of innocence and holiness, quest. 173.
which we call newness of life.

Faith is the gift of God, quest. 180.
and a singular and excellent gift.

The Holy Ghost has wrought faith in my heart by the preaching of the Gospel.
quest. 249.


CHAP. VIII. Of the purification of the heart.
Moral persuasion goes before any intent in man to purify his own heart. If
then this latter act of purifying the heart, which must necessarily follow the
intention of purging be attributed to God, then must he needs doc more in the
cenversion of a sinner then morally to persuade him to purge his own heart.
Now that this act is ascribed to God, the books can witness.

O God make clean our hearts within us. Short prayers after the Creed. Letany.


From all blindness of heart, from pride, vaineglory, and hypocrisy, from envy
hatred and malice, Good Lord deliver us.

Grant us the true circumcision of the Spirit, Coll. on circumcision of Christ.
that our hearts being mortified from all worldly and carnal lusts, etc.

Create and make in us new and contrite hearts. Coll. 1. day of Lent. Coll. 3.
on good Friday. Coll. on Tuesday in Easter.


Have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics, and take from them
all ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word.

Grant us so to put away the leaven of malice and wickedness, that we may, etc.

Grant that we may be presented to thee with pure and clean minds. Collect.
on the Purif. of the virgin S. Mary. Coll. on S. Matthews day. Coll. on S.
Lukes day. Hom. of Inform. of them which take offense etc. Part. 2. end. Sermon.
for Rogat. week Part. 3.


Grant us grace to forsake all covetous desires, and inordinate love of riches.

May it please thee by the wholesome medicines of Lukes doctrine, to heal all
the diseases of our souls.

God therefore for his mercies sake vouchsafe to purify our minds through
faith in his Son Jesus Christ, and to instill the heavenly drops of his grace
into our hard stony hearts to supple the same, that we be not contemners and
deriders of his infallible word.

In Gods Spirit shall we be meet vessels to receive the grace of Almighty God.
For it is he that purges and purifieth the mind by his secret working.

CHAP. IX. Of the external effect of grace.
IF the external effects of grace come not altogether from the spiritual
power put into us at the first, nor from the persuasions of the Ministers, but
God is said to work in us the deed as well as the will to do well, and we
taught to pray to God for such effectual grace, as may produce good effects
outwardly, then it follows that the grace it self cannot be wrought in us only
by moral persuasion, but must be wrought in us by divine operation. Now
whither the outward effects of grace be wrought by Gods assisting spirit or no,
let the authentic records of our Church speak.

O Lord open thou our lips, Short prayers after the Lords Pr. Letany.
and our mouth shall show forth thy praise.

That all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the Church, may both by their
preaching and living, set forth and show true knowledge and understanding.

That it may please thee to give the Magistrates grace to execute Justice, and
to maintain truth. Letany.


That it may please thee to give us an heart diligently to live after thy
commandments. Letany.


That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace to hear
meekly thy word, Letany.
and to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit.

That it may please thee to endue us with the grace of thy holy Spirit, Letany.
to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

Grant that we evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness of living. Prayer
in the Letany before the prayer for the King. Prayer for the King. Prayer for
the Bishops. Coll. on 1. Sund. after Epiph. Coll. on 5. Sund. after Epiph.
Coll. on 1. Sunday in Lent. Coll. on Sun. before East.


So replenish the King with the grace of thy holy Spirit, that he may always
walk in thy way.

That Bishops and Curats, and all Congregations committed to their charge may
truly please thee, pour upon them the continual dew of thy blessing.

Grant that thy people which call upon thee, may have grace and power
faithfully to fulfill what they know, they ought to do.

Lord we beseech thee to keep thy Church continually in the true Religion.

Give us grace to use such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the
spirit, we may ever obey thy godly motions.

Mercifully grant that we both follow the example of Christ's patience.

Receive our prayers, 2. Coll. on good Friday
that every member of thy holy Congregation in his vocation, and ministry may
truly and godly serve thee.

As by thy special grace preventing us, Collect. on Easter day.
thou did put in our mind good desires, So we beseech that by thy continual
help we may bring the same to good effect.

Grant that we may daily endeavor our selves, Coll. on 2. Sund. after Easter.
Coll. on 3. Sund. after Easter. Coll. on 1. Sunday after Trinity.
to follow the blessed steps of Christ's most holy life.

Grant unto all them that be admitted into the fellowship of Christ's religion,
that they may follow all such things as be agreeable to their profession.

Because the weakness of our mortal nature can do no good thing without thee,
grant us the help of thy grace, that in keeping of thy commandments we may
please thee both in will and deed.

Grant us Lord we beseech thee, Coll. on 9. Sund. after Trinity.
the Spirit to think and do always such things as be rightful, that we which
cannot be without thee, may by thee be able to live according to thy will.

Almighty and merciful God of whose only gift it comes, Coll. on 13. Sund.
after Trinity.
that thy faithful people do unto thee true and laudable service.

Because the frailty of man without thee cannot but fall, Coll. on 15. Sund.
after Trinity. Coll. on 17. Sund. after Trinity.
lead us to all things profitable to our salvation.

Lord we pray thee that thy grace may always prevent, and follow us, and make
us continually to be given to all goods works.

Lord we beseech thee to keep the Church in continual godliness, Coll. on 22.
Sund. after Trinity.
that it may be devoutly given to serve thee in good works.

Grant unto us all, Coll. on S. Andr. day.
that we being called by thy holy word, may forthwith give over our selves
obediently to fulfill thy holy commandments.

Grant that we may follow thy holy doctrine that Saint Paul taught. Coll. on
Convers. of S. Paul. Coll. on S. Barn.


Let us not be destitute of thy manifold gifts, nor yet of grace to use them
always to thy honor and glory.

Make us so follow the doctrine, Coll. on S. John Bapt.
and holy life of Saint John Baptist, that we may truly repent, and constantly
speak the truth, boldly rebuke vice and patiently suffer for the truths sake.

Make we beseech thee all Bishops and Pastors diligently to preach thy holy
word, Coll. on S. Peter.
and the people obediently to follow the same.

Grant that we forsaking all worldly and carnal affections, Coll. on S. James.
may be evermore ready to follow thy commandments.

Grant us grace to follow thy holy Saints in all virtuous and godly living.
Collect. on All Saints. Prayer after every command. Ser. against peril of
idol. 2. Part. Sermon concerning Pr. 1. Part. 1. Part. of Sermon. for Rog. week. In
the same place.


Lord have mercy upon us and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Let us beseech God that we may flee from all idolatry.

God for his great mercy sake so work in our hearts by his holy Spirit, that we
may always make our humble prayers unto him as we ought to do.

Let us call upon the father of mercy, that we may be assisted with the
presence of his holy Spirit, and demean our selves in speaking and hearing to
the salvation of our souls.

If we should ask the Saints in heaven, whence came their glorious works which
they wrought in their lives, Esaias says, O Lord it is thou of thy goodness,
that have wrought all works in us.

Grant that this thy rod, Prayers for the Fast. 1625. 2. Prayer added in the
Letany. Thanksgiving. 1625. Collect. 1. In the same book. 3. Prayer after the
Gospel.
may by thy heavenly grace speedily work in us the fruit and effect of true
repentance, unfainedly turning and converting unto thee, and perfect amendment
of our whole lives.

Give us such effectual grace, that we looking every one of us into the plague
of his own heart, may abhor our own corruptions, and turn from our evil
ways.

We most humbly beseech thee to pour thy heavenly grace into our hearts, that
we may learn to turn unto thee from our wicked ways.

CHAP. X. Of Gods governing us.
SEeing after we are regenerated and have spiritual life wrought in us, we
still need Gods help to govern us, it must needs follow that being spiritually
dead by nature, we could not be made alive by a moral swasion, but by a
powerful work of God. That we still need Gods governing grace, appears by
authorized books.

GRant that our doings may be ordered by thy governance, Morning Prayer. Coll.
3.
to do always that is righteous in thy sight.

We beseech thee, Coll. on 5. Sunday in Lent.
that by thy great goodness thy people may be governed and preserved evermore
both in body and soul.

Lord from whom all good things do come, Coll. on 5. Sund. after Easter.
grant us thy humble servants, that by thy holy inspiration we may think those
things that be good, and by thy merciful guiding may perform the same.

Lord make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy name, Coll. on 2.
Sund. after Trinity.
for thou never failest to help and govern them, whom thou do bring up in thy
steadfast love.

Grant that the course of this world may be so ordered by thy governance, Coll.
on 5. Sund. after Trinity.
that thy congregation may joyfully serve thee in all godly quietness.

O Almighty Lord everliving God vouchsafe, Short Pray. after Com. Prayer 2.
we beseech thee to direct, sanctify and govern both our hearts and bodies in
the ways of thy laws, and in the works of thy commandments.

Defend, O Lord, Prayer in Confirm. Hom. of Matrim.
this child with thy heavenly grace, that he may continue thine for ever

Married persons must crave the help of Gods Spirit so to rule their hearts,
that their minds be not desevered.

Use often prayer to God, In the same Hom.
that he would be present by you, that he would continue concord and charity
betwixt you.

We pray that God by his holy Spirit would illuminate and govern the hearts of
all such, Now. Cat. quest. 206.
as be of his Cuurch, wherein he reigns specially, as in his kingdom.

As thou have by Gods guiding, quest. 251.
first conceived this mind and will, so shall thou by his grace attain to a
happy end of this thy godly study and endeavor.

CHAP. XI. Of Gods preserving us in godliness, and from sin.
AS the power of God manifests it self at first in regenerating us, so may it
evidently be discerned afterward in resisting Satan's temptations and keeping
us in the ways of piety. If an effectual work of God be sometimes needful
to keep us from gross idolatry in heavy temptations, then is it much more
needful to keep us from evil thoughts, and in pious meditations with
delight. Our flesh is quickly weary of good ways and easily inclining to evil
after we are regenerate. If now besides the strength of that working grace,
which God put into us at first there be need of an effectual help of grace
still: then was there at first, when we were able to do nothing, need not of a
stock, that we might use well or ill, but of an effectual work of grace, to
work faith and repentance in us. Now what need we have of Gods preserving
help let the books speak.

VOuchsafe, Te Deum.
O Lord, to keep us this day without sin.

From all evil and mischief, Letany.
from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the devil, from thy wrath and
from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vaineglory, and hypocrisy, from
envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh, and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee in righteousness and holiness of life thy servant, Letany.
Charles our most gracious King and Governor.

Lord make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy name. Coll. Sund.
2. after Trin. Sund. 7.


Nourish us with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep us in the same.

Lord we beseech thee grant thy people grace to avoid the infections of the
devil. Sund. 18.


Lord we beseech thee to keep thy household the Church in continual
godliness. Sund. 22.


Almighty God confirm and strengthen you in all goodness. Absolv. at the
Communion. Cat in book of Com. Pr. quest. 13. Pr. 3. in vis. of the sick. Veni
Creator.


I pray unto God, that it will please him to save and defend us in all dangers
ghostly and bodily, and that he will keep us from all sin and wickedness.

Preserve and continue this sick member in the unity of thy Church.

Strength and stablish all our weakness
so feeble and so frail,
That neither flesh the world nor devil
against us do prevail. In the same hymn.

And grant, O Lord, that thou being
our leader and our guide:
We may eschew the snares of sin,
and from thee never slide.
Only thy grace must be my stay Humble suit of sin.

least that I fall down flat,
And being down, then of my self
cannot recover that.
Lord keep our King and his council, Prayer to the Holy Ghost before Sermon.
Hom. of faith. Part. 3. Hom. of Inform. of them which take offense etc. Part.
1. In the same place.

and give them will and might
To persevere in thy Gospel,
which can put sin to flight.
It is God that must be our defense and protection against all temptation of
wickedness and sin.

Noah and Lot godly men, which otherwise felt inwardly Gods holy Spirit
inflaming them in their hearts with the fear and love of God, could not by
their own strength keep themselves from committing horrible sins.

We must therefore acknowledge our own infirmity and weakness, and pray more
earnestly to God incessantly for his grace to strengthen us and to defend us
from all evil.

It is of the goodness of God, Sermon. for Rogat. week Part. 3.
that we faint not in our hope unto him. It is verily Gods work in us, the
charity wherewith we love our brethren. If after our fall we repent, it is by
him that we repent, which reaches forth his merciful hand to raise us up. If
any will we have to rise, it is he that preventeth our will, and disposes us
thereto.

Pray God to defend and maintain you in marriage, Hom. of Matrim. Now. Cat.
quest. 206.
that ye be not overcome with any temptations.

We pray that God would strengthen the members of his Church with his aid and
power, as his soldiers, that they may earnestly fight against and subdue the
devil, the world, and the lusts of the flesh.

We pray God not to suffer us to be overcome with any wicked temptation, but
that he will deliver us, quest. 224.
and save us from all evil.

Direct our steps in thy word, Psalm. for Even.
and so shall our feet be kept from falling, and no wickedness shall have
dominion over us.

Deliver us from the power of wicked spirits, Even. prayer there.
and from all sin, the works of darkness, and from all other perils bodily
and ghostly.

CHAP. XII. Of the progress of the Regenerate.
THe servants of God that are regenerate though they be able to do spirtuall
actions by virtue of that grace they have received, yet so unperfectly, that
they cannot make any great progress in godliness without further help of
Gods grace, they acknowledge that they have of Gods assistance to bring into
action their good cogitations, so violently are they opposed by the remainders
of fleshly corruption. Now if the regenerate have need of Gods grace to make a
progress, how much more have they need of his effectual grace, that have no
power to regenerate themselves, as we say, or at least not so much as the
regenerate have to proceed, as our adversaries must say, unless they will put
no difference betwixt spiritual death and spiritual life. Let us now hear
the testimony of the books in this particular.

Grant that we being regenerate, Collect. on Christmas day.
and made thy children by adoption and grace, may daily be renewed by thy holy
Spirit.

Nourish us with all goodness. Sund. 7. after Trinity. Sunday 14. after Trin.
Prayer 3. in Baptism. Prayer in priv. Bapt.


Almighty and everlasting God, give unto us the increase of faith, hope, and
charity.

Increase this knowledge, and confirm this faith in us evermore.

Give thy holy Spirit to this infant, that he being born again, and being made
heir of everlasting salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, may continue thy
servant, and attain thy promise.

Daily increase in these thy servants, Prayer 1. in Confirm.
thy manifold gifts of grace, the spirit of ghostly strength, and true
godliness, and fulfill them, O Lord, with the spirit of thy holy fear.

Defend O Lord, Prayer 2. there.
this child with thy heavenly grace, that he may continue thine for ever, and
daily increase in thy holy Spirit more and more, until he come unto thy
everlasting kingdom.

O Lord increase our faith in us, Prayer to holy Ghost before Ser. Prayer 3. in
order of Priests,

and love so to abound, etc.
We humbly beseech thee, by the same thy Son to grant unto all us which
either here, or else where call upon thy name, that we may show our selves
thankful to thee for these and all other thy benefits, and that we may daily
increase and go forwards in the knowledge and faith of thee and thy Son by
thy holy Spirit.

Almighty God accomplish in you the good work, Prayer. 2. in Consecr. of
Bishops.
which he has begun, that ye may be found perfect, and irreprehensible at the
latter day.

Regard not the horror of our sins, Prayer in fast. 1625. Coll. 1.
but our unfeigned repentance. Perfect that work which thou have begun in us.

Give unto us every day more earnest and unfeignned repentance: Prayer 6. added
to Letany there.
plant in our hearts by the grace of thy holy Spirit a settled fear of thy
name, and full resolution to lead the rest of our life in the careful
obedience of thy holy will in our callings, and faithful hope of a better life
to come.

Lord we believe, but do thou increase our faith, Prayer for season. weather
there.
our devotion, our repentance, and all Christian virtues.

Thou did most graciously accept our undeserved repentance before thee:
Prayer against pestil. in the fast. 1626.
we beseech thee to give us the grace of greater humiliation, and to show as
yet further mercy.

Neither does the holy Ghost think it sufficient, Hom. for Whitsunday Part. 1.
inwardly to work the spiritual and new birth of man, unless he do also
dwell, and abide in him.

Whether the Prince be good or evil, Hom. against wilful rebel. Part. 1.
Thanksgiv. Nov. 5. Pr. after 1. Coll.
let us pray for him, for his continuance and increase in goodness, if he be
good; and for his amendment, if he be evil.

Increase in us more and more a lively faith, and fruitful love in all
obedience.

CHAP. XIII. Of the prayers of holy men.
SVch as are endued with true grace already, yet pray to God still for grace.
By which grace they do not entend a power to do well if they please, for this
they have already, yea, they had it before they did actually believe, and by
virtue of this power did believe as our adversaries say. The grace then that
Gods servants pray for, that they may obey God, is an actual inclination of
their will already regenerate, to the effecting of those good desires, that are
in their souls. Neither must we suppose that their prayers aim only at an
indefinit power of doing well, but at a certain event of spiritual power
given them by God, as appears by those frequent expressions of the end of
their desires in such phrases, as these, That we loving that thou requirest may
obtain that thou promisest. That we may continue thy servants, and attain thy
promises. That they may so please thee in this world, that in the world to come
they may have life everlasting. And many such like. Their prayers do seek more
for the furtherance of the will, then for the illumination of the
understanding. And of such a will, as is made good already. They must needs
then aim at a greater power of the will to good, and a more effectual
direction of good thoughts to good actions, because they seek for a certain
effect, which they ask in faith, and God gives in mercy. If they then yet pray
for effectual grace, then could they not be converted at the first without it.
What they pray for, let us now observe.

HOwbeit ye cannot have a mind and a will thereto of your selves, Order of
Priests Exhort.
for that power and ability is given of God alone. Therefore ye see, how ye
ought and have need earnestly to pray for his holy Spirit.

Let us earnestly call for grace, Hom. of Swearing. Part. 2.
that all vain swearing and perjury set apart, we may only use such oaths as
be lawful and godly, and that we may truly without all fraud keep the same
according to Gods will and pleasure.

Let us pray that Kings may ever in all things have God before their eyes,
Sermon. of obedience.
that they may have zeal to Gods glory, that they may rightly use their sword
and authority, that they may most faithfully follow the Kings in the Bible.

Let us pray for ourselves that we may live godly in holy and Christian
conversation. In the same Hom.


Let us beseech God that we being warned by his holy word, Hom. against peril
of idolatry. Part. 2. Hom. of Prayer. Part. 3.
forbiding all idolatry may flee from all idolatry.

It is needful daily to pray for the ministers, that they may effectually
preach the Gospel to the people, and bring forth the true fruits thereof to
the example of all other.

The confessing that all grace of the soul is Gods gift only, Hom. for Rogat.
week Part. 2.
will make us to have recourse to God for all grace, as the wiseman did for
chastity, Wisd. 10. saying, After I knew that otherwise I could not be chaste,
except God granted it, I made have to the Lord, and earnestly besought him from
the bottom of my heart to have it.

Now if the aid of prayer be taken away, Hom. of Matrim.
by what means can married persons sustain themselves in any comfort? For
they cannot otherwise either resist the devil, or yet have their hearts staid
in stable comfort in all perils and necessities, but by prayer.

If thy wife be wicked, In the same Hom.
chafe not in anger, but pray unto Almighty God for her.

By prayer we may obtain Gods help, In the same Hom.
his grace, and defense, and protection to continue without discord in marriage
to a better life to come. Which grant us he that dyed for us all.

These things being considered let us earnestly pray unto the living God our
heavenly Father, Sermon. of Repent. Part. 1.
that he will vouchsafe by his holy Spirit to work a true and unfeigned
repentance in us.

We pray that Gods name may be called upon with pure mind by men of all ages,
Now. Cat. quest. 203. quest. 209.
etc.

We pray that whatsoever betides us, we may receive it with contented and
gladsome hearts, and that we may in all things be serviceable and obedient to
God, and that we rebel not, nor repine not against Gods will.

I being of my self most weak and unable thereunto, quest. 249.
must continually and earnestly sue by hearty prayer to God the giver of all
good things for increase of faith, and grace to please God.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Gods grants.
WHat God grants unto his people, that he does not permit them to do, or give
leave that they do it themselves by strength of nature, or some former grace
received without any further help of God, for God not hinder us from doing any
good, but give us free leave in his word: So that there needs no new grant of
leave to do well, or to use well the strength we have received. But Gods
granting is giving some new spiritual strength or grace to use well the grace
we have received. If such grace be yet effectually granted to good men, then
could they not at first be made good without Gods effectual operation. We
shall be brief in this last point, because all the prayers we have cited
before are but expressions of Gods peoples desires, and of Gods satisfaction,
which he gives unto the same.

GRant O most merciful Father, Confession.
that we may hereafter live a godly righteous and sober life, to the glory of
thy holy name. Amen.

Grant this day that we fall into no sin, Coll. 3. Morning Pray. Coll. Sund. in
Advent.
neither run into any kind of danger.

Blessed Lord God which have caused all holy Scriptures to be written for our
learning. Grant us that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn,
and inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of thy holy word we may
embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou
have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ.

Lord we beseech thee mercifully to receive the prayers of thy people which
call upon thee, Coll. Sund. after Epiph
and grant that they may both perceive and know what things they ought to do,
and also have grace and power faithfully to fulfill the same through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Receive our supplications and prayers, Coll. on good Frid.
which we offer before thee, for all estates of men in thy holy congregation,
that every member of the same in his vocation and ministry may truly and
godly serve thee through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Grant unto all them that be admitted into the fellowship of Christ's religion,
Sund. 3. after Easter
that they may eschew those things that be contrary to their profession, and
follow all such things as be agreeable to the same.

Grant we beseech thee Almighty God, Coll. on Ascens. day.
that like as we do believe thy only begotten Son our Lord to have ascended
into the heavens: so we may also in heart and mind thither ascend and with him
continually dwell.

Grant us by thy Spirit to have a right judgment in all things, Coll. on
Whitsunday.
and evermore to rejoice in his holy Comfort.

Grant we beseech thee that we which have S. Coll. on convers. of S. Paul.
Paul's wonderful conversion in remembrance, may follow and fulfill thy holy
doctrine that he taught, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Grant that we may with pure and clean minds be presented unto thee by Jesus
Christ our Lord. Coll. on Purif. of virg. Mary. Genesis confess. before receiving
the Commu.


Grant that we may ever hereafter serve and please thee in newness of life, to
the honor and glory of thy name through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Conclusion.
THus have I showed out of the authentic records of our Church, what is the
judgment thereof about the power of man's will, and Gods effectual work upon
the same in man's regeneration. True it is, many of these places speak of men
already regenerate. Which is so far from weakening the argument, that it makes
it the stronger. For if that man that in the judgment of the Church is alive
in grace be so imperfect, that he have often need of new and effectual grace,
and help of God to go forward, how much need had he then of an effectual work
of Gods grace in regenerating him, who by the judgment of the same Church was
dead in sins and trespasses before, yea as dead to grace (for so are the
words of the Homilies) as they are to the world, that want souls. It may be
thought superfluous to collect so many testimonies, diverse whereof differ but
in words and agree in sense. This have I done because of the weight of the
cause, and the rather because the public doctrine of the Church is by some
said to be on the other side. It may be some few testimonies might have been
slighted, but such variety, out of so many several records, must needs show
to every indifferent person the constant doctrine of the Church which way it
runs. It may also stop the mouths of such as pretend a few seeming and
misconceived places to the contrary. I might have made a world of Syllogismes,
if I would have proceeded scholastically. But I had rather lay down the naked
doctrine of the Church for learned and unlearned to peruse, reduced to diverse
heads all tending to one end, and that for the ease and better understanding of
the reader. If it be said, that I have sometimes set down the same words in
several places, the answer is at hand. I did it for sundry reasons. One while
the place was fruitful, and out of diverse words did afford diverse reasons
belonging to several heads. Another while the place could not well be
understood without coherence, so that I was compelled to set down the words
precedent, though I had made use of them elsewhere. Lastly, sometimes the words
were doubtful to which head they did belong, or rather seemed to me to belong
to both, and so have I placed them accordingly. If any yet object further, that
the places may admit of another interpretation, and may at least some of them
so be understood, as they may make for the adverse part. I answer there are
many of them plain enough, that cannot easily be misconstrued. Other places
must be interpreted by them that are plain. The Scripture it self the voice
of our Father is wrested daily to a contrary sense, and no marvel if the
voice of our Mother the Church may be so abused also. Let the Reader by that
reason and grace, that God has given him, endeavor to understand which is the
right sense of the words. I have added nothing of mine own, save the state of
the question at first, and the relation that every argument or head has to the
question in the beginning of every Chapter. Less I could not add without
injury to the cause. More I would not, least I should be tedious to the Reader,
or lie more open to the exceptions of such as are otherwise minded, who cannot
now except against my words without wounding the Church, whose words I have
faithfully reported.

Thus I commend the cause to God whose it is, and to the Church of God whom it
concerns, beseeching God so to work in every member of it by his effectual
grace, that we may consent in judgment, and agree in affection on earth, till
we come to perfection in heaven.

FINIS.

