A true Description, OR Rather a Parallel between Cardinal WOLSEY,
Archbishop of YORK, AND WILLIAM LAUD, Archbishop of CANTERBVRY.

Printed in the Year 1641.

A true Description, or rather a Parallel, between Cardinal Wolsey,
Archbishop of York, and William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, etc.
THere be two Primates, or Archbishops throughout England and Wales,
Canterbury and York, both Metropolitans, York of England, Canterbury of all
England, for so their Titles run. To the Primate of Canterbury be
subordinate thirteen Bishops in England, and four in Wales. But the Primate
of York has at this time but two Suffragans in England: Namely, the Bishops
of Carliele, and Durhan: though he had in King Lucius days, (who was the
first Christian King of this our Nation) all the Prelacy of Scotland within his
jurisdiction: Canterbury commanding all from this side the River Trent to the
furthest limits of Wales; and York commanding all from beyond the Trent to the
utmost bounds of Scotland, and hitherto, their prime Archiepiscopall
Prerogatives may (not unproperly) be paralleld.

In the time of Henry the first were potent two famous Prelates, Anselme of
Canterbury, who durst contest against the King, and Girald of York, who
denied to give place or any precedence at all to Anselme. Thomas Becket, who
was first Chancellor, and after Archbishop of Canterbury, in the reign of
Henry the second, bore himself so insol^ntly against the King his Sovereign.
that it cost him his life, being slain in the Church as he was going to the
Altar. But above all, the pride, tyranny, and oppression of the Bishop of Ely,
in the reign of Richard the first wants example, who was at once Chancellor
of England, and Regent of the Land, and held in his hand at once the two
Arch-Bishopricks of York and Canterbury, who never rid abroad without a
thousand horse for his guard to attend him, whom we may well parallel with the
now great Cardinal of France: and need he had of such a train to keep
himself from being pulled to pieces by the oppressed Prelates, and people,
equally extorting from the Clergy, and Laietie; yet he in the end, disguising
himself in the shape of an old Woman, thinking to pass the Sea at Dover,
where he awayted on the Strand, a Pinace being hired for that purpose, he was
discovered by a Sayler, and brought back to abide a most severe sentence.
Stephen Lancthon, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the time of King John, would
not absolve the Land, being for six years together indicted by the Pope, till
the King had paid unto him and the rest of the Bishops eighteen thousand
Marks in gold; and thus I could continue the pride of the Prelacie, and their
great Tyranny through all the Kings Reigns: But I now fall upon the promised
parallel betwixt Thomas Wolsey, Archbishop of York, and Cardinal, and William
Laud, Doctor in Divinity, and Archbishop of Canterbury.

They were both the sons of mean and Mechanic men, Wolsey of a Butcher,
Laud of a Clothworker. The one borne in Ipswich, (threescore miles) the other
in Reading thirty miles distant from the City of London, both of them very
toward, forward, and pregnant grammar Scholars, and of singular apprehensions,
as suddenly rising to the first form in the School. From thence, being young,
they were removed to the University of Oxford, Wolsey admitted into Maudlin
Coledge, Laud into St. John's, and as they were of different times, so they were
of different statures; yet either of them well shapt according to their
proportions: Wolsey was of a competent tallnesse, Laud of a less size, but
might be called a pretty man, as the other a proper man: both of ingenious and
acute aspects, as may appear by this man's face, the others picture. In their
particular Colleges they were alike proficients, both as active of body as
brain, serious at their private studies, and equally frequent in the Schools,
eloquent Orators, either to write, speak, or dictate, dainty Disputants, well
verst in Philosophy, both Moral, Physical, and Metaphysicall, as also in the
Mathematics, and neither of them strangers to the Muses, both taking their
degrees according to their time; and through the whole Academie, Sir Wolsey was
called the boy-Batchelour, and Sir Laud the little Batchelour.

The maine study that either of them fixed upon was Theology: for though they
were conversant in all the other Arts and Sciences, yet that they solely
professed, and by that came their future preferment; Wolsey being Batchelour was
made Schoolmasters of Maudlin School in Oxford, but Laud came in time to be
Master of St. John's College in Oxford; therein transcending the other, as also
in his degrees of Master of Art, Batchelour of Divinity, and Doctor of
Divinity, when the other being suddenly called from the Rectorship of his
school, to be resident upon a Country Benefice, he took no more Academicall
degrees, than the first of Batchelour, and taking a strange affront by one Sir
Amius Paulet, a Knight in the Country, who set him in the Stocks, he endured
likewise diverse other disasters: but that disgrace he made the Knight pay
dearly for, after he came to be invested in his dignity. Briefly, they came
both to stand in the Princes eye; but ere I proceed any further, let me give
the courteous Reader this modest caveat, that he is to expect from me only, a
parallel of their Acts and Fortune., but no legend of their lives; it
therefore briefly thus follows,

Both these from Academicks coming to turn Courtiers; Wolsey by his diligent
waiting, came to insinuate himself into the breasts of the Privy Counselors.
His first emploiment was in an Embassy to the Emperor, which was done by such
fortunate, and almost incredible expedition, that by that only he grew into
first grace with King Henry the seventh, father to King Henry the eighth. Laud,
by the mediation and means wrought by friends, grew first into favor with
King James of sacred memory, father to our now royal Sovereign King Charles.
They were both at first the Kings Chaplains, Woolseyes first preferment was to
be Deane of Lincoln, of which he was after Bishop. Lauds first
ecclesiastical dignity was to be Deane of Saint David's, of which he was after
Bishop also. And both these Prelaticall Courtiers came also to be privy
Counselors. Woolsey in the beginning of Henry the eighths reign, was made
Bishop of Tourney in France, soon after Bishop of Lincoln, and before his full
consecration (by the death of the Incumbent) was ended, translated to the
Archbishopric of York, and all this within the compass of a year; Laud,
though not so suddenly, yet very speedily, was from St. David's removed to
London, and from London to Canterbury, and this in the beginning of the Reign
of King Charles. Thus you see they were both Archbishops, and as Laud was
never Cardinal, so Woolsey was never Canterbury.

But in some things the Cardinal much exceeded Canterbury, as in holding all
these Bishoprics at once, when the other was never possessed but of one at one
time. The Cardinal also held the Bishopric of Winchester, of Worcester, Bath
and W^lls, with a fourth, and two Abbat-ships in Commendam: He had besides an
Hat sent him from Rome, and made himself Cardinal, (that being before but
York) he might overtop Canterbury. But our William howsoever he might have
the will, yet never attained to that power, and howsoever he could not
compass a Hat from Rome, yet made the means to have a consecrated Miter sent
from Rome; which was so narrowly watched, that it came not to his wearing.
Moreover, the Cardinal extorted the Chancellourship from Canterbury; but we
find not that Canterbury ever either trencht upon the jurisdiction, or took
any thing away from the Archbishopric of York.

Woolsey likewise far out-went him in his numerous Train, and the nobleness
thereof, being waited on not only by the prime gentry, but even of Earls,
and Earls sons, who were listed in his family, and attended him at his
Table, as also in his hospitality, his open house being made free for all
comers, with the rare and extraordinary state of his Palace, in which there
were daily uprising and downe-lying a thousand persons, who were his domestic
servants. Moreover in his many entertainments of the K. with Masks, and mighty
sumptuous banquets, his sumptuous buildings, the Prince-like state he carried
in his foreign Embassages, into France, to the Emperor, etc. in which he
spent more Coin in the service of his King, for the honor of his Country,
and to uphold the credit of his Cardinals Cap, than would (for the time) have
paid an Army Royal. But I answer in behalf of our Canterbury, that he had
never that means or employment, by which he might make so vainglorious a
show of his Pontificalitie, or a^ Archiepiscopall Dignity: For unbounded
minds may be restrained within narrow limmits, and therefore the parallel may
something hold in this too.

They were also in their judicial Courts equally tyrannous; the one in the
Chancerie, the other in the High Commission: both of them at the Council
board, and in the Star Chamber alike Draconically supercilious. Blood drawn
from Doctor Bonners head by the fall of his Cross presaged the Cardinals
downfall. Blood drawn from the Ears of Burton, Prin, and Bastwick, was a
prediction of Canterburies ruin; the first accidental, the last premeditate
and of purpose. The Cardinal would have expelled all the Lutherans and
Protestants out of the Realm, this our Canterbury would have exiled both our
Dutch and French Church out of the Kingdom. The Cardinal took maine delight
in his fool Patch, and Canterbury took much delight in his party colored
Cats. The Cardinal used for his agents Bonner and others, Canterbury for his
Ministers, Duck, Lamb, and others. They both favored the Sea of Rome, and
respected his Holiness in it. The Cardinal did profess it publicly, the
Archbishop did reverence it privately. The Cardinals ambition was to be
Pope, the Archbishop strove to be Patriarch, they both bid fairly for it,
yet lost their aim; and far easier it is for men to descend, than to ascend.

The Cardinal (as I have said) was very ambitious; the Archbishop was
likewise of the same mind, though better molded, and of a more politic
brain, having a close and more reserved judgment in all his observations, and
more fluent in his deliverie. The Cardinal was very curious in his attire,
and ornament of his body, and took great delight in his train, and other his
servants for their rich aparrell; the Archbishop his attire was neat and rich,
but not so gaudie as the Cardinals was, yet took as much felicity in his
Gentlemen's rich aparrell, especially those that waited on his person, as ever
the Cardinal did, though other men paid for them: and if all men had their
own, and every bird her Feather, some of them would be as bare as those that
profess themselves to be of the Sect of the Adamists: To speak truth, the
Archbishops men were all given to covetousness and wantonness; that I never
heard of was in the Cardinals men.

As the Cardinal was sumptuous in his buildings, as that of White Hall,
Hampton Court, etc. as also in laying the foundation of two famous Coledges,
the one at Ipswich, where he was borne, the other at Oxford where he had his
breeding: so Christ-Church which he left unfinished, Canterbury has since
repaired; and wherein he has come short of him in building, though he has
bestowed much on St. John's Coledge, yet he has out-gone him in his bounty of
brave voluminous Books, being fourscore in number, late sent to the Bodleian
or Universitie Library: Further, as the Cardinal was Chancelour of England,
so Canterbury was Chancellor of Oxford: And as the Cardinal by plucking
down of some small Abbeys, to prepare stone for (...) greater Structures,
opened a gap for the King, by which he took the advantage utterly to raze and
demolish the rest: so Canterbury by giving way for one Bishop to have a
temporal Trial, and to be convicted, not by the Clergy, but the Laity, so
he left the same path open both for himself, and the rest of the Episcopacie:
of which, there before scarce remained a president.

I have paralleld them in their dignities: I will conclude with a word or two
concerning their downe-falls. The Cardinal fell into the displeasure of his
King, Canterbury into an extreme hatred of the Commons: both were arrested of
high Treason, the Cardinal by Process, Canterbury by Parliament. The
Cardinal at Keywood Castle near York, Canterbury at Westminster near
London; both their falls were speedy and sudden: The Cardinal sat as this
day in the high Court of Chancerie, and within two days after was confined to
his house; Canterbury as this day sat at the Counsell-boord, and in the upper
house of Parliament, and the same day committed to the black Rod, and from
thence to the Tower: The Cardinal dyed at Leicester some say of a Flux;
Canterbury remains still in the Tower, only sick of a fever. Vanitas
vanitatum omnia vanitas.

FINIS.

