A True DISCOVERY Of the Private League, between The late King James, (Since
his coming from Ireland) And the K. of France: Showing their Design to Destroy
all The Protestants in Europe, Being sent from a French Merchant to his Friend
in London.
Done out of French, and Printed according to Order..
SIR, When you went for England, you desired I would send you what News of
moment should happen in these parts, the most remarkable is, concerning the
private Intreague between the King of France and the late King James, since his
Arrival from Ireland; notwithstanding the ^ll success he has had in that
Country, is still pushed on by the King of France to a further Contrivance for
the utter extirpation of all Protestants, as you will find by the following
Discourse between the King of France and the late King Jumes.

K. James. I heartily thank your Majesty for the Favors and Kindnesses you
have so generously shown to a Prince in Distress, and though I cannot at
present make a suitable Return, yet I doubt not but by the Assistance of my
Sub^ects in Scotland, notwithstanding my ill success in Ireland, to be able to
form such an Army, as may Reclaim my Kingdom of England, and settle me again in
the Throne of my Fathers, and then I believe you will not doubt of my Readiness
to Gratify your utmost Wishes and Request.


K of France. Your Majesty may assure your self I Cordially have and do desire
your Welfare and Success, and if your Majesty had thought fit to follow the
Intimati^ns of my Advice, I assure you, you had by this time gained your point,
and have been peaceably seated in your Throne.


K. James. Perhaps Sir, you are not more acquainted with England than my self:
I brought upon them more Innovations in Four Years, than my Predecessors in
Fourscore, and which is a Miracle, I hardly ever heard them so much as Murmur
till toward the end of all; did not I New-Model both Church an^ State, and in
One Year more, I should the Army too.


K. of France. Why, with submission, there was your Error; you first let the^
see what you designed, before you were in a condition to Execute it I advise^
you and told you it would be impossible to bring in the Catholic Religion with
(...) Pr^testant Army, and that the main thing you were to take Care of, was to
settl^ the Sword fast in your Hand, and then to strike at Discretion; their
Destruction or Submission should have been as sudden as the Shot of my
Muskets, and they should never had reasan to complain of a Grievance till I
had their Necks under my Foot.


K. James* We wanted time for this, for the thought of your Auxilleries would
have put them all in a Confusion, and my own were not to be trusted.

K. of France. Was not Ireland your own? could not Forty Thousand from time to
time been easily and without Suspicion Transported, and upon a signal been
ready and willing for any Service?


K. James. I had a considerable Army in Ireland, which in a short time, I did
resolve to make use of.


K. of France. But you had first given your Heretics the Alarm, which not only
put them upon their Guard, but made hem afterward look upon you as an absolute
Enemy to their Interest.


K. James. But supposing these Men had been sent over, the Country must have
been sensible of it, and Consequently would have judged at the Design.


K. o^ France Believe (...) ^o, for ^^ile they had no reason to complain of the
Breach of Privileges, they would have been Secure and Negligent: I would have
been so far from Encroaching upon any of their Franchises, till I were able to
strike Home, that I would in the Intrim have Granted and Promised them more
than they already had. England must first be Deceived, and then Destroyed


K. James. I wish I were to play the Game over again: I Confess I was too hasty
with them, I thank some of my Councillors.

K. of France. Wish not, but be assured you shall, Ireland will keep them in
Play a little longer sure, Scotland will not be backward, and certainly you
have some good Subjects in England yet left; be assured of my utmost
Assistance, and I doubt not to give them all powerful Diversion: But when you
have brought about your Business, lean not on the Advice of every hotheaded
Fellow, I Will Engage that Father Petre, and two or three more such blustering
Politicians have done the Catholic Cause more harm, these four last Years,
than all our United Councils can do it good these Ten years to come; you have
seen the Coursess I have taken, and how I have thrived upon it; therefore when
you are well Settled, take with Submission, those Measures, which by a long
Experience, I can assure you, I know will not prove Inefectual.


K. James. I have dear Brother, in the Meridian of my strength, adhered to your
Councils and Admonitions, and now in my Distress, it is both my Interest and
Inclination to follow all rules of Prescription, and if ever I be settled again
in my Throne, and POPERY but once more flourish in England, I will not be
unmindful, or ungrateful in the Return, and till then I must rely upon your
Kindnesses and Favors.


By these Measures, we may see, that our Law, our Liberties, our Religion, Nay,
our Lives, were in eminent Danger, till the Prince of Orange (now our Gracious
King) came to our timely Rescue.

Printed for R. White, over against the Horse, at Chairing-Cross, 1690.


