A True Declaration of the last affairs in Ireland, Showing the late
overthrowes given to the IRISH Rebels.

Sent over in two Letters, the one from the Earl of Ormond, and the other ftom
Sir John Temple, Red in the House of Parliament, and ordered to be Printed.

May fourteen 1642.
Ordered that these Letters forthwith be PRINTED.

H. Elssing Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London Printed, by R. B. for I. Frank, and are to be sold at his Shop, next
door to the Kings Head in Fleet-Streete. 1642.

My Lord,
SInce the last Victory it pleased God to give His Majesty's Forces, under the
Conduct of the Earl of Ormond against the Rebels. We have heard little of them
here-abouts, Their maine power is certainly broken, and the people so dispersed
as they will not without great difficulty be drawn together again in any
considerable body. Our men are now grown to terrible unto them as the quit for
the most part their places of strength if they do but hear any part of our
Army marching toward them; of which my Lord Lisle has lately had the
experience for his Lorship suddenly after his arrival here, desirous to put
himself into action, undertook the relief of my Lady of Offaly, and some
other Castles in those parts. He had the chief Commands, and being accompanied
with Sir Charles Coote, some troops of Horse out of his own Regiment, and two
troops of Dragons went on upon the most desperate piece of service that has
^^t yet been undertaken; All his friends there were much against his Lordships
going apprehending much hazard to his Person in the Journey. For indeed the
Rebels were in great numbers in those parts and the passages through the Bogges
and Woods so difficult as it was verily believed they would have (as with great
advantage they might have done) made great opposition against him; But it
seems they durst not adventure to make good even those barricadoes and works
which they had made to impeach his passage over Rivers, and other sleights
which he passed without any encounter, until he came to Philips Town a
place of very difficultnesse, by reason of the Bogs on every side* when they
came, there, they found the Town abandoned, but the Fort kept by the Rebels,
they resolve to assault it and so part the Dragons on foot; The Rebls
entertained them for 2. hours with their shot, and S. Charles Coote thinking
he should do no good upon it, till the night came, when he intended to go on
with all his men and make a general assault, our men seeing some of their
fellows wounded, were impatient to attend any longer, some of got to the
Spikeholes* out of which the Rebels shot and put in their Muskets to shoot at
them: others having Crowe^ of Iron got to the Port in a little time, and so made
the Rebels yield presently, without any condition, their Captains was taken
and sent up hither, and many of them hanged. From thence having some two Miles
to my Lady of Offaly, which was over a narrow Causey thorough a Bog, they
caused their Dragon to make good the way till the Horses went and relieved the
Lady of Offaly, whom they found in great distress, but so well provided her,
as it seems her Ladyship intends still to abide in her Castle, So they returned
burning and spoiling all the Towns belonging to the Rebels in their way back,
and came to termine a town of great importance within 20. miles of this City,
which was defended by the Lords of the Pale. But their Lordships as it seems
were retired and they found some three or four hundred men in it, they
presently be set the town about the Walls, and resolved to take it by
assault, but one of the gates being not very strong, a troop of Horse found
first entrance there which the Rebels perceiving ran presently out the other
way and were pursued by them and many cut off; My Lord Lisle as it seems,
likes the service and the Country so well, as he resolves there to abide by
it, and has sent some propositions to the Lords Justices, to have a Regiment
sent down to him wherewith they purpose to do great service by the blessing of
God in those parts, as I hope they will, the Lords of the Pale lying in the
Navan, (since the writing of this I hear the Lords of the Pale have quitted
the Navan and burnt it,) which after their manner they have fortified, it is
within 7. Miles of Tryme, and there they are, as it is said, with 2000. men.

This business received a great debate the last night at the Board* and though
several of the lords were of opinion to recall them, yet at length it was
carried by plurality of voices, to send down more forces to them, and it is
resolved lieutenant Collonell Gibson shall march toward them to morrow with
1200. foot, and Captain Sidneyes Horse troop, and there remain under the
command of my Lord Lesle, who^ I am confident will give a very good account of
himself in that place, for I assure your lordship, he has carried himself
very gallantly and very discreetly in this action.

There came last night two letters unto the Lords Justices from the Lord Conway
at the Newry, advertising their Lordships, that he and General Major Monroe
were marched down thither with 3000. men, and had taken in that place, and
intended to go find out the Rebels, who they heard were gathered in some
numbers about the County of Armagh; Sir Henry Tichbourne has likewise taken
in Carlingford, and daily makes great destruction among the roagues in all
those quarters.

By letters which came lately from the Ea^le of Saint Albaines, we understand
that the town of Galway since their defection has made some attempts upon his
Majesty's Forts there, as likewise upon one of his Majesty's ships that came
into that Harbor, in her passage toward Limberie, whether she was sent to
relieve the fort there,, but without any success, his Lordship is come down
with 1500. men within 4. miles of the town, and gives such interruption to
their Supplies, which they expect out of the Country, as in his letter he
speaks as if he hoped in a very short, time to draw in them upon submission.
His Lordship carries himself very well there, and continues to do very good
service for his Majesty in those parts.

My Lord Rannelagh has likewise delivered Athoue from the seige, and is at
liberty to walk abroad, which he cannot do much, till the forces designed
for Conaght arive.

Thus your Lordship sees how it pleases God to bless us in all our
undertakings here. We hope thorough your Lordships care and great zeal for the
prosperity of this service, we shall suddenly receive the long expected
supplies of men, money, and munition and match, by want of which we are now in
that condition here, as our men must lie still, as being altogether disabled to
march out before the forces designed for this place do arive, we have not
been failing particularly to represent unto your lordship our most pressing
necessities, and the advantages the state of England will have by a rigourous
prosecution of the war here this Summer. If we let slip this opportunity,
while the Rebbels want arms and Munition, remain so extremely dejected and
disanimated by our late victories, and give them space to breath while winter
she shall again put this whole Kingdom to a hazard, or at least trebble the
charge it would now cost for the recoverie of it, and occasion the perrishing
of multitudes of our own soldiers, the extremities they must then necessarily
endure. But I shall add no more, but that I am really

Dublin in May 5. 1642. Your Lordships most humble and most faithful servant
I. Temple.

May 14. 1642.
Ordered that this Letter be forthwith printed.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. de Com.

My most honored Lord,
IN my last I acquainted your Lordship with a design then undertaken by my
Lord Lisle, for the relief of the Lady Ofaly, which his Lordship has
prosecuted with so much judgment and good success, that not only her Ladyship
is put into a condition of subsistence, in despite of what the Rebbels were or
are like to be able to do, but upon intelligence given him, he has approved
his first intentions, and taken in a Town called Trim, from whence his
Lordship sent hither a party of Horse, desiring to be enabled to follow his
good fortune, by the sending to him one troop of Horse more, and 1200. foot,
which is condescended unto, and the troops will be sent home on Saturday next,
no man can observe his gallant inclinations, attended with his suitable events,
with greater delight than I do, Nor shall be more ready to serve him to Ward
accomplishment of all his undertakings.

I am bold to send unto your Lordship a Copy of the Commission, by which I
have been entrusted by your Lordship with the command of their Army; which as
is most fit will determine upon your arrival; but I observe by the commission
that not only my command over the army, but my place of Lieutenant General
will then likewise be at an end whereof I thought fit to give your Lordship
notice and to send unto you a drought of a new Commission varying nothing in
substance from the former, saying that where the other was to be of force, no
longer then during your Lordships absence, this which I now desire (if it may
stand with your good pleasure) has no such limitation, but this I refer to
your Lordships better judgment, and to enlarge or qualify this draught as you
shall think fittest, and most conduceing to the advancement of the Kings
service whereunto I shall always limit my desires, who am

Dublin the 5. of May, 1642. Your Lordships faithful and humble servant Ormond
Ossory.

May 14. 1642.
Ordered that this Letter be forthwith printed.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. de Com.


