A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE Duke of Monmouth's Late JOURNEY into the WEST, IN A
LETTER FROM AN Eyewitness thereof, to his Correspondent in London.
SIR,
THAT branch of our contest (which these unhappy times have occasioned betwixt
your self and me, privately) concerning the present temper of the people of
England, as to the reception of Popery, has now (I think) so fully been
decided, that I shall no longer differ from you in that point, but with joy
acknowledge to you, that I am perfectly convinced, nay sure, that not only the
Principles, but even the very Genius of the people of England will never endure
to be again rid like a Hackney of Rome, to both the temporal and eternal
destruction of the poor Creature. Of this my eyes as well as my understanding
saw the demonstration, when I saw that incredible (if not universal) confluence
of people of all Qualities, Sexes, and Ages, meet to welcome a Protestant Duke
into these Countries. Now that I have not miscalled this a Demonstration, pray
observe this Journal of the Duke's progress, and the peoples joy.

On the 24 th of August he came from Esquire Thyn's in Wiltshire to Esquire Speak's in
Sommersetshire, in which Progress he had all the way been caressed with the
joyful Welcomes and Acclamations of the people, who came from all parts, 20
miles about, filling and lining the Hedges with Men, Women and Children, some
going before, some following after for some miles in the High ways, all the
way, and incessantly with hearty and great shouts crying, God bless our King
Charles, and God bless the Protestant Duke. Some Towns and Paridies expressed
also their Country*respects in strewing their streets and ways thorough which
he passed, with herbs and flowers, as was seen at Ilchester, and Pithyton, etc.
In some places where no other better present could be expected or made, the
honest kind Good-women with rustic sincerity presented to him bottles of Wine,
which he courteously accepted and tasted. Some of these good Dames could not
restrain their joys, but in their homely phrase called out to him thus, Master,
we are glad to see you, and you are welcome into our Country. And then some
caught hold of his Feet, some took him by the Hand, some by the Coat, but all
cried, Welcome, welcome, no Popery, no Popery, etc. When he drew near to Esquire
Speaks by 10 miles, he was met by 2000 persons on Horse back, who were so
increast before they arrived at Mr. Speaks, that some conjectured they were in
number near 20000, others said, they were many more. At his arrival the Esquire;
set out several Hogsheads and Vessels of Beer, Ale, and Sider, to entertain the
people, notwithstanding that they (to enlarge their passage to the house) had
broke down several perch of his Park-pales; and though the hoopings,
shoutings, and acclamations of the people had so affrighted the Deer out of the
Park, that as yet they cannot be got in again (it is conceived that the people
did get Venison as well as the Duke) yet true, loyal protestant, and English
Gentleman thus received the Duke and the people. May he be an Example to all
the Gentry for his Loyalty to his King, and love to his Country, for being an
Orthodox Protestant, and a true hospitable lover of our dear true Protestant
Englishmen.

On the 26 of August he dined with Sir J. Sydenham at Brempton, where he met
such an abundance of people, and such a splendid entertainment, that it was
difficult to determine which deserved the greater wonder.

On the 27 th of August he dined with that true Patriot William Stroud, Esquire; at
Barrington, whose noble Treat to this Illustrious Prince and Protestant Duke,
suited those high qualities. Nor was this Dinner without that best of Music,
the joyful shouts of thousands.

After Dinner he went to Chard, where was presented to him a Collation of great
variety and excellency, the second Course was the hearts and tongues of very
numerous people. He arrived there about five in the Afternoon, followed by a
Train of 500 Horsemen; but when entered, he was met by a Crowd of Men, Women and
Children, not a Mute amongst them all, but all almost made deaf with their own
Cries and Acclamations; scarce was there one that drank not the Kings Health,
and the Dukes, to which still succeeded their loud Vollies of God bless the
King with long Life, God bless the Protestant Duke his Son, etc.

That Evening he was most acceptably received and lodged by that worthy English
Gentleman, Esquire Prideaux.

The next day, viz. 28 th of August, after a great and sumptuous Dinner, he
rode to Ilminster, where he accepted of a Collation as at Chard; from thence to
Whitlackindon, where was his stated Lodgings

On the 29 th of August (being Sunday) he observed it with a due Protestant and
Christian respect, and went to Ilminster-Church, etc.

On the 30 th of August, he removed to Calliton, and lodged with the most
ingenious, loyal, and generous Sir Walter Young.

On the 31 he lodged with that English Worthy Esquire Dukes, at Otterton, in which
and all the other parts, his Treatments were rich and great, and every where
his rejoicing admirers numberless.

But on the first of September. he journied to Exceter, where he was
magnificently entertained at the Dean's house by that Gentleman of unspotted
Loyalty, Sir William Courtney. The Citizens, together with the people of all
the adjacent parts, (verily believed to exceed 20000 persons) came all forth to
meet the Duke with their Souls and Mouths filled with love and joy, trumpetting
forth his welcome, and shouting out thus, God bless our Gracious Sovereign King
Charles, God bless the Protestant Duke, God bless the Protestant Prince, etc.
But that which most deserves remark, was the appearance of a company of brave
stout young men, all clothed in linen Wast-coats and Drawers, white and
harmless, having not so much as a stick in their hand, but joining hands, their
number was reputed to be 10 or 1200 (the least conjecture of them was 800)
these met the Duke within 3 miles of the City, being put into order on a small
round hill, and divided into two parts, and so attended the coming of the Duke,
who when arrived rode up between them, and after rode round each company, who
then united, and went hand in hand in their order, before the Duke into the
City. Where when arrived, the great concourse of people, the amazing shouts,
the universal joys were such, as are more easily related than can be credited
by the absent Reader. I shall only say of it, that it suited (at this time) the
reception that a Protestant people was willing to give to an illustrious
Protestant Prince.

Sept. 2. he returned to Esquire Speaks, where again flocked in to meet and see him
the whole neighboring Country, as not yet enough satisfied, unless thus
extraordinarily to caresse him in his return.

Sept. 3. he dined at the worthy Esquire Harvy's near Yeovil, and after rode to Esquire
Thyn's, the Country still waiting in great shoals to expect him on Howden hill,
from Crookhorn, Yeovil, and all other circumjacent parts to the number of 4 or
5000 to take their leaves of him, and to present him their thanks for his kind
visit, and his acceptance of their English true-hearted respects.

Sir, you cannot but with difficulty imagine (except you had been both an eye
and an ear-witness, as I was) with what earnestness the people of all sorts,
all sexes, all ages and degrees came forth to express their Loyalty to their
King and Sovereign in praying for his long life and happy reign, and in
heartily drinking his Health every where, but especially also in manifesting
their true English hearty love to this Protestant Duke, having never since his
Majesty's happy Restoration, had the good occasion to see amongst them their
King, or any of his Royal Family until now. The Country esteeming it a great
glory and happiness to see one of that stock to appear amongst them.

Lastly, let us remark, that in all this progress were diverse persons of noble
as well as gentile quality, viz. Lords, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, who
together with the Duke made a Constellation of English Protestants glorious in
their beams derived from the Sun of great Britain.

God bless and save the King.
Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in
Paternoster Row, 1680.


