A TRVE RELATION OF Several Acts, Passages and Proceedings, done, undertaken,
suffered and performed, by Captain Robert Lawson, now one of the Sheriffs of
the City and County of Londonderry, upon and since the first beginning of the
great and general Rebellion in Ireland, in several parts and places within
the Province of Vlster.

With a true Copy of his Commission at Lysnegarvy, a Copy of a Letter to Sir
Robert Stewart from the Commissioners, and Copies of his warrants to his two
Lievtenants and Quartermaster to Command in his absence, with a true Copy of
another Commission for raising of men in Londonderry, with a true Certificate
under the hands of the Colonels, Commissioners, and Captains in general,
touching his carriage in and about Londonderry, with his Commission of agencie
from the City of Londonderry during his abode in London.

Printed at London, 1643.

A true relation of several Acts, passages and proceedings; done, undertaken,
suffered and performed, by Captain Robert Lawson, now one of the Sheriffs of
the City and County of Londonderry, etc.
ABout the sixteenth of October 1641. before any notice of an Insurrection of
this great and general Rebellion, Captain Lawson having occasion to take a
journey from Londonderry unto Dublin, and to to travel by way of Belfast, to
the iron works within two miles thereof, wherein he had some stock and
interest, took his journey from thence with intent to go for Dublin upon
Friday the 21. of October following, and came and rested that night in safety
at Drummore, where arising early the next morning, being Saturday, took his
journey toward Newry, when upon the way he happened to meet with a son of
Sir Edward Trevers coming from thence, who related unto him upon enquiry, that
the Country there was rising in Rebellion, which he not giving much credit to,
went forwards until he came within a mile of Newry to the Bridge there,
observing and seeing upon the way upon several hills, ten and twenty men in a
company, and the Bridge guarded with about 80. men, who offered to assault this
Captain, whereupon he observing great danger, being accompanied only with his
man, returned back to Loughbrickelane, where he happened to meet with Sir
Thomas Lucas and Captain Armestrong, where after long conference between
them, a messenger approaches, and comes, who did relate the truth of a general
Rebellion in all those parts; upon further conference it was agreed and
concluded that the said Captain Lawson with the rest should repair for their
relief to a house of Sir Edward Trevers, whither being come, they found there
his son Mark Trevers, and his wife, and a maid, and an Irish Agent of his,
who was well mounted, and had served his Father sixteen years, and five Irish
footmen ready to depart thence into another house of his Fathers about twelve
miles distant, his Father being gone in his Coach about an hour before a
by-way from Newry, but yet not above a mile or two from Newry. So demanding
what to do for best safety, it was agreed amongst them, that they should go
into Sir Edward Trevers house, it being a place of some defense; and coming
within a mile thereof, they sent their footmen before to the house, and stayed
themselves upon the side of a hill, to have intelligence if the house were
safe, whereupon one of the boys in company with them, the rest being fled to
the Enemy, returned and acquainted them that Sir Conn. Mackgennis had newly
taken his Fathers house and himself prisoner so considering what to do, it
drawing toward night, it was resolved they should ride all night and go
Downepatricke way, when they presently espied a horseman coming from Newry,
whereupon Captain Lawson and the Irish Agent stayed to enquire for news, and
the rest of the company going forwards, but seeing the Enemies horse halt on
the way, and the rest of the company being about a quarter of a mile before:
Captain Lawson desired the Irish Agent to come along with him forwards in
their company, but being well mounted he leaves Captain Lawson, and rid to
the Enemy to Newry, and presently rose 80. men, and followed Captain Lawson
and his company to Dondromme, where they stayed for a short time, in and about
half an hour after they left it, came the Enemy and took it in, where in
pleased God to give them a great deliverance, that night being Saturday; and
the next morning being Sunday about break of the day they came to
Downe-patricke, where they stayed to hear a Sermon, all the Town being in a
great affright.

After which they went forwards and came that night to Killeleagh to the Lord
Hamiltons, where Sir Thomas Lucas and the rest stayed, and Captain Lawson
thereupon that night procured a man with him from thence, and came in the night
by Comber, through the Lord of Ardes Country about by litttle Belfast, and
came to great Belfast, and up to the Iron works near thereunto about three of
the clock in the morning, where his wife was then resident, and having sent
several messengers before to enquire after him, who were taken and robbed. But
Captain Lawson not having rested there above two hours, arose, calling two
horsemen with him. And in the morning being Monday, went down back again to
great Belfast, where they found most part of the inhabitants fled, and flying,
and carrying away their goods to Carrickefergus, and the old Lord Chichester
shipped aboard in a Ship. So Captain Lawson went throughout the Town, and
blamed them much for offering to leave the Town, and entreated for some Arms,
either by buying or lending, but could not prevail. At last he found in Master
Lesquires house seven Muskets and eight Halberts ready in the streets to be
shipped for Carrickefergus, which Arms he took and bought a Drum, and
beating the same through the Town, ^aised about twenty men, who came with him
again up to the Iron works, having Mr. Forbus, and some number with him joined
with Cap. Lawson, where also he gathered in-all about 160. horse and foot, who
about two of the clock upon the same Monday in the afternoon, being the 25.
of October, the second day after the rebellion, marched unto Lisnegarvy, and
there entered the Town about four of the clock the same day, all the people
with the Troop there engarrisond, having before left the Town to the Enemies
mercy the Sunday before, and they quartered all that night, in the house the
Bishop of Down lived in, and put many Candles in the Market-house and Centries
out in every quarter of the Town, making show of six or seven lighted matches
for every piece to astonish the Enemy, who came to the Centries that night,
intending to have burnt the Town, but our show and carriage was more then our
force, the Enemy being strong and many in number, by which means they were
affrighted and beaten off that night. And The next morning being Tuesday, the
Enemy appeared by the Towns end, and drived before them about 400. Cowes,
whereupon Captain Lawson with 45. horse issues forth, leaving the rest to
guard the Town, and it pleased God by their good labor and industry they
took the prey of Cowes, and some prisoners, and killing others of the Enemy,
and got seventeene of their mantles. And after sending the prey into the Town,
they adventured three miles further, and brought in before night as many more
Cowes, and kept them within the Bawne wall of the Bishops house, and all the
next night secured the Town also. Sir Conn. Mackgennis threatening and sending
word he would burn the Town that night, but it please God they were prevented
and beaten off, and the Town kept in safety, and often issued forth amongst
the Enemy to prevent their gathering to a great head, until at length upon the
next day being Wednesday, the Troop and townsmen came in again to the Town,
hearing and understanding what service Captain Lawson and his small company of
men had done there in securing the same, the preservation whereof under God was
a means of the safety not only of Lisnegarvy and Belfast, but of most of
those parts thereabouts. Being the first that opposed the Enemy in those parts.
And at night came thither the Lord of Ards forces and the Lord Hamilton, Sir
Arthur Firingham, Captain Chichester, Sir Thomas Lucas, and Sir James
Montgomery, and Mr. Arthur Hill, with their forces, who Captain Lawson and his
men great thanks for their good care and service in the Town, and offered to
give him a Commission to enable him to do more service, which he was very
unwilling to accept of, in regard of his Calling, being a Merchant. But being
moved by Sir Thomas Lucas, accepted thereof, and gave him power thereby to
raise as many horse and foot as he pleased in the Counties of Down and Antrym
(as may appear by his said Commission) praying him to accept thereof, the said
Sir Thomas Lucas promising he would acquaint his Majesty with his good service,
which the rather encouraged him to accept thereof.

So there being come up to Lisnegarvy about 1500. horse and foot, himself,
his men, and company had their order by their Commission, and quarters about
the Iron works in the Barony of Belfast, and then left to the Army about 400.
Cowes, and only brought with him from thence about sixty Cowes for his own
company.

About four days their Armies stayed in Lisnegarvie, and in that time most of
their men went home with some Cowes to Claneboyes, and the Ards, and Captain
Chichester, Sir Arthur Tiringham, with some others, went to Drommore, where the
Enemy approaching upon them, they retired home to their Quarters, by which
means Lisnegarvie was left in a worser case then at first, so was Captain
Lawson was forced from time to time upon all Alarms to come up from his
Quarters, being three miles off to relieve the Town. And for the space of a
month by reason of the often approaches of the Enemies got little rest in day
or night, but still in skirmish and assisting the Town, and was at the putting
250. of the Enemy out of Mr. Rawdens house near thereunto, and recovered from
them some Lead, with much other goods left therein, and were preserved for the
owners, and killed several of the Enemy at that time and afterward above ten
or more every day, and marched up to Ballanderry, and brought many Cowes from
thence, put out Mr. Rory an Arch-rebell out of his house, losing upon many
skirmishes some few of his men, which the Country thereabout well knows, in
which service Captain Windsor was, and behaved himself gallantly, and
several other times as occasion offered.

At last having gotten notice of a Ship of his which he had fraughted with
Butter from Londonderry to go for France, was stayed there and not suffered to
pass. Captain Lawson acquainted Captain Chichester, Sir Arthur Tiringham,
and the rest of the Commissioners, therewith, desiring them to have leave to
come to Derry to take some course to release her, which they willingly granted,
and gave him a Warrant under their hands (as does appear) unto his two
Lieutenants and Quartermaster to command his company of horse and foot in his
absence, being limited for ten days and no longer, and withal write their
letters in his behalf to some of the Commissioners at Londonderry to take him
into their care, and show him all favor in releasing of his Ship and goods,
and setting forth the good services done by him in those parts, as likewise
does appear. Howbeit the Commissioners at Derry at his coming thither taking
into consideration the great number of distressed robbed people there, and no
shipping there to transport them, he was refused, his goods unshipped, and much
spoiled, and much lost, and imbezelled by reason of the distraction of the
times, and lost of Advance-money to the Master of the Ship 30. li. Sterling,
besides the benefit of his market beyond Seas, and for the defraying of his
credit abroad and at home, which was the only staff of his livelihood, and
might have been the means to have returned a Ship or more of Corn intended
for these parts, so as he cannot be less dampnified then 600. li. the same
ship being afterward employed to carry away into Scotland about 500. poor
souls, which would have perished if that occasion had not been offered, no
other shipping being there resident for the space of six months before. So as
all his goods so shipped, being Butter, are wholly employed and disposed for
the supply of the several Regiments, his own Soldiers and others of the
British there.

By reason whereof, and for that the Country all about in this time were then
broken out into open rebellion, he could not in safety return back to his
Quarters by Land or by Sea, but was forced to stay in Derry; howbeit all his
company at the Iron works still kept on foot for four months together,
doing good service all that time, they being at all battles, and skirmishes
there with the Enemy, and about ten of his company lost therein, whereof one
was Captain Boyd his Soldier at first, and after made a Captain, whose wife
and poor children wholly depend upon Captain Lawsons relief; so as he cannot
have expended less then 1200. li. for the raising, keeping, and maintaining
his several companies there, with Victuals, Munition, and Arms, besides all
his stock at the Iron works, with the works themselves wholly lost and
brought to decay, the Sowe-iron unwrought to the quantity of 2000. li. value,
beside much Iron oar, and 1000. tons of square timber most burnt by the
Soldiers, 1000. loads of Charcoles burnt by the Enemy at Forge, Furnace, and
in the Woods, with three Gorne Mils, and many houses burned, and land laid
waste, and all the movables taken away by the Enemy and others, the land and
Mils being worth 150. li. per Annum. The Mils, Lands, and Woods, wholly
belonging to Robert Bar Esquire his Father in Law, only 2000. li. Sterling
which Captain Henry Osburne his brother in Law and he had as a stock on foot
therein, which upon the matter is the loss of the greatest part of their three
estates, the whole loss is above 12000. li.

In the interim of which time Captain Lawson the more to express his
willingness to further his Majesty's service, having a Ship come into
Carrickefergus, at the first of the rebellion, which was laden with 85. tons
of Salmon for the account of him, Captain Henry Finch and Captain Osburn, with
other goods for Derry, and bound for France, caused the same to transport from
thence to Dublin, Sir Thomas Lucas and Cap. Charles Boulton, where being
landed, and the ship intending forwards to France, was presently after cast
away worth 2000. l. Sterling, occasioned by the same. And by that conveyance
Cap. Boulton getting to Dublin, shortly afterward brought back from thence to
Londonderry, thirty Barrels of Powder, with other Arms and Munition, being the
first relief and supply which came thither for the supplies of the Regiments,
and Soldiers there, without which they had been utterly lost and perished, as
being destitute before of any Power or Arms.

Captain Lawson not being able by reason of the general rebellion to return
back from Derry unto his charge and companies at Lisnegarvie and the parts
thereabouts, the Commissioners at Derry desired him to make his stay there, it
being the place of his most aboade and dwelling, and were pleased to give him
another Commission to raise a company there, which he out of a desire and zeal
to the public service did at his own cost, consisting of 150. foot and
eleven horse, and were there lately so mustered by the Commissary, which
company of horse and foot he has kept, maintained, and continued at his own
charge by weekly pay of two shil. six pence weekly, from the first of December
1641. and 100. beside officers still continued on foot by his weekly pay; and
has issued and delivered out about 4000. Deal boards to make several houses
with timber, Planckes and Nails to receive the Soldiers, their wives and
children in the dead of Winter, most of them having been men of good ability
and householders, neither has he been wanting on his part for and toward the
repairing of the decayed walls, gates, and ramparts of the City, and doing other
necessary works there, and has begun a trench without the walls of the City
of good consequence, intended to be perfected; for all which he cannot have
expended less, to our understanding, then 5000. li. Sterling, besid^s his
loss of several houses, goods, and commodities at Strabane, all burned and
consumed, to the value of 1500. li. Sterling, and the want of his means and
employment (as being a Merchant-adventurer to the Seas) and having great debts
abroad in the Rebels hands, and others, who are poor distressed people and not
able to make any satisfaction.

All which premises considered, as by certificate in them the said does
appear, are of opinion that Captain Lawsons pains, zeal, valor, care, and
service has justly demerited a good reward, and a consideration to be had of
his great losses sustained, being the first that opposed the Enemy in the
Kingdom, at and about Lysnegarvy, by which means under God, we enjoy most of
the County about, in regard it was so suddenly opposed, being upon the Monday
following, the 25. of October 1641.

A true Copy of a Commission at Lisnegarvy, 28. October. 1641.
By the honorable Captain Arthur Chichester, and Sir Arthur Terringham
Knight, commanding in the Army against the Rebels, etc.
Whereas we find that Captain Robert Lawson is willing to employ his own
service and pains together with such forces as he has now a foot or can
raise, in defending and preserving the several Counties of Down and Antrim,
and especially in the Barony of Belfast: These are therefore to pray and
authorize him so to do for the furtherance of his Majesty's service in
suppressing the Rebels now up in Arm^s, and we do hereby straightly charge and
require all his Majesty's Officers and loyal Subjects to be aiding and
assisting to him in that service, and to be ready from time to time to relieve
him and his companies with provision and other necessaries during his said
employment, and that he fail not to give us daily intelligence of his
proceedings therein. And for his so doing, this shall be his Warrant, given
under our hands from his Majesty's Army in Lisnegarvy, this 28. day of October
1641.

Arthur Chichester. Arthur Tirringham.


A true Copy of a License when I came to Derry, and Commission to my two
Lieutenants and Quartermaster to command in my absence.
By the Honorable Captain Arthur Chichester and Sir Arthur Tyrringham Knight,
Governor, etc. and Commissioners for his Majesty's present service against the
Rebels.
Whereas we have Licenced Captain Robert Lawson to be absent from his charge
for the space of ten days, these are to require and authorize you Lieutenant
Clugstone and Lieutenant Hannay, and Quartermaster Stewart to govern and
command the said Captains Troop and company in his absence, and reduce them
all to one body according as they were first entered and enlisted under his
command, and that you and they receive your further directions from us: and we
do hereby require you to enquire and search out what wearing clothes or other
goods the Soldiers have pillaged out of Master Roydens house or elsewhere, and
that you fail not to seize upon the said goods, and to take them unto your
charge, and especially those taken by one Pwrdy. And having received the same
unto your hands, you are to keep and dispose them or any other goods that
hereafter shall be so pillaged by any of the said company or such as shall
follow them according as your Captain shall appoint and direct, whereof you
are not to fail as you will answer the contrary at your perils.

Given under our hands at Carrickefergus the 16. of November 1641. Arthur
Chichester. Arthur Tyrringham.


A true Copy of Sir Arthur Chichester and Sir Arthur Tyrringhams Letter to Sir
Robert Stewart.
Noble Sir,
IT is the best right we can do Capt. Robert Lawson in part of recompense for
the good service he has done here against the Rebels to recommend him and his
occasions in your parts to your care and favor: he informed us of a Ship of
his that is now a loading at Derry, and fears in regard of these troubles it
will not be suffered to carry away his goods, by which means he is like to
under-goe much loss and damage, we shall therefore entreat you for our sakes
to countenance his business there, and to procure his Ship and goods a free
passage, we are confident you will not be backward to favor so deserving a
man, which is earnestly desired by those that will be most ready to express
our selves,

Carrickefergus, November. 6. 1641. Your very affectionate friends, Arthur
Chichester. Arthur Tyrringham.

We find him so able a man that we have stayed him here, and given him a
command; he has supplied us being destitute of any means of sending
intelligence to the State with a Ship, though it was bound for France.



A true Copy of a License to transport my wife and goods to Derry.
KNow all men by these presents, that we have licenced Captain Robert Lawson,
to convey and bring his wife and family with their goods to the Town of
Londonderry, and do therefore straightly require all his Majesty's Officers
and loving Subjects, to assist and aid them in their journey with their said
goods, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given under our hands at Carrickefergus the sixth day of November 1641. Arthur
Chichester. Arthur Tirringham.


A true Copy of London derry Commission.
Whereas by his Majesty's Commission under the hands of the Right Honorable
Sir William Parsons and Sir John Borlase Knights, now Lords Justices of this
Kingdom of Ireland, and others of the Honorable Privy Council of the same
Kingdom, to us and others directed, bearing date the eighteenth day of
November last past; whereby we or any one of us jointly or severally are
required and authorized to levy, arm, and array all such forces both of foot
and horse of the British Nation, within the several Counties of Tyrone,
Londonderry, Donnagall, Cavan, Armagh, and Fermanagh, all, or any of them, and
also to divide, distribute, and dispose the said forces into Troops or
several Companies, and to appoint Officers and Commanders over them. Now by
virtue of the foresaid Commission, we do hereby nominate, ordain, and appoint
Robert Lawson Merchant, and one of the Burgesses of the City of Londonderry to
be Captain and Commander of one hundred men of the British Nation, and he to
appoint such Officers under him for the commanding and due ordering of his said
company as he shall know and approve to be men of discretion, care and trust to
discharge the Offices whereunto they shall be elected and appointed by him. And
we do hereby authorize the said Robert Lawson to join his said company with
any other his Majesty's forces for the defense of the foresaid City of
Londonderry, or in pursuing, slaying, and destroying any of the Rebels, and
for the taking and surprising any of the Holds or Forts now possessed by them
or any of them if occasion shall so require. And we do hereby require and
command all such persons as shall be entered in the List, and under the command
of the said Robert Lawson to render all due obedience to him and his Officers
as by them in point of Martial affairs they or any of them shall be commanded
and required, as they will answer at their perils.

Given under our hands and seals at the City of Londonderry, the fifth day of
December 1641. John Vaughan. Henry Vaughan. Dudley Phillips.


To Robert Lawson Burgess.
A true Copy of a Commission from the City of Londonderry to London.
WE the Major of the City of Londonderry, in the Kingdom of Ireland, and Sir
John Vaughan Knight, one of his Majesty's Honorable Privy Council of the said
Kingdom, and others the Aldermen and Captain of the aforesaid City, hereunto
subscribing, having important occasion at this present to employ an Agent of
especial trust into England for the public good, and better safety of this
City and the Country adjoining, in regard of the eminent danger the same are
in, in respect of the general Rebellion of the Natives of this Kingdom; Have
thought fit to employ the Bearer hereof Robert Lawson, one of the Sheriffs of
the said City, and Captain of a foot company of Soldiers now ingarrisoned in
the same City to be our Agent in the foresaid business, who intends by the
assistance of Almighty God with all possible speed to pass into the Kingdom
of England, there to expedite our affairs, and afterward to make his return
hither. We therefore do pray and desire all his Majesty's Officers, Ministers,
and loving Subjects of any his Highness Realms and Dominions, to whom these
Presents shall come to be seen, to take notice hereof, and to permit the said
Robert Lawson to pass and repasse both by Sea and Land without trouble or
molestation either in body or goods, and to assist him if need require with
Posthorses, or any other thing need full in his journey, and return hither as
they as every of them tender his Majesty's service, and the welfare of this
part of his Majesty's Kingdom, in testimony whereof we have hereunto set our
hands, and caused the Seal of Maioralty of the foresaid City of be hereto
affixed at the said City, the 23. day of September, Anno Dom. 1642. Annoque
Reg. Car. 18.

John Vaughan. Henry Vaughan. John Kilner. Robert Thorneton Major. Simon Pits.
Henry Finch.


A true Copy of a Certificate of the Commissioners, Colonels, Captains, and
Commanders, of Captain Lawsons carriage in and about Londonderry, and
Lisnegarvy, and the Country adjoining.
TO all Christian people unto whom these Presents shall come, We Sir William
Stewart Knight and Baronet, Sir John Vaughan Knight, two of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council of Ireland, Sir Robert Stewart Knight, and other his
Majesty's Commissioners, Captains and Commanders of the several Regiments
under the command of the said Sir William Stewart, Sir Robert Stewart, and Sir
Ralph Gore Knight and Colonel, lately deceased, here under subscribing; do
hereby certify, That whereas by virtue of several Commissions to some of us
and others directed from the Right Honorable the Lords, Justices, and Council
of Ireland, bearing date the 27. of October last, a Commission issued amongst
others, to Robert Lawson, one of the Sheriffs of the City and County of
Londonderry, to raise and arm a company and number of men to consist of one
hundred and upwards for the safe keeping of the said City and County and the
Country adjoining, and apposing the Rebels, who thereupon with great
expedition, care, and carriage, raised, armed, and maintained from the first of
December last past, at his own cost and charges one foot company of 150.
foot and a Troop of eleven horse which have been so lately mustered, have by
the Commissary, with which company of foot being joined with other companies
within the City, he has carefully watched and guarded the said City, being a
place of great important, and joined with the other companies, in repairing the
decayed walls; rampires, and gates thereof; and has also at all needful times,
and upon all offered occasions by himself in person, and with his company of
horse and foot marched forth and joined with our Regiments, and given battle
to the Enemies with us in the greatest services that have been done in the
Countries of Tyrone, Donnegall, and Londonderry, always furnishing his men,
and carrying victuals and provisions for them without putting the Country to
any charge, having accompanied us at many good skirmishes, set battles, and
hard encounters with the Rebels, and some time adventured abroad, and done good
service with his own company; And we do hereby sincerely acknowledge that the
said Captain Lawson with other the City companies have under God been no
small means for the preservation, not only of the said City, but of this part
of Vlster. And that we without the assistance of the said City companies could
not have so well subsisted. And we do further declare that Captain Lawson
has taken great care in training and exercising his company, that they are
expert ready Soldiers; and if it please his Majesty and his Honorable Court
of Parliament so to esteem of him and his company, he has well demerited good
pay and reward, as well for his service done in these parts, as for the like by
him done and performed at Lisnegarvy, and the parts thereabouts at the first
Insurrection of this Rebellion, as is intimated and signified unto some of us
under the hands of diverse Honorable persons in this Kingdom, which we have
seen and perused, and give good credit thereunto; and we do also certify on
the behalf of the said Captain Lawson that he has issued and delivered
without any payment or satisfaction the number of 4000. Deale-boards together
with Timber, Iron, and Nails, wherewith to erect and set up several houses
for the lodging and receiving of the Soldiers, other poor distressed people
within the City resorting thither for relief in the dead time of winter,
without which many of them otherwise had perished and been lost, the most part
of the houses in the Suburbs being pulled down in fear of the Enemies
approach. And having a Ship laden at Derry upon the first beginning of this
Rebellion, with a great quantity of Butter to be transported for France, did
afterward unlade the same Butter, and distributed the same by times, by our
order, amongst the Soldiers and others for their relief, without any payment.
By which means he lost 30. li. of Advance-money to the Master of the Ship, the
loss of the benefit of his markets abroad, and preservation of his credit at
home and abroad, besides his loss at the Iron works above Belfast, amounting
to a great value, and his loss and damage sustained by several houses,
goods, and commodities burned and consumed at Strabane of great worth, and
great debts abroad in the Rebels hands, much on the behalf of the said
Captain Lawson, we do certify to be true, besides other good services
performed by his own hands in killing and cutting of some of the Arch-rebels,
and in testimony of the truth hereof, we have here under subscribed this 16.
day of September, Anno Dom. 1642. An. R. Car. Angl. etc. decimo octavo.

Robert Thorneton Major. Henry Vaughan. Robert Culbreth. Simon Pitts. Henry
Finch. John Vaughan. Robert Stewart. Edward Maxwell. Thomas Fairefax. John
Stewart. William Stewart. William Simpill. James Gulbreth. Thomas Dutton.



