TRUE NEWS FROM HARBOROUGH IN LEICHESTERSHIRE: Declaring how the EARL of
STAMFORD Met with PRINCE ROBERT As he was plundering the said town, and taking
away their horses, with other insufferable oppressions.

Also how the said Earl of Stamford fell upon them, killed some, took others
Prisoners, and Prince Robert himself escaped very narrowly.

Likewise the true Proceedings of the Parliaments Forces in those parts against
the evill-affected Party and malignant spirits of the Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for J. Upton. September. 17. 1642.

TRUE NEWS FROM HARBOROUGH IN LEICHESTERSHIRE: Wherein is declared how the
Earl of Stamford met with Prince Robert as he was plundering the said town.
Also how the said Earl of Stamford fell upon them, killed some, took others
prisoners, and how Prince Robert himself escaped very narrowly.
PRince Robert the second son to the Lady Elizabeth, the Kings Majesty's
only Sister, has (if report speak truth) since his last coming and abode in
England, done many outrages, plundered many towns, destroyed much corn, with
many other insufferable injuries and oppressions, which have been by him
heaped on the poor subjects that stood well-affected to the Parliament. And
least any should make question of the truth of this Relation, ye know that an
attempt of the same nature was by the said Prince Robert and his Followers put
in execution on monday last the twelfth of September at a place called
Harborough in Leichestershire, the inhabitants of the town, it appears; being
well affected to the King and Parliament: For which cause the said Prince
Robert came against them with eighteen hundred horse, and some small number of
Foot, and fell upon them, plundering of their houses, taking away their arms,
seizing upon their horses, throwing their hay about, and trampling it under
feet with their horses, and doing mischief without control, the town not
being able to make any resistance without aid from some other place, which for
the present was not afforded unto them.

During the time that Prince Robert was putting the town to this extreme
trouble and distraction, the noble Earl of Stamford had received intelligence
of this proceedings, he being upon a march only with eight hundred horse:
whereupon, knowing that Prince Robert would never adventure upon such a
design; if his strength were not answerable; and withal considering the great
damage that he might sustain, if he should go against him, being so weak
and unprepared: Wherefore he drew up his men into a small Front, with a loud
voice immediately declaring what information he had newly received from
Harborough, and also declared unto them the number of the Forces that
accompanied the said Prince Robert, and with many expressions setting forth the
earnest desire he had to go up to assist them, but withal was very loath to
adventure his small Forces against so great odds, and he for the present not
knowing how to gain strength to suppress them, his Forces being dispersed
thorough the Country upon several urgent and necessary occasions for the
maintaining of the peace of the Kingdom; wherefore the said Earl demanded of
them whether they were willing to go on or retreat, withal telling them, that
if they did go on, they must resolve to fight it out to the uttermost, and to
stand against a double opposition for their number.

Notwithstanding all this, and these difficulties, and the imminent danger,
they with a general shout cried, On, On: Which the good Earl perceiving, with
a great deal of joy encouraged them, telling them that himself in person would
lead them on and bring them off, and not forsake them so long as he had either
breath or one drop of blood in his veins.

Thus with confidence and courage they presently marched forward, singing of
Psalms till they were within the sight of Harborough, where they might plainly
perceive the Prince with all his Forces marching out of the said town, very
confidently and securely, without the least suspicion of being opposed, with
their prize of Arms and Horse which they had taken from the town; which the
Earl of Stamford seeing, made a stand under a wood side, which sheltered him
and his Companies from the sight of the Princes Forces: which having done, he
sent forth a Scout privately to the town, to command them to put themselves
into the best posture of defense that they could, to keep them from retreating
back to the town, which was accordingly effected; in which time the Prince
had recovered the bottom of the hill, where the Earl of Stamford had placed
his men, only two Troops which he had sent through the wood, to come on the
Rear of the Princes Troops, and consequently to get between him and the
town.

As soon as the Prince saw himself so suddenly encompassed, he endeavored to
retreat again to the town; but finding that there was no security, and seeing
that the Earl of Stamford pressed so hard upon him, and charged so hotly
against him, the Prince with his horse made up to the wood side, endeavoring
to gain the wind, but was immediately prevented, and beaten back upon the
River, by which means his Troops were disordered: for the other two Troops
of horse which the Earl of Stamford had sent to get between the Princes
Forces* and the town, together with the inhabitants of the town on the one
side, and the Earl of Stamford with his Troops on the other side, pursued
them so closely, that most of the Princes Foot were forced to take the river,
thirty were slain, many Prisoners were taken, and the Prince himself enforced
to fly for the safety of his Person, and leave his rich Prize behind him,
otherwise the Earl of Stamford had taken order for his forth coming.

This victory being thus obtained, they marched back again to the town,
where they were joyfully entertained by the inhabitants, bringing back with
them the pillage also which Prince Roberts Forces had taken from them. The^e is
a Troop of horse quartered there for the safeguard and future security of the
town against other such like attempts of the Cavaliers. The town is now in a
good posture of defense, being a rich town for trading, and well affected to
the King and Parliament, the defense of the Protestant Religion, and the
liberty of the subject.

M. Hastings plays least in sight since the arrival of the Earl of Stamford:
this is the truth of all the proceedings of note in our County. So I rest, Your
friend to be commanded,

Andrew Chapman.
Harborough, Sept. 14.
FINIS.

