A TRVE RELATION Of the apprehension of the Lord DIGBY,

As he was intending his journey and shipped for France, intercepted by Sir
John Pennington, Vice Admiral of his Majesty's Fleet, and by him detained
Prisoner.

With a bloody plot politically intended against the Parliament, by certain
Papists and their Adherents.

As also the opposition made by the Inhabitants of Hull, against a Gentleman
and his three hundred men sent by the Parliament, with their general and free
acceptance of the Earl of Newcastle, authorized by his Majesty's Commission to
the same effect.

As also the store of Ammunition wherewith the said Town is fortified.

LONDON, Printed for John Hammond. 1642.

The manner of apprehending the L: DIGBY, Son to the Earl of Bristow, BY Sir
JOHN PENINGTON.
NEver since GOD had first been pleased to show his mercies toward us, was it
known, that pernicious and nefarious offenders against his Church and elect,
have escaped unpunished. Never have Conspirators gone undiscerned, ill members
unconvicted; and generally no matter, manner, plot or conspiracy whatsoever,
against Religion, remained unconcealed, but have (through his wonderful means)
palpably appeared to the attaching and punishing of the offenders, the terror
of malevolent and evill-minded persons, and the glory of Almighty God, the
revealer of secrets. This no less then other, is worthy of your perspicuous
apprehension. The Lord Digby whose judicious understanding, if well applied,
might have both much advantaged, and also extended to the settling of a general
and unaccomplished peace in this kingdom, proving a delinquent, and flying the
just judgment and censure of the Parliament against him, first attempting a
transportation for Ireland, reduced himself into the County of Carmarthen,
where many days being vigilant, and waiting for opportunity, being still
frustrated, in respect that the Parliaments most judicious command denied any
commerce thitherward, without their special license, he resolved of another,
as he thought more auspitious, was to return for France; where, amongst hi^
former acquaintance, to spend away the time, until being gievn intelligence of
a security, and safe permittance in his return. This settled in his opinion,
he sets forward to sea in a French Bark, called le Olive Shampaneell, where
although his desires were earnest, and expected a sudden transportation; yet
the wind proving inauspitious, and the Sea very turbulent, he was forced to
remain upon the waves for the space of eight days upon the coast of Wales:
whereas it fortuned Sir John Penington, Vice Admiral of his Majesty's Fleet,
likewise to ride; who having diverse times taken a view of him, and knowing him
by reason of former acquaintance, attached him, and received him into his ship,
where he is detained as prisoner until further order should be given from the
Parliament concerning the same.

The Papists plot against the PARLIAMENT.
Mischiefs in hell erst hatched, has not been found
So bad, pernicious, or so cursed a ground,
As this I mean to treat on, whose intent
Has been for to abolish Parliament,
Undo a King and Kingdom, make a State
Through want of Peers to prove unfortunate:
And all this bloody massacre provided
For us, but that the hand of God decided,
And cured our evils; also giving hope
We shall have freedom from their Lord the Pope.
Thus was it contrived: Many demi Blades
Amongst their brave Papisticall Comrades,
Advanced to Westminster, with Pistols, Swords,
Their Arms complete, and many braving words,
Ha^berts provided for to cut and hew
Such as they meant should bid the world adieu.
Our bes^ of men that purposed good, they evil
Provided as if seconds for the Devil.
Thrusting the Officers from off their place,
Abusing others; thinking to deface
The form of government: But God be praised,
Their plot's defaced, and our fortunes raised
By their defeating; Had they had the word,
We must have suffered or by fire or sword.
A Letter since produced to the house of Commons,
Which shows their private and conjoined summons,
Is afterward inserted, look and view,
It is not half so dismal as it is true.
O praise the Lord then, all that love his Name,
Lift up your hearts, eternize still his fame,
Who still does shield us harmless day by day,
To whom be honor, glory, now and aye.
A RELATION OF THE ENTERtainment given to the Gentleman sent by the Parliament
to be governor of Hull,
With his garrison of three hundred men, and their opposing the same, as also
their willing acceptance of my Lord of Newcastle, sent with a Commission from
his Majesty.
Upon the tenth day of January last past, a Gentleman anthorized by the
Parliament to undertake the government and vigilant care of the Town of Hull,
with three hundred able men for that purpose, set forward in their journey
toward the County of York: where arrived, the inhabitants of the said Town
denied him entrance within the walls, notwithstanding he produced the command
from the Honorable House of Parliament to that effect. But after some time
spent in mature consideration, they admitted him, but not his men, alleging
that the Fort being his Majesty's, he having there also a Magazine, the power
and custody thereof ought not to be conferd and delivered over unto any,
without his Majesty's special commission authorizing some Noble and well known
Common-wealths-man by it, otherwise they were not bound, neither would they
deliver it up to any; but if he pleased to view their Ammunition, Magazine, and
what strength they had to defend it, he should and made no question but he
should find both it and them sufficient an able enough to withstand any
foreign force or enemy in defense and safeguard of the same.

Thus answered, he deprrted; and came to London, since when the Earl of
Newcastle authorized by his Majesty's commission, and attended with a train of
five hundred assistants, was generally and joyfully received of the
inhabitants, where he has supplied his Majesty's Magazens and Block-houses
(where it was wanting) with powder, shot, bullets, both for Canon and Musket,:
he has also mounted the pieces of Ordnances; raised platformes, rectified all
defaults, whether in carriages or Fieldpeeces, and is now continually
re-edifying and adding to the fortifications formerly built there, his
endeavors, and so generally thought for the good of this Kingdom, that we
daily wish a greater multiplication of such loyal subjects. He is a man so
generally fraught with virtue, and so industrious in the effectation of his
present commission, that neither being misled to vice, nor losing opportunity
for the proceeding in his importunate affairs, that he may be a pattern of
emulation for hereafter times.

The manner and plantation of the Ordnance is thus described.

The Blockhouse standing toward the East, adjoining to the Sea, has twenty
pieces; five whole Canons, and fifteen Demicanons and Culverings: the other
toward North-east, having ten pieces, whereof three are Culverings, the
residue small pieces, and mounted with an aspect over the whole Town for
defense by land, two murderers at Gray wharfe, and two more at Dilham Port, all
made ready and fit for service: there being in the Magazines Arms for an
hundred thousand men.

These are the endeavors of the worthy Earl of Newcastle, which we wish to
continue both there and other places in this kingdom by him and such other
like good agents, to the honor and glory of God, terrifying our enemies, our
own safety, and hopes of ensuing tranquillity. Amen.

The Copy of a writing produced and presented to the Parliament.
WE work, we plot, we study and devise
Our powder works, whiles that you blind the eyes
Of those perspicuous enemies: our plot
Stands so securely hid, they must to pot
Go altogether, in their Chaires of state
Mounted aloft by the promiscuous fate,
Like Phaeton in fire their Chariot hot
Will sear their nimble intellect; a trot
Phoebus swift Geldings never glide, they run,
So shall they suddenly ere we have done.
Farewell. I. P.

FINIS.

