A true RELATION OF CERTAIN PASSAGES which Captain Basset brought from the
West parts of Cornwall.

CONCERNING Some Ships which came from Bilbo in Spain to go to Jreland; but
were driven into an Island called St. Ives, by reason of tempestuous weather;
wherein was found great store of Popish Relics, beside FRIARS, PRIESTS, and
JESUITS.

There was also a Ship which came from France to go to Ireland, wherein was
found diverse Commanders, and Officers who are ordered by the Parliament to come
up to London with a strong Guard.

LIKEWISE, Three Ships which are in Dunkerke laden with Ammunition and Men for
IRELAND.

AS ALSO, Several Propositions made by the City of London, for the raising of
a Million of Money for the speedy subduing of the Rebels in Ireland; Twenty
Members of the HOUSE of Commons having subscribed already for 20000. pounds.

LONDON, Printed by R. O. and G. D. for John Bull dwelling in Grubstreet. Anno
Dom. MDCXLII.

A true Relation of certain Ships which were driven into St Jves in Corn-wall,
and into Dortmouth, by reason of Tempestuous Weather.
UPON Sabbath day last in the morning being the 13. of February 1641. one
Captain Basset came to London from the West Parts of Cornwall, and now lodges
at the Sign of the Swann in the Strand, who brought certain intelligence of
two Ships which were driven into a Harbor, by reason of the Tempestuousnesse
of the Weather, and now lies at St. Jves, which Ships came from Bilbo in
Spain, being bound for Jreland to assist the Bloud-sucking Rebels there,
against his Majesty's Subjects; which Rebels daily increase more and more, and
if speedy relief comes not to those who yet are not overcome, the whole
Kingdom is like to be lost.

Now these two Ships when they were driven into St. Ives, some of the men which
were on bourd came on Land, to view the place where they were cast into, and as
they say to buy food for themselves.

There was a man who lived in that Harbor, being witty, he made as if he had
bin a Justice of Peace whereupon he examined them, what and who they were; and
from whence they came, and whither they were going, this man not liking their
answer, tendered unto them the Oath of Allegiance, the which they took, he
seeing that he could not find them out what they were by that means, then he
tendered unto them the Oath of Supremacy the which they refused to take,
whereupon he suspected what they were, and therefore made those acquainted with
it which had authority, and so caused them to be laid hold on and apprehended,
which when they were laid fast, then they went with a great number together to
the Ships and searched them, wherein they found a-Bourd great store of Iron,
six and twenty Tunn of Wheat, and eighteen Hoggs-heads of Wine. There was
also found six Friars, and abundance of Priests and Jesuits, together with
many others of their faction.

There was likewise found on bourd in the same Ships many Crucifixes, Beads,
and certain men's Teeth, which the Priests told were some of St. Peter's Teeth.
There was likewise found a little water in a very small Vessel, which the
Priests say is Mary Magdalens Tears, there was likewise found a piece of Wood
which they say was a piece of the Cross which Christ was Crucified upon. This
more especially they took with them that so by that means they may be
protected with safety to their Ionrneys end, now how Treacherously their God
whom they trusted in) has dealt with them: all men may judge by the effects,
for they are all in Prison in St. Ives until the pleasure of the Parliament be
known concerning them.

Besides there was found in those two Ships very many Letters, which now are
brought to the Parliament: the contents whereof are not yet published.

There is also certain intelligence brought over of three other Ships which is
in Dunkirk very full of Ammunition and men bound for Jreland, the names of the
Ships are these.

1. The Admiral of Dunkirk. 2. The Flute. 3. An Hamburgur.
The truth of this is verifyed in a Message from a Committee of both Houses, to
the Spanish Ambassador.

Lastly there was also very lately driven into Dartmouth by reason of
Tempestuous Weather a Barque which came from France, wherein was diverse
Commanders and Officers going to Ireland, who now are taken hold of and laid in
safe Custody, being ordered by the Parliament to come up to London, with a
strong guard, First the Commanders by themselves and the Officers by themselves
a part from the Commanders, that so the truth of their intentions may be the
better known.

The Votes of the Lords and Commons upon the Propositions made by diverse worthy
and well affected Persons, for the speedy and effectual reducing of the
Kingdom of Ireland.
THe Lords and Commons, taking into their serious considerations, as well the
necessity of a speedy reducing of the Rebels of Ireland, to their due
obedience, as also the great sums of money that the Commons of this Realm
have of late paid for the public and necessary affairs of the Kingdom,
whereof the Lords and Commons are very sensible, and desirous to embrace all
good and honorable ways, tending to his Majesty's greatness and profit, the
settling of that Realm, and the case of his Majesty's Subjects of ENGLAND: And
whereas diverse worthy and well affected persons, perceiving that many Millions
of Acres of the Rebels Lands of that Kingdom, which go under the name of
profitable Lands, will be confiscate, and to be disposed of, and that in case
two Millions and a half of those Acres, to be equally taken out of the four
Provinces of that Kingdom, may be allotted for the satisfaction of such
persons as shall disburse any sums of money for the reducing of the Rebels
there, would effectually accomplish the same, have made these Propositions
ensuing.

FIrst, that two Millions and a half of those Acres may be assigned, allotted,
and divided amongst them, after this Proportion; Viz.

For each Adventure of 200. li. 1000. Acres in Vlster. 300. li. 1000. Acres in
Conaght. 450. li. 1000. Acres in Munster. 600. li. 1000. Acres in Lemster.


All according to the English measure, and consisting of Meadow, Arable, and
profitable Pasture; The bogs, woods and barren mountains being cast in, over
and above; These two Millions and a half of Acres to be holden in free, and
common Soccage of the King, as of his Castle of Dublin.

2. That out of those two Millions and a half of Acres a constant rent shall
be reserved to the Crown of England, after this proportion, viz.

Out of each Acre thereof in Vlster. 1.d. Conaght. 1.ob. Munster. ij. q;
Lemster. iij.d.


Whereby his Majesty's Revenue out of those lands will be much improved,
besides the advantages that he will have by the coming to his hands of all
other the Lands of the Rebels, and their personal estates, without any charge
unto his Majesty.

3. That for the erecting of Manors, settling of wastes and commons, maintaining
of preaching Ministers, creating of Corporations, and regulating of the
several Plantations, one or more Commissions be hereafter granted by
Authority of Parliament.

4. That Moneys for these great occasions may be the more speedily advanced,
All the undertakers in the City of London, and within twenty miles distant
thereof, shall under-write their several sums before the twentieth day of
March; 1641. And all within sixty Miles of LONDON, before the first day of
April, 1642. And the rest of the Kingdom before the first day of May, 1642.

5. That the several sums to be under written, shall be paid in at four
payments; viz. one fourth part within 10. days after such under-writing: And
the other three parts at three months, 3. months, and 3. months, all to be
paid in the Chamber of London.

6. That, for the better securing of the said several sums accordingly, Every
one that does so under-write shall at the time of his subscription pay down the
twentieth part of the total sum that shall be by him then underwritten.

And in case that the residue of his first fourth part be not paid in to such
person or persons as shall be appointed to receive the same, within the ten
days before limited: then such party shall not only forfeit the twentieth
part of sum total, formerly deposited, but so much more of his first fourth
payment to be added thereunto as shall make up the one moitie of the said first
payment. And if the same person shall fail in any other of the 3. payments,
he shall then forfeit his entire first fourth and all the benefit of his
subscription, which forfeiture shall accrue to the common benefit of the rest
of the undertakers.

The Lords and Commons upon due and mature deliberation of these propositions,
have approved of them, and given their consent unto the same; and will become
humble Petitioners to his Majesty for his Royal approbations thereof, and that
hereafter he will be pleased, upon the humble suit of both Houses of
Parliament to give his Royal assent unto such Bills as they shall tender unto
him for the settling of those Propositions, and all other things necessary
conducing thereunto.

FINIS.

