AN APOLOGY FOR AUTHORIZED and SET FORMS OF LITVRGIE: AGAINST THE PRETENSE OF
THE SPIRIT.

1. For ex tempore Prayer, AND 2. Forms of Private composition.

Hierocl: in Pythag. (...). LONDON, Printed for R. Royston in Ivie-lane. 1649

To His most Sacred Majesty.
IT is now two years, since part of these ensuing Papers, like the public
issue of the people, imperfect and undressed, were exposed, without a Parent to
protest them, or any hand to nourish them. But since your Most Sacred Majesty
was pleased graciously to look upon them, they are grown into a Tract, and
have an ambition (like the Gourd of Jonas) to dwell in the eye of the Sun
from whence they received life and increment. And although, because some
violence has been done to the profession of the doctrine of this Treatise, it
may seem to be verbum in tempore non suo, and like the offering Cypress to a
Conqueror, or Palms to a broken Army, yet I hope I shall the less need an
Apology, because it is certain, he does really disserve no just and Noble
interest, that serves that of the Spirit, and Religion. And because the
sufferings of a KING and a Confessor are the great demonstration to all the
world that Truth is as Dear to your MAJESTY as the Jewels of your Diadem,
and that your Conscience is tender as a pricked eye, I shall pretend this only
to alleviate the inconvenience of an unseasonable address, that I present your
MAJESTY with a humble persecuted truth, of the same constitution with that
condition whereby you are become most Dear to God, as having upon you the
characterisme of the Sons of God, bearing in your Sacred Person the marks of
the Lord Jesus, who is your Elder Brother, the King of Sufferings, and the
Prince of the Catholic Church. But I consider that Kings, and their Great
Councels, and Rulers Ecclesiastical have a special obligation for the defense
of Liturgies, because they having the greatest Offices, have the greatest needs
of auxiliaries from Heaven, which are best procured by the public Spirit, the
Spirit of Government and Supplication. And since the first, the best, and most
Solemn Liturgies and Set forms of Prayer were made by the best and greatest
Princes, by Moses, by David, and the Son of David; Your MAJESTY may be
pleased to observe such a proportion of circumstances in my laying this [
Apology for Liturgy] at Your feet, that possibly I may the easier obtain a
pardon for my great boldness; which if I shall hope for, in all other
contingencies I shall represent my self a person indifferent whether I live or
die, so I may by either, serve God, and Gods Church, and Gods Vicegerent, in
the capacity of,

Great Sir, Your Majesty's most humble, and most obedient Subject and Servant,
TAILOR.

An APOLOGY for LITURGY.
I Have read over this Book which the Assembly The Directory for Prayer.] I
confess I came to it with much expectation, and was in some measure confident,
I should have found it an exact and unblameable model of Devotion free from
all those Objections which men of their own persuasion had obtruded against
the Public Liturgy of the Church of England; or at least, it should have been
composed with so much artifice and finenesse, that it might have been to all
the world, an argument of their learning and excellency of spirit, if not of
the goodness and integrity of their Religion and purposes. I shall give no
other character of the whole, but that the public disrelish which I find
amongst Persons of great piety, of all qualities, not only of great, but even
of ordinary understandings, is to me some argument that it lies so open to the
objections even of common spirits, that the Compilers of it, did intend more to
prevail by the success of their Armies, then the strength of reason, and the
proper grounds of persuasion, which yet most wise and good Men believe to be
the more Christian way of the two. But because the judgment I made of it from
an argument so extrinsecall to the nature of the thing, could not reasonably
enable me to satisfy those many Persons who in their behalf desired me to
consider it, I resolved to look upon it nearer, and to take its account from
something that was ingredient to its Constitution, that I might be able both to
exhort and convince the Gainsayers, who refuse to hold fast (...), that
faithful word which they had been taught by their Mother the Church of England.

I shall decline to speak of the efficient cause of this Directory, and not
quarrel at it, that it was composed against the Laws both of England and all
Christendom. If the thing were good and pious, and did not directly or
accidentally invade the rights of a just Superior, I would learn to submit to
the imposition, and never quarrel at the incompetency of his authority that
engaged me to do pious and holy things. And it may be when I am a little more
used to it, I shall not wonder at a Synod, in which not one Bishop sits (in the
capacity of a Bishop) though I am most certain this is the first example in
England since it was first Christened. But for the present it seems something
hard to digest it, because I know so well that all Assemblies of the Church
have admitted Priests to consultation and dispute, but never to authority and
decision, till the Pope enlarging the phylacteries of the Archimandrites, and
Abbots, did sometime by way of privilege and dispensation give to some of them
decisive voices in public Councels; but this was one of the things in which he
did innovate and invade against the public resolutions of Christendom, though
he durst not do it often, and yet when he did it, it was in very small and
inconsiderable numbers.

I said I would not meddle with the Efficient, and Final cause, nor guess at
any other ends and purposes of theirs then at what they publicly profess,
which is the abolition and destruction of the Book of Common Prayer; which
great change because they are pleased to call Reformation, I am content in
charity to believe they think it so, and that they have Zelum Dei, but whether
secundum scientiam, according to knowledge or no, must be judged by them who
consider the matter, and the form.

But because the matter is of so great variety and the form of it; concerning
which, I shall give my judgment without any sharpness or bitterness of
spirit, for I am resolved not to be angry with any men of another persuasion,
as knowing that I differ just as much from them as they do from me.

The Directory takes away that Form of Prayer all set forms of prayer, and
give way to every man's spirit; the other, that they might take away this
Form, and give way and countenance to their own. The First, is an Enemy to
all deliberation. The Second, to all authority. They will have no man to
deliberate, These would have none but themselves. The former are unwise and
rash; the latter are pleased with themselves, and are full of opinion. They
must be considered apart, for they have rent the Question in pieces, and with
the fragment in his hand, every man has run his own way.

First, of them that deny all set Forms, though in Quest. 1.
blameless.

And here I consider that the true state of the Question offend not in his
tongue, and therefore he himself deliberates, and takes the best guides he
can; or he who out of the confidence of his own abilities, or other exterior
affistances, (...); Isocrat. in Panathen.
speaks what ever comes uppermost.

And here I have the advice and counsel of a very Solomon, Be not rash with
thy Eccles. 5. 2.
mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, for God
is in Heaven and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy words be few. The
consideration of the vast distance between God and us, Heaven and Earth, should
create such apprehensions in us, that the very best and choicest of our
offertories are not acceptable but by Gods gracious vouchsasing and
condescension: and therefore since we are so much indebted to God for accepting
our best, it is not safe ventured to present him with a dowbaked sacrifice, and
put him off with that which in nature and humane consideration, is absolutely
the worst; for such is all the crude and imperfect utterance of our more
imperfect conceptions; Hoc non probo in philosopho cujus oration sicut vita
debet esse composita, said Seneca, A wise man's speech should be like his life,
and actions; composed, studied, and considered. And if ever inconsideration be
the cause of sin, and vanity; it is in our words, and therefore is with
greatest care to be avoided in our prayers, we being most of all concerned that
God may have no quarrel against them, for folly, or impiety.

But abstracting from the reason, let us consider deliberates, or he that
considers not when he speaks? What man in the world is hasty to offer any thing
unto God, if he be not, who prays ex tempore? And then add to it but the
weight of Solomon's reason, and let any man answer me if he thinks it can well
stand, with that reverence we owe to the immense, the infinite and to the
eternal God, the God of wisdom, to offer him a sacrifice, which we durst not
present to a Prince or a prudent Governor in re seria, such as our prayers
ought to be.

And that this may not be dashed with a pretense Go and offer this to thy
Prince, see if he will accept it; implying, that the best person is to have the
best present; and what the Prince will slight as truly unworthy of him, much
more is it unfit for God. For God accepts not of any thing, we give or do, as
if he were bettered by it; for therefore it is estimate is not taken by it is
relation or natural complacency to him, for in it self it is to him as
nothing: but God accepts it by it is proportion and commensuration to us. That
which we call our best, and is truly so in humane estimate, that pleases God,
for it declares that if we had better, we would give it him. But to reserve the
best, says too plainly, that we think any thing is good enough for him. As
therefore God in the Law would not be served by that which was imperfect in
genere naturae: so neither now, nor ever, will that please him which is
imperfect in genere morum, or materia intellectuali, when we can give a better.

And therefore the wisest Nations, and the most in set forms, with as much
religion as they dressed their sacrifices, and observed the rites of Festivalls
and Burialls. Amongst the Romans it belonged to the care of the Priests, to
worship in prescribed and determined words. In omni precatione qui vota
effundit Sacerdos, Vestam and Alex. ab Alex. l. 2. c. 14.
Janum aliosque Deos praescriptis verbis and composito carmine advocare solet.
The Greeks did so too, receiving Idem, l. 4. c. 17.
their prayers by dictate word for word. Itaque sua carmina suaeque precationes
singulis diis institutae sunt, quas plerunque nequid praepostere dicatur,
aliquis ex praescripto praeire and ad verbum refer solebat. Their hymns and
prayers were ordained peculiar to every God, which, lest any thing should be
said preposteroufly, were usually pronounced word for word after the Priest,
and out of written Copies; and the Magi among the Persians were as considerate
in their devotions; Magos and Ibidem.
Persas primo semper diluculo canere Diis hymnos and lauds, meditato and
solenni precationis carmine, The Persians sang hymns to their Gods by the
morning twilight in a premeditate, solemn and metricall form of prayer, faith
the same Author. For since in all the actions and discourses of men, that
which is the least considered is likely to be the worst, and is certainly of
the greatest disreputation, it were a strange cheapnesse of opinion, toward
God and Religion, to be the most incurious of what we say to him, and in our
religious offices. It is strange that every thing should be considered but our
Prayers. It is spoken by Eunapius to the honor of Proaeresius Scholars, that
when the Proconsul asked their judgments in a question of Philosophy, they were
(...), In vita Proaeresii.
they with much consideration and care gave in answer those words of Aristides,
that they were not of the number of those that used to vomit out answers, but
of those that considered every word they were to speak. Nihil enim ordinatum
est quod praecipitatur and properat, said Seneca. Nothing can be regular and
orderly, that is hasty and precipitate, and therefore unless Religion be the
most imprudent, trifling, and inconsiderable thing, and that the work of the
Lord is done well enough, when it is done negligently, or that the sanctuary
has the greatest beauty, when it has the least order, it will concern us
highly to think our prayers and religious offices are actions fit for wise
men, and therefore to be done as the actions of wise men use to be, that is,
deliberately, prudently, and with greatest consideration.

Well then! in the nature of the thing ex tempore Et nescit tarda molimina
spiritus sancti gratia, Gods Spirit (if he pleases) can do his work as well
in an instant, as in long premeditation. And to this purpose are pretended
those places of Scripture which speak of the assistance of Gods spirit in our
prayers, Zech. 12. 10. And I will pour upon the house of David, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and supplication. But especially
Romans 8. 26. likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings that cannot be uttered, etc. From whence the
Conclusion that is inferred is in the words of Saint Paul, that we must pray
with the Spirit, therefore not with set forms, therefore ex tempore.

The Collection is somewhat wild, for there is

It is one of the Privileges of the Gospel, and the ex tempore? no such thing:
the Objection proves nothing of this.

15. Here therefore we will join issue, whether the gifts and helps of the
Spirit be immediate infusions of the faculties and powers and perfect
abilities? Or that he does assist us only by his aides external, and
internal, in the use of such means which God and nature has given to man to
ennoble his soul, better his faculties, and to improve his understanding? **
That the aides of the Holy Ghost are only assistances to us, in the use of
natural and artificial means, I will undertake to prove, and from thence it
will evidently follow, that labor, and hard study, and premeditation, will
soonest purchase the gift of prayer, and ascertaine us of the assistance of the
Spirit, and therefore set Forms of Prayer studied and considered of, are in a
true and proper sense, and without Enthusiasme, the fruits of the Spirit.

First, Gods Spirit did assist the Apostles by ways extraordinary,

Thus the Holy Ghost brought to their Memory all Jesus spoke and did, and by
that means we come to know all that the Spirit knew to be necessary for us,
the Holy Ghost being Author of our knowledge, by being the fountain of the
Revelation, and we are therefore (...), taught by God, because the Spirit of
God revealed the Articles of our Religion that they might be known to all ages
of the Church; and this is testified by S. Paul, he gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets, Ephesians. 4. 12.
etc. for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and
of the knowledge of the of Son God unto a perfect man, etc. This was the effect
of Christ's ascension, when he gave gifts unto men, that is, when he sent the
Spirit, the verification of the promise of the Father. The effect of this
immission of the Holy Ghost was to fill all things, and that for ever; to build
up the Church of God, until the day of consummation; so that the Holy Ghost
abides with the Church for ever, by transmitting those revelations, which he
taught the Apostles, to all Christians in succession. Now as the Holy Ghost
taught the Apostles, and by them still teaches us what to believe; so it is
certain he taught the Apostles how, and what to pray; and because it is
certain that all the rules concerning our duty in prayer, and all those graces
which we are to pray for are transmitted to us by Derivation from the Apostles;
whom the Holy Ghost did teach even to that very purpose also, that they should
teach us; it follows evidently that the gift of prayer is a gift of the Holy
Ghost, and yet to verify this Proposition we need no other immediate
inspiration or extraordinary assistance than that we derive from the Holy Ghost
by the conveyance of the Apostolical Sermons and Writings.

The reason is the same in Faith and Prayer; and if faith certainly needs a
more immediate infusion, as being of greatest necessity, and yet a grace to
which we least cooperate, it being the first of graces, and less of the will
in it, then any other. But yet the Holy Ghost is the Author of our faith, and
we believe with the Spirit, (it is Saint Paul's expression) and yet our belief
comes by hearing, and reading the holy Scriptures, and their interpretations.
Now reconcile these two together, Faith comes Ephesians. 2. 8.
by hearing, and yet is the gift of the Spirit, and it says 1 Cor. 12. 9.
that the gifts of the Spirit are not ecstasies, and immediate infusions of
habits, but helps from God, to enable us upon the use of the means of his own
appointment, to believe, to speak, to understand, to prophecy, and to pray.

But whosoever shall look for any other gifts of the Paul calls 2 Cor. 4. 13.
it) acquired by humane means, using divine aides? that is, by our endeavors
in hearing, reading, catechizing, desires to obey, and all this blessed and
promoted by God, this produces faith. Nay, it is true of us what Christ told
his Apostles, sine me nihil potestis facere: not nihil magnum aut difficile,
but omnino nihil, as Saint Austin observes. Without me ye can do nothing, and
yet we were not capable of a Law, or of reward or punishment, if neither with
him, nor without him, we were able to do any thing. And therefore although in
the midst of all our cooperation we may say to God in the words of the
Prophet, Domine omnia opera operatus es in nobis, O Lord thou have wrought all
our works in us, yet they are opera nostra still; God works, and we work; First
is the (...), Gods grace is brought to us, he helps and gives us abilities, and
then expects our duty. And if the spirit of prayer be of greater consequence
then all the works God has wrought in us besides, and has the promise of a
special prerogative, let the first be proved, and the second be shown in any
good Record, and then I will confess the difference.

The Parallel of this Argument, I the rather urge, because the spirit as any
thing in the world, and yet which the Apostle presses upon us as duties, and
things put into our power to be improved by our industry, and those are faith,
(in which I before instanced) and charity. But ye (beloved) building up your
selves on your most holy Epist. Iud, v. 20
faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God. All of
the same consideration, Faith, and Prayer, and Charity, all gifts of the
Spirit, and yet build up your selves in faith, and keep your selves in love,
and therefore by a parity of reason, improve your selves in the spirit of
Prayer, that is, God by his Spirit having supplied us with matter, let our
industry and co-operations per modum naturae, improve these gifts, and build
upon this foundation.

Thus the Spirit of God is called the Spirit of adoption, the Spirit of
counsel, the Spirit of grace, the Spirit of meekness, the Spirit of wisdom.
And without doubt he is the fountain of all these to us all, and that for
ever, and yet it cannot reasonably be supposed, but that we must stir up the
graces of God in us, cooperate with his assistances, study in order to
counsel, labor and consider in order to wisdom, give all diligence to make
our calling and election sure in order to our adoption, in which we are sealed
by the Spirit. Now these instances are of gifts, as well as graces, and since
the days of wonder and need of miracles is expired, there is no more reason to
expect inspiration of gifts, then of graces, without our endeavors. It
concerns the Church rather to have these secured than those, and yet the Spirit
of God puts it upon the condition of our cooperation, for according to the
Proverb of the old Moralists, Deus habet sinum facilem non perforatum, God's
bosom is apt and easy to the emission of graces and affistances, but it is
not loose and ungirt; something must be done on our part, we must improve the
talents, and swell the bank; for if either we lay them up in a napkin, or spend
them, suppress the Spirit, or extinguish it, we shall dearly account for it.

In the mean time if we may lose the gifts by our

The same doctrine we are taught by Saint Paul's exhortation Timothy, Neglect
not the gift that is in thee, 1 Timothy 4. 14.
which was given thee by prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. And again, stir up the gift of 2 Timothy 1. 6.
God which is in thee by the laying on of my hands. If there be any gifts of
the Holy Ghost, and spiritual influences, dispensed without our cooperation,
and by inspiration of the entire power, it is in ordination, and the persons so
ordained are most likely to receive the gift of prayer, if any such thing be
for the edification of the Church, they being the men appointed to intercede,
and to stand between God and the people, and yet this gift of God even in those
times when they were dispensed with miracle, and assistances extraordinary,
were given as all things now are given, by the means also of our endeavor,
and was capable of improvement by industry, and of defaillance by neglect, and
therefore much rather is it so now in the days of ordinary ministration and
common assistances.

And indeed this argument, beside the efficacy of its adversaria are addressed,
because themselves call upon their Disciples, to exercise the gift of prayer,
and offer it to consideration, that such So as that hereby they become not
slothful and negligent in stirring up the gifts of Christ in them. But that
each one by meditation, by taking heed, etc. may be careful to furnish his
heart and tongue with further or other materials, etc. Preface to the Directory.
exercising it, is the way to better it; and if natural endowments and
artificial endeavors are the way to purchase new degrees of it, it were not
amiss they did consider a little before they begin; and did improve their
first and smallest capacities before they ventured any thing in public by way
of address to Almighty God. For the first beginnings are certainly as
improveable as the next degrees, and it is certain they have more need of it,
as being more imperfect and rude. Therefore when ever Gods Spirit has given us
any capacities, or assistances, any documents, motions, desires, or any aides
whatsoever, they are therefore given us with a purpose we should by our
industry, skill, and labor, improve them, because without such cooperation,
the intention is made void, and the work imperfect.

And this is exactly the doctrine I plainly gather from Paul, The Spirit
helps our infirmities, (...), it is in the Greek, collaborantem adjuvat. It
is an ingeminate expression of our labors. And that supposes us to have
faculties capable of improvement, and an obligation to labor, and that the
effect of having the gift of prayer depends upon the mutual concourse, that
is, upon God blessing our powers and our endeavors. And if this way the Spirit
performs his promise sufficiently, and does all that we need, and all that he
ties himself to; he that will multiply his hopes farther then what is
sufficient, or what is promised, may possibly deceive himself, but never
deceive God, and make him multiply and continue miracles to justify his
fancy.

Better it is to follow the Scriptures for our guide, as in Ephesians. 6. 17, 18.
Take the sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God, Praying always with all
prayer and supplication in the Spirit. The word of God is the sword of the
Spirit; praying in the Spirit is one way of using it, indeed the only way that
he here specifies. Praying in the Spirit then being the using of this Sword,
and this Sword being the word of God, it follows evidently, that praying in the
spirit, is praying in, or according to the word of God, that is, in the
directions, rules, and expresses of the Word of God, that is, of the holy
Scriptures. For we have many infirmities, and we need the spirit to help; as
doubting, coldness, weariness, disrelish of heavenly things, indifferency;
and these are enough to interpret the place quoted in the Objection, without
tying him to make words for us to no great religious purposes when God has
done that for us in other manner then what we dream of.**

So that in effect, praying in the Holy Ghost, or with the spirit, is nothing
but prayer for such things, and in such manner which God by his Spirit has
taught us in holy Scripture. Holy Prayers, spiritual songs, so the Apostle
calls one part of prayer, viz. Eucharisticall or thanksgiving, that is, Prayers
or Songs which are spiritual in materia. And if they be called spiritual for
the Efficient cause too, the Holy Ghost being the Author of them, it comes all
to one, for therefore he is the cause and giver of them, because he has in his
word revealed, what things we are to pray for, and there also has taught us
the manner.

And this I plainly prove from the words of Paul before quoted, The Spirit
helps our infirmities, Romans 8. 26.
[ for we know not what we should pray for as we ought] In this we are infirm,
that we know not our own needs, nor our own advantages: when the Holy Ghost
has taught us what to ask, and to ask that as we ought, then he has healed
our infirmities, and our ignorances in the matter and the manner; then we know
what to pray for as we ought, then we have the grace of Prayer, and the Spirit
of supplication. And therefore in the instance before mentioned concerning
spiritual songs, when the Apostle had twice enjoined the use of them in order
to Prayer and Preaching, to instruction and to Eucharist, and those to be done
by the aid of Christ, and Christ's spirit; What in Ephesians. 5. 18, 19.
one place he calls, [ being filled with the Spirit:] In the other he calls, [
Col. 3. 16.
the dwelling of the word of Christ in us richly] plainly intimating to us,
that when we are mighty in the Scriptures, full of the word of Christ, then we
are filled with the Spirit, because the Spirit is the great Dictatour of them
to us, and the Remembrancer, and when by such helps of Scripture we sing Hymns
to Gods honor and our mutual comfort, then we sing and give thanks in the
spirit. And this is evident, if you consult the places, and compare them.

And that this is for this reason called a gift, and grace, a speaking by the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 8. No man Vid. Act. 19. 21. and 16. 7, 8, 9, 10.
can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost. For though the world
could not acknowledge Jesus for the Lord without a revelation, yet now that we
are taught this truth by Scripture, and by the preaching of the Apostles to
which they were enabled by the Holy Ghost, we need no revelation or Enthusiasme
to confess this truth, which we are taught in our Creeds and Catechismes; and
this light sprang first from the immission of a ray from Gods Spirit, we must
for ever acknowledge him the fountain of our light. Though we cool our thirst
at the mouth of the river, yet we owe for our draughts to the springs and
fountains from whence the waters first came, though derived to us by the
succession of a long current. If the Holy Ghost supplies us with materials and
fundamentals for our building, it is then enough to denominate the whole
edifice to be of him, although the labor and the workmanship be ours upon
another stock. And this is it which the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 13. Which
things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which
the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. The Holy
Ghost teaches, yet it is upon our cooperation, our study and endeavor; while
we compare spiritual things with spiritual, the Holy is said to teach us,
because these spirituals were of his suffestion and revelation.

For it is a rule of the School, and there is much Habitus infusi infunduntur
per modum acquisitorum, whatsoever is infused into us is in the same manner
infused as other things are acquired, that is, step by step, by humane means
and cooperation, and grace does not give us new faculties, and create another
nature, but meliorates and improves our own. And therefore what the Greeks
called (...), habits, the Christians used to call (...) and (...), gifts,
because we derive assistances from above to heighten the habits, and facilitate
the actions, in order to a more noble and supernatural end. And what Saint
Paul said in the Resurrection, is also true in this Question, That is not first
which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and then that which is
spiritual. The graces and gifts of the Spirit are postnate, and are additions
to art and nature. God directs our counsels, opens our understandings,
regulates our will, orders our affections, supplies us with objects and
arguments, and opportunities, and revelations in scriptis, and then most when
we most employ our own endeavors, God loving to bless all the means, and
instruments of his service, whether they be natural, or acquisite.

So that now I demand, Whether, since the expiration No, discourages all men
from reading the Scriptures, from industry, from meditation, from conference,
from humane ars, and sciences, and from whatsoever else God and good Laws,
provoke us to by proposition of rewards. But if Yea, (as most certainly God
will best crown the best endeavors) then the spirit of prayer is greatest in
him, who (supposing the like capacities and opportunities) studies hardest,
reads most, practices most religiously, deliberates most prudently; and then by
how much want of means, is worse then the use of means, by so much ex tempore
prayers are worse then deliberate and studied. Excellent therefore is the
Counsel of Saint Peter, 1. Epist. Chapter 4. v. 11. If any man speak let him
speak as the Oracles of God (not lightly then and inconsideratly) If any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives, (great reason then
to put all his abilities and faculties to it) and whether of the two does most
likely do that, he that takes pains, and considers and discusses, and so
approves and practices a form, or he that never considers what he says, till
he says it, needs not much deliberation to pass a sentence. Only me thinks
it is most unreasonable that we should be bound to prepare our selves with due
requisites to hear what they shall speak in public, and that they should not
prepare what to speak, as if to speak were of easier or of less consideration,
than to hear what is spoken; or if they do prepare what to speak to the
people, it were also very fit they prepared their prayers, and considered
before hand of the fitness of the Offertory they present to God.

Lastly, Did not the Penmen of the Scripture, write holy Men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost, says Saint Peter. And certainly they were
moved by a more immediate motion, and a motion nearer to an Enthusiasme, then
now Etiam Veteres Prophetae disposuerunt se ad respondendum prophetice. Et
vaticinia admoto plectro, aut hausto calice, dederunt. (Genesis 44. 5.) Scyphus
quem furati estis ipse est in quo Dominus meus bibit, and in quo augurari
solet. Dixit Oeconomus Iosephi. Et afferte psalterium. Dixit Eliseus (2 Reg. 3.
15.) Domi^^on interrogaturus.
adays in the gift and spirit of Prayer. And yet in the midst of those great
assistances and motions they did use study, art, industry, and humane
abilities. This is more than probable in the different styles of the several
Books, some being of admirable art, others lower and plain. The words were
their own, at least sometimes, not the Holy Ghosts. And if Origin, Saint
Hierome, and especially Vid. Erasmi Epist. ad Jo. Eckium. Epist. 1. 20.
the Greek Fathers, Scholiasts and Grammarians were not deceived by false
Copies, but that they truly did observe, sometimes to be impropriety of
expression in the language, sometimes not true Greek, who will think those
errors or imperfections in Grammar, were (in respect of the words, I say,
precisely) immediate inspirations and dictates of the Holy Ghost, and not
rather their own productions of industry and humanity? But clearly some of
their words were the words of Aratus, some of Epimenides, some of Menander,
some of S. Paul [ This speak I, not the Lord.] Some were the words of i Cor. 7.
Moses, even all that part of the Leviticall Law which concerned divorces, and
concerning which, our blessed Savior affirms, that Moses permitted it,
because of the hardness of their hearts, but from the beginning it was not so:
and diverse others of the same nature collected and observed to this purpose, by
Homil. 16. in Numer.
Origin, Lib. 5. contr. Eunom. c. penult.
S. Basil, Lib. 8. in Luca^. c. 16.
Saint Ambrose; and particularly, that promise which S. Paul made of calling
upon the Corinthians as he passed into Macedonia, which certainly in all reason
is to be presumed to have been spoken humanitus, and not by immediate
inspiration and infusion, because S. Paul was so hindered that he could not be
as good as his word, and yet the Holy Ghost could have foreseen it, and might
better have excused it, if Saint Paul had laid it upon his score; but he did
not, and it is reasonable enough to believe there was no cause he should, and
yet because the Holy Ghost renewed their memory, improved their understanding,
supplied to some their want of humane learning, and so assisted them that they
should not commit an error in fact or opinion, neither in the narrative nor
dogmaticall parts, therefore they writ by the Spirit. Since then we cannot
pretend upon any grounds of probability to an inspiration so immediate as
theirs, and yet their assistances which they had from the Spirit did not
exclude humane arts and industry, but that the ablest Scholar did write the
best, much rather is this true in the gifts and assistances we receive, and
particularly in the gift of Prayer, it is not an ex tempore and an inspired
faculty, but the faculties of nature, and the abilities of art and industry are
improved and ennobled by the supervening assistances of the Spirit. And if
these who pray ex tempore, say that the assistance they receive from the Spirit
is the inspiration of words and powers without the operations of art and
natural abilities and humane industry, then besides that it is more then the
Pen men of Scripture sometime had (because they needed no extraordinary
assistances to what they could of themselves do upon the stock of other
abilities) besides this, I say, it must follow that such Prayers so inspired,
if they were committed to writing, would prove as good Canonical Scripture as
any is in Saint Paul's Epistles, the impudence of which pretension is
sufficient to prove the extreme vanity of the challenge.

The sum is this. Whatsoever this gift is, or this

And now let us take a man that pretends he has the gift of Prayer, and loves
to pray ex tempore, I suppose his thoughts go a little before his tongue; I
demand then, Whether cannot this man, when it is once come into his head, hold
his tongue, and write down what he has conceived? If his first conceptions
were of God, and Gods Spirit then they are so still, even when they are
written. Or is the Spirit departed from him, upon the sight of a Pen and
Inkhorne? It did use to be otherwise among the old and new Prophets, whether
they were Prophets of prediction, or of ordinary ministry. But if his
conception may be written, and being written, is still a production of the
Spirit, then it follows that set forms of prayer, deliberate, and described,
may as well be a praying with the Spirit, as sudden forms and ex tempore
out-lets.

Now the case being thus put, I would feign know what deliberate and ex tempore
Prayers, save only that in these there is less consideration and prudence;
for that the other are (at least as much as these) the productions of the
Spirit, is evident in the very case put in this Argument: and whether to
consider and to weigh them be any disadvantage to our devotions, I leave it to
all wise men to determine; So that in effect since after the pretended
assistance of the Spirit in our prayers we may write them down, consider them,
try the spirits, and ponder the matter, the reason and the religion of the
address; let the world judge whether this sudden utterance and ex tempore
forms be any thing else but a direct resolution not to consider before hand
what we speak. Sic itaque habe, ut istam vim dicendi rapidam, aptiorem esse
circulanti judices, quam agenti rem magnam and seriam docentique. They are the
words of Seneca, and express what naturally flows from the premises. The
pretense of the Spirit, and the gift of prayer is not sufficient to justify
the dishonor they do to Religion in serving it in the lowest and most
indeliberate manner, nor quit such men from unreasonablenesse and folly who
will dare to speak to God in the presence of the people, and in their behalf,
without deliberation, or learning, or study. Nothing is a greater disreputation
to the prudence of a Discourse, then to say it was a thing made up in haste,
that is, without due considering.

But here I consider, and I wish they whom it concerns Ananias and Saphira,
(...), that they did falsely pretend and belie the Holy Spirit, which crime
bestdes that it dishonours the holy Ghost, to make him the president of
imperfect and illiterate rites, the author of confusion, and indeliberate
Discourses, and the parent of such productions which a wise person would blush
to own: it also intitles him to all those Doctrines which either Chance or
Design shall expose to the people in such prayers, to which they entitle the
holy Spirit as the Author and immediate Dictator. So that if they please, he
must not only own their follies, but their impieties too; and how great
dis-reputation this is to the Spirit of Wisdom, of Counsel, and of Holiness,
I wish they may rather understand by Discourse then by Experiment.

But let us look a little farther into the mystery, and praying with the
Spirit. In what sense the holy Ghost is called the Spirit of Prayer, I have
already shown, viz. by the same reason as he is the Spirit of Faith, of
prudence, of knowledge, of understanding, and the like, because he gives us
assistances for the acquiring of these graces, and furnishes us with
revelations by way of object and instruction. But praying with the Spirit has
besides this, other senses also in Scripture. I find in one place, that we then
pray with the Spirit, when the holy Ghost does actually excite us to desires
and earnest tendencies, to the obtaining our holy purposes, when he prepares
our hearts to pray, when he enkindles our desires, gives us zeal and devotion,
charity and fervor, spiritual violence, and holy importunity. This sense is
also in the latter part of the objected words of S. Paul, Romans 8. The Spirit it
self makes Intercession for us with groanings. And indeed this is truly a
praying with the Spirit, but this will do our Reverend Brethren of the
Assembly little advantage as to the present Question. For this Spirit is not a
Spirit of utterance, not at all clamorous in the ears of the people, but cries
loud in the ears of God with [ groans unutterable,] so it follows, and only
[ He that searches the heart, he understands the meaning of the Spirit.]
This is the Spirit of the Son, which God has sent into Sunt ne mei? sunt ne
tui? imo sunt gemitus Ecclesiae, aliquando in me, aliquando in te August. eodem
modo quo S. August. dixit Deo, Conqueror tibi Domine lachrymis Jesu Christi, de
quo dictum est, Heb. 5. 7. (...).
our hearts, (not into our tongues) whereby we cry, Abba, Father, Gal. 4. 6.
And this is the great (...) for mental prayer, which is properly and truly
praying by the Spirit.

Another praying with the Spirit I find in that place of Paul, from whence this
expression is taken, and commonly used, I will pray with the spirit, and I will
pray with the understanding also. It is generally supposed that Saint Paul
relates here to a special and extraordinary gift of Prayer, which was indulged
to the Primitive Bishops and Priests, the Apostles and Rulers of Churches, and
to some other persons extraordinarily, of being able to compose prayers, pious
in the matter, prudent in the composure, devout in the forms, expressive in
the language; and in short, useful to the Church, and very apt for devotion,
and serving to her religion and necessities. I believe that such a gift there
was, and this indulged as other issues of the Spirit to some persons, upon
special necessities, by singular dispensation, as the Spirit knew to be most
expedient, for the present need, and the future instruction. This I believe,
not because I find sufficient testimony that it was so, or any evidence from
the words now alleged, but because it was reasonable it should be so, and
agreeable to the other proceedings of the holy Ghost. For although we account
it an easy matter, to make prayers, and we have great reason to give thanks to
the holy Ghost for it, who has descended so plentifully upon the Church, has
made plentiful revelation of all the public and private necessities of the
world, has taught us how to pray, given rules for the manner of address,
taught us how to distinguish spiritual from carnal things, has represented
the vanity of worldly desires, the unsatisfyingnesse of earthly possessions,
the blessing of being denied our impertinent, secular, and indiscreet requests,
and has done all this at the beginning of Christianity, and has actually
stirred up the Apostles and Apostolical men to make so many excellent Forms
of Prayer, which their successors did in part retain, and in part imitate,
till the conjunct wisdom of the Church saw her offices complete, regular and
sufficient. So that now every man is able to make something of Forms of
Prayer, (for which ability they should do well to pay their Eucharist to the
holy Ghost, and not abuse the gift to vanity or schism) yet at the first
beginning of Christianity, till the holy Spirit did fill all things, they found
no such plenty of forms of Prayer: and it was accounted a matter of so great
consideration to make a Form of Prayer, that it was thought a fit work for a
Prophet, or the Founder of an Institution. And therefore the Disciples of John
asked of him to teach them how to pray; and the Disciples of Christ did so too.
For the Law of Moses had no rules to instruct the Synagogue how to pray; and
but that Moses, and David, and Asaph, and some few of the Prophets more, left
forms of Prayer which the Spirit of God inspired them withal upon great
necessities, and great mercy to that people, they had not known how to have
composed an office, for the daily service of the Temple, without danger of
asking things needless, vain, or impious, such as were the prayers in the
Roman Closets, that he was a good man that would not own them, Et nihil arcano
qui roget ore Deos.
-- Pulchra Laverna
Da mihi fallere, dajustum, sanctumque videri
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus objice nubem.
But when the Holy Ghost came down in a full breath, and a mighty wind, he
filled the breasts and tongues of men, and furnished the first Christians not
only with abilities enough to frame excellent devotions for their present
offices, but also to become precedents for Liturgy to all ages of the Church,
the first being imitated by the second, and the second by the third, till the
Church being settled in peace, and the records transmitted with greater care,
and preserved with less hazard, the Church chose such Forms whose Copies we
retain at this day.

Now since it was certain that all ages of the Church prayer with its several
parts, and instances, is a great portion of the Religion (the Sacraments
themselves being instruments of grace, and effectual in genere orationis) it
is very reasonable to think that the Apostolical men, had not only the first
fruits, but the elder Brothers share, a double portion of the Spirit, because
they were not only to serve their own needs, to which a single and an
ordinary portion would have been then (as now) abundantly sufficient, but also
to serve the necessity of the succession, and to instruct the Church for ever
after.

But then, that this assistance was an ability to pray ex tempore, I find it no
where affirmed by sufficient authentic Testimony, and if they could have done
it, it is very likely they would have been wary, and restrained in the public
use of it. I doubt not but there might then be some sudden necessities of the
Church, for which the Church being in her infancy had not as yet provided any
public forms, concerning which cases, I may say as Quintilian of an Orator
in the great and sudden needs of the Commonwealth, Quarum si qua non dico
cuicunque De extemporali dicendi facultate
innocentiam civium, sed amicorum ac propinquorum alicui evenerit, stabitne
matus, and salutarem parentibus vocem, statim, si non succurratur, perituris,
moras and secessum and silentium quaeret, dum illa verba fabricentur, and
memoriae insidant, and vox ac latus praeparetur? I do not think that they
were oratores imparati ad casus, but that an ability of praying on a sudden was
indulged to them by a specall aid of the Spirit to contest against sudden
dangers, and the violence of new accidents, to which also possibly a new
inspiration, was but for a very little while necessary, even till they
understood the mysteries of Christianity, and the revelations of the Spirit, by
proportion and analogy to which they were sufficiently instructed to make their
sudden prayers when sudden occasions did require.

This I speak by way of concession and probability.

For, 1. It is here employed that they did prepare some of when you come
together each of you (peradventure) has a Psalm. (...) not (...), not every
one makes, but when you meet, every one has, viz. [already] which supposes
they had it prepared against the meeting. For the Spirit could help as well at
home in their meditation, as in the public upon a sudden: and though it is
certain, the Holy Spirit loves to bless the public meetings, the communion
of Saints, with special benedictions; yet I suppose my Adversaries are not
willing to acknowledge, any thing that should do much reputation to the
Church, and the public authorized conventions; at least, not to confine the
Spirit to such holy and blessed meetings. They will (I suppose) rather grant
the words do probably intimate they came prepared with a Hymn, and therefore
there is nothing in the nature of the thing, but that so also might their other
forms of Prayer; the assistance of the Spirit (which is the thing in Question)
hinders not, but that they also might have made them by premeditation.

2. In this place, praying with the Spirit, signifies, no (...), If I pray in a
tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is without fruit, what then? I
will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also. Plainly
here, praying in the Spirit, which is opposed to praying in understanding, is
praying in an unknown tongue; where by the way observe, that praying with the
Spirit, even in sense of Scripture, is not always most to edification of the
people. Not always with understanding. And when these two are separated, Saint
Paul preferres five words with understanding, before ten thousand in the
spirit. For this praying with the Spirit was indeed then a gift extraordinary
and miraculous, like as prophesying with the Spirit and expired with it. But
while it did last it was the lowest of gifts, inter dona linguarum, it was but
a gift of the tongue, and not to the benefit of the Church directly or
immediately.

This also observe in passing by. If Saint Paul did so Liturgy with their blood.

But to return. In this place, praying with the Spirit, my spirit praying,]
that is, it implies my cooperation with the assistance of the Spirit of God,
insomuch that the whole action may truly be denominated mine, and is called (
of the Spirit) only by reason of that collateral assistance. For so Saint
Paul joins them as terms identicall, and expressive one of another meaning,
as you may please to read, ver. 14, and 15. 1 Cor. 14. I will pray with the
Spirit, and my spirit truly prays. It is the act of our inner man, praying
holy and spiritual prayers. But then indeed at that time there was something
extraordinary adjoined, for it was in an unknown Tongue, the practice of which
Saint Paul there dislikes. This also will be to none of their purposes. For
whether it were ex tempore, or by premeditation is not here expressed; or if it
had, yet that assistance extraordinary in prayer, if there was any beside the
gift of Tongues, (which is not here, or any where else expressed) is no more
transmitted to us, then the speaking tongues in the Spirit, or prophesying ex
tempore and by the Spirit.

But I would add also one experiment which S. Paul ex tempore, then so is
singing too. For they are expressed in the same place in the same manner, to
the same end, and I know no reason why there should be differing senses put
upon them to serve purposes. And now let us have some Church Music too,
though the Organs be pulled down, and let any the best Psalmist of them all,
compose a Hymn in Metricall form (as Antipater Sidonius in Quintilian, and
Licinius Archias in Cicero could do in their Verses) and sing it to a new tune
with perfect and true music, and all this ex tempore. For all this the Holy
Ghost can do if he pleases; But if it be said that the Corinthian Christians,
composed their Songs and Hymns according to art and rules of Music, by study
and industry, and that to this they were assisted by the Spirit; and that this
together with the devotion of their spirit, was singing with the Spirit, then
say I, so composing set forms of Liturgy by skill, and prudence, and humane
industry, may be as much praying with the Spirit, as the other is singing with
the Spirit. Plainly enough. In all the senses of praying with the Spirit, and
in all it is acceptations in Scripture, to pray or sing with the spirit, neither
of them of necessity implies ex tempore.

The sum or Collecta of the premises is this. Praying per motionem actualis
auxilii: or (2) when the spirit teaches us what, or how to pray, telling us the
matter, and manner of our prayers. (3) Or lastly, dictating the very words of
our prayers. There is no other way in the world to pray with the Spirit, or in
the Holy Ghost, that is pertinent to this Question. And of this last manner the
Scripture determines nothing, nor speaks any thing expressly of it, and yet
suppose it had, we are certain the Holy Ghost has supplied us, with all these,
and yet in set forms of Prayer best of all, I mean, there where a difference
can be; For (1) as for the desires, and actual motions or incitements to pray,
they are indifferent to one or the other, to set forms, or to ex tempore.

2. But as to the matter or manner of prayer, it is clearly

3. Now then for the very words. No man can assure ex tempore prayer are the
words of the holy Spirit: it is not reason nor modesty to expect such immediate
assistances to so little purpose, he having supplied us with abilities more
then enough to express our desires aliunde, otherwise then by immediate
dictate; But if we will take David's Psalter, or the other Hymns of holy
Scripture, or any of the Prayers which are respersed over the Bible, we are
sure enough that they are the words of Gods spirit, mediately or immediately,
by way of infusion or ecstasy, by vision, or at least by ordinary assistance.
And now then, what greater confidence can any man have for the excellency of
his prayers, and the probability of their being accepted, then when he prays
his Psalter, or the Lords Prayer, or any other office which he finds consigned
in Scripture? When Gods spirit stirs us up to an actual devotion, and then
we use the matter he has described and taught, and the very words which Christ
and Christ's spirit, and the Apostles, and other persons, full of the Holy Ghost
did use; If in the world there be any praying with the Spirit (I mean, in
vocal prayer) this is it.

And thus I have examined the entire and full scope of Scribendum ergo quoties
licebit; Si id non dabitur cogitandum: Quintil. l. 10. c. 7.
ab utroque exclusi, debent tamen adniti, ut neque deprehensus orator, neque
destitutus esse videatur. In making our Orations and public advocations, we
must write what we mean to speak, as often as we can; when we cannot, yet we
must deliberate, and study; and when the suddenness of the accident prevents
both these, we must use all the powers of art and care that we have a present
mind, and call in all our first provisions, that we be not destitute of matter
and words apt for the employment. This was Quintilian's rule for the matter of
prudence, and in secular occasions; but when the instance is in Religion, and
especially in our prayers, it will concern us nearer, to be curious and
deliberate what we speak in the audience of the eternal God, when our lives and
our souls, and the honor of God, and the reputation of Religion are
concerned, and whatsoever is greatest in it self, or dearest to us.

THe second Question has in it something more Quest. 2.
of difficulty; for the Men that own it will give leave that set forms may be
used, so you give leave to them to make them; but if authority shall interpose
and prescribe a Liturgy, every word shall breed a quarrel, and if the matter be
innocent, yet the very injunction is tyranny, a restraining of the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, it leaves the spirit of a Man sterile and unprofitable, it is not
for edification of the Church, and is as destitute of comfort, as it is of
profit. For God has not restrained his Spirit to those few that rule the
Church in prelation above others, but if he has given to them the spirit of
government, he has given to others the spirit of prayer, and the spirit of
Prophecy. Now the manifestation 1 Cor. 12. 7.
of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, for to one is given by
the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, by the same
Spirit. And these and many other gifts are given to several members that they
may supply one another, and all join to the edification of the body. And
therefore that must needs be an imprudent sanction that so determines the
offices of the Church, that she cannot be edified by that variety of gifts
which the holy Spirit has given to several men to that purpose, just as if
there should be a Canon, that but one Sermon should be preached in all Churches
forever. Besides, it must needs be, that the devotion of the suppliants must be
much retarded by the perpetui^y, and unalterable reiteration of the same form;
For since our affections will certainly vary and suffer great alteration of
degrees, and inclinations, it is easier to frame words apt to comply with our
affections then to conform our affections in all varieties to the same words:
When the forms are daily changed, it is more probable that every Man shall
find something proportionable to his fancy, which is the great instrument of
Devotion, then to suppose that any one form, should be like Manna fitted to
every taste; and therefore in prayers, as the affections must be natural,
sweet, and proper, so also should the words expressing the affections, issue
forth by way of natural emanation. Sed extemporalis Quintil. dial. de Oratorib.
audaciae atque ipsius temeritatis vel praecipua jucunditas est. Nam in ingenio
sicut in agro quanquam alia diu serantur, atque elaborentur, gratiora tamen
quae sua sponte nascuntur. And a garment may as well be made to fit the moon,
as that one form of Prayer should be made apt and proportionable to all men,
or to any man at all times.

This Discourse relies wholly upon these two grounds;

Before I descend to consideration of the particulars, I other, and although a
liberty in private may be for edification of good people, when it is piously
and discreetly used, yet in the public, if it were indifferently permitted, it
would bring infinite inconvenience, and become intolerable, as a sad experience
does too much verify.

But now then, this distinction, evacuates all the former

But since these advantages to devotion are accidental,

Thus, if public forms of Prayer be described whose extent, and provisionary
for all public, probable, feared, or foreseen events, whose frame and
composure is prudent, and by authority competent and high, and whose use and
exercise is isntrumental to peace and public charity, and all these hallowed
by intention, and care of doing glory to God, and advantages to Religion,
expressed in observation of all such rules, and precedents as are most likely
to teach us best, and guide us surest, such as are Scriptures, Apostolical
Tradition, Primitive practice, and precedents of Saints, and holy Persons, the
public can do no more, all the duty is performed, and all the care is taken.

Now after all this there are personal necessities and Neque hoc Quintil:
ego ago ut extempore dicere malit, sed ut possit.

And indeed sometimes an exuberant, and an active affection, and undermined.
(For there was a case in the days of the inundation of the Spirit, when a man
full of the Spirit was commanded to keep silence in the Church; and 1 Cor. 14
18.
to speak to himself and to God) yet when this grace is given him in private,
he may compose his own Liturgy, Quintilian.
pectus enim est quod disertos facit, and vis mentis. Ideoque imperit is
quoque, si mode sint aliquo affectu concitati, verba non desunt. Only when in
private devotion we use forms of our own making or choosing, we are concerned to
see, that the matter be pious, apt for edification and the present necessity,
and without contempt of public prescriptions, or irreverence to God, and in
all the rest we are at liberty; Quale ect illud apud Tertull: de privatis
Christianorum precibus, non quidem ab alio dictatis, sed a Scripturarum
fontibus, derivatis. Illuc suspicientes Christiani manibus expansis, quia
innocui; capite nudo, quia non erubescimus: denique sine monitore quia de
pectore: oramus pro omnibus Imperatoribas, vitam illis prolixam, imperium
securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem
quietum, and quaecunque hominis and Caesaris vota sunt.
only in the Lord, that is, according to the rule of faith, and the analogy of
Christian religion. For supposing that our devotion be servent, our intention
pious, and the petition (...), according to the will of God, Whatsoever our
expressions are, God reads the petition in the Character of the Spirit, though
the words be brevia concisa, and singultantium modo ejecta. But then these
accidental advantages, and circumstances of profit, which may be provided for
in private; as they cannot be taken care of in public, so neither is it
necessary they should: for those pleasures of sensible devotion are so far
from being necessary to the acceptance of prayer, that they are but
compliances with our infirmities, and suppose a great weakness in him that
needs them (say the Masters of spiritual life) and in the strongest prayers,
and most effectual devotions, are seldomest found; such as was Moses prayer
when he spoke nothing, and Hannah's and our blessed Savior's when he called
upon his Father, (...), with strong cries, in that great desertion of Spirit,
when he prayed in the Garden; In these prayers the Spirit was bound up with the
strictness and violence of intention, but could not ease it self with a flood
of language, and various expression. A great devotion is like a great grief,
not so expressive as a moderate passion, tears spend the grief, and variety of
language breathes out the devotion; and therefore Christ went thrice, and said
the same words; he could just speak his sense in a plain expression, but the
greatness of his agony was too big for the pleasure of a sweet and sensible
expression of devotion.

So that let the devotion be never so great, set forms enough of any desire,
though importunate as extremity it self; but when the Spirit is weak, and the
devotion imperfect, and the affections dry, though in respect of the precise
duty on our part, and the acceptance on Gods part, no advantage is got by a
liberty of an indifferent, unlimited, and chosen form; and therefore in all
cases, the whole duty of prayer is secured by public forms; yet other
circumstantiall and accidental advantages, may be obtained by it, and
therefore let such persons feast themselves in private with sweetmeats, and
less nourishing delicacies, weak stomachs must be cared for, yet they must be
confessed to have stronger stomachs, and better health, that can feed upon the
wholesome food prepared in the common refectories.

So that public forms (it is true) cannot be fitted man's duty, and for the
pleasing the affections and fancies of men, that may be sometimes convenient,
but it is never necessary; and God that suffers dryness of affections many
times in his dearest servants, and in their greatest troubles, and most
excellent Devotions, has by that sufferance of his, given demonstration that
it is not necessary such affections should be complied withal, for then he
would never suffer those sterilities, but himself by a cup of sensible
Devotion would water and refresh those drinesses; and if God himself does not,
it is not to be expected the Church should.

And this also is the case of Scripture, for the many Paul's Epistles would not;
and yet certainly there is no comparison between them, but one Chapter of S.
Paul is more excellent and of better use to the substantial part of Religion,
then all the Sermons of Saint Chrysostom: and yet there are some circumstances
of advantage which humane eloquence may have, which are not observed to be in
those other more excellent emanations of the holy Spirit. And therefore if the
Objection should be true, and that conceived forms of Prayer in their great
variety might do some accidental advantages to weaker persons, and stronger
fancies, and more imperfect judgments, yet this instance of Scripture is a
demonstration that set and composed devotions may be better; and this reason
does not prove the contrary, because the Sermons in Scripture are infinitely to
be preferred before those discourses and orations, which do more comply with
the fancies of the people. Nay, we see by experience, that the change of our
prayers, or our books, or our company, is so delightful to most persons, that
though the change be for the worse, it more complies with their affections then
the peremptory and unaltered retaining of the better; but yet this is no good
argument to prove that change to be for the better.

But yet if such compliance with fancies and affections

And after all, it is nothing but the fantastique and ground of their
displeasure is nothing from the thing it self, but from themselves only: they
are wanton with their meat, and long for variety, and then they cry out that
Manna will not nourish them, but prefer the onions of Egypt before the food of
Angels; the way to cure this inconvenience is to alter the men, not to change
the institution; for it is very certain that wholesome meat, is of it self
nutritive, if the body be disposed to its reception, and entertainment. But it
is not certain that what a sick man fancies out of the weakness of his spirit,
the distemper of his appetite, and wildness of his fancy, that it will become
to him either good, or good physic. Now in the entertainments of Religion and
Spiritual repasts, that is wholesome, nutritive, and apt to edify, which is
pious in it self, of advantage to the honor of God, whatsoever is good
Doctrine, or good Prayers, especially when it is prepared by a public hand,
and designed for public use, by all the wisdom of those men who in all reason
are to be supposed to have received from God all those assistances which are
effects of the spirit of Government; and therefore it is but weakness of
spirit, or strength of passion, impotency in some sense or other, certainly,
that first dislikes the public provisions, and then, say, they are not
wholesome.

For I demand concerning the public Lyturgies of a [ by Jesus Christ] and
which gives all the glory that is due to God, and gives nothing of this to a
Creature, and has in it many admirable documents; whether there be any thing
wanting in such a Lyturgie toward edification? What is there in prayers that
can edify, that is not in such in a Lyturgie so constituted? Or what can there
be more in the private forms of any Minister, then is in such a public
composition?

By this time, I suppose, the Objection with all its

1. The Church has a power given to her by the Spirit Stewards of the manifold
Graces of God, whose office is to provide every man's portion, and to dispense
the graces and issues Evangelicall by way of Ministry. Who is that faithful
and wise Steward, whom his Lord shall make ruler of his Household? It was our
blessed Saviors Question, and Saint Paul answered it: Let a man so account of
us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and 1 Cor. 4. 1.
Stewards of the mysteries of God. Now the greatest Ministry of the Gospel is
by way of prayer, (most of the graces of the Spirit being obtained by prayer,
and such offices which operate by way of impetration, and benediction, and
consecration, which are but the several instances of prayer) Prayer,
certainly, is the most effectual and mysterious ministry: and therefore since
the Holy Ghost has made the Rulers of the Church, Stewards of the mysteries,
they are by virtue of their Stewardship Presidents of Prayer and public
Offices.

2. Which also is certain, because the Priest is to stand He is a Prophet and
shall pray Genesis 20. 7.
for thee, said God, concerning Abraham to Abimelech. And therefore the
Apostles appointed inferior Officers in the Church that they might not be
hindered in their great work, but we will give our selves to the word of God
and Act^ 6. 4.
to prayer; And therefore in our greatest need, in our sickness, and last
scene of our lives, we are directed to send for the Elders of the Church, that
they may pray over us; and God has promised to hear them: and if prayer be of
any concernment toward the final condition of our souls, certainly it is to
be ordered, guided, and disposed by them who watch for our souls, (...), as
they that must give account to God for them.

3. Now if the Rulers of the Church are Presidents of the public is certainly
concerned, that is, by the Rulers of the Church, who are answerable if there be
any miscarriage in the public. Thus far I suppose there will not be much
Question with those who allow set forms, but would have themselves, be the
Composers; They would have the Ministers pray for the people, but the Ministers
shall not be prescribed to; the Rulers of the Church shall be the Presidents of
religious rites, but then they will be the Rulers, therefore we must proceed
farther; and because I will not now enter into the Question who are left by
Christ to govern his Church, I will proceed upon such grounds which I hope may
be sufficient to determine this Question, and yet decline the other. Therefore

4. Since the Spirit of God is the spirit of supplication, stylus curiae, the
form of all the great promises, being in general and comprehensive terms,
appears in this, that when any single person is out of this Communion, he has
also no title to the promises; which yet he might, if he had any upon his own
stock, not derivative from the Church. Now then I infer; if any single persons
will have us to believe without possibility of proof (for so it must be) that
they pray with the Spirit, (for how shall they be able to prove the spirit
actually to abide in those single persons?) then much rather must we believe it
of the Church, which by how much the more general it is, so much the more of
the Spirit she is likely to have: and then if there be no errors in the matter,
the Church has the advantage and probability on her side; and if there be an
error in matter in either of them, neither of them have the Spirit, or they
make not the true use of it. But the public Spirit in all reason is to be
trusted before the private when there is a contestation, the Church being prior
and potior in promissis, she has a greater and priour title to the Spirit. And
why the Church has not the spirit of prayer in her compositions as well as any
of her Children, I desire once for all to be satisfied upon true grounds either
of reason or revelation. And if she have, whether she have not as much as any
single person? If she have but as much, then there is as much reason in respect
of the divine assistance, that the Church should make the forms, as that any
single Minister should, and more reason in respect of order and public
influence, and care, and charge of souls: but if she have a greater portion of
the Spirit than a single person, that is, if the whole be greater then the
part, or the public better than the private, then it is evident, that the
spirit of the Church in respect of the divine assistance, is chiefly, and in
respect of order, is only to be relied upon for public provisions and forms
of prayer.

But now if the Church in her united capacity makes prayers for the people,
they cannot be supposed to be other than limited and determined forms; for it
is not practicable, or indeed, imaginable, that a Synod of Church Governors
(be they who they will, so they be of Christ's appointment) should meet in every
Church, and pray as every man list; their Counsels are united, and their
results are Conclusions, and final determinations, which like general
propositions are applicable to particular instances; so that (1) since the
Spirit being the great Dictatour of holy prayers, and (2) the Spirit is
promised to the Church in her united capacity, and (3) in proportion to the
Assembly caeteris paribus, so are measures of the Spirit powered out, and (4)
when the Church is assembled, the Prayers which they teach the People are
limited and prescribed forms; it follows that limited and prescribed forms,
are in all reason, emanations from the greatest portion of the Spirit,
warranted by special promises, which are made to every man there present that
does his duty, as a private member of the Christian Church, and are due to him
as a Ruler of the Church, and yet more especially, and in a further degree to
all them met together; where (if ever) the holy Spirit gives such helps and
graces which relate to the public government, and have influence upon the
communities of Christians, that is, will bless their meeting, and give them
such assistances as will enable them to do the work for which they convene.

But yet if any man shall say, What need the Church quod spectat ad omnes ab
omnibus tractari debet, the matter is of public concernment, and therefore
should be of public consultation, and the advantages of publicly described
forms I shall afterward specify. In the mean time,

5. As the Church, I mean the Rulers of the Church, Rulers in conjunction are
enabled to do it best by the advantages of special promises, and double
portions of the Spirit; so she always did practice this, either in
conjunction, or by single dictate, by public persons, or united authority; but
in all times, as necessity required, they prescribed set Forms of Prayer.

If I should descend to minutes, and particulars, I Moses a set Form of
Prayer, and benediction to be used when he did bless the people. *2. That
Moses composed a Song, or Hymn for the children of Israel, to use, to all
their generations *3. That David composed many for the service of the
Tabernacle, and every company of singers was tied to certain Psalms, as the
very titles intimate; and the Psalms were such limited and determinate
prescriptions, that in some, Gods Spirit did bind them to the very number of
the Letters, and order of the Alphabet. *4. That Solomon, and the holy Kings of
Judah brought them in, and continued them in the ministration of the Temple.
*5. That in the reformation by Hezekiah, the Priests and Levites were commanded
to praise the Lord in the words of David and Asaph. *6. That all Scripture is
written 2 Chronicles. 29. 30
for our learning; and since all these, and many more set Forms of Prayer are
left there upon record, it is more then probable, that they were left there for
our use, and devotion; and certainly, it is as lawful, and as prudent to pray
Scriptures, as to read Scriptures; and it were well, if we would use our selves
to the expression of Scripture, and that the language of God were familiar to
us, that we spoke the words of Canaan, not the speech of Ashdod; and time was,
when it was thought the greatest Ornament of a spiritual Person, and
instrument of a religious Conversation; but then the consequents would be, that
these Prayers were the best Forms which were in the words of Scripture, and
those Psalms and Prayers there recorded, were the best devotions, but these
are set Forms. *7. To this purpose I could instance in the example of Saint
John Baptist, who taught his Disciples a Form of Prayer. And that Christ's
Disciples begged the same favor, and it was granted as they desired it.

And here I mean to fix a little, for this ground cannot Moses was bid to make
the Tabernacle, after the pattern which God showed him in the Mount, and Mat.
5. 1.
Christ showed his Apostles; but he has given us the Mat. 6. 9.
very tables written with his own hand, that we should use them as they are so
delivered; this Prayer was not only a precedent and pattern, but an instance
of address, a perfect form for our practice, as well as imitation. For

1. When Christ was upon the Mount, he gave it for

2. When the Apostles upon occasion of the Form Luke 11. 2.
when ye pray, say, our Father, Proaeres. ap. Eunapium.
when they speak to God, it was fit they should speak in his words, in whose
name also their prayers only could be acceptable.

3. For if we must speak this sense, why also are not the

4. And it is observeable that our blessed Savior does Hallowed be thy name,
etc. so that he prescribes this Prayer, not in massa materiae, but in forma
verborum, not in a confused heap of matter, but in an exact composure of words,
it makes it evident he intended it not only pro regula petendorum, for a
direction of what things we are to ask, but also pro forma orationis, for a
set form of Prayer. Now it is considerable that no man ever had the fullness of
the Spirit, but only the holy Jesus, and therefore it is also certain, that no
man had the Spirit of prayer like to him, and then, if we pray this prayer
devoutly, and with pious and actual intention, do we not pray in the Spirit
of Christ, as much as if we prayed any other form of words pretended to be
taught us by the Spirit? We are sure that Christ and Christ's spirit taught us
this Prayer, they only gather by conjectures and opinions, that in their ex
tempore or conceived forms the Spirit of Christ teaches them. So much then as
Certainties are better then Uncertainties, and Gods words better than Man's, so
much is this Set form, besides the infinite advantages in the matter, better
then their ex tempore and conceived Forms, in the form it self. And if ever
any prayer was, or Gal. 3. 2.
could be, a part of that doctrine of faith by which we received the Spirit,
it must needs be this prayer which was the only form our blessed Master
taught the Christian Church immediately, was a part of his great and glorious
Sermon in the Mount, in which all the needs of the world are sealed up as in a
treasure house, and intimated by several petitions as diseases are by their
proper and proportioned remedies, and which Christ published as the first
emanation of his Spirit, the first perfume of that heavenly anointing which
descended on his sacred head when he went down into the waters of Baptism.

This we are certain of, that there is nothing wanting,

Now then I demand whether the Prayer of Manasses, be Lords Prayer? or is the
Prayer of Judith, or of Tobias, or of Judas Maccabeus, or of the Son of
Sirach, is any of these so good? Certainly no man will say they are; and the
reason is, because we are not sure they are inspired by the Holy Spirit of God;
prudent, and pious, and conformable to Religion they may be, but not penned by
so excellent a spirit as this Prayer. And what assurance can be given that any
Ministers prayer is better then the prayers of the Son of Sirach, who was a
very wise, and a very good man, as all the world acknowledges; I know not any
one of them that has so large a testimony, or is of so great reputation. But
suppose they can make as good prayers, yet surely they are Apocryphal at
least, and for the same reason that the Apocryphal prayers are not so
excellent as the Lords prayer, by the same reason must the best they can be
imagined to compose fall short of this excellent pattern by how much they
partake of a smaller portion of the Spirit, as a drop of water is less then
all the waters under, or above the Firmament.

Secondly, I would also willingly know, whether if pro loco and tempore,
(according to the nature and obligation of all affirmative precepts) as it is
certain he did, in the preceptive words recorded by S. Luke, [ When ye pray,
say, Our Father] then it is to be considered that a Divine Commandment is
broken, by its rejection; and therefore, if there were any doubt remaining,
whether it be a command or no; yet since, on one side there is danger of a
negligence, and a contempt, and that on the other side, the observation and
conformity cannot be criminal, or imprudent; it will follow, that the
retaining of this Prayer in practice, and suffering it to do all its
intentions, and particularly becoming the great (...), or authority for set
forms of Prayer, is the safest, most prudent, most Christian understanding of
those words of Christ, propounding the Lords Prayer to the Christian Church.
And because it is impossible that all particulars should be expressed in any
form of prayer, because particulars are not only casual and accidental, but
also infinite; Christ, according to that wisdom he had without measure, framed
a Prayer, which by a general comprehension should include all particulars,
eminent, and vertually; so that there should be no defect in it, and yet so
short, that the most imperfect memories might retain, and use it.

And it is not amiss to observe, that our blessed Savior a priori, we also in
the event, see the excellent spirit and wisdom in the Constitution; for those
persons who have laid aside the Lords Prayer, have been noted by common
observation; to be very long in their forms, and troublesome, and vain enough
in their repetitions, they have laid aside the medicine, and the old wound
bleeds afresh, the Pharisees did so of old.

And after all this, it is strange employment, that any man should be put to
justify the wisdom and prudence of any of Christ's institutions; as if any of
his servants who are wise upon his Stock, instructed by his Wisdom, made
knowing by his Revelations, and whose all that is good, is but a weak ray of
the glorious light of the Sun of Righteousness, should dare to think that the
Derivative should be before the Primitive, the current above the Fountain; and
that we should derive all our excellency from him, and yet have some beyond
him, that is, some which he never had, or which he was not pleased to manifest;
or that we should have a spirit of prayer able to make productions beyond his
Prayer who received the Spirit without measure. But this is not the first time
man has disputed against God.

And now let us consider with sobriety, not only of ex tempore, or by study,
make better? Who dares pretend that he has a better spirit than David had? or
than the Apostles and Prophers, and other holy persons in Scripture, whose
Prayers and Psulmes are by Gods Spirit consigned to the use of the Church for
ever? Or will it be denied but that they also are excellent Directories and
Patterns for prayer? And if Patterns, the nearer we draw to our example, are
not the imitations and representments the better? And what then if we took the
Samplers themselves? Is there any imperfection in them, and can we mend them,
and correct the Magnificat? The very matter of these, and the Author no less
then Divine cannot but justify the Forms, though set, determined and
prescribed.

In a just proportion and commensuration, I argue so England, they would
against all defiance put in for the next place to those forms of Liturgy,
which mutatis mutandis, are nothing but the words of Scripture. But I am
resolved at this present not to enter into Question concerning the matter of
Prayers.

Next, we must enquire what the Apostles did in obedience Vid. Scalig. de
emend. tempor. de Judaeor. magn. Allelujah.
Allelujah which was usually sung at the end of the Paschall Supper, After
Supper they sang a hymn, says the Evangelist. The Jews also used every
Sabbath to sing the XCII Psalm, which is therefore intit'led, A Song or Psalm
for the Sabbath, and they who observed the hours of Prayer, and Vows,
according to the rites of the Temple, need not be suspected to have omitted the
Jewish forms of prayer. And as they complied with the religious customs of
the Nation, worshipping according to the Jewish manner, it is also in reason to
be presumed they were Worshippers according to the new Christian institution,
and used that form their Lord taught them.

Now, that they tied themselves to recitation of the very pro loco and tempore,
I am therefore easy to believe, because I find they were strict to a scruple
in retaining the Sacramental words which Christ spoke when he instituted the
blessed Sacrament, insomuch that not only three Evangelists, but S. Paul also
not only making a narrative of the institution, but teaching the Corinthians
the manner of its celebration, to a tittle he recites the words of Christ. Now
the action of the Consecrator is not a theatricall representment of the action
of Christ, but a sacred, solemn, and Imo totus Canon consecrationis tam
similis est and fere idem in verbis apud. Graecos, Latinos, Arabas, Armenios,
Syros, Egyptios, AEthiopas, ut nisi a communi font, qui nisi Apostolorum non
est, manare non potuerit. Unde intelligi datur quia multum erat ut in Epistola,
totum illum agendi ordinem insinuaret, quem Vniversa per orbem servat Ecclesia,
ab ipso ordinatum esse, quod nulla morum diversitate variatur. S. Aug. ep. 118.
Sacramental prayer, in which since the Apostles at first, and the Church ever
after did with reverence, and fear, retain the very words, it is not only a
probation of the Question in general, in behalf of set forms; but also a high
probability that they retained the Lord's Prayer, and used it to an (...), in
the very form of words.

And I the rather make this inference from the preceding Gregory, and Greg. l.
7. cp. 63.
Saint Hierome affirms, that the Apostles, by the command Hier. lib. contr.
Pelag.
of their Lord, used this Eligo in his verbis hoc intelligere, quod omnis, vel
pene omnis frequentat Ecclesia, ut precationes accipiamus dictas quos facimus
in celebratione Sacramentorum antequam illud quod est in Domini mensa incipiat
benedici; orationes cum benedicitur, and ad distribuendum comminuitur: quam
totam orationem, pene omnis Ecclesia, Dominica oratione concludit. 8. Aug. cp.
59. q. 5. ad illud Pauli, Obsecro primum omnium fieri obsecrationes.
prayer in the benediction of the Elements.

But besides this, when the Apostles had received God in Hymns, and Psalms,
and Spiritual Songs, Col. 3. 16.
which is so certain, that they were compositions of industry and
deliberation, and yet were sung in the Spirit, that he, who denies the last,
speaks against Scriptures, he who denies the first, speaks against Reason,
and would best consute himself, if in the highest, of his pretense of the
Spirit, he would venture at some ex tempore Hymns. And of this, we have the
express testimony of Saint Austin, De Hymnis and Psalmis canendis haberi
Epist. 119. c. 18.
Domini and Apostolorum documenta, and utilia praecepta. And the Church obeyed
them, for as an Ancient Author under the name of Dionysius Areopagita relates,
the chief of the Clericall, and Ministering Order offer bread upon the Altar,
Cum Ecclesiastici omnes, laudem hymnumque generalem Deo tribuerint, cum quibus
Pontifex sacras preces rite perficit, etc. They all sing one Hymn to God, and
then the Bishop prays rite, according to the rituall or constitution, which in
no sense of the Church, or of Grammar, can be understood without a solemn and
determined form; (...) says Casaubon In Theophrast. charact.
is cantare, idem saepius dicere, apud Graecos (...); they were forms of
praising God used constantly, periodically, and in the daily Offices. And the
Fathers of the Council of Antioch complain against Paulus Samosatenus, Ap.
Eusebius 1. 7. c. 24.
Quod Psalmos and cantus qui ad Domini nostri Jesu Et Walafr. Strab. c. 25. de
reb. Eccles.
Christi honorem decantari solent tanquam recentiores, and a viris recentioris
memoriae editos exploserit. The quarrel was, that he said the Church had used
to say Hymns which were made by new men, and not derived from the Ancients;
which, if we consider that the Council of Antioch was in the 12 year of
Gallienus the Emperor, 133 years after Christ's Ascension, will fairly prove,
that the use of prescribed Forms of Prayer, Hymns and forms of Worshipping,
were very early in the Church; and it is unimaginable it should be otherwise,
when we remember the Apostolical precept before mentioned. And if we fancy a
higher precedent, than what was manifested upon earth, we may please to see one
observed to have been made in Heaven; for a set form of Worship, and address
to God, was recorded by Saint John, Apoc. 15.
and sung in Heaven; and it was composed out of the Songs of Moses, ( Exodus
15.) of David, ( Psalm. 145.) and of Jeremy, ( Chapt. 10. 6, 7.) which,
certainly, is a very good precedent for us to imitate although but revealed to
Saint John, by way of vision and ecstasy, that we may see, if we would speak
with the tongue of Men and Angels, we could not praise God in better Forms,
then what are recorded in holy Scripture.

But besides the metricall part, the Apostle has described though it be in
determined form of words, yet not so bound up with numbers, as Hymns: and
these Saint Paul calls supplications, prayers, intercessions, and (...)
giving of thanks, which are several manners of address distinguished by
their subject matter, by their form and manner of address. As appears plainly
by [ intercessions and giving of thanks] the other are also by all men
distinguished, though in the particular assignment they differ, but the
distinction of the Words implies the distinction of Offices, which together
with the (...), the Lectionarium of the Church, the Books of the Apostles, and
Prophets spoken of by Justin Martyr, and said to be used in the Christian
Congregations, are the constituent parts of Liturgy; and the exposition of the
words we best learn from the practice of the Church, who in all Ages of whose
public offices any record is left to us, took their Hesych. vide S. August.
ep. 59 q. 5. in hunc locum. descripsi verba ad. 86.
pattern from these places of Scripture, the one for Prose, the other for
Verse; and if we take Liturgy into its several parts, or members, we cannot
want something to apply to every one of the words of Saint Paul in these
present allegations.

For the offices of prose we find but small mention of James, S. Mark, Saint
Peter, and others of the Apostles and Apostolical men made Liturgies, and if
these which we have at this day were not theirs, yet they make probation that
these Apostles left others, or else they were impudent people that prefixed
their names so early, and the Churches were very incurious to swallow such a
bole, if no pretension could have been reasonably made for their justification.
But concerning Church Hymns we have clearer testimony in particular, both
because they were many of them, and because they were dispersed more, soon got
by heart, passed also among the people, and were pious arts of the Spirit
whereby holy things were instilled into their Souls by the help of fancy,
and a more easy memory. The first civilizing of people used to be by Poetry,
and their Divinity was conveyed by Songs and Verses, and the Apostle exhorted
the Christians, to exhort ut quisque de Scripturis sanctis, vel de proprio
ingenio potest, provocatur in medium Deo canere. Tertull. Apolog:
one another in Psalms and Hymns, for he knew the excellent advantages were
likely to accrue to Religion by such an insinuation of the mysteries. Thus
Saint Hilary, and Saint Ambrose composed Hymns for the use of the Church, and
Saint Austin made a Hymn against the Schism of Donatus, which Hymns when
they were publicly allowed of, were used in public Offices; not till then;
For Paulus Samosatenus had brought Women into the Church to sing vain and
trifling Songs, and some Bishops took to themselves too great and incurious a
license, and brought Hymns into the Church, whose gravity and piety was not
very remarkable; upon occasion of which, the Fathers of the Council of
Laodicea, ordained, (...), No Psalms of private composition must be brought
into the Church, so Gentian Hervet renders it; Isidore Translates it [ Psalmos
ab Idiotis compositos,] Psalms made by common persons;] Psalms usually sung
abroad, so Dionysius Exiguus calls them, [ Psalmos Plebeios] but I suppose by
the following words is meant, That none but Scripture Psalms shall be read
there, for so the Canon adds, (...), nothing to be read in the Church but Books
of the Old and New Testament. And this Interpretation agrees well enough with
the occasion of the Canon which I now mentioned.

This only by the way, the reddition of (...) Isidore to be Psalms made by
common persons, whom the Scripture calls (...), ignorant, or unlearned, is
agreeable enough with that of Saint Paul, who intimates, that Prayers, and
forms of Lyturgies are to be composed for them, not by them, they were never
thought of, to be persons competent to make Forms of Prayers themselves: For
Saint Paul speaks 1 Cor. 14.
of such a one as of a person coming into the Church to hear the Prophets,
pray, and sing, and interpret, and prophecy, and (...), he is reproved of all,
and judged of all; and therefore the most unfit person in the world to bring
any thing that requires great ability, and great authority, to obtrude it upon
the Church, his Rulers, and his Judges. And this was not unhandsomely intimated
by the word sometimes used by the (...) of the Greek Church, calling the
public Lyturgie (...), which signifies prayers, made for the use of the
Idiotae, or private persons, as the word is contradistinguished from the Rulers
of the Church. For (...) signifies contum, and (...), is as much as (...), to
live in the condition of a private person, and in the vulgar Greek (says
Arcadius) (...) and (...) signify a little man, of a low stature, from which
two significations (...) may well enough design a short form of Prayer, made
for the use of private persons. And this was reasonable, and part of the
Religion even of the Heathen as well as Christians; the presidents of their
Religion were to find prayers for the people, and teach them forms of
address to their Gods. Castis cum pueris ignara puella mariti
Disceret unde preces, vatem ni Musa dedisset?
Poscit opem chorus, and praesentia numina sentit,
Caelestes implorat aquas, docta prece blandus, Horat. Epist. l. 2. cp. 1.

Carmine dii superi placantur, carmine Manes.
But this was by the way.

But because I am casually fallen, upon mention of Laodicean Council, and that
it was very ancient, before the Nicene, and of very great reputation, both in
the East, and in the West; it will not be a contemptible addition to the
reputation of set forms of Lyturgie, that we find them so early in the
Church, reduced to a very regular and composed manner. The XV Canon suffers
none to sing in the Church, but the (...), they that sing by book, and go up
into the Pulpit; they were the same persons, and the manner of doing their
office, was their appellative, which shows plainly, that the known custom of
the Church, was for them who were in the (...), in the Pulpit to read their
offices, and devotions. They read them (...), that is the word in the Canon.
Those things which signify the greatest, or first Antiquity, are said to be
(...), was spoken proverbially, to signify ancient things: And (...): So that
if these Fathers chose these words as Grammarians, the singers (...) were such
as sung ancient Hymns of Primitive antiquity, which also is the more credible,
because the persons were noted and distinguished by their employment, as a
thing known by so long an use, till it came to be their appellative. * The 17.
and 18. Canons command that Lessons and Psalms should be said interchangeably
(...) (...), and the same Liturgy that is the word) or office of prayers to be
said always at Nones and Vespers. This shows the manner of executing their
office of Psalmists, and Readers, they did not sing or say ex tempore, but they
read Prayers and Psalms, and sung them out of a Book; neither were they
brought in fresh and new at every meeting, but it was (...), still the same
form of prayers, without variation.

But then if we remember how ancient this office was Simeon Thessalonicensis in
particular concerning the (...), he does dictate the hymns to the singers, and
then of the singers there is no question) and that these two offices was so
ancient in the Church, that Epist. ad Antiochen. memorantur etiam in 25 Canone
Apostolorum.
they were mentioned by S. Ignatius, who was contemporary with the latter times
of the Apostles; We may well believe that set and described forms of Liturgy
were as early as the days of the Apostles, and continued in the continuation
of those and the like offices in all descending ages. Of the same design and
intimation were those known offices in the Greek Church, of the (...) and the
(...) which Socrates speaks of as of an office in the Church of Alexandria,
(...), etc. Their office was the same with the Reader, they did ex praescripto
praeire, and ad verbum refer, the same which ab Alexandro notes to have been
done in the religious rites of Heathen Greece, They first read out of a Book
the appointed prayers, and the others rehearsed them after. Now it is
unimaginable that constant officers should be appointed to say an office, and
no public office be described.

I shall add but this one thing more, and pass on ad alia. And that is, that
I never yet saw any instance, example, or pretense of precedent of any Bishop,
Priest, or Lay person that ever prayed ex tempore in the Church, and although
in some places, single Bishops, or peradventure, other persons of less
Authority did oftentimes bring prayers of their De proprio ingeuio] [de
pectore] sine monitore] we find once in Tertullian.
own into the Church; yet ever they were compositions, and premeditations, and
were brought thither, there to be repeated often, and added to the Lyturgie;
and although the Lyturgies, while they were less full then since they have
been, were apt to receive the additions of pious and excellent Persons, yet the
inconvenience grew so great, by permitting any forms but what were approved by
a public Spirit, that the Church, as She always had forms of public
Prescription, so She resolved to permit no mixture of any thing but what was
warranted by an equal power, that the Spirits of the Prophets might be subject
to the Prophets, and such Spirits, when they are once tried whether they be of
God or no, tried by a lawful Superior, and a competent Judge may then venture
into the open air. And it were a strange imprudence, choosingly to entertain
those inconveniences which our wiser Forefathers felt, and declared, and
remedied. For why should we be in love with that evil, against which they so
carefully armed their Churches, by the provision and defense of Laws? For this
produced that Canon of the Council of Mileuis in Africa, Placuit ut preces
quae probatae fuerint in Conoilio ab omnibus celebrentur, nec aliae omnino
dicantur in Ecclesia, nisi quae a prudentioribus factae fuerint in Synodo.
That Is the restraint and prohibition; public Prayers, must be such as are
publicly appointed and prescribed by our Superiors, and no private forms of
our conceiving must be used in the Church. The reason follows, Ne forte
aliquid contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam vel per minus studium sit compositum,
left through ignorance, or want of deliberation any thing be spoken in our
Prayers against faith, [and good manners;] Their reason is good, and they are
witnesses of it who hear the variety of Prayers, before and after Sermons,
there where the Directory is practiced, where (to speak most modestly) not
only their private opinions, but also humane interests, and their own
personal concernments, and wild fancies, born perhaps not two days before,
are made the objects of the peoples hopes, of their desires, and their prayers,
and all in the mean time pretend to the holy Spirit.

Thus far we are gone. The Church has (1) power Moses to Christ, from Christ
to the Apostles, from them to all descending Ages; for I have instanced till
Saint Austine's time; and since, there is no Question, the people were (...),
as Balsamon says of those of the Greek Communion, they used unalterable forms
of Prayers, described out of the Books of public Liturgy; it remains only
that I consider upon what reason and grounds of prudence and religion the
Church did so, and whether she did well or no? In order to which, I consider,

1. Every man has personal needs of his own, and he that understands his
own condition, and has studied the state of his Soul in order to eternity,
his temporal estate in order to justice and charity, and the constitution and
necessities of his body in order to health, and his health in order to the
service of God, as every wise and good man does, will find that no man can make
such provision for his necessities, as he can do for his own, (caeteris
paribus) no man knows the things of a man but the spirit of the man, and
therefore if he have proportionable abilities, it is allowed to him, and it is
necessary for him to represent his own conditions to God, and he can best
express his own sense, or at least best sigh forth his own meaning, and if
he be a good man, the Spirit will make intercession for him, with those
unutterable groans. Besides this, every Family has needs proper to it in the
capacity of a Family, and those are to be represented by the Master of the
Family; whom men of the other persuasion are apt to consesse to be a Priest in
his own Family and a King, and Sacrorum omnium potestas sub Regibus esto, they
are willing in this sense to acknowledge; and they call upon him to perform
Family duties, that is, all the public devotions of the Family are to be
ordered by him.

Now that this is to be done by a set form of words Didoclavius. Nam licet in
conclavi Altar Damas cenum.
(Paterfamilias) verbis exprimere animi affectus pro arbitrio potest, quia
Dominus cor intuetur, and affectus, tamen public coram tota familia idem
absque indecoro non potest. If he prays ex tempore, without a Set form of
prayer, he may commit many an u^decency; a set and described form of prayer is
most convenient in a Family that Children and Servants may be enabled to
remember, and tacitly recite the prayer together with the Major domo. But I
rely not upon this; but proceed upon this Consideration.

As private Persons and as Families, so also have Churches Rulers and Feeders,
Priests and Presidents of religion, who are to represent all their needs to
God, and to make provisions. Now because the Church cannot all meet in one
place, but the harvest being great it is bound up in several bundles, and
divided into many Congregations, for all which the Rulers and Stewards of this
great Family are to provide, and yet cannot be present in those particular
Societies, it is necessary that they should have influence upon them by a
general provision, and therefore that they should take care that their common
needs should be represented to God, by Set forms of Prayer, for they only can
be provided by Rulers, and used by their Ministers and Deputies; such as must
be one in the principe, and diffused in the execution; and it is better
expression of their care and duty for the Rulers to provide the bread and
bless it, and then give it to them who must minister it in small portions and
to particular companies, (for so Christ did) then to leave them who are not in
the same degree answerable for the Churches, as the Rulers are, to provide
their food, and break it, and minister it too. The very Economy of Christ's
Family requires that the dispensations be made according to every man's
capacity. The general Stewards are to divide to every man his portion of
work, and to give them their food in due season, and the under-servants are to
do that work is appointed them; so Christ appointed it in the Gospel, and so
the Church has practiced in all Ages, inde enim per temporum and successionum
vices Episcoporum ordinatio S. Cyprian. op. 27
and Ecclesiae ratio decurrit, ut Ecclesia supra Episcopes constituatur, and
omnis actus Ecclesiae per eosdem Praepositos gubernetur, when the Rulers are
few (for the Ecclesiastical regiment is not Democraticall) and the under
offices many, and the companies numerous, for all which those few Rulers are
bound to provide, and prayer and offices of devotion, are one of the greatest
instances of provision, it is impossible there should be any sufficient care
taken or caution used by those Rulers in the matter of prayers, but for them to
make such prescript forms which may be used by all companies, under their
charge; that since they are to represent all the needs of all their people,
because they cannot be present by their persons in all Societies, they may be
present by their care and provisions, which is then done best when they make
prescript Forms of prayer, and provide pious Ministers to dispense it.

2. It is in the very nature of public prayer that it be public, and private
prayer, are certainly two distinct duties; but they are least of all
distinguished by the place, but most of all, by the Spirit that dictates the
prayer, and the consent in the recitation; and it is a private prayer which
either one man makes, though spoken in public, as the Laodicean Council calls
(...), private Psalms, or which is not attested by public consent of minds,
and it is a public prayer, which is made by the public spirit, and consented
to by a general acceptance; and therefore the Lords prayer, though spoke in
private, is a public form, and therefore represented plurally; and the place
is very extrinsecall to the nature of prayer; I will that men pray every where,
lifting 1 Timothy 2. 5.
up pure hands; and retiring into a Closet is only advised for the avoiding of
hypocrisy, not for the greater excellency of the duty. So that if public
Prayer have advantages beyond private Prayer, or upon its own stock, besides
it, the more public influences it receives, the more excellent it is. And
hence I conclude, that set Forms of Prayer composed and used by the Church; I
mean by the Rulers in Conjunction and Union, of Heads and Counsels, and used
by the Church; I mean the People in Union, and society of Hearts in Spirits,
has two very great advantages which other Prayers have not.

For first, it is more truly public, and has the benefit the mighty price of
their high calling, and by praying for each other in the same sense, and to the
same purpose, doing the same to them, that I desire they should do for me, do
testify and preserve, and increase their charity; it follows, that common,
and described prayers are the most excellent instrument, and act, and ligament
of the Communion of Saints, and the great common term of the Church in its
degrees of Catholic capacity. And therefore says S. Ignatius, (...), All meet
together, and join to common Prayers, (...), let there be one mind, and let
there be one prayer. That Is the true Communion of Christians.

And in pursuance of this, I consider, that if all Christian a communicatione
orationis, and conventus, and omnis sancti commercii, from the participation of
the public meeting and Prayers; and therefore the more united the Prayer is,
still it is the greater instrument of Union; the Authority and Consent, the
public Spirit, and common Acceptance, are so many degrees of a more firm and
indissoluble Communion.

3. To this I add, that without prescribed Forms, issues ex tempore, or not
enjoined Prayers, to pray their Sermons over, to reduce their Doctrine into
Devotion and Lyturgie. I mislike it not for the thing it self, if it were
regularly for the manner, and the matter always pious and true. But who shall
assure me, when the Preacher has disputed, or rather dogmatically decreed a
point of predestination, or of prescience, of contingency, or of liberty, or
any of the most mysterious parts of Divinity, and then prays his Sermon over,
that he then prays with the Spirit? Unless I be sure that he also Preached
with the Spirit, I cannot be sure that he Prays with the Spirit, for all he
prays ex tempore. Nay, if I hear a Protestant preach in the Morning, and an
Anabaptist in the Afternoon, to day a Presbyterian, to morrow an Independent,
am I not most sure, that when they have preached contradictories, and all of
them pray their Sermons over, that they do not all pray with the Spirit? More
then one in this case cannot pray with the Spirit, possibly all may pray
against him.

4. From whence I thus argue in behalf of set forms of prayer. That in the
case above put, how shall I, or any man else, say Amen to their prayers that
preach and pray Contradictories? At least, I am much hindered in my devotion.
For besides that, it derives our opinions into our devotions, makes every
School-point, become our Religion, and makes God a party so far as we can,
intit'ling him to our impertinent wranglings; Besides this, I say, while we
should attend to our addresses toward God, we are to consider whether the
point be true, or no? and by that time we have tacitly discoursed it, we are
upon another point, which also perhaps is as questionable as the former, and by
this time our spirit of devotion, is a little discomposed and something out of
countenance, there is so much other employment for the spirit, the spirit of
discerning and judging, All which inconveniences are avoided in Set forms of
Liturgy. For, we know beforehand the conditions of our communion, and to what
we are to say, Amen, to which if we like it, we may repair; if not, there is
no harm done, your devotion shall not be surpised, nor your communion
invaded, as it may be often, in your ex tempore prayers, and unlimited
devotions.

5. And this thing has another collateral inconvenience

6. So that either the people must have an implicit but by chance, and
irregularly; and ex post fact, when the prayer is approved of, and after the
devotion is spent, for till then they cannot judge, and before they do, they
cannot say Amen, and till Amen be said there is no benefit of the prayer, nor
no union of hearts and desires, and therefore as yet no communion.

7. Public Forms of prayer are great advantages to is not to be mooked.

And, certainly it were a very strange Liturgy in or a Doxology, in defiance of
a new-sprung Haeresie. The Fathers of Nice framed the Gloria Patri, against the
Arians. Saint Austin composed a Hymn against the Donatists. Saint Hierome
added the [ sicut erat in principio] against the Macedonians. S. Ambrose framed
the [ Te Deum] upon occasion of Saint Austine's Baptism, but took care to
make the Hymn to be of most solemn adoration, and yet of prudent institution
and public Confession, that according to the advice of Saint Paul we might
sing with grace in our hearts to the Lord, and at the same time teach and
admonish one another too: Now this cannot be done but in Set forms of prayer;
for in new devotions and uncertain forms we may also have an ambulatory faith,
and new Articles may be offered before every Sermon, and at every convention;
the Church can have no security to the contrary, nor the Article any stable
foundation, or advantageous insinuation either into the judgment or memory of
the persons to be informed or persuaded, but like Abraham's sacrifice, as soon
as his back is turned, the birds shall eat it up. Quid quod haec oration quae
sanandis Seneca. l. 5. ep. 40
mentibus adhibetur, descendere in nos debet. Remedia non prosunt nisi
immorentur. A cursory Prayer shall have a transient effect; when the hand is
off, the impression also is gone.

8. Without the description of public forms of prayer assa foetida for
incense, and the marrow of a Man's bones in stead of the fat of Rams; and of
all things in the world we should be most curious that our prayers be not
turned into sin, and yet if they be not prescribed and preconsidered, nothing
can secure them antecedently, the people shall go to Church but without
confidence that they shall return with a blessing, for they know not whether
God shall have a present made of a holy oblation, or else whether the Minister
will stand in the gap, or make the gap wider? But this I touched upon before.

9. They preserve the authority and sacredness of Government, Cancel between
the Clergy and the People, that they are deputed to speak to God for them, so
is it the great distinction of the persons in that order, that the Rulers shall
judge between the Ministers and the People in relation to God, with what
addresses they shall come before God, and intercede for the People, for so
Saint Paul enjoynes, that the spirits of the Prophets, should be submitted to
the Prophets, viz. to be discerned and judged by them, which thing is not
practicable in permissions of every Minister to pray what forms he pleases
every day.

10. Public forms of Liturgy are also the great securities basis to the
religion and piety of the people; for circumstances govern them most, and the
very determination of a public office, and the appointment of that office at
certain times, engages their spirits, the first to an habitual; the latter, to
an actual devotion. It is all that the (...), many men know of their Religion,
and they cannot any way know it better, then by those Forms of prayer which
publish their faith, and their devotion to God, and all the world, and which by
an admirable expedient reduces their faith into practice, and places their
Religion in their understanding, and affections. And therefore Saint Paul when
he was to give an account of his Religion, he did it not by a mere recitation
of the Articles, but by giving account of his Liturgy, and the manner of his
worship. After that way which they call haeresie, so worship I the God of my
Fathers. And the best worship, is the best religion, and therefore I am not to
trust any man to make my manner of worshipping, unless I durst trust him to be
the Dictator of my Religion; and a Form of Prayer made by a private man, is
also my Religion made by a private man. So that we must say, after the manner
that G. the Minister of B. shall conceive and speak, so worship I the God of my
Fathers, and if that be reasonable or pious, let all the world judge.

11. But when Authority shall consider and determine

12. But nothing can answer for the great scandal

13. I will not now instance in the vainglory that is appendant new made,
every-dayes forms of prayer, and that some have been so vain, like the Orators
Quintilian speaks of, ut verbum petant quo incipiant, that they have published
their ex tempore faculty upon experiment, and scenicall bravery, you shall name
the instance, and they shall compose the form: Amongst whom also the gift of
the man is more then the devotion of the man; nor will I consider that then his
gift is esteemed best, when his prayer is longest; and if he takes a
complacency in his gift (as who is not apt to do it?) he will be sure to
extend his prayer till a suspicious and scrupulous man would be apt to say, his
Prayer pressed hard upon that which our blessed Savior reprehended in the
Pharisees, who thought to be heard for their much babbling. I know it was
observed by a very wise man, that the vanity of spirit and popular opinion that
grows great, and talks loudly of his abilities that can speak ex tempore, may
not only be the incentive, but a helper of the faculty, and make a man not
only to love it, but to be the more able to do it. Addit ad dicendum etiam
pudor stimulos, Quintil. lib. 10. cap. 7.
addit and dicendorum expectata laus, mirumque videri potest, quod cum stylus
secreto gaudeat, atque omnes arbitros reformidet, extemporalis actio auditorum
frequentia, ut miles congestu signorum excitatur. Namque and difficiliorem
concitationem exprimit, and expolit dicendi necessitas, and secundos impetus
auget placendi cupido. Adeo praemium omnia spectant omnia eloquentia quoque
quanquam plurimum habeat in se voluptatis maxim tamen praesenti fructu laudis,
opinionisque ducatur. It may so happen that the opinion of the people as it is
apt to actuate the faculty, so also may encourage the practice, and spoil the
devotion. But these things are accidental to the nature of the thing, and
therefore though they are too certainly consequent to the person, yet I will
not be too severe, but preserve my self on the surer side of a charitable
construction, which truly I desire to keep, not only to their persons, whom I
much reverence, but also to their actions. But yet I durst not do the same
thing even for these last reasons, though I had no other.

In the next place we must consider the next great objection, viz. that in set
Forms of Prayer we restrain and confine the blessed Spirit; and in conceived
Forms, when every man is left to his liberty, then the Spirit is free,
unlimited and unconstrained.

I answer, either their conceived forms (I use their own ex tempore. If they
be premeditate and described, then the Spirit is as much limited in their
conceived Forms, as in the Churches conceived Forms. For as to this
particular it is all one who describes and limits the Form, whether the
Church, or a single man does it, still the Spirit is in constraint and limit.
So that in this case they are not angry at set Forms of Prayer, but that they
do not make them. And if it be replied, that if a single person composes a set
Form, he may alter it if he please, and so his Spirit is at liberty; I answer,
so may the Church, if She see cause for it; and unless there be cause, the
single person will not alter it, unless he do things unreasonable, and without
cause. So that it will be an unequal challenge, and a peevish quarrel to
allow of set Forms Prayer made by private Persons, and not of set Forms made
by the public Spirit of the Church. It is evident that the Spirt is limited in
both alike.

But if by [conceived Formes] in this Objection they ex tempore Prayers (for so
they would be thought most generally to practice it) and that in the use of
these, the liberty of the Spirit is best preserved; To this I answer, that the
being ex tempore, or premeditate will be wholly impertinent to this Question of
limiting the Spirit. For there may be great liberty in set Forms, even when
there is much variety; and there may be great restraint in extempore prayers,
even then when it shall be called unlawful to use set forms. That the Spirit
is restrained, or that it is free in either, is accidental to them both; for
it may be either free or not free in both, as it may happen.

But the restraint is this, that every one is not left to

2. Does not the Minister confine, and restrain the Where the Spirit of God is,
there must be liberty.

3. If the spirit must be at liberty, who shall assure us

4. Does not the Directory that thing which is here called Palladium that is
contended for, and a princely liberty they leave unto the Spirit, to be free
only in the supplying the place of a Vocabulary, and a Copia verborum? For as
for the matter, it is all there described and appointed; and to those
determined senses the Spirit must assist, or not at all, only for the words he
shall take his choice. Now I desire it may be considered sadly and seriously:
Is it not as much injury to the Spirit to restrain, his matter, as to appoint
his words? Which is the more considerable of the two, Sense or Language, Matter
or Words? I mean when they are taken singly, and separately. For so they may
very well be, (for as if men prescribe the matter only, the Spirit may cover
it with several words and expressions; so if the Spirit prescribe the words, I
may still abound in variety of sense, and preserve the liberty of my meaning;
we see that true in the various interpretations of the same words of
Scripture.) So that, in the greater of the two, the Spirit is restrained when
his matter is appointed; and to make him amends, for not trusting him with the
matter without our directions and limitations, we trust him to say what he
pleases, so it be to our sense, to our purposes. A goodly compensation surely!

5. Did not Christ restrain the spirit of his Apostles, Pray this, or Pray
thus, Pray these words, or Pray after this manner? Or though it had been less
then either, and been only a Directory for the matter; still it is a thing
which our Brethren in all other cases of the same nature, are resolved
perpetually to call a restraint. Certainly then, this pretended restraint, is
no such formidable thing. These men themselves do it by directing all of the
matter, and much of the manner, and Christ himself did it, by prescribing both
the matter, and the words too.

6. These restraints (as they are called) or determinations Paul to the
Corinthians, when he prescribed orders for public Prophesying, and
Interpretation, and speaking with Tongues. The Spirit of some he so restrained,
that he bound them to hold their peace, he permitted but two or three to speak
at one meeting, the rest were to keep silence, though possibly six or seven
might at that time have the Spirit.

7. Is it not a restraint of the Spirit to sing a Psalm in

8. And now after all this strife, what harm is there he ascended up on high
gave unto men. But this whole matter is wholly a stranger to reason, and never
seen in Scripture.

For, Divinity never knew any other vicious restraining in materia speciali:
The second is tyrannical and Antichristian. And to it persecution of true
Religion is to be reduced. But as for this pretended limiting or restraining
the Spirit, viz. by appointing a regular Form of prayer, it is so very a
Chimaera, that it has no footing or foundation upon any ground where a wise
man may build his confidence.

9. But lastly, how if the Spirit must be restrained, and Paul, by saying, The
spirits of the Prophets must be subject to the Prophets? What greater restraint
then subjection? If subjected, then they must be ruled; if ruled, then limited;
prescribed unto, and as much under restraint as the spirits of the superior
Prophets shall judge convenient. I suppose by this time this Objection will
trouble us no more. But perhaps another will.

For, why are not the Ministers to be left as well to

1. Our Prayers offered up by the Minister, are in behalf,

2. It is more fit a liberty be left in Preaching than But being crafty I
caught you,] says Saint Paul to the Corinthians. And discourses and arguments
ad hominem, upon their particular principles and practices may more move them
than the most polite and accurate that do not comply and wind about their
fancies and affections. Saint Paul from the absurd practice of being baptized
for the dead, made an excellent Argument to convince the Corinthians of the
Resurrection. But this reason also ceases in our prayers. For God understands
what we say, sure enough, he has no prejudices to be removed, no infirmities
to be wrought upon, and a fine figure of Rhetoric, a pleasant cadence and a
curious expression move not him, at all: No other twinings and compliances
stir him, but charity, and humility, and zeal, and importunity, which all
are things internal and spiritual. It was observed by Pliny, Deos non tam
accuratis adorantium Plin. Panegyr. Trajan dictum.
precibus, quam innocentia and sanctitate laetari: gratioremque existimari qui
delubris eorum puram castamque mentem quam qui meditatum carmen intulerit. And
therefore of necessity there is to be great variety of discourses to the
people, and permissions accordingly, but not so to God, with whom a Deus
miserere prevails as soon as the great Office of 40 hours not long since
invented in the Church of Rome, or any other prayers spun out to a length
beyond the extension of the office of a Pharisee.

3. I fear it cannot stand with our reverence to God to permit to every spirit
a liberty of public address to him in behalf of the people. Indeed, he that
is not fit to pray, is not always fit to preach, but it is more safe to be
bold with the people, then with God, if the persons be not so fit. In that
there may be indiscretion, but there may be impiety and irreligion in this. The
People may better excuse and pardon an indiscretion, or a rudeness, (if any
such should happen) than we may venture to offer it to God.

4. There is a latitude of Theology, much whereof is

5. But indeed, if I may freely declare my opinion, I Vulgus Cleri should
instruct the People out of the fountains of the Church, and the public stock,
till by so long exercise and discipline in the Schools of the Prophets, they
may also be entrusted to minister of their own unto the People. This I am sure
was the practice of the Primitive Church, when preaching was as ably and
religiously performed as now it is; but in this, I prescribe nothing. But truly
I think the reverend Divines of the Assembly are many of them of my mind in
this particular, and that they observe a liberty indulged to some Persons to
preach, which I think they had rather should hold their peace, and yet think
the Church better edified in their silence, then their Sermons.

6. But yet methinks the Argument objected so far ex tempore Men make use of
it, if it were turned with the edge the other way, would have more reason in
it; and instead of arguing [ Why should not the same liberty be allowed to
their spirit in praying as in preaching?] it were better to substitute this, If
they can pray with the Spirit, why do they not also preach with the Spirit?
And it may be there may be in reason or experience something more for preaching
and making Orations by the excellency of a man's spirit and learning, then for
the other, which in the greatest abilities it may be unfit to venture to God
without public approbation: but for Sermons they may be fortunate and safe if
made ex tempore. Frequenter Quintilian. de extemporal. facult. l. 10. c. 7.
enim accidit ut successum extemporalem consequi cura non possit: quem si calor
ac spiritus tulit, Deum tunc adfuisse cum id evenisset veteres Oratores, ut
Cicero dicit, aiebant. Now let them make demonstration of their Spirit by
making excellent Sermons ex tempore: that it may become an experiment of their
other faculty, that after they are tried and approved in this, they may be
considered for the other: And if praying with the Spirit be praying ex tempore,
why shall not they preach ex tempore too, or else confess that they preach
without the Spirit, or that they have not the gift of preaching? For to say
that the gift of Prayer is a gift ex tempore, but the gift of Preaching is with
study and deliberation, is to become vain and impertinent. Quis enim discrevit?
Who has made them of a different Consideration? I mean as to this particular,
as to their Efficient cause? nor Reason, nor Revelation, nor God, nor Man.

To sum up all. If any man has a mind to exercise England, so apparent need,
that some of the Church of Rome have made it an objection against us) and this
his Gift of Prayer will be to edification. But otherwise, I understand it is
more fit for oftentation, then any spiritual advantage. For God hears us not
the sooner for our ex tempore, long or conceived Prayers, possibly they may
become a hindrance, as in the cases before instanced. And I am sure, if the
people be intelligent, and can discern, they are hindered in their Devotion;
for they dare not say Amen till they have considered, and many such cases will
occur in ex tempore, or unlicenc'd Prayers, that need much considering before
we attest them. But if the people be not intelligent, they are apt to swallow
all the inconveniences which may multiply in so great a license: and therefore
it were well that the Governors of the Church, who are to answer for their
souls should judge for them, before they say Amen; which judgment cannot be
without set Forms of Lyturgie. My sentence therefore is, (...), let us be as
we are already, few changes are for the better.

For if it be pretended, that in the Lyturgie of the England, which was
composed with much art and judgment, by a Church that has as much reason to
be confident She has the Spirit and Gifts of Prayer as any single person has,
and each learned man that was at its first composition can as much prove that
he had the Spirit, as the Objectors now adays; (and he that boasts most,
certainly has the least:) If I say it be pretended that there are many errors
and inconveniences both in the Order and in the matter of the
Common Prayer Book, made by such men with so much industry: how much more, and
with how much greater reason may we all dread the inconveniences and disorders
of ex tempore and conceived Prayers? Where respectively there is neither
conjunction of Heads, nor Premeditation, nor Industry, nor Method, nor Art, nor
any of those Things, (or at least not in the same Degree) which were likely to
have exempted the Co^mon-prayer-booke from errors and disorders. If these
things be in the green tree, what will be done in the dry?

But if it be said the ex tempore and conceived Prayers

And after this, I would feign know, what benefit England in her united
capacity receives by this new device? For the public it is clear, that
whether the Ministers Pray before they Study, or Study before they Pray, there
must needs be infinite difformity in the public Worship, and all the benefits
which before were the consequents of Conformity and Unity will be lost, and if
they be not valuable, I leave it to all them to consider, who know the
inconveniences of Public disunion, and the Public disunion that is certainly
consequent to them, who do not communicate in any common Forms of Worship.
And to think that the Directory will bring Conformity, is as if one should say,
that all who are under the same Hemisphere are joined in communi patria, and
will love like Countrymen. For under the Directory there will be as different
religions, and as different desires, and as differing forms, as there are
several varieties of Men and Manners under the one half of Heaven, who yet
breathe under the same half of the Globe.

But I ask again, what benefit can the public receive

But I observe, that all the benefit which is pretended, Maximus vero studiorum
fructus est and praemium quoddam amplissimum Quint, l. 10. c. 7.
longi laboris ex tempore dicendi facultas, said an exccellent person. And it
is very true; to be able to speak excellent things, without long considering is
an effect of a long industry, and greatest learning: but certainly the greatest
enemy in the world to its production: Much learning, and long use of speaking
may enable a man to speak upon sudden occasions, but speaking without
consideration, will never make much learning. Nec quisquam tantum fidit ingenio
ut sibi speret incipienti Idem ibid.
statim posse contingere, sed sicut in cogitatione praecepimus, ita facilitatem
quoque extemporalem a parvis initiis paulatim perducemus ad summam. And to
offer that, as a means of getting learning, which cannot be done at all as it
ought, but after learning is already gotten in a very great degree, is highest
mistaking. I confess I am very much from believing the allegation, and so will
every man be that considers what kind of men they are that have bin most
zealous for that way of conceived Prayer. I am sure, that very few of the
learned, very many ignorants, most those who have made least abode in the
Schools of the Prophets. And that I Lucian. Rhetor. praecept. (...).
may disgrace no man's person, we see Tradesmen of the most illiberable arts,
and women pretend to it, and do it with as many words, (and that is the maine
thing) with as much confidence, and speciousnesse of spirit as the best among
them. Sed nec tumultuarii nec fortuiti sermonis contextum mirabor unquam quem
jurgantibus etiam mulierculis Quint, l. 10. 7.
superfluere video, said Quintilian. And it is but a small portion of learning
that will serve a man to make conceived Forms of Prayer, which they may have
easily upon the stock of other men, or upon their own fancy, or upon any thing
in which no learning is required. He that knows not this, knows nothing of the
craft that may be in the Preachers trade. But what? Is God better served? I
would fain see any authority, or any reason, or any probability for that. I am
sure, ignorant men offer him none of the best sacrifices ex tempore, and
learned men will be sure to deliberate and know, God is then better served when
he is served by a public, then when by a private Spirit. I cannot imagine what
accruements will hence come to the Public: it may be some advantages may be to
the private interests of men. For there are a sort of men whom our Blessed
Savior noted, Who do devour Widows houses, and for a pretense make long
prayers. They make Prayers, and they make them long, by this means they
receive double advantages, for they get reputation to their ability, and to
their piety. And although the Common Prayer Book in the Preface to the
Directory be charged with unnecessary length, yet we see that most of these
men, they that are most eminent, or would be thought so, make their Prayers
longer, and will not lose the benefits which their credit gets, and they, by
their credit, for making their Prayers.

Add this, that there is no promise in Scripture that ex tempore, shall be
heard the better, or that he shall be assisted at all to such purposes, and
therefore to innovate in so high a matter without a warrant to command us, or a
Promise to warrant us, is no better then vanity in the thing, and presumption
in the person. He therefore that considers that this way of Prayer is without
all manner of precedent in the Primitive Church, against the example of all
famous Churches in all Christendom, in the whole descent of XV Ages, without
all command or warrant of Scripture, that it is unreasonable in the nature of
the thing, against prudence and the best wisdom of humanity, because it is
without Deliberation, that it is innovation in a high degree, without that
authority which is truly, and by inherent and Ancient right to command and
prescribe to us in external Forms of Worship, that it is much to the disgrace
of the first Reformers of our Religion, that it gives encouragement to the
Church of Rome to quarrel, with some reason, and more pretense against our
Reformation, as being by the Directory confessed to have been done in much
blindness; and therefore might err in the excess as well as in the defect,
throwing out too much, as casting off too little, (which is the more likely,
because they wanted No Zeal to carry them far enough:) He that considers the
universal difformity of public Worship, and the no means of Union, no Symbol
of public Communion being publicly consigned; that all Heresies may, with the
same authority, be brought into our Prayers, and offered to God in the behalf
of the people, with the same authority, that any truth may, all the particular
matter of our Prayers being left to the choice of all men, of all persuasions,
and then observes that actually, there are in many places, Heresy, and
Blasphemy, and Impertinency, and illiterate Rudenesses put into the Devotion of
the most solemn Days, and the most public Meetings; and then lastly, that
there are diverse parts of Lyturgie, for which no provision at all is made in
the Directory; and the very administration of the Sacraments let so loosely,
that if there be any thing essential in the Forms of Sacraments, the
Sacrament may become ineffectuall for want of due Words, and due
Administration; I say, he that considers all these things (and many more he may
consider) will find that particular men are not fit to be entrusted to offer
in Public with their private Spirit, to God, for the people, in such
Solemnities, in matters of so great concernment, where the Honor of God, the
benefit of the People, the interest of Kingdoms, the being of a Church, the
unity of Minds, the conformity of Practice, the truth of Persuasion, and the
salvation of Souls, are so much concerned as they are in the public Prayers of
a whole national Church. An unlearned man is not to be trusted, and a Wise man
dare not trust himself; he that is ignorant cannot, he that is knowing will
not.

FINIS.

