A TRVE RELATION OF A SCOTCHMAN, Who coming into the Church of St. Olaves in
the Old Jury in London, at such time as the people were receiving the
Communion, did much disturb them, and by force tore the Service Book in pecces,
on Sunday September. 5. 1641.

WITH An admonition to all such abortives amongst us, to persuade them to wait
the time of the Lords Reformation by the Parliament, and not to be so
disorderly.

GOD IS MY HELPER


London printed by Thomas Harper. 1641. With license.

A true relation of the insolence of a Scotchman offered in the Church of Saint
Olaves, in old Jury, London, the fifth of September 1641.
O Ye furious Zoilists, do ye imagine that your zeal is good, or that your
deeds are lawful, that in these happy days of reformation, will dare of your
own accord to reform as you list, as if you would prevent the high and
honorable Court of Parliament? Will you be the Judge before they have
censured? Nay, will you be the executioner before they have judged? Will you be
so rash before they have determined? You run too fast, that makes you stumble,
you fall ere you be aware, and take heed lest you bruise you sore unexpected.
Had we no hope of reformation in things amiss, it were the more to be
excused: but seeing reformation is even now in acting by those glorious stars
assembled for that very purpose, you are much to be blamed to go about it any
other way. Be persuaded therefore, all you who presume to be thus unruly, and
trouble not the way that is in working: Is not Gods time better then yours? And
is not a Parliament way beyond and before your ignorant zeal? Are you grieved?
So are we. Would you be relieved? So would we. But you are not in a way to be
relieved, if you will run your own way. Petition to that honorable Assembly,
they will judge your cause, whose whole study is to make our Churches glorious:
therefore stay your hands, and be not so unruly.

The Relation of the Scotchman.
1. This Scotchman came into the Church in the Old Jury, whilst the people
were receiving the Sacrament: here was a great offense, to trouble them at such
a time, when they were about so great a work. Is it a small matter to disturb
the people at the Sacrament? at such a time the greatest charge concerning the
preparation and the celebration whereof, is to receive it with peace? And do
but consider what a great unkindnesse this was to disturb them, and to make an
uprore amongst them at such a time? This was as great indignity as could be
offered.

2. It was on the Sabbath day, the Sermon being newly ended, which was a time
in which it was fitter for him to have hasted home, that having refreshed
himself with the creatures of God, and dined, he might have pondered of what
he had heard preached, and considered of what he had been taught concerning
his salvation looking to his own particular charge and calling, preparing
himself for the partaking of the ordinances and worship of God in the
afternoon, that so he might have sanctified the Sabbath to the Lord, and not
have run into such strange and disorderly stratagems.

3. He was a Scotchman, an alien, wherein appears his great sauciness, to be
so bold, so audaciously to trouble any of our Churches, himself being a
stranger, to take upon him to regulate the affairs in our Churches, who
neither was a Magistrate, nor a Divine; no, nor an English man, one of our own
nation, but a Scotchman and a Laick that was of Scotland, how great is this
boldness in him to tear and spoil any thing in the Church as he did, having
no right to any such calling, especially in these times in which peace is so
happily newly established between us and them, and a day of thankesgiving for
that purpose celebrated to the Lord.

4. He went unto the Deske, where the Church books lay, and took up the
Service book in his hands; which the Clarke seeing, endeavored to take it
from him, which before he could do, the Scotchman tore out a great part of the
leaves out of the book: he made marshall law with it, in which did appear a
great deal of indignity to both the Minister, people, yea, and to the Book it
self: he offered injustice to the very book, Justice should have permitted it
to have had a trial, he might have stayed until the Parliament had regulated
the matter, there both he and it should have had a fair trial, and just
proceedings, and no injustice offered to either part. But herein appears his
unrighteous dealing to play the executioner, before a proceeding in any fair
trial.

5. As he would have escaped forth of the Church, he was stayed, and after
evening prayer was brought before the Lord Mayor. Had he done well, he needed
not to fear: Now is the glorious hopes of our reformation, and had he had a
just Commission granted for what he had done, from them in whose hands the
power is to reform, he needed not fear; but he feared because he did evil,
and is like to know that the Magistrate bears not the sword in vain.

6. Being examined by the Lord Mayor, why he did so, he answered, that it
troubled his conscience. But see his folly herein, why should it trouble his
conscience, he being neither compelled to use it, nor to partake with those
that did use it.

7 The Lord Mayor has bound him over to answer it at the next Sessions: to
whom I leave him to a trial, and advise him to humble himself, and to repent
for it, and to dissuade others from the like attempt.

FINIS.

