THE TRUE RELATION Of the bloody Attempt by JAMES SALOWAYES To cut his own
Throat in the Compter, upon Sunday the 21. of June, 1663.

TOGETHER WITH Satan's Attempt and Overthrow, IN A SERMON Preached upon that
occasion in Wood-street-Compter, upon Sunday the 21. of June, 1663.

B R. F. Minister of Gods Word.

Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God,

Psalm. 51 14. LONDON, Printed by R. Dickinson, Anno Dom. 1663.

To the Honorable Sir William Turner, Knight and Baronet, Sheriff of the City
of London.
SIR,
IT is the occasion, not the opinion of any worth in this work, which presumes
a necessity to become public; for seeing the best of men are not exempted
from, and the worst do too willingly admit temptations, it is my desire that
this example may not only be printed in this paper, but imprinted in our
hearts, Actiones Precedentium sunt succedentium libri, The Actions of our
Predecessors are our books, much more may this exemplary act become a book to
us who are present, wherein we may read Man's frailty, the Tempters malice, Gods
great and ever to be remembered restraint. The Press and the Pulpit have of late
been too guilty of light Wares, and traded too much (to our shame and sorrow)
in triflls and unhappy troubles, Truth has rather been suppressed then
printed, not commended to the print, but condemned to the Press for silence; we
have had papers stuffed with words of a new stamp, cruel murders vizarded with
the title of signal victories, Faelix and prosperum scaelus virtus vocatur, and
those sheets may now serve for the Authors penance. And it has been the
delight of the troublers of our Israel, to enlarge their Pamphlets with a list
of their murdered Brethren: As I cannot but sorrow for their sin and protest
against their practice, so I cannot but conceive the printing of this haynom
act may be no less then necessary: Here is not one (...) against another, but
which is worse, a more unnatur^^ war, a man fighting against himself; the
Tempter here designing the final discomfiture of soul and body. Nobis est in
exemplum; these works are warning-pieces, our sins and Satan's wiles do assume
his name, Legion, for they are many: Many sad blows do we receive from Satan,
Peccata sunt totidem vulnera, and every day whilst we are in the field of this
world presents a Duel unto us, our members warring against the Spirit we stand
in need of Armor, and this presents unto us Armor like David's, which we ought
to prove; and Christ is here presented as a Champion, through whom we are only
conquerours.

This is all I presume to present to you, it is no pride that puts me upon it,
but that warrantable ambition to do the weaker people service, which, I hope,
may beseech your acceptance and excuse.

SIR, Your unworthy, but oblidged Servant R. F.

The true Relation of that strange attempt by James Salowayes upon himself, to
cut his own Throat, in Wood-street Compter, Sunday June 21. 1663.
UPon Saturday the twentieth of June he was brought prisoner to Wood street
Compter, his debt was about three pounds, but his grief was more then his debt:
He was observed to besid^ which was rather imputed to his condition then his
constitution, few men come there but are accompanied with sadness: The next
day, being Sunday, he was present whilst divine Service and Sermon command, and
afterward invited by a Friend to dine, a kindness not to be denied in that
place, where he eat little, and, as was observed, spoke less; after dinner some
words, not so well understood as heard were spoken by him to his (...) ^^^er in
love then a Prisoner, viz. That he wondered that people in the prison should
talk of him, and something of ^^^ni^e, but so imperfect, that his ^rother was
^ather (...) then serupulous to know (...) meaning: He r^^^^^d himself without
suspicion of any his brother supposing only he had gone to sleep; but a voice
(as he afterward confessed) uttered within him. Thou shall be burned in this
Prison, therefore it is better for thee to make away thy self then be burnt: He
presently went to a House of office a little distrant from his chamber, where
with a knife broken in the edge he wounded himself in the throat, and took the
gullet, by which the meat passes into the body in his hand, and cut a piece of
it, and threw it in the House of Office, he widened the wound four ways, and
leaned upon his hands to let his blood run into the House of office; some
Prisoners which heard a noise came near, but suspecting nothing, only supposing
his sickness and vomiting, withdrew, which gave him further time to execute his
purpose; then he lays his knife by, and takes his band, with which he wiped
the blood from the boards, and stopped his band into his wound, whereby you may
conceive the largeness of it; but finding not so sudden a dispatch as he
desired, he willing to put an end to it, draws his band from the wound, throws
it into the House of office, and betakes himself to his knife, resolving, as he
says, to strike home and cut the windpipe, when lo the Power of God, whilst
he was lifting it to his throat, the knife (though, as he says, firmly holden)
dropped out of his hand into the House of office, where he could not recover it.
This continued till Evening-service was begun, at which time some Prisoners,
having oocasion that way, found him all bloody and speechless. It was forth
with made known to the Officers, who readily sent for a Surgeon; the skin
was stitched, but the part of the gullet wanting: he continued for full six
hours speechless; yet while we were in prayer he did by lifting up his hand
answer to our desires, and when I urged unto him the danger of his condition
and necessity of unfeigned repentance, he did by shaking his head evidence his
sorrow; I desired him to keep his thoughts a work in praying unto God, he lift
up his hand and looked earnestly upon me; about eight that evening it pleased
God to give him strength to speak, and he did assure us he understood and
remembered what we had said whilst he was speechless, he said he was sorry for
his heinous fact, and told me, he hoped by the morning to be better able to
satisfy me further: That night was troublesome to him and passed without rest,
but in the morning he s^ept for some hours, and upon his waking I came to him,
and spoke to him, he presently thanked me for my pains, and told me he had
great cause to give God praise for the addition of that mercy, to add one day
more to his life, and he desired to live to glorify God. I found it not
requisite to trouble him with many questions, those few I asked were, first, if
he were not very sensible of his sin, how much he had offended the Mercy of God
in offering to commit that horrid act? He told me he had finned grievous^y, and
heartily desired pardon. I asked what might chiefly occasion that desperate
act? He told me, Sabbath-breaking, that he had the Sabbath day before by lewd
Soldiers been persuaded to drink and play, and in his excess they had deceived
him of moneys, and since that time he had been melancholy, and bad motions
were suggested to him. I asked him in what manner his temptation was, whether
by appearance, or some voice uttering express words? He told me again, not by
appearance, but a voice since he came into Prison spoke within him, and told
him, He should be burned in prison, and therefore better to make himself away
with his knife. I asked him if now he had not a great desire to live? He told
me yes, that he might glorify God. I asked him, if he had a comfortable
experience of Gods Power over Satan, and Mercy toward him, in preventing the
full execution of the act? He told me, looking more steadfastly upon me. O yes
yes, my good God would not let me hold my knife, but dropped it down. I pressed
him no more with questions, but spoke some comfortable and assuring sentences
of holy Writ unto him, and ended in Prayer. Whilst he continued there he did
demonstrate his sorrow, and desire to live to serve God in a stricter manner.

This is the plain and impartial relation of this bloody business, which is
worthy of reading and remembering: The breach of the Sabbath did occaon it, and
on the Sabbath he endeavors to pay himself the wages of so bad a work.

With this be pleased to read the Sermon purposely preached to warn the
Auditors, and printed for no other end but the advantage of the Reader, which
is the desire of

R. F.

ERRATA.
Page 4 line 10. read praedi^ere: l 11. for prodict c. praedict: p. 6. l. 26.
fo Ba l^d^ Ba^ak p 8 l 15 Judamy r Judae^^: p 10. l. 25. for templatio ^
templatio: p 13. l. 2, r, let them have a double portion of honor: p 18. l.
1^. ^ interiorem and exteriorem: p. 26. l. 34. r. tecum ero, I will be with
thee.

Satan's Attempt and Overthrow.
MAT. 4. ver. 3. And when the Tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son
of God, command that these stones be made bread.


THere is not mention of many actions of our Savior Christ betwixt his Birth
and his Baptism, in those thirty years, as if he had not been man^re for any
public matter, or otherwise not called to them he lived privately; only we
read of his Father and his Mother) though that Sex may seem to be exempted)
their yearly going to Jerusalem, and himself very probably went along, for
certain he was there in the twelfth of his age, where he stayed behind them, to
the grief of his Parents, and occasion of their search with sorrow, and the
third day (as if he would so early intimate the time of his Resurrection) was
he found of them, in a place and posture where they could not expect him: He
was in the Temple, and that not with mean company but amidst the Doctors; nor
idle, for he was hearing, asking, and answering Questions, and not according to
an ordinary rate, but so, that it filled all that heard him with admiration:
His Parents return not from Jerusalem till the holy Duties he ended, those
which attend not the accomplishment of holy Exercises depart without a
blessing: His Mother she is present, love to the happy Child, and love to the
holy Duty, takes away the tediousness of the journey: Christ after his return
contents himself with privacy, and whilst so he is at quiet, Satan is not so
busy to assault him, till he be ready for the conflict, Christ stays till he
have power, and when he has ability stays for authority, runs not before he
be called; and knowing that he must finish his course with the Baptism of
Blood, he begins it with the Baptism of Water, which no sooner done, and God
does own him for his Son, but Satan would tempt him to his service, no sooner
is he out of the Water then he is in the Wilderness, where and when it was that
the Tempter came unto him and said;

The words do plainly divide themselves into three parts.

1. The Person tempting, called here, The Tempter. 2. The Person tempted; Him,
in the first verse, Jesus, 3. The manner of his tempting, and that twofold. 1.
By approaching: He came to him. 2. By express words: He said.

In the Person tempting, there is three particulars.

1. The time, Forty days. 2. The place, The Wilderness. 3. The present want,
He was hungry.
The time was tedious, forty days, and very troublesome, a continued series of
temptations: The place was sad and solitary, the Wilderness, and wild beasts:
His present want is much, he was hungry; and in this hunger, after forty days,
does the Tempter take his opportunity, Then came unto him the Tempter, etc.

The time, forty days.

He which found our first Parents in P radise finds our Savior ^ere in the
Wilderness: There he tempted them to eat the Fruit which was forbidden; and
here he tempts our Savior, when he has not any thing to eat. Then the Serpent
tempted man by a subtle insinuation to eat, that he may become as God. Here he
works and tempts by necessity, that our Savior would distrust God, and by
providing to eat would become as the worst of men; God there bestowed his Image
and an innocent estate upon Adam, which he lost in eating; And no sooner has
he owned the innocence of his Son in the likeness of a D^ve, ^at 3. ulr.
and an express approbation, but Satan tempts him by his diffidence to forfeit
that title, and part with his birth ^ight for a piece of bread.

These forty days we cannot think free from fiery onsets; t^^ Tempter would
not loose any time to further his design; (...) he directs his greatest
Ordnance against the weakest wall, (...) raises his strongest battery when and
where he can expect the least resistance, when forty days was done, and when
he was hungry.

Moses who received the Law, Elias by whom the Law was restored, and Christ by
whom the Law was fulfilled, had their fast of forty days. In Moses his first
fast the sight of the glory of God was like a consuming sire, and the anger
which he conceived, if it did not satiate, Exodus 24.1^.
yet did it not admir of any appetite to meat. And when he goes up the second
time, as he was not mindful of it, so there was no need of provisions; if the
vision of God did before fright him, now it feasts him, and if before he was
possessed with anger, now he is replenished with glory; but in both he lives
the life of faith, and like one who rightly shadowed Christ, it was his meat
and drink t^ ^o the Lords work. And we must confess, though want did attend
Elijah, yet in his fastings no less then a miracle did feed him; the Ravens
they became his Purveyours, and the Widows last Cake was sustenance to him, and
a storehouse to her self, and though the threats of Jezabel makes the Prophets
life as a burden to him, yet whilst he is sleeping, 1 K^rg. 1^.^.
the Keeper of Israel slumbers not, his Angel awaketh him, gives him command to
arise, gives him meat to enable him to that command, and in the strength of
that to accomplish his journey to Mount Horeb. In that Mount where Moses saw
God, shall God find Eliah; and Moses, and Eliah, and Christ, the three great
Easters, shall be seen in Mount Tabor in his Transfiguration; yet must we
consider a difference in their condition, Moses was both times on the Mount
talking with God; but Christ is in the Valley, nay in the Wilderness tempted of
the Devil: Moses was on the Mount receiving Gods Commands and the Tables of
stone, but Christ is in the Wilderness receiving Satan's demands, that the
stones may become bread for his table; Eli^ah was in the Wilderness under the
Juniper tree, and though he was hungry and thirsty, his soul fainting within,
yet could he sleep; but Christ is in the Wilderness, where his temptation does
not admit or an intermission, but the increase of necessity does strengthen the
assault. Then came the Tempter.

In remembrance of this fast the holy practice of his dearest Spouse may aptly
be approved, the like time of forty days being by her sequestered to
abstinence; a fast it was for admiration not for imitation, and this commends
unto our use the moral, not the miracle, wherein we are to abstain a tanto,
though not a toto, by abatement, but not by ablation of meat. And very
seasonably has the Church appointed this Fast, Fassionem predic^^e and a^
Resucre^ti^nem preparare, to humble us in the sense of his (...) st^ring and so
pr^diet us the Passion, Christ R^s^^^ ^^^^^st Ch^y^^ ^u^^ Ex^l^^. ^.
and that his rising may be our only Festival.

Agree^ble with this is the continue practice of the Eastern Church, who
solemnly observed this Fast for six weeks before the Resurrection: And an
ingenious Pen observes, that this forty days is attended with Christ's forty
hours or thereabouts remaining in the Sepulcher, his forty days conversing
with his Disciples betwixt his Ruing and Ascension; all which days, like
Jonah's errand of forty days, proclaims unto us a sitting down in s^ck^loath,
and turning to our God by true repentance, that we may expend o^r days
according to this happy president in prayer and in fasting. Noltut tentari
Christus usquedum ^ejunasset, (...) ^^d.
Christ would not be tempted before he had fasted; not that he should have
offended without that preparation, but to teach others the best preparative and
preservative against temptation; for seeing that Adam's innocent estate could
not exempt him from the Serpents cunning, nor Christ's entire and untainted
Piety could not privilege him from the Tempter, it is our parts to arm against
so feirce assaults, and in our f^lness and fasting, plenty and want, to be upon
a good guard when the Tempter shall come unto us.

As this temptation was for forty days and forty n^g^^s, (...) this lose and
powerful assault is likely to be at the expiration* Achitophe^'s advise to
Absalon was, 2 Samuel 17.2.
I will come upon him whilst he is weary and weak banded. It Is the policy here
of this Tempter I will fall upon him when this fast has produced hunger, skin
for skin, what will he not do for his life? And this was his con^ition, he was
hungry.

That Christ had the passions and affections of a man none which are more then
brutish will deny, joy and sorrow, fear and want, hunger here, and thirst at
his Passion; and that Satan is sedulous and subtle, in baiting his books with
what is most taking* and tendering such supply as is most sut^^le to the
tempteds necessity, is as easy to affirm: Christ is hungry what will he not do
to procure meat? Jacob rather then his Sons and himself shall starve will send
them into Egypt to buy Corn and, though hardly persuaded, parts from his
Benjamin rather then their lives shall part from them for want of bread: David
when he was hungry entered into the House of God, eat of the Shewbread, which
was only for the Priest: Christ on the Sabbath plucked the ears of Corn where
was the proprieties, Matthew 12.
besides the profanation of the day, yet for all this blameless; necessity
legitimates that act which otherwise was sin^^l, and want was the warrant for
this work: And why may not his present hunger engage him to a miracle for his
maintenance? He that for pleasuring of others, manifesting of his glory, John 2.
and augmenting faith in others, turned water into wine, and at a Wedding, when
we presume there was not much want* Why may not he in the Wilderness, when he
is hungry for refreshment, for evidencing his power, confounding Satan, turn
stones into bread? He that had compassion on the multitude that came from far
and had not to eat, has he no pity on himself, who had fasted far beyond their
time in the desert? This Tempter could answer God concerning J^b. Does J^b
serve God f^r naught? And has God less care of his Son then of his servant?
Job. 1
must Christ serve him for naught? Did Christ say to his Disciples, when he
sent them out without scrip or pur^e, did you lack any thing? and does God send
f^rts his Son into the Desert amongst Wolves and wild be^sts and has nothing?
Quare adduxisti, was the peoples against Moses

O blessed Jesu, how much rather had thou suffer want then thy Fathers wrath,
death then thy Fathers displeasure, famish then offend thy God, or need of that
great work thou had in hand: Adam eats and sins, bidden by Satan and
forbidden by God to eat, but thou fasts and sins not, though bidden by Satan to
eat, yet forbidden by God; Thou wast not here without power to command bread,
but thou art with^^ purpose to distrust thy Father; thou wast not without
power^^ do a miracle, b t without will to gratify Satan, and do it a^^
pleasure: What God was pleased to say to the Jews Christ thought meet in effect
to say unto Satan, If I were hungry I will not tell thee, though thou usurps
it, Psa^. 50.
yet the World is mine and the fullness thereof; I will offer thanksgiving and
pay my vows to the most High; bread is not that only which I depend upon, that
Providence which has kept me forty days will not let me perish man live^h not
by bread only, there is another Ma^m which it left for relief, and that is the
Word of God, that is the childrens bread, O seed us with these crumbs and we
shall not perish.

And is this nothing unto us that pas^ by? Yes it is, see and c^rs^^er how
answerable Christ's obedience is to our offense; Adam cast behind him the
Commandment of God, and having the Apple before his eyes he eat; Christ he
casts the temptation behind him, and having the fear of God before his eyes he
fasted, but answers for that sin in fasting which was committed by eating.

This Tempter, like a cunning Broaker, will not that his Customer shall want
any Commodity, his storehouse must furnish at the le^st promise him what he
most desires; he wants not his Factors and active Agents to drive on his
design and bring the dece^^ful heart within his books; if thou art low he has
a way to promise riches and wants not a Ballade to promote thee unto ^^no^r; if
poor, he will tender thee a supply, and though he can challenge nothing but
torments as his due, yet Omnia ha^ dubitibi is as ready with him to offer, as
with our depraved natures to accept? God tells thee, Thou shall have no other
Gods; if thou be weary of thy subjection unto him, Satan h^^ a Serpent can
^^ll thee how to be exempted from thy obedience instead of thy submission to
his Commands, Eritis sic^t d^i, you shall be as gods.

G^d says, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, but the Tempter
tells thee of a greater liberty, If God from ab^ve do not condescend to thy
desires, attend thy expectations; if Moses st^y but in the Mount, Satan has
his season in the Valley; Up let us make our selves Gods which shall go before
us; we know not what is become of Moses, Exodus 32.
let us make g^ds will go with us: Thus Satan frames gods according to their
minds, and their minds according to their gods.

God says, Exodus 5.2.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, but Satan can afford
thee a release of this severity, the Tempter wants not his Pharaohs, Who is
the Lord that I should obey his voice, and what is his Name that I should
reverence it? He wants not his Rab^hakeh to belch out ugly language, What is
the Lord, Isai. 36.4.
or what is this confidence whe^^in thou trustest? This Tempter will suggest
unto thee to take his Name in thy mouth, so do those servants who draw near to
God with their lips, but their hearts are far from him; and Satan has other
servants, who have his Name to^ ^^ten in their mouths, because it is to make up
their vanity; his Name is used, not to call upon him for a blessing, but is
used in cursing, such Oaths as the horridness thereof commands me to rebuke,
though modesty forbids me to mention, madness of men, nay monsters rather: Was
it Thomas his weakness that he must have his fingers in his Wounds, and must it
be the sinful wickedness of these wretches that they must have his Wounds in
their mouths; let them beware, that Fountain which was opened for uncleanness,
may that upon their filthiness. God says, Swear not at all, let your
communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, that is, make not an use of Oaths in
your discourse, mingle not your conference with them, swear not unless where
and when controversies are to be decided, and right to be evidenced and
vindicated by your solemn Oaths: but Satan will not have his gallants to be
thus tongue-tyed, their Tongues are their own, who shall control them: yea and
nay are syllables which serve not their turns, such morsel; of words will not
fit their mouths, tearing of his Heart renewing of his Wounds, piercing of his
Soul, p^oph^^ing of his Majesty, engaging of confusion, calling dawn daman^^^n,
and it Gods Justice were ready to answer our desires and deserts, confirming
it, are only such terms as do them service; their curses must be like their
clothes, Alamode and east in the latest mold; this temptation has been too
taking, under which the Land mourns, every parish, nay this place, where I
forbear to personate any, but should I forbear to rebuke all the stones would
speak, does grievously lie under this temptation; the Lord reform them, and
cast out these Devils of drunkenness and swearing by fasting and by prayer,
for, Hoc genus Damomi, etc. these kind of Devils is not otherwise to be ejected.

God commands thee to remember the Sabbath in keeping it holy; but the Tempter
will release thee from the severity of this Precept; some he tempts them to so
much superstition, that they will not do good, nor have good done on that day;
if Christ cure on that day the people murmr, and that which is the perfection
of the Gospel must be accounted the breach of the Law. It is not lawful to
beal on the Sabbath Day; nay such superstitious observers may be very well
observed to be derived from the family of Solomon that Anglo Judamy, who
falling into a ditch on the Sabbath refused to (...) taken out,

Sabbata nostra colo de ^^er ^re surgere nolo. which occasioned the Christian
that came by on the Sunday to answer him in his own kind;

Sabbata nostra quidem Sal^^on celibrabis ibidem. Thus some will not heal
others, n^^ be healed, on the Sabbath, so let the superstitious perish: In our
times we are more under the temptation of profaneness then superstitious
observation. God commands holy Duties and commends them: Satan in^inuates, what
does it avail to walk mournfully all the day long? and what profit have ye that
ye have served the Lord? thus (...) the Tempter. God requires that yo^ shall
account his Sabbath a delight; Satan tempts you to repu^e it a burden. God
requires that in it you will call for a blessing on your weeks-work; Satan he
tempts you to account this work a we^riness, this service a hinderance, When
will the Sabbath be gone that we may set f^rth ^heat? God would have you to
observe it as a rest from your la^our, from your sin: Satan he tells you it is
a ceasing from you lucre, and in it tempts you to sin: This is no^ all, God
would have you to his Church, the Devil would keep you in his Chapel, because
it is a day of rest from the labor of the body, he must have it a rest from
the service of the soul; Thou shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my
Sanctuary: A holy time the Sabbath, Levit. 26.2.
and a holy place the Sanctuary, and holy duties reverence to be used. Satan
tempts thee against the time, Every day is a Sabbath; but never a day is kept
holy: against the place he wants not Factors of Jeroboam's family, It is too
much for you to go up to Jerusalem to the public place of worship, behold
nearer gods; 1 King 12.28.
and he set the one in Dan and the other in Bethel: Why should we go to Gods
place, let God come to our place. What Corah said of the persons Satan says of
the places, You take too much upon you seeing all the places are holy: I speak
not against private duties, prayer in families, but I would not have Martha to
justle out Mary, many cumbers, and troubles, and inventions to take place of
the one thing which David desired, of that better part which Mary chose; I
would not have them to look to their own and let Gods House lie waste: What as
the Tribes said concerning their Brother Benjamin, I say with sorrow for these
separating Brethren, O Lord, how comes it to pass that one Tribe this day is
wanting in Israel? How comes it to pass, that one Tribe, one Family, one
Person, is this day wanting in thy Temple? It was David's joy, and let it be
ours, to go up to the Temple of the Lord but admit we come to the Sanctuary,
Satan has yet more baits to catch simple souls into his drag-net; Abraham he
prepares to sacrifice, but Fowls lights upon it; we prepare to sacrifice, but
Satan has Fowls ready to fall upon it; when the heart is unprepared, when the
affections are indisposed, suspect a Fowl upon the sacrifice. God commands
Nehemiah to build up the wall, that there may be no breaches; but Satan wants
not a Sanballet to send an errand to obstruct the work, Come let us meet
together, let the work alone: Nehem. 6.3.
Nehemiah knew it to be a temptation replies like a Prophet, I am doing of a
great work, I cannot come down, why shall I leave the work and let it cease
whilst I come down to you? It is the observation of an ancient Writer, that
Satan does especially busy himself at these times.

In principio bonae actionis ne sit. Hugo Car.

In medio ut obsit
In fine bonae actionis ne prosit.
That this is Divinity Christ his temptations will attest it, and I think our
own experience will confirm it. What Saint Paul says of Afflictions, Christ
and Christians may say of Temptations, me manent, They wait for me: Christ,
though formerly in the world, is but entered into the work of our Redemption,
publicly appearing to the world for our welfares, newly baptized into
obedience, and acting what God had sent him for. David had a security in the
sheep-coats, though his flocks, yet himself was not assaulted: but when he was
sent by his father to visit his brethren, he meets with the insolences of a
great Goliath, he is in the public Court, entertains the Challenge, hearing the
promise made, That whosoever kills the Philistine the King will enrich him,
will give him his Daughter, and make his Fathers house free in Israel. 1 Samuel
17.25.
He is now not only tempted, but his weakness is contemned: a youth, a
stripling, our better David in his privacy and retirement we find not to be
tempted; but now that he is sent out to gather his lost brethren, now that he
appears openly, and has received an assurance, that he that overcomes the
spiritual Goliath, the King will enrich him, giving him his Daughter the Church,
making his Kindred free, which notes our freedom through Christ our
Conqueror ^he is unprovidedly assaulted by a strong Phi^^stine, and in the
beginning of his work, when want is upon him is tempted by him whose weapons
threaten ruin, and promise victory to the owner, Thus came the Tempter, etc.

Secondly, Though he be disappointed in the first design he may withdraw, but
he will not wholly desist the enterprise; he leaves him for a season; Luke 4.13.
he set upon him without meat, and he will endeavor to find him without
ministration, to come upon him when the Angel is gone from him, and this ut
obsit; Christ's life was said, and truly, to be continuata passio as well it may
be templatio; for in the midst of this work his Disciple Peter s^^o^^eth of
Satan, and would withdraw his Master from his business: had the Son of God gone
ten degrees backward he had spo led all; had he stood still, Non progredi est
regredi, he had hindered the work of our restoration; but he rejoiced to run
his course, and therefore speaks a defiance to all delay, rebukes Peter, Get
thee behind me Satan.

Third^^, To c^^th him in his words was the Pharisees design, and at last to
catch him in their hands, in the end of his work Ne prosit.

At his end how strongly is he tempted, betrayed by his Disciple, apprehended
by the multitude, forsaken by his followers, arraigned, accused, exclaimed
against, mocked, struck, blindfolded, and derided in the Tempters language, If
thou be the Christ prophecy who is this that smote thee; either must he choose
to submit to their temptation, or it must pass, pro confess^, he was not the
chosen of God. Miracles he did in the time of his trouble, his enemies fall
backward, and yet can these blinded Jews go forward to condemn him; he heals
Malchus his eat, and yet they kill their Physician: Nay his temptation is yet
stronger, one of the Malefactors in the same condemnation with him raileth on
him, with an If, the language of the Tempter, If thou be Christ save thy self
and us.

O blessed Jesu, if thou at the instance of thy Tempters had saved thy self
from temporal, how had thou saved us from eternal death: We must not forget
his Agony, where those grumae sanguinis, that bloody sweat, that exceeding
fear, that parching thirst, but that bitter cup, that sense of his Fathers
desertion was upon him, which made him with his precious blood to pour out
cries and prayers, and all this does not express a tithe of his temptations
whilst this work was a finishing. Thus in the beginning, progress and
perfecting the work of our reconcilement, the Tempter came unto him. If Satan
be thus busy at our holy works, we must likewise expect him on Gods holy Day,
set apart for performance of holy duties.

The last Lords day afforded us a sad example, whilst we were tendering of an
Evening-sacrifice, our sacrifice was mingled with blood: The Word of God read,
and the work of Satan under the same roof, our eyes and ears were witnesses;
and when the occasion of this dismal act was required, what return could we
expect? Was it blood that might have required blood? Was it the murdering of
another which provoked ^^m to his own murder? No, but it was a due denied to
God* the breach of his Sabbath, turning his Grace into lewdness, the day of
prayer and devotion into playing and drunkenness; this he did against God on
his day, and this does the Devil against him on the Lords day: this was the day
when he should have drawn near to God, but withdrawing himself from God, Satan
draws near to him, into him, and he that could not keep a Sabbath cannot have a
rest, but must attempt to be his own m^rderer. This example should serve to
imprint the first line of this Commandment in all our hearts, Remember to keep
holy the Sabbath day.

And in the performance of the duties relating to the Sabbath let not thy
services be cold; coldness and luke warmness are not relishing; be zealous is
Gods expectance, yet let thy ^eal have knowledge, otherwise it will but be
madness, and let thy knowledge have zeal, otherwise it will be deadness; let
thy service be entire, God loves not a half service, a half heart is no heart;
Aut totum honora aut totum abjice, God loves not a sleepy service; N. (...) z.
Awake thou that sleep and call upon thy God: God loves not an unmannerly
service, he is not proud, he delights that thou should walk with him; but let
not condiscension lift up thy heart, for he requires thou should walk humbly
with him: M^^.
God would not have his Spouse to be gaw^y ga^ish and painted, but he loves to
have her decent, not in a new ^a^hion, but in a Matron-like and ancient order:
He that will have her glorious within, will not have her sluttish without;
(...). ^6.14.
She shall be brought to the King in a raiment of needle work, not masked as to
externals, but one part of decency joined and woven with another.

How dreadful is thy dewlling place, O God, how carefully must we enter thy
presence Chamber? How must we long to hear thy Will imparted to us? How must we
fear to impart our wants unto thee? If our Petition be rude, how can we expect
a gracious reference? How shall not we deport our selves with reverence when we
have to deal with a holy God in a holy place, on a holy day, to do a holy duty,
knowing that i^ these duties the Tempter comes unto us, etc.

God says, Honor thy Father and thy Mother; but (...) Tempter ran from the
mouth of Christ; quote Scripture and acquit thee from this obligation: Mary in
the mouth of her Son is no more then Woman, and that not with obedience but
objurgation, What have I to do with thee? Jo. 2.4.
What say we to this bait? does he who teaches this Commandment disdain his
Mother? The giver of the Precept is he a president for the breach?

Let Reverend Bishop Hall answer this Objection; Bish. Hall.
In all bodily actions his style was Mother; in spiritual and heavenly Woman;
she was the Mother of his flesh, his Deity was eternal; that part which he took
from her shall observe her, she must observe that nature which was above her;
as that nature made him a Son and Man, so that nature made her both a Woman and
a Mother: God as thy heavenly Father calls for fear, the King as Pater patriae
calls for honor; Fear God and bonour the King; the Conjunction couples them;
Whom God has put together let no man put asunder. The spiritual Fathers, so
says Saint Paul, Vos genui in Evangelio, I have begotten you in the Gospel;
claim an honor, let them have a double portion of the spirit of your honor:
Thy natural Father calls or obedience; Can the Mother forget her affection?
Shall the Child forget his duty? Can the Parent forget his care? Shall the
Child not crave a blessing? Blesseme, even me also my Father.

And now am I come to that great temptation, which has been and is too common
in our bloody days; God says, Thou shall do no murder. Thou shall not shed
the blood of thy brother under the Gospel, who might not eat the blood of the
beast under the Law. The Tempter comes, yea, has God said so? and has no
small store of provocations and pretenses to the breach of this Commandment:
The first and most unfortunate quarrel was the Tempters, when in Paradise he
prevailed with our first Parents to rebel against God; this quarrel, from the
mouth of God that sharp-edged sword, did produce no less then death, Morte
morieris; in this Duel Man, being instigated by the Tempter, lost the field,
and in this rebellion was the whole posterity tainted, and without the
satisfaction of that blessed and powerful second Adam wholly and finally
destroyed; and as if t^ls had not been a too sufficient witness of his malice
against man: The Tempter starteth another quarrel betwixt two brothers when
there was none to rescue, Here was the first ^nhappy field wherein Cain spills
the blood of his brother Abel, provoked by this grand murderer, because his
brothers sacrifice was better accepted, he cannot rest till the innocent blood
of his brother be sacrificed to his malice, Cain made himself drunk with
revenge, and now that deadly draught does so distract him, that he proceeds
to despair, and now his guilt as clamorous as the act makes him cry out, My sin
is greater then can be pardoned, passing from the ^in against a finite
creature, to sin against the inexhausted mercy of an infinite and eternal
Majesty; Thus hell tempting him ^o this heinous act, bequeaths its horror to
him, which whatsoever way he looks still stands before him.

And still this Tempter, as if blood were his business, continues his course
he has now charactered Cain in the chequered colors red and black, blood and
despair; his next piece must be to set a difference betwixt Jacob and Esau,
these struggling in the womb must not be quiet in the world; That the Devil
therefore may become a perfect dueller, he without doubt appoints the place in
Cain, the field; now the time in Esau. The day of mourning for his Father to be
the day of murdering his Brother, which purposed and heart-murder being
prevented by a great providence, as if the Tempter were engaged to prosecute in
the defense of his servant Esau, he sowes a dissent betwixt the children of
Jacob, and patches a conspiracy amongst the brethren to kill Joseph, still more
blood? what pretense can this furious fiend have for his acting? horrid enemy!
how coul^st thou design a duel betwixt God and man? the Potter and the ^lay?
How durst thou attempt this affront against the Maker of mankind? How can
thou glos^e or any way excuse the lifting up Cains hand against his brother?
Esaus heart against Jacob? and all the brethrens voices against Joseph (...)
thou ^^^st out rebellion, and interlines reasons thou bl^^^^^ out di^obedience
toward God, and set down advan^^ into man, Eat, says God, and thou shall
die, Eat, says S^^ and thou shall be as Gods, which do not die: Thou blot^^^
murder, and writest in Cains near a copy of discretion, justice and of policy:
There Is none stands in comperition with the only Abel what obstruction to the
acceptance of my offering? why do thou not remove him and then thy tender
will be received; Besotted Cain! could thou be tempted to believe that the
blood in the field smelled sweeter then the fruit of the ground? Thou blottest
out murder in Esau, and tells him it is justice; Has not Jacob supplanted thee
in thy birth right, and in thy blessing? what is thy life unto thee if he lives
he will again dissemble? is it not justice to stop his breath who stole thy
blessing (how can it be counted murd nor revenge, or construed cruelty to put a
period to his days, who has supplanted thee in thy enjoyments? Thou blo^test
out murder in the false brethren, and though in Letters of blood thou writest
Reason, great cause why Joseph should be slain, first he is a tel^ale, Genesis 37.
he pries into our actions, and gives an evil report to our father: then though
a youngling he wears the only livery of our fathers favor, as if we were not
his children, or it so that we were cast off; next the lad makes bad use of
that favor, it makes him insolent; the dearness of our father does distract
him, pride swells him and makes him burst out into disdainful and undutiful
language: He dreams, and not only so, but says it waking, that be shall have
dominion over us; A son to rule over his father, where is nature? where is
grace? is this the requital? has Jacob bestowed a coat upon Joseph to go naked
himself? a brother, and a younger brother to rule over us his elder brethren,
where is nature? where is affection? Though he come to see us, it is but to be
ray us; though he has taken this journey, it is but to return our evil report,
Come therefore and let us kill him and let his blood be charged in the salvage
beasts, wil^e creatures! bruits and without understanding, though Satan has
informed you, his sub^ilty has tempted you, yet Joseph does live, Joseph must
reign over you, your eyes shall see it, and your hearts shall enforce your
tongues to confess your bloody act, your guilt, Genesis 4.
and his innocence: Thus did the ^empter move the Jews to kill our better
Joseph, but in despite of his and their malice it is our joy, Joseph, Jesus is
yet alive and triumphs.

But though this was of old, and the Tempter might prevesrie in those times yet
can it be that any such temptation should take place in our century; whose eyes
do not drop a tear, nay, whose hearts do not bleed to hear our Rachels weeping
for their children, and cannot be comforted because they are not; War has of
late been as a pastime, we have lately lived as if Abner and Joab had been
among us; Come let the young men play before us: 2 Samuel 2.14.16.
Each caught his fellow by the head, thrust him through with his sword, they
fell together, this Tragic play deserves a memory, and the field is called
Helkath hazzurim, The field of strong men: surely the strength of our
transgression has slain the strength of our Nation, Quis legit haec, who reads
these red lines running so lately and drawn amongst us, and receives
temptations to bloodshed.

This crafty Serpent can yet skin over these wounds, and mitigate the sting of
these complaints; the commonnesse and seeming advantages, the present
satisfactions, are not the least and meanest of the baits. Abimilech forgets
the murder of his brethren for a Kingdom; he has so much thought of what he
would have, that he forgets what he does to obtain it; the end makes him forget
the act: O Abimelech, thou layest the sixty nine brethrens blood upon a stone
to gain a Crown, which though upon thy head is not armor enough against one
stone by a weak Woman, but from the powerful hand of Heaven.

Rebellious Absalon, thou forgettest thy duty toward David, envies him as
King, for a Crown forgoes thy Father, suffers thy self to be tempted, and
tempts others to the excess of sinfulness, goes up to thy Fathers Concubines,
makes thy self odious in the sight of Heaven and Earth, all this for a Crown,
whilst that giddy head shall only live for thy shame and punishment, and lives
to learn thee, that a Tree is fitter then a Crown for thy treachery.

Sull n Ahab. can the sight and the unwarranted desire of thy Neighbors
Vineyard make thee forget his murder? Who has tempted thee? Is not thy
subjects blood ^earer then his field? Is not the welfare of his person more to
thee then his possession? Have thou not learned to know, that a good Kings
heart cannot but bleed in the loss and slaughter of a subject? He cannot but
bleed with them that bleed, suffer with them that s^^^er. Thou and the Tempters
Minion shall know, that you shall not be privileged from your shares in this
destruction.

Let us come further: Blind-folded Jews, who has tempted and bewitched you to
kill the Lord of life? Can you forget his Miracles, the blind see, the deaf
hear, the dumb speak, the Lepers are cleansed, the dead are raised, and will
not yet your souls be subject to his Scepter? what profit can you propose to
your selves and your posterities by his death? what evil do you find in him?
for which of his works of wonder do you kill him? Satan has seared their
consciences, Let us kill him, not one check but an encouragement, the
inheritance will be ours.

Deluded Herod, how has the Devil tempted thee to the murder (...) a Man who
endeavored thy salvation? Art thou become his enemy because he has told the
truth? must he be exposed to the sword because he has opened his mouth against
thy sin? shall the Devil first tempt thee to act filthiness with thy brothers
wife, then draw a rash and unadvised oath from thee, to grant whatsoever the
Strumper requires? and must thou now to make good thy bad oath murder a good
man? Matthew. 14.9.
can the Tempter make thee mindful of thy oath, and forgetful of thy murder?
Much better had thou bro^k thy promise then have slain thy Prophet: must thy
birth needs be his dying day? is this the glory thou give to Christ for being
born, to murder him who was the forerunner of Christ born? Consider how the
Tempter deals with them, with you, where there is murder he pretends Justice,
where there is murder he pleads advantage: Here for the killing John he pleads
the necessity of performing his promise, he is prompted to it for the companies
sake, where he ought to have forborne it for conscience sake.

Yet a little further; the Devil does skin ever this wound, let us lance it to
the bottom; God says, Thou shall not kill; Satan says, (for in plain truth
it is he) it is against thy honor to pass by an injury unrevenged: Grant that
thou worst injured, shall God forgive sins, and thou not forgive errors? What a
thing is this b^^ble o^ honor, that cannot be maintained but by dishonouring
God defacing his Image wounding thy soul, and without Gods great mercy
destroying and damning bo^y and soul. But all this is against killing of
another; does he then pass by or privilege the killing of thy self? ^very
temptation thou entertainest is a wound, Peceata sunt t^tidem vulnera, sins are
so many wounds to Christ, to thy soul, makes him bleed afresh, kills thy soul
without found repentance: ^very man in acting wickedness lays violent hands
upon himself, like Baal's Priests, cuts, lances and wounds himself. Think not
then, he that is angry, if thy hand be lifted up against others, will not be
offended if thou liftest thy hand against thy self.

It was a bad sign Achitophel had not ordered his house aright when he hanged
himself: We must have care to dispose domum intertorum, and domum exteriorum,
thy inward and outward stare: Achitophel might distribute his goods, I doubt he
did not dispose his soul; he might bequeath his goods to the world, not give
his soul to God: What if his counsel was not taken, must therefore this
desperate course be taken? O the Tempters cunning! First, it was he that bids
him give Absalon bad advi^e, now it is he that gives Achitophel worse counsel;
had thou kept close to thy God in Heaven, then had thou not forsaken thy
God, I mean the King upon earth; had thou continued loyal to him thou
might have lived as an Oracle, and died as a Saint; but now rebelling, Quem
Deus vult perdere dement at trius, thy wisdom is become foolishness, thy hand
which was against thy King is now against thy self, thou live a Rebel, and
dies a Reprobate: so let the enemies of my Lord the King perish.

Monster of men, accursed Judas, son of perdition, it was Satan came to Christ,
but into thee and made thee go out from, thy Master; How wast thou guilty of
betraying thy Master and can be innocent in murdering thy self? The Pens of
Angels cannot write thy impiety. A Disciple one which saw Christ, which the
Fathers longed for; one who heard Christ, with whom was the Words of Life; one
which knew Christ, whom to know was life eternal if rightly known; one which
was entrusted by Christ with what he had; How has the Tempter fooled thee? A
little money becomes thy master; and at last the fact is so ugly presented to
thee, to thy conscience, that, as if thou were unworthy of another hand, thou
becomes thy own Executioner: Thus comes the Tempter, etc.

Neither does he want fig leaves to hide the breach of other Commandments, let
him patch them they are but fig leaves, the eye of God can easily look through
them: If God says, Thou shall not commit aduliery: Thou shall not steal: Satan
who dares appear amongst the Children of God to tempt Job, and here dares
assault Christ, can present David with a Bathsheba, and with her a way to cover
the transgression: Uriah must be sent for home, invited, encouraged to her bed
to smother their unlawful dalliance: when that leaf will not do, another must
be applied, drunkenness must be added, that may prevail with Vriah to do he
knows not what: when this will not serve, Uriah must be sent away recompensed,
with the tru^^ of a Letter, as he conceives: This proves a fatal order, the
message of his own mortality; Place him in the front (the place of perilous
honor) but leave him alone in the v^n, forlorn, void of aid, for fear of his
evasion, so shall he not live to return, not return to know his Wifes sin and
his own sorrow. David a King, a Priest, a Prophet, yet under his sinful
passions blinded in iniquity; to what purpose do thou slay thy loyal subject,
that prizes the event of thy wars before the joys of wedlock? can thou by
this means masque it? No, the blood of thy subject cries in the ears of God, in
the ear of another Prophet, thou can not be at quiet till thou have condemned
thy self in a Parable, and afterward becomes the moral of that history, and
notwithstanding all these vizards acknowledge thy sin, shame and sorrow.

Unhappy Achan, the Tempter brings thee to an accursed thing; unhappy to
Israel, who cannot stand before the enemy; unhappy to thy self, thou trustest
this betrayer: Satan is a bad Secretary, he bids thee hide the Golden Wedge*
the Garment, in the ground; what ground is this for thy security? He that can
cause the earth to open upon Corah to his destruction, cannot he cause the
ground to open for the discovery of Achan's fact; a let shall do it, and now
must Achan confess his sin, and give glory unto God.

Poor spirited Soldiers, what tempted you to witness against your consciences,
against Christ, who came to be your Jesus? What moved you to report the
Disciples stole away our Savior by night when you were sleeping? Soldiers and
sleep upon your watch! If sleeping, how could you tell they st^le him? if
waking, why did you not obstruct it? 'Twas the J^ws money, that Aqua vitae to a
bad cause, and Satan paid it; this testimony stands upon record, and their
false witness will be against them when truth it self shall appear.

I (...) at the last Commandment, Thou shall not covet, so says G^d: but Satan
can dispense with that, and give another comment upon the Commandment. Simple
Ananias and Saphira, who moved you to sell? You will say, Gods Spirit. Who
moved thee to give? the same Spirit. But who moved thee to lie? who moved thee
to court a strange courting? before thou soldst it, was it not thy own? but
when it was sold it was Gods, that alienes the propriety; the whole sum is
required, what moves thee to deny it? Deceitful and distrustful ^earts, would
seem to serve God, but reserve something for your selves, would trust to God
but with a reservation, seals God a^ Deed but keeps possession. I have posted
through the Precepts, I have s^own you presidents, I have set before you Satan^
b^its, the best works, and duties, and persons are not free from his
temptations; let our Saviors Rules be general he ha^^ his exceptions; let Gods
Commands be absolute, Satan's demands shall be peremptory, plausible, and very
spacious; so was it here for bread when Christ was hungry: Then came to him the
Tempter, and said* etc.

And this leads us to the third part observable, Third Part.
the manner of his temptation, He came unto him and said, etc.

He came unto him. There is a vast difference betwixt coming unto, and coming
into, the Tempter came unto Christ, but into Judas.

Shall I seem to speak a Paradox, if I say Satan has a will to come near to
Christ, but no will that Christ should come near to him; Job 1:
Satan came into the presence of God as a servant amongst the Sons of God, some
company is ever with Christ with whom Satan would have to do: There is a J^b,
and as God has kept him, so Satan has considered him; M^^^m.
Imm^nei huic occasiont: If Christ and his Angels have true joy in the
conversion of a sinner, Satan and his Angels have their joy in the delusion of
a Saint; let Peter be with Christ, Satan is about him, and would be within
Peter; let Christ do his work to win, Satan does his part to winnow him* yet is
the power of Christ so awful unto Satan, his presence so much of prejudice to
his proceedings, that the very sense thereof makes them complain of his coming
near them. Quid habemus tecum agere, Ma t^ 8.29.
etc. What have we to d^ with thee, O Jesus of N^z^reth art thou come to
torment us before the time. What plea ure can they have in his approach, or
quiet, when they know it is to displace and dispossess. When a stronger man
comes the Fort must be surrendered.

Wherever the Devil was found by Christ he dis^^mfited him; he found him in
heaven, thence he ejected him by his power; he finds him lurking in the secret
cabinet of the heart, thence he throws him by his Word and Spirit; he finds him
in the bodies of possessed men, thence he commands their departure and they
unwillingly obey him; he might have kept his state and would not, he would have
kept heaven his habitation, but co^ld not; and this present trouble which they
have at his presence, gives them to remember their future tormen, for as he
shall come to the completion of the joy of his elect, so shall he come to the
fullness and aggravation of the demands, grief and sorrow.

If any shall enquire in what manner or form the devil c mes unto the
creatures, we must know that no form is ^o ^lorious that he either does not, or
dares not undertake, no language so heavenly which he cannot dissemble. He
transf^rms himself into the likeness of an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14.
light is taken there for glory, and without peradventure, where he deludes one
as devil, he deceives thousands as an Angel of glory.

When Saul contracts with the witch for the raising up Samuel, we find Satan
appearing like the good old prophet, when Saul asks her what she saw, she
answers, 1 Samuel 18.1^.
Gods ascending from the earth; He bids her not fear when he had more cause of
sear and horror; He enquires the form, an old man covered with a mantle, S tan
neither wants the habit nor the hairs of Samuel, not yet the language of the
Prophet, Why have thou disquieted me to bring me up? wherefore do thou ask of
me seeing the Lord is depart^d from thee? What could Samuel have said if he had
been present that Satan says not in his likeness; he tells him his present
condi^ion, and that he may evidence himself a prophet he pr^^^cts his future
state. To morrow thou shall be with me and thy s^ns, 1 Samuel 28.19.
and God shall give the army into the hands of the Phil^s^mes; and if we wonder
at his speaking since nothing can natur^l^y speak but what has the instrumen^s
of speech, which spirits have not, they can no otherwise speak vocally (then as
they ^ss me voices) in taking of bodies. This Tempter did appear in one
likeness of a Serpent, and has communicated much of his subtil^y to that
creature, pl^usible appearance and crafty insinuation, seducing the we^ker
creature, the woman but we m^st conceive the spirit of the Devil in that
Serpen^, and so that Angel speaks in the Serpent as the good Angel spoke in
Bal^ams ^sse; nor can we wonder of these miraculous transformings, and
pr^phet-like expressions, nor ye^ of the wor^s of his evil spirit in the
Serpent; if we consider of the author whose Almightiness can as easily create a
voice without a body as a body without a voice.

When God asks Sa^an, not but that he knew it, Whence com^st th u? that liar is
fo^^ed to re^urn a truth, From compassing the earth, walking to and fro up and
down in it; Then as he comes unto Christ so is he continually about Christians,
and within the wicked, for by Gods permission he is the same in the men^al
p^ss^ssi ns, as he is in the corporal, and as he seats himself in the bodies,
s^ h^ endeavors to seize the souls of all when he (...) s duce.

There is a threefold coming of Christ, says holy Bernard. Ad homin^m in
hominem, c^ntra h^minem; Bernard.
unto man to redeem him, into man to comfort him, against man to judge him: And
on the con^r^ry we may admit the like comings of Satan unto man, so unto Christ
in^o man, so into Ju^as and against man, so against the wicked who ha^^ ^o
(...) ^^^^rmed, and are reserved for futher torment: (...) ^omings there is
this difference, unhappy they unto whom Christ only came, and came not into
them; but happy those unto whom Satan comes, but enters not into them; Christ
and Christians c^nnot be free from the assaults of Satan, but happy ^re we, if
with an^ through Christ he have not entertainment: The godly man is ^h^
greatest combatant, and it is through Christ only that he is conqueror: So
much of Sa an attends the regenera^e man, n^y, creeps within that he has a
great militancy within himself, which the elect vessel St. Paul did undergo,
Romans 7.23.
I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity: His only confidence was in his champion Christ: the
assa lts of Satan co ld not be by that holy man prevented, but by Christ in
Paul they were repelled; And though our brainsick Saints will br^g of their
impeccancy, yet I must rank them among Saint John's rabble, who deceive
themselves, and there is no truth in him, and then there must be much of error;
and dare affirm with confidence and warrant, that whilst we live in this
Wilderness we can nei her free our selves from remanencies of sin, nor several
temptations: And though S^z men could report of Apoll^nius, that he never was
tempted, never wanted what he wished, yet I may doubt that full supply might
turn a temptation, and shall not without scruples ascertain their titles unto
Heaven, who labor not to assure it under the seal of many trials.

It was the complaint of our Savior, that though his House was appointed for
prayer, yet they had made it a den of thieves: And it is to be feared that our
bodies, which ^re as the Temple, and our souls as the sanctum sanct^ram, ^re
become the receptacles of Satan.

For what requires or coveteth Satan, but that which is Gods due, the heart?
our condition is never so dangerous whilst we quench his evil motions, and do
not give w^y to his suggesti^^^ and suffer our selves to be overcome of ou^ own
corrupti^^^ A g^od Soldier, when he is besi^ged, though he cannot (...) ^^er
his enemy from assaul^ing, yet he will be circumspect th t he may not enter,
and if he have a Mutineer within his Garrison he will be sure to secure him: A
good Christian, though he has enemies abroad, yet he will ^^bour to have all at
home in quiet. Cortugal the Turkish Ambassador returns from Rhodes with this
intelligence to his Master, Christianus occasus intestinis dissid^is
corroboratur, Home differences do promise and confirm victory to our foreign
Adversaries, Israel could not stand against Ai because there was an accursed
thing in the midst of Israel: Josh. 7.13.
Satan's temptations are not in their way unlike to J^shuahs besieging of
Jericho, Diabolus est dei simia, he goes about the City, he shuts up the soul
strictly he would not have any thing of Christ to come in, nor any thing of a
good motion to come out for its assistance; yet can he not take the City, enter
the soul, till the walls fall. And more, Satan though he seem to slight it at
the first, that his ass^ults be not so assiduous, yet at the last he shall
compass the City seven times: At the first he draws forth his temptations,
which may be named after him, Legion, for they are many, give thy soul an
Alarm, proffer thee fair conditions, draw a league betwixt you, proffer a
truce if thou will pay him tribute, promise to remove hostility if thou will
pay him homage, but all this time he waits but an opportunity of approaching,
nay of entering.

It was a prudent and safe piece of advice which a Counselor gave to his
King. That it was only safe for a King to treat with a sword in his hand: And
it is safe for every Christian, we have a dangerous enemy to deal withal.
Judas was their General and led those that took Jesus, he comes unto him with a
kiss, when he brought them to kill him; we have no safer way then to keep him
at the swords point. A noble and judicious Peer of this Realm was wont to say,
Prevention was cheaper then recovery, our armor avails us little after the
wound be received, that which timely put on had kept out the bullet, now serves
but to increase the wound, and to that purpose^ though Readiness Armor will not
fit David, yet is it not fitting that David should combat with Goliath wholly
unprepared.

We must observe, that Saul's Armor* another man's* will not serve us in this
day of battle; and why? says David, For that I have not proved. 1 Samuel 17.39.
Christ Armor, by which he repels Satan, was his own Armor which he has
proved, we may say it, himself, for he was the Word, and this is temptation
proof, one job one syllable of this shall no^ sail. Holy Job n^ had special
Armor, the Devil considered him, considered what way he might enter him, but he
finds God had made a hedge about him; his goods they were abroad in the fields,
the lives of his children they were in the house of their eldest brother, only
the life of Job was enclosed, was hedged about: Satan attempts a nearer
assault, moves that his bone and his flesh may be touched, and yet can he only
fire the subburbs, but the City he cannot take; his body may be plagued, but
his life and soul is protected.

The Church the Spouse of Christ has Armor of proof, she is builded upon a
Rock, and that Rock is Christ, like a good Wife she is under covert, the gates
of Hell, though they labor her discomfiture, yet shall they not prevail
against her: The Dragon may and will make war against the Woman, he may like a
resolute Soldier rally his forces, prepare his batteries* pour out his poison,
floods and waters, crosses and persecutions, schisms and heresies, yet shall
he not prevail, Christ shall break his head; but let his members be prepared,
wrath and war is against them; he will, though he shall not break, we bruise
his heel; he will labor to se^ the Bush on fire, though, blessed (...) God, it
shall not be consumed; this fire of the Church shall give light though it does
not burn, but Satan's ^ell fire shall burn though it gives no light. And thus I
am come to the Application.

Nunquidego Domine, was the Disciples, Is it I Lord? Who is it that Satan does
thus assault? No less then Christ; and if this befall the Master, 2 Cor. 16.15.
what may the servant (...) If Sat^^ dare assault Christ, his servants will
dare to (...) ^^sciples: If Satan be transformed, it is no gre^^ (...)
^^nisters be transformed: If no man can be (...) ^ration, then no man but he is
concerned in thi^ ^^ex^^, a^^ ^^e sad example, which occasions this Sermon,
conc^^ns us, and to good and evil is an admonition; the time, place and
condition of the person tempted does concern us: The time, when Christ had
begun the great work of our redemption, when he was entering into the execution
of his divine Office, it is not for man to appear in the field of God without
he be armed for all encounters, shrubs may be unmoved when the tallest Ce^^ars
are shaken, and privacy does supersede from several attempts, whereunto those
of public concernment are exposed.

He that espouseth the Lords quarrel cannot but expect many adversaries, and
few men, though they may put themselves forward, are fitted for this conflict.
Gideons Army of thirty two thousand are reduced to three hundred, and serves to
inform, ^at as God can do his work by few, so few are sitting for doing Gods
work* how few will stand and lap water in their spiritual mar^^^ not y^el an
inch of ground, ^u^e. ^.6.
not loose of their neight in time of danger? How many will kneel and bend for
water in the fiery trial? and though they be armed and furnished to the field
yet, like the children of Ephrams, they prove but broken bows, and start back
in the day of battle: but Christ has not to taught us. Saul ^e killed his
thousands, and David his ten thousands; but Christ does more, for though his
person meets with Legions, his word ejects them, s^^yes them. Lord, thou have
given us thy Word, give us thy Spirit, and we shall not be afraid if thousand,
be against us.

2. The place does concern us, it was in the Wilderness: Eli^ah was much
dejected when he was alone, and the place does not a little contribute to the
lessening or augmenting of misery. Adam had a Para^ise, Christ finds a
Wilderness, Jos^^h a Prison, Jeremy a Dangeon, Daniel a ^^ons Den, the three
Children a fiery F^^^^ce, Peter and Paul a Prison, but ^^l^x^^^o passio cum
Christus ingreditur careres, happy prison (...), unhappy paradise where Satan
inhabits: (...) are in the Wilderness how weary we are of (...) ^e dye, says
Elijah: when Peter was left alone (...) ^ith began to saint, and going afar off
gave (...) ^n to interpose temptations: Hold up our (...) ^derne^s of this
world with that comfortable (...) with ye in life in death: thus shall the
Desert be leli^^^ome to us.

3. The condition, He was hungry: Sometimes want and sometimes wealth are in
laqueum. Agar prayed against both; ^^ve m^ neither poy^^ (...) nor riches, not
poverty, least I be poor and steal, not riches least I b^ full and forget God:
Pread^ the bait which he laid before Christ, if that would have temp^^ him,
Christ had turned thief and ^ob'^ God of his honor. I^^ness was Judahs, yes
and Sodoms sin, and has been, my, and (...) our iniquity, It we want we
murmr, if we have plenty we lift up our hearts against God, and our ^^lness
^erve^^, ^in to the full against God: And we have great cause to impect the
sins of our fullness when we do but ^^ll^^t upon Christ's ^^^er (...) by his
fasting, seeing therefore for our sakes and sins, that righteo^sness did
hunger, Give us Lord, for thy sons sake, hearts to hunger after righteousness.

Again it is the Tempter which comes unto Christ's surely we cannot (though he
assumes several forms) but understand him. Would thou know him by his
appe^latives? Names are predictionary, so are ^is, not one but it hints the
evilness of, ^s nature. W^^l (...) judge of him by his works* they are like the
author, and speak not his pr^^se, but his s^ame in the gates. Is it any thing
would tempt thee to unlawful acts? it is (...), thou can but suspect him: Is
it any thing would diver thee from thy God? it is the Devil thou have cause to
(...) him: Is it any thing would tempt thee unto si^? it is the deceiver: Is it
any thing would make ship^v^^ck of thy says* it is the son of perdition: Is
(...) my thing may (...) the (...) of one precept, the commision of a s^n ^n
(...) of the D^vil thy unto him as Christ unto Satan tempting Peter, (...) thee
behind me Satan.

But if he presumes to come unto Christ how shall I withstand him; Christ
promised (...) ^eave (...) le^s; what he promised he has performed: That
a^^our w^^h hep^ ^^d, wherewith he prevailed, as a legacy of his l^ve, is
tends bequeathed unto thee, Scripium si, it is written was Satan's weapon;
this proud Goliah's sword ^ath our better D^vid taken f^^^ him, cut off ^^s
hea^ with his own sw^rd, and turned the (...) himself: The while panoply* the
complete ar^^^^ (...) ^roved furniture are afforded; Christians must the C^^^^
(...): med from top to toe, Ephe^. 6.14.
there is a he^met and a breast plate, a shie^d and a tried ^word, and if your
enemies be principalities and powers, your armor is experienced, your engines
(...) as powerful, not parleys and surrenders, but prayers (...) supplications,
these ordnance does gall your adversaries, (...) with an acceptable violence
opens the gates of heaven, (...) only place of refuge to the conquerors, the
choicest Sentinel is perseverance; In this quarrel our Captain is before us,
that valiant J^nathan, who through temptations has prevailed, ascended up the
hill, and having in his fathers house prepared Mansions, calls to us for our
following; good soldiers will not fail the expection of their Captain; loyal
subjects will go wheresoever their King goes, in life and death they will be
with him, O blessed Captain glorious King! thou have conquered Satan for us,
thou have left us thy Spirit to conduct us, thy Word to comfort us, the sword
of thy Word and Spirit to de^end us; let the same spirit go along with us in
this conflict, and in our selves, though we are unable, yet through thy
strength we shall be more then conquerours. In this battle be thou with ^s, who
by thy blood has overcome our enemies, and give us hearts to ascribe the glory
of this conquest unto thee, that when this painful time of our militancy is
ended, we may become members of the Church triumphant praising thee with Songs
of Salvation and victory for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

