A CHOICE MANUAL, Containing What is to be Believed, Practiced, and Desired or
Prayed for; the Prayers being fitted to the several Days of the Week.

ALSO FESTIVAL HYMNS, According to the Manner of the ANCIENT CHURCH.

Composed for the use of the Devout, especially of younger Persons, By Jeremy
Tailor, D. D.

LONDON, Printed, by J. Grover, for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty. 1677.

THE Golden Grove.

The Eleventh Edition.

THE GUIDE of Infant-Devotion together with a Guide for the PENITENT


A CHOICE MANUAL, Containing What is to be Believed, Practiced, and Desired or
Prayed for; the Prayers being fitted to the several Days of the Week.

ALSO FESTIVAL HYMNS, According to the Manner of the ANCIENT CHURCH.

Composed for the use of the Devout, especially of younger Persons, By Jeremy
Tailor, D. D.

LONDON, Printed, by J. Grover, for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty. 1677.

TO THE Pious and Devout. READER
IN this sad declension of Religion, the Seers, who are appointed to be the
Watchmen of the Church, cannot but observe that the Supplanters and Underminers
are gone out, and are digging down the foundations; and having destroyed all
public forms of Ecclesiastical Government, discou^tenanc'd an excellent,
Liturgy, taken off the hinges of Unity, disgraced the Articles of Religion,
polluted public Assemblies, taken away all cognizance of Schism, by mingling
all Sects, and giving Countenance to that against which all Power ought to
stand upon their guard. There is now nothing left, but that we take care that
men be Christians: For concerning the Ornament and advantages of Religion, we
cannot make that provision we desire; Incertis de salute de gloria minime
certandum. For since they who have seen Jerusalem in prosperity, and have
forgotten the order of the Morning and Evening Sacrifice, and the beauty of the
Temple will be tempted to neglect so excellent a ministration, and their
assembling themselves together for peace, and holy Offices, and be content with
any thing that is brought to them, though it be but the husks and acorns of
Prodigals and Swine, so they may enjoy their Lands and their Money with it; we
must now take care that the young men, who were born in the Captivity, may be
taught how to Worship the God of Israel after the manner of their forefathers,
till it shall please God that Religion shall return into the Land, and dwell
safely, and grow prosperously,

But never did the excellency of Episcopal Government apppear so
demonstratively and conspicuously as now: Under their conduct and order we had
a Church so united, so orderly, so governed, a Religion so settled, Articles so
true, sufficient, and confessed Canons so prudent and so obeyed, Devotions so
regular and constant, Sacraments so adorned and ministered, Churches so
beauteous and religious, Circumstances of Religion so grave and prudent, so
useful and apt for edification, that the enemies of our Church, who serve the
Pope in all things, and Jesus Christ in some, who dare transgress an
Institution and Ordidinance of Christ, but dare not break a Canon of the Pope,
did despair of prevailing against Us and Truth, and knew no hopes but by
setting their faces against us to destroy this Government, and then they knew
they should triumph without any enemy: so Balaam the Son of Bosor was sent for,
to curse the People of the Lord, in hope that the son of Zippor might prevail
against them that had long prospered under the Conduct of Moses and Aaron.

But now instead of this excellency of Condition and Constitution of Religion,
the people are fallen under the Harrows and Saws of impertinent and ignorant
Preachers, who think all Religion is a Sermon, and all Sermons ought to be
Libels against Truth and old Governors, and expound Chapters that the meaning
may never be understood, and pray, that they may be thought able to talk, but
not to hold their peace, they casting not to obtian any thing but Wealth and
Victory, Power and Plunder: and the People have reaped the fruits apt to grow
upon such Crabstocks; they grow idle and false, hypocrites and careless, they
deny themselves nothing that is pleasant, they despise Religion, forget
Government, and some never think of Heaven, and they that do, think to go
thither in such paths which all the Ages of the Church did give men warning of,
lest they shoul that way go to the Devil.

But when men have tried all that they can, it is to be supposed they will
return to the excellency and advantages of the Christian Religion, as it is
taught by the Church of England; for by destroying it no end can be served but
of Sin and Folly, Faction and Death eternal. For besides that no Church, that
is enemy to this, does worship God in that truth of Propositions, in that
unblameable and pious Liturgy, and in preaching the necessities of holy life,
so much as the Church of England does; besides this (I say) it cannot be
persecuted by any Governor that understands his own Interest, unless he be
first abused by false Preachers, and then prefers his secret Opinion before his
public Advantage. For no Church in the World is so great a friend to Loyalty
and Obedience as she, and her Sisters of the same persuasion. They that hate
Bishops have destroyed Monarchy, and they that would erect an Ecclestical
Monarchy must consequently subject the temporal to it; and both one and the
other would be supreme in Consciences: and they that govern there with an
opinion that in all things they ought to be attended to, will let their Prince
govern others, so long as he will be ruled by them.

And certainly for a Prince to persecute the Protestant Religion, is as if a
Physician should endeavor to destroy all Medicaments, and Fathers kill their
Sons, and the Master of Ceremonies destroy all Formalities and Courtships, and
as if the Pope should root out all the Ecclesiastic State. Nothing so combines
with Government, if it be of God's appointment, as the Religion of the Church
of England, because nothing does more adhere to the Word of God, and disregard
the crafty advantages of the World. If any man shall not decline to try his
Title by the Word of God, it is certain there is not in the world a better
guard for it than the true Protestant Religion, as it is taught in our Church.
But let things be as it please God; it is certain that in that day when Truth
gets her Victory, in that day we shall prevail against all God's enemies and
ours, not in the purchaces and perquisites of the world, but in the rewards and
returns of Holiness and Patience, and Faith and Charity; for by these we
worship God, and against this Interest we cannot serve any thing else.

In the mean time we must by all means secure the founndation, and take care
that Religion may be conveyed in all its material parts the same as it was, but
by new and permitted instruments. For let us secure that our young men be good
Christians, it is easy to make them good Protestants, unless they be abused
with prejudice, and suck venom with their milk; they cannot leave our Communion
till they have reason to reprove our Doctrine.

There is therefore in the following pages a Compendium of what we are to
Believe, what to do, and what to Desire. It is indeed very little; but it is
enough to begin with, and will serve all persons so long as they need milk, and
not strong meat. And he that has given the following Assistances to thee,
desires to be even a doorkeeper in God's House, and to be a servant of the
meanest of God's servants, and thinks it a worthy employment to teach the most
ignorant, and make them to know Christ, though but in the first rudiments of a
holy Institution. This only he affirms, that there is a more solid comfort and
material support to a Christian spirit in one article of Faith, in one period
of the Lord's Prayer, in one Holy Lesson, than in all the disputes of
impertinent people, who take more pains to prove there is a Purgatory, than to
persuade men to avoid Hell: And that a plain Catechism can more instruct a
Soul, than the whole day's prate which some daily spit forth, to bid them get
Christ, and persecute his Servants.

Christian Religion is admirable for its wisdom, for its simplicity; and he
that presents the following Papers to thee, designs to teach thee as the Church
was taught in the early days of the Apostles; to believe the Christian Faith,
and to understand it; to represent plain Rules of good Life; to describe easy
Forms of Prayer; to bring into your Assemblies Hymns of Glorification and
Thanksgiving, and Psalms of Prayer. By these easy paths they lead Christ's
little ones into the Fold of their great Bishop: and if by this any service be
done to God, any ministry to the Soul of a Child or an ignorant Woman, it is
hoped that God will accept it: and it is reward enough, if by my Ministry God
will bring it to pass that any Soul shall be instructed, and brought into that
state of good things, that it shall rejoice for ever.

But do thou pray for him that desires this to thee, and endeavors it,

Jer. Tailor.
CREDENDA, OR, What is to be Believed.
A SHORT CATECHISM For the Institution of young persons in the Christian
Religion.
Quest. IN what does true Religion consist?


Answ. In the knowledge of the one true God, John 17.3.
and, 1 John 2. 23.
whom he has sent Jesus Christ, and in the worshipping and serving them.


Quest. What do thou believe concerning God?


Answ. 1. That there is is a God: 2. That he is One, Deuteronomy. 6. 2.
3. Eternal, Exodus 20. 2, 3.
4. Almighty: Rev. 1.4.
5. That he has made all the world: Psalm. 90. 2.
6. That he knows all things: 1 Timothy 1. 17.
7. That he is a Spirit; not of any shape, Genesis 1. 1.
or figure, or parts, or body: Exodus 20. 11.
8. That he is present in all places: Heb. 3. 4.
9. That his seat is in Heaven, Isa. 40. 12.
and he governs all the world, Job 42. 2, 3.
so that nothing happens without his order and leave: Psalm. 139. 1, etc.
10. Psalm. 147. 5.
That he is the Fountain of Justice, Exodus 34. 6, 7.
11. Of Mercy, 1 Timothy 6. 1, 16.
12. of Bounty or Goodness: John 4. 24
13. That he is unalterably happy, 1 King. 8. 27.
and infinitely perfect: Amos 3. 6.
14. That no evil can come near him: Psalm. 139. 1, 9.
15. And he is the Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Acts 7. 48, 49.
PS. 2. 4. and 103. 16. and 115. 3.
Isa. 11. 4. and 44. 6.
Job. 9.4, etc.
Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
Genesis 18. 25.
Deuteronomy. 32.4.
Exodus: 34. 7.
Psalm. 103. 8. and 25. 8. and 86. 5.
Psalm. 51. 2
Jam. 1.17.
Heb. 11.6.



Quest. What other Mystery is revealed concerning God?


Answ. That God being one in Nature, is also three in Person; expressed in
Scripture by the names of Mat.28.19.
[Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.] Joh. 14. 16, 26. and 15. 26.
The first Person being known to us by the name of 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6.
[ The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. ] 2 Cor.13. 13.
The second Person is called 1 John 5. 7.
[ The son, and the Word of the Father.] 1 John. 1. 18. and 3. 16.
The third is [ The Spirit and promise of the Father.] Luke 24. 49.
And these are Three and One after a secret manner, Acts 1. 4.and 3. 33.
which we must believe, but cannot understand.


Quest. What is this God to us?


Answ. He is our Creator and Father, Colos. 1. 16.
and therefore he is our Lord; Acts 1. 7. 24.
and we are his Creatures, his Sons, 1 Cor. 8. 6. and 1 Cor. 6. 18.
and his Servants. Gal. 1. 4. Phil. 2. 22. Dan. 2. 47. Zach. 4. 14. and 14. 9.
Mat. 11. 25.



Quest. Wherefore did God create and make us?


Answ. That we might do him honor and service, Psalm. 145. 10, 11.
and receive from him infinite felicities. Acts 14. 15.



Quest. How did God make man?


Answ. By the Power of his word out of the slime of the Earth, Genesis 2. 7.
and he breathed into him the breath of life.


Quest. Was man good or bad when God made him?


Answ. Man was made pure and innocent. Eccles. 7. 29. Ecclus 15. 14.



Quest. How then did man become sinful and miserable?


Answ. By listening to the whispers of a tempting spirit, Genesis 2. pro tot.
and breaking an easy Commandment which God gave him as the first trial of his
obedience.


Quest. What evils and chages followed this Sin,


Answ. Adam, who was the first man and the first sinner, Romans 5. 12. and 3. 23
and 6. 20.
did both for himself and his posterity fall into the state of death, Ephesians. 2. 3.
of sickness and misfortunes, and disorder both of Body and Soul: we were
thrown out of Paradise, and lost our Immortality.


Quest. Was man left in these evils without Remedy?


Answ. No; Genesis 3. 15.
but God, pitying his creature promised, Gal. 4. 4.
That of the seed of the Woman he would raise up a Savior and Redeemer, 1
Pet.1.20.
who should restore us to God's favor, John 3. 16.
Heb. 2. 14, 15, etc.
and to the felicity which we lost.


Quest. How did God perform the promise?


Answ. By sending Jesus Christ to take upon him our nature, Joh 8. 25, 18.
to die for our sins, to become our Lord, Heb. 2. 9.and 16, 17, 18.
and the Author of holiness, and life, Luke 1. 74, 75.
and Salvation to mankind.


Quest. Who is Jesus Christ? Isa. 9. 6.



Answ. He is the Son of God, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
the Second Person of the holy Trinity, 1 John. 5. 20.
equal with the Fathe, Isa. 35. 4, 5.
rtrue God without beginning of life or end of days. Joh.1.2 and 18. and Joh.
8. 5, 8.Rev. 1. 8. Heb. 13. 8. and 1.8.



Quest. How then could he be our Redeemer, Phil. 2. 6.
and the promised seed of the Woman? Romans 9. 5.



Answ. The Son of God in the fullness of time, by the miracles of his Mercy,
Gal. 4. 4. Romans 1. 3.
took upon him Humane nature, Acts 2. 30. and 3. 32.and 3. 22.
and united it after a wonderful manner to his Godhead; Heb. 1. 1. and 2. 11.
so that he was both God and Man. Acts 13.23.
He was born of a Virgin, Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
who conceived him not by any natural means, Mat. 1. 18.
but by the power of the holy Ghost, and was called Jesus Christ; and his
Mother's name was Mary of the seed of Abraham, Mat. 1. 21.
of the family of David. Luke 2. 4, 5, etc.
And all these things came to pass when Augustus Caesar was Lord of the Roman
Empire.


Quest. How did Jesus Christ work this promised Redemption for us?


Answ. By his holy and humble life, Heb.29.10.
and his obedient dying a painful death for us upon the Cross.


Quest. What benefits do we receive by the life and death of Jesus Christ?


Answ. We are instructed by his Doctrine, Read the 3.and 4. and 5.
encouraged by his excellent Example, Chapters to the Hebr.
we are reconciled to God by his death; Ephesians. 2. 13, 14, 15.
He has given us an excellent Law, and glorious Promises, Luke 19. 27. and 24.
46, 47.
and himself has received power to make good all those Promises to his
Servants, and fearfully to destroy them that will not have him to reign over
them.


Quest. What Promises has Jesus Christ made us in the Gospel?


Answ. He has promised to give us all that we need in this life; Mat.6.25,etc.
That every thing shall work together for our good; Rom.8.28.John 13.33.Acts
14.22. 2 Cor.1.4.
That he will be with us in tribulation and persecution. Mat.8.11,12. and
11.20,21.
He has promised his Graces and his holy Spirit to enable us to do our duty;
Joh. 6.44,45.2 Pet.3.4.
and if we make use of these Graces, Acts 2.38.and 3.19,
he has promised to give us more. Luke 18.7.
He has promised to forgive us our sins; Mat.7.7.
to hear our prayers; Col.2.13.
to take the sting of death from us; 1 Cor.15.54,55,57.
to keep our souls in safe custody after death; Rev. 14. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 22. 1
Cor. 6. 14. 2 Cor. 4. 14. John 6. 40.
and in his due time to raise our bodies from the grave, and to join them to
our Souls, and to give us eternal life, and joys that shall never cease.


Quest. How is Jesus Christ able to do all this for us?


Answ. When he had suffered death, Mat.28 6,18.
and was buried three days, Phil.2.9, etc.
God raised him up again, Heb. 2. 9. and 5.6. and 1.8.
and gave him all power in Heaven and Earth made him head of the Church,
Tit.2.13,14.
Lord of Men and Angels, Ephesians. 3.14,15,20.
and the judge of the quick and dead. 1 Cor. 11. 3. Ephesians. 5. 23. Col. 2. 10.
Acts 10. 42. 2 Timothy 4. 1. and 8 17, 31. 1 Pet. 4. 5.



Quest. By what means does Jesus Christ our Lord convey all these Blessings to
us?


Answ. Jesus Christ had three Offices, 1 Timothy.2.5.
and in all he was Mediator between God and man; Heb.8.6. and 9.15.and 12.24.
He is our Prophet, our Priest, and our King.


Quest. What was his Office as he was a Phophet?


Answ. This Office he finished on earth; John 1.18.
beginning when he was thirty years old to ^each the Gospel of the Kingdom,
Luke 3.23. John 5.43.
Faith and Repentance. Luke 24. 19. Acts 3.23,etc.



Quest. When began his Priestly Office? and wherein does it consist?


Answ. It began at his death; Heb.5.5,7,8, etc.
for he was himself the Priest and the Sacrifice, Heb.7.per tot.
offering himself upon the Altar of the Cross for the sins of all the World.


Quest. Did his Priestly Office then cease?


Answ. No: He is a Priest for ever, Heb.7.24,25.
that is, unto the end of the world, and represents the same Sacrifice to God
in Heaven, interceding and praying continually for us in the virtue of that
sacrifice, by which he obtains relief of all our necessities.


Quest. What does Christ in Heaven pray for on our behalf?


Answ. That our sins may be pardoned, Rom.8.33,34.
our infirmities pitied, 1 John 2.1.
our necessities relieved, Heb.4. 14, 15,16.
our persons defended, our temptations overcome, that we may be reconciled to
God, and be saved.


Quest. How is Jesus Christ also our King?


Answ. When he arose from his grave, and had for forty days together conversed
with his Disciples, Heb.1.3,8.
showing himself alive by many infallible tokens, Psalm.110.1.
he ascended into Heaven, 1 These.1.10.
and there sits at the right hand of God, Acts 1.3.
all things being made subject to him, Luke 24.51. and 1.33.
Angels, 1 Pet.3.23.
and Men, and Devils, Heaven and Earth, the Elements, and all the Creatures;
and over all he reigns, comforting and defending his elect, subduing the power
of the Devil, taking out the sting of Death, and making all to serve the Glory
of God, and to turn to the good of his Elect.


Quest. How long must his Kingdom last?


Answ. Till Christ has brought all his enemies under his feet, Psalm.110.1.
that is, till the day of judgment: 1 Cor. 15.24.25,28.
in which Day shall be performed the greatest acts of his Kingly power; for
then he shall quite conquer Death, Mat.25.34.41.
triumph over the Devils, throw his enemies into Hellfire, and carry all his
Elect to neverceasing glories: and then he shall deliver up the Kingdom to his
Father, that God may be all in all.


Quest. How is Christ a Mediator in all these Offices.


Answ. A Mediator signifies one that stands between God and us. As Christ is a
Prophet, Gal.3.20.
so he taught us his Father's will, and ties us to obedience: As he is a
Priest, he is our Redeemer, Heb.8.6. and 9.15. and 12.24.
having paid a price for us even his most precious blood; and our Advocate,
pleading for us, and mediating our Pardon and Salvaon: As he is a King, so he
is our Lord, our Patron, and our Judge; yet it is the Kingdom of a Mediator,
^Cor.15.24.
that is, in order to the world to come, but then to determine and end. And in
all these he has made a Covenant between God and us of an everlasting interest.


Quest. What is the Covenant which Jusus Christ our Mediator has made between
God and us?


Answ. That God will write his Laws in our hearts, Heb.8.6. and 10. 13.
and will pardon us and defend us, Heb.10.16. and 12.24.
and raise us up again at the last day, Jer. 31. 31.
and give us an inheritance in his Kingdom.


Quest. To what Conditions has he bound us on our parts.


Answ. Faith and Repentance. Mark 16. 16. Matthew. 4. 17. Acts 8.37. and 2. 13.



Quest. When do we enter into this Covenant?


Answ. In our Baptism, and at our ripe years, when we understand the secrets of
the kingdom of Christ, Acts 2.38.41. and 3.19.
and undertake willingly what in our names was undertaken for us in our infancy.


Quest. What is the Covenant of Faith which we enter into in Baptism?


Answ. We promise to believe that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, 1 John 2.9.
or he that was to come into the world; Matthew. 16. 16. and 1. 18.
That he is the Anointed of the Lord, or the Lord's Christ; That he is the Son
of God, and the Son of the Virgin Mary; That he is God incarnate, 1 Timothy 3.16.
or God manifested in the flesh; Rom.14.9.
That he is the Mediator between God and Man; Acts 1.9. and 3.21. and 17.31.
That he died for us upon the Cross, Rev. 1. 5. and 17. 14.
and rose again the third day, and ascended into Heaven, and shall be there
till the day of Judgment; that then he shall be our Judge; in the mean time he
is the King of the world, and head of the Church.


Quest. What is the Covenant of Repentance?


Answ. We promise to leave all our sins, Luke 1.75.Tit. 2.11,12.
and with a hearty and sincere endeavor to give up our will and affections to
Christ, 1 Pet.2.1,2,3.2 Pet.1.4, etc.
and do what he has commanded (according to our power and weakness.)
Heb.12.1,2.



Quest. How if we fail of this Promise through infirmity, and commit sin?


Answ. Still we are within the Covenant of Repentance, 1 John 2.12. and 5.
16,17.
that is, within the promise of pardon, Gal. 6.1. and 5.24,25.
and possibility of returning from dead works and mortifying our lusts: and
though this be done after the manner of men, that is, in weakness, and with
some failings; yet our endeavor must be hearty, and constant, and diligent,
and our watchfulness and prayers for pardon must be lasting and persevering.


Quest. What Ministeries has Christ appointed to help us in this duty?


Answ. The Ministry of the Word and Secraments, Rom.10.15. Ephesians.2.20. and
4.11,12.
which he will accompany with his Grace and his Spirit. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 2 Cor.
5. 20. Mat.28.20.



Quest. What is a Sacrament?


Answ. An outward Ceremony ordained by Christ, to be a sign and a means of
conveying his grace unto us.


Quest. How many Sacraments are ordained by Christ?


Answ. Two: Mat.28.19. and 26.26.
Baptism, and the Supper of our Lord. 1 Cor.11.21.



Quest. What is Baptism?


Answ. An outward washing of the Body in Water, Gal.3.27. -- Ephesians.5.26.
in the Name of the Father, 1 Cor.12.23. -- Col.2.11,12.
Son, Rom.6.4. -- Acts 2. 38.
and Holy Ghost: John 3.5. -- Acts 22.16.
in which we are buried with Christ in his death, Tit.3.5. -- Heb.10.22.
after a Sacramental manner, 1 Pet.3.21.
and are made partakers of Christ's Death and of his Resurrection, teaching us,
that we should rise from the death of Sin to the life of Righteousness.


Quest. What is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?


Answ. A ceremony of eating Bread and drinking Wine, 1 Cor.11.23,24,25.
being blessed and consecrated by God's Minister in public Assemblies,
Matthew.26.26.
in remembrance of Christ's Death and Passion. Mark 14.22.Luke 22.19.



Quest. What benefits are done unto us by this Sacrament?


Answ. Our Souls are nourished by the Body and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor.10.16.
our Bodies are sealed to a Blessed Resurrection and to Immortality;
Matthew.26.28.
our Infirmities are strengthened, our Graces increased, our Pardon made more
certain: and when we present our selves to God, having received Christ's Body
within us, we are sure to be accepted, and all the good prayers we make to God
for our selves and others are sure to be heard.


Quest. Who are fit to receive this Sacrament?


Answ. None but baptized Christians, 1 Cor.11.27,28,29.
and such as repent of their Sins, and heartily purpose to lead a good Life.


Quest. What other Ministeries has Christ ordained in his Church to help us,
and to bring so many great purposes to pass?


Answ. Jesus Christ has appointed Ministers and Ambassadors of his own, 2
Cor.5.18.
to preach his word to us, Acts 20.28.1 Pet.5.2.
to pray for us, Gal.1.16.James 5.14.
to exhort and to reprove, to comfort and instruct, to restore and reconcile
us, if we be overtaken in a fault, to visit the sick, to separato the vile from
the precious, to administer the Sacraments, and to watch for the good of our
Souls.


Quest. What are we tied to perform toward them?


Answ. To pay them honor and maintenance, Gal.6.6.
to obey them in all things according to the Gospel, 1 Timothy.5.17.
and to order our selves so that they may give account of our Souls with
cheerfulness and joy. Heb.13.17



Quest. Which are the Commandments and Laws of Jesus Christ?


Answ. They are many, but easy; holy, but very pleasant to all good minds, to
such as desire to live well in this world and in the world to come: Read also
Romans 12.
and they are set down in the Sermons of our Blessed Lord and of his Apostles;
Ephesians. 5, and 9.
but especially in the 5, 6, 7. Chapters of S. Matthew. Chapters. 1 These. 5.



AN EXPOSITION OF The Apostles Creed
I Believe in God, I Believe that there is a God, who is one, true, supreme and
alone, Luke 6.35.
infinitely wise, Deuteronomy. 10.17. and 6.4.
just, good, Mar.12.29,32.
free, eternal, immense and blessed, 1 Cor.8.4.
and in him alone we are to put our trust. John 17. 3. 1 These. 1. 9. Ps. 90.2.
and 93.2. and 77.13 and 95.3. and 147.5. Romans 16.27. 1 Timothy 1. 17. 2 Chronicles. 19.
7. Psalm. 119. 137. 1 Chronicles. 16.34. Psalm. 34.8. and 135.3, 5. Exodus 33.19. 1,
Tim. 1.11.


The Father Almighty, I believe that he is (1.) John 8. 38.
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and (2.) Romans 8.29,32.
of all that believe in him, whom he has begotten by his

Word, 1 Cor.8.6. and 15.24.
and adopted to the inheritance of Sons: Matt.24.36.
and because he is our Father, Heb.2.11.
he will do us all that good; 1 Pet.1.23.
to which we are created and designed by Grace; Gal.4.4.
and because he is Almighty, he is able to perform it all; and therefore we may
safely believe in him and rely upon him.

Maker of Heaven and Earth. He made the Sun and the Moon the Stars,
Isa.65.17.and 66.22.
and all the Regions of Glory; Acts 4 24.
he made the Air, the Earth and the Water, and all that live in them; he made
Angels and Men: and he who made them does, Psalm.36.7,8.
and he only can preserve them in the same being, Matt. 6.26. and 10.29,30.
and thrust them forwards to a better. He that preserves them does also govern
them, and intends they should minister to his Glory: and therefore we are to do
worship and obedience to him in all that we can, Rev.14.7.
and that he has commanded. Matt.4.10.


And in Jesus Christ, I also believe in Jesus Christ, Matt.1.21.
who is and is called a Savior, John 3.34.
and the Anointed of the Lord, promised to the Patriarchs, Acts 10.38. and
3.22,23.
whom God anointed with the Holy Spirit and with power, to become the Great
Prophet, and declarer of his Father's Will to all the world; telling us how God
will be worshipped and served: he is anointed to be the Mediator of the New
Covenant, Heb.12.24.and 1.8. and 6.16,21.
and our HighPriest, reconciling us to his Father by the Sacrifice of himself;
and to be the Great King of all the world. Rev.1.5.
And by this Article we are Christians, Acts 11.26. and 26.28.
who serve and worship God the Father through Jesus Christ. 1 Pet.4.19.


His only Son. Jesus Christ is the Son of God, Luke 1.32.
he alone, Rom.1.3,4.1. Joh.5.9, etc.
of him alone. Heb. 1.5.
For God by his Holy Spirit caused him to be born of a Virgin; Joh.1.11.
by his power he raised him from the dead, Col.1.17,18.
and gave him a new Birth or being in the Body.: he gave him all power, and all
excellency. Heb.1.3.
And beyond all this, John 5.19.
he is the express Image of his person, Phil. 2.6.
the brightness of his glory, John 3.25.
equal to God, Col.2.9,10.
beloved before the beginning of the world, John 17.24.
of a nature perfectly Divine, very God by essence, and very Man, by
assumption: as God, all one in nature with the Father, and as Man, one Person
in himself.

Our Lord; Jesus Christ, God's only Son, Mat.28.18.
is the Heir of all things and persons in his Father's house: Acts 2.36.
All Angels and Men are his servants, Psalm.2.6,7, etc.
and all the Creatures obey him. 1 Cor.8.6.
We are to believe in him, Heb.1.6.
and by Faith in him only and in his name we shall be saved. 1 Pet.1.21.


Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, I believe that Jesus Christ was not
begotten of a Man, nor born by natural means, Luke 1.35.
but that a Divine Power from God Gal.4.4.
[God's Holy Spirit] Luke 1.32.
did overshadow the VirginMother of Christ, and made her in a wonderful manner
to conceive Jesus in her womb; and by this his admirable manner of being
conceived he was the Son of God alone, and no Man was his Father.

Born of the Virgin Mary, Though God was his Father, Luke 1.26, etc.
and he begat him by the power of the Holy Ghost, Matt.1.18.
and caused him miraculously to begin in the womb of his Mother; yet from her
he also derived his humane Nature, and by his Mother he was of the Family of
King David, and called the Son of Man; his Mother being a holy person, not
chosen to this great honor for her wealth or beauty, but by the good will of
God, and because she was of rare exemplar modesty and humility: Luke 1.48.
and she received the honor of being a Mother to the Son of God, Matt.1.25.
and ever a Virgin, and all generations shall call her blessed.

Suffered under Pontius Pilate. After that Jesus passed through the state of
Infancy and Childhood, being subject to his Parents, Luke.2.51.
and working in an humble. Trade to serve his own and his Mother's needs, he
grew to the estate of a man: Luke 3.23.
he began to preach at the age of thirty years, and having for about three
years and a half Preached the Gospel, and taught us his Father's will, having
spoken the Gospel of his Kingdom, and revealed to us the secrets of Eternal
life, Joh.3.4,etc.
and Resurrection of the Dead, Acts 13.39.
Regeneration, Mat.25.31,32.
and Renewing by the Holy, Spirit, perfect Remission of sins, and Eternal
Judgment; at last, that he might reconcile the world to his Father, he became a
Sacrifice for all our sins, and suffered himself to be taken by the malicious
Jews, Luke 22.63.etc.
and put to a painful and shameful death; John 18.12. etc.
they being envious at him for the number of his Disciples, Matthew.26.and 27.
and the reputation of his person, the innocence of his life, the mightiness of
his Miracles, and the power of his Doctrine: and this Death he suffered when
Pontius Pilate was Governor of Judea.

Was crucified. Jesus Christ being taken by the Rulers of the Jews, bound and
derided, buffeted and spit upon, accused weakly and persecuted violently; at
last, Matthew. 27.
wanting matter and pretenses to condemn him, Mark 15.
they asked him of his person and office; Luke 23.
and because he affirmed that great Truth, John 19.
which all the world of good men longed for, that he was the Messiah, and
designed to sit on the right hand of the Majesty on high, they resolved to call
it Blasphemy, and delivered him over to Pilate, and by importunity and threats
forced him, against his Conscience, to give him up to be scourged, and then to
be Crucified. The Soldiers therefore mocking him with a Robe and Reed, and
pressing a Crown of thorns upon his head, led him to the place of his death;
compelling him to bear his Cross, to which they presently nailed him; on which
for three hours he hanged in extreme torture, being a sad spectacle of the most
afflicted and the most innocent person of the whole world.

Dead, When the Holy Jesus was wearied with tortures, and he knew all things
were now fulfilled, and his Father's wrath appeased toward Mankind, Ibidem.
his Father pitying his innocent Son groaning under such intolerable miseries,
hastened his Death; and Jesus commending his Spirit into the hands of his
Father, cried with a loud voice, John 18.30.
bowed his head, Phil.2.8.
and died, and by his death sealed all the Doctrines and Revelations which he
first taught the world and then confirmed by his Blood. Col.1.20.
He was consecrated our merciful High Priest, and by a feeling of our miseries
and temptations, became able to help them that are tempted; Isa.53.10.
and for these his sufferings was exalted to the highest Throne, Heb.7.25. and
9.12. and 7.18.
and seat of the right hand of God; and has shown, that to Heaven there is no
surer way than suffering for his Name; Luk.23.46.
and has taught us willingly to suffer for his sake, Job 10.17,18. and 12.32.
and 11.51.
what himself has already suffered for ours. Ephesians.2.13.14.
He reconciled us to God by his Death led us to God, drew us to himself,
redeemed us from all iniquity, Heb.2.10.
purchased us for his Father, and for ever made us his servants and redeemed
ones, Col.1.21,22.
that we being dead unto sin, might live unto God. And this Death, Tit.2.14.
being so highly beneficial to us, John.6.51.
he has appointed means to apply to us, and to represent to God for us in the
Holy Sacrament of his last Supper. And upon all these considerations, 1
Pet.2.24 and 4.13.
that Cross which was a smart and shame to our Lord, is honor to us, and as it
turned to his Glory, 2 Timothy.2.11.
so also to our Spiritual advantages. Gal. 6. 14.


And Buried. That he might suffer every thing of humane nature, Matthew.27.
he was by the care of his Friends and Disciples, Mark 15.
by the leave of Pilate, taken from the Cross, and embalmed, (as the manner of
the Jews was to bury) and wrapped linen, and buried in a new grave hewn out of
a Rock. And this was the last and lowest step of his Humiliation.

He descended into Hell. That is He went down into the lower parts of the
earth, Ephesians.4.9.
(as himself called it) into the heart of the earth; Matt.12.40.
by which phrase the Scripture understands the state of Separation, Acts 2.27.
or of Souls severed from their Bodies. By this his descending to the land of
darkness, where all things are forgotten, Hos. 13.14.
he sanctified the state of Death and Separation, that none of his servants
might ever after fear the jaws of Death and Hell; 1 Cor. 15.54. etc.
whither he went, Matt. 16.18
not to suffer torment, Rev.20.13,14.
(because he finished all that upon the Cross) but to triumph over the gates of
Hell, Rev.1.17,18.
to verify his Death, and the event of his sufferings, and to break the iron
bars of those lower prisons, that they may open and shut hereafter only at his
command.

The third day he rose again from the Dead. After our Lord Jesus Mark 16. 1.
Acts 10. 40.
had abode in the grave the remaining part of the day of his Passion, and all
the next day, early in the morning upon the third day, by the power of God, he
was raised from Death and Hell to Light and Life, Rom.14.9.
never to return to death any more, Acts 5.30, etc.
and is become the firstborn from the dead, Col.1.18.
the first fruits of them that slept: Matthew.28.1.
and although he was put to death in the flesh, 1 Pet.3.18. and 1.3.
yet now, Ephesians.1.17.
being quickened in the Spirit, he lives for ever. 1 Cor.15.20, etc.
And as we all die in Adam, so in Christ we all shall be made alive; but every
man in his own order: Christ is the first; and we, if we follow him in the
Regeneration, shall also follow him in the Resurrection.

He ascended into Heaven, When our dearest Lord was risen from the Grave,
Luk.24.45,50.
he conversed with his Disciples for forty days together, Matthew.21.17.
often showing himself alive by infallible proofs, Joh.20 and 21.
and once to five hundred of his Disciples at once appearing. Acts 1.9.
Having spoken to them fully concerning the affairs of the Kingdom, and the
Promise of the Father; leaving them some few things in charge for the present,
1 Cor.15.6,45,47.
he solemnly gave them his Blessing, and in the presence of his Apostles was
taken up into Heaven by a bright Cloud and the Ministry of Angels, being gone
before us, to prepare a place for us above all Heavens, Heb.6.19.
in the presence of his Father, and at the foot of the Throne of God. From
which glorious presence we cannot be kept by the change of Death and the powers
of the Grave, Rom.8.38.39.
nor the depth of Hell, 1 John 3.2.
nor the height of Heaven; but Christ being lifted up shall draw all his
Servants unto him.

And sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty. I believe that Jesus
Christ sits in Heaven above all Principalities and Powers, Phil.2.8,9, etc.
being exalted above every Name that is named in Heaven and Earth, Ephesians.1.17,22.
that is above every creature above and below, all things being put under his
feet. That he is always in the presence of his Father, interceding for us, and
governs all things in Heaven and Earth, that he may defend his Church, Romans 8.
34.
and adorn her with his Spirit, and procure and effect her eternal Salvation,
Heb. 7. 27. 2. Pet. 1. 4.
There he sits and reigns as King, and intercedes as our High Priest. He is a
Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which God made, Heb. 12.
2.
and not man, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, the Captain of our
Confession, the great Apostle of our Religion, the Great Bishop of our Souls,
the Head of the Church, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth. And therefore to him
we are to pay Dvino Worship, 1. Pet. 1.20, 21. Heb. 1. 6.
Service and Obedience; and we must believe in him, and in God by him, and rely
entirely on the mercies of God through Jesus Christ.

From thence he shall come In the Clouds shining, and adorned with the glory of
his Father, attended by millions of bright Angels, John 14.3. Matthew. 24. 30.
with the voice of an Archangel, and a shout of all the Heavenly, Army, the
Trump of God; and every eye shall see him, 1 These. 4. 16.
and they that pierced his hands and his ^eet shall behold his Majesty, his
Terror, and his Glory: Rev. 1. 7. Acts 1. 11. 2 Timothy 4. 1.
and all the families of the earth shall tremble at his presence, and the
powers of Heaven shall be shaken, and the whole earth and sea shall be broken
in pieces and confusion; for then he shall come to put an end to this world, and

To Judge the Quick and the Dead. For the Father judges no man, but has given
all judgment to his Son. Joh. 5. 22, 23. 1 These. 4. 16, 17.
And at this day of Judgment the Lord Jesus shall sit in the Air in a glorious
Throne; Matthew. 25. 32.
and the Angels having gathered together God's Elect from the four corners of
the world, Acts 10. 24.
all the kindreds of the earth, being brought before the Judgmentseat, shall
have the Records of their Conscience laid open, that is, all that ever they
thought, or spoke, or did, shall be brought to their memory, to convince the
wicked of the Justice of the Judge in passing the fearful Sentence upon them,
and glorify the mercies of God toward his Redeemed ones: and then the
righteous Judge shall condemn the wicked to the portion of Devils for ever,
Mat.25.34, etc.
to a state of torments, the second, and eternal, and intolerabl death; and the
godly, being placed on his right hand, shall hear the blessed Sentence of
absolution, and shall be led by Christ to the participation of the glories of
his Father's Kingdom for ever and ever.

Amen.
I believe in the Holy Ghost [or] the Holy Spirit. Who is the third Person of
the holy, undivided, ever-blessed Trinity, which I worship and adore and
admire, but look upon with wonder, and am not in a capacity to understand. I
believe that the Holy Spirit into whose name, as of the Father and the Son,
Matthew. 28. 19.
I was baptized, is the heavenly Author, the Captain, John 15. 26. Acts 15. 32.
16. 13. -- and 3. 33. 6. 45. -- 24. 7. 16, 17. -- 13. 5. 37. 1, 2, 2. -- 20.28.
the Teacher, and the Witness of all the Truths of the Gospel: that as the
Father sent the Son, so the Son from Heaven sent the holy Spirit to lead the
Church into all truth, to assist us in all Temptations, and to help us in the
purchase of all Virtue. This Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father, Luke 12.12
John 17. 37. 14. 16 16. 13, 8
and our Lord Jesus received him from his Father, and sent him into the world;
who receiving the things of Christ and declaring the same excellent Doctrines,
speaks whatsoever he has heard from him; and instructed the Apostles, and
builds the Church; Mat. 10. 8, 9. Ephesians. 1. 17. and 3.16.
and produces Faith, and confirms our Hope, and increases Charity. And this
Holy Spirit our blessed Lord has left with his Church for ever, by which all
the servants of God are enabled to do all things necessary to Salvation, 1 Cor.
2. 10, 11.12.
which by the force of Nature they cannot do: Romans 8. 14, 15, 16.
and we speak by the Spirit, and work by the Spirit, Romans 14. 17.and 15. 13, 19.
when by his assistances any ways imparted to us we speak or do any thing of
our duty. He it is who enlightens our Understanding, 1 These.1. 6.
sanctifies our Will, orders and commands our affections; he comforts our
sorrows, supports our spirits in trouble, and enables us by Promises, and
Confidences, and Gifts, to suffer for the Lord Jesus and the Gospel. And all
these things God the Father does for us by his Son, and the Son by the Holy
Spirit, and the Holy Spirit by all means within and without, which are
operative upon and proportionable to the nature of reasonable creatures. This
is he who works Miracles, gives the gifts of Prophecy and of Interpretation,
that teaches us what and how to pray, that gives us Zeal and holy Desires; who
sanctifies Children in Baptism, and confirms them with his grace in
Comfirmation, and reproves the world, and consecrates Bishops and all the
Ministers of the Gospel, and absolves the Penitent, and Blesses the Obedient,
and comforts the Sick, and excommunicates the Refractory, and makes
intercession for the Saints: that is, the Church and those whom he has
Blessed, appointed and sanctified to these purposes, do all these Ministeries
by his Authority and his Commandment and his Aids. This is he that testifies to
our Spirits that we are the Sons of God, and that makes us to cry, Abba,
Father; that is, who inspires into us such humble confidences of our being
accepted in our hearty and constant endeavors to please God, that we can with
cheerfulness and joy call God our Father, and expect and hope for the portion
of Sons both here and hereafter, and in the certainty of this hope, to work out
our Salvation with fear and reverence, with trembling and joy, with distrust of
our selves and mighty confidence in God. By this holy and everblessed Spirit
several persons in the Church, and every man in his proportion, receives the
gifts of Wisdom, and Utterance, and Knowledge, and Interpretation, and
Prophecy and Healing, and Goverement, and discerning of Spirits, and Faith,
and Tongues, and whatsoever can be necessary for the Church in several ages and
periods, for her beginning, for her continuance, for her in prosperity, and for
her in persecution. This is the great Promise of the Father, Luke 24.49. and
4.18.
and it is the gift of God, Acts 2. 33, 38.
which he will give to all them that ask him, and who live piously and chastely,
and are persons fit to entertain so Divine a Grace. This Holy Spirit God gives
to some more, to some less, according as they are capable. They who obey his
Motions, Ephesians. 4. 7, 30.
and love his presence, 1 Cor.3.16.
and improve his Gifts, Ephesians. 1. 13.
shall have him yet more abundantly: but they that grieve the Holy Spirit shall
loose that which they have; Acts 7.51.
and they that extinguish him belong not to Christ, but are in the state of
reprobation; and they that blaspheme this holy Spirit, Romans 1. 14.
and call him the spirit of the Devil, or the Spirit of error, 2. These. 5. 19.
or folly, or do malicious despites to him, that is, they who on purpose,
considering and choosing, do him hurt by word or by deed, Mark. 3. 29.
(so far as lies in them) shall for ever be separated from the presence of God
and of Christ, and shall never be forgiven in this world nor in the world to
come. Lastly, this Holy Spirit seals us to the day of Redemption; that is, God
gives us his Holy Spirit as a testimony that he will raise us again at the last
day, and give us a portion in the glories of his Kingdom, in the inheritance of
our Lord Jesus. 2 Cor. 1. 22. and 5. 5.


The holy Catholic Church. I believe that there is and ought to be a visible
company of men professing the service and discipline, 1. The. 3. 15.
that is, the Religion, of the Gospel, who agree together in the Belief of all
the Truths of God revealed by Jesus Christ, and in confession of the Articles
of this Creed, and agree together in praying and praising God through Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 3. 21.
to read and hear the Scriptures read and expounded, Heb. 2. 12.10, 24.^
to provoke each other to love and to good works, to advance the honor of
Christ, and to propagate his Faith and Worship. I believe

this to be a Holy Church, 1 Cor.14. 26,etc.
Spiritual, and not Civil and Secular, but sanctified by their Profession, and
the solemn Rites of it, professing holiness, Mat.18.17,18.
and separating from the evil manners of heathens and wicked persons, by their
laws and institutions. And this Church is Catholic; that is, Acts 12. 5. 1
Cor. 1.
it is not confined to the Nation of the Jews, as was the old Religion, but it
is gathered out of all Nations, and is not of a differing Faith in differing
places, but always did, does, and ever shall profess the Faith which the
Apostles preached, Gal.1. 8,9.
and which is contained in this Creed; with whosoever believes is a Catholic
and a Christian, Col. 2. 8, 9. Heb. 13. 8, 9
and he that believes not is neither. This Catholic Church I believe, that is,
I believe whatsoever all good Christians in all Ages and in all places did
confess to be the Catholic and Apostolic Faith.

The Communion of Saints, That is, the Communion of all Christians; because by
reason of their holy Faith they are called Saints in Scripture, Acts 26. 10.and
9. 12, 32.
as being begotten by God into a lively Faith, 1. Cor. 6.11. and 1. 2.
and cleansed by Believing: Matthew. 22. 14.
and by this Faith, and the Profession of a holy life in obedience to Jesus
Christ, they are separated from the world, called to the knowledge of the
Truth, justified before God, and endued with the holy Spirit of Grace,
foreknown from the beginning of the world, 1 Pet. 1. 2, 14, 15, 16.
and predestined by God to be made conformable to the image of his Son, 2
Pet. 3. 11.
here in holiness of life, hereafter in a life of glory; and they who are
Saints in their belief and profession must be so also in their practice and
conversation, that so they may make their calling and election sure, lest they
be Saints only in name and title, in their profession and institution, and not
in manners and holiness of living; that is, lest they be so before men, and not
before God. I believe that all people who desire the benefit of the Gospel are
bound to have a fellowship and society with these Saints, Matthew.18.17,18.
and communicate with them in their holy things, Heb. 10. 25.
in their Faith, and in their Hope, and in their Sacraments, and in their
Prayers, and in their Public Assemblies, 1 Cor.11.23,etc.
and in their Government: and must do to them all the acts of Charity and
mutual help which they can and are required to: E^h. 4. 13. 5, 6, 7, 21 6. 18
and without this Communion of Saints, and a conjunction with them who believe
in God through Jesus Christ, there is no Salvation to be expected;
Phil.2.4.and1.27.
which Communion must be kept in inward things always and in all persons,
Rom.16. 16, 17.
and testified by outward acts always, 1 John.3.18.
when it is possible, 1 Pet.1.22.
and may be done upon just and holy conditions.

The Forgiveness of sins. I believe that all the sins I committed before I came
to the knowledge of the Truth, Rom.3.28.Acts 2.38.and 13.38.
and all the slips of humane infirmity, against which we heartily pray, and
watch, and labor, 1.John 2.1,2,12.
and all the evil habits of which we repent so timely and effectually that we
obtain their contrary graces and live in them, are fully remitted by the blood
of Christ; Gal.6.2.John 20.23. Mark 16.16.2 Pet.1.5,etc.
which forgiveness we obtain by Faith and Repentance, Ephesians.1.13. 1
Pet.11.5,16,17,18.
and therefore are not justified by the Righteousness of Works, Jam.2.17,20,etc.
but by the Righteousness of Faith: and we are preserved in the state of
forgiveness or justification by the fruits of a lively Faith, 1 John 3. 21, etc.
and a timely active Repentance. Heb. 12. 14, 15, 16.


The Resurrection of the Body. I believe that at the last day all they whose
sins are forgiven, and who lived and died in the Communion of Saints, and in
whom the Holy Spirit did dwell, 1 Cor.15.29,etc.
shall rise from their grves, their dead bones shall live and be clothed with
flesh and skin, Matthew.22.31.
and their Bodies together with their Souls shall enter into the portion of a
new life: Rom.8.11,23.
and that this body shall no more see corruption, but shall rise to an
excellent condition; John 6.39.
it shall be Spiritual, Phil.3.20.
Powerful, Immortal and Glorious, like unto his glorious body, who shall then
be our Judge, is now our Advocate, 2 Cor.4.1.
our Savior and our Lord.

And the Life everlasting. I believe that they who have their part in this
Resurrection shall meet the Lord in the Air, 2 These.4.17.
and when the blessed Sentence is pronounced upon them, Rev.21.4.
they shall for ever be with the Lord in joys unspeakable and full of glory,
God shall w^pe all tears from their eyes; there shall be no fear or sorrow, no
mourning or death; Rev.22.5.
a friend shall never go away from thence, and an enemy shall never enter;
there shall be fullness without want, light eternal brighter then the Sun,
Matthew.25.34.
day and no night, joy and no weeping, difference in degree and yet all full;
there is love without dissimulation, excellency without envy, multitudes
without confusion, music without discord; there the Understandings are rich,
the Will is satisfied, the Affections are all love and all joy, and they shall
reign with God and Christ for ever and ever. Amen.

This is the Catholic Faith, which except a man believe faithfully he cannot
be saved.

Tertull. de velandis Virgin.

Regula quidem fidei ^na omnino est, sola immobilis and irreformabilis,
credendi, scilicet, in unicum Deum Omnipotentem, etc. Hac lege fidei manente,
caet^ra jam disciplinae and conversationis admittunt novitatem correctionis,
operante, scil. and proficiente usque in finem Gratia Dei.

The Rule of Faith is wholly one, unalterable, never to be mended, never
changed; to wit, I believe in God, etc, This Law of Faith remaining, in other
things you may increase and grow.

S. Aug. de Fide and Symb.

Haec est Fides, quae paucis verbis tenenda in Symbolo Novellis datur. Quae
pauca verba fiedelibus not a sunt: ut credendo subjugentur Deo, subjugati recte
vivant, recte vivendo cor mundent, cord mundo quod credunt, intelligant.

This is the Faith which in few words is given to Novices. These few words are
known to all the faithful; that by believing they may be subject to God, by
this subjection they may live well, by living-well they may purify their
hearts, and with pure hearts they may [relish and] understand what they do
believe.

Max. Taurin. de Tradit. Symb. Symbolum tessera est and signaculum, quo inter
fideles Perfidosque secernitur.

This Creed is the Badge or Cognizance by which the Faithful are discerned from
Unbelievers.

Hujus Catholici Symboli brevis and perfecta Confessio, quae duodecim
Apostolorum totidem est signata sententiis, tam instructa est in munitione
coelesti, ut omnes Haereticorum opiniones solo possint gladio detruncari. Leo
M. ad Pulcheriam Aug.

This short and perfect Confession of this Catholic Creed, which was consigned
by the Sentences of twelve Apostles, is so perfect a celestial Armor, that all
the Opinions of Heretics may by this alone, as with a Sword, be cut in pieces.

AGENDA: OR, Things to be done.
THE DIARY OR, A RULE to spend each day religiously.
SECT. 1.
1. SUppose every day to be a day of business: for your whole life is a race,
and a battle; a merchandise, and a journey. Every day propound to your self a
Rosary or a Chaplet of good works to present to God at night. 2. Rise as soon
as your health and other occasions shall permit; but it is good to be as
regular as you can, and as early. Remember, he that rises first to Prayer has
a more early title to a Blessing. Bnt he that changes night into day, labor
into idleness, watchfulness into sleep, changes his hopes of blessing into a
dream. 3. Never let any one think it an excuse to lie in bed, because he has
nothing to do when he is up: for whoever has a Soul, and hopes to save that
Soul, has work enough to do to make his calling and election sure, to serve
God and to pray, to read and to meditate, to repent and to amend, to do good to
others, and to keep evil from themselves. And if thou have little to do, thou
ought to employ the more time in laying up for a greater Crown of Glory. 4.
At your opening your eyes, enter upon the day with some act of piety. 1. Of
Thanksgiving for the preservation of you the night past. 2. Of the
Glorification of God for the works of the Creation, or any thing for the honor
of God.
5. When you first go off from your bed, solemnly and devoutly bow your head,
and worship the Holy Trinity, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. 6. When you are
making ready, be as silent as you can, and spend that time in holy thoughts;
there being no way left to redeem that time from loss, but by meditation and
short mental prayers. If you choose to speak, speak something of God's praises,
of his goodness, his mercies, or his greatness. Ever resolving that the first
fruits of thy Reason and of all thy Faculties shall be presented to God, to
sanctfie the whole harvest of thy conversation. 7. Be not curious, nor careless
in your Habit, but always keep these measures. 1. Be not troublesome to thy
self or to others by unhandsomness or uncleanness. 2. Let it be according to
your state and quality. 3. Make Religion to be the difference of your habit, so
as to be best attired upon Holy or Festival days.
8. In your dressing, let there be ejaculations fitted to the several actions
of dressing: as at washing your hands and face, pray God to cleanse your Soul
from sin; in putting on your clothes, pray him to cloth your Soul with the
righteousness of your Savior and so in all the rest.

For Religion must not only be the garment of your Soul, to invest it all
over; but it must be also as the fringes to every of your actions, that
something of Religion appear in every one of them, besides the innocence of all
of them.

9. As soon as you are dressed with the first preparation of your clothes, that
you can decently do it, kneel and say the Lord's Prayer; then rise from your
knees and do what is necessary for you in order to your farther dressing, or
affairs of the house, which is speedily to be done; and then finish your
dressing according to the foregoing Rules. 10. When you are dressed, retire
your self to your Closet, and go to your usual devotions; which it is good that
at the first prayers they were divided into seven actions of Piety. 1. An act
of Adoration. 2. Of Thanksgiving. 3. Of Oblation. 4. Of Confession. 5. Of
Petition. 6. Of Intercession. 7. Of Meditation, or serious, deliberate, useful
reading of the holy Scriptures.
11. I advise that your reading should be governed by these measures. (...)S.
Chrysostom.Hom.3.de Lazaro
1. Let it not be of the whole Bible in order, but for your devotion use the
New Testament, and such portions of the Old as contain the Precepts of holy
life. 2. The Historical and less useful part, let it be read at such other
times which you have of leisure from your domestic employments. 3. Those
portions of Scripture which you use in your prayers, let them not be long: a
Chapter at once, no more. But then what time you can afford, spend it in
thinking and meditating upon the holy Precepts which you read. 4. Be sure to
meditate so long, till you make some act of piety upon the occasion of what you
meditate either that you get some new arguments against a sin, or some new
encouragements to virtue; some spiritual strength and advantage, or else some
act of Prayer to God, or glorification of him. 5. I advise that you would read
your Chapter in the midst of your Prayers in the Morning, if they be divided
according to the number of the former actions; because little interruptions
will be apt to make your Prayers less tedious, and your self more attent upon
them. But if you find any other way more agreeing to your spirit and
disposition, use your liberty without scruple.
12. Before you go forth of your Closet, after your Prayers are done, set your
self down a little while and consider what you are to do that day, what matter
or business is like to employ you or to tempt you; and take particular
resolution against that, whether it be matter of wrangling, or anger, or
covetousness, or vain courtship, or feasting; and when you enter upon it,
remember upon what you resolved in your Closet. If yo are likely to have
nothing extraordinary that day, a general recommendation of the affairs of that
day to God in your prayers will be sufficient: but if there be any thing
foreseen that is not usual, be sure to be armed for it by a hearty, though a
short, prayer, and an earnest prudent resolution beforehand, and then watch
when the thing comes. 13. Whosoever has Children or Servants, let him or her
take care that all the Children and Servants of the Family say their Prayers
before they begin their work. The Lord's Prayer and the Ten Commandments, with
the short verse at the end of every Commandment which the Church uses, and the
Creed, is a very good office for them, if they be not fitted for more regular
offices. And to these also it were good that some proper Prayer were
apportioned, and they taught it. It were well if they would serve themselves of
this Form set down at the end of this Diary. 14. Then go about the affairs of
your house and proper employment, ever avoiding idleness, or too much
earnestness of affection upon the things of the world: Do your business
prudently, temperately, diligently, humbly, charitably. 15. Let there be no
idle person in or about your family, of beggars or unimployed Servants, but
find them all work and meat, call upon them carefully, reprove them without
reproaches or fierce railings. Be a master or a mistress, and a friend to them,
and exact of them to be faithful and diligent. 16. In your Servants suffer any
offense against your self rather than against God; endure not that they should
swear, or lie, or steal, or be wanton, or curse each other, or be railers, or
slanderers, or tell-tales, or sowers of dissension in the family, or amongst
neighbors. 17. In all your intercourse with your neighbors in the day, let
your affairs be wholly matter of business or civility, and always managed with
Justice and Charity: never let it be matter of curiosity or enquiry into the
actions of others, always without censuring or rash judgment, without
backbiting, slandering or detraction: Do it not your self, neither converse
with them that do. He or she that loves tale-bearers shall never be beloved, or
be innocent. 18. Before dinner and supper, as often as it is convenient or can
be had, let the public Prayers of the Church, or some parts of them be said
publicly in the family, and let as many be present as you can. The same rule
is also to be observed for Sundays and Holy Days, for their going to Church.
Let no servant be always detained, but relieved and provided for by changes.
19. Let your meal be temperate and wholesome according to your quality and the
season, begun and ended with Prayer: and be sure that in the course of your
meal, and before you rise, you recollect your self, and send your heart up to
God with some holy and short Ejaculation; remembering your duty, fearing to
offend, or desiring and sighing after the eternal Supper of the Lamb. 20. After
meal use what innocent refreshment you please, to refresh your mind or body
with these measures. 1. Let it not be too expensive of time. 2. Let it not
hinder your devotion, nor your business. 3. Let it be always without violence
or passion. 4. Let it not then wholly take you up when you are at it; but let
your heart retire with some holy thoughts and sober recollections, lest your
mind be seized upon by it, and your affections carried off from better things:
secure your affections for God, and sober and severe employment. Here you may
be refreshed, but take heed you neither dwell here, nor sin here. It is better
never to use recreation, than at any time to sin by it: But you may use
recreation, and avoid sin, and that is the best temper. But if you cannot do
both, be more careful of your Soul than of your refreshment; and that is the
best security. But then, in what you use to sin, carefully avoid it, and change
your refreshment for some other instance in which you can be more innocent.
21. Entertain no long discourse with any, but, if you can, bring in something
to season it with Religion: as God must be in all your thoughts, so, if it be
possible, let him be in all your discourses, at least let him be at one end of
it; and when you can speak of him, be sure you forget not to think of him. 22.
Toward the declining of the day, be sure to retire to your private devotions:
Read, meditate and pray. In which I propound to you this method, On the Lord's
day meditate of the glories of the Creation, of the works of God, and all his
benefits to mankind, and to you in particular. Then let your devotion be,
humbly upon your knees to say over the 8th and 9th Psalms, and sometimes the
104th, with proper Collects which you shall find or get: adding the form of
Thanksgiving which is in the Rule of Holy Living, page 378. in the manner as is
there directed, or some other of your own choosing. Meditate on Monday on 1.
Death Tuesday 2. Judgment Wednesday 3. Heaven Thursday 4. Hell. Saying your
usual Prayers, and adding some Ejaculations or short sayings of your own,
according to the matter of your devotion.

On Friday recollect your sins that you have done that week, and all your
lifetime and let your devotion be to recite humbly and devoutly some
penitential Litanies, whereof you may serve your self in the Rule of Holy
Living, page 373.

On Saturday at the serne time, meditate on the Passion of our blessed Savior
and all the mysteries of our Redemption, which you may do and pray together by
using the forms made to that purpose in the Rule of Holy Living, page 391. in
all your devotions begin and end with the Lord's Prayer.

Upon these two days and Sunday you may choose some partions out of The Life of
Christ, to read and help your meditation, proper to the mysteries you are
appointed to meditate, or any other devout books.

23. Read not much at a time; but meditate as much as your time and capacity
and disposition will give you leave: ever remembering, that little reading and
much thinking, little speaking and much hearing, frequent and short prayers and
great devotion is the best way to be wise, to be holy, to be devout. 24. before
you go to bed, bethink your self of the day past: if nothing extraordinary has
happened, your Conscience is the sooner examined; but if you have had any
difference or disagreeing with any one, or a great feast, or great company, or
a great joy, or a great sorrow, then recollect your self with the more
diligence: ask pardon for what is amiss; give God thanks for what was good. If
you have omitted any duty, make amends next day; and yet if nothing be found
that was amiss, be humbled still, and thankful, and pray God for pardon if any
thing be amiss that you know not of. If all these things be in your offices,
for your last prayers be sure to apply them according to what you find in your
examination: but if they be not, supply them with short ejaculations before you
begin your last prayers, or at the end of them. Remember also and be sure to
take notice of all the mercies and deliverances of your self and your Relatives
that day. 25. As you are going to bed, as often as you can conveniently, or
that you are not hindered by company, meditate of death and the preparations to
your grave. When you lie down, close your eyes with a short prayer, commit your
self into the hands of your faithful Creator: and when you have done, trust him
with your self, as you must do when you are dying. 26. If you awake in the
night, fill up the intervals or spaces of your not sleeping by holy thoughts
and aspirations, and remember the sins of your youth: and sometimes remember
your dead, and that you shall die; and pray to God to send to you and all
mankind a mercy in the day of Judgment. 27. Upon the Holy Days observe the same
Rules; only let the matter of your meditations be according to the mystery of
the day. As upon Christmasday meditate on the Birth of our Blessed Savior, and
read the Story and Considerations which are in The Life of Christ: and to your
ordinary devotions of every day add the prayer which is fitted to the mystery,
which you shall find in The Life of Christ, or The Rule of Holy Living. Upon
the day of the Annunciation, or our Lady Day, meditate on the Incarnation of
our Blessed Savior; and so upon all the Festivals of the year. 28. Set apart
one day for fasting once a week, or once a fortnight, or once a month at least:
but let it be with these cautions and measures. 1. Do not choose a Festival of
the Church for your Fasting-day. 2. Eat nothing till your afternoondevotions be
done, if the health of your body will permit it: if not, take something, though
it be the less. 3. When you eat your meal, let it be no more than ordinary,
lest your fasting day end in an intemperate evening. 4. Let the actions of all
the day be proportionable ot it; abstain from your usual recreations on that
day, and from greater mirth. 5. Be sure to design beforehand the purposes of
your fast, either for. Repentance, or for Mortification, or for the advantages
of Prayer, and let your devotins be accordingly. But be sure not to think
fasting, or eating fish, or eating nothing of it self to be pleasing to God,
but as it serves to one of these purposes. 6. Let some part of that day
extraordinary be set apart for Prayer for the actions of Repentance, for
Confession of sins, and for begging of those Graces for whose sake you set
apart that day. 7. Be sure that on that day you set apart something for the
poor; for Fasting and Alms are the Wings or Prayer. 8. It is best to choose that
day for your fast which is used generally by all Christians, as Friday and
Saturday: but do not call it a fasting-day, unless also it be a day of
extraordinary devotion and of Alms.
29. From observation of all the days of your life, gather out the four
extraordinaries. 1. All the great and shameful sins you have committed. 2. All
the excellent or greater acts of Piety which by God's grace you have performed.
3. All the great blessings you have received. 4. All the dangers and great
sicknesses you have escaped: and upon all the days of your extraordinary
devotions, let them be brought forth, and produce their acts of virtue.
1. Repentance and prayers for pardon. 2. Resolutions to proceed and increase
in good works. 3. Thanksgiving to God. 4. Fear and watchfulness, lest we fall
into worse, as a punishment for our sin.
30 Keep a little Catalogue of these, and at the foot of them set down what
Promises and Vows you have made, and kept or broken, and do according as you
are obliged. 31. Receive the blessed Sacrament as often as you can: endeavor
to have it once a month, besides the solemn and great Festivals of the year.
32. Confess your sins often, hear the Word of God, make Religion the business
of your life, your study, and chiefest care; and be sure that in all things a
spiritual Guide take you by the hand.

Thou shall always rejoice in the Evening, if thou do spend the day
virtuously.


VIA PACIS.
A SHORT METHOD OF Peace and Holiness. With a Manual of DAILY PRAYERS Fitted to
the days of the Week.
SUNDAY.
Decad the first.
Prayer and Obedience; by Love and Patience.







for knowledge rather than for holy life; and the time shall come, when it
shall more avail thee to have subdued one lust, than to have known all
mysteries.



within, nothing can hurt us from without: for from inordinate love and vain
fear comes all unquietness of spirit and distraction of our senses.



and he quickly falls into indignation and contention and envy.



MONDAY.
The second Decad.
do amiss, then may these also speak amiss. Man is frail and prone to evil, and
therefore may soon fail in words.







esteemed poor in this world; for he that hears God teaching him, will find
that it is the best wisdom to withdraw all our affections from secular honor
and troublesome riches, and to place them upon eternal treasures, and by
patience, by humility, by suffering scorn and contempt, and all the Will of
God, to get the true riches.









fair intention: we speak wllingly, but seldom return to silence.

TUESDAY.
the Third Decad,






sometimes be contradicted and ill thought of, and that we always bear it well,
even when we deserve to be well spoken of. Perfect peace and security cannot be
had in this world.













WEDNESDAY.
The fourth Decad.




counsels and perfections, and the extraordinaries of Religion, as you see
cause.



of Devotion: If thou let men alone, they will let thee alone; and if you
desire not to converse with them, let them know it, and they will not desire to
converse with thee.







success so long as he has life and health.



THURSDAY.
The fifth Decad.






Thou will then think thy self very miserable and very foolish, for neglecting
one hour, and one day of thy Salvation: Think so now, and thou will be more
provident of thy time and of thy talent. For there will a time come, when every
careless man shall desire the respite of one hour for Prayer and Repentance,
and I know not who will grant it. Happy is he that so lives, that in the day of
death he rejoices, and is not amazed.





of Repentance; for in Hell one hour is more intolerable than a hundred years
in the house of Repentance: and try; for if thou can not endure God punishing
thy follies gently, for a while, to amend thee, how will thou endure his
vengeance for ever to undo thee?





increasing thy ordinary devotions then thy extraordinary. For if they be not
regular, but come by chance, they will not last long. But if they be added to
your ordinary offices, or made to be daily, thy spirit will by use and custom
be made tender, and not willing to go less.

FRIDAY.
The sixth Decad.


for God will last for ever. But if he takes felicity in things of this world,
where will his felicity be when this world is done? Either here alone or
hereafter must be thy portion.





how or what he suffers, so he suffer well, and be the friend of Christ; nor
where nor when he prays, so he may do it frequently, fervently and acceptably.

Jesus; for nothing will more enable us to bear our Cross patiently, injuries
charitably, the labor of Religion comfortably, and censuring words and
detractions with meekness and quietness.





and mingle not thy affections with any creature, but in just subordination to
God, and to Religion, and thou shall have joy, if there be any such thing in
this World. For there is no joy but in God, and no sorrow but in an evil
conscience.



SATURDAY.
The seventh Decad.
Jesus, and contends earnestly to be like him. Nothing else can satisfy, or
make us perfect. But be thou a bearer of his Cross, as well as a lover of his
Kingdom. Suffer tribulation for him, or from him, with the same spirit thou
receivest consolation: follow him as well for the bitter Cup of his passion as
for the Loaves; and remember, that if it be a hard saying, Take up my Cross and
follow me, it is a harder saying, Go ye Cursed into everlasting fire.



that, this will return. Any man would serve God, if he felt pleasure in it
always; but the virtuous does it when his Soul is full of heaviness, and
regards not himself, but God, and hates that consolation that lessens his
compunction, but loves any thing whereby his is made more humble.

there are many secrets of Religion which are not perceived till they be felt,
and are not felt but in the day of a great calamity.

can and do, and love to do it.





humble Confession of them, from speedy Repentance, from the custody of thy
Senses and of thy Heart, from firm purposes of growing in grace, from reading
good Books, and frequent receiving the Holy Sacrament. It is all one to him, if
he deceives the by a lie or by truth; whether he amaze or trouble thee by love
of the present, or fear of the future. Watch him but in these things, and there
will be no part left unarmed in which he can wound thee.



all is well, when nothing pleases him but God, being thankful in the midst of
his afflctions; and he is holy, who, when he has lost his comfort, loses
nothing of his duty, but is still the same, when God changes his face toward
him.

POSTULANDA. OR, Things to be prayed for.
A FORM of PRAYER, By way of Paraphrase expounding The Lord's Prayer.
Our Father.
MErciful and Gracious, thou gave us being, raising us from nothing, to be an
excellent creation, efforming us after thy own Image, tenderly feeding us, and
conducting and strengthening us all our days: Thou art our Father by a more
excellent Mercy, adopting us in a new birth, to become partakers of the
ininheritance of Jesus: Thou have given us the portion and the food of Sons; O
make us to do the Duty of Sons, that we may never loose our title to so
glorious an inheritance.

Let this excellent Name and Title, by which thou have vouchsafed to relate to
us, be our Glory and our Confidence, our Defense and Guard, our Ornament and
Strength, our dignity, and the endearment of Obedience, the Principle of a holy
Fear to thee our Father, and of Love to thee and to our Brethren partakers of
the same Hope and Dignity.

Unite every member of the Church to thee in holy bands: Let there be no more
names of Division, nor Titles and Ensigns of Error and Partiality: Let not us
who are Brethren contend, but in giving honor to each other and glory to thee,
contending earnestly for the Faith, but not to the breach of Charity, nor the
denying each others Hope. But grant that we may all join in the promotion of
the honor of thee our Father, in celebrating the Name, and spreading the
Family, and propagating the Laws and Institutions, the Promises and Dignities
of our Elder Brother, that despising the transitory entertainments of this
world, we may labor for and long after the inheritance to which thou have
given us title, by adopting us into the dignity of Sons. For ever let thy
Spirit witness to our spirit that we are thy children: enable us to cry Abba,
Father.

Which art in Heaven.
Heaven is thy Throne, the Earth thy Footstool. From thy throne thou beholdest
all the dwellers upon Earth, and triest out the hearts of men, and nothing is
hid from thy sight. And as thy Knowledge is infinite, so is thy Power
uncircumscribed as the utmost Orb of Heaven, and thou sit in thy own
Essential Happiness and Tranquillity, immovable and Eternal. That is our
Country, and thither thy Servants are traveling; there is our Father, and that
is our inheritance; there our hearts are, for there our treasure is laid up
till the day of Recompense.

Hallowed be thy Name.
Thy Name, O God, is glorious, and in thy Name is our hope and confidence.
According to thy Name, so is thy praise unto the World's end. They that love
thy Name shall be joyful in thee; for thy Name which thou made to be
proclaimed unto thy people, is, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and that will by no means clear
the guilty. In this glorious Name we worship thee, O Lord; and all they that
know thy Name will put their trust in thee. The desire of our Soul is to thy
Name, and to the remembrance of thee. Thou art worthy, O Lord, of Honor, and
praise, and glory, for ever and ever: we confess thy glories, we rejoice in thy
mercies; we hope in thy Name, and thy Saints like it well: for thy Name is
praised unto the end of the World; it is believed by Faith, relied upon by a
holy Hope, and loved by a great Charity. All thy Church celebrates thee with
praises, and offers to thy Name the Sacrifices of Prayers and Thanksgiving.

Thou, O God, did frame our Nature by thy own Image, and now thou have
imprinted thy Name upon us, we are thy servants, the relatives and domestics
of thy family, and thou have honored us with the gracious appellative of
Christians. O let us never dishonor so excellent a Title, nor by unworthy
usages profane thy holy Name, but for ever glorify it. Let our Life be
answerable to our dignity; that our body may be chaste, our thoughts clean, our
words gracious, our manners holy, and our life useful and innocent; that men
seeing our good works, may glorify thee our Father which art in Heaven.

Thy Kingdom come.
Thou reignest in Heaven and Earth: O do thou rule also in our hearts, advance
the interest of Religion, let thy Gospel be placed in all the Regions of the
earth, and let all Nations come and worship thee, laying their proud^ wills at
thy feet, submitting their understandings to the obedience of Jesus, conforming
their affections to thy holy Laws. Let thy Kingdom be set up gloriously over
us, and do thou reign in our Spirits by thy Spirit of Grace; subdue every lust
and inordinate appetite, trample upon our pride, mortify all rebellion within
us, and let all thine and our enemies be brought into captivity, that sin may
never reign in our mortal Bodies; but that Christ may reign in our
Understanding by Faith, in the Will, by Charity, in the Passions by
Mortifications, in all the Members by a right and a chaste use of them. And when
thy Kingdom that is within us has flourished and is advanced to that height
whither thou have designed it, grant thy Kingdom of Glory may speedily succeed,
and we thy Servants be admitted to the peace and purity, the holiness and
glories of that state where thou reignest alone, and art all in all.

Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
Thy Will, O God is the measure of holiness and peace; thy Providence the great
disposer of all things, tying all events together, in order to thy glory and
the good of thy Servants, by a wonderful mysterious Chain of Wisdom. Let thy
Will also be the measure of our desires: for we know that whatsoever thou
say is true, and whatsoever thou do is good. Grant we may submit our
wills to thine, being patient of evils which thou inflictest, lovers of the
good which thou command, haters of all evil which thou forbiddest, pleased
with all the accidents thou sendest; that though our nature is weaker than
Angels, yet our obedience may be as humble, our conformity to thy will may
arise up to the degrees of Unity, and theirs cannot be more; that as they in
Heaven, so we on Earth May obey thy will promptly, cheerfully, zealously, and
with all our faculties: and grant, that as they there, so all the world here
may serve thee with peace and concord, purity and love unfeigned, with one
heart and one voice glorifying thee our heavenly Father.

Grant that we may quit all our own affections, and suspect our reasonings, and
go out of our selves, and all our own confidences; that thou being to us all
things, disposing all events, and guideing all our actions, and directing our
intentions, and overruling all things in us and about us, we may be Servants
of thy Divine Will for ever.

Give us this day our daily Bread.
Thou, O God, which take care of our Souls, do not despise our Bodies which
thou have made and sanctified, and designed to be glorious. But now we are
exposed to hunger and thirst, nakedness and weariness, want and inconvenience,
Give unno us neither poverty nor riches, but feed us with food convenient for
us, and cloth us with fitting provisions, according to that state and condition
wherein thou have placed thy Servants: that we may not be tempted with want,
nor made contemptible by beggary, nor wanton or proud by riches, nor in love
with any thing in this World; but that we may use it as strangers and pilgrims,
as the relief of our needs, the support of our infirmities, and the oil of our
lamps, feeding us till we are quite spent in thy service. Lord, take from thy
Servants sad carefulness and all distrust, and give us only such a proportion
af temporal things as may enable us with comfort to do our duty.

Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us
O dear God, unless thou art pleased to pardon us, in vain it is that we should
live here, and what good will our life do us? O look upon us with much mercy,
for we have sinned grievously against thee. Pardon the adherent imperfections
of our life, the weakness of our duty, the carelessness of our spirit, our
affected ignorance, our indiligence, our rashness and want of observation, our
malice and presumptions. Turn thine eyes from our impurities, and behold the
brightness and purest innocence of the holy Jesus; and under his cover we plead
our cause, not that thou should judge our sins, but give us pardon, and blot
out all our iniquities, that we may never enter into the horrible regions where
there are torments without ceasing, a prison without ransom, reproaches without
comfort, anguish without patience, darkness without light, a worm that never
dies, and the fire that never goes out.

But be pleased also to give us great charity, that we may truly forgive all
that trouble or injure us, that by this Character thou may discern us to be
thy Sons and Servants, Disciples of the Holy Jesus; lest our prayer be turned
into sin, and thy Grace be recalled, and thou enter into a final anger against
thy Servants.

Lead us not into Temptation;
Gracious Father, we are weak and ignorant, our affections betray us, and make
us willing to die; our adversary the Devil goes up and down, seeking whom he
may devour, he is busy and crafty, malicious and powerful, watchful and
envious; and we tempt our selves, running out to mischief, delighting in the
approaches of sin, and love to have necessities put upon us, that sin may be
unavoidable. Pity us in the midst of these disorders, and give us spiritual
strength, holy Resolutions, a watchful Spirit, the whole Armor of God, and thy
protection, the guard of Angels, and the conduct of thy holy Spirit, to be our
security in the day of danger. Give us thy grace to fly from all occasions to
sin, that we may never tempt our selves, nor delight to be tempted; and let thy
blessed Province so order the accidents of our lives, that we may not dwell
near an enemy; and when thou shall try us, and suffer us to enter into combat,
let us always be on thy side, and fight valiantly, resist the Devil, and endure
patiently, and persevere constantly unto the end, that thou may crown thy
own work in us.

But deliver us from evil.
From sin and shame, from the malice and fraud of the Devil, and from the
falseness and greediness of men, from all thy wrath, and from all our
impurities, good Lord deliver thy Servants.

Do not reserve any thing of thy wrath in store for us; but let our sins be
pardoned so fully, that thou may not punish our inventions. And yet if thou will not be entreated, but that it be necessary that we suffer, thy will be
done: Smite us here with a Father's rod, that thou may spare us hereafter:
let the sad accidents of our life be for good to us, not for evil; for our
amendment, not to exasperate or weary us, not to harden or confound us: and
what evil soever it be that shall happen, let us not sin against thee. For ever
deliver us from that evil, and for ever deliver us from the power of the evil
one, the great enemy of mankind; and never let our portion be in that Region of
Darkness in that everlasting burning which thou have prepared for the Devil and
his Angels for ever.

For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
So shall we thy Servants advance the Mightiness of thy Kingdom, the Power of
thy Majesty, and the Glory of thy Mercy, from generation to generation for ever.

Amen.
LITANIES FOR All Things and Persons.
O God the Father of Mercies, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy
upon thy Servants, and hear the prayers of us miserable sinners.

O Blessed Jesus, the Fountain of Peace and Pardon, our Wisdom and our
Righteousness, our Sanctification and Redemption, have mercy upon thy Servants,
refuse not to hear the Prayers of us miserable, sorrowful and returning sinners.

O Holy and Divinest Spirit of the Father, help our infirmities; for of our
selves we know not what to ask, nor how to pray; but do thou assist and be
present in the desires of us miserable sinners.

I. For Pardon of Sins.
REmember not, Lord, the follies of our childhood, nor the lusts of our youth,
the wildness of our head, nor the wanderings of our heart; the infinite sins of
our tongue, and the inexcusable errors of the days of vanity.

Lord, have mercy upon us poor miserable sinners.

Remember not, O Lord, the growing iniquities of our elder age, the pride of
our spirit, the abuse of our members, the greediness of our purposes, the
peevishness and violence of all our passions and affections.

Lord, have mercy, etc.

Remember not, O Lord, how we have been full of envy and malice, anger and
revenge; fierce and earnest in the purchases and vanities of the world, and
lazy and dull, slow and soon weary in the things of God and of Religion.

Lord, have mercy, etc.

Remember not, O Lord, our uncharitable behavior ^towards those with whom we
have conversed, our jealousies and suspicions, our evil surmisings and evil
reportings, the breach of our promises to men, and the breach of all our holy
vows made to thee our God.

Lord, have mercy, etc.

Remember not, O Lord, how often we have omitted the several parts and actions
of our duty; for our sins of Omission are infinite, and we have not sought
after the Righteousness of God, but have rested in carelessness and
forgetfulness, in a false peace and a silent Conscience.

Lord, have mercy, etc.

O most gracious Lord, enter not into judgment with thy servants, lest we be
consumed in thy wrath and just displeasure; from which,

Good Lord, deliver us, and preserve thy servants for ever.

II. For Deliverance from Evils.
FRom gross ignorance and stupid negligence, from a wandering head and a
trifling spirit, from the violence and rule of passion, from a servile will and
a commanding lust, from all intemperance, inordination and irregularity
whatsoever.

Good Lord, deliver and preserve thy servants for ever.

From a covetous mind and greedy desires, from lustful thoughts and a wanton
eye, from rebellious members and the pride and vanity of spirit, from false
opinions and ignorant confidences,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From improvidence and prodigality, from envy and the spirit of slander, from
idleness and sensuality, from presumption and despair, from sinful actions and
all vicious habits,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From fierceness of rage and hastiness of spirit, from clamorous and
reproachful language, from peevish anger and inhumane malice, from the spirit
of contention and hasty and indiscreet zeal,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From a schismatical and heretical spirit, from tyranny and tumults, from
sedition and factions, from envying the Grace of God in our Brother, from
impenitence and hardness of heart, from obstinacy and apostasy, from
delighting in sin and hating God and good men,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From fornication and adultery, from unnatural desires and unnatural hatreds,
from gluttony and drunkenness, from loving and believing lies, and taking
pleasure in the remembrances of evil things, from delighting in our Neighbor's
misery and procuring it, from upbraiding others and hating reproof of our
selves,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From impudence and shame, from contempt and scorn, from oppression and
cruelty, from a pitiless and unrelenting spirit, from a churlish behavior and
undecent usages of our selves or others.

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From famine and pestilence, from noisome and infectious deseases, from sharp
and intolerable pains, from impatience and tediousness of spirit, from a state
of temptation and hardened consciences,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From banishment and prison, from widowhood and want, from violence of pains
and passions, from tempests and earthquakes, from the rage of fire and water,
from Rebellion and Treason, from fretfulness and inordinate cares, from
murmuring against God and disobedience to the Divine Commandment,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From delaying our rep^ntance and persevering in sin, from false principles and
prejudices, from un^hankfulness and irreligion, from seducing others and being
abused our selves, from the malice and craftiness of the Devil, and the deceit
and lyings of the World.

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From wounds and murder, from precipices and falls, from fracture of bones and
dislocation of joints, from dismembring our bodies and all infatuation of our
Souls, from folly and madness, from uncertainty of mind and state, and from a
certainty of sinning,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From Thunder and lightning, from phantasms. Specter and illusions of the
night, from sudden and great Changes, from the snares of wealth and the
contempt of beggary and extreme poverty, from being made an example and a
warning to others by suffering sad judgments our selves,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From condemning others and justifying our selves, from misspending our time
and abusing thy Grace, from calling good evil and evil good, from consenting to
folly and tempting others,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From excess in speaking and peevish silence, from looser laughing and
immoderate weeping, from giving evil example to others or following any our
selves, from giving or receiving scandal, from the horrible sentence of endless
death and damnation,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From cursing and swearing, from uncharitable chiding and easiness to believe
evil, from the evil spirit that walks at noon and the arrow that flies in
darkness, from the Angel of wrath and perishing in popular diseases

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From the want of a Spiritual Guide, from a famine of the Word and Sacramants,
from hurtful persecution, and from taking part with persecutors,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From drowning or being burnt alive, from sleepless nights and contentious
days, from a melancholic and a confused spirit, from violent fears and the
loss of reason, from a vicious life and a sudden and unprovided death,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From relying upon vain fancies and false foundations, from an evil and an
amazed Conscience, from sinning near the end of our life, and from despairing
in the day of our death,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

From hypocrisy and wilfulness, from self-love and vain ambition, from
curiosity and carelesnes, from being tempted in the days of our weakness, from
the prevailing of the flesh and grieving the Spirit, from all thy wrath, and
from all our sins,

Good Lord, deliver, etc.

III. For gifts and graces.
HEar our Prayer, O Lord, and consider our desire, hearken unto us for thy
truth and righteousness sake: O hide not thy face from us, neither cast away
thy servants in displeasure.

Give unto us the spirit of Prayer, frequent and fervent, holy and persevering;
an unreprovable^ Faith, a just and an humble Hope, and a never-failing Charity.

Hear our Prayers, O Lord, and consider our desire.

Give unto us true humility, a meek and a quiet spirit, a loving and a
friendly, a holy and a useful conversation, bearing the burdens of our
neighbors, denying our selves, and studying to benefit others, and to please
thee in all things.

Hear our Prayers, etc

Give us a prudent and a sober, a just and a sincere, a temperate and a
religious spirit, a great contempt of the world, a love of holy things, and a
longing after Heaven, and the instruments and paths that lead thither.

Hear our Prayers, etc

Grant us to be thankful to our Been factors, righteous in performing promises,
loving to our relatives, careful of our charges; to be gentle and easy to be
entreated, slow to anger, and fully instructed and readily prepared for every
good work.

Hear our Prayers, etc.

Give us a peaceable spirit and a peaceable life, free from debt and deadly
sin; grace to abstain from appearances of evil, and to do nothing but what is
of good report, to confess Christ and his holy Religion, by a holy and obedient
life, and a mind ready to die for him when he shall call us and assist us.

Hear our Prayers, etc.

Give to thy servants a watchful and an observing Spirit, diligent in doing our
duty, inflexible to evil, obedient to thy word, inquisitive after thy will,
pure and holy thoughts, strong and religious purposes, and thy grace to perform
faithfully what we have promised in the day of our duty, or in the day of our
calamity.

Hear our Prayers, etc.

O teach us to despise all vanity, to fight the battles of the Lord manfully
against the Flesh, the World and the Devil, to spend our time religiously and
usefully, to speak gracious words, to walk always as in thy presence, to
preserve our Souls and bodies in holiness, fit for the habitation of the holy
Spirit of God.

Hear our Prayers, etc.

Give us a holy and a perfect repentance, a well-instructed understanding,
regular affections, a constant and a wise heart, a good name, a fear of thy
Majesty, and a love of all thy glories above all the things in the world for
ever.

Hear our Prayers, etc.

Give us a healthful body and a clear understanding, the love of our neighbors
and the peace of the Church, the public use and comforts of thy holy Word and
Sacraments, a great love to all Christians, and obedience to our Superiors
Ecclesiastical and Civil all the days of our life.

Hear our Prayers, etc.

Give us Spiritual Wisdom, that we may discern what is pleasing to thee, and
follow what belongs unto our peace; and let the knowledge and love of God, and
of Jesus Christ our Lord, be our guide and our portion all our days.

Hear our Prayers, etc.

Give unto us holy dispositions, and an active industry in thy service, to
redeem the time misspent in vanity: for thy pity sake take not vengeance of us
for our sins, but sanctify our Souls and bodies in this life, and glorify
them hereafter.

Hear our Prayers, etc.

Our Father, etc.

IV. To be added to the former Li^anies, according as our Devotions and time
will su^fe^.
For all states of Men and Women, especially in the Christian Church.

O Blessed God, in mercy remember thine inheritance, and forget not the
congregation of the poor for ever; pity poor mankind, whose portion is misery
and folly, shame and death. But thou art our Redeemer, and the lifter up of our
head, and under the shadow of thy wings shall be our help, until this Tyranny
be over-past.

Have mercy upon us, O God, and hid not thy self from our Petition.

Preserve, O God, the Catholic Church in holiness and truth, in unity and
peace, free from persecution, or glorious under it; that she may for ever
advance the honor of our Lord Jesus, for ever represent his Sacrifice, and
glorify his Person, and advance his Religion, and be accepted of thee in her
blessed Lord; that being filled with his Spirit, she may partake of his glory.

Have mercy upon us, etc.

Give the spirit of Government and Holiness to all Christian Kings, Princes and
Governors: grant that their people may obey them, and they may obey thee, and
live in honesty and peace, justice and holy Religion, being Nursingfathers to
the Church, Advocates for the oppressed, Patrons for the widows, and a
Sanctuary for the miserable and the fatherless; that they may reign with thee
for ever in the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus.

Have mercy upon us, etc.

Give to thy Servants the Bishops, and all the Clergy, the Spirit of holiness
and courage, of patience and humility, of prudence and diligence, to preach and
declare thy will by a holy life and wise discourses; that they may minister to
the good of Souls, and find a glorious reward in the day of our Lord Jesus.

Have mercy npon us, etc.

Give to our Relatives [our Wives and Children, our Friends and Benefactors,
our Charges, our Family, etc.] pardon and support, comfort in all their
sorrows, strength in all temptations, the guard of Angels to preserve them from
evil, and the conduct of thy holy Spirit to lead them into all good; that they
doing their duty, may feel thy mercies here, and partake of thy glories
hereafter.

Have mercy upon us, etc.

Give to all Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths peace and plenty, health and
holy Religion; to all Families of Religion and Nurseries of Piety zeal and
holiness, prudence and unity, peace and contentedness; to all Schools of
Learning quietness and industry, freedom from wars and violence, factions and
envy.

Have mercy upon us, etc.

Give to all married persons faith and love, charitable and wise compliances,
sweetness of society and innocence of conversation; to all Virgins and Widows
great love of Religion, a sober and a contented spirit, an unwearied attendance
to devotion and the offices of holiness: protection to the fatherless, comfort
to the disconsolate, patience and submission, health and spiritual advantages
to the sick; that they may feel thy comforts for the days wherein they have
suffered adversity.

Have mercy upon us, etc.

Be thou a star and a guide to them that travel by land or sea, the confidence
and comfort of them that are in storms and shipwrecks, the strength of them
that toil in the Mines and row in the Galleys, an instructor to the ignorant;
to them that are condemned to die be thou a guide unto death: give cheerfulness
to every sad heart, spiritual strength and proportionable comfort to them that
are afflicted by evil spirits; pity the lunaticks, give life and salvation to
all to whom thou have given no understanding, accept the stupid and the fools
to mercy: give liberty to prisoners, redemption to captives, maintenance to the
poor, patronage and defense to the oppessed, and put a period to the iniquity
and to the miseries of all mankind.

Have mercy upon us, etc.

Give unto our enemies grace and pardon, charity to us, and love to thee; take
away all anger from them, and all mistakes from us, all mis-interpretations and
jealousies; bring all sinners to repentance and holiness, and to all thy Saints
and Servants give an increasing love, and a persevering duty: bring all Turks,
Jews and Infidels to the knowledge and confession of the Lord Jesus, and a
participation of all the Promises of the Gospel, all the benefits of his
Passion; to all Heretics give humility and ingenuity, repentance of their
errors, and grace and power to make amends to the Church and Truth, and a
public acknowledgment of a holy faith, to the glory of the Lord Jesus.

Have mercy, etc.

Give to all Merchants faithfulness and truth; to the laboring husbandman
health and fair seasons of the year, and reward his toil with the dew of Heaven
and the blessings of the earth; to all Artisans give diligence in their
Callings, and a blessing on their labors and on their familes; to old men
piety and perfect repentance, a liberal heart and an open hand, great Religion
and desires after Heaven; to young men give sobriety and chastity; health and
usefulness, an early piety and a persevering duty; to all families visited with
the rod of God give consolation, and a holy use of the affliction, and a speedy
deliverance; to us all pardon and holiness, and life eternal, through Jesus
Christ,

Amen.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communication
of the Holy Spirit, be with us all for ever.

Amen.
A short Prayer to be said every Morning.
I.
O Almighty God Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God of mercy and comfort,
with reverence and fear, with humble confidence and strong desires, I approach
to the throne of Grace, begging of thee mercy and protection, pardon and
Salvation. O my God, I am a sinner, but sorrowful and repenting: Thou art
justly offended at me, but yet thou art my Lord and my Father, merciful and
gracious. Be pleased to blot all my sins out of thy remembrance, and heal my
Soul that I may never any more sin against thee. Lord, open my eyes, that I may
see my own infirmities, and watch against them; and my own follies, that I may
amend them; and be pleased to give me perfect understanding in the way of
godliness, that I may walk in it all the days of my pilgrimage. Give me a
spirit diligent in the works of my calling, cheerful and zealous in Religion,
fervent and frequent in my prayers, charitable and useful in my Conversation.
Give me a healthful and a chaste body, a pure and a holy Soul, a sanctified and
an humble spirit; and let my body and Soul and spirit be preserved unblameable
to the coming of the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
II.
BLessed by thy Name, O God, and blessed be thy Mercies, who have preserved me
this night from sin and sorrow, from sad chances and a violent death, from the
malice of the Devil and the evil effects of my own corrupted nature and
infirmity. The outgoings of the Morning and Evening shall praise thee, and thy
Servants shall rejoice in giving thee praise for the operation of thy hands.
Let thy providence and care watch over me this day and all my whole life, that
I may never sin against thee by idleness or folly, by evil company or private
sins, by word or deed, by thought or desire; and let the employment of my day
leave no sorrow or the remembrance of an evil conscience at night; but let it
be holy and profitable, blessed and always innocent; that when the days of my
short abode are done, and the shadow is departed, I may die in thy fear and
favor, and rest in a holy hope, and at last return to the joys of a blessed
Resurrection, through Jesus Christ: in whose name, and in whose words in behalf
of my self, and all my friends, and all thy Servants, I humbly and heartily
pray, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
ETernal God, Almighty Father of Men and Angels, by whose care and providence I
am preserved and blessed, comforted and assisted, I humbly beg of thee to
pardon the sins and follies of this day, the weaknesses of my services and the
strength of my passions, the rashness of my words and the vanity and evil of my
actions. O just and dear God, how long shall I confess my sins, and pray
against them, and yet fall under them? O let it be so no more, let me never
return to the follies of which I am ashamed, which bring sorrow and death, and
thy displeasure worse than death. Give me a command over my evil inclinations,
and a perfect hatred of sin, and a love to thee above all the desires of this
world. Be pleased to bless and preserve me this night from all sin, and all
violence of Chance, and the malice of the spirits of darkness: Watch over me in
my sleep, and whether I sleep or wake, let me be thy servant. Be thou first and
last in all my thoughts, and the guide and continual assistance of all my
actions. Preserve my body, pardon the sin of my Soul, and sanctify my spirit.
Let me always live holily, and justly, and soberly; and when I die, receive my
Soul into thine hands. O holy and ever blessed Jesus, that I may lie in thy
bosom, and long for thy coming, and hear thy blessed Sentence at Doomsday, and
behold thy face, and live in thy Kingdom, singing praises to God for ever and
ever. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

For Sunday. A Prayer against Pride.
I.
OEternal God, merciful and glorious, thou art exalted far above all heavens;
thy Throne, O God, is glory, and thy Scepter is righteousness, thy Will is
holiness, and thy Wisdom the great foundation of Empire and Government. I adore
thy Majesty, and rejoice in thy Mercy, and revere thy Power, and confess all
glory and dignity and honor to be thine alone, and theirs to whom thou shall
impart any ray of thy Majesty, or reflection of thy honor: but as for me, I am
a worm and no man, vile dust and ashes, the son of corruption and the heir of
rottenness, seized upon by folly, a lump of ignorance and sin, and shame and
death. What art thou, O Lord? The great God of Heaven and Earth, the Fountain
of Holiness and Perfection infinite. But what am I? So ignorant, that I know
not what; so poor, that I have nothing of my own; so miserable, that I am the
heir of sorrow and death; and so sinful, that I am encompassed with shame and
grief.

II.
AND yet, O my God, I am proud; proud of my shame, glorying in my sin, boasting
my infirmities; for this is all that I have of my own, save only that I have
multiplied my miseries by vile actions, every day dishonouring the work of thy
hands: my understanding is too confident, my affections rebellious, my will
refractory and disobedient; and yet I know thou resistest the proud, and did
cast the morning Stars, the Angels, from Heaven into chains of darkness, when
they grew giddy and proud, walking upon the battlements of Heaven, beholding
the glorious Regions that were above them.

III.
THou, O God, who give grace to the humble, do something also for the proud
man; make me humble and obedient. Take from me the spirit of pride and
hautiness, ambition and selfflattery, confidence and gaiety: teach me to think
well, and to expound all things fairly of my brother, to love his worthiness,
to delight in his praises, to excuse his errors, to give thee thanks for his
graces, to rejoice in all the good that he receives, and ever to believe and
speak better things of him than of my self.

IV.
O Teach me to love to be concealed and little esteemed; let me be truly
humbled, and heartily ashamed of my sin and folly: teach me to bear reproaches
evenly, for I have deserved them; to refuse all honors done unto me, because I
have not deserved them; to return all to thee, for it is thine alone; to suffer
reproof thankfully, to amend all my faults speedily: and do thou invest my Soul
with the humble robe of my meek Master and Savior Jesus; and when I have
humbly, patiently, charitably and diligently served thee, change this robe into
the shining garment of immortality, my confusion into glory, my folly to
perfect knowledge, my weaknesses and dishonours to the strength and beauties of
the Sons of God.

V.
IN the mean time use what means thou please to conform me to the image of
thy holy Son; that I may be gentle to others, and severe to my self; that I may
sit down in the lowest place, striving to go before my brother in nothing but
in doing him and the honor, staying for my glory till thou shall please in the
day of recompenses to reflect light from thy face, and admit me to behold thy
glories. Grant this for Jesus Christ's sake, who humbled himself to the death
and shame of the Cross, and is now exalted unto glory: Unto him, with thee, O
Father, be glory and praise for ever and ever.

Amen.
For Monday. A Prayer against Covetousness.
I.
O Almighty God, eternal Treasure of all good things, thou fillest all things
with plenteousness; Thou clothest the lilies of the field, and fecdest the
young ravens that call upon thee: Thou art allsufficient in thy self, and
all-sufficient to us. Let thy providence be my storehouse, my dispensation of
temporal things the limit of my labor, my own necessity the measures of my
desire: but never let my desires of this world be greedy, nor my labor
immoderate, nor my care vexatious and distracting; but prudent, moderate, holy,
subordinate to thy Will, the measure thou have appointed for me.

II.
TEach me, O God, to despise the world, to labor for the true riches, to seek
the Kingdom of Heaven and its Righteousness, to be content with what thou
providest, to be in this world like a stranger, with affections set upon
Heaven, laboring for and longing after the possessions of thy Kingdom; but
never suffer my affections to dwell below: but give me a heart compassionate to
the poor, liberal to the needy, open and free in all my communications, without
base ends, or greedy designs, or unworthy arts of gain; but let my strife be to
gain thy favor, to obtain the blessedness of doing good to others, and giving
to them that want, and the blessedness of receiving from thee pardon and
support, grace and holiness, perseverance and glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

For Tuesday. A Prayer against Lust.
I.
O Eternal Purity, thou art brighter than the Sun, purer than the Angels, and
the Heavens are not clean in thy sight; with mercy behold thy servant, apt to
be tempted with every object, and to be overcome by every enemy. I cannot, O
God, stand in the day of battle and danger, unless thou coverest me with thy
shield, and hidest me under thy wings. The fiery darts of the Devil are ready
to consume me, unless the dew of thy grace for ever descend upon me. Thou did
make me after thine image: be pleased to preserve me so, pure and spotless,
chaste and clean, that my body may be a holy Temple, and my Soul a Sanctuary to
entertain thy divinest Spirit, the Spirit of love and holiness, the Prince of
Purities.

II.
REprove in me the spirit of Fornication and Uncleanness, and fill my Soul with
holy fires, that no strange fire may come into the Temple of my body, where
thou have chosen to dwell. O cast out all those unclean spirits which have
unhallowed the place where thy holy feet have trod; pardon all my hurtful
thoughts, all my impurities, that I, who am a member of Christ, may not become
the member of an harlot, nor the slave of the Devil, nor a servant of lust and
unworthy desires, but do thou purify my love, and let me seek the things that
are above, hating the garments spotted with the flesh, never any more grieving
the holy spirit by filthy inclinations, with impure and fantastic thoughts;
but let my thoughts be holy, my Soul pure, my body chaste and healthful, my
spirit severe, devout and religious every day more and more; that at the day of
our appearing I may be presented to God washed and cleansed pure and spotless,
by the blood of the holy Lamb, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
For Wednesday. A Prayer against Gluttony and Drunkenness.
I.
O Almighty Father of Men and Angels, who have of thy great bounty provided
plentifully for all mankind, to support his state, to relieve his necessities
to refresh his sorrows, to recreate his labors, that he may praise thee, and
rejoice in thy mercies and bounty; be thou gracious unto thy servant yet more,
and suffer me not by my folly to change thy bounty into sin, thy grace into
wantonness. Give me the spirit of temperance and sobriety, that I may use thy
creatures in the same measures and to the same purposes which thou have
designed, so as may best enable me to serve thee; but not to make provision for
the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Let me not, as Esau, prefer meat
before a blessing; but subdue my appetite, subjecting it to reason and the
grace of God, being content with what is moderate and useful, and easy to be
obtained, taking it in due time, receiving it thankfully, making it to minister
to my body, that my body may be a good instrument of the Soul, and the Soul a
Servant of thy Divine Majesty for ever and ever.

II.
PArdon, O God, in whatsoever I have offended thee by meat and drink and
pleasures; and never let my body any more be oppressed with loads of sloth and
delicacies, or my Soul drowned in Seas of wine or strong drink: but let my
appetites be changed into spiritual desires, that I may hunger after the food
of Angels, and thirst for the wine of elect Souls, and may account it meat and
drink and pleasure to do thy will, O God. Lord, let me eat and drink so, that
my food may not become a temptation, or a sin, or a disease; but grant that
with so much caution and prudence I may watch over my appetite, that I may in
the strength of thy mercies and refreshments, in the light of thy countenance,
and in the paths of thy Commandments, walk before thee all the days of my life
acceptable ot thee in Jesus Christ, ever advancing his honor, and being filled
with his Spirit, that I may at last partake of his glory, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For Thursday. A Prayer against Envy.
I.
O Most gracious Father, thou Spring of an eternal Charity, who have so loved
mankind, that thou did open thy bosom, and send thy holy Son to convey thy
mercies to us: and thou did create Angels and Men, that thou might have
objects to whom thou might communicate thy goodness: Give me grace to follow
so glorious a precedent, that I may never envy the prosperity of any one, but
rejoice to honor him whom thou honor, to love him whom thou love, to
commend the virtuous, to discern the precious from the vile, giving honor to
whom honor belongs; that I may go to Heaven in the noblest way of rejoicing in
the good of others.

II.
O Dear God, never suffer the Devil to rub his vilest Leprosy of Envy upon me;
never let me have the affections of the desperate and damned; let it not be ill
with me, when it is well with others: but let thy holy Spirit so overrule me
for ever, that I may pity the afflicted, and be compassionate, and have a
fellow-feeling of my brother's sorrows, and that I may as much as I can,
promote his good, and give thee thanks for it, and rejoice with them that do
rejoice; never censuring his actions curstly, nor detracting from his praises
spitefully, nor upbraiding his infelicities maliciously, but pleased in all
things, which thou do or give; that I may then triumph in spirit when thy
Kingdom is advanced, when thy Spirit rules, when thy Church is profited, when
thy Saiuts rejoice, when the Devil's interest is destroyed, truly loving thee,
and truly loving my brother; that we may all together join in the holy
Communion of Saints, both here and hereafter, in the measures of grace and
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For Friday. A Prayer against Wrath and inordinate Anger.
I.
O Almighty Judge of Men and Angels, whose anger is always the minister of
Justice, slow, but severe, not lightly arising, but falling heavily when it
comes; give to thy servant a meek and a gentle spirit, that I also may be slow
to anger, and easy to mercy and forgiveness. Give me a wise and a constant
heart, that I may not be moved with every trifling mistake and inconsiderable
accident in the conversation and intercourse of others, never be moved to an
intemperate anger for any injury that is done or offered; let my anger ever be
upon a just cause, measured with moderation and reason, expressed with charity
and prudence, lasting but till it has done some good, either upon my self or
others.

II.
LOrd, let me be ever courteous, and easy to be entreated; never let me fall
into a peevish or contentious spirit, but follow peace with all men, offering
forgiveness, inviting them by courtesies, ready to confess my own errors, apt
to make amends, and desirous to be reconciled. Let no sickness or cross
accident, no employment or weariness, make me angry, or ungentle and
discontent, or unthankful, or uneasy to them that minister to me; but in all
things make me like unto the holy Jesus. Give me the spirit of a Christian,
charitable, humble, merciful and meek, useful and liberal, complying with every
chance; angry at nothing but my own sins, and grieving for the sins of others:
that while my passion obeys my reason, and my reason is religious, and my
religion is pure and undefiled, managed with humility, and adorned with
charity, I may escape thy anger which I have deserved, and may dwell in thy
love, and be thy Son and Servant for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For Saturday. A Prayer against weariness in well-doing.
I.
O My God, merciful and gracious, my Soul groans under the loads of its own
infirmity, when my spirit is willing, my flesh is weak, my understanding
foolish and imperfect, my will peevish and listless, my affections wandering
after strange objects, my fancy wild and unfixed, all my senses minister to
folly and vanity; and though they were all made for Religion, yet they least of
all delight in that. O my God, pity me, and hear me when I pray, and make that
I may pray acceptably. Give me a love to Religion, an unwearied spirit in the
things of God. Let me not relish or delight in the things of the world, in
sensual objects and transitory possessions; but make my eyes look up to thee,
my Soul be filled with thee, my spirit ravished with thy love, my understanding
employed in the meditation of thy Law, all my powers and faculties of Soul and
Body wholly serving thee, and delighting in such holy ministeries.

II.
O Most glorious God, what greater favor is there than that I may, and what
easier employment can there be than to pray to thee, to be admitted to thy
presence, and to represent our needs, and that we have our needs supplied only
for asking and desiring passionately and humbly? But we rather quit our hopes
of Heaven, than buy it at the cheapest rate of humble prayer. This, O God, is
the greatest infirmity and infelicity of man, and has an intolerable cause,
and is an insufferable evil.

III.
O Relieve my spirit with thy graciousness, take from me all tediousness of
spirit, and give me a laboriousness that will not be tired, a hope that shall
never fail, a desire of holiness not to be satisfied till it possesses, a
charity that will always increase; that I, making Religion the business of my
whole life, may turn all things into Religion, doing all to thy glory, and by
the measures of thy Word and of thy Spirit, that when thou shall call me from
this deliciousness of employment, and the holy mysteries of Grace, I may pass
into the employment of Saints and Angels, whose work it is with eternal joy and
thanksgiving to sing praises to the mercies of the great Redeemer of Men, and
Savior of Men and Angels, Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom, with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be all honor and worship, all service and thanks, all Glory
and Dominion, for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer to be said by a Maiden, before she enters into the state of Marriage.
I,
O Most glorious God, and my most indulgent Lord and gracious Father, who do
bless us by thy bounty, pardon us by thy mercy, support and guide us by thy
grace, and govern us sweetly by thy providence; I give thee most humble and
hearty thanks, that thou have hitherto preserved me in my Virgin-state with
innocence and chastity in a good name and a modest report. It is thy goodness
alone, and the blessed emanation of thy holy Spirit, by which I have been
preserved; and to thee I return all praise and thanks, and adore and love thy
goodness infinite.

II.
AND now, O Lord, since by thy dispensation and overruling providence I am to
change my condition, and enter into the holy state of Marriage, which thou have
sanctified by thy Institution, and blessed by they Word and Promises, and
raised up to an excellent mystery, that it might represent the Union of Christ
and his Church; be pleased to go along with thy servant in my entering into and
passing through this state, that it may not be a state of temptation or sorrow,
by occasion of my sins or infirmities, but of holiness and comfort, as thou
host intended it to all that love and fear thy holy Name.

III.
LOrd, bless and preserve that dear person whom thou have chosen to be my
Husband: let his life be long and blessed, comfortable and holy; and let me
also become a great blessing and comfort unto him, a sharer in all his joys, a
refreshment in all his sorrows, a meet helper for him in all accidents and
chances of the world. Make me amiable for ever in his eyes, and very dear to
him. Unite his heart to me in the dearest union of love and holiness, and mine
to him in all sweetness, and charity, and compliance. Keep from me all morosity
and ungentleness, all sullenness and harshness of disposition, all pride and
vanity, all discontentedness and unreasonableness of passion and humonr: and
make me humble and obedient, charitable and loving, patient and contented,
useful and observant; that we may delight in each other according to thy
blessed word and Ordinance, and both of us may rejoice in thee, having our
portion in the love and service of God for ever and ever.

IV.
O Blessed Father, never suffer any mistakes or discontent, any distrustfulness
or sorrow, any trifling arrests of fancy or unhandsom accident, to cause any
unkindness between us: but let us so dearly love, so affectionately observe, so
religiously attend to each other's good and content, that we may always please
thee, and by this learn and practice our duty and greatest love to thee, and
become mutual helps to each other in the way of Godliness; that when we have
received the blessings of a married life, the comforts of society, the
endearments of a holy and great affection, and the dowry of blessed Children,
we may for ever dwell together in the embraces of thy love and glories,
feasting in the Marriage-supper of the Lamb to eternal ages, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen, Amen.
A Prayer for a holy and a happy Death.
O Eternal and Holy Jesus, who by death have overcome death, and by thy passion
have taken out its sting, and made it to become one of the gates of Heaven, and
an entrance to felicity, have mercy upon me now and at the hour of my death:
let thy grace accompany me all the days of my life, that I may by a holy
conversation, and an habitual performance of my duty, wait for the coming of
our Lord, and be ready to enter with thee, at whatsoever hour thou shall come.
Lord, let not my death be in any sense unprovided, nor untimely, nor hasty, but
after the manner of men, having in it nothing extraordinary, but an extraordiry
piety, and the manifestation of a great and miraculous mercy. Let my sense and
my understanding be preserved entire till the last of my days, and grant that I
may die the death of the righteous, free from debt and deadly sin: having first
discharged all my obligations of justice, leaving none miserable and unprovided
in my departure; but be thou the portion of all my friends and relatives, and
let thy blessing descend upon their heads, and abide there till they shall meet
me in the bosom of our Lord. Preserve me ever in the communion and peace of the
Church; and bless my Deathbed with the opportunity of a holy and a spiritual
Guide, with the assistance and guard of Angels, with the reception of the holy
Sacrament, with patience and dereliction of my own desires, with a strong
faith, and a firm and humbled hope, with just measures of repentance, and great
treasures of charity to thee my God and to all the world, that my Soul in the
arms of the holy Jesus may be deposited with safety and joy, there to expect
the revelation of thy day, and then to partake the glories of thy Kingdom, O
eternal and holy Jesus.

Amen.
A GUIDE FOR THE PENITENT. OR A Model drawn up for the help of a Devout Soul
wounded with Sin.

Tertull.

Peccator omnium Notarum,
Et nulli Rei nisi poenitentiae natus.
LONDON, Printed by J. Grover, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
Majesty MDCLXXVII.

TO THE Christian Reader.
AMong the so troublesome multitude of Books, and the no less troublesome
scarcity of good ones, I have no reason to think this little Piece will much
increase the number of the one, or not serve to balance the trouble of the
other: but I rather hope it may be acceptable and useful, if either the great
Eminence of the Author, or the Argument it self, or else the small bulk, which
are things that use to render works of this kind considerable, be sufficient
either to recommend or excuse it. For the necessity of the argument may
recommend it not to most Readers only, but very many Writers too. And without
doubt, many of those who have been ambitious to put themselves into the number
of Authors by publishing their abortive labors, will need the Rules and
Offices of this Manual, when their Conscience shall cite them to Repentance,
and to ask God forgiveness for nourishing Faction, and sowing the seeds of
Discord, and venting their crude Notions to others trouble, and their own
shame. For such men in the use of this little Enchiridion may find more
comfort, and do thimselves and the Age more right, than in that small harvest
of reputation their own voluminous labors could bring in, which are now very
fitly preferred from the Closet to the more worthy ministeries of the Shop and
Kitchen. But the most Reverend Author, to whose learned Piety thou owe these
following assistances, who in the sweetness and mildness of these lines has
expressed the features and lineaments of his own candid, serene Soul, did not
address them for his own use in that kind. For that he was of the Highest Order
of our Church, he did not owe to his Interest, which advances some, nor to his
Money, which prefers commonly too many, but wholly to his Virtues and his
Learning, and those other eminent Graces, that made his Example as great in the
Church as was his Dignity. And this little Book is a great instance of his
Humility and Charity, which he does in some kind still exercise, though he be
now gone to receive his reward for them; and as he used to look into the
necessities of indigent persons to relieve them with his hand, so in this
Portuise he descends to converse with the weaknesses and solitariness of humble
Penitents, directing and improving their Devotions, and instigating their
Repentance, and preparing a constant storehouse of relief for them by his Pen.
And now if a person so eminent in Grace, so innocent in Life, needed such
Exercises as this, (for what thou receivest here, know, Courteous Reader, it
comes from his Counsel, and from his daily Experience and Practice too)
consider whether thou thy self art not concerned to bring thy actions and life
to as severe a scrutiny and a repentance as operative. If thou joynest with me
in Opinion, here is a Directory ready at hand: but if not, thou need it so
much the more. For our Sins, the less impression they make on our Memory, the
deeper they make on our Conscience; and he is in some cases the most guilty who
presumes he is wholly innocent. Retract therefore that conceit, and betake ^hy
self to thy Closet and the practice of ^his Book, and God bless it to thy
benefit and his own glory.

A GUIDE FOR THE PENITENT.
Remembrances concerning the Examination of your Conscience.
I.
YOU are to consider the Necessity of this Duty. For if we take care that the
Rooms which we eat or sleep in should be kept clean, you cannot but think that
the cleansing of the Soul is a Concernment infinitely beyond it: and for doing
this there is no other way left but to search out every corner of it, and to
cast out every Sin, with every unclean thought that has defiled it.

II.
You are to remember, that there is a great Measure of Discretion to be used in
the Performance of this: so that you may neither omit it, when your own heart
may tell you that there is something amiss in you which must be looked after;
nor on the other side over-scrupulously pursue it, when you are not conscious
to your self of any notable Failings, but such as are incident to humane
frailty: for if you do not wilfully pass over any of your greater Offenses, but
confess particularly, and repent seriously of them, God will more easily pass
by your lesser Infirmities, being such as the Holy Prophet despaired of finding
out, when he so sadly complained, Who can tell how often he offends?

III.
That though it may not only seem, but be impossible to you to recollect every
failing, and that your scrupulous endeavoring of it may rather prove a torture
to the Conscience than an Ease to it; yet you are so far to exercise an
Inquisition upon your self, as by observing these lesser particulars (though it
be but in gross) you may the better discover what the corruption of your Nature
sways you to; and having discovered it, you are bound to strive to subdue it by
degrees, and what you cannot for the present overcome, humbly to ask pardon for.

IV.
That though it be the Duty of every day not to let the Sun go down upon any
Sin that you have committed, without examining of the Merits of it; yet there
are times when this ought to be more punctually and solemnly done, especially
at such times as you set apart for humbling your Soul with Fasting, or for
preparing your self for the devout Receiving of the Sacrament.

V.
For the Manner of Ordering this Examination several Methods have been
prescribed, some by dividing the subject Matter of it into Thoughts, Words and
Deeds; others as sins are differenced by their several Objects, either as being
immediately sins against God, or against your Neighbor, or against your own
Soul. Others advise to set God's holy Commandments before you, and to examine
by that Rule what you have done amiss. But in the chice of this you may free
your self from all Perplexity by taking his advice whom you shall choose to be
your Spiritual Guide. And the Duty it self being once resolved upon, the Mode
of doing may easily be found out.

Advice Concerning Confession.
I.
THat besides this Examination of your Conscience, (which may be done in secret
between God and your own Soul) there is great use of Holy Confession: which
though it be not generally in all Cases, and peremptorily commanded, as if
without it no Salvation could possibly be had; yet you are advised by the
Church under whose discipline you live, that before you are to receive the Holy
Sacrament, or when you are visited with any dangerous sickness, if you find any
one particular sin or more that lies heavy upon you, to disburthen your self of
it into the Bosom of your Confessor, who not only stands between God and you to
pray for you, but has the power of the Keys committed to him, upon your true
Repentance to Absolve you in Christ's Name from those sins which you have
confessed to him.

II.
You are to remember that you bring along with you to Confession not only
unfeigned Sorrow and Remorse of Conscience for sins past, but settled
Resolutions for the time to come never to offend in the same kind again: for
without this, Confession is but a mere Pageant, and rather a mockery of God,
than any effectual means to reconcile you to him.

III.
That having made choice of such a Confessor who is every way qualified that
you may trust your Soul with him, you are advised plainly and sincerely to open
your heart to him, and that laying aside all consideration of any personal
weakness in him, you are to look upon him only as he is a Trustee from God, and
commissioned by him as his Ministerial Deputy to hear, and judge, and absolve
you.

IV.
That the Manner of your Confession be in an humble posture on your knees, as
being made to God rather than man: and for the Matter of it, let it be severe
and serious; but yet so as it may be without any inordinate Anxiety and
unnecessary Scruples, which serve only to entangle the Soul, and instead of
setting you free, (which is the benefit to be looked for by Confession) perplex
you the more.

V.
That for the frequency of doing this, you are to consult with your own
necessities: and as your Physician is not sent for upon every small diftemper,
which your own care may rectify; so neither are you obliged upon every failing
to be over-scrupulous, or to think it a point of Necessity presently to confess
it: For the Confessor cannot be always present, but your God is, to whom if you
apply your self with Prayers and Penitence, confessing in his ears alone
whatever you have done amiss, and steadfastly believing that through the merits
of your Savior they shall never be imputed to you, you may be confident that
your Absolution is at that time sealed in Heaven, but the comfortable
declaration of it you are to look for from the Priest.

Advice concerning Devout Receiving the Holy and Blessed Sacrament.
I.
YOU are first to consider seriously the Infinite love of your Savior, who not
only offered himself for you as a Sacrifice upon the Cross, but that this might
never be forgotten by you, left the blessed memory of it in his holy Sacrament,
which as often as you devoutly and faithfully receive, you are effectually made
Partaker of all the merits of his precious Death and Passion.

II.
That for the frequency of doing this (if your own Conscience does not speak
home to you) you refer your self to your Spiritual Guide, who knowing the
Temper of your Soul, and how you stand disposed, may best direct you. Only I
shall add this, that the oftener you apply your self to do it, your life will
be the purer, your heart the chearfuller, and the better armed against all
Temptations.

III.
That three times in the year at least, especially on those solemn Festivals
observed by all Christians, who have not utterly cast off Obedience to the
Church, and order in their Devotions, you lay aside all excuses, and every Sin
that then besets you, and seriously prepare your self for so great a Blessing.

IV.
That as soon as you wake that Morning, (and the sooner you awake the better
sign it is that your mind is set upon it) you rouse your self up with a fervent
expectation of Receiving that day the Bread that came from Heaven, which
whosoever is rightly partaker of shall not perish, but have life everlasting.

V.
As for the precedent days of Preparation, how many they should be, or how they
should be employed, you are to refer your self to your Guide, who may advise
you not to be over-scrupulous of the Time, (for the Primitive Christians
communicated every day;) and if your life be innocent from great offenses, your
Preparation need not be long. Only be sure you bring with you Faith and
Charity, clean hands and a penitent heart: which if you do, be confident the
Master of the Feast will not find fault with you for want of a Weddinggarment.

VI.
That upon the blessed day of your Receiving you do more vigorously prepare
your self by lifting up your Heart and Hands to God, and offering up your
private Prayers, (fitted for that purpose with all possible Devotion.) And that
being done, you may compose your self in quiet and in silence till the time of
the Morning Sacrifice be come; when being called to a more Public Oratory, you
may be the fitter to go with an humbly Confidence to meet your Savior, and
with that Ardour and Affection as a chaste Virgin goes to an holy Marriage.

VII.
That during the Celebration of this Holy Sacrament you attend earnestly to
what is done by the Priest. When he breaks the Bread, imagine to your self that
you see the Body of your dear Savior torn and crucified, and when he pours out
the Wine, consider that his Blood was thus poured out upon the Altar of the
Cross: and last of all, when he that consecrates shall stand before you, ready
in particular to apply it, you may then think that you see Christ himself
reaching out his own Body and Blood to you, to feed your Soul unto Eternal Life.

VIII.
That farther you are really to believe the words as they are spoken, This is
my Body, This is my Blood; and not to doubt, but that it is effectually made
good to you in the Receiving, without any dispute at all, or scrupulous
inquiring into the manner of it, which neither Christ has revealed, and
neither Men nor Angels are able to pry into.

IX.
That the Celebration of these Holy Mysteries being ended, you are to retire
with all Thankfulness of heart for having been admitted to that Heavenly Feast,
wherein your Savior, who gave himself for you on the Cross, has now more
particularly given himself to you in the Sacrament, never to depart from you,
unless you again wilfully offend him; which you are the more earnestly to
beware, lest by frequent Relapses the Sacrament it self prove not only useless,
but dangerous to you, and your latter end prove worse than your beginning.

Advice concerning Fasting.
I.
YOU are to consider Fasting either as a Duty enjoined by the Church or as a
voluntary undertaking of your own. Your Obedience is required to the former in
every particular as far as it is enjoined, unless the want of Health or some
other Accidents may unavoidably hinder you, wherein not only the Bishop may
dispense with you, but he that has the charge of your Soul, especially if the
Necessity be evident.

II.
Besides the ordinary Fasts prescribed by the Church, you are advised to set
aside some Day, either Weekly or (at least) Monthly, wherein you may mourn in
private, not only for your own sins and personal calamities, but for those
public Judgments now fallen on the whole Church and Nation, and those crying
sins which have occasioned them; offering up your earnest prayers to God for
the removing of them, which, when they come from a mortified Body and a
contrite Heart, are such a Sacrifice that God, (who deceives no man) being true
to his Promises, cannot possibly despise.

III.
That the Fast for the time designed be such as may in some measure be
afflictive to you, abstaining totally that day from all manner of food, if the
condition of your health will bear it; or if that cannot be, that you be so
moderate in your feeding, that it may appear that you rather serve your
Necessities in eating than satisfy your Appetite.

IV.
That you employ this Day (or such a part of it (at least) as you may keep free
to your self) as a Retreat from the world, the business and the pleasures of
it, that so you may with the more freedom make up the Accounts between God and
your own Soul, and by Prayer and Penitence reconcile your self to him; for
without this, Fasting is of no use.

Expressions of Humiliation preparatory to the following Devotions.
RIghteousness, O Lord, belongs unto thee; but unto me confusion of face, the
vainest, the vilest, the sinfullest of all the children of men.

Lord, I am vile in mine own eyes, and I will be yet more vile, because my sins
have made me vile in thine.

I am not worthy of the Air I breath, of the Earth I tread upon, or of the Sun
that shines upon me; much less worthy to lift up either hands or eyes to Heaven.

For thou have said that no unclean thing shall come within thy sight: and how
then shall I appear, who am so miserably defiled?

If the Man according to thine own heart could say that he was a Worm, and no
Man, O what am I?

If Abraham, who had the honor to be called thy Friend, could say that he was
but Dust and Ashes, O what am I?

O my God, thou made me of nothing; and thou feast how I have spoiled this
work of thine, for I have made my self worse than nothing.

For I am still in my Sins, and what to do I know not.

Acts of Resolution to second this Humiliation.
But this I will do;

I Will confess my wickedness, and be sorry for my sins.

I will stand aloof with the Publican, and smite my breast, and say, Lord, be
merciful to me a sinner.

I will return with the Prodigal, and say, Father, I am not worthy to be called
thy Child; make me as one of thine hired Servants.

I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eyelids to slumber, till I
have by the mediation of thy dear Son obtained my pardon.

And what shall I say more? I will pour out my prayers in the bitterness of my
Spirit; and if my dry Eyes want Tears, I will call unto my Heart for Tears of
Blood, wherewith I may supply them.

And therefore now, Lord, call my sins to my remembrance: and when thou have
done so, blot them out of thy remembrance, and pardon me.

A Litany of Confession to be made use of by the Penitent Soul that finds it
self burdened with a true sense of Sin.
I.
WOE, Woe unto me, O God, that being a Creature of thine, and made by thee
capable of enjoying everlasting felicity, I have lived so wickedly and leudly,
that, unless thy mercy prevent it, I shall utterly forfeit the very End of my
Creation.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am utterly ashamed of it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
II.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that I have trifled away so many of my Youngest days
without knowing thee, or taking any notice of those strict duties which I did
owe unto thee; that I was so long a Child in all things, excepting Innocence,
and that only by an overhasty Spring of early Wickedness I was more than a
Child.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my
self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
III.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that as I grew up, the seeds of Corruption which I
brought with me into the world grew up along with me, and by insensible degrees
(which I observed not) Pride and Folly and Lust took Possession of me, and Sin
has reigned in my mortal Body.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am infinitely confounded at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
IV.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that being washed in the Waters of Baptism from the
guilt of that Original Corruption which I brought with me into the World, I
have since that time so many ways actually defiled my self, that I can no
longer pretend by any former contract with thee, that I am either a Child of
thine, a member of thy Christ, or an heir of the Kingdom of Heaven.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am utterly confounded at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
V.
Woe unto me, O God, that having been received into the Bosom of thy Church,
(which so many millions of Souls have not had the happiness to be) I have
ingratefully dishonored thy holy Faith by an unholy Life; and having so often
confessed thee with my tongue, I have denied thee in my life and actions.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my Self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
VI.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having abjured the Devil and all his works, and
given up my name to Christ, to fight under the Banner of his Cross, I have on
the contrary treacherously complied with his Enemy in many things, and shall be
found (I fear) to have been more diligent in serving him, than I have been in
serving thee.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am confounded and astonished at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
VII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that being obliged by that high calling of being a
Christian to renounce the Pomps and Vanities of the World, I have so infinitely
failed in this, that I have doted on nothing more: for those very Vanities have
been my Idols, and my seduced Heart has gone a Whoring after them.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am ashamed and confounded at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
VIII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that being farther bound by that most Solemn Vow,
utterly to forsake the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, I have, instead of forsaking
them pursued and hunted after them, and when other temptations have failed,
have been apt enough to kindle my own Fire, and to be a Tempter to my self.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I hate, and loath, and abhar my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
IX.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that knowing thy revealed Will to be the Law to which I
was bound in all obedience to submit my self, I, like an insolent Rebel, have
not only set up my own Will, in opposition to thine, but many times preferred
it before thine, and have listened more to the false Oracles of Flesh and Blood
than to all thy Holy Commandments.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my
self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
X.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that being made according to thine Image, (the greatest
honor that could be done thy Creature) I have dashed so many blurs and spots
and foul sins upon it, so defaced all the lines and features of it, that,
unless the Holy Spirit please to renew that Image in me again, I tremble to
think what I must one day hear, Depart from me, I know you not.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am ashamed and confounded at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XI.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having received a Rational Soul from thee, to be a
Moral Light and guide unto my actions, I have been so brutish as to follow my
sensual appetite instead of it, and have made no farther use of Reason than to
find out vain excuses to cozen my own Soul into all the by-ways of Sin and
Error.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that being endowed with Memory to serve as a Magazine
to treasure up thy Precepts and holy Counsels in, I have stuffed it so miserably
full with the Idea's of former Vanities and Sin, that I have left no room for
thee at all.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I infinitely condemn my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XIII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having received a Heart from thee to be the seat
of clean and holy affections, and the only Temple for thy holy Spirit to dwell
in, I have so unworthily abused and altered the property of it, that it is now
become a Den of Thieves, and an unhandsome receptacle of all uncleanness.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I hate, and loath, and abhor my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XIV.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that my wretched Heart being corrupted, my Imagination
has run wildly after with a swarm of vain and sinful Thoughts, which like
importunate Flies, being driven away light again and again upon my destracted
Soul, and intermingle with the best of my Devotions.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am infinitely troubled and grieved for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XV.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that mine Eyes, being greedy after Vanity, have been
upon all occasions as open windows to let in Sin; but when by the same way they
should have issued out Penitential Tears, to wash away the stains those Sins
had made, there has been no passage found for them.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am inwardly grieved and deplore my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XVI.
Woe, Woe unto me, O my God, that, for the entertaining of vain conversation, I
have left mine Ears too often open to light and vain and sinful discourses, and
in all my inquiries have hearkened more to what the world says abroad, than to
what thy holy Spirit and my own Conscience says within me.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XVII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that I have not resolved, with thy Servant David, to
take care of my ways, that I offend not in my tongue, but have many times
vainly and inconsiderately let it loose, and, either to please the Company or
my self, I have spoken words which might unhappily prove occasions of sin both
to them and me, without regard, or remembering how great Flames such little
sparks might kindle.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I do infinitely condemn my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XVIII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that all the parts and faculties of my Soul and Body
have been abused, and have not served the Laws of their Creator, but have so
eagerly and constantly pursued the corrupt desires of a seduced Heart, that I
have cause to fear that either my whole life may be looked upon as one
continued sin, or at least as having admitted so few inconsiderable Pauses,
that if thou should enter into strict Judgment with me, I should not have the
confidence to say when, or where, or wherein I have been innocent.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am confounded and astonished at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XIX.
Woe unto me, O God, that I have wretchedly failed even in my best endeavors,
that I have been cold in my Devotions, weary of my Prayers, inconstant to good
purposes, dull and heavy in the way to Heaven, but quick and active in all the
ways of sin, having made it the whole business of my life, rather to seem to be
Religious, than really to be so.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my
self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XX.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that I have not washed mine hands in Innocence, when I
have gone unto thine Altar, nor made mine heart ready to receive the bread that
came from Heaven, but have failed in my Preparations, and have not sufficiently
considered either mine own unworthiness, or the high secrets of so great a
Mystery.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am grieved and troubled at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXI.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having so often received those inestimable Pledges
of thy love, the precious Body and Blood of thy dear Son in the Holy Sacrament,
I have been so unwary as to admit my former sins under the same roof with thee,
and have unhappily done what lay in me to drive thee from me.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am infinitely ashamed at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that my Repentance, the only plank left me in the
Shipwreck of my Soul, has been so weak, so slight, and so unsteady, that every
small blast of a new Temptation has been able to drive me from it, and by
frequent Relapses into sin, gives me cause enough to repent, even of my vain
repentance.

But I Repent again, O God, again I
I Repent.
I hate, and loath, and abhor my self
for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXIII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having received my Life and Being and Preservation
from thee, with so many advantages to have made me happy in this world, and
blessed in the next, I have been so abominably unthankful, that I have cast all
these thy Blessings behind me and returned thee nothing back for all thy
favors, but affronts, and injuries, and sins.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am confounded and astonished at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXIV.
Woe, woe unto me, O God, that being Redeemed by the Death and Passion of thy
dear and only Son, I have not laid his bitter Agonies to heart, nor made right
use of the precious Ransom which was laid down for me: That I have not yet sued
out my pardon with such Penitent Tears as thou requirest, nor laid hold of the
benefits of it by a lively Faith; but have chosen rather stupidly to continue
in my Sins, and to neglect the Blood of the Covenant as an unholy thing.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I hate, and loath, and abhor my self
for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXV.
Woe, Woe unto me O God, that thy Holy Spirit I have grieved, thy Counsels I have
rejected, thy Motions I have quenched, and have entertained the Lusts and
Vanities nf this life with far more earnest and passionate affections than all
thy Holy Inspirations.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am utterly ashamed and confounded at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXVI.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having thus far opened my guilty heart before
thee, I have left so many Sins behind, that I cannot number them; some that I
have really forgot, some that I would forget, if my Conscience would give me
leave; Sins known, that I cannot conceal, and sins secret, such as I have taken
so much care to hide from others, that they are now become hidden from my self.

But whatsoever they are, or wheresoever they are registered, whether in my own
Conscience or in any other Record, that may be proved against me in the day of
Judgment,

I call the whole Court of Heaven to witness,
That I do sadly Repent my self of them all;
That I do abhor my self for them all;
That I resolve steadfastly to renounce them all.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
Amen. Amen.
The Penitent Soul having made this or the like Confession, prepares and stirs
up it self to true Contrition.
WHat shall I say more unto thee, O thou that art the Judge of the whole Earth?
or what shall I do more? I have ransacked my breast and laid it open; I have
spread it before thee, as Hezekiah the blaspheming Letter of his Enemy. I do
not desire that there should be so much as any fold, or pleight, or corner of
it hidden from thee.

Or if this be not enough to transact this great business of my Soul between me
and thee alone, and that possibly I may flatter my self in the several acts of
my intended Penitence, I am ready to go farther, and (to make my self the more
ashamed of sinning) with all humility to confess these sins of mine to some of
those servants of thine, whom thou have placed between me and thee, and to
whom alone under thee thou have so clearly given the power of Absolution.

O deal with me then as thou did with thy Servant David, who no sooner
confessed his sins,but thou forgavest him all his iniquities.

But are there not they who confess their sins, and have the impudence to glory
in them, or at least pass them over without any act of real Contrition, or any
remorse at all?

But, O my God, (if my heart deceive me not) I am none of those; for I can
neither glory in my shame, nor can I be satisfied with my self when I appear
with dry eyes before thee.

After this Preparation these Express Acts of Contrition may follow.
FOR I am grieved, O my God, I am grieved passionately, heartily grieved that
ever I offended thee.

That I, the work of thy hands, have sinned against thee my Maker.

That I, the price of thy Blood, have sinned against thee my Jesus, who had
so much love for me as to be content to die for me.

That I, the chosen Temple of thy Holy Spirit, have sinned against him who
sanctified me.

For this I grieve, and mourn, and
my heart is wounded within me.
And having done all this, yet I have not done; for still I am grieved: grieved
that I can grieve no more, that my Head is not a continual Spring, and mine
Eyes Fountains of Tears.

Woe is me, wretch as I am, that I who have been so easy, so forward, so eager
to sin, should not be so untoward, so heavy, so unable to repent.

Woe is me, that I should be still so drowsy, so dead asleep in sin, that I
should not be yet awake, and sensible of the condition I am in.

O that I had died before my unworthy Soul had given way to those strst sins,
which has drawn so foul a Train after them.

But, O my God, though I cannot wait on thee among the Innocent, yet deny me
not a room among the Penitent.

Remember, O my God, that though Ahab had sold himself to work wickedness, yet
because he Prayed, and Fasted, and humbled himself before thee, thou had so
much regard even of this outward Penitence of his, as to promise not to bring
the evil upon him in his days.

But, Lord, if my heart deceives me not, I do not only outwardly and seemingly,
but really and cordially Repent.

And therefore for the evil that I have deserved, O my God, rather let the
punishment light upon me in this world than in the next.

Rather let me perform the Penance of my Tears here, than reserve it for that
sad time, when a whole Sea of Tears will do no good.

And having said all this, if my Repentance be yet imperfect, (as I know it
cannot but want many grains, if weighed in this just balance) let the bitter
Sufferings of thy dear Son Jesus be cast into the Scale, and then I shall not
fear if thou enter into Judgment with me.

But of my self, O God, I am utterly unable; and which way to satisfy thee I
know not.

I dare not say so much as the Servant in the Gospel did, Master, have patience
with me, and I will pay thee all. But rather, Master, have patience with me,
for I can pay thee nothing at all, unless thy bounty be so great as to give it
me to pay thee.

I can Fast from a meal sometimes, (though it be with much ado) and I can Pray,
though coldly enough; and if the fit and qualm of my Devotion holds out longer,
I can strain for a Tear or two to sprinkle upon my dry Devotions.

But should I fast my self into Air and Emptiness, and weep my self into Water;
should I tear the skin from this sinsul Flesh of mine, I should never be able
to satisfy for the least of those Millions of Millions of sins, which, through
the several moments of my life, either ignorantly or knowingly, weakly or
wilfully, I have sinned against thee.

What I have transgressed against others, I am not only sorry for, but ready,
as far as my power will reach, to satisfy. But for my sins against thee, my
God, I must lay my hand upon my mouth for ever, for I have nothing to return or
answer.

But the comfort is, (and blessed shall be my Soul if rightly I lay hold on it)
that it is thou, O my blessed Jesu, who have satisfied for me, one drop of
whose blood is enough to satisfy for the sins of a thousand worlds.

And this being so, will thy offended Eather be so rigorous as to require the
same payment again? Especially will he require it of me, a poor, a broken, and
a bankrupt Sinner?

Can thou exact the utmost farthing of him who has not a mite of his own to
pay thee?

The Transition which the Penitent makes from the Acts of Contrition to the
Acts of Resolution for amendment of life, without which all sorrow for Sin is
in vain.
BUT because by thy infinite Mercy, O my God, thou have satisfied for me
already, shall I therefore fold my Arms, and sit down and do nothing toward
it? Or which is worse, shall I go on? Shall I continue in my Sins that Grace
may abound?

Now God forbid.

No, I here resolve rather to die the Death, than ever wilfully to sin against
thee more.

I do here resolve utterly to avoid the temptations and approaches toward
those former sins which have hitherto so miserably betrayed me.

I do here resolve (thy holy Spirit assisting me) upon all the duties of a new
life; to be hereafter more wary in my ways, and more constant to good
resolutions, to love thee above all the pleasures and interests of this life,
and sadly to consider what an infinite loser I should be, if to gain all that
my corrupt heart desires I should lose thee:

If after all this I should be so miserably forgetful both of my self and thee,
as shamefully to relapse into any of those sins which I have now repented of.

I do here once more resolve to abhor and loath my self for it, and not to let
my Conscience sleep or admit of any rest, till I have with bitter tears and a
sharp reiterated Repentance obtained my pardon.

Having thus far made his Resolution, the Penitent betakes himself to Prayer.
AND now O thou great Searcher of all Hearts, who see that I am of my self
weak and mutable, and no better than a Reed shaken with the wind, O show thy
strength in my weakness: fasten and confirm me in these good purposes, and so
bind them with Cords unto thine Altar, that I may never start from thee more,
or be any longer of that Herd, whose good resolutions are as a dream in the
night; or if they last longer, they are but as the next morning dew, and as
soon vanish away.

O give me the Resolution of thy Servant Joshua; I and my house will serve the
Lord.

O give me the Heart of thy Servant David, who so passionately makes his
Protestations.

I will take no wicked thing in hand, I hate the sins of unfaithfulness, there
shall no such cleave unto me.

I will walk in my house with a perfect heart.

I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous Judgments.

Lord, I am not able to think one of these good thoughts without thee, much
less to resolve upon them.

But I, who without thee am able to do nothing, may venture to say as thine
Apostles did, that in thee I am able to do all things.

Lord, give me the strength to do what thou requirest, and then require of me
what thou please.

Amen.
After these Resolutions the Penitent prepares himself with an humble Soul and
bended knees to beg Pardon.
O The God of my life, and the unexhausted Fountain of Mercy which can never be
drawn dry, I have now by the assistance of thy holy Spirit gone through (though
with weak and trembling steps) the whole exercise of Repentance: for I have
confessed my sins, and thou have promised (upon my confession of them) not to
impute them to me; I have gone one step farther, for I have repented of my
sins, and thou have promised again that upon my repentance thou will remember
them no more; and because thy holy Word has taught me that a new life is the
only life of a true Repentance, I have this day in thy sight, and in the
presence of all the Holy Angels that attend thee in the Conversion of a Sinner,
made my firm resolution never to fall again into the sins which I have repented
of.

And now what remains for a poor Penitent to do more, but humbly and earnestly
to beg thy Pardon?

The Penitent's Prayer.
O God the Father, who can not be thought so cruel as to make me only to
destroy me,

Have mercy on me.
O God the Son, who knowing thy Father's Will, did make it thy business to
come into the world to save me,

Have mercy on me.
O God the Holy Ghost, who to the same end did sanctify me in my Baptism,
and have so often since breathed holy thoughts and motions on me,

Have mercy on me.
O Holy and Blessed and Glorious Trinity, whom in three Persons I adore as my
one and only true God,

Have mercy on me.
Hear me, O Lord.
Help me, O Lord.
Save me, or else I perish.
Lord, carest thou not that I perish? Thou that would have all men saved?
Thou who would have none to perish?

And will thou now show thine anger against a Worm, against a Leaf, against a
Vapor that vanishes before thee?

O remember how short my time is, and deliver not my Soul into the power of
Hell.

For, alas! what profit is there in my Blood? or who shall ever give thee
thanks in that bottomless pit?

No, let me live in thy sight? let me live, O my God, that my Soul may praise
thee.

Forget me as I have been disobedient, provoking thee to anger; and regard me
as I am distressed, crying out to thee for help.

Look not upon me as I am a Sinner; but consider me as I am thy Creature.

A Sinner I am, I confess, a Sinner of no ordinary strain; but let not this
hinder thee, O my God, for upon such sinners thou gettest the greatest glory.

O remember for whose sake it was that thou came from the bosom of thy
Father, and did let thy self down so low as to be content to be born of thine
own humble handmaid.

Remember for whom it was that thy tender body was Torn, and Scourged, and
Crucified, and thy precious Blood shed.

Was it not for the sins of the whole world? and shall I be so narrow-hearted
to my own Soul, or so injurious to thy Glory, as to think that in all this
crowd, thou have particularly excepted me?

Or, which is as great a dishonor to thee, can I possibly imagine that thou
diedst only for Sinners of a lower kind, and leftest such as I am without
remedy?

What had become then of him who filled Jerusalem with blood? What of the noted
Woman who had lived in a trade of Sin? Nay, what had become of thine own
Disciple who with Oaths and Curses thrice denied thee?

O how easy is it for thee to forgive? for it is thy Nature.

How proper is it for thee to save? for it is thy Name.

How suitable is it to thy only End of coming into the World? for it is thy
Business.

And when I consider that I am the chief of Sinners, may I not urge the Father,
and say, Shall the very chief of thy business be left undone?

Mercy, Mercy, good Lord.
I ask not of thee any longer the things of this world: neither Power, nor
Honors, nor Riches, nor Pleasures. No, my God, dispose of them to whom thou
please, so that thou give me Mercy.

O that I could hear thee once say, as thou did to him in the Gospel, My Son,
be of good cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee.

How would my drooping Spirits revive at such a sound? and my now wounded Soul
break forth into Hymns and Praises and Hallelujahs for a mercy so utterly
undeserved of me, and which the Angels which fell could never hear of?

But, O my weak Soul, what do thou fear? or what do thou scruple at? For
thou art not yet in such a desperate condition, but thou may expect that
what was said to him may possibly be said to thee.

Nay, be confident (though it be with a mixture of fear and trembling) that if
thou do not act the part of an Hypocrite all this while, thy Savior stands
ready at the very doors of thy Heart, to breath the very same words in a
heavenly whisper to thee; Be of good cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee.

Return then unto thy rest, O my Soul, for thy Sins are forgiven thee.

Only take this Counsel along with thee, Sin no more, lest a worse thing fall
unto thee.

O that I could never sin against thee more; never purposely, deliberately,
wilfully sin against thee more.

And for those sins of daily Incursion, those over-familiar corruptions of my
nature, which thou have not yet given me strength enough to conquer; Lord,
either subdue them to me by degrees, or lay them not to my charge.

But wherein soever my Conscience most accuses me, therein, O my God, be thou
most merciful unto me.

Save me, O God, as a Brand snatched out of the Fire.

Receive me, O my Jesu, as a Sheep that has wandered, but is now returned to
the great Shepherd and Bishop of my Soul.

The Jubilee of the Penitent Soul after the sense of Pardon obtained.
Rejoice over me, O God the Father; that this thy Child was lost, but is found,
was dead, but is alive again.

Rejoice over me, O God the Son, that thy loud Cries and Tears, and bitter
Agonies which for my sake thou enduredst upon the Cross, were ^ot so unhappily
lost, as to be cast away in vain upon me.

Rejoice over me, O God the Holy Ghost, that thy so many secret and powerful
touches have at last got the upper hand of me.

Rejoice over me, O ye holy Angels, a great part of whose Ministry it is, to
rejoice at the Conversion of a Sinner.

Rejoice over thy self, O my Soul, that thou have received so much grace from
Heaven this day, as sadly to confess thy Sins, seriously to repent of them, and
steadfastly to resolve never to be guilty more of so much bruitishness, as to be
likened to the Dog that returns to his Vomit, or to the Swine wallowing in the
Mire.

The Penitent closes all with this short Prayer.
LET this day, O my God, be noted in thy Book.

Do not thou forget my Prayers, nor suffer me to forget my Resolutions.

For though I am weak, though I am unworthy, though I am unprofitable, yet I am
thy Servant.

And here upon my bended Knees I humbly beg of thee, that I may live and die so.

Lord hear my Prayers, and let my cry come unto thee.

Lord, pardon my Prayers, and let not my coldness and wanderings, and infinite
unworthiness turn them into sin.

Lord, hear my Prayers, and let my cry come unto thee.

Amen. Amen.
FESTIVAL HYMNS.
Celebrating the Mysteries and chief Festivals of the Year, according to the
manner of the Ancient Church: fitted to the fancy and devotion of the younger
and pious persons.

Apt for memory, and to be joined to their other Prayers.

Hymns for Advent, or the Weeks immediately before the Birth of our Blessed
Savior.
I.
WHen, Lord, O when shall we
Our Dear Salvation see?
Arise, arise,
Our fainting eyes
Have longed all night, and 'twas a long one too.
Man never yet could say.
He saw more than one day,
One day of Eden's seven:
The guilry hour there blasted with the breath
Of sin and death
Has ever since worn a nocturnal hue.
But thou have given us hopes that we
At length another day shall see,
Wherein each vile neglected place,
Gilt with the aspect of thy face,
Shall be like that, the porch and gate of heaven
How long, dear God, how long!
See how the Nations throng:
All humane kind,
Knit and combined
Into one body, look for the their Head.
Pity our multitude.
Lord, we are vile and rude,
Headless and senseless, without thee,
Of al things but the want of thy blestface.
O haste apace,
And thy bright self to this our body wed
That, through the influx of thy power,
Each part that er'st confusion wore
May put on order, and appear
Spruce as the childhood of the year,
When thou to it shall so united be.
Amen.
The second Hymn forAdvent; or Christ's coming to Jerusalem in triumph.
LOrd, come away,
Why do thou stay?
Thy rode is ready, and thy paths made straight
With longing expectation wait
The Consecration of thy beauteous feet.
Ride on triumphantly, behold we lay
Our lusts and proud wills in thy way.
Hosanna! welcome to our hearts. Lord, here
Thou have a Temple too, and full as dear
As that of Sion, and as full of sin.
Nothing but Thieves and robbers dwell therein.
Enter, and chase them forth, and cleanse the floor;
Crucify them, that they may never more
Profane that holy place,
Where thou have chose to set thy face.
And then, if our stiff tongues shall be
Mute in the praises of thy Deity,
The stones out of the Temple wall
Shall cry aloud and call
Hosanna! and thy glorious footsteps greet.
Amen.
Hymns for Christmas Day
I.
MYsterious truth! that the self-same should be
A Lamb, a Shepherd, and a Lion too!
Yet such was he
Whom first the sheperds knew,
When they themselves became
Sheep to the Shepherd-Lamb.
Shepherd of Men and Angels, Lamb of God,
Lion of Judah, by these titles keep
The Wolf from thy endangered Sheep.
Bring all the world unto thy Fold;
Let Jews and Gentiles hither come
In numbers great that cannot be told,
And call thy Lambs, that wander, home.
Glory be to God on high,
All glories be to the glorious Deity.
The second Hymn; being a Dialogue between three Shepherds.

That has made
All the world so full of joy
And expectation;
That glorious boy
That Crowns each Nation
With a triumphant wreath of blessedness?

And among
His Angel-Ministers, that sing
And take wing
Just as may Echo to his Voice,
And rejoice,
When wing and tongue and all
May so procure their happiness?

A poor Cow,
An Ox and Mule stand and behold,
And wonder,
That a stable should enfold
Him that can thunder.
Chorus. O what a gracious God have we!
How good! How great! even as our misery.
The third Hymn: Of Christ's Birth in an Inn.
THE blessed Virgin travailed without pain
And lodged in an Inn,
A glorious Star the sign,
But of a greater guest than ever came that way:
For there he lay
That is the God of Night and Day,
And over all the powers of Heaven does reign.
It was the time of great Augustus Tax,
And then he comes
That pays all sums,
Even the whole price of lost Humanity.
And sets us free
From the ungodly Empirie
Of Sin, and Satan, and of Death.
O make our hearts, blessed God, thy lodging-place,
And in our breast
Be pleased to rest;
For thou love Temples better than an Inn:
And cause that sin
May not profane the Deity within,
And fully over the ornaments of Grace.
Amen.
A Hymn for Christmas Day.
A Wake, my Soul, and come away,
Put on thy best array,
Lest if thou longer stay,
Thou lost some minutes of so blessed a day.
Go run and bid good morrow to the Sun,
Welcome his safe return to Capricorn,
And that great morn
Wherein a God was born,
Whose Story none can tell
But he whose every word's a Miracle.
To day Almightiness grew weak,
The World it self was mute,
And could not speak.
That Jacob's Star which made the Sun
To dazzle, if he durst look on,
Now mantled over in Bethlehem's night
Borrowed a Star to show him light.
He that begirt each Zone,
To whom both Poles are one,
Who grasped the Zodiac in's hand,
And made it move or stand,
Is now by Nature Man,
By stature but a Span;
Eternity is now grown short,
A King is born without a Court;
The Water thirsts, the Fountain's dry,
And Life, being born, made apt to die.
Chorus. Then let our praises emulate and vie
With his Humility:
Since he is exiled from skies,
That we might rise,
From low estate of men
Let Us sing him up again.
Each man wind up's heart
To bear a part
In that Angelick Quire; and show
His glory high, as he was low.
Let Us sing toward men good will and Charity,
Peace upon Earth, Glory to God on high.
Hallelujah, Hallelujah.
A Hymn upon St. John's day.
This day
We sing
The friend of our eternal King,
Who in his bosom lay,
And kept the Keys
Of his profound and glorious Mysteries:
Which to the world dispensed by his hand,
Made it stand
Fixed in amazement to behold that light,
Which came
From the throne of the Lamb,
To invite
Our wretched eyes (which nothing else could see
But fire and sword, hunger and misery)
TO anticipate by their ravished sight
The beauty of Celestial delight.
Mysterious God, regard me when I pray:
And when this load of clay
Shall fall away,
O let thy gracious hand conduct me up,
Where on the Lamb's rich viands I may sup;
And in this last supper I
May with thy friend in thy sweet bosom lie
For ever in Eternity.
Allelujah.
Upon the day of the holy Innocents.
MOurnful Judah shreeks and cries
At the obsequies
Of their Babes, that cry
More that they lose the paps, than that they die.
He that came with life to all
Brings the Babes a funeral,
To redeem from slaughter him
Who did redeem us all from sin.
They like himself went spotless hence,
A sacrafice to Innocence,
Which now does ride
Trampling upon Herod's pride,
Passing from their fontinels of clay
To heaven a milky and a bloody way.
All their tears and groans are dead,
And they to rest and glory fled.
Lord, who were pleased so many Babes should fall,
Whilst each sword hoped, that every of the All
Was the desired King, make us to be
In Innocence like them, in Glory thee.
Amen.
Upon the Epiphany, and the three Wise men of the East coming to worship Jesus.
A Comet dangling in the air
Presaged the ruin both of Death and Sin,
And told the wise man of a King,
The King of Glory, and the Sun
Of Righteousness, who then begun
To draw toward that blessed Hemisphere.
They from the farthest East this new
And unknown light pursue,
Till they appear
In this blessed Infant-King's propitious eye,
And pay their homage to his Royalty.
Persia might then the rising Sun adore,
It was Idolatry no more.
Great God, they gave to thee
Myrrh, Frankincense and Gold:
But, Lord, with what shall we
Present our selves before thy Majesty,
Whom thou redeem'dst when we were sold?
We Have nothing but our selves, and scarce that neither;
Vile dirt and clay:
Yet it is soft, and may
Impression take.
Accept it, Lord, and say, this thou had rather;
Stamp it, and on this sordid metal make
Thy holy image, and it shall outshine
The beauty of the golden Mine.
Amen.
A Meditation of the Four last things.
Death, For the time of Lent especially. Judgment, Heaven, Hell.

A Meditation of Death.
DEath, the old Serpent's Son,
Thou had a sting once like thy Sire,
That carried Hell and ever-burning fire:
But those black days are done;
Thy foolish spite buried thy sting.
In the profound and wide
Wound of our Savior's side.
And now thou art become a tame and harmless thing,
A thing we dare not fear
Since we hear
That our triumphant God, to punish thee
For the affront thou did him on the Tree,
Has snatched the Keys of Hell out of thy hand,
And made thee stand
A Porter to the gate of Life, thy mortal enemy.
O thou who art that Gate, command that he
May, when we die,
And thither flee,
Let us into the Courts of Heaven through thee.
Allelujah.
The Prayer.
MY Soul does pant toward thee,
My God, Source of eternal life:
Flesh fights with me^
Oh end the strife,
And part us, that in peace I may Unclay
My wearied spirit, and take
My flight to thy eternal Spring,
Where, for his sake
Who is my King,
I may wash all my tears away That day.
Thou Conqueror of Death,
Glorious Triumpher over the Grave,
Whose holy breath
Was spent to save
Lost Mankind, make me to be styled
Thy Child;
And take me when I die,
And go unto my dust, my Soul
Above the sky
With Saints enroll,
That in thy arms for ever I
May lie.
Amen.
Of the day of Judgment.
GReat Judge of all, how we vile wretches quake!
Our guilty bones do ache,
Our marrow freezes, when we think
Of the consuming fire
Of thine ire;
And horrid phials thou shall make
The wicked drink,
When thou the wine press of thy wrath shall tread
With feet of lead.
Sinful, rebellious clay! what unknown place
Shall hide it from thy face?
When earth shall vanish from thy sight.
The Heavens, that never erred,
But Observed
Thy laws, shall from thy presence take their flight,
And, killed with glory, their bright eyes stark dead
Start from their head;
Lord, how shall we,
Thy enemies, endure to see
So bright, so killing Majesty?
Mercy, dear Savior: thy Judgment Seat
We dare not, Lord, entreat;
We are condemned already there.
Mercy: vouchsafe one look
Of life. Lord, we can read thy saving Jesus here,
And in his Name our own Salvation see.
Lord, set us free;
The book of sun
Is crossed within,
Our debts are paid by thee.
Mercy.
Of Heaven.
O Beauteous God, uncircumscribed Treasure
Of an eternal pleasure,
Thy Throne is seated far
Above the highest Star,
Where thou prepar'st a glorious place
Within the brightness of thy face
For every spirit
To inherit
That builds his hopes on thy merit,
And loves thee with an holy Charity.
What ravished heart, Scraphick tongue or eyes,
Clear as the morning's rise,
Can speak, or think, or see
That bright Eternity,
Where the great King's transparent Throne
Is of an entire Jasper stone?
There the eye
Of The Chrysolite,
And a sky
Of Diamonds, Rubies, Chrysoprase,
And above all the holy Face
Makes an Eternal Clarity.
When thou thy Jewels up do bind, that day
Remember us, we pray;
That where the Beryll lies
And the Crystal 'bove the skies,
There thou may appoint us place
Within the brightness of thy face,
And our Soul
In the Scrowl
Of life and blissfulness enrowl,
That we may praise thee to eternity.
Allelujah.
Of Hell.
HOrrid darkness, sad and sore,
And an eternal Night,
Groans and shrieks, and thousand more
In the want of glorious light;
Every corner has a Snake
In the accursed lake.
Seas of fire, beds of snow
Are the best delights below;
A Viper from the fire
Is his hire
That knows not moments from Eternity.
Glorious God of Day and Night,
Spring of Eternal Light,
Allelujahs, Hymns and Psalms
And Coronets of Palms
Fill thy people ever more.
O mighty God,
Let not thy bruising rod
Crush our loins with an eternal pressure;
O let thy mercy be the measure:
For if thou keep wrath in store,
We all shall die,
And none be left to glorify
Thy Name, and tell
How thou have saved our Souls from Hell.
Mercy.
On the Conversion of St. Paul.
FUll of wrath, his threatening breath
Belching naught but chains and death,
Saul was arrested in his way
By a voice and a light,
That if a thousand days
Should join rays
To beautify one day,
It would not show so glorious and so bright.
On his amazed eyes it night did fling,
That day might break within;
And by those beams of Faith
Make him of a child of wrath
Become a vessel full of glory.
Lord, curb us in our dark and sinful way.
We humbly pray,
When we down horrid precipices run
With seet that thirst to be undone,
That this may be our story.
Allelujah.
On the Purification of the Blessed Virgin.
PUre and spotless was the Maid
That to the Temple came,
A pair of Turtle-doves she paid,
Although she brought the Lamb.
Pure and spotless though she were,
Her body chaste and her Soul fair,
She to the Temple went
To be purified,
And tried
That she was spotless and obedient.
O make us to follow so blessed Precedent,
And purify our Souls, for we
Are clothed with sin and misery.
From our Conception
One Imperfection,
And a continued state of sin,
Has fullied all our faculties within.
We present our Souls to thee
Full of need and misery;
And for Redemption a Lamb
The purest, whitest that e're came
A Sacrifice to thee,
Even he that bled upon the Tree.
On Good Friday.
THE Lamb is eaten, and is yet again
Preparing to be slain.
The cup is full and mixed,
And must be drunk:
Wormwood and Gall
To this are draughts to beguile care withal.
Yet the Decree is fixed,
Doubled knees and groans and cries,
Prayers and sighs and flowing eyes
Could not entreat.
His sad Soul sunk
Under the heavy pressure of our sin,
The pains of Death and Hell
About him dwell.
His Fathers burning wrath did make
His very heart, like melting wax, to sweat
Rivers of Blood
Through the pure strainer of his skin:
His boiling body stood
Bubling all over,
As if the wretched whole were but one door
To let in pain and grief,
And turn out all relief.
O thou, who for our sake
Did drink up
This bitter Cup,
Remember us, we pray,
In thy day,
When down
The struggling throats of wicked men
The dregs of thy just fury shall be thrown.
Oh then
Let thy unbounded mercy think
On us, for whom
Thou underwent'st this heavy doom,
And give us of the Well of Life to drink.
Amen.
On the Annunciation to the Blessed Virgin.
A Winged Harbinger from bright Heaven flown
Bespeaks a lodging-room
For the mighty King of Love,
The spotless structure of a Virgin-womb
O're-shadow'd with the wings of the blessed Dove:
For he was traveling to earth,
But did desire to lay
By the way,
That he might shift his clothes, and be
A perfect man as well as we.
How good a God have we! who for our sake,
To save us from the burning lake,
Did change the order of Creation:
At first he made
Man like himself in his own Image; now,
In the more blessed reparation,
The Heaven's bow,
Eternity took the measure of a span,
And said,
Let us make our self like Man,
And not from Man the Woman take,
But from the Woman, Man.
Allelujah: we adore
His Name whose goodness has no store.
Allelujah.
Easter Day.
WHat glorious light!
How bright a Sun after so sad a night
Does now begin to dawn! Blessed were those eyes
That did behold
This Sun when he did first unfold
His glorious beams, and now begin to rise.
It was the holy tender Sex
That saw the first ray:
Saint Peter and the other had the reflex,
The second glimpse of the day.
Innocence had the first, and he
That fled, and then did penance, next did see
The glorious Sun of Righteousness
In his new dress
Of triumph, immortality and bliss.
O dearest God preserve our Souls
In holy innocence;
Or if we do amiss,
Make us to rise again to the life of Grace, (face,
That we may live with thee, and see thy glorious
The Crown of holy Penitence.
Allelujah.
On the Day of Ascension.
HE is risen higher, not set:
Indeed a cloud
Did with his leave make bold to shroud
The Sun of Glory from Mouut Olivet.
At Pentecost hee'I show himself again,
When every ray shall be a tongue
To speak all comforts, and inspire
Our Souls with their celestial fire;
That we the Saints among
May sing and love and reign.
Amen.
On the Feast of Pentecost, or Whitsunday.
TOngues of fire from Heaven descend
With a mighty rushing wind,
To blow it up and make
A living fire
Of heavenly Charity and pure desire,
Where they their residence should take.
On the Apostles sacred heads they sit,
Who now like Beacons do proclaim and tell
The invasion of the host of Hell,
And give men warning to defend
Themselves from the enraged brunt of it.
Lord, let the flames of holy Charity
And all her gifts and graces slide
Into our hearts, and there abide;
That thus refined, we may soar above
With it unto the element of Love,
Even unto thee, dear Spirit,
And there eternal peace and rest inherit.
Amen.
Penitential Hymns.
I.
LOrd, I have sinned, and the black number swells
To such a dismal sum,
That should my stony heart and eyes,
And this whole sinful trunk, a flood become,
And run to tears, their drops could not suffice
To count my score,
Much less to pay:
But thou, my God, have blood in store,
And art the Patron of the poor.
Yet since the Balsame of thy blood,
Although it can, will do no good,
Unless the wounds be cleans'd with tears before;
Thou in whose sweet, but pensive, face
Laughter could never steal a place,
Teach but my heart and eyes
To melt away.
And then one drop of Balsam will suffice.
Amen.
II.
GReat God, and just! how can thou see,
Dear God, our misery,
And not in mercy set us free?
Poor miserable man! how were thou born,
Weak as the dewy jewels of the Morn,
Wrapped up in tender dust,
Guarded with sins and lust,
Who like Court-flatterers wait
To serve themselves in thy unhappy fate?
Wealth is a snare, and poverty brings in
Inlets for theft, paving the way for sin:
Each perfumed vanity does gently breath
Sin in thy Soul, and whispers it to death.
Our faults like ulcerated sores do go
Over the sound flesh, and do corrupt that too.
Lord, we are sick, spotted with sin,
Thick as a crusty Leper's skin.
Like Naaman, bid us wash, yet let it be
In streams of blood that flow from thee.
Then will we sing,
Touched by the heavenly Dove's bright wing,
Hallelujabs, Psalms and Praise
To God the Lord of night and days;
Ever good and ever just,
Ever high, who ever must
Thus be sung, is still the same:
Eternal praises crown his Name.
Amen.
A Prayer for Charity.
FUll of Mercy, full of Love,
Look upon us from above;
Thou who taught'st the blind man's night
To entertain a double light,
Thine and the day's, (and that thine too:)
The Lame away his Crutches threw;
The parched crust of Leprosy
Returned unto its infancy;
The Dumb amazed was to hear
His own unchain'd tongue strike his ear:
Thy powerful mercy did even chase
The Devil from his usurped place,
Where thou thy self should dwell, not he.
O let thy love our pattern be:
Let thy Mercy teach one Brother
To forgive and love another;
That copying thy Mercy here,
Thy Goodness may hereafter rear
Our Souls unto thy glory, when
Our Dust shall cease to be with ^en.
Amen.
The End

