Antiquitates Christianae: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Life and Death OF THE HOLY
JESUS: AS ALSO THE LIVES, ACTS and MARTYRDOMS OF HIS APOSTLES.

IN TWO PARTS.

The First Part, containing the Life of CHRIST, Written by JER. TAILOR, late
Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.

The Second, containing the Lives of the APOSTLES, with an Enumeration, and
some Brief Remarks upon their first Successors in the Five Great APOSTOLICAL
CHURCHES;

By WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

By whom also is added an APPARATUS, or Discourse Introductory to the whole
Work, concerning the Three Great Dispensations of the Church, Patriarchal,
Mosaical and Evangelical.

Orig. c^ntr. Cells. lib. 1. d^ Pr^^^^, p. 1, 2. (...)

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, M DC LXXV.

THE ANNUNTIATION.
Ave gratia plena; Dominus tecum; Benedicta tu inter mulieres. Hail thou full
of grace. ye Lord is with thee; Blessed art thou among women. Luke 1. 28.

Will: Fathorne sculp.



ANTIQUITATES CHRISTIANAE OR The Life and Death of the Holy JESUS AS ALSO The
Lives Acts and Martyrdoms of his Apostles.

London Printed for R: Royston at the Angel in Amen Corner. 1675.



TO THE Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God NATHANAEL, Lord
BISHOP of DURHAM, And Clerk of the Closet to His MAJESTY.
MY LORD,
NOTHING but a great experience of Your Lordships Candor could warrant the
laying what concernment I have in these Papers at Your Lordships feet. Not but
that the subject is in it self Great and Venemble, and a considerable part of
it built upon that Authority that needs no Patronage to defend it: But to
prefix Your Lordships Name to a subject so thinly and meanly managed, may
perhaps deserve a bigger Apology than I can make. I have only brought some few
scattered handfuls of Primitive Story, contenting my self to Glean, where I
could not Reap. And I am well assured, that Your Lordships wisdom and love to
Truth would neither allow me to make my Materials, nor to trade in Legends and
Fabulous reports. And yet alas! how little solid Foundation is left to Build
upon in these matters? So fatally mischievous was the carelessness of those who
ought to have been the Guardians of Books and Learning in their several Ages,
in suffering the Records of the Ancient Church to perish. Unfaithful Trustees,
to look no better after such Divine and inestimable Treasures committed to
them. Not to mention those infinite Devastations that in all Ages have been
made by Wars and Flames, which certainly have proved the most severe and
merciless Plagues and Enemies to Books.

By such unhappy accidents as these we have been robbed of the Treasures of the
wiser and better Ages of the World, and especially the Records of the first
times of Christianity, whereof scarce any footsteps do remain. So that in this
Enquiry I have been forced to traverse remote and desert paths, ways that
afford little fruit to the weary Passenger: but the consideration, that it was
Primitive and Apostolical, sweetened my journey, and rendered it pleasant and
delightful. Our inbred thirst after knowledge naturally obliges us to pursue
the notices of former times, which are recommended to us with this peculiar
advantage, that the Stream must needs be purer and clearer, the nearer it comes
to the Fountain; for the Ancients In (...). 16. Tom. 2.
(as Plato speaks) were (...), better than we, and dwelt nearer to the Gods.
And though'tis true the (...) of those times is very obscure and dark, and
truth often covered over with heaps of idle and improbable Traditions; yet may it
be worth our labor to seek for a few Jewels, though under a whole (...) heap
of Rubbish. Is not the Gleaning of the Ancients (say the (...)
Jews) better than the Vintage of later times? The very fragments of Antiquity
are Venerable, and at once instruct our minds, and gratify our curiosity.
Besides, I was somewhat the more inclinable to retire again into these studies,
that I might get as far as I could from the crowd and the noise of a
quarrelsome and contentious Age.

MY LORD,

We live in times, wherein Religion is almost wholly disputed into talk and
clamor, men wrangle eternally about useless and insignificant Notions, and
which have no tendency to make a man either wiser or better. And in these
quarrels the Laws of Charity are violated, and men persecute one another with
hard names and characters of reproach, and after all consecrate their
fierceness with the honorable title of Zeal for Truth. And what is yet a much
sorer evil, the Peace and Order of an excellent Church, incomparably the best
that ever was since the first Ages of the Gospel, is broken down, her holy
Offices derided, her solemn Assemblies deserted, her Laws and Constitutions
slighted, the Guides and Ministers of Religion despised, and reduced to their
Primitive Character, The Scum and Offscouring of the World. How much these
evils have contributed to the (...) and Impiety of the present Age, I shall not
take upon me to determine. Sure I am, the thing it self is too sadly visible,
men are not content to be modest and retired Atheists, and with the Fool to say
only in their hearts, there is no God; but (...) appears with an open forehead,
and disputes its place in every company, and without any regard to the Voice of
Nature, the Dictates of Conscience, and the common sense of Mankind, men
peremptorily determine against a Supreme Being, account it a pleasant
divertisement to Droll upon Religion, and a piece of Wit to plead for Atheism.
To avoid the (...) and troublesome importunity of such uncomfortable
Reflections, I find no better way, than to retire into those Primitive and
better times, those first and purest Ages of the Gospel, when men really were,
what they pretended to be, when a solid Piety and Devotion, a strict Temperance
and Sobriety, a Catholic and unbounded Charity, an exemplary Honesty and
Integrity, a great reverence for every thing that was Divine and Sacred,
rendered Christianity Venerable to the World, and led not only the Rude and the
Barbarous, but the Learned and Politer part of Mankind in triumph after it.

But, My Lord, I must remember that the Minutes of great Men are Sacred, and
not to be invaded by every tedious impertinent address. I have done, when I
have begged leave to acquaint Your Lordship, that had it not been more through
other men's fault than my own, these Papers had many Months since waited upon
You in the number of those Public Congratulations, which gave You joy of that
great Place, which You worthily sustain in the Church. Which that You may long
and prosperously enjoy, happily adorn, and successfully discharge to the honor
of God, the benefit of the Church, and the endearing Your Lordships Memory to
Posterity, is the hearty Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships faithfully devoted Servant, WILLIAM CAVE.

TO THE READER.
THE design of the following APPARATUS is only to present the Reader with a
short Scheme of the state of things in the preceding periods of the Church, to
let him see by what degrees and measures the Evangelical state was introduced,
and what Methods God in all Ages made use of to conduct Mankind in the paths of
Piety and Virtue. In the Infancy of the World he taught men by the Dictates of
Nature, and the common Notices of Good and Evil ((...), as Philo calls them,
the most Ancient Law) by lively Lib. de (...). page 350.
Oracles, and great Examples of Piety. He set forth the Holy Patriarchs (as
Chrysostom observes) as Tutors to the rest of Mankind, who by their Religious
(...). XXVII. in Genes. Tom. 2. p. 285.
lives might train up others to the practice of Virtue, and as Physicians, be
able to cure the minds of those, who were infected and overrun with Vice.
Afterward ( says he) having sufficiently testified his care of their welfare
and happiness by many instances of a wise and benign Providence toward them
both in the land of Canaan and in Egypt, he gave them Prophets, and by them
wrought Signs and Wonders, together with innumerable other expressions of his
bounty. At last finding that none of these Methods did succeed, not Patriarchs,
not Prophets, not Miracles, not daily Warnings and Chastisements brought upon
the World, he gave the last and highest instance of his love and goodness to
Mankind, he sent his only begotten Son out of his own bosom, (...), the great
Physician both of Soul and Body, who taking upon him the form of a Servant, and
being born of a Virgin, conversed in the World, and bore our sorrows and
infirmities, that by rescuing Humane Nature from under the weight and burden of
Sin, he might exalt it to Eternal Life. A brief account of these things is the
main intent of the following Discourse, wherein the Reader will easily see,
that I considered not what might, but what was fit to be said, with respect to
the end I designed it for. It was drawn up under some more disadvantageous
circumstances, than a matter of this nature did require; which were it worth
the while to represent to the Reader, might possibly plead for a softer
Censure. However such as it is, it is submitted to the Readers Ingenuity and
Candor.

W. C.

IMPRIMATUR.

THO. TOMKYNS.
Ex AEd. Lambeth. Feb. 25. 1674.
AN APPARATUS OR Discourse Introductory TO THE Whole WORK, concerning the Three
Great Dispensations OF THE CHURCH, PATRIARCHAL, MOSAICAL, and EVANGELICAL.
SECT. I. Of the PATRIARCHAL Dispensation.
The Tradition of Elias. The three great Periods of the Church. The Patriarchal
Age. The Laws then in force natural or positive. Natural Laws what; evinced
from the testimony of natural conscience. The (...) Precepts of the Sons of
Noah. Their respect to the Law of Nature. Positive Laws under that
dispensation. Eating Blood why prohibited. The mystery and signification of it.
Circumcision when commanded and why. The Laws concerning Religion. Their
public Worship what. Sacrifices in what sense natural, and how far instituted.
The manner of God's testifying his acceptance. What the place of their public
Worship. Altars, and Groves whence. Abraham's Oak, its long continuance, and
destruction by Constantine. The Original of the Druids. The times of their
religious Assemblies. In process of time, Genes. 4. what meant by it. The
Seventh Day whether kept from the beginning. The Ministers of Religion, who.
The Priesthood of the firstborn. In what cases exercised by younger Sons. The
state of Religion successively under the several Patriarchs. The condition of
it in Adam's Family. The Sacrifices of Cain and Abel, and their different
success, whence. Seth, his great Learning and Piety. The face of the Church in
the time of Enosh. What meant by, Then began Men to call upon the Name of the
Lord. No Idolatry before the Flood. The Sons of God, who. The great corruption
of Religion in the time of Jared. Enoch's Piety, and walking with God. His
translation, what. The incomparable sanctity of Noah, and his strictness in an
evil Age. The character of the men of that time. His preservation from the
Deluge. God's Covenant with him. Sem or (...) whether the Elder Brother. The
confusion of Languages when, and why. Abraham's Idolatry and conversion. His
eminency for Religion noted in the several instances of it. God's Covenant with
him concerning the Messiah. The Piety of Isaac and Jacob. Jacob's blessing the
twelve Tribes, and foretelling the Messiah. Patriarchs extraordinary under this
dispensation. Melchisedeck who: wherein a type of Christ. Job, his Name,
Country, Kindred, Quality, Religion, Sufferings; when he lived. A reflection
upon the religion of the old World, and its agreement with Christianity.

GOD who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past to the
Fathers Heb. 1. 1, 2.
by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. For having
created Man for the noblest purposes, to love, serve, and enjoy his Maker; he
was careful in all Ages by various Revelations of his Will to acquaint him with
the notices of his duty; and to show him what was good, and what the Lord did
require of him: till all other Methods proving weak and ineffectual for the
recovery and the happiness of humane nature, God was pleased to crown all the
former dispensations with the Revelation of his Son. There is among the Talm.
Trast. Sanbedr. cap. Halce. and alibi. vid. Menass. Ben Isr. d^ Resurrect. lib.
3. c. 3. and Council. Quast. xxx. in Genes.
Jews an ancient Tradition of the House of Elias, that the World should last
Six Thousand Years, which they thus compute, (...) Two Thousand Years empty,
(little being recorded of those first Ages of the World) Two Thousand Years the
Law, and Two Thousand the Days of the Messiah. A Tradition, which if it
minister to no other purposes, does yet afford us a very convenient division of
the several Ages and Periods of the Church, which may be considered under a
threefold Economy, the Patriarchal, Mosaical, and Evangelical dispensation. A
short view of the two former will give us great advantage to survey the later,
that new and better dispensation which God has made to the World.

2. THE Patriarchal Age, (...), as the Jews call it, the days of emptiness,
commenced from the beginning of the World, and lasted till the delivery of the
Law upon Mount Sinai. And under this state the Laws which God gave for the
exercise of Religion, and the Government of his Church were either Natural, or
Positive. Natural Laws are those innate Notions and Principles, whether
speculative or practical, with which every Man is born into the World, those
common sentiments of Virtue and Religion, those Principia justi and decori,
Principles of fit and right, that naturally are upon the minds of Men, and are
obvious to their reason at first sight, commanding what is just and honest, and
forbidding what is evil and uncomely; and that not only in the general, that
what is good is to be embraced, and what is evil to be avoided, but in the
particular instances of duty according to their conformity or repugnancy to
natural light, being conversant about those things, that do not derive their
value and authority from any arbitrary constitutions, but from the moral and
intrinsic nature of the things themselves. These Laws, as being the results
and dictates of right reason, are, especially as to their first and more
immediate emanations, the same in all Men in the World, and in all Times and
Places, (...) 'as the Jews call them, Precepts that are evident among all
Nations, indeed they are interwoven into Men's nature, inserted into the texture
and constitution of their minds, and do discover themselves as soon as ever
they arrive to the free use and exercise of their reason. That there are such
Laws and Principles naturally planted in Men's breasts, is evident from the
consent of Mankind, and the common experience of the World. Whence else comes
it to pass, that all wicked Men even among the Heathens themselves, after the
commission of gross sins, such as do more sensibly rouse and awaken conscience,
are filled with horrors and fears of punishment? but because they are
conscious to themselves of having violated some Law and Rule of Duty. Now what
Law can this be? not the written and revealed Law, for this the Heathens never
had: it must be therefore the inbred Law of Nature, that is born with them, and
fixed in their minds, antecedently to any external revelation. For when the
Gentiles which have not the Law, Romans 2. 14, 15.
do by nature (by the light and evidence, by the force and tendency of their
natural notions and dictates) the things contained in the Law, these having not
a Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law written in
their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts, (...),
the reasonings of their minds, in the mean while ((...), by turns) accusing or
else excusing one another; that is, although they had not a written Law, as the
Jews had of old, and we Christians have at this day, yet by the help of their
natural Principles they performed the same actions, and discharged the same
Duties that are contained in, and commanded by the written and external Law,
showing by their practices that they had a Law (some common notions of good and
evil) written in their hearts. And to this their very Consciences bear witness,
for according as they either observe or break these natural Laws, their
Consciences do either acquit or condemn them. Hence we find God in the very
infancy of the World, appealing to Gain for the truth of this, as a thing
sufficiently plain and obvious, Why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance
fallen? if thou do well, shall thou Genesis 4. 6, 7.
not be accepted, (...) be lift up? able to walk with a pleased and a cheerful
countenance the great indication of a mind satisfied in the conscience of its
duty: but if thou do not well, sin lies at the door; the punishments of sin
will be ready to follow thee, and conscience as a Minister of vengeance will
perpetually pursue and haunt thee. By these Laws Mankind was principally
governed in the first Ages of the World, there being for near Two Thousand
Years no other fixed and standing Rule of Duty, than the dictates of this Law
of Nature; those Principles of Vice and Virtue, of Justice and Honesty, that
are written in the heart of every Man.

3. THE Jews very frequently tell us of some particular commands to the number
Gem. Babyl. T^. Sanhedr. cap. 7. fol. 56. Maimond. Tr. Me lak. cap. 9. and al
^^ passim ap. Judaeos. vid. Sel^en de Jur. N. and G. l. 1. c. 10. and de
Synedr. Vol. 1. c. 2. p. 8.
of Seven, which they call (...) the Precepts of the Sons of Noah, Six whereof
were given to Adam and his Children, and the Seventh given to Noah, which they
thus reckon up. The first was (...) concerning strange worship, that they
should not give Divine honor to Idols, or the Gods of the Heathens, answerable
to the two first commands of the Decalogue, Thou shall have no other Gods but
me; thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing, that is in. Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under
the Earth; thou shall not bow down thy self to them, or serve them: for, etc.
From the violation of this Law it was that Job, one of the Patriarchs that
lived under this dispensation, solemnly purges himself, when speaking
concerning the worship of the Celestial Lights, the great if not only Idolatry
of those early Ages, says he, if I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon
walking Job 31. 26, 27, 28.
in her brightness, and my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has
kissed my hand, this also were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, for I
should have denied the God that is above. The second (...) concerning blessing,
or worshipping, that they should not blaspheme the Name of God. This Law Job
also had respect to, when he was careful to sanctify his Children, and to
propitiate the Divine Majesty for them every Morning, for it may be (said he)
that my Sons have sinned, and cursed God in their Job 1. 6.
hearts. The third was (...) concerning the shedding of blood, forbidding
Manslaughter; a Law expressly renewed to Noah after the Flood, and which
possibly Job aimed at, when he vindicates himself, that he had not rejoiced at
the destruction Job 31. 29
of him that hated him, or lift up himself when evil found him. Nor was all
effusion of humane blood forbidden by this Law, capital punishments being in
some cases necessary for the preservation of humane Society, but only that no
Man should shed the blood of an innocent Person, or pursue a private revenge
without the warrant of public Authority. The fourth was (...) concerning the
disclosing of uncleanness, against filthiness and adultery, unlawful marriages,
and incestuous mixtures: If mine heart Job 31. 9, 10, 11.
(says Job in his Apology) has been deceived by a Woman, or if I have laid
wait at my neighbor's door; then let my Wife grind, etc. for this is an
heinous crime, yea it is an iniquity to be punished by the Judges. The fifth
was (...) concerning theft and rapine, the invading another Man's right and
property, the violation of bargains and compacts, the falsifying a Man's word
or promise, the deceiving of another by fraud, lying, or any evil arts. From
all which Job justifies himself, that he had not walked with vanity, nor Verse.
5. 7.
had his foot hasted to deceit, that his step had not turned out of the way,
nor his heart walked after his eyes, nor any blot cleaved to his hands. And
elsewhere he bewails it as the great iniquity of the Times, that there were
some that removed the Landmarks, that Chap. 24. 2, 3, 4, and seq.
violently took away the Flocks, and fed thereof, that drove away the Ass of
the Fatherless, and took the Widows Ox for a pledge, that turned the needy out
of the way, and made the poor of the Earth hide themselves together, etc. The
sixth was (...) concerning judgments, or the administration of Justice, that
Judges and Magistrates should be appointed in every Place for the Order and
Government of Civil Societies, the determination of Causes, and executing of
Justice between Man and Man. And that such there then were, seems evident from
the (...) which Job twice speaks of in one Chap. 31. 11-28.
Chapter, the judged iniquity, which the Jews expound, and we truly render, an
iniquity to be punished by the Judges. The seventh (...) concerning the member
of any live-creature, that is, as God expresses it in the Precept to Noah, they
might not eat the blood, or the flesh with the life thereof. Whether these
Precepts were by any solemn and external promulgation particularly delivered to
the Ante-deluvian Patriarchs (as the Jews seem to contend) I will not say: for
my part I cannot but look upon them (the last only excepted) as a considerable
part of Nature's Statute Law, as comprizing the greater strokes and lineaments
of those natural dictates that are imprinted upon the souls of Men. For what
more comely and reasonable, and more agreeable to the first notions of our
minds, than that we should worship and adore God alone, as the Author of our
beings, and the Fountain of our happiness, and not derive the luster of his
incommunicable perfections upon any Creature; that we should entertain great
and honorable thoughts of God, and such as become the Grandeur and Majesty of
his being; that we should abstain from doing any wrong or injury to another,
from invading his right, violating his privileges, and much more from making
any attempt upon his life, the dearest blessing in this World; that we should
be just and fair in our transactions, and do to all men, as we would they
should do to us; that we should live chastely and temperately, and not by wild
and extravagant lusts and sensualities offend against the natural modesty of
our minds; that Order and Government should be maintained in the World, Justice
advanced, and every Man secured in his just possessions? And so suitable did
these Laws seem to the reason and understandings of Men, that the Jews though
the most zealous People under Heaven of their Legal Institutions, received
those Gentiles who observed them as Proselytes into their Church, though they
did not oblige themselves to Circumcision, and the rest of the Mosaic Rites.
Nay in the first Age of Christianity, when the great controversy arose between
the Jewish and Gentile-Converts about the obligation of the Law of Moses as
necessary to salvation, the observation only of these Precepts, at least a
great part of them, was imposed upon the Gentile-Converts as the best expedient
to end the difference, by the Apostolical Synod at Jerusalem.

4. BUT though the Law of Nature was the common Law by which God then
principally governed the World, yet was not he wanting by Methods extraordinary
to supply, as occasion was, the exigencies and necessities of his Church,
communicating his mind to them by Dreams and Visions, and other ways of
Revelation, which we shall more particularly remarque, when we come to the
Mosaical Economy. Hence arose those positive Laws which we meet with in this
period of the Church, some whereof are more expressly recorded, others more
obscurely intimated. Among those that are more plain and obvious two are
especially considerable, the prohibition sor not eating blood, and the Precept
of Circumcision, the one given to Noah, the other to Abraham. The prohibition
concerning blood is thus recorded, every moving thing that lives shall Genesis 9.
3, 4.
be meat for you: but flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof,
shall you not eat. The blood is the vehiculum to carry the spirits, as the
Veins are the channels to convey the blood, now the animal (...) give vital
heat and activity to every part, and being let out, the blood presently cools,
and the Creature dies. Not flesh with the blood, which is the life thereof,
that is, not flesh while it is alive, while the blood and the spirits are yet
in it. The mystery and signification whereof was no other than this that God
would not have Men trained up to arts of cruelty, or whatever did but carry the
color and aspect of a merciless and a savage temper, lest severity toward
Beasts should degenerate into fierceness toward Men. It Is good to defend the
out-guards, and to stop the remotest ways that lead toward sin, especially
considering the violent propensions of humane nature to passion and revenge.
Men commence bloody and inhumane by degrees, and little approaches in time
render a thing in it self abhorrent not only familiar, but delightful. The
Romans who at first entertained the People in the (...) only with wild Beasts
killing one another, came afterward wantonly to sport away the Lives of the
Gladiators, yea to cast Persons to be devoured by Bears and Lions, for no other
end than the divertisement and pleasure of the People. He who can please
himself in tearing and eating the Parts of a living Creature, may in short time
make (...). Porphyr. de (...). lib. 1. Sect. 47. p. 39.
no scruple to do violence to the Life of Man. Besides eating blood naturally
begets a savage temper, makes the spirits rank and fiery, and apt to be easily
inflamed and blown up into choler and fierceness. And that hereby God did
design to bar out ferity, and to secure mercy and gentleness, is evident from
what follows after: and surely your blood of your lives will I require: (...).
V. 5, 6.
at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of Man, at the
hand of every Man's brother will I require the life of man; whosoever sheddeth
Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed. The life of a Beast might not be
wantonly sacrificed to Men's humors, therefore not Man's; the life of Man being
so sacred, and dear to God, that if killed by a Beast, the Beast it self was to
dye for it; if by man, that man's life was to go for retaliation, by man shall
his blood be shed; where by man we must necessarily understand the ordinary
Judge and Magistrate, or (...) as the Jews call it, the lower Judicature, with
respect to that Divine and Superior Court, the immediate judgment of God
himself. By which means God admirably provided for the safety and security of
Man's life, and for the order and welfare of humane society: and it was no more
than necessary, the remembrance of the violence and oppression of the Nephilim
or Giants before the Flood being yet fresh in memory, and there was no doubt
but such mighty Hunters, men of robust bodies, of barbarous and inhumane
tempers would afterward arise. This Law against eating blood was afterward
renewed under the Mosaic Institution, but with this peculiar signification, for
the life (...). 17. 11.
of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar, to
make an atonement for your souls; for it is the blood that makes an atonement
for the soul: that is, the blood might not be eaten, not only for the former
reason, but because God had designed it for particular purposes, to be the
great Instrument of Expiation, and an eminent type of the Blood of the Son of
God, who was to dye as the great expiatory Sacrifice for the World: Nay it was
re-established by the Apostles in the infancy of Christianity, and observed by
the Primitive Christians for several Ages, as we have elsewhere observed.

5. THE other Precept was concerning Circumcision, given to Abraham at the time
of God's entering into Covenant with him. God said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep
my Gen 17. 9, 10, 11.
Covenant, etc. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and
thy Seed after thee, every Man-child among you shall be circumcised: and ye
shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the
Covenant betwixt me and you. God had now made a Covenant with Abraham to take
his Posterity for his peculiar People, and that out of them should arise the
promised Messiah: and as all foederal compacts have some solemn and external
rites of ratification, so God was pleased to add Circumcision as the sign and
seal of this Covenant, partly as it had a peculiar fitness in it to denote the
promised Seed, partly that it might be a discriminating badge of Abraham's
Children (that part whom God had especially chosen out of the rest of Mankind)
from all other People. On Abraham's part it was a sufficient argument of his
hearty compliance with the terms of this Covenant, that he would so cheerfully
submit to so unpleasing and (...) a sign as was imposed upon him. For
Circumcision could not but be both painful and dangerous in one of his Years,
as it was afterward to be to all newborn Infants: whence (...) complained of
Moses, commanding her to circumcise her Son, that he was (...) an husband of
bloods, a cruel and inhumane Husband. And this the Talm. Tract. Jeban. (...). 8.
Jews tell us was the reason, why circumcision was omitted during their Forty
Years Journey in the Wilderness, it was (...) by reason of the trouble and
inconvenience of the way, God mercifully dispensing with the want of it, (...)
it should hinder their traveling, the soarness and weakness of the circumcised
Person not comporting with hard and continual Journies. It was to be
administered the (...). Mor. (...). 3. (...). 49. p. 506.
eighth day, not sooner, the tenderness of the Infant not well till then
complying with it, besides that the Mother of a Male-child was reckoned legally
impure till the seventh Day; not later, probably because the longer it was
deferred, the more unwilling would Parents be to put their Children to pain, of
which they would every Day become more sensible, not to say the satisfaction it
would be to them, to see their Children solemnly entered into Covenant.
Circumcision was afterward incorporated into the Body of the Jewish Law, and
entertained with a mighty Veneration, as their great and standing Privilege,
relied on as the main Basis and Foundation of their (...), and hopes of
acceptance with Heaven, and accounted in a manner equivalent to all the other
Rites of the Mosaic Law.

6. BUT besides these two, we find other positive Precepts, which though not so
clearly expressed, are yet sufficiently intimated to us. Thus there seems to
have been a Law that none of the Holy Line, none of the Posterity of Seth
should marry with Infidels, or those corrupt and idolatrous Nations which God
had rejected, as appears in that it is charged as a great part of the sin of the
old World, that the Sons of God matched Genesis 6. 2, 3.
with the Daughters of Men, as also from the great care which Abraham took that
his Son Isaac should not take a Wife of the Daughters of the Canaanites among
whom he dwelt. There was also (...) Jus Levirationis, whereby the next Brother
to him who died without Issue was obliged to marry the Widow of the deceased,
and to raise up seed unto his Brother, the contempt whereof cost Onan his Life:
together with many more particular Laws which the story of those Times might
suggest to us. But what is of most use and importance to us, is to observe what
Laws God gave for the administration of his Worship, which will be best known
by considering what worship generally prevailed in those early Times; wherein
we shall especially remarque the nature of their public Worship, the Places
where, the Times when, and the Persons by whom it was administered.

7. IT cannot be doubted but that the Holy Patriarchs of those days were
careful to instruct their Children, and all that were under their charge (their
Families being then very vast and numerous) in the Duties of Religion, to
explain and improve the natural Laws written upon their minds, and acquaint
them with those Divine Traditions, and positive Revelations which they
themselves had received from God: this being part of that great character which
God gave of Abraham, I know him, that he will command his Genesis 18. 19.
Children, and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
to do justice and judgment. To this they joined Prayer and Invocation, than
which no duty is more natural and necessary; more natural, because it fitly
expresses that great reverence and veneration which we have for the Divine
Majesty, and that propensity that is in Mankind to make known their wants: none
more necessary, because our whole dependence being upon the continuance and
constant returns of the Divine power and goodness, it is most reasonable that we
should make our Daily addresses to him, in whom we live, move, and have our
being. Nor were they wanting in returns of praise, and solemn celebrations of
the goodness of Heaven, both by entertaining high and venerable thoughts of
God, and by actions suitable to those honorable sentiments which they had of
him. In these acts of worship they were careful to use gestures of the greatest
reverence and submission, which commonly was prostration. Abraham bowed himself
toward the ground: Genesis 18. 2.
and when God sent the Israelites the happy news of their deliverance out of
Egypt, they Exodus, 4. 31.
bowed their Heads and worshipped. A posture which has ever been the usual
mode of adoration in those Eastern Countries unto this day. But the greatest
instance of the Public Worship of those times was Sacrifices; a very early
piece of Devotion, in all probability taking its rise from Adam's fall. They
were either Eucharistical, expressions of thankfulness for blessings received,
or expiatory, offered for the remission of sin. Whether these Sacrifices were
first taken up at Men's arbitrary pleasure, or positively instituted and
commanded by God, might admit of a very large enquiry. (...) (...), XVIII, in
(...). p. 173. Tom. 2.
But to me the case seems plainly this, that as to Eucharistical (...), such as
first fruits, and the like oblations, Men's own reason might suggest and
persuade them, that it was fit to present them as the most natural
significations of a thankful mind. And thus far there might be Sacrifices in
the state of Innocence: for Man being created under such excellent
circumstances as he was in Paradise, could not but know that he owed to God all
possible gratitude and subjection; obedience he owed him as his Supreme Lord
and Master, gratitude, as his great Patron and Benefactor, and was therefore
obliged to pay to him some Eucharistical Sacrifices, as a testimony of his
grateful acknowledgment, that he had both his being and preservation from him.
But when sin had changed the scene, and Mankind was sunk under a state of
guilt, he was then to seek for a way how to pacify God's anger: and this was
done by bloody and expiatory sacrifices, which God accepted in the sinners
stead. And as to these, it seems reasonable to suppose that they should be
founded upon a positive Institution, because pardon of sin being a matter of
pure grace and favor, whatever was a means to signify and convey that, must
be appointed by God himself, first revealed to Adam, and by him communicated to
his Children. The Deity propitiated by these atonements was wont to testify
his acceptance of them by some external and visible sign; Thus Cain sensibly
perceived that God had respect to Abel's sacrifice, and not to his: though what
this sign was, it is not easy to determine. Most probably it was fire from
Heaven coming down upon the Oblation, and consuming it: For so it frequently
was in the Sacrifices of the Mosaic dispensation, Genesis 15. 17.
and so we find it was in that famous Sacrifice of Abraham, a Lamp of Fire
passed between the parts of the Sacrifice. Thus when it is said, God had respect
to Abel and to his offering, Theodotion renders it, (...), he burnt it; and to
this custom the Psalmist alludes in that Petition, Remember all thy offerings,
and accept thy burnt Psalm 20. 3.
Sacrifice, (...) reduce thy burnt-offering into ashes.

8. WHERE it was that this Public Worship was performed, is next to be
enquired into. That they had fixed and determinate Places for the discharge of
their religious Duties, those especially that were done in common, is greatly
probable, Nature and the reason of things would put them upon it. And this most
think is intended in that phrase, where it is said of Cain and Abel, that they
brought their oblations, that is, (as Aben-Ezra and others expound it) (...) to
the place set apart (...) P. (...). in Genesis 4.
for divine worship: And this probably was the reason, why Cain though vexed to
the heart to see his Brother preferred before him, did not presently set upon
him, the solemnity and religion of the Place, and the sensible appearances of
the Divine Majesty having struck an awe into him, but deferred his murdrous
intentions till they came into the Field, and there fell upon him. For their
Sacrifices they had Altars, whereon they offered them, contemporary no doubt
with Sacrifices themselves, though we read not of them till after the Flood,
when Noah built an Altar unto the Lord, and offered Genesis 8. 20.
burnt-offerings upon it: So Abraham immediately after his being called to the
worship Genesis 12. 7, 8. (...). chap. 13. 4. 18.
of the true God, in Sichem built an Altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto
him, and removing thence, to a Mountain Eastward, he built another Altar, and
called on the Name of the Lord, as indeed he did almost in every place where he
came. Thus also Genesis 21. 33.
when he dwelt at Beer-sheba in the Plains of Mamre, he planted a Grove there,
and called on the Name of the Lord the everlasting God. This no doubt was the
common Chapel or Oratory; whither Abraham and his numerous Family, and
probably those whom he gained to be Proselytes to his Religion were wont to
retire for their public adorations, as a Place infinitely advantageous for
such Religious purposes. And indeed the Ancient devotion of the World much
delighted in Groves, in Woods and Mountains, partly for the convenience of such
Places, as better composing the thoughts for divine contemplations, and
resounding their joynt-praises of God to the best advantage, partly because the
silence and retiredness of the Place was apt to beget a kind of sacred dread
and horror in the mind of the Worshipper. Hence we find in Ophrah where
Gideon's Judge 6. 25.
Father dwelt, an Altar to Baal, and a Grove that was by it; and how common the
superstitions and idolatries of the Heathen-world were in Groves and
High Places, no Man can be ignorant, that is never so little conversant either
in profane or sacred stories. For this reason that they were so much abused to
idolatry, God commanded the Israelites to destroy their Altars, break down
their Images, and cut down their Groves: and (...). 13.
Deuteronomy. 16. 21.
that they should not plant a Grove of any Trees near unto the Altar of the
Lord, lest he should seem to countenance what was so universally prostituted to
false worship and idolatry. But to return to Abraham. He planted a Grove, (...)
a Tree, which the Ancients generally make to have been a large spreading Oak;
and some foundation there is for it in the sacred Text; for the place where
Abraham planted it is called the Plain of Mamre, (...). 13. 18.
or as in the Hebrew, he dwelt (...) among the Oaks of Mamre, and so the
Syriac renders it (...) The House (...). LXX. Ita (...) aliter (...) in (...).
18. 1.
of the Oak: The name whereof Antiquit. Jd. l. 1. c. 11. p. 19.
Josephus tells us, was Ogyges; and it is not a conjecture to be despised, that
Noah might probably inhabit in this place, and either give the name to it, or
at least derive his from it, Ogyges being the Name by which he is usually
described in foreign Writers. This very Oak S. (...) loc. (...). in (...)
Arboch.
Hierom assures us, and (...)
Eusebius intimates as much, was yet standing till the time of Constantine, and
worshipped with great superstition. And Hist. Ec. l. lit. 2. c. 4. p. 447.
Sozomen tells us more particularly that there was a famous Mart held there
every Summer, and a Feast celebrated by a general confluence of the
neighboring Countries, and Persons of all Religions, both Christians, Jews and
Gentiles, (...) every one doing honor to this Place according to the different
Principles of their Religion: but that Constantin being offended that the Place
should be profaned with the superstitions of the Jews, and the idolatry of the
Gentiles, wrote with some severity to Macarius the Bishop of Jerusalem, and the
Bishops of Palestin, that they should destroy the Altars and Images, and deface
all Monuments of Idolatry, and restore the Place to its ancient Sanctity. Which
was accordingly done, and a Church (...) in the Place, where God was purely and
sincerely worshipped. From this Oak, the ordinary place of Abraham's worship
and devotion, the Religion of the Gentiles doubtless derived its Oaks and
Groves, and particularly the Druids, the great and almost only Masters and
Directors of all Learning and Religion among the Ancient Britains, hence
borrowed their Original; who are so notoriously known to have lived wholly
under Oaks and Groves, and there to have delivered their Doctrines and
Precepts, and to have exercised their Religious and mysterious Rites, that
hence they fetched their denomination, either from (...) (as the Ancients
generally thought) or more probably from the old Cetlic word Deru, both
signifying an Oak, and which the Welsh, the Descendants of the Ancient
Britains, still call Derw at this day. But of this enough.

9. FROM the place where, we proceed to the times when they usually paid their
Devotions. And seeing Order is necessary in all undertakings, and much more in
the actions of Religion, we cannot think that Mankind was left at a roving
uncertainty in a matter of so great importance, but that they had their stated
and solemn times of Worship: especially when we find among all Nations, even
the most rude and unpolished Heathens, times peculiarly set apart for the
honor of their gods, and the public solemnities of Religion. And so no
question it was in the more early Ages of the World, they had fixed and
appropriate Seasons, when they met together to do homage unto God, and to offer
up their joynt-acknowledgments to Heaven. Thus we read of Cain that he brought
his oblation in process of time, (...) at the end of days, at one of those
fixed Genesis 4. 30 (...)
and periodical returns, when they used to meet in the Religious Assemblies,
the word (...) denoting not simply an end, but a determinate and an appointed
end. I know many with great zeal and eagerness contend, that the Sabbath or
Seventh Day from the Creation was set apart, and universally observed as the
time of Public Worship, and that from the beginning of the World. But alas the
foundation upon which this opinion is built, is very weak and sandy, having
nothing to rely on, but one place where it is said, that God resting on the
Seventh Day from all his Works, blessed the Seventh Day and sanctified Genesis 2.
3.
it. Which words are reasonably thought to have been set down by Moses by way
of Prolepsis, as it was in his time, if they relate at all to the (...), and
are not rather to be understood of God's blessing and sanctifying the Seventh
Day, as having completed all his Works in the creating of Man and in whom as
in the crown and glory of the Creation he would sanctify himself. For that it
should be meant of a Weekly Sabbath, has as little countenance from this Text,
as it has from the practice of those times, there being no footsteps or
shadow of any such Sabbath kept through all the Patriarchal periods of the
Church, till the times of Moses, which besides the evidence of the story, is
universally owned by the Ancient Jews, and very many of the Fathers do
expressly assert it.

10. THE last circumstance concerns the Persons by whom the Public Worship was
administered. Impossible it is that any Society should be regularly managed,
where there are not some peculiar Persons to (...), direct, and govern the
affairs of it. And God who in all other things is a God of Order, is much more
so in matters of Religion: and therefore no doubt from the beginning appointed
those, whose care and business it should be to discharge the public parts of
Piety and Devotion in the name of the rest. Now the Priesthood in those times
was vested in the Heads of Tribes, and in the firstborn of every Family. To
the Patriarch or Head of every Tribe it belonged to bless the Family, to offer
Sacrifice, to intercede for them by Prayer, and to minister in other solemn
acts of Religion. And this Office hereditarily descended to the firstborn, who
had power to discharge it during the life of his Father; for it was not
necessary, that he who was Priest by virtue of his primogeniture, should be
also the eldest of the House, Jacob, who succeeded in his Brother's right,
offered Sacrifices in the life of his Father Isaac, and Abraham was a Priest,
though Sem the Head of the Family, and ten degrees removed from him in a direct
line, was then alive, yea survived Abraham near Forty Years. Every firstborn
had three great Prerogatives, a double portion of the Paternal inheritance a
Lordship and Principality over his Brethren, and a right to the Priesthood, to
instruct them in the knowledge of Divine things, and to manage the common
Offices of Religion. So that in those times there was a particular Priesthood
in every Family, the administration whereof was usually appropriate to the
first born. Thus Noah, Abraham, and Isaac offered Sacrifices, and Job (who
lived about that time, or not long after) both for his Children and his
Friends. Thus (...) was a Priest by his primogeniture, and that goodly Raiment
of her Son Esau which Rebeccah put upon Jacob, when he went in to his Father,
is by many not improbably understood of the Sacerdotal Vestments, wherein as
firstborn he was wont to execute his Office. Of these Priests we are to
understand that Place, Let the Priests which come near to the Lord, (...), 19.
22.
sanctify themselves. This could not be meant of the Levitical Priests, (the
Aaronical Order not being yet instituted) and therefore must be understood of
the Priesthood of the firstborn, and so Solomon farchis gloss expounds it.
Thus when Moses had built an Altar at the foot of the Mountain, he sent young
men of the children of Israel, which offered Exodus 24. 5.
burnt-offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings unto the Lord. Where for young
men, the Chaldee Paraphrase and the Jerusalem Targum have (...) the firstborn
of the children of Israel; so has that of Jonathan, who expressly adds this
reason, for unto that very Hour the worship remained among the firstborn, the
Tabernacle of the Covenant not being yet made, nor the Aaronical Priesthood set
up. So when Jacob bequeathed his blessing to Reuben, Reuben thou art my
firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my Genesis 49. 3.
strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power, the same
Jewish Paraphrasts tell us, that there were three things in this blessing
conveyed and confirmed to Reuben, the Birthright, the Kingdom, and the
Priesthood, but that for his enormous and unnatural sin they were transferred
to others, the primogeniture to Joseph, the Kingdom to Judah, and the
Priesthood to Levi. But though the Sacerdotal function ordinarily belonged to
the firstborn, yet was it not so wholly invested in them, but that it might in
some cases be exercised by younger Brothers, especially when passing into other
Families, and themselves becoming Heads of Tribes and Families. Abraham we know
was not a firstborn, and it is highly probable that Sem himself was not Noah's
eldest Son, Moses was a Priest, yea (...) as the Jews call him, the Priest of
Priests, and yet was but (...) second Son, and Aaron's younger Brother. So that
the case in short seemed to lie thus. The Patriarch or surviving Head of every
Tribe was a kind of High Priest over all the Families that were descended from
him, the firstborn in every Family was the ordinary Priest, who might
officiate in his Father's stead, and who after his decease succeeded in his
room, the younger Brethren, when leaving their Father's house, and themselves
becoming heads of Families, and their seats removed too far distant to make use
of the ordinary Priesthood, did themselves take the office upon them, and
exercise it over all those that were under them, and sprung from them, though
the main honor and dignity was reserved for the Priesthood of the firstborn:
Thus Abraham, though but a second Son, yet when become the head of a great
Family, and removed into another Country, became a Priest, and that not only
during the life of his Father, but of Sem himself, the grand surviving
Patriarch of that time. I observe no more concerning this, than that this right
of the firstborn was a prime honor and privilege, and therefore the reason
((...) the (...) fol. 71. col. 1. ap. Seldom. de success. ad leg. Ebr. c. 5. p.
45.
Jews) why Jacob was so greatly desirous of the birth right, was because in
those days the Priesthood was entailed upon it. And for this chiefly no doubt
it was that Esau is called (...), a profane person, for selling Heb. 12. 16.
his birthright for a mess of Pottage, because thereby he made so light of the
sacred honor of the Priesthood, the Venerable office of ministering before God.

11. HAVING thus seen what were the Laws, what the Worship of those times, it
remains briefly to consider what was the face of the Church, and the state of
Religion under the several Patriarchs of this Economy. Not to meddle with the
story either of the Creation or Apostasy of Adam, no sooner was he fallen from
that innocent and happy state wherein God had placed him, but Conscience began
to stir, and he was sensible that God was angry, and saw it necessary to
propitiate the offended Deity by Prayer and Invocation, by Sorrow and
Repentance, and probably by offering Sacrifice; a conjecture that has at least
some countenance from those Coats of Skins Genesis 3. 21.
wherewith God clothed our first Parents, which seem likely to have been the
Skins of Beasts slain for Sacrifice; for that they were not killed for food is
evident, because flesh was not the ordinary diet (if it was at all) of those
first Ages of the World. And God might purposely make choice of this sort of
covering, to put our first Parents in mind of their great degeneracy, how deep
they were sunk into the animal life, and by gratifying brutish and sensual
appetites at so dear a rate, how like they were become to the Beasts that
perish. And (...) this were so, it possibly might give birth to that Law Levit.
7. 8.
of Moses, that every Priest that offered any man's burnt-offering, should have
to himself the skin of the burnt-offering which he had offered. But however
this was, it is certain that Adam was careful to instruct his Children in the
knowledge of Divine things, and to maintain Religion and the worship of God in
his Family. For we find Cain and Abel bringing their oblations, and that at a
certain time, though they had a different success. I omit the Traditions of the
East, that the cause of the difference between Cain and Abel was about a Wife,
and that they sought to decide the case by Sacrifice, and that when Abel's
sacrifice was accepted, Cain out of envy and indignation fell upon his brother,
struck his head with a stone, and slew him. The present they brought was
according to their different ways and institutions of life: Cain as an (...)
(...). Homil.
Husbandman brought of the fruit of the ground, Abel as a Shepherd brought of
the firstlings of his Flock, and of the fat thereof: But the one was accepted,
and the other rejected. The cause whereof certainly was not that the one was
little and inconsiderable, the other large and noble; the one only a dry
oblation, the other a burnt-offering; or that Cain had entertained a conceived
prejudice against his Brother; the true cause lay in the different temper and
disposition of their minds; Abel had great and honorable thoughts of God, and
therefore brought of the best that he had, Cain mean and unworthy XVIII. in
(...). p. 174.
apprehensions, and accordingly took what came first to hand; Abel came with a
grateful sense of the goodness of Heaven, with a mind piously and heartily
devoted to the Divine Majesty, and an humble reliance upon the Divine
acceptance; Cain brought his oblation indeed, but looked no further, was not
careful to offer up himself a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, as
being the most reasonable service, too confidently bearing up himself, as we
may suppose, upon the prerogative of his primogeniture. By which means Abel
offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained
Heb. 11. 4.
witness, that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts. For he had
respect unto Genesis 4. 4, 5.
Abel, and to his offering: But unto Cain, and to his offering he had not
respect. And if in that fire, by which God testified his respect by consuming
one oblation, and not the other, there was (as the Jews say) seen the face of a
Lion, it doubtless prefigured the late promised Messiah, The Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, our great expiatory sacrifice, of whom all other sacrifices were but
types and shadows, and in whom all our oblations are rendered grateful unto God,
The odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and wellpleasing unto God.

12. A. B. E. L being taken away by his envious and enraged Brother, God was
pleased to repair the loss by giving his Parents another Son, whom they called
Seth, and he accordingly proved a very Virtuous and Religious man. He was (if
we may believe the Ancients) a great Scholar; the first inventor of Letters,
and Writing, an accurate Astronomer, and taught his Children the knowledge of
the Stars, who having heard from their Grandfather Adam, that the World was to
be twice destroyed, once by Fire, and again by Water (if the story be true
which Josephus without any great warrant Antiquit. Jud. (...). 1. (...). 3.
(...). 8.
reports) wrote their Experiments and the principles of their Art upon two
Pillars, one of Brick, the other of Stone, that if the one perished, the other
might remain, and convey their notions to posterity, one of which Pillars
Josephus adds, was said to be standing in Syria in his time. But that which
rendered Seth most renowned, was his piety and devotion; a good man he was, one
who asserted and propagated Religion and the true worship of God, as he had
received it from his Father Adam, notwithstanding the (...) and degeneracy, and
possibly oppositions of his Brother Cain and his party. The Eastern Writers,
both Jews and (...). Smeg. (...). 8. p. 226. and seqq.
Arabians, confidently assure us, that Seth and his retinue withdrew from Cain,
who dwelt in the Valley, where he had killed his brother Abel, into a very high
mountain (on the top whereof their Father Adam was buried) so high, if we could
believe them, that they could hear the Angels singing Anthems, and did daily
join in with that Heavenly Quire. Here they wholly devoted themselves to the
daily worship of God, and obtained a mighty name and veneration for the
holiness and purity of their lives. When Seth came to lie upon his deathbed, he
summoned his Children, their Wives and Families together, blessed them, and as
his last Will commanded them to worship God, adjuring them by the blood of Abel
(their usual and solemn oath) that they should not descend from the holy Mount,
to hold any correspondence or commerce with Cain or his wicked faction. And
then breathed his last. A command, say my Authors, which they observed for
seven generations, and then came in the promiscuous mixtures.

13. To Seth succeeded his Son Enos, who kept up the glory and purity of
Religion, and the honor of the holy Line. Of his time it is particularly
recorded, then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. The ambiguity of
the word (...) signifying Genesis 4. 26.
sometimes to profane, sometimes to begin, has begotten various apprehensions
among learned men concerning this place, and led them not only into different,
but quite contrary senses. The words are by some rendered thus, Then men
profaned in calling upon the name of the Lord; which they thus explain, that
at that time when Enos was born, the true worship and service of God began to
sink and fail, corruption and idolatry mightily prevailing by reason of Cains
wicked and apostate Family; and that as a sad memorial of this corrupt and
degenerate Age, holy Seth called his son's name Enosh, which not only simply
signifies a man, but a poor, calamitous, miserable man. And this way go many of
the Jews, and some Christian writers of great name and note. Nay Maimonides,
one of the wisest and soberest of all the Jewish writers, begins his Tract
about (...). 1. Sect. 1.
Idolatry (...) from the times of Enosh, referring to this very passage; he
tells us, that men did then grievously err, and that the minds of the wise men
of those days were grown gross and stupid; yea, that Enos himself was (...)
among those that erred, and that their Idolatry consisted in this, That they
worshipped the Stars and the Host of Heaven. Vid. ap. (...). cit. p. 230.
Others there are who expressly assert, that (...) was the first that invented
Images, to excite the Spirit of the Creatures, (...) that by their mediation
men might invocate and call upon God. But how infirm a foundation this Text is
to build all this upon, is evident. For besides, what Dionys. Voss. not. in
(...). p. 4. (...). de Hist. Patr. (...). 6. p. 223.
some have observed, that the Hebrew phrase is not tolerably reconcilable with
such a sense, if it were, yet (...) as one of the R. Eliez. Maas. Beres. (...).
22. ibid.
Rabbis has well noted, that there wants a foundation for any such exposition,
no mention being made in Moses his story of any such false Gods as were then
worshipped, no footsteps of Idolatry appearing in the World till after the
Flood. Nor indeed is it reasonable to suppose, that the Creation of the World
being yet fresh in memory, and Divine Traditions so lately received from Adam,
and God frequently communicating himself to men, that the case being thus, men
could in so short a time be fallen under so great an apostasy, as wholly to
forget and renounce the true God, and give Divine honors to senseless and
inanimate creatures; I can hardly think that the Cainites themselves should be
guilty of this, much less Enosh and his Children. The meaning of the words then
is plainly this, That in Enosh his time the holy Line being greatly multiplied,
they applied themselves to the worship of God in a more public and remarkable
manner, either by framing themselves into more distinct societies for the
exercise of public worship, or by meeting at more fixed and stated times, or
by invocating God under more solemn and peculiar rites than they had done
before. And this probably they did the rather, to obviate that torrent of
profaneness and impiety, which by means of the sons of Cain they saw flowing
in upon the World. This will be further confirmed, if we take the words as by
some they are rendered, then men began to be called by the name of the Lord,
that is, the difference and separation that was between the children of Seth
and Cain every day ripening into a wider distance, the posterity of Seth began
to take to themselves a distinctive title, that the World might the better
distinguish between those who kept to the service of God, and those who threw
off Religion, and let loose the reins to disorder and impiety. And hereof we
meet with clear intimation in the story of those times when we read of (...)
the sons of God (who doubtless were the Genesis 6. 2.
pious and devout posterity of Seth, calling themselves after the name of the
Lord, whom they constantly and sincerely worshipped, notwithstanding the fancy
of Josephus, and the Fathers, that they were Angels, or that of the Jewish
Paraphrasts, that they were (...) the sons of great men and Princes) in
opposition to the (...) the sons of men, the impure and debauched posterity of
Cain, who made light of Religion, and were wholly governed by (...) and sensual
inclinations. And the matching of these sons of God with the daughters of men,
that is, those of the Family of Cain, and the fatal consequences of those
unhappy marriages, was that which provoked God to destroy the World. I have no
more to add concerning Enosh, than that we are told, that dying he gave the
same commands to his Children, which he had received of his Father, that they
should make Religion their great care and business, and keep themselves pure
from society and converse with the Line of Cain.

14. AFTER Enosh was his son Kenan, who, as the Arabian Elmacin. ap. (...). p.
233.
Historian informs us, ruled the people committed to him by a wise and
excellent government, and gave the same charge at his death that had been given
to him. Next Kenan comes Mahalcleel, Id. (...). p. 234.
who carries devotion and piety in his very name, signifying, one that praises
God, of whom they say, that he trained up the people in ways of justice and
piety, blessed his Children at his death, and having charged them to separate
from the Cainites, appointed his son Jared to be his successor; whose name
denotes a descent, probably either because of the notable decrease and
declension of piety in his time, or because in his days some of the Sethites
descended from the holy Mountain to mix with the posterity of Cain. For so the
Elmac. and Patric. apud (...) supr. p. 235.
Oriental writers inform us, that a great noise and shout coming up from the
Valley, an hundred of the holy Mountaineers agreed to go down to the sons of
Cain, whom Jared endeavored to hinder by all the arts of counsel and
persuasion. But what can stop a mind bent upon an evil course? down they went,
and being ravished with the beauty of the Cainite-women, promiscuously
committed folly and lewdness with them; from whence sprang a race of Giants,
men of vast and robust bodies, but of more vicious and ungovernable tempers,
who made their Will their Law, and Might the standard and rule of Equity.
Attempting to return back to the holy Mount, Heaven had shut up their way, the
stones of the Mountain burning like fire when they came upon them; which
whether the Reader will have faith enough to believe, I know not. Jared being
near his death, advised his Children to be wise by the folly of their Brethren,
and to have nothing to do with that profane generation. His son Enoch followed
in his steps, a man of admirable strictness and piety, and peculiarly exemplary
for his innocent and holy conversation, it Genesis 5. (...)
being particularly noted of him, that he walked with God: He set the Divine
Majesty before him, as the guide and pattern, the spectator and rewarder of his
actions, in all his ways endeavored to approve himself to his All-seeing eye,
by doing nothing but what was grateful and acceptable to him; he was the great
instance of virtue and goodness in an evil Age, and by the even tenor and
constancy of a holy and a religious life showed his firm belief and expectation
of a future state, and his hearty dependence upon the Divine goodness for the
rewards of a better life. And God, who is never behind-hand with his servants,
crowned his extraordinary obedience with an uncommon Heb. 11. 5, 6.
reward. By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was
not found, because God had translated him: For before his translation he had
this testimony, that he pleased God. And what that faith was, is plain by what
follows after, a belief of God's Being and his Bounty, Without faith it is
impossible to please him: For he that comes to God, must believe that he is,
and that (...) is a (...) of them that diligently seek him. What this
translation was, and whether it was made, whither into that Terrestrial
Paradise out of which Adam was expelled and banished, and whereunto Enoch had
desired of God he might be translated, as some fancy, or whether placed among
the Stars, as others, or carried into the highest Heavens, as others will have
it, were nice and useless speculations. It Is certain he was taken out of these
mutable Regions, and set beyond the reach of those miseries and misfortunes, to
which a present state of sin and mortality does betray us; translated,
probably, both Soul and Body, that he might be a type and specimen of a future
Resurrection, and a sensible demonstration to the World that there is a reward
for the righteous, and another state after this, wherein good Men shall be
happy sor ever. I pass by the fancy of the Jews as vain and frivolous, that
though Enoch was a good Man, yet was he very mutable and inconstant, and apt to
be led aside, and that this was the reason, why God translated him so soon,
lest he should have been debauched by the charms and allurements of a wicked
World. He was an eminent Prophet, and a fragment of his Prophecy is yet extant
in S. Jude's Epistle, by which it appears, that wickedness was then grown
rampant, and the manners of men very corrupt and vicious, and that he as
plainly told them of their faults, and that Divine vengeance that would
certainly overtake them. Of Methuselah his Son nothing considerable is upon
Record, but his great Age, living full DCCCCLXIX. Years (the longest proportion
which any of the Patriarchs arrived to) and died in that very Year wherein the
Flood came upon the World.

15. FROM his Son Lamech, concerning whom we find nothing memorable, we proceed
to his Grand child Noah, by the very imposition of whose Name his Parents
presaged that he would be a refreshment and comfort to the World, and highly
instrumental to remove that curse which God by an Universal Deluge was bringing
upon the Earth, he (...) his Name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us
concerning our work Genesis 5. 29.
and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord has cursed; he
was one in whom his Parents did acquiesce and rest satisfied, that he would be
eminently (...) and serviceable to the World. Indeed he proved a person of
incomparable sanctity and integrity, a Preacher of righteousness to others, and
who as carefully practiced it himself. He was a just man, and perfect in his
generation, and he walked with God. He did not warp Genesis 6. 9.
and decline with the humor of the Age he lived in, but maintained his
station, and kept his Line. He was upright in his Generation. It Is no thanks to
be religious, when it is the humor and fashion of the Times: the great trial
is, when we live in the midst of a corrupt generation. It is the crown of
virtue to be good, when there are all manner of temptations to the contrary,
when the greatest part of Men go the other way, when virtue and honesty are
laughed and drolled on, and censured as an over-wise and affected singularity;
when lust and debauchery are accounted the modes of Gallantry, and pride and
oppression suffered to ride in prosperous triumphs without control. Thus it
was with Noah, he contended with the Vices of the Age, and dared to own God and
Religion, when almost all Mankind besides himself had rejected and thrown them
off. For in his time wickedness openly appeared with a brazen Forehead, and
violence had covered the face of the Earth, the promiscuous mixtures of the
Children of Seth and Cain had produced Giants and mighty Men, men strong to do
evil, and who had as much will as power, (...), Antiqu. Jud. lib. 1. (...). 4.
p. 8.
as Josephus describes them, a race of men insolent and ungovernable, scornful
and injurious, and who bearing up themselves in the confidence of their own
strength, despised all justice and equity, and made every thing truckle under
their (...) lusts and appetites. The very same character does Lucian give of
the Men of this Age, speaking of the times (...) Syria. p. 882. (...). 2.
of Deucalion (their Noah) and the Flood, (...) (says he) (...), etc. Men
exceedingly scornful and contumelious, and guilty of the most unrighteous and
enormous actions, violating all Oaths and Covenants, throwing off kindness and
hospitality, and rejecting all addresses and supplications made to them. For
which cause great miseries overtook them: for Heaven and Earth, Seas and Rivers
conspired together to pour out mighty Floods upon the World; which swept all
away, but Deucalion only, who for his prudence and piety was left to repair
Mankind. And so he goes on with the relation consonant to the account of the
Sacred story. This infection had spread it self over all parts, and was become
so general and Epidemical, that all Flesh had corrupted their ways, and scarce
any besides Noah left to keep up the face of a Church, and the profession of
Religion. Things being come to this pass quickly alarmed the Divine Justice,
and made the World ripe for vengeance; the patience of God was now tired out,
and he resolved to make Mankind feel the just effects of his incensed severity.
But yet in the midst of judgment he remembers mercy: he tells them, that though
he would not suffer his patience to be eternally prostituted to the wanton
humors of wicked men, yet that he would bear with them CXX. Years longer in
order to their reformation. So loath is God to take advantage of the sins of
men, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come unto
repentance. In the mean time righteous Noah found favor with Heaven (a good
man has a peculiar guardianship and protection in the worst of times) and God
orders him to prepare an Ark for the saving of his House. An Hundred Years was
this Ark in building, not but that it might have been finished in a far less
time, but that God was willing to give them so long a space for wise and sober
considerations, Noah preaching all the while both by his doctrine and his
practice, that they would break off their sins by repentance, and prevent their
ruin. But they that are filthy, will be filthy still; the hardened World
persisted in their impieties, till the wrath of God came upon them to the
uttermost; and destroyed the World of the ungodly. God shut up Noah, his Wife,
his three Sons and their Wives into the Ark, together with provisions, and so
many Creatures of every sort as were sufficient not only for food, but for
reparation of the kind (Miracles must not be expected, where ordinary means may
be (...)) and then opened the Windows of Heaven, and broke up the Fountains of
the Deep, and brought in the Flood that swept all away. Twelve months Noah and
his Family continued in this floating habitation; when the Waters being gone,
and the Earth dried, he came forth, and the first thing he did, was to erect an
Altar, and offer up an Eucharistical Sacrifice to God for (...) remarkable a
deliverance (some of the Jews tell us, that coming out of the Ark he was bitten
by a Lion, and rendered unfit for Sacrifice, and that therefore Sem did it in
his room) he did not concern himself for food, or a present habitation, but
immediately betook himself to his devotion. God was infinitely pleased with the
pious and grateful sense of the good man, and openly declared that his
displeasure was over, and that he would no more bring upon the World such
effects of his severity as he had lately done, and that the Ordinances of
Nature should duly perform their constant motions, and regularly observe their
periodical revolutions. And because Man was the principal Creature in this
lower World, he restored to him his Charter of Dominion and Sovereignty over
the Creatures, and by enacting some Laws against Murder and Cruelty secured the
peace and happiness of his life: and then established a (...) with Noah and all
Mankind, that he would no more drown the World, for the ratification and
ensurance whereof he placed the Rainbow in the Clouds, as a perpetual sign and
memorial of his Promise. Noah after this betook himself to Husbandry, and
planting Vineyards, and being unwarily overtaken with the fruit of the Vine,
became a scorn to Cham one of his own Sons, while the two others piously
covered their Fathers shame. A wakeing out of his sleep, and knowing what had
been done, he prophetically cursed Cham and his Posterity; blessed Sem, and in
Japhet foretold the calling of the Gentiles to the worship of God, and the
knowledge of the Messiah, that God should enlarge Japhet, and that he should
dwell in the Tents of Shem. He died in the DCCCCL. Year of his Age, having seen
both Worlds, that before the Flood, and that which came after it.

16. SEM and Japhet were the two good Sons of Noah, in the assigning whose
primogeniture, though the Scripture be not positive and decretory, yet do the
most probable reasons appear for Japhet, especially if we compute their Age.
Sem was an Genes. 11. (...).
Hundred Years old two Years after the Flood (for (...) he begat Arphaxad) now
the Flood happened just in the DC. Year of Noah's Age; whence it follows that Sem
was 7. 11.
born, when his Father was Five Hundred and Two Years old. But Noah being
expressly said to have begotten Sons in the Five Hundredth Year of his Age,
plain it is that 5. 32.
there must be another Son two Years Elder than Sem, which could be no other
than Japhet, Cham being acknowledged by all the Younger Brother. And hence it
is that 10. 21.
Sem is called, the Brother (...) of Japhet the Greater, or as we render it,
the Elder. They were both pious and devout Men, having been brought up under
the religious Institutions, not only of their Father Noah, but their
Grandfather (...), and their Great-grand-father Methuselah, who had for some
Hundreds of Years conversed with Adam. The holy story records nothing
concerning the state of Religion in their days, and little heed (...) to be
given to the Eastern Writers, when they tell us of Sem, that according to the
command of his Father he took the Body of Adam, which Noah had secretly hidden
in the Ark, and joining himself to Melchisedec, they went and (...) it in the
heart of the Earth, an Angel going before, and conducting them to the placewith
a great deal more, with little truth, and to as little purpose. As for the
(...) born after the Flood, little notice is taken of them besides the (...)
mention of their names, Arphaxad, Salah, Eber. Of this last they say, that he
was a great (...), that he instituted Schools and Seminaries for the
advancement and propagation of (...): (...). and (...) p. (...).
and there was great reason for him to bestir himself, if it be true, what the
Arabian Historians tell us, that now Idolatry began mightily to prevail, and
men generally carved to themselves the Images of their Ancestors, to which upon
all occasions they addressed themselves with the most solemn veneration, the
Demons giving answers through the Images which they worshipped. Heber was the
Father of the Jewish Nation, Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 7. p. 15.
who from him are said to have derived the title of Hebrews, (...), as Josephus
tells us, (though there want not those who assign other reasons of the name)
and that the Hebrew Language was preserved in his family, which till his time
had been the mother tongue, and the common Language of the World. To Eber
succeeded his son Peleg, a name given him out of a Prophetical foresight of
that memorable division that happened in his time. For now it was that a company
of bold daring persons combining themselves under the conduct and command of
Nimrod, resolved to erect a vast and stupendous Fabric, partly to raise
themselves a mighty reputation in the World, partly to secure themselves from
the Invasion of an after-deluge, and probably as a place of retreat and
defense, the better to enable them to put in practice that oppression and
tyranny which they designed to exercise over the World. But whatever it was,
God was displeased with the attempt, and to show how easily he can basfle the
subtillest Councils, and in a moment subvert the firmest projects, on a sudden
he confounded the Language of these foolish Builders, so that they were forced
to desist from their vain and ambitious design, as not being able to understand
and converse with one another. To Peleg succeeded his son Rehu, to (...) Serug,
to him (...), to Nachor Terah, who dwelt in Ur of the Chaldaeans, where
conversing with those Idolatrous Nations, he lapsed himself into the most gross
Idolatry. So apt are men to follow a multitude to do evil, so fatally
mischievous is ill company, and a bad example. But the best way to avoid the
plague, is to remove out of the house of infection. Away goes Terah to Haran,
where by repentance he is said to have recovered himself out of the snare of
the Devil.

17. ABRAHAM the second son of Terah succeeds in the Patriarchal Line. In his
minority he was educated in the Idolatries of his Father's house, who, they
say, was a maker of Statues and Images: And the (...). p. 8. (...) Hotting.
(...). c. 8. p. 291. conser (...). part. 3. (...). 29. p. 421.
Jews tells us many pleasant stories of Abraham's going into the shop in the
absence of his Father, his breaking the Images, and jeering those that came to
buy, or worship them; of his Father's carrying him to Nimrod to be punished,
his witty answers, and miraculous escapes. But God who had designed him for
higher and nobler purposes, called him at length out of his Father's house,
fully discoverd himself to him, and by many solemn promises and federal
compacts peculiarly engaged him to himself. He was a man entirely devoted to
the honor of God, and had consecrated all his services to the interests of
Religion, scarce any duty either toward God or men for which he is not eminent
upon record. Toward God, how great was his zeal and care to promote his
worship? erecting Altars almost in every place, whereon he publicly offered
his prayers and sacrifice. His love to God wholly swallowed up the love and
regard that he had to his dearest interests, witness his entire resignation of
himself, his cheerful renouncing all the concernments of his Estate and Family,
and especially his readiness to sacrifice his only son, the son of his old age,
and which is above all, the son of the promise, when God by way of trial
required it of him. How vigorous and triumpant was his faith, especially in the
great promise of a son, which he firmly embraced against all humane
probabilities to the contrary? Against hope he believed in hope, and being
strong in faith, gave glory to God. How hearty was his dependence upon the
Divine Providence, when called to leave his Father's house, and to go into a
strange Country, how cheerfully did he obey and go out, though he knew not
whither he went? How unconquerable was his patience, how even the composure of
his mind in all conditions? in fifteen several journeys that he undertook, and
ten difficult temptations which he underwent, he never betrayed the least
murmuring or hard thought of God. Toward others he showed the greatest
tenderness and respect, the most meek and unpassionate temper, a mind inflamed
with a desire of peace and concord: Admirable his justice and equity in all his
dealings, his great hospitality and bounty toward strangers, and for that end
(say the Jews) he got him an house near the entering into Haran, that he might
entertain strangers as they went in, or came out of the City, at his own table;
as indeed he seems to have had that most excellent and Divine temper of mind,
an universal love and charity toward all men. But his greatest charity
appeared in the care that he took of the Souls of men. Maimonides tells us,
that he kept a public School of institution, whither he gathered Mor. (...).
Part. 2 cap. 39. p. 301.
men together, and instructed them in that truth, which he himself had
embraced, and he gives us an account by what methods of reasoning and
information he used to convince and persuade them. But whatever he did toward
others, we are sure he did it toward those that were under his own charge. He
had a numerous family, and a vast retinue, and he was as careful to inform them
in the knowledge of the true God, and to instruct them in all the duties of
Religion. It Is the character which God himself gave of him, I know Abraham,
that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. And so he did, his house
being a School of piety, wherein Religion was both taught and practiced, many
reclaimed from the errors and idolatries of the times, and all his domestics
and dependants solemnly dedicated to God by Circumcision. Therefore when it is
said, that he brought with him all the Souls which they had gotten in Haran,
the Paraphrase of Genesis 12. 5.
Onkelos renders it, (...) the Souls which they had subjected to the Law in
Haran; Jonathans Targum, and much at the same rate that of Jerusalem, (...) the
Souls which they had made proselytes in Haran, or as Solomon Jarchi expresses
it, a little more after the Hebrew mode, the Souls which they had gathered,
(...) under the wings of the Divine Majesty; and he further Genesis 14. 14.
adds, that Abraham proselyted the men, and Sarah the women. So when elsewhere
we read of his trained servants, some of the Jewish Masters expound it by (...)
those that were initiated and trained up in the knowledge of the Law. Such
being the temper of this holy man, God was pleased frequently to converse with
him, and to impart his mind to him, acquainting him with the secret counsels
and purposes of his Providence, whence he is styled the friend of God. But that
which showed him to be most dear to Heaven, was the Covenant which God solemnly
made with him, wherein binding Abraham and his seed to a sincere and universal
obedience, he obliged himself to become their God, to be his shield and his
exceeding great reward, to take his posterity for his peculiar people, to
increase their number, and to enlarge their power, to settle them in a rich and
a pleasant Country (a type of that Heavenly and better Country that is above)
and which was the crown of all, that in his seed all the Nations of the Earth
should be blessed, that is, the promised Messiah should proceed out of his
loins, who should be a common blessing to mankind, in whom both Jew and Gentile
should be justified and saved, and he by that means become (spiritually) the
Father of many Nations. This Covenant was ratified and ensured on God's part by
a solemn oath, For Heb. 6. 13, 14.
when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he
swear by himself, saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I
will multiply thee. On Abraham's part it was sealed with the Sacrament of
Circumcision, which God instituted as a peculiar federal rite, to distinguish
Abraham's posterity from all other people. Abraham died in the (...) year of
his Age, and was buried in the Sepulcher which himself had purchased of the
sons of Heth. Contemporary with Abraham was his Nephew 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.
Lot, a just man, but vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked; for
dwelling in the midst of an impure and debauched generation, In seeing and
hearing he vexed his righteous Soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.
This endeared him to Heaven, who took a particular care of him, and sent an
Angel on purpose to conduct him and his family out of Sodom, before he let
loose that fatal vengeance that overturned it.

18. Abraham being dead, Isaac stood up in his stead, the son of his Parents
old age, and the fruit of an extraordinary promise. Being delivered from being
a sacrifice, he frequented (say the Jews) the School of Sem, wherein he was
educated in the knowledge of Divine things till his marriage with Rebeccah. But
however that was, he was a good man, we read of his going out to meditate or
pray in the field at even-tide, and Genesis 24. 63.
elsewhere we find him publicly sacrificing and calling upon God. In all his
distresses God still appeared to him, animated him against his fears, and
encouraged him to go on in the steps of his Father, renewing the same promises
to him which he had made to Abraham. Nay, so visible and remarkable was the
interest which he had in Heaven, that Abimelech King of the Philistines and his
Courtiers thought it their wisest course to confederate with him for this very
reason, because they saw certainly that the Genesis 26. 28, 29.
Lord was with him, and that he was the blessed of the Lord. Religion is the
truest interest, and the wisest portion, it is the surest protection, and the
safest refuge. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to
be at peace with him. Isaac dying in the CLXXX, year of his life, the
Patriarchate devolved upon his son Jacob, by virtue of the primogeniture which
he had purchased of his brother Esau, and which had been confirmed to him by
the grant and blessing of his Father (though subtly procured by the artifice
and policy of his Mother) who also told him, that God Almighty would bless and
multiply him and his seed after him, and that the blessing of Abraham should
come upon them. He entirely devoted himself to the fear and service of God,
kept up his Worship, and vindicated it from the encroachments of Idolatry, he
erected Altars at every turn, and zealously purged his house from those
Teraphim or Idols which Rachel had brought along with her out of Laban's house,
either to prevent her Father's enquiring at them which way Jacob had made his
escape, or to take away from him the instruments of his Idolatry, or possibly
that she might have wherewith to propitiate Antiq. Jul. lib. 1. (...). 19. p.
31.
and (...) her Father in case he should pursue and overtake them, as Josephus
thinks, though surely then she would have produced them, when she saw her
Father so zealous to retrieve them. He had frequent Visions and Divine
condescensions, God appearing to him, and ratifying the Covenant that he had
made with Abraham, and changing his name from Jacob to Israel, as a memorial of
the mighty prevalency which he had with Heaven. In his later time he removed
his family into Egypt, where God had prepared his way by the (...) of his son
Joseph to be Viceroy and Lord of that vast and fertile Country, advanced to
that place of state and grandeur by many strange and unsearchable methods of
the Divine Providence. By his two Wives, the Daughters of his Uncle Laban, and
his two Handmaids he had twelve Sons, who afterward became founders of the
Twelve Tribes of the Jewish Nation; to whom upon his deathbed he bequeathed his
blessings, consigning their several portions, and the particular fates of every
Tribe, among whom that of (...) is most remarkable, to whom it was foretold,
that the (...) should arise out of that Tribe, that the Regal Power and
Political Genesis 49. 10.
Sovereignty should be annexed to it, and remain in it till the (...) came, at
whose coming the Scepter should depart, and the Lawgiver from between his
knees: And thus all their own Paraphrasts, both Onkelos, Jonathan, and he of
Jerusalem do expound it, that there should not want Kings or Rulers of the
house of Judah, nor Scribes to teach the Law of that race, (...) until the time
that (...) the King shall come, whose the Kingdom is. And so it accordingly
came to pass, for at the time of Christ's Birth, Herod, who was a stranger, had
usurped the Throne, debased the Authority of their great Sanhedrim, murdered
their Senators, divested them of all Judiciary power, and kept them so low,
that they had not power (...) to put a man to death. And unto him shall the
gathering of the people be. A prophecy exactly accomplished, when in the first
Ages of Christianity the Nations of the World (...) to the standard of Christ
at the publication of the Gospel. Jacob died CXLVII. years old, and was buried
in Canaan, in the Sepulcher of his Fathers: After whose decease his posterity
for some hundreds of years were afflicted under the Egyptian yoke. Till God
remembering the Covenant he had made with their Fathers, powerfully rescued them
from the Iron Furnace; and conducted them through the wilderness into the Land
of Promise, where he framed and ordered their Commonwealth, appointed Laws for
the government of their Church, and settled them under a more fixed and certain
dispensation.

19. HITHERTO we have surveyed the state of the Church in the constant
succession of the Patriarchal Line. But if we step a little further into the
History of those times, we shall find that there were some extraordinary
persons without the Pale of that holy Tribe, renowned for the worship of God,
and the profession of Religion; among whom two are most considerable,
Melchisedeck and Job. Melchisedeck was King of Salem in the land of Canaan, and
Priest of the most high God. The short account which the Scripture gives of him
has left room for various fancies and conjectures. The opinion that has most
generally obtained is, that Melchisedeck was Sem, one of the sons of Noah, who
was of a great Age, and lived above LXX. years after Abraham's coming into
Canaan, and might therefore well enough meet him in his triumphant return from
his conquest over the Kings of the Plain. But notwithstanding the universal
authority which this opinion assumes to it self, it appears not to me with any
tolerable probability, partly because Canaan, where Melchisedeck lived, was
none of those Countries which were allotted to Sem and to his posterity, and
unlikely it is that he should be Prince in a foreign Country: partly, because
those things which the Scripture reports concerning Melchisedeck, do no ways
agree to Sem, as that he was without Father and Mother, without genealogy,
etc. whenas Moses does most exactly describe and record Sem and his Family,
both as to his Ancestors, and as to his posterity. That therefore which seems
most probable in the case, is, that he was one of the Reguli, or petty Kings
(whereof there were many) in the land of Canaan, but a pious and devout man,
and a worshipper of the true God, as there were many others in those days among
the Idolatrous Nations; he being extraordinarily raised up by God from among
the Canaanites, and brought in without mention of Parents, original or end,
without any Predecessor or Successor in his office, that he might be a fitter
type of the Royal and Eternal Priesthood of Christ. And for any more particular
account concerning his person, it were folly and rashness over-curiously to
enquire after what God seems industriously to have concealed from us. The great
character under which the Scripture takes notice of him, is his relation to our
blessed Savior, who is more than once said to be a Priest, (...), after the
order, in the same way and manner that Melchisedeck was, or (as the Apostle
explains himself) after the similitude of Melchisedeck. Our Heb. 7. 15.
Lord was such a Priest as Melchisedeck was, there being a nearer similitude
and conformity between them, than ever was between any other Priests
whatsoever. A subject which S. Paul largely and particularly treats of. Passing
by the minuter instances of the parallel, taken from the name of his person,
Melchisedeck, that is, King of righteousness, and his title to his Kingdom,
King of Salem, that is, of Peace; we shall observe three things especially
wherein he was a type of Christ. First, in the peculiar qualification of his
person, something being recorded of him uncommon to the rest of men, and that
is, that he was without Father, without Mother, and without descent. Heb. 7 3.
Not that Melchisedeck like Adam was immediately created, or in an instant
dropped down from Heaven, but that he has no kindred recorded in the story,
which brings him in without any mention of Father or Mother, (...), as
Chrysostom glosses, we know not what Father or Mother he had: He was (...). 12.
in Hebr. p. 1838.
(says S. Paul) (...), without genealogy, without having any pedigree extant
upon record, whence the ancient Syriack Version truly expresses the sense of
the whole passage thus, Whose neither Father nor Mother are written, (...)
among the generations, that is, the genealogies of the ancient Patriarchs. And
thus he eminently typified Christ, of whom this is really true: He is without
Father in respect of his humane nature, begotten only of a pure Virgin; without
Mother, in respect of his Divinity, being begotten of his Father before all
Worlds, by an eternal and ineffable generation. Secondly, Melchisedeck typified
our Savior in the duration and continuance of his office; for so it is said of
him, that he was without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of
life, but made like unto the Son of God, abides a Priest continually. By which
we are not to understand that Melchisedeck never died, for being a man he was
subject to the same common Law of mortality with other men: But the meaning is,
that as he is said to be without Father and Mother, because the Scripture
speaking of him makes no mention of his Parents, his Genealogy and descent: So
he is said to abide a Priest for ever, without any beginning of days, or end of
life, because we have no account of any that either preceded, or succeeded him
in his office, no mention of the time either when he took it up, or laid it
down. And herein how lively and eminent a type of Christ, the true
Melchisedeck, who as to his Divine nature was without beginning of days from
Eternal Ages, and who either in the execution or virtue of his office abides
for ever. There is no abolition, no translation of his office, no expectation
of any to arise that shall succeed him in it: He was made a Priest not after
the Law of a carnal Commandment, a transient and mutable dispensation, but
after the power of an endless life. Thirdly, Melchisedeck was a type of Christ
in his excellency above all other Priests. S. Paul's great design is to evince
the pre-eminence and precedence of Melchisedeck above all the Priests of the
Mosaic ministration, yea, above Abraham himself, the Founder and Father of the
Jewish Nation, from whom they reckoned it so great an honor to derive
themselves. And this the Apostle proves by a double instance. First, that
Abraham, in whose loins the Levitical Priests then were, paid tithes to
Melchisedeck, when he gave him the tenth of all his spoils, as due to God and
his Ministers, thereby confessing himself and his posterity inferior to him.
Now consider Heb. 7. 4, 5, 6, (...) and (...).
how great this man was, unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of
the spoils. Secondly, that Melchisedeck conferred upon Abraham a solemn
benediction, it being a standing part of the Priests office to bless the
people. And this was an undeniable argument of his superiority. He whose
descent is not counted from them (the legal Priests) Ibid. Ver. 6. 7.
received tithes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the promises: And without
all contradiction the less is blessed of the better. Whereby it evidently
appears, that Melchisedeck was greater than Abraham, and consequently than all
the Levitical Priests that descended from him. Now herein he admirably
prefigured and shadowed out our blessed Savior, a person peculiarly chosen out
by God, sent into the World upon a nobler and a more important errand, owned by
more solemn and mighty attestations from Heaven, than ever was any other
person; his office incomparably beyond that of the legal Economy, his person
greater, his undertaking weightier, his design more sublime and excellent, his
oblation more valuable and meritorious, his prayers more prevalent and
successful, his office more durable and lasting, than ever any whose business
it was to intercede and mediate between God and man.

20. THE other extraordinary person under this (...) is Job, concerning whom
two things are to be enquired into, Who he was, and when he lived. For the
first, we find him described by his Name, his Country, his Kindred, his
Quality, his Religion, and his Sufferings, though in many of them we are left
under great uncertainties, and to the satisfaction only of probable
conjectures. For his name, among many conjectures two are especially
considerable, though founded upon very different reasons, one that it is from
(...) signifying one that grieves or groans, mystically presaging those
grievous miseries and sufferings that afterward came upon him; the other, more
probably, from (...) to love, or to desire, noting him the desire and delight
of his Parents, earnestly prayed for, and affectionately embraced with the
tenderest endearments. His Country was the land of (...), though where that
was, is almost as much disputed, as about the source of Nilus: Some will have
it Armenia, others Palestine, or the land of Canaan, and some of the Jewish
Masters assure us, that (...) his School, or place of institution was at
Tiberias, and nothing more commonly showed to Travelers than Job's well in the
way between Ramah and Jerusalem; others place it in Syria near Damascus, so
called from (...), the supposed Founder of that City; others a little more
Northward at Apamea, now called Hama, where his house is said to be showed at
this day: Most make it to be part of Idumaea near mount (...), or else Arabia
the Desert (probably it was in the confines of both) this part of Arabia being
nearest to the Sabaeans and Chaldaeans, who invaded him, and most applicable to
his dwelling among the Sons of the East, to the situation of his friends who
came to visit him, and best corresponding with those frequent Arabisms
discernable both in the Language and Discourses of Job and his Friends; not to
say that this Country produced persons exceedingly addicted to Learning and
Contemplation, and the studies of natural Philosophy, whence the wise men who
came out of the East to worship Christ are thought by many to have been
Arabians. For his kindred and his friends, we find four taken notice of, who
came to visit him in his distress; Eliphaz the Temanite, the son probably of
Teman, and grandchild of Esau by his eldest son Eliphaz, the Country deriving
its name Teman from his Father, and was situate in Idumaea in the borders of
the Desert Arabia: Bildad the Shuhite, a descendant in all likelihood of Shuah,
one of the sons of Abraham by his wife Keturah, whose seat was in this part of
Arabia: Zophar the Naamathite, a Country lying near those parts: And Elihu the
Buzite, of the offspring of Buz the son of Nahor, and so nearly related to Job
himself. He was the son of Barachel, of the kindred of Ram, who was the head of
the Family, and his habitation was in the parts of Arabia the Desert near
Euphrates, or at least in the Southern part of (...) bordering upon it. As for
Job himself, he is made by some a Canaanite, of the posterity of Cham; by
others to descend from Sem by his son Amram, whose eldest sons name was (...);
by most from Esau, the Father of the Idumaean Nations; but most probably either
from Nahor, Abraham's brother, whose sons were Huz, Buz, Chesed, etc. or from
Abraham himself by some of the sons which he had by his wife Keturah, whereby
an account is most probably given, how Job came to be imbued with those seeds
of Piety and true Religion, for which he was so eminently remarkable, as
deriving them from those Religious principles and instructions which Abraham
and Nahor had bequeathed to their posterity. His quality and the circumstances
of his External state were very considerable, a man rich and honorable; His
substance was seven thousand Sheep, and three thousand Camels, and five hundred
yoke of Oxen, and five hundred she-Asses, and a very great household, so that he
was the greatest of all the men of the East; himself largely describes the
great honor and prosperity of his fortunes, that he washed his steps in
Butter, and the rock poured out rivers of Oil; when he went out to the gate
through the City, and prepared his seat in the street, the young men saw him,
and hid themselves, the aged arose and stood up, the Princes refrained talking,
and laid their hand on their mouth, etc. He delivered the poor that cried, and
the fatherless and him that had none to help him, the blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon him, etc. He brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked
the spoil out of their teeth, etc. Indeed so great his state and dignity, that
it has led many into a persuasion, that he was King of Idumaea, a powerful and
mighty Prince; a fancy that has received no small encouragement from the common
but groundless confounding of Job with Jobab King of Edom, of the race of Esau.
For the story gives no intimation of any such royal dignity, to which Job was
advanced, but always speaks of him as a private person, though exceeding
wealthy and prosperous, and thereby probably of extraordinary power and
estimation in his Country. Nay that he might not want fit Companions in his
Regal capacity, three of his friends are made Kings as well as he, the LXX.
Translators themselves stiling Eliphaz King of the Temanites, Bildad of the
Suchites, and Zophar King of the Minaeans, though with as little, probably less
reason than the former.

21. BUT whatever his condition was, we are sure he was no less eminent for
Piety and Religion, he was a man perfect and upright, one that feared God, and
eschewed evil. Though living among the Idolatrous Gentiles, he kept up the true
and sincere worship of God, daily offered up Sacrifices and Prayers to Heaven,
piously instructed his Children and Family, lived in an entire dependence upon
the Divine Providence, in all his discourses expressed the highest and most
honorable sentiments and thoughts of God, and such as best became the Majesty
of an Infinite Being; in all transactions he was just and righteous,
compassionate and charitable, modest and humble, indeed by the character of God
himself, who knew him best, There was none like him in the Earth, a perfect and
an upright man, fearing God, and eschewing evil: his mind was submissive and
compliant, his patience generous and unshaken, great even to a Proverb, You
have heard of the Patience of Job. And enough he had to try it to the utmost,
if we consider what sufferings he underwent; those evils which are wont but
singly to seize upon other men, all centred and met in him. Plundered in his
Estate by the Sabaean and Chaldaean Free-booters (whose standing livelihood
were spoils and robberies) and not an Ox or Ass left of all the Herd, not a
Sheep or a Lamb either for Food or Sacrifice: Undone in his Posterity, his
Seven Sons, and Three Daughters being all slain at once by the fall of one
House: blasted in his credit and good name, and that by his nearest friends,
who traduced and challenged him for a dissembler and an hypocrite. Ruined in
his health, being smitten with sore boiles from the crown of the Head to the
sole of the Foot, till his Body became a very Hospital of Diseases: tormented
in his mind with sad and uncomfortable reflections, The arrows of the Almighty
being shot within him, the poison whereof drank up his spirit, the terrors of
God setting themselves in array against him. All which were aggravated and set
home by Satan, the grand Engineer of all those torments, and all this
continuing for at least Twelve Months (say the Jews) probably for a much longer
time; and yet endured with great courage and fortitude of mind, till God put a
period to this tedious Trial, and crowned his sufferings with an ample
restitution. We have seen who this excellent Person was, we are next to enquire
when he lived. And here we meet with almost an infinite variety of Opinions,
some making (...). Part. 3. cap. 22. p. 395.
him contemporary with Abraham, others with Jacob, which had he been, we should
doubtless have found some mention of him in their story, as well as we do of
(...): others again refer him to the time of the Law given at Mount Sinai, and
the Israelites travels in the Wilderness; others to the times of the Judges
after the settlement of the Israelites in the Land of Promise, nay some to the
reign of David and Solomon; and I know not whether the Reader will not smile at
the fancy of the Turkish Chronologists, Anz. (...), de (...). Turcic. Epist. 1.
p. 94.
who make Job Major-domo to Solomon, as they make Alexander the Great, the
General of his Army. Others go further, and place him among those that were
carried away in the Pabylonish Captivity, yea in the time of Ahasuerus, and
make his fair Daughters to be of the number of those beautiful young Virgins
that were sought-for for the King. Follies that need no confutation. It Is
certain that he was elder than Moses, his Kindred and Family, his way of
sacrificing, the Idolatry rise in his time, evidently placing him before that
Age; besides that there are not the least footsteps in all his Book of any of
the great things done for the (...) deliverance, which we can hardly suppose
should have been omitted, being examples so fresh in memory, and so apposite to
the design of that Book. Most probable therefore it is, that he lived about the
time of the Israelitish Captivity in Egypt, though whether as some Jews will
have it, born that very Year that Jacob came down into Egypt, and dying that
Year that they went out of Egypt, I dare not peremptorily affirm. And this no
question is the reason why we find nothing concerning him in the Writings of
Moses, the History of those Times being crowded up into a very little room,
little being recorded even of the Israelites themselves for near Two Hundred
Years, more than in general that they were heavily oppressed under the Egyptian
Yoke. More concerning this great and good Man, and the things relating to him,
if the Reader desire to know, he may among others consult the elaborate
exercitations of the younger (...) in his Historia Jobi, where the largest
curiosity may find enough to satisfy it.

22. AND now for a Conclusion to this Occonomy, if we reflect a little upon the
state of things under this period of the World, we shall find that the Religion
of those (...) Ages was plain and simple, unforced and natural, and highly
agreeable to the common dictates and notions of Men's minds. They were not
educated under any foreign Institutions, nor conducted by a Body of numerous
Laws and written Constitutions, Phil. lib. (...). 350.
but were (...) (as Philo calls them) tutored and instructed by the dictates of
their own minds, and the Principles of that Law that was written in their
hearts, following the order of Nature and right Reason, as the safest, and most
ancient Rule. By which means (as one of the Ancients observes) (...) (...).
Evangel. lib. 7. c. 6. (...). 304.
they maintained a free and uninterrupted course of Religion, conducting their
lives according to the rules of Nature, so that having purged their minds from
lust and passion, and attained to the true knowledge of God, they had no need
of external and written Laws. Their Creed was short and perspicuous, their
notions of God great and venerable, their devotion and piety real and
substantial, their worship grave and serious, and such as became the grandeur
and majesty of the Divine being, their Rites and Ceremonies few and proper,
their obedience prompt and sincere, and indeed the whole conduct of their
conversation discovering it self in the most essential and important duties of
the humane life. According to this standard it was that our blessed Savior
mainly designed to reform Religion in his most excellent Institutions, to
retrieve the piety and purity, the innocence and simplicity of those (...) and
more uncorrupted Ages of the World, to improve the Laws of Nature, and to
reduce Mankind from ritual observances to natural and moral duties, as the most
vital and essential parts of Religion, and was therefore pleased to charge
Christianity with no more than two positive Institutions, Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper, that Men might learn, that the main of Religion lies not in such
things as these. Hence Eusebius undertakes at large to prove the faith and
manners of the Holy Patriarchs, who Demonstrat. Evangel. lib. 1. cap. 5. and 6.
p. 9, 10. etc. and (...). supr. (...).
lived before the times of Moses, and the belief and practice of Christians to
be (...), one and the same. Which he does not only assert and make good in
general, but deduce from particular instances, the examples of Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Melchisedeck, Job, etc. whom he expressly proves to have believed and
lived (...), altogether after the manner of Christians: Nay that they had the
name also as well as the thing, (...), as he shows from that place (which he
proves to be meant of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob) (...), Touch not my Christians,
mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. And in short, that as they had the
same common Religion, so they had the common blessing and reward.

SECT. II. Of the MOSAICAL Dispensation.
Moses the Minister of this Economy. His miraculous preservation. His learned
and noble education. The Divine temper of his mind. His conducting the
Israelites out of Egypt. Their arrival at Mount Sinai. The Law given, and how.
Moral Laws; the Decalogue whether a perfect Compendium of the Moral Law. The
Ceremonial Laws what. Reduced to their proper Heads. Such as concerned the
matter of their Worship. Sacrifices, and the several kinds of them.
Circumcision. The Passover, and its typical relation. The place of Public
Worship. The Tabernacle and Temple, and the several parts of them, and their
typical aspects considered. Their stated times and (...), weekly, monthly,
annual. The Sabbatical Year. The Year of Jubilee. Laws concerning the Persons
ministering; Priests, Levites, the High Priest, how a type of Christ. The Design
of the Ceremonial Law, and its abolition. The Judicial Laws, what. The Mosaic
Law how divided by the Jews into affirmative and negative Precepts, and why.
The several ways of Divine revelation. Urim and Thummim what, and the manner of
its giving Answers. Bath-Col. Whether any such way of revelation among the
Jews. Revelation by Dreams. By Visions. The Revelation of the Holy Spirit,
what. Moses his way of Prophecy wherein exceeding the rest. The pacate way of
the spirit of prophecy. This spirit when it ceased in the Jewish Church. The
state of the Church under this Dispensation briefly noted. From the giving of
the Law till Samuel. From Samuel till Solomon. Its condition under the
succeeding Kings till the Captivity. From thence till the coming of Christ. The
state of the Jewish Church in the time of Christ more particularly considered.
The prophanations of the Temple. The Corruption of their Worship. The abuse of
the Priesthood. The Depravation of the Law by false glosses. Their Oral and
unwritten Law. Its original and succession according to the mind of the Jews.
Their unreasonable and blasphemous preferring it above the written Law. Their
religious observing the Traditions of the Elders. The Vow of Corban, what. The
superseding Moral Duties by it. The Sects in the Jewish Church. The Pharisees,
their denomination, rise, temper and principles. Sadducees, their impious
Principles, and evil lives. The Essenes, their original, opinions, and way of
life. The Herodians, who. The Samaritans. Karraeans. The Sect of the Zealots.
The Roman Tyranny over the Jews.

1. THE Church, which had hitherto lain dispersed in private Families, and had
often been reduced to an inconsiderable number, being now multiplied into a
great and a populous Nation, God was pleased to enter into Covenant, not any
longer with particular Persons, but with the Body of the People, and to govern
the Church by more certain and regular ways and methods, than it had hitherto
been. This Dispensation began with the delivery of the Law, and continued till
the final period of the Jewish state, consisting only of meats and drinks, and
diverse washings, and carnal Ordinances, imposed on them until the time of
reformation. In the survey whereof we shall chiefly consider what Laws were
given for the Government of the Church, by what Methods of revelation God
communicated his mind and will to them, and what was the state of the Church,
especially toward the conclusion of this Economy.

2. THE great Minister of this Dispensation was Moses the Son of Amram, of the
House of Levi, a Person, whose signal preservation when but an Infant presaged
him to be born for great and generous undertakings. Pharaoh King of Egypt
desirous to suppress the growing numbers of the Jewish Nation had afflicted and
kept them under with all the rigorous severities of tyranny and oppression. But
this not taking its effect, he made a Law that all Hebrew Male-children should
be drowned as soon as born, knowing well enough how to kill the root, if he
could keep any more Branches from springing up. But the wisdom of Heaven
defeated his crafty and barbarous (...). Among others that were born at that
time was Moses, a goodly Child, and whom his Mother was infinitely desirous to
preserve: but having concealed him, till the saving of his might endanger the
losing her own life, her affection suggested to her this little stratagem, she
prepared an Ark made of Paper-reeds, and pitched within, and so putting him
a-board this little Vessel, threw him into the River Nilus, committing him to
the mercy of the waves, and the conduct of the Divine Providence. God, who
wisely orders all events, had so disposed things that Pharaohs daughter (whose
name, say the Jews, was Bithia, Thermuth says Josephus, say the Arabians,
Sihhoun) being troubled with a distemper Antiq. Jud. l. 2. c. 5. p. 56.
that would not endure the hot Bathes, was come down at this time to wash in
the Nile, where the cries of the tender Babe soon reached her ears. She
commanded the Ark to be brought ashore, which was no sooner opened, but the
silent oratory of the weeping Infant sensibly struck her with compassionate
resentments: And the Jews add, that she no R. Ellez. c. 48. apud Hotting. Smeg.
Orient. c. 8. p. 402.
sooner touched the Babe, but she was immediately healed, and cried out that he
was a holy Child, and that she would save his life; for which (say they) she
obtained the favor to be brought under the wings of the Divine Majesty, and to
be called the daughter of God. His Sister Miriam, who had all this while beheld
the scene afar off, officiously proffered her service to the Princess to call
an Hebrew Nurse, and accordingly went and brought his Mother. To her care he
was committed with a charge to look tenderly to him, and the promise of a
reward. But the hopes of that could add but little, where nature was so much
concerned. Home goes the Mother joyful and proud of her own pledge, and the
royal charge, carefully providing for his tender years. His infant state being
passed, he was restored to the Princess, who adopted him for her own son, bred
him up at Court, where he was polished with all the arts of a noble and
ingenuous education, instructed in the modes of civility and behavior, in the
methods of policy and government, Learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,
whose renown for wisdom is not only once and again taken notice of in holy
Writ, but their admirable skill in all liberal Sciences, Natural, Moral and
Divine, beyond the rate and proportion of other Nations, is sufficiently
celebrated by foreign Writers. To these accomplishments God was pleased to add
a Divine temper of mind, a great zeal for God, not able to endure any thing
that seemed to clash with the interests of the Divine honor and glory; a
mighty courage and resolution in God's service, whose edge was not to be taken
off either by threats or charms; He was not afraid of the Kings commandment,
nor (...). 5. 27.
feared the wrath of the King, for he endured as seeing him that is invisible.
His contempt of the World was great and admirable, sleighting the honors of
Pharoah's Court, and the fair probabilities of the Crown, the treasures and
pleasures of that rich, soft and luxurious Country, out of a firm belief of the
invisible rewards of another World; Ver. 24, 25, 26
He refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, choosing rather to
suffer (...) with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season; Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in
Egypt; for he had respect unto the recompense of reward. Josephus relates, that
when but a child he was presented by the Princess to (...). l. 57.
her Father, as one whom she had adopted for her son, and designed for his
successor in the Kingdom, the King taking him up into his arms, put his Crown
upon his head, which the child immediately pulled off again, and throwing it
upon the ground, trampled it under his feet. An action which however looked
upon by some Courtiers then present, (...), (...) portending a fatal Omen to
the Kingdom, did however evidently presage his generous contempt of the
grandeur and honors of the Court, and those plausible advantages of
Sovereignty that were offered to him. His patience was insuperable, not tired
out with the abuses and disappointments of the King of Egypt, with the
hardships and troubles of the Wilderness, and which was beyond all, with the
cross and vexatious humors of a stubborn and unquiet generation. He was of a
most calm and treatable disposition, his spirit not easily ruffled with
passion; he who in the cause of God and Religion could be bold and fierce as a
Lion, was in his own patient as a Lamb, God himself having given this character
of him, That he was the meekest man upon the Earth.

3. THIS great personage thus excellently qualified, God made choice of him to
be the Commander and conducter of the Jewish Nation, and his Ambassador to the
King of Egypt, to demand the enfranchisement of his people, and free liberty to
go serve and worship the God of their Fathers. And that he might not seem a
mere pretender to Divine revelation, but that he really had an immediate
commission from Heaven, God was pleased to furnish him with extraordinary
Credentials, and to seal his Commission with a power of working Miracles beyond
all the Arts of Magic, and those tricks for which the Egyptian Sorcerers were
so famous in the World. But Pharaoh unwilling to part with such useful Vassals,
and having oppressed them beyond possibility of reconcilement, would not
hearken to the proposal, but sometimes downright rejected it, otherwhiles
sought by subtle and plausible pretenses to evade and shift it off; till by
many astonishing Miracles, and severe Judgments God extorted at length a grant
from him. Under the conduct of Moses they set forwards after at least two
hundred years servitude under the Egyptian yoke; and though (...) sensible of
his error, with a great Army pursued them, either to cut them off, or bring
them back, God made way for them through the midst of the Sea, the waters
becoming like a wall of Brass on each side of them, till being all passed to
the other (...), those invisible cords which had hitherto tied up that liquid
Element, bursting in sunder, the waters returned and overwhelmed their enemies
that pursued them. Thus God by the same stroke can protect his friends, and
punish his enemies. Nor did the Divine Providence here take its leave of them,
but became their constant guard and defense in all their journeys, waiting upon
them through their several stations in the wilderness; the most memorable
whereof was that at Mount Sinai in Arabia: The place where God delivered them
the pattern in the Mount, according to which the form both of their Church and
State was to be framed and modelled. In order hereunto Moses is called up into
the Mount, where by Fasting and Prayer he conversed with Heaven, and received
the body of their Laws. Three days the people were by a pious and devout care
to sanctify and prepare themselves for the promulgation of the Law, they might
not come near their Wives, were commanded to wash their clothes, as an emblem
and representation of that cleansing of the heart, and that inward purity of
mind, where with they were to entertain the Divine will. On the third day in
the morning God descended from Heaven with great appearances of Majesty and
terror, with thunders and lightnings, with black clouds and tempests, with
shouts and the loud noise of a trumpet (which trumpet, say the Jews, was made
of the horn of that Ram that was offered in the room of Isaac) with fire and
smoke on the top of the Mount, ascending up like the smoke of a Furnace; the
Mountain it self greatly quaking, the people trembling; nay, so terrible was
the sight, that Moses (who had so frequently, so familiarly conversed Heb. 12.
21.
with God) said, I exceedingly fear and quake. All which pompous trains of
terror and magnificence God made use of at this time, to excite the more solemn
attention to his Laws, and to beget a greater reverence and veneration for them
in the minds of the people, and to let them see how able he was to call them to
account, and by the severest penalties to vindicate the violation of his Law.

4. THE Code and Digest of those Laws, which God now gave to the Jews as the
terms of that National Covenant that he made with them, consisted of three
sorts of Precepts, Moral, Ecelesiastical and Political; which the Jews will
have intimated by those three words, that so frequently occur in the writings
of Moses, Laws, Statutes and Judgments. By (...) Laws, they understand the
Moral Law, the notices of good and evil naturally implanted in men's minds: By
(...) or Statutes, Ceremonial Precepts, instituted by God with peculiar
reference to his Church: By (...) or Judgments, Political Laws concerning
Justice and Equity, the order of humane society, and the prudent and peaceable
managery of the Commonwealth. The Moral Laws inserted into this Code are those
contained in the Decalogue, (...) as they are called, the ten words that were
written upon two Tables of Stone. These Deuteronomy. 4. 13.
were nothing else but a summary Comprehension of the great Laws of Nature,
engraven at first upon the minds of all men in the World; the most material
part whereof was now consigned to writing, and incorporated into the body of
the Jewish Law. I know the Decalogue is generally taken to be a complete System
of all natural Laws: But whoever impartially considers the matter, will find
that there are many instances of duty so far from being commanded in it, that
they are not reducible to any part of it, unless hooked in by subtilties of
wit, and drawn thither by forced and unnatural inferences. What provision
except in one case or two do any of those Commandments make against neglects of
duty? Where do they obligue us to do good to others, to love, assist, relieve
our enemies? Gratitude and thankfulness to benefactors is one of the prime and
essential Laws of Nature, and yet no where that I know of (unless we will have
it implied in the Preface to the Law) commanded or intimated in the Decalogue:
With many other cases, which it is naturally evident are our duty, whereof no
footsteps are to be seen in this Compendium, unless hunted out by nice and
sagacious reasonings, and made out by a long train of consequences, never
originally intended in the Commandment, and which not one in a thousand are
capable of deducing from it. It is probable therefore that God reduced only so
many of the Laws of Nature into writing, as were proper to the present state
and capacities of that people to whom they were given, superadding some, and
explaining others by the Preaching and Ministry of the Prophets, who in their
several Ages endeavored to bring men out of the Shades and Thickets, into
clear light and Noonday, by clearing up men's obligations to those natural and
essential duties, in the practice whereof humane nature was to be advanced unto
its just accomplishment and perfection. Hence it was that our Lord, who came
not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill and perfect it, has explained the
obligations of the natural Law more fully and clearly, more plainly and
intelligibly, rendered our duty more fixed and certain, and extended many
instances of obedience to higher measures, to a greater exactness and
perfection, than ever they were understood to have before. Thus he commands a
free and universal charity, not only that we love our friends and relations,
but that we love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them that
hate us, and pray for them that despitefully use and persecute us: He has
forbidden malice and revenge with more plainness and smartness; obliged us not
only to live according to the measures of sobriety, but extended it to
self-denial, and taking up the Cross, and laying down our lives, whenever the
honor of God, and the interest of Religion calls for it; he not only commands
us to do no wrong, but when we have done it, to make restitution; not only to
retrench our irregular appetites, but to cut off our right hand, and pluck out
our right eye, and cast them from us, that is, mortify and offer violence to
those vicious inclinations, which are as dear to us, as the most useful and
necessary parts and members of our body. Besides all this, had God intended the
Decalogue for a perfect summary of the Laws of Nature, we cannot suppose that
he would have taken any but such into the collection, whereas the Fourth
Commandment concerning the Seventh day is unquestionably Typical and
Ceremonial, and has nothing more of a Natural and Eternal obligation in it,
than that God should be served and honored both with public and private
worship, which cannot be done without some portions of time set apart for it:
But that this should be done just at such a time, and by such proportions, upon
the Seventh rather than the Sixth or the Eighth day, is no part of natural
Religion. And indeed the reasons and arguments that are annexed to it, to
enforce the observance of it, clearly show that it is of a later date, and of
another nature than the rest of those Precepts in whose company we find it,
though it seems at first sight to pass without any peculiar note of
discrimination from the rest. As for the rest they are Laws of Eternal
righteousness, and did not derive their value and authority from the Divine
sanction which God here gave them at Mount Sinai, but from their own moral and
internal goodness and equity, being founded in the nature of things, and the
essential and unchangeable differences of good and evil. By which means they
always were, always will be obligatory and indispensable, being as Eternal and
Immutable as the nature of God himself.

5. THE second sort of Laws were Ceremonial, Divine Constitutions concerning
Ritual observances, and matters of Ecclesiastical cognizance and relation, and
were instituted for a double end, partly for the more orderly government of the
Church, and the more decent administration of the worship of God; partly that
they might be types and figures of the Evangelical state, Shadows of good
things to come, visible and symbolical representments of the Messiah, and those
great blessings and privileges which he was to introduce into the World; which
doubtless was the reason why God was so infinitely punctual and particular in
his directions about these matters, giving orders about the minutest
circumstances of the Temple ministration, because every part of it had a glance
at a future and better state of things. The number of them was great, and the
observation burdensome, the whole Nation groaning under the servility of that
yoke. They were such as principally related to God's worship, and may be
reduced either to such as concerned the worship it self, or the circumstances
of time, place and persons that did attend it. Their worship consisted chiefly
in three things, Prayers, Sacrifices and Sacraments. Prayers were daily put up
together with their Offerings, and though we have very few Constitutions
concerning them, yet the constant practice of that Church, and the particular
forms of Prayer yet extant in their writings, are a sufficient evidence.
Sacrifices were the constant and most solemn part of their public worship;
yea, they had their (...) their continual burnt-offering, a Lamb (...). 29.
offered Morning and Evening with a Measure of Flower, Oil and Wine, the charge
whereof was defrayed out of the Treasury of the Temple. The rest of their
Sacrifices may be considered either as they were Expiatory, or Eucharistical.
Expiatory were those that were offered as an atonement for the sins of the
people, to (...) the Divine displeasure, and to procure his pardon, which they
did by virtue of their Typical relation to that great Sacrifice which the Son
of God was in the fullness of time to offer up for the sins of the World. They
were either of a more general relation, for the expiation of sin in general,
whole burnt-offerings, which were entirely (the skin and the entrails only
excepted) burnt to ashes; or of a more private and particular concernment,
designed for the redemption of particular offenses, whereof there were two
sorts: (...) or the sin-offering, for involuntary offenses committed through
error or ignorance, which according to the condition and capacity of the
Person were either for the Priest, or the Prince, or the whole Body of the
People, or a private Person. The other (...) or the trepass offering, for sins
done wittingly, studied and premeditated transgressions, and which the Man
could not pretend to be the effects of surprise or chance. Eucharistical
Sacrifices were testimonies of gratitude to God for mercies received, whereof
three sorts especially. 1. (...) or the meat offering, made up of things
without life, oil, fine flower, incense, etc. which the worshipper offered as a
thankful return for the daily preservation and provisions of life, and
therefore it consisted only of the fruits of the ground. 2. (...) or the
peace offering; this was done either out of a grateful sense of some blessing
conferred, or as a voluntary offering to which the Person had obliged himself
by vow in expectation of some safety or deliverance which he had prayed for. In
this Sacrifice God had his part, the fat which was the only part of it burnt by
fire, the Priest his, as the instrument of the ministration, the Offerer his,
that he might have wherewith to rejoice before the Lord. 3. (...) a
thanksgivingoffering, or a Sacrifice of praise, it was a mixed kind of
Sacrifice, consisting of living Creatures, and the fruits of the Earth, which
they might offer at their own will, but it must be eaten the same day, and none
of it left until the morrow. What other provisions we meet with concerning
ceremonial uncleanness, first fruits, the firstborn, tenths, etc. are
conveniently reducible to some of these heads which we have already mentioned.
The last part of their worship concerned their Sacraments, which were two,
Circumcision, and the Paschal Supper. Circumcision was the federal Rite annexed
by God as a Seal to the Covenant which he made with Abraham and his Posterity,
and accordingly renewed and taken into the Body of the Mosaical constitutions.
It was to be administered the eighth day, which the Jews understand not of so
many days complete, but the current time, six full days, and part of the other.
In the room of this, Baptism succeeds in the Christian Church. The Passover,
which was the eating of the Paschal Lamb, was instituted as an Annual memorial
of their signal and miraculous deliverance out of Egypt, and as a typical
representation of our spiritual Redemption by Christ from the bondage of sin
and that Hell that follows it. It was to be celebrated with a Male-lamb without
blemish taken out of the Flock, to note the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the World, who was taken from among men, a Lamb without blemish and
without spot, holy, harmless, and separate from sinners. The Door-posts of the
House were to be sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, to signify our security
from the Divine vengeance by the blood of sprinkling. The Lamb was to be
roasted and eaten whole, typifying the great sufferings of our blessed Savior,
who was to pass through the fire of Divine wrath, and to be wholly embraced and
entertained by us in all his Offices, as King, Priest, and Prophet. None but
those that were clean and circumcised might eat of it, to show that only true
believers, holy and good men can be partakers of Christ and the merits of his
Death; It was to be eaten standing, with their Loins girt, and their staff in
their hand, to put them in mind what haste they made out of the house of
bondage, and to intimate to us what present diligence we should use to get from
under the empire and tyranny of sin and Satan, under the conduct and assistance
of the Captain of our Salvation. The eating of it was to be mixed with bitter
herbs, partly as a memorial of that bitter servitude which they underwent in
the Land of Egypt, partly as a type of that repentance and bearing of the cross
(duties difficult and unpleasant) which all true Christians must undergo.
Lastly, it was to be eaten with unleavened Bread, all manner of leaven being at
that time to be banished out of their Houses with the most critical diligence
and curiosity, to represent what infinite care we should take to cleanse and
purify our hearts, to purge (...) 1 Cor. 5. 7. 8.
the old leaven, that we may be a new lump: and that since Christ our Passover
is sacrificed for us, therefore we should keep the Feast (the Festival
commemoration of his Death) not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of
malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

6. THE Places of their Public Worship were either the Tabernacle made in the
Wilderness, or the Temple built by Solomon, between which in the main there was
no other difference, than that the Tabernacle was an ambulatory Temple, as the
Temple was a standing Tabernacle, together with all the rich costly Furniture
that was in them. The parts of it were three, the Holiest of all, whither none
entered but the High Priest, and that but once a Year, this was a type of
Heaven; the holy place, whither the Priests entered every Day to perform their
Sacred Ministrations; and the outward Court, whither the People came to offer
up their Prayers and Sacrifices. In the Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holiest of all
there was the Golden Censer, typifying the Merits and Intercession of Christ;
the Ark of the Covenant, as a representation of him who is the Mediator of the
Covenant between God and man; the Golden Pot of Manna, a type of our Lord, the
true Manna, the Bread that came down from Heaven; the Rod of Aaron that budded,
signifying the Branch of the Root of Jesse, that though our Savior's Family
should be reduced to a state of so much meanness and obscurity, as to appear
but like the trunk or (...). 11. 1-10.
stump of a Tree, yet there should come forth a rod out of this stem of Jesse,
and a branch grow Romans 15. 12.
out of his roots, which should stand for an Ensign of the People, and in him
should the Gentiles trust. And within the Ark were the two Tables of the
Covenant, to denote him, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, and who is the end and perfection of the Law: Over it were the
Cherubims of glory shadowing the Mercy-seat, who looking toward each other,
and both to the Mercy-seat denoted the two Testaments, or Dispensations of the
Church, which admirably agree, and both direct to Christ the Mediator of the
Covenant. The Propitiatory, or Mercy-seat was the Golden covering to the Ark,
where God vailing his Majesty was wont to manifest his Presence, to give
Answers, and show Himself reconciled to the People, herein eminently (...) our
Blessed Savior, who interposes between us and the Divine Majesty, whom God
has set forth to be a Propitiation, through faith in his blood for the
remission of sins; so that now we may come boldly to the Throne of Grace, and
find mercy to help us. Within the Sanctuary, or the Holy Place was the Golden
(...) with Seven Branches, representing Christ, who is the Light of the World,
and who enlightens every one that comes into the World, and before whose Throne
there are said to be seven Lamps of Fire, which are the seven spirits Rev. 4. 5.
of God: The Table, compassed about with a Border and a Crown of Gold, denoting
the Ministry, and the Shewbread set upon it, shadowing out Christ, the Bread
of Life, who by the Ministry of the Gospel is offered to the World: here also
was the Golden Altar of Incense, whereon they burnt the sweet (...) Morning and
Evening, to signify to us that our Lord is the true Altar, by whom all our
Prayers and Services are rendered the odor of a sweet smell acceptable unto
God; to this the Psalmist refers, Let my Prayer be (...) 141. 2.
set forth before thee as incense, and the (...) up of my hands as the Evening
Sacrifice. The third part of the Tabernacle, as also of the Temple, was the
Court of Israel, wherein stood the Brazen Altar, upon which the Holy Fire was
continually preserved, by which the Sacrifices were consumed, one of the Five
great Prerogatives that were wanting in the second Temple. Here was the Brazen
Laver, with its Basis, made of the brazen Looking-glasses of the Women that
assembled at the Door of the Tabernacle, wherein the Priests washed their Hands
and their Feet, when going into the Sanctuary, and both they and the People
when about to offer Sacrifice; to teach us to purify our hearts, and to
cleanse our selves (...) all filthiness of flesh and spirit, especially when we
approach to offer up our services to Heaven; hereunto David alludes, I will
wash mine hands in innocence, Psalm 26. 6.
so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord. Solomon in building the Temple made an
addition of a fourth Court, the Court of the Gentiles, whereinto the unclean
Jews and Gentiles might enter, and in this was the Corban or Treasury, and it
is sometimes in the New Testament called the Temple. To these Laws concerning
(...) Place of Worship we may reduce those that relate to the holy Vessels and
Utensils of the Tabernacle and the Temple, Candlesticks, Snuffers, Dishes, etc.
which also had their proper mysteries and significations.

7. THE stated times and seasons of their worship are next to be considered,
and they were either Daily, Weekly, Monthly, or Yearly. Their Daily worship was
at the time of the Morning, and the Evening Sacrifice; their Weekly solemnity
was the Sabbath, which was to be kept with all imaginable care and strictness,
they being commanded to rest in it from all servile labors, and to attend the
Duties and Offices of Religion, a type of that rest that remains for the People
of God. Their monthly Festivals were the New Mons, wherein they were to blow
the Trumpets over their Sacrifices and Oblations, and to observe them with
great expressions of joy and triumph, in a thankful resentment of the blessings
which all that Month had been conferred upon them. Their Annual Solemnities
were either ordinary or extraordinary; Ordinary were those that returned every
Year, whereof the first was the Passover, to be celebrated upon the Fourteenth
day of the first Month, as a Memorial of their great deliverance out of Egypt:
The second, Pentecost, called also the Feast of Weeks, because just seven
Weeks, or fifty days after the Passover: Instituted it was partly in memory of
the promulgation of the Law, published at Mount Sinai fifty days after their
celebration of the Passover in Egypt, partly as a thanksgiving for the in
gathering of their Harvest, which usually was fully brought in about this time.
The third was the Feast of Tabernacles, kept upon the Fifteenth day of the
Seventh Month for the space of Seven days together; at which time they dwelt in
Booths made of green Boughs, as a memento of that time when they sojourned in
Tents and Tabernacles in the Wilderness, and a sensible demonstration of the
transitory duration of the present life, that the Earthly house of our
Tabernacle must be dissolved, and that therefore we should secure a building of
God, an house not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. These were the three
great solemnities, wherein all the Males were obliged to appear at Jerusalem,
and to present themselves and their offerings in testimony of their homage and
devotion unto God: Besides which they had some of lesser moment, such as their
Feast of Trumpets, and that of Expiation. The Annual Festivals extraordinary
were those that recurr'd but once in the periodical return of several years;
such was the Sabbatical year, wherein the Land was to lie fallow, and to rest
from ploughing and sowing, and all manner of cultivation; and this was to be
every seventh year, typifying the Eternal Sabbatism in Heaven, where good men
shall rest from their labors, and their works shall follow them. But the great
Sabbatical year of all was that of Jubilee, which returned at the end of seven
ordinary Sabbatick years, that is, every fiftieth year, the approach whereof
was proclaimed by the sound of Trumpets; in it servants were released, all
debts discharged, and mortgaged Estates reverted to their proper heirs. And how
evidently did this shadow out the state of the Gospel, and our Lord's being
sent to preach good tidings to the meek, to bind Isa. 61. 1, 2.
up the broken hearted, to preach liberty to the captives, and the opening of
the prison to them Luke 4. 18.
that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, that they might
lift up their heads, because their redemption drew nigh?

8. LASTLY, They had Laws concerning the persons by whom their public worship
was administered; and here there was appointed an High Priest, who had his
proper offices and rules of duty, his peculiar attire and consecration;
ordinary Priests whose business was to instruct the people, to Pray and offer
sacrifice, to bless the Congregation, and judge in cases of Leprosy, and such
like; at their Ordination, they were to be chosen before all the people, to be
sprinkled with the water of Expiation, their Hair shaved, and their Bodies
washed, afterward anointed, and sacrifices to be offered for them, and then
they might enter upon their Priestly ministrations. Next to these were the
Levites, who were to assist the Priests in preparing the Sacrifices, to bear
the Tabernacle (while it lasted) and lay up its Vessels and Utensils, to
purify and cleanse the Vessels and Instruments, to guard the Courts and
Chambers of the Temple, to watch weekly in the Temple by their turns, to sing
and celebrate the praises of God with Hymns and Musical Instruments, and to
join with the Priests in judging and determining Ceremonial causes; they were
not to be taken into the full discharge of their Function till the thirtieth,
nor to be kept at it beyond the fiftieth year of their age; God mercifully
thinking it fit to give them then a Writ of Ease, whose strength might be
presumed sufficiently impaired by truckling for so many years under such
toilsom and laborious ministrations. Though the Levitical Priests were types of
Christ, yet it was the High Priest, who did eminently typifie him, and that in
the unity and singularity of his office; for though many Orders and Courses of
inferior Priests and Ministers, yet was there but one High Priest, There is one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus; in the qualifications
necessary to his election, as to place, he was to be taken out of the Tribe of
Levi; as to his person, which was to be every ways perfect and comely, and the
manner of his Consecration; in his singular capacity, that he alone might enter
into the holy of holies, which he did once every year upon the great day of
Expiation, with a mighty pomp and train of Ceremonies, killing Sacrifices,
burning Incense, sprinkling the blood of the Sacrifice before and upon the
Mercyseat, going within the veil, and making an atonement within the holy
place. All which immediately referred to Christ, who by the sacrifice of
himself, and through the veil of his own flesh entered, not into the holy place
made with hands, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God
for us. All which might be represented more at large, but that I intend not a
discourse about these matters.

9. BESIDES the Laws which we have hitherto enumerated, there were several
other particular Commands, Ritual Constitutions about Meats and Drinks, and
other parts of humane life. Such was the difference they were to make between
the Creatures, some to be clean, and others unclean; such were several sorts of
pollution and uncleanness, which were not in their own nature sins, but
Ceremonial defilements; of this kind were several provisions about Apparel,
Diet, and the ordering Family-affairs, all evidently of a Ceremonial aspect,
but too long to be insisted on in this place. The main design of this
Ceremonial Law was to point out to us the Evangelical state, The Law had only a
shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of Heb. 10. 1.
the things themselves, the body was Christ, and therefore though the Law came
by Moses, John 1. 17.
yet grace and truth (the truth of all those types and figures) came by Christ.
It was time for Moses to resign the Chair, when once this great Prophet was
come into the World. Ceremonies could no longer be of use, when once the
substance was at hand: well may the Stars disappear at the rising of the Sun:
the Messiah being cut off, should cause the Sacrifice and the Oblation to
cease. At the time of Christ's death the veil of the Temple from top to bottom
rent in sunder, to show that his death had revealed the mysteries, and
destroyed the foundations of the legal Economy, and put a period to the Jom.
cap. 4. fol. 39. ap. (...). p. 218.
whole Temple-ministration. Nay, the Jews themselves confess, that forty years
before the destruction of the Temple (a date that corresponds exactly with the
death of Christ) the Lot did no more go up into the right hand of the Priest
(this is meant of his dismission of the Scapegoat) nor the scarlet Ribbon,
usually laid upon the forehead of the Goat, any more grow white, (this was a
sign that the Goat was accepted for the remission of their sins) nor the
Evening Lamp burn any longer, and that the gates of the Temple opened of their
own accord. By which as at once they confirm what the Gospel reports of the
opening of the Sanctum Sanctorum by the scissure of the veil; so they plainly
confess, that at that very time their Sacrifices and Temple-services began to
cease and fail: As indeed the reason of them then ceasing, the things
themselves must needs vanish into nothing.

10. THE third sort of Laws given to the Jews were Judicial and Political,
these were the Municipal Laws of the Nation, enacted for the good of the State,
and were a kind of appendage to the second Table of the Decalogue, as the
Ceremonial Laws were of the first. They might be reduced to four general heads;
such as respected men in their private and domestical capacities, concerning
Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants; such as
concerned the Public and the Commonwealth, relating to Magistrates, and Courts
of Justice, to Contracts and matters of right and wrong, to Estates and
Inheritances, to Executions and Punishments, etc. such as belonged to
strangers, and matters of a soreign nature, as Laws concerning Peace and War,
Commerce and Dealing with persons of another Nation; or lastly, such as secured
the honor and the interests of Religion, Laws against Apostates and Idolaters,
Wizards, Conjurers and false Prophets, against Blasphemy, Sacrilege, and such
like; all which not being so proper to my purpose, I omit a more particular
enumeration of them. These Laws were peculiarly calculated for the Jewish
State, and that while kept up in that Country wherein God had placed them, and
therefore must needs determine and expire with it. Nor can they be made a
pattern and standard for the Laws of other Nations; for, though proceeding from
the wisest Lawgiver, they cannot reasonably be imposed upon any State or
Kingdom, unless where there is an equal concurrence of circumstances, as there
were in that people, for whom God enacted them. They went off the Stage with
the Jewish Polity, and if any parts of them do still remain obligatory, they
bind not as Judicial Laws, but as branches of the Law of Nature, the reason of
them being Immutable and Eternal. I know not whether it may here be useful to
remark what the Jews so frequently tell us of, that the entire body of the
Mosaic Law consists of DCXIII. Precepts, intimated (say they) (...). 33. 4.
in that place where it is said Moses commanded us a Law, where the Numeral
Letters of the word (...) or Law make up the number of DCXI. and the two that
are wanting to make up the complete number are the two first Precepts of the
Decalogue, which were not given by Moses to the people, but immediately by God
himself. Others say (...) ap. (...). de (...). Div. c. 23. p. 338.
that there are just DCXIII. letters in the Decalogue, and that every letter
answers to a Law: But some that have had the patience to tell them, assure us
that there are two whole words consisting of seven letters supernumerary, which
in my mind quite spoils the computation. These DCXIII. Precepts they divide
into CCXLVIII. (...), according to the number of the parts of man's body (which
they make account are just so many) to put him in mind to serve God with all
his bodily powers, as if every member R. (...). de Number. (...). ap. (...).
of his body should say to him, (...) make use of me to fulfill the command; and
into CCCLXV. Negative, according to the number of the days of the year, that so
every day may call upon a man, and say to him, (...) oh do not in me transgress
the Command: Or as others will have it, they answer to the Veins or Nerves
(...). lib. 2. c. (...).
in the body of man; that as the complete frame and compages of man's body is
made up of CCXLVIII. Members, and CCCLXV. Nerves, and the Law of so many
affirmative, and so many negative Precepts, it denotes to us, that the whole
perfection and accomplishment of man lies in an accurate and diligent
observance of the Divine Law. Each of these divisions they reduce under twelve
houses, answerable to the twelve Tribes of Israel. In the Affirmative Precepts
the first House is that of Divine worship, consisting of twenty Precepts; the
second, the House of the Sanctuary, containing XIX; the third, the House of
Sacrifices, wherein are LVII; the fourth, that of Cleanness and Pollution,
containing XVIII; the fifth, of Tithes and Alms, under which are XXXII; the
sixth, of Meats and Drinks, containing VII; the seventh, of the Passover,
concerning Feasts, containing XX; the eighth, of Judgment, XIII; the ninth, of
Doctrine, XXV; the tenth, of Marriage, and concerning Women, XII; the eleventh,
of Judgments criminal, VIII; the twelfth, of Civil (...), XVII. In the Negative
Precepts, the first House is concerning the worship of the Planets, containing
XLVII Commands; the second, of separation from the Heathens, XIII; the third,
concerning the reverence due to holy things, XXIX; the fourth, of Sacrifice and
Priesthood, LXXXII; the fifth, of Meats, XXXVIII; the sixth, of Fields and
Harvest, XVIII; the seventh, of Doctrine, XLV; the eighth, of Justice, XLVII;
the ninth, of Feasts, X; the tenth, of Purity and Chastity, XXIV; the eleventh,
of Wedlock, VIII; the twelfth, concerning the Kingdom, IV. A method not
contemptible, as which might minister to a distinct and useful explication of
the whole Law of Moses.

11. THE next thing considerable under the Mosaical Economy, was the methods
of the Divine revelation, by what ways God communicated his mind to them,
either concerning present emergences or future events, and this was done,
(...), as the Apostle tells us, at sundry times, or by sundry degrees and
parcels, and in diverse manners, by various methods of revelation, whereof
three most considerable, the Urim and Thummim, the audible voice, and the
spirit of Prophecy, imparted in dreams, visions, etc. We shall make some brief
remarks upon them, referring the Reader, who desires fuller satisfaction
herein, to those who purposely treat about these matters. The Urim and Thummim
was a way of revelation peculiar to the High Priest: Thou shall put on the
breast plate of Judgment, the Urim and the Thummim, and they shall Exodus 28. 30.
be upon Aaron's heart, when he goes in before the Lord, and Aaron shall bear
the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the Lord
continually. Thus Eleazar the Priest is commanded to ask counsel after the
Judgment of Urim before the Lord. What this Numb. 27 21.
Urim and Thummim was, and what the manner of receiving answers by it, is
difficult, if not impossible to tell, there being scarce any one difficulty
that I know of in the Bible that has more exercised the thoughts either of
Jewish or Christian Writers. Whether it was some addition to the High Priests
breast plate made by the hand of some curious Artist, or whether only those two
words engraven upon it, or the great name Jehovah carved and put within the
foldings of the breast plate, or whether the twelve stones resplendent with
light, and completed to perfection with the Tribes names therein, or whether
some other mysterious piece of artifice immediately framed by the hand of
Heaven, and given to Moses, when he delivered him the two Tables of the Law, is
vain and endless to enquire, because impossible to determine. Nor is the manner
of its giving answers less uncertain: Whether at such times the fresh and
orient luster of the stones signified the answer in the Affirmative, while
their dull and dead color spoke the Negative; or whether it was by some
extraordinary protuberancy and thrusting forth of the letters engraven upon the
stones, from the conjunction whereof the Divine Oracle was gathered; or whether
probably it might be, that when the High Priest enquired of God, with this
breast plate upon him, God did either by a lively voice, or by immediate
suggestions to his mind, give him a distinct and perspicuous answer,
illuminating his mind with the Urim, or the light of the knowledge of his will
in those cases, and satisfying his doubts and scruples with the Thummim of a
perfect and complete determination of those difficulties that were propounded
to him, thereby enabling him to give a satisfactory and infallible answer in
all the particulars that lay before him. And this several of the Jews seem to
intend, when they make this way of revelation one of the degrees of the Holy
Ghost, and say that no sooner did the High Priest put on the Pectoral, and had
the case propounded to him, but that he was immediately clothed with the Holy
Spirit. But it is to little purpose to hunt after that where fancy and
conjecture must decide the case. Indeed among the various conjectures about
this matter, none appears with greater probability than the opinion (...). de
Vaticin. lib. 3. (...). 3.
of those who conceive the Urim and Thummim to have been a couple of Teraphim,
or little Images (probably formed in humane shape) put within the hollow
foldings of the Pontifical breast plate, from whence God by the ministry of an
Angel vocally answered those interrogatories which the High Priest made:
Nothing being more common even in the early Ages of the World, than such
Teraphim in those Eastern Countries, usually placed in their Temples, and
whence the Demon was wont oracularly to determine the cases brought before
him. And as God permitted the Jews the use of Sacrifices, which had been
notoriously abused to Superstition and Idolatry in the Heathen World, so he
might indulge them these Teraphim (though now converted to a sacred use) that
so he might by degrees wean them from the Rites of the Gentile World, to which
they had so fond an inclination. And this probably was the reason, why when
Moses is so particular in describing the other parts of the Sacerdotal
Ornaments, nothing at all is said of this, because a thing of common use among
the Nations, with whom they had conversed, and notoriously known among
themselves. And such we may suppose the Prophet intended, when he threatened the
Jews, that they should abide without a Sacrifice, without Hos. 3. 4.
an Image or Altar, without an Ephod, and without a Teraphim. A notion very
happily improved by an ingenious Pen, whose acute conjectures, and elaborate
dissertations about Joan. (...). de (...) and Thum. Edit. (...). 1670. 8.
this matter justly deserve commendation even from those who differ from it. It
seems to have been a kind of political Oracle and to be consulted only in great
and weighty cases, as the Election of Supreme Magistrates, making War, etc. and
only by Persons of the highest rank, none being permitted (say the Jews) to
enquire of it, (...) (...). Jom. cap. 7. Sect. 5. page 167.
unless in a case wherein the King, or the Sanhedrim, or the whole Congregation
was concerned.

12. A SECOND way of Divine Revelation was by an audible voice, accompanied
many times with Thunder, descending as it were from Heaven, and directing them
in any emergency of affairs. This the Jewish Writers call (...), the daughter
or Echo of a (...) oice, which they confess to have been the lowest kind of
revelation, and to have been in use only in the times of the second Temple,
when all other ways of Prophecy were ceased. But notwithstanding their common
and confident assertions whether ever there was any such standing way of
revelation as this, is justly questionable Dr. (...). H. (...) Matthew. 3. 17.
(nay it is peremptorily denied by one incomparably versed in the Talmudick
Writings, who adds, that if there was any such thing at any time, it was done
by Magic Arts, and diabolical delusions) partly because it is only delivered
by Jewish Writers, whose faith and honesty is too well known to the World to be
trusted in stories that make so much for the honor of their Nation, not to
mention their extravagant propension to lies and fabulous reports; partly,
because by their own confession God had withdrawn all his standing Oracles and
ordinary ways of Revelation, their notorious impieties having caused Heaven to
retire, and therefore much less would it correspond with them by such immediate
converses; partly, because this seemed to be a way more accommodate to the
Evangelical dispensation at the appearance of the Son of God in the World. A
voice from Heaven is the most immediate testimony, and therefore sit to do
honor to him who came down from Heaven, and was sure to meet with an obdurate
and incredulous Generation, and to give evidence to that Doctrine that he
published to the World. Thus by a Bath-Col or a Voice from Heaven God bare
witness to our Savior at his Baptism, and a second time at his
Transfiguration, and again at the Passover at Jerusalem, when there came a
Voice from Heaven, which the People took for Thunder, or the Communication of
an Angel, and most of S. John's intelligences from above recorded in his Book
of Revelation are ushered in with an, I heard a (...) from Heaven.

13. BUT the most frequent and standing method of Divine communications was
that whereby God was wont to transact with the Prophets, and in extraordinary
cases with other Men, which was either by Dreams, Visions, or immediate
Inspirations. The way by Dreams was when the Person being overtaken with a deep
sleep, and all the exterior senses locked up, God presented the Species and
Images of things to their understandings, and that in such a manner, that they
might be able to apprehend the will of God, which they presently did upon their
awaking out of sleep. These Divine Dreams the Jews distinguish into two sorts,
Monitory, such as were sent only by way of instruction and admonition, to give
Men notice of what they were to do, or warning of what they should avoid, such
were the Dreams of Pharaoh, Abimelech, Laban, etc. or else they were
Prophetical, when God by such a powerful energy acted upon the mind and
imagination of the Prophet, as carried the strength and force of a Divine
evidence along with it. This was sometimes done by a clear and distinct
impression of the thing upon the mind without any dark or aenigmatical
representation of it, such as God made to Samuel, when he first revealed
himself to him in the Temple: sometimes by apparition, yet so as the Man though
a-sleep was able to discern an Angel conversing with him. By Visions, God
usually communicated himself two ways. First, when something really appeared to
the sight; thus Moses beheld the Bush burning, and stood there while God
conversed with him; Manoah and his (...) saw the Angel, while he took his
leave, and in a flaming Pyramid went up to Heaven; the three Angels appeared to
Abraham a little before the fatal ruin of Sodom; all which apparitions were
unquestionably true and real, the Angel assuming an humane shape, that he might
the freelier converse with, and deliver his message to those to whom he was
sent. Secondly, by powerful impressions upon the imagination, usually done
while the Prophet was awake, and had the free and uninterrupted exercise of his
reason, though the Vision often overpowered, and cast him into a trance, that
the Soul being more retired from sensible objects might the closer intend those
Divine notices that were represented to it. Thus all the Prophets had the Ideas
of those things that they were to deliver to the People, the more strongly
impressed upon their fancies, and this commonly when they were in the greatest
solitude and privacy, and their powers most called in, that the Prophetical
influx might have the greater force upon them. In some such way S. Paul was
caught up into the third Heaven, probably not so much by any real separation of
his Soul from his Body, or local translation of his Spirit thither, as by a
profound abstraction of it from his corporeal Senses, God, during the time of
the trance, entertaining it with an internal and admirable (...) of the glory
and happiness of that state, as truly and effectually, as if his Soul had been
really conveyed thither.

14. THIRDLY, God was wont to communicate his mind by immediate Inspirations,
whereby he immediately transacted with the understandings of Men, without any
relation to their sancy or their senses. It was the most pacate and serene way
of Prophecy, God imparting his mind to the Prophet not by Dreams or Visions,
but while they were awake, their powers active, and their minds calm and
undisturbed. This the Jews call (...) the Holy Spirit, or that kind of
Revelation that was directly conveyed into the mind by the most efficacious
irradiation and inspiration of the Holy Spirit; God by these Divine illapses
enabling the Prophet clearly and immediately to (...) Vid. (...). Mor. (...).
2. cap. 45. p. 317.
the things delivered to him. And in this way the (...) or holy Writings (...)
dictated and conveyed to the World, in which respect the Apostle says, that all
(...) is (...), given by divine inspiration. The highest pitch of this
Prophetical revelation was (...) the gradus Mosaicus, or that way of Prophecy
that God used toward Moses, of whom it is particularly said, that the Lord
spoke unto Moses Exodus 33. 11.
face to face, as a Man speaks unto his friend: and elsewhere it is evidently
distinguished from all inferior ways of Prophecy, If there be a Prophet among
you, I the Lord will (...). 12. 6, 7, 8.
make my self known unto him in a Vision, and will speak unto him in a Dream:
(...) Servant Moses is not so, with him I will speak mouth to mouth, even
apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the similitude of the Lord shall he
behold: Clearly implying a mighty (...) in God's way of revelation to Moses
above that of other Prophets, which the Jewish Writers make to have lain in
four things. First, that in all God's communications to Moses (...) immediately
spoke to his understanding, without any impressions upon fancy, any visible
appearances, any Dreams or Visions of the Night. Secondly, that Moses had
prophecies conveyed to him without any fears or consternations, whereas the
other Prophets were astonished and weakened at the sight of God. Thirdly, that
Moses had no previous dispositions or preparations to make him capable of the
Divine revelation, but could directly go to God and consult him, as a man
speaks with his friend, other Prophets being forced many times by some
preparatory arts to invite the Prophetic spirit to come upon them. Fourthly,
that Moses had a freedom and liberty of spirit to prophecy at all times, and
could when he pleased have recourse to the Sacred Oracle. But as to this the
Scripture intimates no such thing, the spirit of Prophecy retiring from him at
some times as well as from the rest of the Prophets. And indeed the Prophetic
spirit did not reside in the holy men by way of habit, but occasionally, as God
saw fitting to pour it out upon them; it was not in them as light is in the
Sun, but as light in the Air, and consequently depended upon the immediate
irradiations of the Spirit of God.

15. THESE Divine Communications were so conveyed to the minds of the Prophets
and inspired (...), that they always knew them to be Divine revelations; so
mighty and (...) was the evidence that came along with them, that there could
be no doubt, but they were the birth of Heaven. It Is true, when the Prophetic
spirit at any time seized upon wicked men, they understood not its effect upon
them, nor were in the least improved and bettered by it; the revelation passed
through them, as a sound through a Trunk, or water through a Leaden-pipe,
without any particular and distinct apprehension of the thing, or useful
impression made upon their minds, as is evident besides others in the case of
Caiaphas and Balaam, of which last the Jews say expressly (...) that he
prophesied according to the will of God, but understood not what he prophesied.
But it was otherwise with the true Prophets, they always knew who 'twas that
acted them, and what was the meaning of that intelligence that was communicated
to them. In the Gentile world, when the Demon entered into the inspired person,
he was usually carried out to the furious transports of rage and madness. But
in the Prophets of God, although the impulse might sometimes be very strong and
violent (whence the Prophet Jeremy complains, Mine heart within me is broken,
all my bones shake, I am like a drunken man, like a man whom wine has
overcome, because of the Lord, and because of the words of his holiness) so as
a little to ruffle their imagination, yet never so as to discompose their
reason, or hinder them from a clear perception of the notices conveyed upon
their minds; (...), Adv. (...). XLVIII p. 176.
says Epiphanius, the Prophet had his Oracles dictated by the Holy Spirit,
which he delivered strenuously, and with the most firm and unshaken consistency
of his rational powers; and afterward, (...) Ibid. page 177.
that the Prophets were often in a bodily ecstasie, but never in an ecstasie of
mind, their understandings never being rendered useless and unserviceable to
them. Indeed it was absolutely necessary that the Prophet should have a full
satisfaction of mind concerning the truth and Divinity of his message; for how
else should they persuade others, that the thing was from God, if they were not
first sufficiently assured themselves; and therefore even in those methods that
were most liable to doubts and questions, such as communications by dreams, we
cannot think but that the same Spirit that moved and impressed the thing upon
them, did also by some secret and inward operations settle their minds in the
firmest belief and persuasion of what was revealed and suggested to them. All
these ways of immediate revelation ceased some hundreds of years before the
final period of the Jewish Church. A thing confessed not only by Christians but
by Nizz. p. 159. (...). Th. Phil. l. 2. c. 3. p. 564.
Jews themselves, (...) There was no Prophet in the second Temple; indeed they
universally acknowledge, that there were five things wanting in the second
Temple, built after their return from the Babylonish Captivity, which had been
in that of Solomon, viz. the Ark of the Covenant, the fire from Heaven that lay
upon the Altar, the Schekinah or presence of the Divine Majesty, the (...) and
Thummim, and the spirit of Prophecy, which ceased (as they tell us) about the
second year of Darius, to be sure at the death of Malachy, the last of that
order, after whom there arose no Prophet in Israel, whom therefore the Jews
call, (...) the seal of the Prophets. Indeed it is no wonder that Prophecy
should cease at that time, if we consider that one of the prime ends of it did
then cease, which was to be a seal and an assurance of the Divine inspiration
of the holy Volumes, now the Canon of the Old Testament being consigned and
completed by Ezra with the assistance of Malachy, and some of the last
Prophets, God did not think good any longer to continue this Divine and
Miraculous gift among them: But especially if we consider the great degeneracy
into which that Church was falling; their horrid and crying sins having made
God resolve to reject them, the departure of the Prophetic spirit showed that
God had written them a bill of divorce, and would utterly cast them off; that
by this means they might be awakened to a more lively expectation of that new
state of things, which the Messiah was coming to establish in the World,
wherein the Prophetic spirit should revive, and be again restored to the
Church, which accordingly came to pass, as we shall elsewhere observe.

16. THE third thing propounded, was to consider the state of Religion, and the
Church under the successive periods of this (...). And here we shall only make
some general remarks, a particular survey of those matters not consisting with
the design of this discourse. Ecclesiastical Constitutions being made in the
Wilderness, and the place for public worship framed and erected, no sooner did
they come into the promised Land, but the Tabernacle was set down at Gilgal,
where, if the Jewish Chronology say true, it continued fourteen years, till
they had subdued and divided the Land: Then fixed at Shiloh, and the Priests
and Levites had Cities and Territories assigned to them, where it is not to be
doubted but there were Synagogues, or places equivalent for prayer and the
ordinary solemnities of Religion, and Courts for the decision of Ecclesiastical
causes. Prosperity and a plentiful Country had greatly contributed to the
depravation of men's manners, and the corruption of Religion till the times of
Samuel, the great Reformer of that Church, who erected Colleges, and
instituted Schools of the Prophets, reduced the Societies of the Levites to
their Primitive order and purity, forced the Priests to do their duty
diligently to minister in the affairs of God's worship, and carefully to teach
and instruct the people: A piece of reformation no more than necessay, For the
word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no open vision. CCCLXIX.
years (say the Jews) the Tabernacle abode at Shiloh, from whence it was
translated to Nob a City in the Tribe of Benjamin, probably about the time that
the Ark was taken, thence after thirteen years to Gibeon, where it remained
fifty years; and lastly, by Solomon to Jerusalem. The Ark being taken out to
carry along with them for their more prosperous success in their War against
the Philistines, was ever after exposed to an ambulatory and unsettled course:
For being taken captive by the Philistines, it was by them kept prisoner seven
months, thence removed to (...), and thence to Kirtath-jearim, where it
remained in the house of Abinadab twenty years, thence solemnly (...) by David,
and after three months rest by the way in the house of Obed-Edom, brought
triumphantly to Jerusalem, and placed under the covert of a Tent which he had
purposely erected for it. David being settled in the Throne, like a pious Prince
took especial care of the affairs of Religion, he fixed the High Priest and his
second, augmented the courses of the Priests from eight to four and twenty,
appointed the Levites, and Singers, and their several turns and times of
waiting, assigned them their proper duties and ministeries, settled the Nethinim
or Porters, the posterity of the (...), made Treasurers of the revenues
belonging to holy uses, and of the vast sums contributed toward the building
of a Temple, as a more solemn and stately place for Divine worship, which he
was fully resolved to have erected, but that God commanded it to be reserved
for the peaceable and prosperous Reign of Solomon, who succeeding in his
Father's Throne, accomplished it, building so stately and magnificent a Temple,
that it became one of the greatest wonders of the World. Under his son Rehoboam
happened the fatal division of the Kingdom, when ten parts of twelve were rent
off at once, and brought under the Empire of Jeroboam, who knew no better way
to secure his new-gotten Sovereignty, than to take off the people from
hankering after the Temple and the worship at Jerusalem, and therefore out of a
cursed policy erected two Golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, persuading the
people there to pay their public adorations, appointing Chaplains like
himself, Priests of the lowest of the people; and from this time Religion began
visibly to ebb and decline in that Kingdom, and Idolatry to get ground amongst
them.

17. THE two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin were loyal both to God and their
Prince, continuing obedient to their lawful Sovereign, and firmly adhering to
the worship of the Temple, though even here too impiety in some places
maintained its ground, having taken root in the Reign of Solomon, who through
his overgreat partiality and fondness to his Wives had been betrayed to give
too much countenance to (...). The extirpation hereof was the design and
attempt of all the pious and good Princes of Judah: Jehosaphat set himself in
good earnest to recover Religion and the state of the Church to its ancient
purity and luster, he abolished the Groves and high places, and appointed
itinerant Priests and Levites to go from City to City to expound the Law, and
instruct the people in the knowledge of their duty; nay, he himself held a
royal Visitation, Going quite through the Land, and bringing back the people to
the Lord 2 (...), 19. (...).
God of their Fathers. But under the succeeding Kings Religion again lost its
ground, and had been quite extinct during the tyranny and usurpation of
Athaliah, but that good Jehoiada the High Priest kept it alive by his admirable
zeal and industry. While he lived, his Pupil Joas (who owed both his Crown and
his life to him) promoted the design, and purged the Temple, though after his
Tutors death he apostatized to profaneness and idolatry. Nor indeed was the
reformation effectually advanced till the time of Hezekiah, who no sooner
ascended the Throne, but he summoned the Priests and Levites, exhorted them to
begin at home, and first to reform themselves, then to cleanse and repair the
Temple; he resetled the Priests and Levites in their proper places and offices,
and caused them to offer all sorts of Sacrifices, and the Passover to be
universally celebrated with great strictness and solemnity; he destroyed the
Monuments of Idolatry, took away the Altars in Jerusalem, and having given
commission, the people did the like in all parts of the Kingdom, breaking the
Images, cutting down the Groves, throwing down the Altars and high places,
until they had utterly destroyed them all. But neither greatness nor piety can
exempt any from the common Laws of mortality, Hezekiah dies, and his son
Manasseh succeeds, a wicked Prince, under whose influence impiety like a
land-flood broke in upon Religion, and laid all waste before it. But his
Grandchild Josiah made some amends, he gave signal instances of an early piety;
for in the eighth year of his Reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek 2 Chronicles. 34. 3.
after the God of David his Father, and in the twelfth year he began to purge
Judah and Jerusalem; he defaced whatever had been abused and prostituted to
Idolatry and Superstition throughout the whole Kingdom, repaired God's house,
and ordered its worship according to the prescript of the Mosaic Law, a copy
whereof they had found in the ruins of the Temple, solemnly engaged himself
and his people to be true to Religion and the worship of God, and caused so
great and solemn a Passover to be held, that there was no Passover like to it
kept in Israel from the days of Samuel. And more he had done, had not an
immature death cut him off in the midst both of his days, and his pious designs
and projects. Not many years after God being highly provoked by the prodigious
impieties of that Nation, delivered it up to the Army of the King of Babylon,
who demolished the City, harassed the Land, and carried the people captive unto
Babylon. And no wonder the Divine patience could hold no longer, when all the
chief of the Priests and the people transgressed very much, after all the
abominations of the Heathen, 2 Chronicles. 36. 14.
and polluted the house of the Lord, which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.
Seventy years they remained under this captivity, during which time the Prophet
Daniel gave lively and particular accounts of the Messiah, that he should come
into the World to introduce a Law of everlasting righteousness, to die as a
sacrifice and expiation for the sins of the people, and to put a period to the
Levitical sacrifices and oblations. And whereas other prophecies had only in
general defined the time of the Messiah's coming, he particularly determines
the period, that all this should be at the end of LXX. weeks, that is, at the
expiration of CCCCXC. years; which exactly fell in with the time of our
Savior's appearing in the World. The seventy years captivity being run out, by
the (...) of the King of Babylon they were set free, and by him permitted and
assisted to repair Jerusalem, and rebuild the Temple, which was accordingly
done under the government of Nehemiah, and the succeeding Rulers, and the
Temple finished by Zorobabel, and things brought into some tolerable state of
order and decency, and so continued till the Reign of Antiochus Epiphanes King
of Syria, by whom the Temple was profaned and violated, and the Jewish Church
miserably afflicted and distressed; he thrust out Onias the High Priest, and
put in his brother Jason, a man lost both to Religion and good manners, and who
by a vast sum of money had purchased the Priesthood of Antiochus: At this time
Matthias a Priest, and the head of the (...) Family, stood up for his Country;
after whom came Judas Macchabaeus, (...), as Josephus truly characters him, a
man of a generous temper, and a valiant mind, ready (...). Jud. lib. 12. c. 19.
p. 425.
to do or suffer any thing to assert the Liberties and Religion of his Country,
followed both in his zeal and prosperous success by his two Brothers Jonathan
and Simon, successively High Priests and Commanders after him. Next him came
John surnamed Hyrcanus, then Aristobulus, Alexander, Hyrcanus, Aristobulus
junior, Alexander, Antigonus; in whose time Herod the Great having by the
favor of Antony obtained of the Roman Senate the Sovereignty over the Jewish
Nation, and being willing that the Priesthood should entirely depend upon his
arbitrary disposure, abrogated the succession of the Asmonaean Family, and put
in one Ananel, (...), as Josephus calls Lib. 15. cap. 2. p. 512.
him, an obscure Priest, of the line of those who had been Priests in Babylon.
To him succeeded Aristobulus, to him Jesus the son of Phabes, to him Simon, who
being deposed, next came Matthias, deposed also by Herod, next him Joazar, who
underwent the same fate from Archelaus, then Jesus the son of Sie, after whom
Joazar was again restored to the Chair, and under his Pontificate (though
before his first deposition) Christ was born, things every day growing worse
among them, till about seventy years after the wrath of God came upon them to
the uttermost, and brought the Romans, who finally took away their place and
Nation.

18. BEFORE we go off from this part of our discourse, it may not be amiss to
take a more particular view of the state of the Jewish Church, as it stood at
the time of our Savior's appearing in the World, as what may reflect some
considerable light upon the History of CHRIST and his Apostles. And if we cast
our eyes upon it at this time, How was the Gold become dim, and the most fine
Gold changed! How miserably deformed was the face of the Church, how strangely
degenerated from its Primitive Institution! whereof we shall observe some
particular instances. Their Temple though lately repaired and rebuilt by Herod,
and that with so much pomp and grandeur, that Josephus, who may justly be
presumed partial to the honor of his own Nation, (...). Jud. lib. 7. (...) p.
958.
says of it, that it was the most admirable structure that was ever seen or
heard of both for the preparation made for it, the greatness and magnificence
of the thing it self, and the infinite expense and cost bestowed upon it, as
well as for the glory of that Divine worship that was performed in it, yet was
it infinitely short of that of Solomon; besides that it had been often exposed
to rudeness and violence. Not to mention the horrible prophanations of
Antiochus, it had been of late invaded by Pompey, who boldly ventured into the
Sanctum Sanctorum, and without any scruple curiously contemplated the mysteries
of that place, but suffered no injury to be offered to it. After him came
Crassus, who to the others boldness added Sacrilege, seizing what the others
piety and modesty had spared, plundering the Temple of its vast wealth and
treasure. Herod having procured the Kingdom, besieged and took the City and the
Temple, and though to ingratiate himself with the People he endeavored what in
him lay to secure it from rapine and impicty, and afterward expended
incredible Sums in its reparation, yet did he not stick to make it truckle
under his wicked policies and designs. The more to indear himself to his
Patrons at Rome, he set up a Golden Eagle of a vast dimension Jos (...).
(the Arms of the Roman Empire) over the great Gate of the Temple: a thing Jud.
l. 17. c. 8. p. 596. and de
so expressly contrary to the Law of Moses, which forbids all Images, and
accounted so (...). Jud. (...). c. 21. p 772.
monstrous a profanation of that holy place, that while Herod lay a dying the
People in a great tumult and uproar gathered together and pulled it down. A
great part of it was become an Exchange and a Market; the place where Men were
to meet with God, and to trade with Heaven, was now turned into a Warehouse
for Merchants, and a Shop for Usurers, and the House of Prayer into a Den of
Thieves. The worship formerly wont to be performed there with pious and devout
affections, was now shrunk into a mere shell and outside, they drew near to
God with their mouths, and honored him with their lips, but their hearts were
(...) from him; Rites of humane invention had justled out those of Divine
Institution, and their very Prayers were made traps to catch the unwary People,
and to devour the Widow and the Fatherless. Their Priesthood was so changed and
altered, that it retained little but its ancient Name; the Highpriests who by
their Original Charter were lineally to succeed, and to hold their place for
life, were become almost annual, scarce a Year passing over, wherein one was
not thrust out, and another put in, (...), H. Eccl. (...). c. 10. p. 28.
as (...) notes out of their own Historian. Nay which was far worse, it was
become not only annual, but venal, Herod exposing it to sale, and scarce
admitting any to the Sacerdotal Office, who had not first sufficiently paid for
his Patent; and which was the natural consequence of that, the place was filled
with the resuse of the People, Men of mean abilities, and debauched manners,
who had neither parts nor piety to recommend them, he being the best and the
fittest man, that offered most. Nay into so strange a degeneracy were they
fallen in this matter, that Josephus reports, that one Phannias was elected
High Priest, not only a rustic (...). Jud. l. 4. (...). p. 872.
and illiterate fellow, not only not of the Sacerdotal Line, but so intolerably
stupid and ignorant, that when they came to acquaint him, he knew not what the
HighPriesthood meant. And not content to be imposed upon, and tyrannized over
by a Foreign Power, they fell a quarrelling among themselves, and mutually
preyed upon one another; the Highpriests falling out with the inferior
Orders, and both Parties Joseph. (...) l 20. c. 8. page 698.
going with an armed retinue after them, ready to clash and fight wherever
they met, the High Priest sending his Servants to fetch away the Tithes due to
the inferior Priests, insomuch that many of the poorest of them were famished
for want of necessary food.

19. THEIR Law, which had been delivered with so much majesty and magnificence,
and for which they themselves pretended so great a reverence, they had
miserably corrupted and depraved (the moral part of it especially) and that two
ways. First, by gross and absurd interpretations, which the Teachers of those
times had put upon it. The Scribes and Pharisees, who ruled the Chair in the
Jewish Church, had by false and corrupt glosses debased the majesty and purity
of the Law, and made it to serve the purposes of an evil life: they had taught
the People, that the Law required no more than external righteousness, that if
there was but a visible conformity of the life, they needed not be sollicitous
about the government of their minds, or the regular conduct of their thoughts
or passions; that so Men did but carry themselves fair to the eye of the World,
it was no great matter how things went in the secret and unseen retirements of
the Soul, nay that a punctual observance of some external Precepts of the Law
would compensate and quit scores with God for the neglect or violation of the
rest. They told Men that when the Law forbad murder, so they did not actually
kill another, and sheath their Sword in their Brother's bowels, it was well
enough, Men were not restrained from furious and intemperate passions, they
might be angry, yea though by peevish and uncomely speeches they betrayed the
rancor and malice of their minds. They confessed the Law made it adultery
actually to embrace the bosom of a stranger, but would not have it extend to
wanton thoughts and unchaste desires, or that it was adultery for a man to lust
after a Woman, and to commit folly with her in his heart: they told them that
in all oaths and vows, if they did but perform what they had sworn to God, the
Law took no further notice of it, when as every vain and unnecessary oath; all
customary and trifling use of the name of God was forbidden by it. They made
them believe that it was lawful for them to proceed by the rigorous Law of
retaliation, to exact their own to the utmost, and to right and revenge
themselves; when as the Law requires a tender, compassionate, and benevolent
temper of mind, and is so far from owning the rigorous punctilio's of revenge,
that it obliges to meekness and patience, to forgiveness and charity, and which
is the very height of charity, not only to pardon, but to love and befriend our
greatest enemies, quite contrary to the doctrine which these men taught, that
though they were to love their neighbors, that is, Jews, yet might they hate
their enemies. In these and such like instances they had notoriously abused and
evacuated the Law, and in a manner rendered it of no effect. And therefore when
our Lord as the great Prophet sent from God came into the World, the first
thing he did after the entrance upon his public Ministry, was to cleanse and
purify the Law, and to remove that rubbish which the Jewish Doctors had cast
upon it. He rescued it out of the hands of their poisonous and pernicious
expositions, restored it to its just authority, and to its own primitive sense
and meaning, he taught them that the Law did not only bind the external act,
but prescribe to the most inward motions of the mind, and that whoever
transgresses here, is no less obnoxious to the Divine Justice, and the
penalties of the Law, than he that is guilty of the most gross and palpable
violations of it: he showed them how infinitely more pure and strict the
command was, than these Impostors had represented it, and plainly told them
that if ever they expected to be happy, they must look upon the Law with an
other-guise eye, and follow it after another rate, than their blind and
deceitful Guides did, For I say unto you, Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you can in no case enter into the
Kingdom of God.

20. THE other way by which they corrupted and dishonored the Law, and weakened
the power and reputation of it, was by preferring before it their Oral and
unwritten Law. For besides the Law consigned to Writing, they had their (...)
their Law delivered by word of mouth, whose pedigree they thus deduce. They
tell us that when Moses waited upon God Forty Days in the Mount, he gave him a
double Law, one in Writing, the other Traditionary, containing the sense and
explication of the former: being come down into his Tent, he repeated it first
to Aaron, then to Ithamar and Eleazar his Sons, then to the Seventy Elders, and
lastly to all the People, the same Persons being all this while present. Aaron
who had now heard it four times recited, Moses being gone out, again repeated
it before them: after his departure out of the Tent, his two Sons who by this
had heard it as often as their Father, made another repetition of it, by which
means the Seventy Elders came to hear it four times, and then they also
repeated it to the Congregation, who had now also heard it repeated four times
together, once from Moses, then from Aaron, then from his Sons, and lastly from
the Seventy Elders, after which the Congregation broke up, and every one went
home, and taught it his Neighbor. This Oral Law Moses upon his Deathbed
repeated (...). cap. 1. Sect. 1. 2, 3. p. 1.
to (...), he delivered it to the Elders, they to the Prophets, the Prophets to
the men of the great Synagogue, the last of whom was Symeon the Just, who
delivered it to Antigonus Sochaeus, and he to his Successors, the wise Men,
whose business it was to recite it, and so it was handed through several
Generations, the names of the Persons who delivered it in the several Ages from
its first rise under Moses till above an Hundred Years after Christ, being
particularly enumerated by Maimonides. At last it came to R. Jehuda, Jad
Chozak. ex quo (...) prolixum (...) Jos. (...). de (...). div. (...). 9. and
(...). ubi varias (...) de Legis (...) origin and (...).
commonly styled by the Jews (...) our holy Master, the Son of Rabban Symeon
(who flourished a little before the time of the Emperor Antoninus) who
considering the unsettled and tottering condition of his own Nation, and how apt
these traditionary Precepts would be to be forgotten or mistaken, by the
weakness of Men's memories, or the perverseness of their wits, or the dispersion
of the Jews in other Countries, collected all these Laws and Expositions, and
committed them to Writing, stiling his Book Mishnaioth, or the Repetition. This
was asterwards illustrated and explained by the Rabbines dwelling about
Babylon, with infinite cases and controversies concerning their Law, whose
resolutions were at last compiled into another Volume, which they called
Gemara, or Doctrine, and both together constitute the entire Body of the
Babylonish Talmud, the one being the Text, the other the Comment. The folly and
vanity of this account, though it be sufficiently evident to need no
confutation with any wise and discerning Man, yet have the Jews in all Ages
made great advantage of it, magnifying and extolling it above the written Law
with Titles and Elogies that hyperbolize into blasphemy. They tell us, that
this is (...) the foundation of the Vid. Buxtorf. de (...). p. 222. and de
Synag. Jud. cap. 3. (...). These. Phil. lib. 2. (...). 3.
Law for whose sake it was that God entered into Covenant with the Israelites,
that without this the whole Law would lie in the dark, yea be mere obscurity
and darkness it self, as being contrary and repugnant to it self, and defective
in things necessary to be known: that it is joy to the heart, and health to the
bones, that the words of it are more lovely and desirable than the words of the
Law, and a greater sin to violate the one than the other; that it is little or
no commendation for a Man to read the Bible, but to study the Mishna is that
for which a Man shall receive the reward of the other World, and that no Man
can have a peaceable and quiet conscience, who leaves the study of the Talmud
to go to that of the Bible; that the Bible is like Water, the Mishna like Wine;
the Talmud like spiced Wine; that all the words of the Rabbis are the very
words of the living God; from which a Man might not depart, though they should
tell him his right hand were his left, and his left his right; nay they blush
not, nor tremble to assert, (...) that to study in the holy Bible is nothing
else but to lose our time: I will mention but one bold and blasphemous sentence
more, that we may see how far these desperate wretches are given over to a
spirit of impiety and infatuation, they tell us, that he that dissents from his
Rabbin or Teacher, (...) dissents from the Divine Majesty, but he that believes
the words of the wise men, believes God himself.

21. STRANGE! that Men should so far offer violence to their reason, so far
conquer and subdue their conscience, as to be able to talk at this wild and
prodigious rate: and stranger it would seem, but that we know a Generation of
Men, great Patrons of Tradition too, in another Church, who mainly endeavor to
debase and suppress the Scriptures, and value their unwritten Traditions at
little less rate than this. But I let them pass. This is no novel and upstart
humor of the Jews, they were notoriously guilty of it in our (...) days, whom
we find frequently charging them with their superstitious observances of many
little rites and usages derived from the Traditions of the Elders, wherein they
placed the main of Religion, and for which they had a far more sacred regard,
than for the plain and positive commands of God. Such were their frequent
washings of their Pots and Cups, their brazen Vessels and Tables, the purifying
Mark 7. 2, 3; and sequ.
themselves after they came from Market (as if the touching of others had
defiled them) the washing their hands before every Meal, and many other things
which they had received to hold. In all which they were infinitely nice and
scrupulous, making the neglect of them of equal guilt with the greatest
immorality, not sticking to affirm, that (...). 1.
he who eats Bread with unwashen hands, (...), is as if he (...) cap. (...).
Syn Jud. c 11. p. 236
lay with an Harlot. This it is plain they thought a sufficient charge against
our Lord's Disciples, that they were not zealous observers of these things.
When they Mark 7. 2 (...).
saw some of his Disciples eat Bread with defiled (that is to say, with
unwashen) hands, they found fault; and asked him, Why walk not thy Disciples
according to the Tradition of the Elders, but (...) Bread with unwashen hands?
To whom our Savior smartly answered, that they were the Persons of whom the
Prophet had spoken, who honored God with their lips, but their hearts were far
from him, that in vain did they worship him, while for doctrines they taught
the commandments of men, laying aside and rejecting the commandments of God,
that they might hold the Tradition of men. For they were not content to make
them of equal value and authority with the Word of God, but made them a means
wholly to evacuate and supersede it. Whereof our Lord gives a notorious
instance in the case of Parents. They could not say but that the Law obliged
Children to honor and revere their Parents, and to administer to their
necessities in all straits and exigencies, but then had found out a fine way to
evade the force of the command, and that under a pious and plausible pretense.
Moses said, Honor thy Father and thy Mother: and who so curses Father or
Mother let him die the death. But ye say, If a man shall say to his Father or
Mother, It is Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou might be
profited by me, (...) shall be (...): And ye suffer him no more to do ought for
his Father; or Mother. By which is commonly understood, that when their Parents
required relief and assistance from their Children, they put them off with this
excuse, that they had consecrated Vid. Lud. (...) Corban. (...). in (...). 15.
5 (...). in (...). Gemar. (...). p. 273. (...).
their Estate to God, and might not divert it to any other use. Though this
seems a (...) and plausible pretense, yet it is not reasonable to suppose, that
either they had, or would pretend that they had entirely devoted whatever they
had to God, and must therefore refer to some other custom. Now among the many
kinds of oaths and vows that were among the Jews they had one, which they
called (...) the vow of interdict; (...). Phil. l. 1. c. 1, Sect. 5, p. (...).
whereby a man might restrain himself as to this or that particular person, and
this or that particular thing; as, he might vow not to accept of such a
courtesy from this friend or that neighbor, or that he would not part with
this or that thing of his own to such a man, to lend him his Horse, or give him
any thing toward his maintenance, etc. and then the thing became utterly
unlawful, and might not be done upon any consideration whatsoever, lest the Man
became guilty of the violation of his Vow. The form of this Vow frequently
occurs in the Jewish Writings, and even in the very same words wherein our Lord
expresses it, (...) Be it (...) or a gift (that is, a thing sacred) whereby I
may be any ways prositable to thee, that is, be that thing unlawful or
prohibited to me, wherein I may be helpful and assistant to thee. And nothing
more common than this way of vowing in the particular case of Parents, whereof
there are abundant instances in the writings of the Jewish Masters, who thus
explain the forementioned Vow, (...) Whatever I shall gain hereafter, shall be
sacred, as to the maintenance of my Father; or as Maimonides expresses it, That
what I provide, my Father shall eat nothing of it, that is, says he, he shall
receive no profit by it; and then as they tell us, (...) He that had thus
vowed, might not transgress or make void his Vow. So that when indigent Parents
craved relief and assistance from their Children, and probably wearied them
with importunity, it was but vowing in a passionate resentment, that they
should not be better for what they had, and then they were safe, and might no
more dispose any part of their Estate to that use, than they might touch the
Corban, that which was most solemnly consecrated to God. By which means they
were taught to be unnatural under a pretense of Religion, and to suffer their
Parents to starve, lest themselves should violate a senceless and unlawful Vow.
So that though they were under the precedent obligations of a natural duty, a
duty as clearly commanded by God as words could express it, yet a blind
Tradition, a rash and impious Vow, made for the most part out of passion or
covetousness, should cancel and supersede all these obligations, it being
unlawful hence forth to give them one penny to relieve them: (...) suffer him
no more (says our Lord) to do ought for his Father or his Mother, making the
word of God of none effect through your tradition, which ye have delivered.

22. THE last instance that I shall note of the corruption and degeneracy of
this Church, is the many Sects and divisions that were in it, a thing which the
Jews themselves in their writings confess would happen in the days of the
(...), whose Kingdom should be overrun with heretical opinions. That Church
which heretofore like Jerusalem had been at unity within it self, was now
miserably broken into (...) and Factions, whereof three most considerable,
Pharisees, Sadducees, and the Essenes. The Pharisees derive their name from
(...), which may admit of a double signification, and either not unsuitable to
them: It may refer to them as (...), Explainers or Interpreters of the Law,
which was a peculiar part of their work, and for which they were famous and
venerable among the Jews; or more probably to their separation (the most proper
and natural importance of the word) so called, (...), as (...) observed of old,
because separated from all others in their extraordinary pretenses of piety,
the very Jews themselves thus describing (...) in (...). (...).
a Pharisee, he is one (...), that separates himself from all uncleanness, and
from all unclean meats, and from the people of the Earth, (the common rout) who
accurately observe not the difference of Meats. It is not certain when this
Sect first thrust up its head into the World, probably not long after the times
of the Macchabees, it is certain they were of considerable standing, and great
account in the time of our Savior: To be sure strangely wide of the mark are
those Jewish Chronologists R. (...). p. 104. (...).
who say, that the Sect of the Pharisees arose in the times of Tiberius Caesar,
and (...) the Egyptian, under whom the Septuagint translation was
accomplished; as Th. Phil. l. 1. c. 1. p. 27.
if Ptolomy Philadelphus and Tiberius Caesar had been Contemporaries, between
whom there is the distance of no less than CCLX. years. But when ever it began,
a bold and daring Sect it was, not fearing to affront Princes, and persons of
the greatest quality, crafty and insinuative, and who by a show of great zeal,
and infinite strictness in Religion, beyond the rate of other men, had procured
themselves a mighty reverence from (...). not. (...). p. 147.
the people; so strict, that (as a Learned man observes) Pharisee is used in
the (...) writings to denote a pious and holy man; and Benjamin the Jew
speaking of R. Ascher, says, he was (...) a truly devout man, separate from the
affairs of this (...). p. 6.
world. And yet under all this seeming severity they were but Religious
villains, spiteful and malicious, griping and covetous, great oppressors,
merciless dealers, heady and seditious, proud and scornful, indeed guilty of
most kinds of immorality, of whose temper and manners I say the less in this
place, having elsewhere given an account of them. They held that the Oral Law
was of infinitely greater moment and value than the written Word; that the
Traditions of their fore Fathers were above all things to be embraced and
followed, the strict observance whereof would entitle a man to Eternal Vid.
Joseph. (...) Jud. l. 18. c. 2 p. 617. and de (...) Jud. l. 2. (...). p. 788.
Life; that the Souls of men are Immortal, and had their dooms awarded in the
Subterraneous Regions; that there is a Metempsuchosis or Transmigration of
pious Souls out of one Body into another; that things come to pass by fate, and
an inevitable necessity, and yet that Man's will is free, that by this means
men might be rewarded and punished according to their works. I add no more
concerning them, than that some great men of the Church of Rome say with some
kind of boasting, that such as were the Pharisees among the Jews, such are the
Religious (they mean the Monastical Orders of their Church) among Christians.
Much good may it do them with the comparison, I confess my self so far of their
mind, that there is too great a conformity between them.

23. NEXT the Pharisees come the Sadducees, as opposite to them in their
temper, as their principles; so called (as Epiphanius and some others will have
it) from (...) justice, as pretending themselves to be very just and righteous
men, but this agrees not with the account given of their lives. They are
generally thought to have been denominated from Sadock the Scholar of Antigonus
Sochaeus, who flourished about the year of the World MMMDCCXX. CCLXXXIV. years
before the Nativity of our Savior. They pass under a very ill character even
among the writers of their own Nation, (...) impious men, and of very loose and
debauched manners: which is no more than what might be expected as the natural
consequence of their principles, this being one of their main dogmata or
opinions, that the Soul is not Immortal, and that there is no future state
after this life. The occasion of which desperate principle is said to have been
a mistake of the doctrine of their Master Antigonus, who was (...). Aboth. cap.
1. (...) 3. p. in. 1.
wont to press his Scholars not to be like (...) Servants, who serve their
Masters merely for what they can get by them; but to serve God for himself,
without expectation of rewards. This, Sadock and Baithos, two of his disciples
misunderstanding, thought their Master had peremptorily denied any state of
future rewards; and having laid this dangerous foundation, these unhappy
superstructures were built upon it; that there is no Resurrection, for if there
be no reward, what need that the Body should rise again; that the Soul is not
Immortal, nor exists in the separate state, for if it did, it must be either
rewarded or punished; and if not the Soul, then by the same proportion of
reason no spiritual substance, neither Angel, nor Spirit; that there is no
Divine Providence, but that God is perfectly placed as beyond the commission,
so beyond the Joseph. de (...). Jud. l. 2. (...). p. 788.
inspection and regard of what sins or evils are done or happen in the World,
as indeed what great reason to believe a wise and righteous Providence, if
there be no reward or punishment for virtue and vice in another life? These
pernicious and Atheistical opinions justly exposed them to the reproach and
hatred of the people, who were wont eminently to style them (...) the
Heretics, (...), Epicureans, no words being thought bad enough to bestow upon
them. They rejected the Traditions so vehemently asserted by the Pharisees, and
taught that men were to keep to the Letter of the Law, and that nothing was to
be imposed either upon their belief or practice, but what was expressly owned
and contained in it. Josephus observes, that they were the fewest of all the
(...). Jud. l. 18. c. 2. p. 617.
Sects, (...), but usually men of the better rank and quality; as what wonder,
if rich and great men, who tumble in the pleasures and advantages of a
prosperous fortune, be willing to take sanctuary at those opinions, that afford
the greatest patronage to looseness and debauchery, and care not to hear of
being called to account in another World, for what they have done in this? For
this reason the Sadducees ever appeared the greatest sticklers to preserve the
peace, and were the most severe and implacable Justicers against the Authors or
fomenters of tumults and seditions, lest they should disturb and interrupt
their soft and easy course of life, the only happiness their principles
allowed them to expect.

24. THE Essenes succeed, a Sect probably distinct from either of the former.
Passing by the various conjectures concerning the derivation of their name,
which when dressed up with all advantages are still but bare conjectures, they
began about the times of the (...), when the violent persecutions of Antiochus
forced the Jews for their own safety to retire to the Woods and Mountains. And
though in time the storm blew over, yet many of them were too well pleased with
these undisturbed solitudes to return, and therefore combined themselves into
Religious societies, leading a solitary and contemplative course of life, and
that in very great numbers, there being usually above four thousand of them, as
both Philo and Josephus tell us. Pliny takes notice of (...). lib. 5. (...).
17. p. 80.
them, and describes them to be a solitary generation, remarkable above all
others in this, that they live without Women, without any embraces, without
money, conversing with nothing but Woods and Palm Trees; that their number
increased every day as fast as any died, persons flocking to them from all
quarters, to seek repose here, after they had been wearied with the inquietudes
of an improsperous fortune. They paid a due reverence to the Temple, by sending
gifts and presents thither, but yet worshipped (...). Phil. lib. (...) liber.
p. 876, 877.
God at home, and used their own Rites and Ceremonies. Every seventh day they
publicly met in their Synagogues, where the younger seating themselves at the
feet of the elder, one reads some portions out of a Book, which another,
eminently Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 18. c. 2. p. 617. (...) de (...). Jud. lib. 2.
(...) p. 785. and seqq.
skilled in the principles of their Sect, expounds to the rest (their dogmata,
like the Philosophy of the Ancients, being obscurely and enigmatically
delivered to them) instructing them in the rules of piety and righteousness,
and all the duties that concerned God, others, or themselves. They
industriously tilled and cultivated the ground, and lived upon the fruits of
their own labors; had all their revenues in common; there being neither rich,
nor poor among them: Their manners were very harmless and innocent, exact
observers of the rules of Justice, somewhat beyond the practice of other men.
As for that branch of them that lived in Egypt, whose excellent Manners and
Institutions are so particularly described and commended by Philo, and whom
(...) and others will needs have to have been Christians converted by S. Mark,
we have taken notice of elsewhere in S. Mark's Life. We find no mention of them
in the History of the Gospel, probably because living remote from Cities and
all places of public concourse, they never concerned themselves in the actions
of Christ or his Apostles. What their principles were in matters of speculation
is not much material to enquire, their Institutions mainly referring to
practice. Out of a great regard to wisdom and virtue they neglected all care of
the body, renounced all conjugal embraces, abstained very much from Meats and
Drinks, some of them not eating or drinking for three, others for five or six
days together, accounting it unbecoming men of such a Philosophical temper and
genius, to spend any part of the day upon the necessities of the body: Their
way they called (...), worship, and their rules (...), doctrines of wisdom;
their contemplations were sublime and speculative, and of things beyond the
ordinary notions of other Sects; they traded in the names and mysteries of
Angels, and in all their carriages bore a great show of modesty and humility.
And therefore these in all likelihood were the very persons, whom S. Paul
primarily designed (though not excluding others who espoused the same
principles) when he charges the (...) to Col. 2. 18. 20, 21, 22, 23.
let no man (...) them of their reward in a voluntary humility, and worshipping
of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up
by his (...) mind, that being dead to the rudiments of the World, they should
no longer (...), be subject to these dogmata or ordinances, such as Touch not,
taste not, handle not, (the main principles of the Essenian Institution) being
the commandments and doctrines of men; which things have indeed a show of
wisdom in will worship and humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any
honor to the satisfying of the (...). Besides these three greater, there were
several other lesser Sects in the Jewish Church, such as the Herodians,
supposed to have been either part of Herod's guard, or a combination of men,
who to ingratiate themselves with the Prince, maintained Herod to be the
Messiah, and at their own charge celebrated his Coronation-days, as also the
Sabbath, when they used to set lighted Candles crowned with Violets in their
windows; an opinion which S. (...) justly Comm. in Matthew. 22. p. 66. Tom. 9.
laughs at as trifling and ridiculous. Probably they were a party that had
(...) Herod's interest, and endeavored to support his new-gotten Sovereignty.
For Herod being a stranger, and having by the Roman power usurped the Kingdom,
was generally hateful and burdensome to the people, and therefore beside the
assistance of a foreign power, needed some to stand by him at home. They were
peculiarly (...) in pressing people to pay Tribute to Caesar, Herod being
obliged (as S. Hierom observes) by the (...).
Charter of his Sovereignty to look after the Tribute due to Caesar, and they
could not do him a more acceptable service, by this means endearing him to his
great Patrons at Rome. In matters of opinion they seem to have sided with the
Sadducees; what S. Matthew calls the leaven of the Sadducees, S. Mark styles
the leaven of Herod. Probable Matthew. 16. 6.
Mark 8. 15.
it is, that they had drawn Herod to be of their principles, that as they
asserted his right to the Kingdom, he might favor and maintain their impious
opinions. And it is likely enough that men of so debauched manners might be
easily tempted to take shelter under principles that so directly served the
purposes of a bad life. Another Sect in that Church were the Samaritans, the
posterity of those who succeeded in the room of the ten captivated Tribes, a
mixture of Jews and Gentiles, they held, that nothing but the (...) was the
Word of God, that Mount Gerizim was the true place of public and solemn
worship, that they were the descendents of Joseph, and heirs of the Aaronical
Priesthood, and that no dealing or correspondence was to be maintained with
strangers, nor any unclean thing to be touched. The Karraeans were a branch of
the Sadducees, but rejected afterward their abominable and unsound opinions,
they are the true Textualists, adhering only to the writings of Moses and the
Prophets, and expounding the Scripture by it self, peremptorily disowning the
absurd glosses of the Talmud, and the idle Traditions of the Rabbis, insomuch
that they admit not so much as the Hebrew points into their Bibles, accounting
them part of the Oral and Traditionary Law; for which reason they are greatly
hated by the rest of the Jews. They are in great numbers about (...), and in
other places at this day. There was also the Sect of the Zealots, frequently
mentioned by Josephus, a Generation of men insolent and ungovernable, (...) and
savage, who under a pretense of extraordinary zeal for God and the honor of
his Law, committed the most enormous outrages against God and Man; but of them
we have given an account in the Life of S. Simon the Zealot. And yet as if all
this had not been enough to render their Church miserable within it self, their
sins and intestine divisions had brought in the Roman power upon them, who set
Magistrates and Taskmasters over them, depressed their great (...), put in and
out Senators at pleasure, made the Temple pay tribute, and placed a Garrison at
hand to command it, abrogated a great part of their Laws, and stripped them so
naked both of Civil and Ecclesiastical Order and Authority, that they had not
power left so much as to put a man to death. All evident demonstrations that
Shiloh was come, and the Scepter departed, that the Sacrifice and Oblation was
to cease, the Messiah being cut off, who came to finish transgression, to make
an end of sins, to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness.

SECT. III. Of the EVANGELICAL Dispensation.
The gradual revelations concerning the Messiah. John the Baptist Christ's
forerunner, His extraordinary Birth. His austere Education, and way of Life.
His Preaching, what. His initiating proselytes by Baptism. Baptism in use in
the Jewish Church. Its Original, whence. His resolution and impartiality. His
Martyrdom. The character given him by Josephus, and the Jews. The Evangelical
Dispensation wherein it exceeds that of Moses. Its (...) and perfection. Its
agreeableness to humane nature. The Evangelical promises better than those of
the Law, and in what respects. The aids of the Spirit plentifully assorded
under the Gospel. The admirable confirmation of this Occonomy. The great extent
and latitude of it. Judaism not capable of being communicated to all mankind.
The comprehensiveness of the Gospel. The Duration of the Evangelical Covenant.
The Mosaical Statutes in what sense said to be for ever. The Typical and
transient nature of that State. The great happiness of Christians under the
Occonomy of the Gospel.

1. GOD having from the very infancy of the World promised the Messiah, as the
great Redeemer of Mankind, was accordingly pleased in all Ages to make gradual
discoveries and manifestations of him, the revelations concerning him in every
Dispensation of the Church still shining with a bigger and more particular
light, the nearer this Sun of Righteousness was to his rising. The first Gospel
and glad tidings of him commenced with the fall of Adam, God out of infinite
tenderness and commiseration promising to send a person who should triumphantly
vindicate and rescue mankind from the power and tyranny of their Enemies, and
that he should do this by taking the humane nature upon him, and being born of
the seed of the Woman. No further account is given of him till the times of
Abraham, to whom it was revealed, that he should proceed out of his loins, and
arise out of the Jewish Nation, though both Jew and Gentile should be made
happy by him. To his Grandchild Jacob God made known out of what Tribe of that
Nation he should rise, the Tribe of Judah; and what would be the time of his
appearing, viz. the departure of the Scepter from Judah, the abrogation of the
Civil and Legislative power of that Tribe and People (accomplished in Herod the
Idumaean, set over them by the Roman power.) And this is all we find concerning
him under that Economy. Under the Legal Dispensation we find Moses foretelling
one main (...) of his coming, which was to be the great Prophet Deuteronomy. 18.
(...). 18, 19.
of the Church, to whom all were to hearken as an extraordinary person sent
from God to acquaint the World with the Councils and the Laws of Heaven. The
next news we hear of him is from David, who was told that he should spring out
of his house and family, and who frequently speaks of his sufferings, and the
particular manner of his death, by piercing his hands and his feet, of his
powerful Resurrection, that God would Psalm 22. (...).
not leave his Soul in Hell, nor suffer his holy one to see corruption, of his
triumphant Ascension Psalm 16. 10.
Psalm 68. 18.
into Heaven, and glorious session at God's right hand. From the Prophet Isaiah
we Psalm 110. 1.
have an account of the extraordinary and miraculous manner of his Birth, that
he (...). 7. 14.
should be born of a Virgin, and his name be Immanuel, of his incomparable
furniture of gifts and graces for the execution of his office, of the
entertainment he was to meet -61. 1, 2.
with in the World, and of the nature and design of those sufferings which he
was to undergo. -53. 1, 2, 3. etc.
The place of his Birth was foretold by Micah, which was to be (...), the least
of the Cities of Judah, but honored above all the rest with the nativity
(...). 5. 2.
of a Prince, who was to be Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth had been from
everlasting. Lastly, the Prophet Daniel (...) the particular period of his
coming, expressly Dan. 9 24 26
affirming, that the Messiah should appear in the World, and be cut off as a
Victim and Expiation for the sins of the people at the expiration of LXX.
prophetical weeks, or CCCCXC. years, which accordingly punctually came to pass.

2. FOR the date of the prophetic Scriptures concerning the time of the
(...)'s coming being now run out, In the fullness of time God sent his Son made
of a Woman, made under the Law, to (...) them that were under the Law: This
being the truth of which God spoke by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, which
have been since the World began. But because it was not sit that so great a
Person should come into the World, without an eminent Harbinger to introduce
and usher in his Arrival, God had promised that he Mal. 3. 1.
would send his Messenger, who should prepare his way before him, even (...)
the Prophet, (...) 4. 5, 6.
whom he would send before the coming of that great day of the Lord, who should
turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, etc. This was particularly
accomplished in John the Baptist, who came in the power and spirit of Elias. He
was the Morning Star to the (...). in Joan. 1. 15.
Son of Righteousness, (...), as S. Cyril says of him, the great and eminent
Forerunner, a Person remarkable upon several accounts. First for the
extraordinary circumstances of his Nativity, his Birth foretold by an Angel,
sent on purpose to deliver this joyful Message, a sign God intended him for
great undertakings, this being never done but where God designed the Person for
some uncommon services; his Parents aged, and though both righteous before God,
yet hitherto Childless; Heaven does not dispense all its bounty to the same
Person, Children though great and desirable blessings are yet often denied to
those, for whom God has otherwise very dear regards. Elizabeth was barren, and
they were both well stricken in years. But is any thing too hard for the Lord?
said God to Abraham in the same case; God has the Key of the Womb in his own
keeping, it is one of the Divine Prerogatives, that he makes the barren Woman
to keep house, and to be a joyful Mother of Children. A Son is promised, and
mighty things said of him: a promise which old Zachary had scarce faith enough
to digest, and therefore had the assurance of it sealed to him by a miraculous
dumbness imposed upon him till it was made good, the same Miracle at once
confirming his faith, and punishing his infidelity. Accordingly his Mother
conceived with Child, and as if he would do part of his errand before he was
born, he leaped in her Womb at her salutation of the Virgin Mary, then newly
conceived with Child of our Blessed Savior; a piece of homage paid by one, to
one yet unborn.

3. THESE presages were not vain and fallible, but produced a Person no less
memorable for the admirable strictness and austerity of his (...). For having
escaped Herod's butcherly and merciless Executioners (the Divine providence
being a shelter and a covert to him) and been educated among the rudenesses and
solitudes of the Wilderness, his manners and way of life were very (...) to his
Education. His Garments borrowed from no other Wardrobe than the backs of his
Neighbour-creatures, the skins of Beasts, (...) hair, and a Leathern girdle,
and herein he literally made good the character 2 Kings 1. 8.
of Elias, who is described as an hairy man, girt with a Leathern girdle about
his Loins. His Diet suitable to his Garb, his Meat was Locusts, and wild Honey:
Locusts, accounted by all Nations amongst the meanest and vilest sorts of food;
wild honey, such as the natural artifice and labor of the Bees had stored up
in caverns and hollow Trees, without any elaborate curiosity to prepare and
dress it up. Indeed his abstinence was so great, and his food so unlike other
Men's, that the Evangelist says of him, that he came neither eating nor
drinking, as if he had eaten nothing, or at least what was worth nothing. But
Meat commends us not to God; it is the devout mind, and the honest life that
makes us valuable in the eye of Heaven. The place of his abode was not in Kings
Luke 1. 80.
houses, in stately and delicate Palaces, but where he was born and bred, the
Wilderness of Judaea, he was in the Deserts until the time of his showing unto
Israel. Divine grace is not consined to particular places, it is not the holy
City, or the Temple at Mount Sion makes us nearer unto Heaven; God can, when he
please, consecrate a Desert into a Church, make us gather Grapes among Thorns,
and Religion become fruitful in a barren Wilderness.

4. PREPARED by so singular an Education, and furnished with an immediate
Commission from God, he entered upon the actual administration of his Office: In
those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the Wilderness of Judaea, and
saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. He was (...), as
Justin (...). p. 268.
Martyr calls him, the Herald to Proclaim the first approach of the Holy Jesus,
his whole Ministry tending to prepare the way to his entertainment,
accomplishing herein what was of old foretold concerning him, For this is he
that was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying, The Voice of one crying in
the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. He
told the (...), that the Messiah whom they had so long expected was now at
hand, and his Kingdom ready to appear, that the Son of God was come down from
Heaven, a Person as far beyond him in dignity, as in time and existence, to
whom he was not worthy to minister in the meanest Offices; that he came to
introduce a new and better state of things, to enlighten the World with the
clearest Revelations of the Divine will, and to acquaint them with counsels
brought from the bosom of the Father, to put a period to all the types and
umbrages of the Mosaic Dispensation, and bring in the truth and substance of
all those shadows, and to open a Fountain of grace and fullness to Mankind; to
remove that state of guilt into which humane nature was so deeply sunk, and as
the Lamb of God by the expiatory Sacrifice of (...) to take away the sin of the
World, not like the continual Burnt-offering, the Lamb offered Morning and
Evening only for the sins of the House of Israel, but for Jew and Gentile,
Barbarian and Scythian, bond and free: he told them, that God had a long time
born with the sins of Men, and would now bring things to a quicker issue, and
that therefore they should do well to break off their sins by repentance, and
by a serious amendment and reformation of life dispose themselves for the glad
tidings of the Gospel; that they should no longer bear up themselves upon their
external privileges, the Fatherhood of Abraham, and their being God's select
and peculiar People, that God would raise up to himself another Generation, a
Posterity of Abraham from among the Gentiles, who should walk in his steps, in
the way of his unshaken faith, and sincere obedience; and that if all this did
not move them to bring forth fruits meet for repentance, the Axe was laid to
the root of the Tree, to extirpate their Church, and to hew them down as fuel
for the unquenchable Fire. His free and resolute preaching together with the
great severity of his life procured him a vast Auditory, and numerous
Proselytes, for there went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and the Region
round about Jordan, Persons of all ranks and orders, of all Sects and Opinions,
(...) and Sadducees, Soldiers and Publicans, whose Vices he impartially
censured and condemned, and pressed upon them the duties of their particular
places and relations. Those whom he gained over to be Proselytes to his
Doctrine, he entered into this new Institution of life by Baptism (and hence he
derived his Title of the Baptist) a solemn and usual way of initiating
Proselytes, no less than Circumcision, and of great antiquity in the Jewish
Church. In all times (says Maimonides) if any Gentile would enter into
Covenant, remain under the Maim. (...). cap. 13. (...). Jac. Alting. (...).
wings of the Schechina, or Divine Majesty, and take upon him the yoke of the
Law, he is bound to have (...) Circumcision, Baptism, and a Peace Offering: and
if a Woman, Baptism, and an Oblation, because it is said, As ye are, so shall
the stranger (...). VII. ds (...). 25. p. 249.
be; as ye your selves (...) into Covenant by Circumcision, Baptism, and a
Peace Offering, so ought the Proselyte also in all Ages to enter in. Though
this last he confesses is to be omitted Numb. 15. 16.
during their present state of desolation, and to be made when their Temple
shall be rebuilt. This Rite they generally make contemporary with the giving of
the Law. So Maimonides, By three things (says he) the Israelites entered into
Covenant (he means Ibid. Sect. 24. p. 248.
the National Covenant at Mount Sinai) by Circumcision, Baptism, and an
Oblation; Baptism being used some little time before the Law; which he proves
from that place, (...) the People to day and to morrow, and let them wash their
Clothes. This the Rabbines Exodus 19. 10. Vid. R. (...). 87. col. 2. ibid.
unanimously expound concerning Baptism, and expressly affirm, that wherever
we read of the Washing of Clothes, there an obligation to Baptism is intended.
Thus they entered into the first Covenant, upon the frequent violations whereof
God having promised to make a new and solemn Covenant with them in the times of
the Messiah, they expected a second Baptism, as that which should be the Rite
of their Initiation into it. And this probably is the reason, why the Apostle
writing to the Hebrews, speaks of the Doctrine (...). 6. 2.
of Baptisms (in the plural number) as one of the primary and elementary
Principles of the faith, wherein the Catechumens were to be instructed; meaning
that besides the Baptism whereby they had been initiated into the Mosaic
Covenant, there was another by which they were to enter into this new (...)
that was come upon the World. Hence the Sanhedrim (to whom the cognizance of
such cases did peculiarly appertain) when told of John's Baptism, never
expressed any wonder at it, as a new upstart Ceremony, it being a thing daily
practiced in their Church, nor found fault with the thing it self, which they
supposed would be a federal Rite under the dispensation of the Messiah, but
only quarrelled with him for taking upon him to administer it, when yet he
denied himself to be one of the prime Ministers of this new state. They said
unto him, why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor (...),
neither that Joh. 1. 25.
(...)? Either of which had he owned himself, they had not questioned his right
to enter Proselytes by this way of Baptism. It is called the Baptism of
Repentance, this being the main qualification that he required of those, who
took it upon them, as the fittest means to dispose them to receive the Doctrine
and Discipline of the Messiah; and to entitle them to that pardon of sin which
the Gospel brought along with it; whence he is said to baptize in the
Wilderness, and to preach the Baptism of repentance, Mark 1. 4.
for the remission of sins. And the success was answerable, infinite Multitudes
flocking to it, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. Nor
is it the least part of his happiness, that he had the honor to baptize his
Savior, which though modestly declined, our Lord put upon him, and was
accompanied with the most signal and miraculous attestations which Heaven could
bestow upon it.

5. AFTER his Preparatory Preachings in the Wilderness he was called to Court
by Herod, at least he was his frequent Auditor, was much delighted with his
plain and impartial Sermons, and had a mighty reverence for him, the gravity of
his Person, the strictness of his Manners, the freedom of his Preaching
commanding an awe and veneration from his Conscience, and making him willing in
many things to reform; But the bluntness of the holy Man came nearer, and
touched the King in the tenderest part, smartly reproving his adultery and
incestuous embraces, for that Prince kept Herodias his Brother Philip's Wife.
And now all corrupt interests were awakened to conspire his ruin. Extravagant
Lusts love not to be controlled and checked, Herodias resents the asfront,
cannot brook disturbance in the pleasures of her Bed, or the open challenging
of her honor, and therefore by all the arts of Feminine subtlety meditates
revenge. The issue was, the Baptist is cast into Prison, as the praeludium to a
sadder fate. For among other pleasures and scenes of mirth performed upon the
King's Birthday, Herod being infinitely pleased with the Dancing of a young
Lady, Daughter of this Herodias, promised to give her Her request, and solemnly
ratified his promise with an Oath. She prompted by her Mother, asks the Head of
John the Baptist, which the King partly out of a pretended reverence to his
Oath, partly out of a desire not to be interrupted in his unlawful pleasures,
presently granted, and it was as quickly accomplished. Thus died the Holy man,
a man strict in his conversation beyond the ordinary measures of an Anchoret,
bold and resolute, faithful and impartial in his Office, endued with the power
and spirit of Elias, a burning and a shining light, under whose light the Jews
rejoiced to sit, exceedingly taken with his temper and principles. He was the
happy Messenger of the Evangelical tidings, and in that respect more than a
Prophet, a greater not arising among them that were born of Women. In short, he
was a Man loved of his Friends, revered and honored by his Enemies; Josephus
gives this character of him, Antiquit. Jud. lib. 18. c. 7. p. (...).
that he was a good man, and pressed the Jews to the study of virtue, to the
practice of picty toward God, and justice and righteousness toward men, and
to join themselves to his Baptism, which he told them would then become
effectual, and acceptable to God, when they did not only cleanse the body, but
purify the mind by goodness and virtue. And though he gives somewhat a
different account of Herod's condemning him to dic, from what is assigned in
the Sacred History, yet he confesses, that the Jews universally looked upon the
putting him to death as the cause of the miscarriage of Herod's Army, and an
evident effect of the Divine vengeance and displeasure. The Jews in their
Writings make honorable mention (...) David Part. 1. ad Ann. 770. Millen. 4.
and (...). Templi secund. (...). 54. col. 4.
of his being put to death by Herod, because reproving him for the company of
his Brother Philip's Wife, stiling him Rabbi Johanan the High Priest, and
reckoning him one (...) of the wise men of Israel. Where he is called
High Priest, probably with respect to his being the Son of Zachariah, Head or
Chief of one of the XXIV. Families or courses of the Priests, who are many
times called Chief or Highpriests in Scripture.

6. THE Evangelical state being thus proclaimed and ushered in by the Preaching
and Ministry of the Baptist, our Lord himself appeared next more fully to
publish and confirm it, concerning whose Birth, Life, Death, and Resurrection,
the Doctrine he delivered, the Persons he deputed to Preach and convey it to
the World, and its success by the Ministry of the Apostles, large and
particular accounts are given in the following work. That which may be proper
and material to observe in this place is, what the Scripture so frequently
takes notice of, the excellency of this above the preceding dispensations,
especially that brought in by Moses, so much magnified in the Old Testament,
and so passionately admired and adhered to by the Jews at this day. Jesus is
the Mediator (...), Heb. 8. 6.
as the Apostle calls it, of a better Covenant. And better it is in several
regards; besides the infinite difference between the Persons, who were employed
to introduce and settle them, Moses and our Lord. The pre-eminence eminently
appears in many instances, whereof we shall remark the most considerable. And
first, the Mosaic dispensation was almost wholly made up of types and shadows,
the Evangelical has brought in the truth and substance. The Law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus (...). 1. 17.
Christ. Their Ordinances were but shadows of good things to come, sensible
representations of what was to follow after, the Body is Christ, the perfection
and accomplishment of their whole ritual Ministration. Their Ceremonies were
Figures of those things that are true, the Land of Canaan typified Heaven,
Moses and Joshua were types of the Blessed Jesus, and the Israelites after the
flesh of the true Israel which is after the Spirit, and all their Expiatory
Sacrifices did but represent that Great Sacrifice whereby Christ offered up
himself, and by his own blood purged away the sins of mankind, indeed the most
minute and inconsiderable circumstances of the Legal Economy were intended as
little lights, that might gradually usher in the state of the Gospel. A curious
Artist that designs a famous and excellent piece is not wont to complete and
finish it all at once, but first with his Pencil draws some rude lines and
rough draughts before he puts his last hand to it. By such a method the wise
God seems to have delivered the first draughts and Images of those things by
Moses to the Church, the substance and perfection whereof he designed should be
brought in by Christ. And how admirably did God herein condescend to the temper
and humor of that people; for being of a more rough and childish disposition,
apt to be taken with gaudy and sensible objects, by the external and pompous
institutions of the Ceremonial Dispensation he prepared them for better things,
as children are brought on by things accommodate to their weak capacities. The
Church was then an heir under age, and was to be trained up in such a way, as
agreed best with its Infant-temper, till it came to be of a more ripe manly
age, able to digest Evangelical mysteries, and then the cover and the veil was
taken off, and things made to appear in their own form and shape.

7. HENCE in the next place appears our happiness above them, that we are
redeemed from those many severe and burdensome impositions wherewith they were
clogged, and are now obliged only to a more easy and reasonable service. That
the Law was a very grievous and (...) Dispensation, is evident to any that
considers, how much it consisted of carnal ordinances, costly duties,
chargeable sacrifices, and innumerable little Rites and Ceremonies. Under that
state they were bound to undergo (yea even newborn Infants) the bloody and
painful (...) of Circumcision, to abstain from many sorts of food, useful and
pleasant to man's life, to keep multitudes of solemn and stated times, new
Moons, and Ceremonial Sabbaths, to take long and tedious journeys to Jerusalem
to offer their sacrifices at the Temple, to observe daily washings and
purifications, to use infinite care and caution in every place; for if by
chance they did but touch an unclean thing, besides their present confinement,
it put them to the expenses of a sacrifice, with hundreds more troublesome and
costly observances required of them. A cruel bondage, heavy burdens, and
grievous to be born; under the weight whereof good men did then groan, and
earnestly breath after the time of reformation; the very Apostles complained
that it was a yoke upon their necks, which Acts 15. 10.
neither their Fathers nor they were able to bear. But this yoke is taken off
from our shoulders, and the way open into the liberties of the children of God.
The Law bore a heavy hand over them, as children in their minority, we are got
from under the rod and lash of its tutorage and Pedagogie, and are no more
subject to the severity of its commands, to the exact punctilio's and
numerousness of its impositions. Our Lord has removed that low and troublesome
Religion, and has brought in a more manly and rational way of worship, more
suitable to the perfections of God, and more accommodate to the reason and
understandings of men. A Religion incomparably the wisest and the best that
ever took place in the World. God did not settle the Religion of the Jews, and
their way of worship, because good and excellent in it self, but for its
suitableness to the temper of that people. Happy we, whom the Gospel has freed
from those intolerable observances to which they were obliged, and has taught
us to serve God in a better way, more (...) and acceptable, more humane and
natural, and in which we are helped forwards by greater aids of Divine
assistence, than were afforded under that Dispensation. All which conspire to
render our way smooth and plain, Take my yoke upon you, for my yoke is easy,
and my burden is light.

8. THIRDLY, the Dispensation of the Gospel is founded upon more noble and
excellent promises: A better Covenant established upon better promises. And
better promises Heb. 8. 6.
they are both for the nature and clearness of their revelation. They were of a
more sublime and excellent nature, as being promises of spiritual and eternal
things, such as immediately concerned the perfection and happiness of mankind,
grace, peace, pardon, and eternal life. The Law strictly considered as a
particular Covenant with the Jews at Mount Sinai had no other promises but of
temporal blessings, plenty and prosperity, and the happiness of this life. This
was all that appeared above-ground, and that was expressly held forth in that
transaction, whatever might otherwise by due inferences, and proportions of
reason be deduced from it. Now this was a great defect in that Dispensation, it
being by this means, considering the nature and disposition of that people, and
the use they would make of it, apt to entangle and debase the minds of men, and
to arrest their thoughts and desires in the pursuit of more sublime and better
things. I do not say but that under the Old Testament there were promises of
spiritual things, and of eternal happiness, as appears from (...) Psalms, and
some passages in the Books of the Prophets: But then these though they were
under the Law, yet they were not of the Law, that is, did not properly belong
to it as a legal Covenant; God in every age of the Jewish Church raising up
some extraordinary persons, who preached notions to the people above the common
standard of that Dispensation, and who spoke things more plainly, by how much
nearer they approached the times of the Messiah. But under the Christian
Economy the promises are evidently more pure and spiritual; not a temporal
Canaan, external prosperity, or pardon of ceremonial uncleanness, but remission
of sins, reconciliation with God, and everlasting life are proposed and offered
to us. Not but that in some measure temporal blessings are promised to us as
well as them, only with this difference, to them earthly blessings were pledges
of spiritual, to us spiritual blessings are ensurances of temporal, so far as
the Divine wisdom sees fit for us. Nor are they better in themselves, than they
are clearly discovered and revealed to us. Whatever spiritual blessings were
proposed under the former state were obscure and dark, and very few of the
people understood them: But to us the veil is taken off, and we behold the
glory of the Lord with open face, especially 1 (...) 2. 25.
the things that relate to another World; for this is the promise that he has
promised us, 2 Timothy 1. 10.
even Eternal Life. Hence our Lord is said to have brought life and immortality
to light through the Gospel. Which he may be justly said to have done, inasmuch
as he has given the greatest certainty, and the clearest account of that state.
He has given us the greatest assurance and certainty of the thing, that there
is such a state. The happiness of the other World was a notion not so firmly
agreed upon either amongst Jews or Gentiles. Among the Jews it was peremptorily
denied by the Sadducees, a considerable Sect in that Church, which we can
hardly suppose they would have done, had it been clearly propounded in the Law
of Moses. And among the Heathens the most sober and considering persons did at
some times at least doubt of it, witness that confession of Socrates himself,
the wisest and best man that ever was in the Heathen World, who when he came to
plead his cause before his Judges, and had bravely discoursed of the happy
state of good men in the other Life, plainly consessed, that he could be
content (...).
(...), to die a thousand times over, were he but assured that those (...) 22.
p. m. (...).
things were true; and being condemned, concludes his Apology with this
farewell, And now, Gentlemen, I am going off the stage, it is your lot to live,
and mine to die, but (...). Sect. 23. ad (...).
whether of us two shall fare better, is (...), unknown to any but to God
alone. But our blessed Savior has put the case past all peradventure, having
plainly published this doctrine to the World, and sealed the truth of it, and
that by raising others from the dead, and especially by his own Resurrection
and (...), which were the highest pledge and assurance of a future Immortality.
But besides the security, he has given the clearest account of the nature of
it. It Is very probable that the Jews generally had of old, as it is certain they
have at this day, the most gross and carnal apprehensions concerning the state
of another Life. But to us the Gospel has perspicuously revealed the invisible
things of the other World; told us what that Heaven is, which is promised to
good men, a state of spiritual joys, of chaste and rational delights, a
conformity of ours to the Divine Nature, a being made like to God, and an
endless and uninterrupted communion with him.

9. BUT because in our lapsed and degenerate state we are very unable without
some foreign assistance to attain the promised rewards, hence arises in the
next place another great privilege of the Evangelical Economy, that it is
blessed with larger and more abundant communications of the Divine Spirit, than
was afforded under the Jewish state. Under the one it was given by drops, under
the other it is poured forth. The Law laid heavy and hard commands, but gave
little strength to do them, it did not assist humane nature with those powerful
aids that are necessary for us in our (...) Romans 8 3.
state, it could do nothing in that it was weak through the flesh, and by
reason of the weakness Heb. 7. 18.
and unprofitableness thereof, it could make nothing (...): (...) was this made
it an heavy yoke, when the commands of it (...) uncouth and troublesome, and
the assistances so small and inconsiderable. Whereas now the Gospel does not
only prescribe such Laws as are happily accommodate to the true temper of
humane nature, and adapted to the reason of mankind, such as every wise and
prudent man must have pitched upon, but it affords the insluences of the Spirit
of God, by whose assistance our vitiated faculties are repaired, and we enabled
under so much weakness, and in the midst of so many temptations to hold on in
the paths of piety and virtue. Hence it is that the plentiful effusions of the
Spirit were reserved as the great blessing of the Evangelical state, that God
would then pour water upon him that is thirsty, and sloods upon the dry ground,
that he Isai. 44. 3. 4.
would pour out his Spirit upon their seed, and his blessing upon their
offspring, whereby they should spring up as among the grass, as willows by the
watercourse: That he would give (...). 36. 26. 27.
them a new heart, and put his Spirit within them, and cause them to walk in
his statutes, and keep his judgments to do them: And this is the meaning of
those branches of the Covenant, so often repeated, I will put my Law into their
minds, and write it in their hearts, that is, by the help of my Grace and
Spirit (...) enable them to live according to my Laws, as readily and
willingly, as if they were written in their hearts. For this reason the Law is
compared to a dead letter, the Gospel to the Spirit that gives life, thence 2
Cor. 3. 6. (...).
styled the ministration of the Spirit, and as such said to (...) in glory, and
that to such a degree, that what glory the Legal Dispensation had in this (...)
is eclipsed into nothing, For even that which was made glorious had no glory in
this respect, by reason of the glory that (...). 10, 11.
excels, for if that which was done away was glorious, much more that which
remains is Joh. 14. 16. 17.
glorious. Hence the Spirit is said to be Christ's peculiar mission, I will
pray the Father, Ephesians. 4. 8.
and he will send you another comforter, even the Spirit of truth, which was
done immediately (...). 3. 6.
after his Ascension, when he ascended up on high, and gave gifts to men, even
the Holy Ghost, which he shed on them abundantly through Jesus Christ our
Savior: For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified. Not but that he was (...) 7. 39.
given before, even under the old Economy, but not in those large and
diffusive measures, wherein it was afterward communicated to the World.

10. FIFTHLY, The Dispensation of the Gospel had a better establishment and
confirmation than that of the Law; for though the Law was introduced with great
scenes of pomp and Majesty, yet was the Gospel ushered in by more kindly and
rational methods, (...) by more and greater miracles, whereby our Lord
unquestionably evinced his Divine Commission, and showed that he came from God,
doing more miracles in three years than were done through all the periods of
the Jewish Church, and many of them such as were peculiar to him alone. He
often raised the dead, which Moses never did, commanded the winds and waves of
the Sea, expelled Devils out of Lunaticks and possessed persons, who fled
as soon as ever he commanded them to be gone, cured many inveterate and
chronical distempers with the speaking of a word, and some without a word
spoken, virtue silently going out from him. He searched men's hearts, and
revealed the most secret transactions of their minds; had this miraculous power
always residing in him, and could exert it when, and upon what occasions he
pleased, and impart it to others, communicating it to his Apostles and
followers, and to the Primitive Christians for the three first Ages of the
Church; he never exerted it in methods of dread and terror, but in doing such
miracles as were highly useful and beneficial to the World. And as if all this
had not been enough, he (...) down his own life after all to give testimony to
it. Covenants were ever wont to be ratified with blood, and the death of
sacrifices. But when out Lord came to introduce the Covenant of the Gospel, he
did not consecrate it with the blood of Bulls and Goats, but with his own most
precious blood, as of a Lamb without spot and blemish. And could he give a
greater testimony to the truth of his doctrine, and those great things he had
promised to the World, than to seal it with his blood. Had not these things
been so, twere infinitely unreasonable to suppose, that a person of so much
wisdom and goodness as our Savior was, should have made the World believe so,
and much less would he have chosen to die for it, and that the most acute and
ignominious death. But he died, and rose again for us, and appeared after his
Resurrection: His enemies had taken him away by a most bitter and cruel death,
had guarded and secured his Sepulcher with all the care, power and diligence
which they could invent. And yet he rose again the third day in triumph,
visibly conversed with his Disciples for forty days together, and then went to
Heaven. By which he gave the most solemn and undeniable assurance to the World,
that he was the Son of God (for he was declared to be the Son of God Romans (...).
with power by the Resurrection from the dead) and the Savior of mankind, and
that those doctrines which he had taught were most true, and did really contain
the terms of that solemn transaction, which God by him had offered to men in
order to their eternal happiness in another World.

11. THE last instance I shall note of the excellency of this above the
Mosaical Dispensation, is the (...) extent and latitude of it, and that both in
respect of place and time. First, it is more universally extensive as to place,
not confined as the former was to a small part of mankind, but common unto all.
Heretofore in Judah only was Psalm. 76. 1, 2.
God known, and his name was great in Israel, he showed his Word unto Jacob,
his Statutes Psalm. 147. 19. 20.
and his Judgments unto Israel; but he did not deal so with any other Nation,
neither had the Heathen knowledge of his Laws. In those times Salvation was
only of the Jews, a few Acres of Land like Gideons Fleece was watered with the
dew of Heaven, while all the rest of the World for many Ages lay dry and barren
round about it, God suffering all Nations Act. 14. 16.
in times past to walk in their own ways, the ways of their own superstition
and Idolatry, E, hes. 2. 13.
being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenants of
promise, having no hope, and without God in the World, that is, they were
without those promises, discoveries, and declarations which God made to Abraham
and his Seed, and are therefore peculiarly described under this character, the
Gentiles which knew not God. Indeed 1 These. 4. 5.
the Religion of the Jews was in it self incapable to be extended over the
World, many considerable parts of it, as Sacrifices, First Fruits, Oblations,
etc. (called by the Jews themselves (...) statutes belonging to that land)
being to be performed at Jerusalem and the Temple, which could not be done by
those Nations that lay a considerable distance from the Land of promise. They
had it is true now and then some few Proselytes of the Gentiles, who came over
and imbodied themselves into their way of worship; but then they either resided
among the Jews, or by reason of their vicinity to Judaea were capable to make
their personal appearance, and to comply with the public Institutions of the
Divine Law. Other Proselytes they had, called Proselytes of the Gate, who lived
dispersed in all Countries, whom the Jews call (...) the pious of the Nations,
Men of devout minds, and Religious lives, but these were obliged to no more
than the observation of the Seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah, that is, in
effect to the Precepts of the Natural Law. But now the Gospel has a much wider
sphere to move in, as vast and large as the whole World it self, it is
communicable to all Countries, and may be exercised in any part or corner of
the Earth. Our Lord gave Commission to his Apostles to go into all (...), and
to Preach the Gospel to every Creature; and so they did, (...) 16. 15.
their sound went into all the Earth, and their (...) unto the ends of the
World, by which Romans 10. (...).
Tit. 2. 11.
means, the grace of God that brings salvation appeared unto all men, and the
Gospel was Cololl. 1. 13.
Preached to every Creature under Heaven. So that now there is neither Jew, nor
Greek, (...). 3. 28.
neither bond nor free, neither male nor female, but we are all one in Christ
Jesus, and in every Act. 10. 35.
Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness is accepted with him.
The Prophet had long since foretold it of the times of Christ, that the House
of God, that is, his Church (...). 56. 7.
should be called an House of Prayer for all People; the Doors should be open,
and none excluded that would enter in. And the Divine providence was singularly
remarkable in this affair, that after our Lord's Ascension, when the Apostles
were going upon their Commission, and were first solemnly to proclaim it at
Jerusalem, there were dwelling there at that time Parthians, Medes, Elamites,
etc. persons out of every Nation under Heaven, that they might be as the
First Fruits of those several Countries, which were to be gathered in by the
preaching of the Gospel, which was accordingly done with great success, the
Christian Religion in a few years spreading its triumphant Banners over the
greatest part of the then known World.

12. AND as the true Religion was in those Days pent up within one particular
Country, so the more public and ordinary worship of God was confined only to
one particular place of it, viz. Jerusalem, hence called the Holy City. Here
was the Temple, here the Priests that ministered at the Altar, here all the more
public Solemnities of Divine adoration, Thither the Tribes go up, the Tribes
of the Lord unto the Testimony of Israel, Psalm. 122. 4.
to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord. Now this was not the least part of
the bondage of that dispensation to be obliged thrice every Year to take such
long and tedious Journies, many of the Jews living some Hundreds of Miles
distance from Jerusalem, and so strictly were they limited to this place, that
to build an Altar, and offer Sacrifices in any other place (unless in a case or
two wherein God did extraordinarily dispense) although it were to the true God,
was though not false, yet unwarrantable worship; for which reason the Jews at
this day abstain from Sacrifices, because banished from Jerusalem and the
Temple, the only legal place of offering. But behold the liberty of the Gospel
in this case, we are not tied to present our devotions at Jerusalem, a pious
and sincere mind is the best Sacrifice that we can offer up to God, and this
may be done in any part of the World no less acceptably, than they of old
sacrificed in the Temple. The hour comes, when ye shall neither in this
Mountain, (Mount Gerizim) nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father, Joh. 4.
21-23.
when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, as
our Lord told the Woman of Samaria; in spirit and in truth] in spirit, in
opposition to that carnal and Idolatrous (...) Philo de (...). p. 755.
worship that was in use among the Samaritans, who worshipped God under the
representation of a Dove: in truth, in opposition to the typical and figurative
worship of the Jews, which was but a shadow of the true worship of the Gospel.
The great Sacrifice required in the Christian Religion is not the fat of
Beasts, or the first fruits of the Ground, but an honest heart, and a pious
life, and a grateful acknowledgment of our dependence upon God in the public
Solemnities of his praise and worship. For the Law and the Gospel did not
differ in this, that the one commanded public worship, the other not, but that
under the one public worship was fixed to one only place, under the other it
is free to any where the providence of God has placed us, it being part of the
duty bound upon us by natural and unalterable obligations, that we should
publicly meet together for the solemn Celebration of the Divine honor and
service.

13. NOR is the Economy of the Gospel less extensive in time than place; the
Old Testament was only a temporary dispensation, that of the Gospel is to last
to the end of the World; the Law was to continue only for a little time, the
Gospel is an Everlasting Covenant; the one to be quickly antiquated and
abolished, the other never to be done away by any other to succeed it. The Jews
indeed stickle hard for the perpetual and immutable obligation of the Law of
Moses, and frequently urge us with those places, where the Covenant of
Circumcision is called an Everlasting Covenant, and God said to (...). 17 7.
1 (...) 9. (...).
choose the Temple at Jerusalem to place his name there for ever, to give the
Land of Canaan Genesis 17. 8.
to Abraham and his seed for an everlasting possession, thus the Law of the
Passover is (...) 12, 14.
(...). 23, 14.
called an Ordinance for ever, the command of the First Fruits a statute for
ever, and the like in other places, which seem to intimate a perpetual and
unalterable Dispensation. But the answer is short and plain, that this phrase
(...) for ever (though when it is applied to God it always denotes Eternity) yet
when it is attributed to other things, it implies no more than a periodical
duration, limited according to the will of the Lawgiver, or the nature of the
thing; thus the Hebrew Servant was to serve his Master for Exodus 21. 6.
ever, that is, but for seven years, till the next year of Jubilee: He shall
walk before mine 1 Samuel 2. 36.
anointed for ever, says God concerning Samuel, that is, be a Priest all his
days. Thus when the Ritual services of the Mosaic Law are called Statutes for
ever, the meaning is, that they should continue a long time obligatory, until
the time of the (...), in whose days the Sacrifice and Oblation was to cease,
and those carnal Ceremonies to give way to the more spiritual services of the
Gospel. Indeed the very typical nature of that Dispensation evidently argued it
to be but for a time, the shadow being to cease, that the substance might take
place; and though many of them continued some considerable time after Christ's
death, yet they lost their positive and obligatory power, and were used only as
things indifferent in compliance with the inveterate prejudices of new
Converts, lately brought over from Judaism, and who could not quickly lay aside
that great veneration which they had for the Rites of the Mosaic Institution.
Though even in this respect it was not long before all Jewish Ceremonies were
thrown off, and Moses quite turned out of doors. Whereas the Evangelical state
is to run parallel with the Heb. 13. 20.
age and duration of the World, it is the Everlasting Covenant, the Everlasting
Gospel, Rev. 14. 6.
the last Dispensation that God will make to the World, God who at sundry
times, and in Heb. 1. 1, 2.
diverse manners spoke in time past by the Prophets, has in these last days
spoken to us by his (...); in which respect the Gospel in opposition to the Law
is styled a Kingdom that cannot Heb. 12. 28.
(...) moved. The (...) in the foregoing Verses speaking concerning the
Mosaical state, Whose voice (says he) then shook the Earth, but now he has
promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but also the Heaven
(a phrase peculiar to the Scripture to note the introducing a new scene and
state of things) and this word, Yet once more, signisieth the removing of those
things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which
cannot be shaken may remain, that is, that the state of the Gospel may endure
for ever. Hence Christ is said to have an unchangeable Priesthood, to be a
Priest for ever, to be consecrated for evermore. From all which it appears, how
incomparably happy we Christians are under the Gospel, above what the Jews were
in the time of the Law; God having placed us under the best of Dispensations,
freed us from those many nice and troublesome observances to which they were
tied, put us under the clearest discoveries and revelations, and given us the
most noble, rational, and masculine Religion, a Religion the most perfective of
our natures, and the most conducive to our happiness; while their Covenant at
best was faulty, and after all could not make him that did the service perfect
in things pertaining to the Conscience. Blessed are the eyes which see the Luke
11. 23. 24.
things that ye see, for I (...) you that many Prophets and Kings have desired
to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those
things which ye hear, and have not heard them.

The End of the APPARATUS.


THE GREAT EXEMPLAR OF Sanctity and Holy Life according to the Christian
Institution; DESCRIBED In the HISTORY of the LIFE and DEATH of the ever-Blessed
JESUS CHRIST, THE SAVIOR of the WORLD. WITH CONSIDERATIONS and DISCOURSES upon
the several parts of the Story; And PRAYERS fitted to the several MYSTERIES.

IN THREE PARTS.

The Fifth Edition.

By JER. TAILOR, Chaplain in Ordinary to King CHARLES the First, and late Lord
Bishop of Down and Conner.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, 1675.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and most truly Noble Lord, CHRISTOPHER LORD HATTON,
Baron HATTON of Kirby, etc.
MY LORD,
WHEN Interest divides the Church, and the Calentures of men breathe out in
Problems and unactive Discourses, each part in pursuance of its own portion
follows that Proposition which complies with and bends in all the flexures of
its temporal ends; and while all strive for Truth, they hug their own Opinions
dressed up in her imagery, and they dispute for ever, and either the Question
is indeterminable, or, which is worse, men will never be convinced. For such is
the nature of Disputings, that they begin commonly in Mistakes, they proceed
with Zeal and fancy, and end not at all but in Schisms and uncharitable names,
and too often dip their feet in blood. In the mean time, he that gets the
better of his adversary oftentimes gets no good to himself, because although he
has fast hold upon the right side of the Problem, he may be an ill man in the
midst of his triumphant Disputations. And therefore it was not here that God
would have Man's Felicity to grow: For our condition had been extremely
miserable, if our final state had been placed upon an uncertain hill, and the
way to it had been upon the waters, upon which no spirit but that of
Contradiction and Discord did ever move: for the man should have tended to an
end of an uncertain dwelling, and walked to it by ways not discernible, and
arrived thither by chance; which, because it is irregular, would have
discomposed the pleasures of a Christian Hope, as the very disputing has
already destroyed Charity, and disunited the continuity of Faith; and in the
consequent there would be no Virtue, and no Felicity. But God, who never loved
that Man should be too ambitiously busy in imitating his Wisdom, (and Man
lost Paradise for it) is most desirous we should imitate his Goodness, and
transcribe copies of those excellent Emanations from his Holiness, whereby as
he communicates himself to us in Mercies, so he propounds himself imitable by
us in Graces. And in order to this, God has described our way plain, certain,
and determined: and although he was pleased to leave us indetermined in the
Questions of exterior Communion, yet he put it past all question that we are
bound to be Charitable. He has placed the Question of the state of Separation
in the dark, in hidden and undiscerned regions; but he has opened the windows
of Heaven, and given great light to us, teaching how we are to demean our
selves in the state of Conjunction. Concerning the Salvation of Heathens he was
not pleased to give us account; but he has clearly described the duty of
Christians, and tells upon what terms alone we shall be saved. And although the
not inquiring into the ways of God and the strict rules of practice have been
instrumental to the preserving them free from the serpentine enfoldings and
labyrinths of Dispute; yet God also with a great design of mercy has writ his
Commandments in so large characters, and engraven them in such Tables, that no
man can want the Records, nor yet skill to read the handwriting upon this
wall, if he understands what he understands, that is, what is placed in his own
spirit. For God was therefore desirous that humane nature should be perfected
with moral, not intellectual, Excellencies, because these only are of use and
compliance with our present state and conjunction. If God had given to Eagles
an appetite to swim, or to the Elephant strong desires to fly, he would have
ordered that an abode in the Sea and the Air respectively should have been
proportionable to their manner of living; for so God has done to Man, fitting
him with such Excellencies which are useful to him in his ways and progress to
Perfection. A man has great use and need of Justice; and all the instances of
Morality serve his natural and political ends, he cannot live without them, and
be happy: but the filling the rooms of the Understanding with aerie and
ineffective Notions, is just such an Excellency as it is in a Man to imitate
the voice of Birds; at his very best the Nightingale shall excel him, and it is
of no use to that End which God designed him in the first intentions of
creation.

In pursuance of this consideration, I have chosen to serve the purposes of
Religion by doing assistence to that part of Theology which is wholly
practical, that which makes us wiser, therefore, because it makes us (...). And
truly (my Lord) it is enough to weary the spirit of a Disputer, that he shall
argue till he has lost his voice, and his time, and sometimes the Question
too, and yet no man shall be of his mind more than was before. How few turn
Lutherans, or Calvinists, or Roman Catholics, from the Religion either of
their Country or Interest? Possibly two or three weak or interested,
fantastic and easy, prejudicate and effeminate understandings pass from
Church to Church, upon grounds as weak as those for which formerly they did
dissent; and the same Arguments are good or bad, as exterior accidents or
interior appetites shall determine. I deny not but for great causes some
Opinions are to be quitted: but when I consider how few do forsake any, and
when any do, oftentimes they choose the wrong side, and they that take the
righter do it so by contingency, and the advantage also is so little, I believe
that the triumphant persons have but small reason to please themselves in
gaining Proselytes, since their purchase is so small, and as inconsiderable to
their triumph, as it is unprofitable to them who change for the worse, or for
the better upon unworthy motives. In all this there is nothing certain, nothing
noble. But he that follows the work of God, that is, labors to gain Souls, not
to a Sect and a Subdivision, but to the Christian Religion, that is, to the
Faith and Obedience of the Lord JESUS, has a promise to be assisted and
rewarded: and all those that go to Heaven are the purchase of such
undertakings, the fruit of such culture and labors; for it is only a holy life
that lands us there.

And now (my Lord) I have told you my reasons, I shall not be ashamed to say
that I am weary and toiled with rowing up and down in the seas of Questions
which the Interests of Christendom have commenced; and in many Propositions of
which I am heartily persuaded I am not certain that I am not deceived; and I
find that men are most confident of those Articles which they can so little
prove, that they never made Questions of them. But I am most certain, that by
living in the Religion and fear of God, in Obedience to the King, in the
Charities and duties of Communion with my Spiritual Guides, in Justice and Love
with all the world in their several proportions, I shall not fail of that End
which is perfective of humane nature, and which will never be obtained by
Disputing.

Here therefore when I had fixed my thoughts, upon sad apprehensions that God
was removing our Candlestick, (for why should be not, when men themselves put
the Light out, and pull the Stars from their Orbs, so hastening the day of
God's Judgment?) I was desirous to put a portion of the holy fire into a
Repository, which might help to re-enkindle the Incense, when it shall please
God Religion shall return, and all his Servants sing (In convertendo
captivitatem Sion) with a voice of Eucharist.

But now (my Lord) although the results and issues of my retirements and study
do naturally run toward You, and carry no excuse for their forwardness, but
the confidence that your Goodness rejects no emanation of a great affection;
yet in this Address I am apt to promise to my self a fair interpretation,
because I bring you an instrument and auxiliaries to that Devotion whereby we
believe you are dear to God, and know that you are to good men. And if these
little sparks of holy fire which I have heaped together do not give life to
your prepared and already-enkindled Spirit; yet they will sometimes help to
entertain a Thought, to actuate a Passion, to employ and hallow a Fancy, and
put the body of your Piety into fermentation, by presenting you with the
circumstances and parts of such Meditations which are symbolical to those of
your daily Office, and which are the passe-temps of your severest hours. My
Lord, I am not so vain to think that in the matter of Devotion, and the rules
of Justice and Religion, (which is the business of your life) I can add any
thing to your heap of excellent things: but I have known and felt comfort by
reading, or hearing from other persons, what I knew my self; and it was
unactive upon my spirit, till it was made vigorous and effective from without:
And in this sense I thought I might not be useless and impertinent.

My Lord, I designed to be instrumental to the Salvation of all persons that
shall read my Book: But unless (because Souls are equal in their substance, and
equally redeemed) we are obliged to wish the Salvation of all men, with the
greatest, that is, with equal, desires, I did intend in the highest manner I
could to express how much I am to pay to you, by doing the offices of that Duty
which, although you less need, yet I was most bound to pay, even the duties and
charities of Religion; having this design, that when posterity (for certainly
they will learn to distinguish things and persons) shall see your Honored Name
employed to separate and rescue these Papers from contempt, they may with the
more confidence expect in them something fit to be offered to such a Personage.
My Lord, I have my end, if I serve God, and You, and the needs and interests of
Souls; but shall think my return full of reward, if you shall give me pardon,
and put me into your Litanies, and account me in the number of your Relatives
and Servants; for indeed, my Lord, I am most heartily

Your Lordship's most affectionate and most obliged Servant, JER. TAILOR.

THE CONTENTS.
THE PREFACE. fol. I. An Exhortation to the Imitation of the Life of CHRIST.
fol. (i)
SECT. I.
The History of the Conception of JESUS. page 1. Considerations upon the
Annunciation of the Blessed MARY, and the Conception of the Holy Jesus. p. 3.
SECT. II.
The Bearing of JESUS in the (...) of the Blessed (...). p. 7. Considerations
concerning the circumstances of the Interval between the Conception and
Nativity. p. 8.
SECT. III.
The Nativity of our Blessed Savior JESUS. p. 13. Considerations upon the
Birth of our Blessed Savior JESUS. p. 15. Discourse 1. Of Nursing Children, in
imitation of the Blessed Virgin Mother. p. 18.
SECT. IV.
Of the great and glorious Accidents happening about the Birth of JESUS. p. 25.
Considerations upon the Apparition of the Angels to the Shepherds. p. 28.
Considerations upon the Epiphany of the Blessed JESUS by a Star, and the
Adoration of JESUS by the Eastern Magi. p. 31.
SECT. V.
Of the Circumcision of JESUS, and his Presentation in the Temple. p. 35.
Considerations upon the Circumcision of the Holy Child JESUS. p. 36. Discourse
2. Of the Virtue of Obedience. p. 40. Considerations upon the Presentation of
JESUS in the Temple. p. 51. Discourse 3. Of Meditation. p. 54.
SECT. VI.
Of the Death of the Holy Innocents or the Babes of Bethlehem, and the Flight
of JESUS into Egypt. p. 65. Considerations upon the Death of the Innocents, and
the Flight of the Holy JESUS into Egypt. p. 67.
SECT. VII.
Of the younger years of JESUS, and his Disputation with the Doctors in the
Temple. p. 73. Considerations upon the Disputation of JESUS with the Doctors in
the Temple. p. 74.
SECT. VIII.
Of the Preaching of John the Baptist, preparative to the Manifestation of
JESUS. p. 77. Considerations upon the Preaching of John the Baptist. p. 78.
Discourse 4. Of Mortification and corporal Austerities. p. 82.
SECT. IX.
Of JESUS being Baptized, and going into the Wilderness to be tempted. p. 93.
Considerations upon the Baptizing, Fasting, and Temptation of the Holy JESUS by
the Devil. p. 95. Discourse 5. Of Temptation. p. 102. Discourse 6. Of Baptism.
p. 116. Of Baptizing Infants. p. 127.
SECT. X.
Of the first Manifestation of JESUS, by the Testimony of John, and a Miracle.
p. 151. Considerations touching the Vocation of five Disciples, and of the
first Miracle of JESUS, done at Cana in Galilee. p. 155. Discourse 7. Of Faith.
p. 159.
SECT. XI.
Of CHRIST's going to Jerusalem to the Passover the first time after his
Manifestation, and what followed till the expiration of the Office of John the
Baptist. p. 167. Considerations upon the first Journey of the Holy JESUS to
Jerusalem, when he whipped the Merchants out of the Temple. p. 169. Discourse 8.
Of the Religion of Holy Places. p. 171.
SECT. XII.
Of JESUS's departure into Galilee; his manner of Life, Miracles and Preaching;
his calling of Disciples; and what happened until the second Passover. p. 181.
Considerations upon the Intercourse happening between the Holy JESUS and the
Woman of Samaria. p. 187. Considerations upon CHRIST's first Preaching, and the
Accidents happening about that time. p. 193. Discourse 9. Of Repentance. p.
197. Upon CHRIST's Sermon on the Mount, and of the Eight Beatitudes. p. 221.
Discourse 10. Upon that part of the Decalogue which the Holy JESUS adopted into
the Institution and obligation of Christianity. p. 231. Of the three additional
Precepts which CHRIST super induced, and made parts of the Christian Law.
Discourse 11. Of CHARITY, with its parts, Forgiving, Giving, not Judging. p.
232. Of Alms. p. 258. Discourse 12. Of the second additional Precept of CHRIST,
(viz.) Of PRAYER. p. 261. Discourse 13. Of the third additional Precept of
CHRIST, (viz.) of the manner of FASTING. p. 272. Discourse 14. Of the Miracles
which JESUS wrought for confirmation of his Doctrine, during the whole time of
his Preaching. p. 277.
SECT. XIII.
Of the Second Year of the Preaching of JESUS. p. 289. Discourse 15. Of the
Excellency, (...), Reasonableness and Advantages of bearing CHRIST's Yoke, and
living according to his Institution. p. 295. Discourse 16. Of Certainty of
(...). p. 313.
SECT. XIV.
Of the Third Year of the Preaching of JESUS. p. 319. Discourse 17. Of Scandal,
or Giving and taking Offense. p. 328. Discourse 18. Of the Causes and Manner of
the Divine Judgments. p. 335.
SECT. XV.
Of the Accidents happening from the Death of Lazarus, until the Death and
Burial of JESUS. p. 345. Considerations of some preparatory Accidents before
the entrance of JESUS into his Passion. p. 357. Considerations upon the Washing
of the Disciples feet by JESUS, and his Sermon of (...). p. 363. Discourse 19.
Of the Institution and Reception of the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. p.
369. Considerations upon the Accidents happening on the Vespers of the Passion.
p. 383. Considerations upon the Scourging and other Accidents happening from
the Apprehension till the Crucifixion of JESUS. p. 389. Discourse 20. Of Death,
and the due manner of Preparation to it. p. 397. Considerations upon the
Crucifixion of the Holy JESUS. p. 411.
SECT. XVI.
Of the Resurrection and Ascension of JESUS. p. 419. Considerations upon the
Accidents happening in the interval after the Death of the Holy JESUS, until
his Resurrection. p. 423.


THE PREFACE.
1. CHRISTIAN Religion has so many exterior advantages to its Reputation and
Advancement, from the Author and from the Ministers, from the fountain of its
Origination and the channels of Conveyance, (GOD being the Author, the Word
incarnate being the great Doctor and Preacher of it, his Life and Death being
its Consignation, the Holy Spirit being the great Argument and demonstration of
it, and the Apostles the Organs and Conduits of its dissemination) that it were
glorious beyond all opposition and disparagement, though we should not consider
the Excellency of its Matter, and the Certainty of its Probation, and the
Efficacy of its Power, and the Perfection and rare accomplishment of its
Design. But I consider that Christianity is therefore very little understood,
because it is reproached upon that pretense which its very being and design
does infinitely confute. It is esteemed to be a Religion contrary in its
Principles or in its Precepts to that wisdom -- (...) and (...) vis (...)
perit, si (...) Facere (...) Non in (...) dum (...) and summa (...) as (...)
quem (...) pudebunt. Lucan. (...). 8.
whereby the World is governed, and Commonwealths increase, and Greatness is
acquired, and Kings go to war, and our ends of Interest are served and
promoted; and that it is an Institution so wholly in order to another World,
that it does not at all communicate with this, neither in its End nor in its
Discourses, neither in the Policy nor in the Philosophy: and therefore as the
Doctrine of the Cross was entertained at first in scorn by the Greeks, in
offense and indignation by the Jews; so is the whole Systeme and collective
Body of Christian Philosophy esteemed imprudent by the Politics of the world,
and flat and irrational by some men of excellent wit and submile discourse;
who, because the permissions and dictates of natural, true and essential Reason
are at no hand to be contradicted by any superinduced Discipline, think, that
whatsoever seems contrary to their Reason is also violent to our Nature, and
offers indeed a good to us, but by ways unnatural and unreasonable. And I think
they are very great strangers to the present affairs and persuasions of the
World, who know not that Christianity is very much undervalued upon this
principle, men insensibly becoming unchristian, because they are persuaded that
much of the Greatness of the World is contradicted by the Religion. But
certainly no mistake can be greater. For the Holy Jesus by his Doctrine did
instruct the Understandings of men, made their Appetites more obedient, their
Reason better principled, and argumentative with less deception, their Wills
apter for noble choices, their Governments more prudent, their present
Felicities greater, their hopes more excellent, and that duration which was
intended to them by their Creator he made manifest to be a state of glory: and
all this was to be done and obtained respectively by the ways of Reason and
Nature, such as God gave to Man then when at first he designed him to a noble
and an immortal condition; the Christian Law being, for the substance of it,
nothing but the (...). Epiph. Panar. l. 1. tom. 1. number. 5. (...) magis (...)
cum (...) quam (...) pene (...) agit quam ut naturam collapsam (...). Erasm. in
11. (...). Mat.
restitution and perfection of the Law of Nature. And this I shall represent in
all the parts of its natural progression, and I intend it not only as a Preface
to the following Books, but for an Introduction and Invitation to the whole
Religion.

2. For God when he made the first emanations of his eternal Being, and created
Man as the End of all his productions Ratio Dti (...) est humanis rebus (...)
est hominibus been (...), si non (...) a summo (...). ad (...). 16.
here below, designed him to an End such as himself was pleased to choose for
him, and gave him abilities proportionable to attain that End. God gave Man a
reasonable and an intelligent nature. And to this noble Nature he designed as
noble an End; he intended Man should live well and happily, in proportion to
his appetites, and in the reasonable doing and enjoying those good things which
God made him naturally to desire. For since God gave him proper and peculiar
Appetites with proportion to their own objects, and gave him Reason and
abilities, not only to perceive the sapidness and relish of those objects, but
also to make reflex acts upon such perceptions, and to perceive that he did
perceive, which was a rare instrument of pleasure and pain respectively; it is
but reasonable to think, that God, who created him in mercy, did not only
proportion a Being to his nature, but did also provide satisfaction for all
those Appetites and desires which himself had created and put into him. For if
he had not, then the Being of a man had been nothing but a state of perpetual
Affliction, and the creation of men had been the greatest Unmercifulness in the
world, disproportionate objects being mere instances of affliction, and those
unsatisfied appetites nothing else but instruments of torment.

3. Therefore, that this intendment of God and Nature should be effected, that
is, that Man should become happy, it is naturally necessary, that all his
regular appetites should have an object appointed them, in the fruition of
which Felicity must consist. Because nothing is Felicity, but when what was
reasonably or orderly desired is possessed: for the having what is not desired,
or the wanting of what we desired, or the desiring what we should not, are the
several constituent parts of Infelicity; and it can have no other constitution.

4. Now the first Appetite Man had in order to his great End was, to be as
perfect as he could, that is, to be as like (...) Arist. de C^^^.
the best thing he knew as his nature and condition would permit. And although
by Adam's sancy and affection to his Wife, and by God's appointing fruit for
him, we see the lower Appetites were first provided for: yet the first Appetite
which Man had, as he distinguishes from lower creatures, was to be like God,
(for by that the Devil tempted him;) and in order to that he had naturally
sufficient instruments and abilities. For although by being abused with the
Devil's sophistry he chose an incompetent instrument; yet because it is
naturally certain, that Love is the greatest assimilation of the object and the
faculty, Adam by loving God might very well approach nearer him according as he
could. And it was natural to Adam to love God, who was his Father, his Creator,
the fountain of all good to him, and of excellency in himself; and whatsoever
is understood to be such, it is as natural for us to love, and we do it for the
same reasons, for which we love any thing else; and we cannot love for any
other reason, but for one or both these in their proportion apprehended.

5. But because God is not only excellent and good, but by being supreme Lord
has power to give us what Laws he pleases, Obedience to his Laws therefore
becomes naturally, but consequently, necessary, when God decrees them, because
he does make himself an enemy to all Rebels and disobedient sons, by affixing
penalties to the transgressors: And therefore Disobedience is naturally
inconsistent, not only with love to our selves, because it brings afflictions
upon us, but with love to our supreme Lawgiver: it is contrary to the natural
love we bear to God so understood, because it makes him our enemy, whom
naturally and reasonably we cannot but love; and therefore also opposite to the
first Appetite of Man, which is to be like God, in order to which we have
naturally no instrument but Love, and the consequents of Love.

6. And this is not at all to be contradicted by a pretense that a man does not
naturally know there is a GOD. Because by the same instrument by which we know
that the World began, or that there was a first man, by the same we know that
there is a GOD, and that he also knew it too, and conversed with that God, and
received Laws from him. For if we discourse of Man, and the Law of Nature, and
the first Appetites, and the first Reasons abstractedly, and in their own
complexions, and without all their relations and provisions, we discourse
jejunely, and falsely, and unprofitably. For as Man did not come by chance, nor
by himself, but from the universal Cause: so we know that this universal Cause
did do all that was necessary for him in order to the End he appointed him. And
therefore to begin the history of a Man's Reason, and the philosophy of his
Nature, it is not necessary for us to place him there where without the
consideration of a (...) (...). de Diis, 3.
GOD, or Society, or Law, or Order, he is to be placed, that is, in the state
of a thing rather than a person; but God by Revelations and Scriptures having
helped us with Propositions and parts of story relating Man's first and real
condition, from thence we can take the surest account, and make the most
perfect derivation of Propositions.

7. From this first Appetite of Man to be like God, and the first natural
instrument of it, Love, descend all the first obligations of Religion. In which
there are some parts more immediately and naturally expressive, others by
superinduction and positive command. Natural Religion I call such actions which
either are proper to the nature of the thing we worship, (such as are giving
praises to him, and speaking excellent things of him, and praying to him for
such things as we need, and a readiness to obey him in whatsoever he commands:)
or else such as are expressions proportionate to our natures that make them;
that is, giving to God the best things we have, and by which we can declare our
esteem of his honor and excellency; assigning some portion of our time, of our
estate, the labors of our persons, the increase of our store, (...) Epict.
(...). 38.
First fruits, Sacrifices, Oblations, and Tithes; which therefore God rewards,
because he has allowed to our natures no other instruments of doing him
honor, but by giving to him in some manner, which we believe honorable and
apt, the best thing we have.

8. The next Appetite a man has is, to beget one like himself, God having
implanted that appetite into Man for the propagation of mankind, and given it
as his first Blessing and permission: It is not good for man to be alone; and,
Increase and multiply. And (...) Somn. (...).
Artemidorus had something of this doctrine, when he reckons these two Laws of
Nature, Deum colere, Mulieribus vinci, To worship God, and To be overcome by
women, in proportion to his two first Appetites of Nature, To be like God, and
To have another like himself. This Appetite God only made regular by his first
provisions of satisfaction. He gave to Man a Woman for a Wife, for the
companion of his sorrows, for the instrument of multiplication; and yet
provided him but of one, and intimated he should have no more: which we do not
only know by an afterrevelation, the Holy Jesus having declared it to have been
God's purpose, but Adam himself understood it, as appears by his first
discourses at the entertainment Genesis 2. 24.
of his new Bride. And although there were permissions afterward of Polygamy,
yet there might have been a greater pretense of necessity at first, because of
enlarging and multiplying fountains rather than channels; and three or four at
first would have enlarged mankind by greater proportion than many more
afterward; little distances near the Center make greater and larger figures
than when they part near the fringes of the Circle: and therefore those
after-permissions were to avoid a greater evil, not a hallowing of the license,
but a reproach of their infirmity. And certainly the multiplication of Wives is
contrariant to that design of love and endearment which God intended at first
between Man and Wife. -- Connubia mill: Claudian, (...).

Non illis generis nexus, non pignora curae,
Sed numero languet pietas --


And amongst them that have many Wives, the relation and necessitude is
tristing (...). gurth.
and loose, and they are all equally contemptible; because the mind entertains
no (...) Eurip. Androm.
loves or union where the object is multiplied, and the act unfixed and
distracted. So that this having a great commodity in order to Man's great End,
that is, of living well and happily, seems to be intended by God in the nature
of things and instruments natural and reasonable toward Man's End; and
therefore to be a Law, if not natural, yet at least positive and superinduced
at first, in order to Man's proper End. However, by the provision which God
made for satisfaction of this Appetite of Nature, all those actions which
deflect and err from the order of this End are unnatural and inordinate, and
not permitted by the concession of God, nor the order of the thing; but such
actions only which naturally produce the end of this provision and satisfaction
are natural, regular, and good.

9. But by this means Man grew into a Society and a Family, and having
productions of his own kind, which he naturally desired, and therefore loved,
he was consequently obliged to assist them in order to their End, that they
might become like him, that is, perfect men, and brought up to the same state:
and they also by being at first impotent, and for ever after (...) is praprium,
(...) parentum (...) prius, qui (...) de (...) buerant (...), Philo,
beneficiaries and obliged persons, are for the present subject to their
Parents, and for ever after bound to duty; because there is nothing which they
can do that can directly produce so great a benefit to the Parents, as they
have to the Children. From hence naturally descend all those mutual Obligations
between Parents and Children, which are instruments of Protection and benefit
on the one side, and Duty and obedience on the other; and all these to be
expressed according as either of their necessities shall require, or any
stipulation or contract shall appoint, or shall be superinduced by any positive
Laws of God or Man.

10. In natural descent of the Generations of Man this one first Family was
multiplied so much, that for convenience they were forced to divide their
dwellings; and this they did by Families especially, the great Father being the
Major-domo to all his minors. And this division of dwellings, although it kept
the same form and power in the several Families which were in the original, yet
it introduced some new necessities, which although they varied in the instance,
yet were to be determined by such instruments of Reason which were given to us
at first upon foresight of the public necessities of the World. And when the
Families came to be divided, that their common Parent being extinct, no Master
of a Family had power over another Master; the rights of such men and their
natural power became equal, because there was nothing to distinguish them, and
because they might do equal injury, and invade each other's possessions, and
disturb their peace, and surprise their liberty. And so also was their power of
doing benefit equal, though not the same in kind: But God, who made Man a
sociable creature, because he knew it was not good for him to be alone, so
dispensed the abilities and possibilities of doing good, that in something or
other every man might need or be benefited by Animus (...) liberalitatis
materiam, (...) inter (...). Senec. de (...). 1.
every man. Therefore that they might pursue the end of Nature, and their own
appetites of living well and happily, they were forced to consent to such
Contracts which might secure and supply to every one those good things without
which he could not live happily. Both the Appetites, the Irascible and the
Concupiscible, fear of evil, and desire of benefit, were the sufficient
endearments of Contracts, of Societies, and Republics. And upon this stock
were decreed and hallowed all those Propositions, without (...) prima (...).
which Bodies politic and Societies of men cannot be happy. And in the
transaction of these, many accidents daily happening, it grew still reasonable,
that is, necessary to the End of living happily, that all those
after-Obligations should be observed with the proportion of the same faith and
endearment which bound the first Contracts. For though the natural Law be
always the same, yet some parts of it are primely necessary, others by
supposition and accident; and both are of the same necessity, that is, equally
necessary in the several cases. Thus, to obey a King is as necessary and
naturally reasonable as to obey a Father, that is, supposing there be a King,
as it is certain naturally a man cannot be, but a Father must be supposed. If
it be made necessary that I promise, it is also necessary that I perform it;
for else I shall return to that inconvenience which I sought to avoid when I
made the Promise: and though the instance be very far removed from the first
necessities and accidents of our prime being and production; yet the reason
still pursues us, and natural Reason reaches up to the very last minutes, and
orders the most remote particulars of our well-being.

11. Thus, Not to Steal, Not to commit Adultery, Not to kill, are very
reasonable prosecutions of the great End of Nature, of living well and happily:
But when a man is said to steal, when to be a Murderer, when to be Incestuous,
the natural Law does not teach in all cases; but when the superinduced
Constitution has determined the particular Law, by natural Reason we are
obliged to observe it: because though the Civil power makes the instance, and
determines the particular; yet right Reason makes the Sanction, and passes the
Obligation. The Law of Nature makes the major Proposition; but the Civil
Constitution, or any superinduced Law, makes the Assumption in a practical
Syllogism. To kill is not Murder; but to kill such persons whom I ought not.
It was not Murder among the Jews to kill a manslayer before he entered a City
of Refuge: to kill the same man after his entry, was. Among the Romans, to kill
an Adulteress or a Ravisher in the A. (...), 10. 23.
act was lawful; with us it is Murder. Murder, and Incest, and Theft, always
were unlawful; but the same actions were not always the same crimes. And it is
just with these as with Disobedience, which was ever criminal; but the same
thing was not estimated to be Disobedience, nor indeed could any thing be so,
till the Sanction of a Superior had given the instance of Obedience. So for
Theft: To catch Fish in rivers, or Deer, or Pigeons, when they were esteemed
ferae naturae, of a wild condition, and so primo (...), was lawful; just as to
take or kill Badgers or Foxes, and Bevers, and Lions: but when the Laws had
appropriated Rivers, and divided Shores, and imparked Deer, and housed Pigeons,
it became Theft to take them without leave. To despoil the Egyptians was not
Theft, when God, who is the Lord of all possessions, had bidden the Israelites:
but to do so now were the breach of the natural Law, and of a Divine
Commandment. For the natural Law (I said) is eternal in the Sanction, but
variable in the instance and the expression. And indeed the Laws of Nature are
very few: They were but two at first, and but two at last, when the great
change was made from Families to Kingdoms. The first is, to do duty to God: The
second is, to do to our selves and our Neighbors, that is, to our neighbors
as to our selves, all those actions which naturally, reasonably, or by
institution or emergent necessity are in order to a happy life. Our Blessed
Savior reduces all the Law to these two; 1. Love the Lord with all thy heart,
2. Love thy neighbor as thy self. In which I observe, in verification of my
former Number. 4.
discourse, that Love is the first natural bond of Duty to God, and so also it
is to our Neighbor. And therefore all intercourse with our neighbor was
founded in, and derived from, the two greatest endearments of Love in the
world: A man came to have a Neighbor by being a Husband, and a Father.

12. So that still there are but two great natural Laws binding us in our
relations to God and Man; we remaining essentially, and by the very design of
creation, obliged to God in all, and to our neighbors in the proportions of
equality, [ as thy self;] that is, that he be permitted and promoted in the
order to his living well and happily, as thou art: for Love being there not an
affection, but the duty that results from the first natural bands of Love,
which began Neighborhood, signifies Justice, Equality, and such reasonable
proceedings which are in order to our common End of a happy life, and is the
same with that other, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do you to
them; and that is certainly the greatest and most effective Love, because it
best promotes that excellent End which God designed for our natural perfection.
All other particulars are but prosecutions of these two, that is, of the order
of Nature: save only that there is a third Law, which is a part of Love too, it
is Self-love, and therefore is rather supposed than at the first expressed,
because a man is reasonably to be presumed to have in him a sufficient stock of
Self-love, to serve the ends of his nature and creation; and that is, that man
demean and use his own body in that decorum which is most orderly and
proportionate to his perfective End of a happy life; which Christian Religion
calls [ Sobriety:] and it is a prohibition of those uncharitable,
self-destroying sins of Drunkenness, Gluttony, and inordinate and unreasonable
manners of Lust; destructive of Nature's intendments, or at least no ways
promoting them. For it is naturally lawful to satisfy any of these desires,
when the desire does not carry the satisfaction beyond the design of Nature,
that is, to the violation of health, or that happy living which consists in
observing those Contracts which mankind thought necessary to be made in order
to the same great End; unless where God has superinduced a restraint, making
an instance of Sobriety to become an act of Religion, or to pass into an
expression of Duty to him: But then it is not a natural, but a Religious
Sobriety, and may be instanced in fasting or abstinence from some kinds of
meat, or some times or manners of conjugation. These are the three natural Laws
described in the Christian Doctrine, that we live, 1. Godly, 2. Soberly, 3.
Righteously. And the particulars of the first are ordinarily to be determined
by God immediately, or his Vicegerents, and by Reason observing and complying
with the accidents of the world, and dispositions of things and persons: the
second by the natural order of Nature, by sense, and by experience: and the
third by humane contracts and civil Laws.

13. The result of the preceding discourse is this. Man, who was designed by
God to a happy life, was fitted with sufficient means to attain that End, so
that he might, if he would, be happy; but he was a free Agent, and so might
choose. And it is possible that Man may fail of his End, and be made miserable,
by God, by himself, or by his neighbor; or by the same persons he may be made
happy in the same proportions, as they relate to him. If God be angry or
disobeyed, he becomes our enemy, and so we fail: If our Neighbor be injured or
impeded in the direct order to his happy living, he has equal right against us
as we against him, and so we fail that way: An dif I be intemperate, I grow
sick and worsted in some Faculty, and so I am unhappy in my self. But if I obey
God, and do right to my Neighbor, and confine my self within the order and
design of Nature, I am secured in all ends of Blessing in which I can be
assisted by these three, that is, by all my relatives; there being no End of
man designed by God in order to his Happiness, to which these are not proper
and sufficient instruments. Man can have no other relations, no other
discourses, no other regular appetites, but what are served and satisfied by
Religion, by Sobriety, and by Justice. There is nothing whereby we can relate
to any person, who can hurt us, or do us benefit, but is provided for in these
three. These therefore are all, and these are sufficient.

14. But now it is to be enquired how these become Laws obliging us to sin if
we transgress, even before any positive Law of God be superinduced: for else,
how can it be a natural Law, that is, a Law obliging all Nations and all
persons, even such who have had no intercourse with God by way of special
revelation, and have lost all memory of tradition? For either such persons,
whatsoever they do, shall obtain that End which God designed for them in their
nature, that is, a happy life according to the duration of an immortal nature:
or else they shall perish for prevaricating of these Laws. And yet if they were
no Laws to them, and decreed and made sacred by sanction, promulgation and
appendent penalties, they could not so oblige them as to become the Rule of
Virtue or Vice.

15. When God gave us natural Reason, that is, sufficient ability to do all
that should be necessary to live well and happily, he also knew that some
Appetites might be irregular, just as some stomachs would be sick, and some
eyes blind; and a man being a voluntary Agent might choose an evil with as
little reason as the Angels of darkness did, that is, they might do
unreasonably because they would do so; and then a man's Understanding should
serve him but as an instrument of mischief, and his Will carry him on to it
with a blind and impotent desire, and then the beauteous order of creatures
would be discomposed by unreasonable and unconsidering or evil persons. And
therefore it was most necessary that Man should have his appetites (...) within
the designs of Nature, and the order to his End; for a Will without the
restraint of a superior power, or a perfect Understanding, is like a knife in a
child's hand, as apt for mischief as for use. Therefore it pleased God to bind
man by the signature of Laws to observe those great natural reasons, without
which man could not arrive at the great End of God's designing, that is, he
could not live well and happily. God therefore made it the first Law to love
him, and, which is all one, to worship him, to speak honor of him, and to
express it in all our ways, the chief whereof is Obedience. And this we find in
the instance of that positive Precept which God gave to Adam, and which was
nothing but a particular of the great general. But in this there is little
scruple, because it is not imaginable that God would in any period of time not
take care that himself be honored, his Glory being the very end why he made
Man; and therefore it must be certain, that this did at the very first pass
into a Law.

16. But concerning this and other things, which are usually called natural
Laws, I consider, that the things themselves were such, that the doing them was
therefore declared to be a Law, because the not doing them did certainly bring
a punishment proportionable to the crime, that is, a just deficiency from the
End of creation, from a good and happy life; 2. And also a punishment of a
guilty Conscience: which I do not understand to be a (...) of Hell, or of any
supervening penalty, unless the Conscience be accidentally instructed into such
fears by experience or revelation; but it is a malum in genere Rationis, a
disease or evil of the Reasonable faculty: that, as there is a rare content in
the discourses of Reason, there is a satisfaction, an acquiescency like that of
creatures in their proper place and definite actions and competent perfections;
so in prevaricating the natural Law there is a dissatisfaction, a disease, a
removing out of the place, an unquietness of spirit, even when there is no
monitor or observer. Adeo facinora atque flagitia sua ipsi quoque in supplicium
verterant. Neque frustra (...) [Plato] sapientiae firmare solitus est, si (...)
Tyrannorum mentes, posse aspici laniatus and (...), quando ut corpora
verberibus, ita saevitia, libidine, malis consultis animus dilaceretur, said
Anual. 6.
Tacitus out of In Gorgia, (...).
Plato, whose words are; (...). It is naturally certain, that the Cruelty of
Tyrants torments themselves, and is a hook in their nostrils, and a Lucian. in
(...). "Rhadamanthus, (...).
scourge to their spirit; and the pungency of forbidden Lust is truly a thorn
in the flesh, full of anguish and secret vexation. Quid, demens, manifesta
negas? En pectus inustae Claudian. de Rufin. lib. 1.

Deformant maculae, vitiisque inolevit imago,
said Claudian of Rusinus. And it is certain to us, and verified by the
experience and observation of all wise Nations, though not naturally
demonstrable, that this secret punishment is sharpened and promoted in degrees
by the hand of Heaven, the finger of the same hand that writ the Law in our
Understandings.

17. But the prevarications of the natural Law have also their portion of a
special punishment, besides the scourge of an unquiet spirit. The man that
disturbs his neighbor's rest meets with disturbances himself: and since I have
naturally no more power over my neighbor than he has over me, (unless he
descended naturally from me) he has an equal privilege to defend himself, and
to secure his quiet by disturbing the order of my happy living, as I do his.
And this equal permission is certainly so great a sanction and signature of the
law of Justice, that in the just proportion of my receding from the reasonable
prosecution of my End, in the same proportion and degree my own Infelicity is
become certain; and this in several degrees up to the loss of all, that is, of
Life it self: for where no farther duration or differing state is known, there
Death is ordinarily esteemed the greatest infelicity; where something beyond it
is known, there also it is known that such prevarication makes that farther
duration to be unhappy. So that an affront is naturally punished by an affront,
the loss of a tooth with the loss of a tooth, of an eye with an eye, the
violent taking away of another man's goods by the losing my own. For I am
liable to as great an evil as I infer, and naturally he is not unjust that
inflicts it. And he that is drunk is a fool or a madman for the time, and that
is his punishment, and declares the law and the sin: and so in proportions to
the transgressions of sobriety. But when the first of the natural laws is
violated, that is, God is disobeyed or dishonored, or when the greatest of
natural evils is done to our Neighbor, then Death became the penalty: to the
first, in the first period of the World; to the second, at the restitution of
the World, that is, at the beginning of the second period. He that did attempt
to kill, from the beginning of Ages might have been resisted and killed, if the
assaulted could not else be safe; but he that killed actually, as Cain did,
could not be killed himself, till the Law was made in Noah's time, because
there was no person living that had equal power on him, and had been naturally
injured: while the thing was doing, the assailant and the assailed had equal
power; but when it was done, and one was killed, he that had the power or right
of killing his murderer, is now dead, and his power is extinguished with the
man. But after the Flood the power was put into the hand of some trusted
person, who was to take the forfeiture. And thus I conceive these natural
reasons in order to their proper end became Laws, and bound fast by the band of
annexed and consequent penalties: Metum prorsus and noxam conscientiae pro
foedere haberi, said Tacitus. And that fully explains my sense.

18. And thus Death was brought into the world; not by every prevarication of
any of the Laws, by any instance of unreasonableness: (...) in proportion to
the evil of the action would be the evil of the suffering, which in all cases
would not arrive at death; as every injury, every intemperance should not have
been capital. But some things were made evil by a superinduced prohibition, as
eating one kind of fruit; some things were evil by inordination: the first was
morally evil, the second was evil naturally. Now the first sort brought in
death by a prime sanction; the second, by degrees and variety of accident. For
every disobedience and transgression of that Law which God made as the instance
of our doing him honor and obedience, is an integral violation of all the band
between him and us; it does not grow in degrees according to the instance and
subject matter; for it is as great a disobedience to eat when he has forbidden
us, as to offer to climb to Heaven with an ambitious Tower. And therefore it is
but reasonable for us to fear, and just in him to make us at once suffer Death,
which is the greatest of natural evils, for disobeying him. To which Death we
may arrive by degrees, in doing actions against the reasonableness of Sobriety
and Justice, but cannot arrive by degrees of Disobedience to God, or
Irreligion; because every such act deserves the worst of things, but the other
naturally deserves no greater evil than the proportion of their own
inordination, till God by a superinduced Law has made them also to become acts
of Disobedience as well as Inordination, that is, morally evil, as well as
naturally: For by the Law (says S. Paul) sin became exceeding sinful, that is,
had a new degree of obliquity added Romans 7. 13.
to it. But this was not at first. For therefore (says S. Paul) Before, Romans
5. 13.
or until, the Law sin was in the world; but sin is not imputed when there is
no Law: meaning, that those sins which were forbidden by Moses's Law were
actually in the manners of men and the customs of the world, but they were not
imputed, that is, to such personal punishments and consequent evils which
afterward those sins did introduce; because those sins which were only evil by
inordination, and discomposure of the order of man's end of living happily,
were made unlawful upon no other stock, but that God would have man to live
happily, and therefore gave him Reason to effect that end; and if a man became
unreasonable, and did things contrary to his end, it was impossible for him to
be happy, that is, he should be miserable in proportion. But in that degree and
manner of evil they were imputed; and that was sanction enough to raise natural
Reason up to the constitution of a Law.

19. Thirdly, The Law of Nature being thus decreed and made obligatory was a
sufficient instrument of making man happy, that is, in producing the end of his
Creation. But as Adam had evil discourses and irregular appetites before he
fell, (for they made him fall) and as the Angels, who had no Original sin, yet
they chose evil at the first, when it was wholly arbitrary in them to do so or
otherwise; so did Man. God made man upright, and he sought out many inventions.
Some men were Ambitious, and by incompetent means would make their brethren to
be their servants; some were Covetous, and would usurp that which by an earlier
distinction had passed into private possession: and then they made new
principles, and new discourses, such which were reasonable in order to their
private indirect ends, but not to the public benefit, and therefore would
prove unreasonable and mischievous to themselves at last.

20. And when once they broke the order of creation, it is easy to understand
by what necessities of consequence they ran into many sins and irrational
(...), (...).
proceedings. AElian tells of a Nation who had a Law binding them to beat their
Parents to death with clubs, when they lived to a decrepit and unprofitable
age. The Persian Magi mingled with their Mothers and all their nearest
relatives. And by a Law of the Venetians (says Bodinus) a Son in banishment De
rep. l. 1. c. 4.
was redeemed from the sentence, if he killed his banished Father. (...). (...)
Hom. Odyss (...) A. Gel. l. 11. c. 18.
And in Homer's time there were a sort of Pirates who professed Robbing, and did
account it honorable. But the great prevarications of the Laws of Nature were
in the first Commandment; when the tradition concerning God was derived by a
long line, and there were no visible remonstrances of an extraordinary power,
they were quickly brought to believe that he whom they saw not was not at all,
especially being prompted to it by Pride, Tyranny, (...), (...). Dial. (...).
Tryph.
and a loose imperious spirit. Others (...) to low opinions concerning God, and
made such as they list of their own; and they were like to be strange Gods
which were of Man's making. When Man either maliciously or carelessly became
unreasonable in the things that concerned God, God was pleased to Romans 1. 25,
26, etc.
give him over to a reprobate mind, that is, an unreasonable understanding, and
false principles concerning himself and his Neighbor, that his sin against the
natural Law might become its own punishment, by discomposing his natural
happiness. Atheism and Idolatry brought in all unnatural Lusts, and many
unreasonable Injustices. And this we learn from S. Paul: As Romans 1. 28, etc.
they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a
reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient, that is,
incongruities toward the end of their creation; and so they became full of
unrighteousness, lust, covetousness, malice, envy, strise, and murder,
disobedient to parents, breakers of Covenants, unnatural in their affections,
and in their passions: and all this was the consequent of breaking the first
natural Law. They changed the truth of God into a lie: For this cause Ver. 25,
26.
God gave them up unto vile affections.

21. Now God, who takes more care for the good of man than man does (...) his
own, did not only imprint these Laws in the hearts and understandings of man,
but did also take care to make this light shine clear enough to walk by, by
adopting some instances of the natural Laws into Religion. Thus the Law against
Murder became a part of Religion in the time of Noah; and some other things
were then added concerning worshipping God, against Idolatry, and against
unnatural and impure Mixtures. Sometimes God superadded Judgments, as to the
23000. Assyrians for Fornication. For although these punishments were not
threatened to the crime in the sanction and expression of any definite Law, and
it could not naturally arrive to it by its inordination; yet it was as
agreeable to the Divine Justice to inflict it, as to inflict the pains of Hell
upon evil livers, who yet had not any revelation of such intolerable danger:
for it was sufficient that God had made such crimes to be against their very
Nature; and they who will do violence to their Nature, to do themselves hurt,
and to displease God, deserve to lose the title to all those good things which
God was pleased to design for man's final condition. And because it grew
habitual, customary, and of innocent reputation, it pleased God to call this
precept out of the darkness, whither their evil customs and false discourses
had put it, and by such an extraregular, but very signal, punishment to re-mind
them, that the natural permissions of Concubinate were only confined to the
ends of mankind, and were hallowed only by the Faith and the design of
Marriage. And this was signified by S. Paul in (...). 2. (...).
these words. They that sin without the Law shall also perish without the Law;
that is, by such Judgments which God has inflicted on evil livers in several
periods of the world, irregularly indeed, not signified in kind, but yet sent
into the world with designs of a great mercy, that the ignorances and
prevarications and partial abolitions of the natural Law might be cured and
restored, and by the dispersion of prejudices the state of natural Reason be
redintegrate.

22. Whatsoever was besides this, was accidental and emergent. Such as were the
Discourses of wise men, which God raised up in several Countries and Ages, as
Job, and Eliphaz, and Bildad, and those of the families of the Patriarchs
dispersed into several countries; and constant Tradition in some noble and more
eminent descents. And yet all this was so little and imperfect, not in it self,
but in respect of the thick cloud man had drawn before his Understanding, that
darkness covered the face of the earth in a great proportion. Almost all the
World were Idolaters: and when they had broken the first of the natural Laws,
the breach of the other was not only naturally consequent, but also by Divine
judgment it descended infallibly. And yet God, pitying mankind, did not only
still continue the former remedies, and added blessings, giving them (...)
seasons, and filling their hearts with food and gladness, so leaving the
Nations without excuse; but also made a very noble change in the world: For
having chosen an excellent Family, the Fathers of which lived exactly according
to the natural Law, and with observation of those few superadded Precepts, in
which God did specificate their prime Duty, having swelled that Family to a
great Nation, and given them possession of an excellent Land, which God took
from seven Nations, because they were egregious violators of the natural Law,
he was pleased to make a very great restitution and declaration of the natural
Law in many instances of Religion and Justice, which he framed into positive
Precepts, and adopted them into the family of the first original instances,
making them as necessary in the particulars as they were in the primary
obligation: but the instances were such, whereof some did relate only to the
present constitution of the Commonwealth; others to such universal Contracts
which obliged all the World, by reason of the equal necessity of all mankind to
admit them. And these himself writ on Tables of stone, and dressed up their
Nation into a body politic by an excellent System of politic Laws, and
adorned it with a rare Religion, and left this Nation as a piece of leven in a
mass of dow, not only to do honor to God, and happiness to themselves, by
those instruments which he had now very much explicated, but also to transmit
the same reasonable Propositions into other Nations: and he therefore
multiplied them to a great necessity of a dispersion, that they might serve the
ends of God and of the natural Law by their ambulatory life and their numerous
disseminations. And this was it which S. Paul (...), The Law was added because
of transgression: Gal. 3. 19.
meaning, that because men did transgress the natural, God brought Moses's Law
into the world, to be as a strand to the inundation of Impiety. And thus the
world stood, till the fullness of time was come: for so we are taught by the
Apostle, [ The Law was added because of transgression;] but the date of this
was to expire at a certain period, it was added to serve but [ till the seed
should come to whom the Promise was made.]

23. For because Moses's Law was but an imperfect explication of the natural;
there being diverse parts of the three Laws of Nature not at all explicated by
that Covenant, not the religion of Prayers, not the reasonableness of
Temperance and Sobriety in Opinion and Diet, and in the more noble instances of
Humanity and doing benefit it was so short that, as S. Paul says, The Law could
not make the comers thereunto perfect; and, which was most of all considerable,
it was confined to a Nation, and the other parts of mankind had made so little
use of the Records of that Nation, that all the world was placed in darkness,
and sat in the (...) of death: Therefore it was that in great mercy God sent
his Son, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of the people Israel;
to instruct those, and consummate these; that the imperfection of the one and
the mere darkness of the other might be illustrated by the Sun of
Righteousness. And this was by restoring the Light of Nature, (which they by
evil Customs and (...) Principles and evil Laws had obscured) by restoring Man
to the liberty of his spirit, by freeing him from the slavery of Sin, under
which they were so lost and oppressed, that all their discourses and
conclusions, some of their moral Philosophy, and all their habitual practices,
were but servants of sin, and made to cooperate to that end, not which God
intended as perfective of humane nature, but which the Devil and vicious
persons superinduced to serve little ends and irregular, and to destroy the
greater.

24. For certain it is, Christianity is nothing else but the most perfect
design that ever was to make a man be happy in his whole capacity: and as the
Law was to the Jews, so was Philosophy to the Gentiles, a Schoolmaster to bring
them to Christ, to teach them the rudiments of Happiness, and the first and
lowest things of Reason; that when Christ was come, all mankind might become
perfect, that is, be made regular in their Appetites, wise in their
Understandings, assisted in their Duties, directed to and instructed in their
great Ends. And this is that which the Apostle calls [ being perfect men in
Christ Jesus,] perfect in all the intendments of nature, and in all the designs
of God. And this was brought to pass by discovering, and restoring, and
improving the Law of Nature, and by turning it all into Religion.

25. For the natural Law being a sufficient and a proportionate instrument and
means to bring a man to the End designed in his creation, and this Law being
eternal and unalterable, (for it ought to be as lasting and as unchangeable as
the nature it self, so long as it was capable of a Law) it was not imaginable
that the body of any Law should make a new Morality, new rules, and general
proportions, either of Justice, or Religion, or Temperance, or Felicity; the
essential parts of all these consisting in natural proportions and means toward
the consummation of man's last End, which was first intended, and is always the
same. It is as if there were a new truth in an essential and a necessary
Proposition. For although the instances may vary, there can be no new Justice,
no new Temperance, no new relations, proper and natural relations and
intercourses, between God and us, but what always were in Praises and Prayers,
in adoration and honor, and in the symbolical expressions of God's glory and
our needs.

26. Hence it comes that that which is the most obvious and notorious
appellative of the Law of Nature, (that it is a Law written in our hearts) was
also recounted as one of the glories and excellencies of Christianity. Plutarch
saying, that Kings ought to be governed by Laws, explains himself, that this
Law must be (...). Romans 2. 14.
a word, not written in Books and Tables, but dwelling in the Mind, a living
rule, the (...) guide of their manners, and monitors of their life. And this
was the same which S. Paul expresses to be the guide of the Gentiles, that is,
of all men naturally. The Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by nature the
things contained in the Law; which shows the work of the Law written in their
hearts. And that we may see it was the Law of Nature that returned in the
Sanctions of Christianity; God declares that in the constitution of this Law he
would take no other course than at first, that is, he would write them in the
hearts of men: indeed with a new style, with a quill taken from the wings of
the holy Dove; the Spirit of God was to be the great Engraver and the Scribe of
the New Covenant, but the Hearts of men should be the Tables. For this is the
Covenant that I will make with them after those days, says the Lord; I will
(...). 10. 16, 17.
put my laws into their hearts, and into their minds will I write them: And
their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more: That is, I will
provide a means to expiate all the iniquities of man, and restore him to the
condition of his first creation, putting him into the same order toward
Felicity which I first designed to him, and that also by the same instruments.
Now I consider, that the Spirit of God took very great care, that all the
Records of the Law of Jesus should be carefully kept and transmitted to
posterity in Books and Sermons, which being an act of providence and mercy, was
a provision, lest they should be lost or mistaken, as they were formerly, when
God writ some of them in Tables of stone for the use of the sons of Israel, and
all of them in the first Tables of Nature with the (...) of Creation, as now he
did in the new creature by the singer of the Spirit. But then writing them in
the Tables of our minds (besides the other,) can mean nothing but placing them
there where they were before, and from whence we blotted them by the mixtures
of impure principles and discourses. But I descend to particular and more
minute considerations.

27. The Laws of Nature either are bands of Religion, Justice, or Sobriety. Now
I consider concerning Religion, that whenever God has made any particular
Precepts to a Family, as to Abraham's, or to a single Person, as to the man of
Judah prophesying against the Altar of Bethel, or to a Nation, as to the Jews
at Sinai, or to all Mankind, as to the world descending from Noah; it was
nothing else but a trial or an instance of our Obedience, a particular
prosecution of the Law of Nature, whereby we are obliged to do honor to God,
which was to be done by such expressions which are natural entercourses between
God and us, or such as he has made to be so. Now in Christianity we are wholly
left to that manner of prosecuting this first natural Law which is natural and
proportionable to the nature of the thing, which the Holy Jesus calls
worshipping God in spirit and truth: In spirit] that is, with our Souls
heartily and devoutly, so as to exclude hypocrisy and (...); and In truth]
that is, without a lie, without vain imaginations and fantastic resemblances
of him, which were introduced by the evil customs of the Gentiles, and without
such false guises and absurd undecencies, which as they are contrary to man's
Reason, so are they contrary to the Glory and reputation of Polyd. Virg. (...).
l. 5. c. 8.
God; such as was that universal Custom of all Nations of sacrificing in man's
blood, and offering festival lusts and impurities in the solemnities of their
Religion; for these being against the purpose and design of God, and against
right Reason, are a Lie, and enemies to the truth of a natural and proper
Religion. The Holy Jesus only commanded us to pray often, and to praise God, to
speak honor of his Name, not to use it lightly and vainly, to believe him, to
revere the instruments and ministers of Religion, to ask for what we need, to
put our trust in God, to worship him, to obey him, and to love him; for all
these are but the expressions of Love. And this is all Christ spoke concerning
the first natural Law, the Law of Religion. For concerning the Ceremonies or
Sacraments which he instituted, they are but few, and they become matter of
duty but by accident, as being instruments and rites of consigning those
effects and mercies which God sent to the world by the means of this Law, and
relate rather to the contract and stipulation which Christ made for us, than to
the natural order between Duty and Felicity.

28. Now all these are nothing but what we are taught by natural Reason, that
is, what God enabled us to understand to be fit instruments of intercourse
between God and us, and what was practiced and taught by sober men in all Ages
and all Nations, whose Records we have received, (as I shall remark at the
Margent of the several Precepts.) For to make these appear certainly and
naturally necessary there was no more requisite, but that Man should know there
was a GOD, that is, an eternal Being, which gave him all that he had or was;
and to know what himself was, that is, indigent and necessitous of himself,
needing help of all the Creatures, exposed to accidents and calamity, and (...)
no ways but by the same hand that made him; Creation and Conservation, in the
Philosophy of all the world, being but the same act continuing and flowing on
him from an instant to duration, as a Line from its Mathematical Point. And for
this God took sufficient care, for he conversed with Man in the very first in
such clear and certain and perceptible transaction, that a man could as
certainly know that God was as that Man was. And in all Ages of the world he
has not left himself without witness, Maxim. Tyr. (...). (...).
but gave such testimonies of himself that were sufficient; for they did
actually persuade all Nations, barbarous and civil, into the belief of a God.
And it is but a nicety to consider whether or no that Proposition can be
naturally demonstrated. For it was sufficient to all God's purposes and to all
Man's, that the Proposition was actually believed; the instances were therefore
sufficient to make faith, because they did it. And a man may remove himself so
far (...) all the degrees of aptness to believe a Proposition, that nothing
shall make them join. For if there were a Sect of witty men, that durst not
believe their Senses, because they thought them fallible; it is no wonder if
some men should think every Reason reproveable. But in such cases Demonstration
is a relative term, and signifies every probation, greater or lesser, which
does actually make faith in any Proposition: And in this God has never been
deficient, but has to all men, that believe him, given sufficient to confirm
them; to those few that believed not, sufficient to reprove them.

29. Now in all these actions of Religion which are naturally consequent to
this belief there is no scruple, but in the instance of Faith, which is
presented to be an infused Grace, an immission from God, and that for its
object it has principles supernatural, that is, naturally incredible; and
therefore Faith is supposed a Grace above the greatest strength of Reason. But
in this I consider, that if we look into all the Sermons of Christ, we shall
Apud Lactant, l. 7. c. 23.
not easily find any Doctrine that in any sense troubles natural Philosophy,
but only that of the Resurrection: (for I do not think those mystical
expressions of plain truths, such as are, [ being born again, eating the flesh
of the Son of man, being in the Father, and the Father in him] to be exceptions
in this assertion.) And although some Gentiles did believe and deliver that
article, and particularly Chrysippus, and the Thracians, (as Mela and Solinus
report of them;) yet they could not naturally discourse themselves into it, but
had it from the imperfect report and opinion of some Jews that dwelt among
them: And it was certainly a revelation or a proposition sent into the world by
God. But then the believing it is so far from being above or against Nature,
that there is nothing in the world more reasonable than to believe any thing
which God tells us, or which is told us by a man sent from God with mighty
demonstration of his power and veracity. Naturally our bodies cannot rise, that
is, there is no natural agent or natural cause sufficient to produce that
effect; but this is an effect of a Divine power: and he has but a little stock
of natural Reason, who cannot conclude that the same power which made us out of
nothing, can also restore us to the same condition as well and easily from dust
and ashes certainly, as from mere nothing. And in this, and in all the like
cases, Faith is a submission of the understanding to the Word of God, and is
nothing else but a confessing that God is Truth, and that he is omnipotent,
that is, he can do what he will, and he will when he has once said it. And we
are now as ignorant of the essence and nature of forms, and of that which
substantially distinguishes Man from Man, or an Angel from an Angel, as we were
of the greatest Article of our Religon before it was revealed; and we shall
remain ignorant for ever of many natural things, unless they be revealed; and
unless we knew all the secrets of Philosophy, the mysteries of Nature, and the
rules and propositions of all things and all creatures, we are fools, if we say
that what we call an Article of Faith, I mean, truly such, is against natural
Reason. It may be indeed as much against our natural reasonings, as those
reasonings are against truth. But if we remember how great an ignorance dwells
upon us all, it will be found the most reasonable thing in the world only to
enquire whether God has revealed any such Proposition; and then not to say, It
is against natural Reason, and therefore an Article of Faith; but, I am told a
truth which I knew not till now, and so my Reason is become instructed into a
new Proposition. And although Christ has given us no new moral Precepts, but
such which were essentially and naturally reasonable in order to the End of
Man's Creation; yet we may easily suppose him to teach us many a new Truth
which we knew not, and to explicate to us many particulars of that estate which
God designed for Man in his first production, but yet did not then declare to
him; and to furnish him with new Revelations, and to signify the greatness of
the designed End, to become so many arguments of indearment to secure his Duty,
that is, indeed, to secure his Happiness by the infallible using the
instruments of attaining it.

30. This is all I am to say concerning the Precepts of Religion Jesus taught
us: he took off those many superinduced Rites which God enjoined to the Jews,
and reduced us to the natural Religion, that is, to such expressions of Duty
which all wise men and Nations used; save only that he took away the Rite of
sacrificing Beasts, because it was now determined in the great Sacrifice Just.
(...). (...). ad Orthodox. ad qu. 83.
of Himself, which sufficiently and eternally reconciled all the world to God.
All the other things, as Prayers, and Adoration, and Eucharist, and Tertul.
adv. (...). 2. 2.
Faith in God, are of a natural order and an unalterable expression: And in
Maimon. (...), l. 3. (...). 32.
the nature of the thing there is no other way of address to God than these, no
other expression of his Glories and our needs; both which must for ever be
signified.

31. Secondly, Concerning the Second natural Precept, Christian Religion has
also added nothing beyond the first obligation, but explained it all: (...) a
(...).
Whatsoever ye would men should do to you, do ye so to them, that is the
eternal rule of Justice; and that binds contracts, keeps promises, affirms
truth, (...)
makes Subjects obedient, and Princes just; it gives security to Marts and Tob.
4. 16.
Banks, and introduces an equality of condition upon all the world, save only
Dixit Mimus, Ab a^io exspectes alteri quod free^is.
when an inequality is necessary, that is, in the relations of Government, for
the preservation of the Singulorum interess, si universi regantur.
common rights of equal titles and possessions, that there be some common term
endued with power, who is to be the Father of all men by an equal provision,
that every man's rights be secured by that fear which naturally we shall bear
to him, who can and will punish all unreasonable and unjust violations of
Property. And concerning this also the Holy Jesus has added an express
Precept, of paying Tribute, and all Caesar's dues, to Caesar: in all other
particulars it is necessary that the instances and minutes of Justice be
appointed by the Laws and Customs of the several Kingdoms and Republics.
(...), Dividit (...).
And therefore it was that Christianity so well combined with the Government of
Heathen Princes, because whatsoever was naturally just, or declared so by the
Political power, their Religion bound them to observe, making Obedience to be a
double duty, a duty both of Justice and Religion: And the societies of
Christians growing up from Conventicles to (...). l. 1. Sat. 3.
Assemblies, from Assemblies to Societies, introduced no change in the
Government, but by little and little turned the Commonwealth into a Church,
till the World being Christian, and Justice also being Religion, Obedience to
Princes, observation of Laws, honesty in Contracts, faithfulness in promises,
gratitude to benefactors, simplicity in discourse, and ingenuity in all
pretenses and transactions, became the Characterisms of Christian men, and the
word of a Christian the greatest solemnity of stipulation in the world.

32. But concerning the general, I consider, that in two very great instances
it was remonstrated, that Christianity was the greatest prosecution of natural
Justice and equality in the whole world. The one was in an election of an A
postle into the place of Judas: when there were two equal Candidates of the
same pretension and capacity, the Question was determined by Lots, which
naturally was the arbitration in questions whose parts were wholly indifferent;
and as it was used in all times, so it is to this day used with us in many
places, where lest there be a disagreement concerning the manner of tithing
some creatures, and to prevent unequal arts and unjust practices, they are
tithed by lot, and their sortuitous passing through the door of their sold. The
other is in the Coenobitick life of the first Christians and Apostles, they had
all things in common, which was that state of nature in which men lived
charitably and without injustice, before the distinction of dominions and
private rights. But from this manner of life they were soon driven by the
public necessity and constitution of affairs.

33. Thirdly, Whatsoever else is in the Christian Law, concerns the natural
precept of Sobriety, in which there is some variety and some difficulty. In the
matter of (...) the Holy Jesus did clearly reduce us to the first institution
of Marriage in Paradise, allowing no other mixture but what was first intended
in the creation and first sacramental union: and in the instance he so
permitted us to the natural Law, that he was pleased to mention no instance of
forbidden Lust, but in general and comprehensive terms of Adultery and
Fornication: in the other, which are still more unnatural, as their names are
concealed and hidden in shame and secrecy, we are to have no instructor but the
modesty and order of Nature.

34. As an instance of this Law of Sobriety, Christ superadded the whole
doctrine of Humility, which Moses did not, and which seemed almost to be
extinguished in the world; and it is called by S. Paul, sapere ad sobrietatem,
the reasonableness or wisdom of sobriety. And it is all the reason in the
world, that a man should think of himself but just as he is. He is deceived
that thinks otherwise, and is a fool. And when we consider that Pride makes
wars, and causes affronts, and no man loves a proud man, and he loves no man
but himself and his flatterers, we shall understand that the Precept of
Humility is an excellent art, and a happy instrument toward humane Felicity.
And it is no way contradicted by a natural desire of Honor; it only appoints
just and reasonable ways of obtaining it. We are not forbidden to receive
Honor; but to seek it for desigus of pride and complacency, or to make it rest
in our hearts. But when the hand of Virtue receives the honor, and transmits
it to God from our own head, the desires of Nature are sufficiently satisfied,
and nothing of Religion contradicted. And it is certain by all the experience
of the world, that in every state and order of men, he that is most humble in
proportion to that state is (if all things else be symbolical) the most
honored person. For it is very observable, that when God designed man to a
good and happy life, as the natural end of his creation, to verify this, God
was pleased to give him objects sufficient and apt to satisfy every appetite;
I say, to satisfy it naturally, not to satisfy those extravagancies which
might be accidental, (...), natis (...) alma (...): hos (...). Virg.
and procured by the irregularity either of Will or Understanding; not to
answer him in all that his desires could extend to, but to satisfy the
necessity of every appetite; all the desires that God made, not all that man
should make. For we see even in those appetites which are common to men (...)
and beasts, all the needs of Nature and all the ends of creation are served by
the taking such proportions of their objects which are ordinate to their end,
and which in man we call Temperance, (not as much as they naturally can:) such
as are mixtures of sexes merely for production of their kind, eating and
drinking for needs and hunger. And yet God permitted our appetites to be able
to extend beyond the limits of the mere natural design, that God by restraining
(...). l. 7. c. 7.
them, and putting the setters of Laws upon them, might turn natural desires
into Sobriety, and Sobriety into Religion, they becoming servants of the
Commandment. And now we must not call all those swellings of appetites Natural
inclination, nor the satisfaction of such tumors and excrescencies any part of
natural felicities: but that which does just cooperate to those ends which
perfect humane Nature in order to its proper End. For the appetites of meat,
and drink, and pleasures, are but intermedial and instrumental to the End, and
are not made for themselves, but first for the End, and then to serve God in
the instances of Obedience. And just so is the natural desire of Honor
intended to be a spur to Virtue (for to Virtue only it is naturally consequent,
or to natural and political Superiority:) but to desire it beyond or besides
the limit, is the swelling and the disease of the desire. And we can take no
rule for its perfect value, but by the strict limits of the natural End, or the
superinduced End of Religion in positive restraints.

35. According to this discourse we may best understand, that even the severest
precepts of the Christian Law are very consonant to Nature and the first Laws
of mankind. Such is the Precept of Self-denial, which is nothing else but a
confining the Appetites within the limits of Nature: for there they are
permitted, (except when some greater purpose is to be served than the present
answering the particular desire) and whatsoever is beyond it is not in the
natural order to Felicity; it is no better than an itch, which must be
scratched and satisfied, but it is unnatural. But for Martyrdom it self,
quitting our goods, losing lands, or any temporal interest, they are now become
as reasonable in the present constitution of the world, as taking unpleasant
potions, and suffering a member to be cauterized, in sickness or disease. And
we see that death is naturally a less evil than a continual torment, and by
some not so resented as a great disgrace; and some persons have chosen it for
sanctuary and remedy: And therefore much rather shall it be accounted prudent
and reasonable, and agreeable to the most perfect desires of Nature, to
exchange a House for a Hundred, a Friend for a Patron, a short Affliction for a
lasting Joy, and a temporal Death for an eternal Life. For so the question is
stated to us by him that understands it best. True it is, that the suffering of
losses, afflictions, and death, is naturally an evil, and therefore no part of
a natural Precept, or prime injunction. But when God having commanded instances
of Religion, Man will not suffer us to obey God, or will not suffer us to live,
then the question is, Which is most agreeable to the most perfect and
reasonable desires of Nature, to obey God, or to obey man; to fear God, or to
fear man; to preserve our bodies, or to preserve our Souls; to secure a few
years of uncertain and troublesome duration, or an eternity of a very glorious
condition. Some men reasonably enough choose to die for considerations lower
than that of a happy Eternity; therefore Death is not such an evil, but that it
may in some cases be desired and reasonably chosen, and in some be recompensed
at the highest rate of a natural value: And if by accident we happen into an
estate in which of necessity one evil or another must be suffered, certainly
nothing is more naturally reasonable and eligible than to choose the least evil;
and when there are two good things propounded to our choice, both which cannot
be possessed, nothing is more certainly the object of a prudent choice than the
greater good. And therefore when once we understand the question of Suffering,
and Self-denial, and Martyrdom to this sense, as all Christians do, and all
wise men do, and all Sects of men do in their several persuasions, it is but
remembering, that to live happily after this life is more intended to us by God,
and is more perfective of humane nature, than to live here with all the
prosperity which this state affords; and it will evidently follow, that when
violent men will not let us enter into that condition by the ways of Nature and
prime intendment, that is, of natural Religion, Justice, and Sobriety, it is
made in that case, and upon that supposition, certainly, naturally and
infallibly reasonable to secure the perfective and principal design of our
Felicity, though it be by such instruments which are as unpleasant to our
senses as are the instruments of our restitution to Health; since both one and
the other in the present conjunction and state of affairs are most
proportionable to Reason, because they are so to the present necessity; not
primarily intended to us by God, but superinduced by evil accidents and the
violence of men. And we not only find that Socrates suffered death in
attestation of a God, though he flattered and discoursed himself into the
belief of an immortal reward, De industria consultae aequanimitatis, non de
fiducia compertae veritatis (as Tertullian says of him;) but we also find that
all men, that believed the Immortality of the Soul firmly and unmoveably, made
no scruple of exchanging their life for the preservation of Virtue with the
interest of their great hope, for Honor sometimes, and oftentimes for their
Country.

36. Thus the Holy Jesus perfected and restored the natural Law, and drew it
into a System of Propositions, and made them to become of the family of
Religion. For God is so zealous to have Man attain to the End to which he first
designed him, that those things which he has put in the natural order to
attain that End he has bound fast upon us, not only by the order of things, by
which it was that he that prevaricated did naturally fall short of Felicity,
but also by bands of Religion; he has now made himself a party and an enemy to
those that will be not-happy. Of old, Religion was but one of the natural Laws,
and the instances of Religion were distinct from the discourses of Philosophy.
Now all the Law of Nature is adopted into Religion, and by our love and duty to
God we are tied to do all that is reason; and the parts of our Religion are but
pursuances of the natural relation between God and us: and beyond all this, our
natural condition is in all senses improved by the consequents and adherencies
of this Religion. For although Nature and Grace are opposite, that is, Nature
depraved by evil habits, by ignorance and ungodly customs, is contrary to
Grace, that is, to Nature restored by the Gospel, engaged to regular living by
new revelations, and assisted by the Spirit; yet it is observable, that the Law
of Nature and the Law of Grace are never opposed. There is a Law of our
members, (says S. Paul,) that is, an evil Romans 7. 23.
necessity introduced into our appetites by perpetual evil customs, examples
and traditions of vanity; and there is a Law of sin that answers to this: and
they differ only as inclination and habit, vicious desires and vicious
practices. But then contrary to these are, (...), a Law of my mind, which is
the Law of Ibid.
Nature and right Reason, and then the Law of Grace, that is, of Jesus Christ,
who perfected and restored the first Law, and by assistances reduced it into a
Law of holy living: and these two (...) as the other, the one is in order to
the other, as (...) and growing degrees and capacities are to perfection and
consummation. The Law of the mind had been so rased and obliterate, and we by
some means or other so disabled from observing it exactly, that until it was
turned into the Law of Grace, (which is a Law of pardoning infirmities, and
assisting us in our choices and elections) we were in a state of deficiency
from the perfective state of Man, to which God intended us.

37. Now although God always designed Man to the same state which he has now
revealed by Jesus Christ, yet he told him not of it, and his permissions and
licenses were then greater, and the Law it self lay closer (...) up in the
compact body of necessary Propositions in order to so much of his End as was
known, or could be supposed. But now, according to the extension of the
revelation the Law it self is made wider, that is, more explicit; and natural
Reason is thrust forward into discourses of Charity and benefit, and we tied to
do very much good to others, and tied to cooperate to each other's felicity.

38. That the Law of Charity is a Law of Nature, needs no other argument but
the consideration of the first constitution of Man. The first instances of
Justice or intercourse of man with a second or third person were to such
persons toward whom he had the greatest endearments of affection in the world,
a (...) and Children; and Justice and Charity at first was the same thing. And
it has obtained in Ages far removed from the first, that Charity is called
Righteousness: He has dispersed and given to the poor; his righteousness (...)
M. Anton, l. 9.
remains for ever. And it is certain, Adam could not in any instance be
unjust, but he must in the same also be uncharitable; the band of his first
Justice being Psalm. (...) 12. 9.
the ties of love, and all having commenced in love. And our Blessed Lord,
restoring all to the intention of the first perfection, expresses it to the
same sense, as I formerly observed; Justice to our Neighbor is, loving him as
our selves. For since Justice obliges us to do as we would be done to, as the
irascible faculty restrains us (...) doing evil for fear of receiving evil, so
the concupiscible obliges us to Charity, that our selves may receive good.

39. I shall say nothing concerning the reasonableness of this Precept, but
that it concurs rarely with the first reasonable appetite of man, of being like
God. Deus est mortali juvare mortalem, (...) haec est ad aeternitatem via, said
Pliny: and, It is more blessed to give than to receive, (said our Blessed
Savior:) And therefore the Commandment of Charity in all its parts is a design
not only to reconcile the most miserable person to some participations and
sense of felicity, but to make the Charitable man happy; and whether this be
not very agreeable to the desires of an intelligent nature, needs no farther
enquiry. And Aristotle asking the Question, whether a man had more need of
friends in prosperity or adversity, makes the case equal; (...). "When they are
in want, they need assistance; when they are prosperous, they need partners of
their felicity, that by communicating their joy to them it may reflect and
double upon their spirits. And certain it is, there is no greater felicity in
the world, than in the content that results from the emanations of Charity. And
this is that which S. John calls the old Commandment, and the new Commandment.
It was 1 Ep. Joh. 2. 7, 8
of old, for it was from the beginning, even in Nature, and to the offices of
which our very bodies had an organ and a -- (...) Sophocl. Oedip.
seat; for therefore Nature gave to a man bowels and the -- Hoc Reges habent
(...) and ingens, (...) dies,
(...) is, (...)
(...) -- Senec. (...).
-- Mollissima corda
Hamano (...) Natura fatetur,
(...) lacrymas dedit; (...) pars optima sens^s
Juven. Sat. 15.
passion of yerning; but it grew up into Religion by parts, and was made
perfect, and in that degree appropriate to the Law of Jesus Christ. For so the
Holy Jesus became our Lawgiver, and added many new Precepts over and above
what were in the Law of Moses, but not more than was in the Law of Nature. The
reason of both is what I have all this while discoursed of: Christ made a more
perfect restitution of the Law of Nature than Moses did, and so it became the
second Adam to consummate that which began to be less perfect from the
prevarication of the first Adam.

40. A particular of the Precept of Charity is forgiving Injuries; and besides
that it has many superinduced benefits by way of blessing and reward, it
relies also upon this natural reason, That a pure and a simple revenge does no
way restore man toward the felicity which the injury did interrupt. For
Revenge is a doing a simple evil; and does not in its formality imply
reparation: For the mere repeating of our own right is permitted to them that
will do it by charitable instruments; and to secure my self or the public
against the future by positive inflictions upon the injurious, (if I be not
Judge my self) is also within the moderation of an unblameable defense, (unless
some accidents or circumstances vary the case:) but forgiving injuries is a
separating the malice from the wrong, the transient act from the permanent
effect; and it is certain, the act which is passed cannot be rescinded, the
effect may; and if it cannot, it does no way alleviate the evil of the
accident, that I draw him that caused it into as great a misery, since every
evil happening in the world is the proper object of pity, which is in some
sense afflictive; and therefore, unless we become unnatural and without bowels,
it is most unreasonable that we should increase our own afflictions by
introducing a new misery, and making a new object of pity. All the ends of
humane Felicity are secured without Revenge, for without it we are permitted to
restore our selves; and therefore it is against natural Reason to do an evil
that no way cooperates toward the proper and perfective End of humane nature.
And he is a miserable person whose good is the evil of his neighbor: and he
that revenges in many cases does worse than he that did the injury; in (...).
(...). Tyrius in (...) An (...) injurid.
all cases as bad. For if the first injury was an injustice to serve an end of
an advantage and real benefit, then (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Menand.
my revenge, which is abstracted, and of a consideration separate and distinct
from the reparation, is worse; for I do him evil without doing my self any real
good, which he did not, for he received advantage by it. But if the first
injury was matter of mere malice without advantage, yet it is no worse than
Revenge, for that is just so; and there is as much fantastic pleasure in
doing a spite, as in doing revenge. They are both but like the pleasures of
eating coals, and toads, and vipers. And certain it is, if a man upon his
private stock could be permitted to revenge, the evil would be immortal. And it
is rarely well discoursed by Tyndarus in Euripides; If the angry Wife shall
kill her Husband, the Son shall revenge his Father's death, and kill his
Mother, and then the Brother shall kill his Mother's murderer, and he also
will meet with an avenger for killing his Brother. (...) Eurip. Orest.

What end shall there be to such inhumane and sad accidents? If in this there
be injustice, it is against natural Reason; and, If it be evil, and disorders
the felicity and security of Society, it is also against natural Reason. But if
it be just, it is a strange Justice that is made up of so many inhumanities.

41. And now if any man pretends specially to Reason, to the ordinate desires
and perfections of Nature, and the sober discourses of Philosophy, here is in
Christianity, and nowhere else, enough to satisfy and inform his Reason, to
perfect his Nature, and to reduce to act all the Propositions of an intelligent
and wise spirit. And the Holy Ghost is promised and given in our Religion to be
an eternal band to keep our Reason from returning to the darknesses of the old
creation, and to promote the ends of our natural and proper Felicity. For it is
not a vain thing that S. Paul reckons helps, and governments, and healings, to
be fruits of the Spirit. For since the two greatest Blessings of the world,
personal and political, consist, that in Health, this in (...) regit ((...) in
(...)) (...) concilia (...), quae (...). 2 Cor. 4. 7.
Government, and the ends of humane Felicity are served in nothing greater for
the present interval than in these two, Christ did not only enjoin rare
prescriptions of Health, such as are Fasting, Temperance, Chastity, and
Sobriety, and all the great endearments of Government, (and, unless they be
sacredly observed, man is infinitely miserable;) but also has given his
Spirit, that is, extraordinary aids to the promoting these two, and
facilitating the work of Nature: that (as S. Paul says at the end of a
discourse to this very purpose) the excellency of the power may be of God, and
not of us.

42. I shall add nothing but this single consideration. God said to the
children of Israel, Ye are a royal Priesthood, a Kingdom of Priests. Which was
1 Pet. 2. 9.
therefore true, because God reigned by the Priests, and the Priests lips did
then preserve knowledge, and the people were to receive the Law from their
mouths; for God having by Laws of his own established Religion and the
Republic, did govern by the rule of the Law, and the ministry of the Priests.
The Priests said, Thus says the LORD; and the people obeyed. And these very
words are spoken to the Christian Church; Ye are a Royal Priesthood, an holy
Nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him that
has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light. That is, God reigns
over all Christendom just as he did over the Jews. He has now so given to them
and restored respectively all those reasonable Laws which are in order to all
good ends personal, oeconomical and political, that if men will suffer
Christian Religion to do its last intention, if men will live according to it,
there needs no other coercion of Laws or power of the Sword. The Laws of God
revealed by Christ are sufficient to make all societies of men happy; and over
all good men God reigns by his Ministers, by the preaching of the Word. And
this was most evident in the three first Ages of the Church, in which all
Christian Societies were for all their proper entercourses perfectly guided,
not by the authority and compulsion, but by the Sermons of their Spiritual
Guides; insomuch that S. Paul sharply reprehends the Corinthians, that Brother
goes to law with Brother, and that before the unbelievers; as if he had said,
Ye will not suffer Christ to be your Judge, and his Law to be your Rule: which
indeed was a great fault among them, not only because they had so excellent a
Law, so clearly described, (or, where they might doubt, they had infallible
Interpreters) so reasonable and profitable, so evidently concurring to their
mutual felicity; but also because God did design Jesus to be their King to
reign over them by spiritual regiment, as himself did over the Jews, till they
chose a King. And when the Emperors became Christian, the case was no otherwise
altered, but that the Princes themselves submitting to Christ's yoke, were (as
all other Christians are) for their proportion to be governed by the Royal
Priesthood, that is, by the Word preached by Apostolical persons, the political
Interest remaining as before, save that by being submitted to the Laws of
Christ it received this advantage, that all Justice was turned to be Religion,
and became necessary, and bound upon the Conscience by Divinity. And when it
happens that a Kingdom is converted to Christianity, the Commonwealth is made a
Church, and Gentile Priests are Christian Bishops, and the Subjects of the
Kingdom are Servants of Christ, the Religion of the Nation is turned Christian,
and the Law of the Nation made a part of the Religion; there is no change of
Government, but that Christ is made King, and the Temporal Power is his
substitute, and is to promote the interest of Obedience to him, as before he
did to Christ's enemy; Christ having left his Ministers as Lieger Ambassadors,
to signify and publish the Laws of Jesus, to pray all in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God: so that over the obedient Christ wholly reigns by his
Ministers, publishing his Laws; over the disobedient, by the Prince also,
putting those Laws in execution. And in this sense it is that S. Paul says,
Bonis Lex non est posita, To such ( who live after the Spirit) there is no Law,
that is, there needs no coercion. But now if we reject God from reigning over
us, and say, like the people in the Gospel, Nolumus hunc regnare, We will not
have him to reign over us, by the ministry of his Word, by the Empire of the
Royal Priesthood, then we return to the condition of Heathens, and persons
sitting in darkness, then God has armed the Temporal Power with a Sword to cut
us off. If we obey not God speaking by his Ministers, that is, if we live not
according to the excellent Laws of Christianity, that is, holily, soberly and
justly in all our relations, he has placed three Swords against us; the Sword
of the Spirit against the unholy and irreligious, the Sword of natural and
supervening Infelicities upon the intemperate and unsober, and the Sword of
Kings against the unjust; to remonstrate the excellency of Christianity, and
how certainly it leads to all the Felicity of man, because every transgression
of this Law, according to its proportion, makes men unhappy and unfortunate.

43. What effect this Discourse may have I know not; I intended it to do honor
to Christianity, and to represent it to be the best Religion in the World, and
the conjugation of all excellent things that were in any Religion, or in any
Philosophy, or in any Discourses. For whatsoever was honest, whatsoever was
noble, whatsoever was wise, whatsoever was of good report, if there be any
praise, if there Phil. (...). 8.
be any virtue, it is in Christianity. For even to follow all these instances
of excellency, is a Precept of Christianity. And (...), they that pretend to
Reason cannot more reasonably endear themselves to the reputation of Reason,
than by endearing their Reason to Christianity; the conclusions and belief of
which is the most reasonable and perfect, the most excellent design, and
complying with the noblest and most proper Ends of Man. And if this Gate may
suffice to invite such persons into the Recesses of the (...), then I shall
tell them that I have dressed it in the ensuing Books with some variety: and as
the nature of the Religion is, some parts whereof are apt to satisfy our
discourse, some to move our affections, and yet all of this to relate to
practice; so is the design of the following pages. For some men are wholly made
up of Passion, and their very Religion is but Passion put into the family and
society of holy purposes: and sor those I have prepared Considerations upon the
special Parts of the Life of the Holy Jesus: and yet there also are some things
mingled in the least severe and most affectionate parts which may help to
answer a Question, and appease a Scruple, and may give Rule for Determination
of many cases of Conscience. For I have so ordered the Considerations, that
they spend not themselves in mere affections and ineffective passions, but they
are made Doctrinal and little repositories of Duty. But because of the variety
of men's spirits and of men's necessities, it was necessary I should interpose
some practical Discourses more severe: For it is but a sad thought to consider,
that Piety and Books of Devotion are counted but entertainment for little
understandings and softer spirits: and although there is much sault in such
imperious minds, that they will not distinguish the weakness of the Writers
from the reasonableness and wisdom of the Religion; yet I cannot but think the
Books themselves are in a large degree the occasion of so great indevotion;
because they are (some few excepted) represented naked in the conclusions of
spiritual life without or art or learning, and made apt for persons who can do
nothing but believe and love; not for them that can consider and love. And it
is not well, that, since nothing is more reasonable and excellent in all
perfections spiritual than the Doctrines of the Spirit or holy life, yet
nothing is offered to us so unlearnedly as this is, so miserable and empty of
all its own intellectual perfections. If I could, I would have had it otherwise
in the present Books: for since the Understanding is not an idle Faculty in a
spiritual life, but hugely operative to all excellent and reasonable choices;
it were very fit that this Faculty were also entertained by such discourses
which God intended as instruments of hallowing it, as he intended it toward
the sanctification of the whole man. For want of it, busy and active men
entertain themselves with notions infinitely unsatisfying and unprofitable: But
in the mean time they are not so wise. For concerning those that study
unprofitable Notions, and neglect not only that which is wisest, but that also
which is of most real advantage, I cannot but think as Aristotle did of Thales
and Anaxagoras, that they may be learned, (...). Arist. l. 6. Eth. cap. 7.
but they are not wise, or wise, but not prudent, when they are ignorant of
such things as are profitable to them. For suppose they know the wonders of
Nature, and the subtilties of Metaphysics, and operations Mathematical; yet
they cannot be prudent, who spend themselves wholly upon unprofitable and
ineffective contemplations. He is truly wise that knows best to promote the
best End, that which he is bound to desire, and is happy if he obtains, and
miserable if he misses; and that is the End of a happy Eternity, which is
obtained by the only means of living according to the purposes of God, and the
prime intentions of Nature; natural and prime Reason being now all one with the
Christian Religion. But then I shall only observe that this part of Wisdom, and
the excellency of its secret and deep Reason, is not to be discerned but by
Experience: the Propositions of this Philosophy being (as in many other)
Empirical, and best found out by observation of real and material events. So
that I may say of Spiritual learning as Quintilian said of some of Plato's
Books: Nam Plato cum in aliis quibusdam, tum praecipue in Timaeo, ne intelligi
quidem, nisi abiis qui hanc quoque partem disciplinae [ Musicae] diligenter
perceperint, potest: The secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven are not understood
truly and thoroughly but by the sons of the Kingdom; and by them too in several
degrees, and to various purposes: but to evil persons the whole systeme of this
Wisdom is insipid and flat, dull as the foot of a rock, and unlearned as the
elements of our mother tongue. But so are Mathematics to a Scythian boor, and
Music to a Camel.

44. But I consider that the wisest persons, and those who know how to value
and entertain the more noble Faculties of their Soul, and their precious hours,
take more pleasure in reading the productions of those old wise spirits who
preserved natural Reason and Religion in the midst of heathen darkness, (such
as are Homer, Euripides, Orpheus, Pindar and Anacreon, AEschylus and Menander,
and all the Greek Poets; Plutarch and Polybius, Xenophon, and all those other
excellent persons of both Faculties, (whose choicest Dictates are collected by
Stobaeus,) Plato and his Scholars, Aristotle, and after him Porphyrie, and all
his other Disciples, Pythagoras and his, especially Hierocles; all the old
Academies and Stoics within the Roman Schools) more pleasure, I say, in
reading these, than the triflings of many of the later Schoolmen, who promoted
a petty interest of a Family, or an unlearned Opinion, with great earnestness,
but added nothing to Christianity, but trouble, scruple and vexation. And from
hence I hope that they may the rather be invited to love and consider the rare
documents of Christianity, which certainly is the great Treasure-house of those
excellent, moral and perfective discourses, which with much pains and greater
pleasure we find respersed and thinly scattered in all the Greek and Roman
Poets, Historians and Philosophers.

But because I have observed that there are some principles entertained into
the persuasions of men which are the seeds of evil life, such as are, the
Doctrine of late Repentance, the mistakes of the (...) of the sins of (...),
the evil understanding the consequents and nature of Original sin, the
sufficiency of Contrition in order to pardon, the efficacy of the Rites of
(...) without the necessity of (...) adherencies, the nature of Faith, and many
other; I was diligent to remark such Doctrines, and to pare off the mistakes so
far that they hinder not Piety, and yet, as near as I could, without engaging
in any Question in which the very life of Christianity is not concerned. Haec
sum profatus -- haud ambagibus
Implicita, sed quae, regulis aequi and boni Polynic. apud Eurip.

Suffulta, rudibus pariter and doctis patent.


My great purpose is to advance the necessity, and to declare the manner and
(...). Arist, Ethic. l. 2.
parts of a good (...), and to invite some persons to the consideration of all
the parts of it, by intermixing something of pleasure with the use; others by
such parts which will better entertain their spirits than a Romance. I have
followed the design of Scripture, and have given milk for babes, and for
stronger men stronger meat; and in all I have despised my own reputation, by so
striving to make it useful, that I was less careful to make it strict in
retired senses, and embossed with unnecessary, but graceful, ornaments. I pray
God this may go forth into a blessing to all that shall use it, and reflect
blessings upon me all the way, that my spark may grow greater by kindling my
brother's Taper, and God may be glorified in us both. If the Reader shall
receive no benefit, yet I intended him one, and I have labored in order to it;
and I shall receive a great recompense for that intention, if he shall please
to say this Prayer for me, That while I have preached to others, I may not
become a castaway.

AN EXHORTATION To the Imitation of the Life of Christ.
HOwever the Person of JESUS CHRIST was depressed with a load of humble
accidents, and shadowed with the darknesses of Poverty and sad contingencies,
so that the Jews, and the contemporary Ages of the Gentiles, and the Apostles
themselves could not at first (...) the brightest essence of Divinity: yet as a
Beauty artificially covered with a thin cloud of Cypress transmits its
excellency to the eye, made more greedy and apprehensive by that imperfect and
weak restraint; so was the Sanctity and Holiness of the Life of JESUS glorious
in its Darknesses, and found Confessors and Admirers even in the midst of those
despites which were done him upon the contrariant designs of malice and
contradictory ambition. Thus the wife of Pilate called him that just person;
Pilate pronounced him guiltless; Judas said he was innocent; the Devil himself
called him the Holy one of God. For however it might concern any man's mistaken
ends to mislike the purpose of his Preaching and Spiritual Kingdom, and those
Doctrines which were destructive of their (...) and carnal securities; yet they
could not deny but that he was a man of God, of exemplar Sanctity, of an
Angelical Chastity, of a Life sweet, affable, and complying with humane
conversation, and as obedient to Government as the most humble children of the
Kingdom. And yet he was Lord of all the World.

2. And certainly very much of this was with a design, that he might shine to
all the generations and Ages of the World, and become a guiding Star, and a
pillar of fire to us in our journey. For we who believe that Jesus was perfect
God and perfect Man, do also believe that one minute of his intolerable
Passion, and every action of his, might have been satisfactory, and enough for
the expiation and reconcilement of ten thousand worlds; and God might upon a
less effusion of blood, and a shorter life of merit, (if he had pleased) have
accepted humane nature to pardon and favor: but, that the Holy Jesus has
added so many excellent instances of Holiness, and so many degrees of Passion,
and so many kinds of Virtues, is, that he might become an Example to us, and
reconcile our Wills to him, as well as our Persons to his heavenly Father.

3. And (...) it will prove but a sad consideration, that one drop of blood
might be enough to obtain our Pardon, and the treasures of his blood running
out till the fountain it self was dry shall not be enough to procure our
Conformity to him; that the smallest minute of his expense shall be enough to
justify us, and the whole Magazine shall not procure our Sanctification; that
at a smaller expense God might pardon us, and at a greater we will not imitate
him: For therefore Christ has suffered for us, (says (...) Pet. 2. 21.
the Apostle) leaving an Example to us, that we might follow his steps. The
least of our Wills cost Christ as much as the greatest of our Sins. And
therefore he calls himself the Way, the Truth, and the Life: That as he redeems
our Souls from death to life by becoming Life to our Persons, so he is the
Truth to our Understandings, and the Way to our Will and Affections,
enlightening that, and leading these in the paths of a happy Eternity.

4. When the King of Moab was pressed hard by the sons of Isaac, [the
Israelites and Edomites] he took the King of Edom's eldest Son, or, as some
think, his own Son, the 2 Kings 3. 27.
Heir of his Kingdom, and offered him as a Holocaust upon the wall; and the
Edomites presently raised the siege at Kir-haraseth, and went to their own
Country. The same and much more was God's design, who took not his enemie's,
but his own Son, his only begotten Son, and God himself, and offered him up in
Sacrifice, to make us leave our perpetual fightings against Heaven: and if we
still persist, we are hardened beyond the wildnesses of the Arabs and Edomites,
and neither are receptive of the impresses of Pity nor Humanity, who neither
have compassion to the Suffering of Jesus, nor compliance with the designs of
God, nor conformity to the Holiness and Obedience of our Guide. In a dark
night, if an Ignis Fatuus do but precede us, the glaring of its lesser flames
do so amuse our eyes, that we follow it into Rivers and Precipices, as if the
ray of that false light were designed on purpose to be our path to tread in:
And therefore not to follow the glories of the Sun of Righteousness, who indeed
leads us over rocks and difficult places, but secures us against the danger,
and guides us into safety, is the greatest both undecency and unthankfulness in
the world.

5. In the great Council of Eternity, when God set down the Laws and knit fast
the eternal bands of Predestination, he made it one of his great purposes to
make his Son (...) S. (...).
like us, that we also might be like his Holy Son; he, by taking our Nature,
we, by imitating his Holiness: God has predestined us to be conformable to
the image of his Son, (says the Apostle.) For the first in every kind is in
nature propounded as the Pattern Romans 8. 29.
of the rest: And as the Sun, the Prince of all the Bodies of Light, and the
Fire of all warm substances, is the principal, the Rule and the Copy which they
in their proportions imitate and transcribe: so is the Word incarnate the great
Example of all the Predestinate; for he is the firstborn among many brethren.
And therefore it was a precept Ibid.
Romans 13 14.
of the Apostle, and by his doctrine we understand its meaning, Put you on the
Lord Jesus Christ. The similitude declares the duty. As a garment is composed
and made of the same fashion with the body, and is applied to each part in its
true figure and commensuration: so should we put on Christ, and imitate the
whole body of his Sanctity, conforming to every integral part, and express him
in our lives, that God, seeing our impresses, may know whose image and
superscription we bear, and we may be acknowledged (...) (...).
for Sons, when we have the air and features and resemblances of our elder
Brother.

6. In the practice of this duty we may be helped by certain considerations,
which are like the proportion of so many rewards. For this, according to the
nature of all holy Exercises, stays not for pay till its work be quite
finished; but, like Music in Churches, is Pleasure, and Piety, and Salary
besides. So is every work of Grace; full of pleasure in the execution, and is
abundantly rewarded, besides the stipend of a glorious Eternity.

7. First, I consider that nothing is more honorable than to be like God; and
the Heathens, worshippers of false Deities, grew vicious upon that (...) quis?
(...), and (...) suae (...): probat, imitatur, and (...) in (...), in (...) in
(...), Caenum (...), and (...) animos (...) abrupta (...) calamitate ducitis
(...) hominibus (...) volentibus sacinorum (...) exemplis. Julius Firmic. de
Error. prof. Relig.
stock; and we who have fondnesses of imitation, counting a Deformity full of
honor, if by it we may be (...) optimus (...) est. Vellei. (...).
like our Prince, (for pleasures were in their height in Capreae, because
Tiberius there wallowed in them, and a wry neck in Nero's Court was the Mode of
Gallantry) might do well to make our imitations prudent and glorious, and, by
propounding excellent Examples, heighten our faculties to the capacities of an
evenness with the best of Precedents. He that strives to imitate another, --
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Eurip. Ion.
admires him, and confesses his own imperfections: and therefore that our
admirations be not flattering, nor our consessions fantastic and impertinent,
it were but reasonable to admire Him from whom really all Perfections do
derive, and before whose Glories all our imperfections must confess their
shame, and needs of reformation. God by a voice from Heaven, and by sixteen
generations of Miracles and Grace, has attested the Holy Jesus to be the
fountain of Sanctity, and the wonderful Counselor, and the Captain of our
sufferings, and the guide of our manners, by being his beloved Son in whom he
took pleasure and complacency to the height of satisfaction: And if any thing
in the world be motive of our affections, or satisfactory to our
understandings, what is there in Heaven or Earth we can desire or imagine
beyond a likeness to God, and participation of the Divine Nature and
Perfections? And therefore, as when the Sun arises every man goes to his work,
and warms himself with his heat, and is refreshed with his influences, and
measures his labor with his course: So should we frame all the actions of our
life by His Light who has shined by an excellent Righteousness, that we no
more walk in Darkness, or sleep in Lethargies, or run a-gazing after the lesser
and imperfect beauties of the Night. It is the weakness of the Organ that makes
us hold our hand between the Sun and us, and yet stand staring upon a Meteor or
an inflamed jelly. And our judgments are as mistaken, and our appetites are as
sottish, if we propound to our selves in the courses and designs of Perfections
any copy but of Him, or something like Him, who is the most perfect. And lest
we think his Glories too great to behold,

8. Secondly, I consider that the imitation of the Life of Jesus is a duty of
that excellency and perfection, that we are helped in it not only by the
assistance of a good and a great Example, which possibly might be too great,
and scare our endeavors and attempts; but also by its easiness, compliance and
proportion to us. For Jesus in his whole life conversed with men with a modest
Virtue, which like a well-kindled fire (...) quod aliquando factum (...).
Exempla (...), qua jam (...). S. Cyprian.
fitted with just materials casts a constant heat; not like an inflamed heap of
stubble, glaring with great emissions, and suddenly stooping into the thickness
of (...). His Piety was even, constant, unblameable, complying with civil
society, without affrightment of precedent, or prodigious instances of actions
greater than the imitation of men. For if we observe our Blessed Savior in the
whole story of his Life, although he was without Sin, yet the instances of his
Piety were the actions of a very holy, but of an ordinary life: and we may
observe this difference in the Story of Jesus from Ecclesiastical Writings of
certain beatified persons, whose life is told rather to amaze us and to create
scruples, than to lead us in the evenness and serenity of a holy Conscience.
Such are the prodigious Penances of Simeon Stylites, the Abstinence of the
Religious retired into the mountain Nitria, but especially the stories of later
Saints in the midst of a declining Piety and aged Christendom, where persons
are represented Holy by way of Idea and fancy, if not to promote the interests
of a Family and Institution. But our Blessed Savior, though his eternal Union
and adherences of love and obedience to his heavenly Father were next to
infinite, yet in his external actions, in which only, with the correspondence
of the Spirit in those actions, he propounds himself imitable, he did so
converse with men, that men after that example might for ever converse with
him. We find that some Saints have had excrescencies and eruptions of Holiness
in the instances of uncommanded Duties, which in the same particulars we find
not in the story of the Life of Jesus. John Baptist was a greater Mortifier
than his Lord was; and some Princes have given more money than all Christ's
Family did, whilst he was alive: but the difference which is observable is,
that although some men did some acts of Counsel in order to attain that
perfection which in Jesus was essential and unalterable, and was not acquired
by degrees, and means of danger and difficulty; yet no man ever did his whole
duty, save only the Holy Jesus. The best of men did sometimes actions not
precisely and strictly requisite, and such as were besides the Precept; but yet
in the greatest flames of their shining Piety they prevaricated something of
the Commandment: They that have done the most things beyond, have also done
some things short of their duty. But Jesus, who intended himself the Example of
Piety, did in manners as in the rule of Faith, which, because it was propounded
to all men, was fitted to every understanding; it was true, necessary, short,
easy, and intelligible. So was his Rule and his Copy (...) not only with
excellencies worthy, but with compliances possible to be imitated; of glories
so great, that the most early and constant industry must confess its own
imperfections, and yet so sweet and humane, that the greatest infirmity, if
pious, shall find comfort and encouragement. Thus God gave his children Manna
from Heaven; and though it was excellent like the food of Angels, yet it
conformed to every palate, according to that appetite which their several
fancies and constitutions did produce.

9. But now when the Example of Jesus is so excellent, that it allures and
tempts with its facility and sweetness, and that we are not commanded to
imitate a Life whose story tells of (...) in Prayer, and (...) (...) de (...).
Abstractions of senses, and immaterial Transportations, and Fastings to the
exinanition of spirits, and disabling all animal operations; but a Life of
Justice and Temperance, of Chastity and Piety, of Charity and Devotion, such a
Life without which humane Society cannot be conserved, and by which as our
irregularities are made regular, so our weaknesses are not upbraided, nor our
miseries made a mockery; we find so much reason to address our selves to a
heavenly imitation of so blessed a Pattern, that the reasonableness of the
thing will be a great argument to chide every degree and minute of neglect. It
was a strange and a confident encouragement which Phocion used to a timorous
Greek who was condemned to die with him; Is it not enough to thee that thou
must die with Phocion? I am sure he that is most incurious of the issues of his
life, is yet willing enough to reign with Jesus, when he looks upon the Glories
represented without the Duty: but it is a very great stupidity and
unreasonableness not to live with him in the imitation of so holy and so prompt
a Piety. It is glorious to do what he did, and a shame to decline his
Sufferings, when there was a God to hallow and sanctify the actions, and a Man
clothed with infirmity to undergo the sharpness of the passion: so that the
Glory of the person added excellency to the first, and the Tenderness of the
person excused not from suffering the latter.

10. Thirdly, Every action of the Life of Jesus, as it is imitable by us, is of
so excellent merit, that by making up the treasure of Grace, it becomes full of
assistances to us, and obtains of God Grace to enable us to its imitation by
way of influence and impetration. For as in the acquisition of Habits the very
exercise of the Action does produce a Facility to the action, and in some
proportion becomes the cause of its self: so does every exercise of the Life of
Christ kindle its own fires, inspires breath into it self, and makes an
univocal production of its self in a differing subject: And Jesus becomes the
fountain of spiritual Life to us, as the Prophet Elisha to the dead child; when
he stretched his hands upon the child's hands, laid his mouth to his mouth, and
formed his posture to the boy, and breathed into him, the spirit returned again
into the child at the prayer of Elisha: so when our lives are formed into the
imitation of the Life of the Holiest Jesus, the spirit of God returns into us,
not only by the efficacy of the imitation, but by the merit and impetration of
the actions of Jesus. It is reported in the Bohemian Story, that S. Wenceslaus
their King one winter-night going to his Devotions (...). 4.
in a remote Church barefooted in the snow and sharpness of unequal and
pointed ice, his servant Podavivus, who waited upon his Master's piety, and
endeavored to imitate his affections, began to faint through the violence of
the snow and cold, till the King commanded him to follow him, and set his feet
in the same footsteps which his feet should mark for him: the servant did so,
and either fansied a cure, or found one; for he followed his Prince, helped
forward with shame and zeal to his imitation, and by the forming footsteps for
him in the snow. In the same manner does the Blessed Jesus: for since our way
is troublesome, obscure, full of objection and danger, apt to be mistaken and
to affright our industry, he commands us to mark his footsteps, to tread where
his feet have stood, and not only invites us forward by the argument of his
Example, but he has trodden down much of the difficulty, and made the way
easier and fit for our feet. For he knows our infirmities, and himself has
felt their experience in all things but in the neighbourhoods of sin; and
therefore he has proportioned a way and a path to our strengths and
capacities, and like Jacob has marched softly and in evenness with the
children and the cattle, to entertain us by the comforts of his company, and
the influences of a perpetual guide.

11. Fourthly, But we must know, that not every thing which Christ did is
imitable by us, neither did he in the work of our Redemption in all things
imitate his heavenly Father. For there are some things which are issues of an
absolute Power, some are expresses of supreme Dominion, some are actions of a
Judge. And therefore Jesus prayed for his enemies, and wept over Jerusalem,
when at the same instant his Eternal Father laughed them to scorn: for he knew
that their day was coming, and himself had decreed their ruin. But it became
the Holy Jesus to imitate his Father's mercies; for himself was the great
instrument of the eternal Compassion, and was the instance of Mercy; and
therefore in the operation of his Father's design every action of his was
univocal, and he showed the power of his Divinity in nothing but in miracles of
Mercy, and illustrations of Faith, by creating arguments of Credibility. In the
same proportion we follow Jesus as himself followed his Father: For what he
abated by the order to his intendment and design, we abate by the proportions
of our Nature: for some excellent acts of his were demonstrations of Divinity,
and an excellent Grace poured forth upon him without measure was their
instrument; to which proportions if we should extend our infirmities, we should
crack our sinews, and dissolve the silver cords, before we could entertain the
instances and support the burden. Jesus fasted forty days and forty nights:
but the manner of our Fastings has been in all Ages limited to the term of an
artificial day; and in the Primitive Observations and the Jewish Rites, men did
eat their meal as soon as the Stars shone in the firmament. We never read that
Jesus laughed, and but once that he rejoiced in spirit: but the declensions of
our Natures cannot bear the weight of a perpetual grave deportment, without the
intervals of refreshment and free alacrity. Our ever-blessed Savior suffered
the Devotion of Mary Magdalene to transport her to an expensive expression of
her Religion, and twice to anoint his feet with costly Nard: and yet if persons
whose conditions were of no greater luster or resplendency of Fortune than was
conspicuous in his family and retinue should suffer the same profusion upon the
dressing and perfuming their bodies, possibly it might be truly said, It might
better be sold and distributed to the poor. This Jesus received as he was the
CHRIST and Anointed of the Lord, and by this he suffered himself to be designed
to Burial, and he received the oblation as Eucharistical for the ejection of
seven Devils; for therefore she loved much.

12. The instances are not many. For how-ever Jesus had some extraordinary
transvolations and acts of emigration beyond the lines of his even and ordinary
conversation, yet it was but seldom: for his being exemplary was of so great
consideration, that he chose to have fewer instances of Wonder, that he might
transmit the more of an imitable Virtue. And therefore we may establish this
for a rule and limit of our imitations: Because Christ our Lawgiver has
described all his Father's will in Sanctions and signature of Laws; whatsoever
he commanded, and whatsoever he did of precise Morality, or in pursuance of the
Laws of Nature, in that we are to trace his footsteps: and in these his Laws
and his practice differ but as a Map and a Guide, a Law and a Judge, a Rule and
a Precedent. But in the special instances of action, we are to abate the
circumstances, and to separate the obedience from the effect: whatsoever was
moral in a ceremonial performance, that is highly imitable; and the obedience
of Sacrificing, and the subordination to Laws actually in being, even now they
are abrogated, teach us our duty, in a differing subject upon the like reason.
Jesus's going up to Jerusalem to the Feasts, and his observation of the
Sabbaths, teach us our duty in celebration of Festivals constitute by a
competent and just Authority. For that which gave excellency to the observation
of Mosaical Rites was an Evangelical duty; and the piety of Obedience did not
only consecrate the observations of Levi, but taught us our duty in the
constitutions of Christianity.

13. Fifthly, As the Holy Jesus did some things which we are not to imitate: so
we also are to do some things which we cannot learn from his Example. For there
are some of our Duties which presuppose a state of Sin, and some suppose a
violent temptation and promptness to it; and the duties of prevention and the
instruments of restitution are proper to us, but conveyed only by Precept, and
not by Precedent: Such are all the parts and actions of Repentance, the duties
of Mortification and Self-denial. For whatsoever the Holy Jesus did in the
matter of Austerity looked directly upon the work of our Redemption, and looked
back only on us by a reflex act, as Christ did on Peter when he looked him into
Repentance. Some states of life also there are which Jesus never led; such are
those of temporal Governors, Kings and Judges, Merchants, Lawyers, and the
state of Marriage: in the course of which lives many cases do occur which need
a Precedent, and the vivacity of an excellent Example, especially since all the
rules which they have, have not prevented the subtilty of the many inventions
which men have found out, nor made provision for all contingencies. Such
persons in all their special needs are to govern their actions by the rules of
proportion, by analogy to the Holiness of the person of Jesus, and the Sanctity
of his Institution; considering what might become a person professing the
Discipline of so Holy a Master, and what he would have done in the like case;
taking our heights by the excellency of his Innocence and Charity. Only
remember this, that in such cases we must always judge on the strictest side of
Piety and Charity, if it be a matter concerning the interest of a second
person; and that in all things we do those actions which are farthest removed
from scandal, and such as toward our selves are severe, toward others full of
gentleness and sweetness. For so would the righteous and merciful Jesus have
done; these are the best analogies and proportions: And in such (...) when the
Wells are dry, let us take water from a Cistern, and propound to our selves
some exemplar Saint, the necessities of whose life have determined his Piety to
the like occurrences.

14. But now from these particulars we shall best account to what the duty of
the Imitation of Jesus does amount: for it signifies, that we should walk as he
walked, tread in his steps, with our hand upon the Guide, and our eye upon his
Rule; that we should do glory to him as he did to his Father; and that
whatsoever we do, we should be careful that it do him honor, and no reproach
to his Institution; and then account these to be the integral parts of our
Duty, which are imitation of his Actions or his Spirit, of his Rule or of his
Life; there being no better Imitation of him than in such actions as do him
pleasure, however he has expressed or imitated the precedent.

15. He that gives Alms to the poor, takes Jesus by the hand; he that patiently
endures Injuries and affronts, helps him to bear his Cross; he that comforts
his brother in Affliction, gives an amiable kiss of peace to Jesus; he that
bathes his own and his neighbor's sins in tears of penance and compassion,
washes his Master's feet: We lead Jesus into the recesses of our heart by holy
Meditations; and we enter into his heart, when we express him in our actions:
for so the Apostle says, He that is in Christ 1 (...). h 2. 6.
walks as he also walked. But thus the actions of our life relate to him by way
of Worship and Religion; but the use is admirable and effectual, when our
actions refer to him as to our Copy, and we transcribe the Original to the
life. He that considers with what affections and lancinations of spirit, with
what effusions of love Jesus prayed, what fervors and assiduity, what innocence
of wish, what modesty of posture, what subordination to his Father and
conformity to the Divine Pleasure were in all his Devotions, is taught and
excited to holy and religious Prayer: The rare sweetness of his deportment in
all Temptations and violences of his Passion, his Charity to his enemies, his
sharp Reprehensions to the Scribes and Pharisees, his Ingenuity toward all men,
are living and effectual Sermons to teach us Patience and Humility, and Zeal
and candid Simplicity, and Justice in all our actions. I add no more instances,
because all the following Discourses will be prosecutions of this intendment.
And the Life of Jesus is not described to be like a Picture in a chamber of
Pleasure, only for beauty and entertainment of the eye; but like the Egyptian
Hieroglyphics, whose every feature is a Precept, and the Images converse with
men by sense, and signification of excellent (...).

16. It was not without great reason advised, that every man should propound
the (...). Ep. 11.
example of a wise and virtuous personage, as Cato, or Socrates, or Brutus; and
by a fiction of imagination to suppose him present as a witness, and really to
take his life as the direction of all our actions. The best and most excellent
of the old Lawgivers and Philosophers among the Greeks had an allay of
Viciousness, and could not be exemplary all over: Some were noted for
Flatterers, as Plato and Aristippus; some for Incontinency, as Aristotle,
Epicurus, Zeno, (...), lib. 3. and 13. and Theognis de (...) and (...). Hoc
(...) S. (...) 1. 6. (...).
Theognis, Plato and Aristippus again; and Socrates, whom their Oracle affirmed
to be the wisest and most perfect man, Narratur and piisci (...) mero (...).
Horat.
yet was by Porphyry noted for extreme intemperance of Anger Majorum and (...),
Graei (...) and (...) suas amicis (...), and alibi (...) quidem an (...): quid
n. de (...) curarent, quam (...) tam (...)? O (...) Attica, O (...) exemplum!
(...) Philosophus and Censor. Tertul. Apolog. c. 39.
both in words and actions: And those Romans who were offered to them for
Examples, although they were great in reputation, yet they had also great
Vices; Brutus dipped his hand in the blood of Caesar his Prince, and his Father
by love, endearments and adoption; and Cato was but a wise man all day, at
night he was used to drink too liberally; and both he and Socrates did give
their Wives unto their friends; the Philosopher and the Censor were procurers
of their Wives Unchastity: and yet these were the best among the Gentiles. But
how happy and richly furnished are Christians with precedents of Saints, whose
Faith and Revelations have been productive of more spiritual Graces, and
greater degrees of moral perfections? And this I call the privilege of a very
great assistance, that I might advance the reputation and account of the Life
of the Glorious Jesu, which is not abated by the imperfections of humane
Nature, as they were, but receives great heightnings and perfection from the
Divinity of his Person, of which they were never capable.

17. Let us therefore press after Jesus, as (...) did after his Master, with an
inseparable prosecution, even whithersoever he goes; that, according to the
reasonableness 1 Cor. 15. 49.
and proportion expressed in S. Paul's advice, As we have born the image of the
earthly, we Dictum (...) Abbat. apud S. Bernardum in (...) S. Mal.
may also bear the image of the heavenly. For, in vain are we called
Christians, if we live not according to the example and discipline of Christ
the Father of the Institution. When S. Laurence was in the midst of the
torments of the Grid-iron, he made this to be the matter of his joy and
Eucharist, that he was admitted to the Gates through which Jesus had entered:
and therefore thrice happy are they who walk in his Courts all their days. And
it is yet a nearer union and vicinity, to imprint his Life in our Souls, and
express Lib. 2. (...). 6. 21.
it in our exterior converse: and this is done by him only who (as S. Prosper
describes the duty) despises all those gilded vanities which he despised, that
fears none of those sadnesses which he suffered, that practices or also teaches
those Doctrines which he taught, and hopes for the accomplishment of all his
Promises. (...).
And this is truest Religion, and the most solemn Adoration.

The PRAYER.
OEternal, Holy, and most glorious Jesu, who have united two Natures of
distance infinite, descending to the lownesses of Humane nature, that thou
might exalt Humane nature to a participation of the Divinity; we thy people
that sat in darkness and in the shadows of death have seen great light, to
entertain our Understandings and enlighten our Souls with its excellent
influences; for the excellency of thy Sanctity shining gloriously in every part
of thy Life is like thy Angel, the Pillar of Fire which called thy children
from the darknesses of Egypt. Lord, open mine eyes, and give me power to behold
thy righteous Glories, and let my Soul be so entertained with affections and
holy ardours, that I may never look back upon the flames of (...), but may
follow thy Light, which recreates and enlightens, and guides us to the
mountains of Safety, and Sanctuaries of Holiness. Holy Jesu, since thy (...) is
imprinted on our Nature by Creation, let me also express thy Image by all the
parts of a holy life, (...) my Will and Affections to thy holy Precepts,
submitting my Understanding to thy Dictates and Lessons of perfection;
imitating thy sweetnesses and Excellencies of Society, thy Devotion in Prayer,
thy Conformity to God, thy Zeal tempered with Meekness, thy Patience heightened
with Charity; that Heart, and Hands, and Eyes, and all my Faculties may grow up
with the increase of God, till I come to the full measure of the (...) of
Christ, even to be a perfect man in Christ Jesus; that at last in thy light I
may see light, and reap the fruits of Glory from the seeds of Sanctity in the
(...) of thy holy Life, O Blessed and Holy Savior Jesus.

Amen.
THE HISTORY OF THE Life and Death OF THE HOLY JESUS:

BEGINNING At the Annunciation to the Blessed Virgin MARY, until his Baptism
and Temptation inclusively:

WITH CONSIDERATIONS and DISCOURSES upon the several parts of the Story;

And PRAYERS fitted to the several MYSTERIES.

THE FIRST PART.

Qui sequitur me, non ambulat in Tenebris.

LONDON,

Printed by R. Norton, for R. Royston, 1675.

THE LIFE Of our Blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.
The Evangelical Prophet
Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son and shall call his name
Immanuel Isa 7 14. Mat 1 22 23

The Annunciation.
S. LUKE. 1. 28

Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee; Blessed art thou
among women.




SECT. I. The History of the Conception of JESUS.
1. WHen the fullness of time was come, after the frequent repetition of
Promises, the expectation of the Jewish Nation, the longings and tedious
waitings of all holy persons, the departure of the Scepter from Judah, and the
Lawgiver from between his feet; when the number of Daniel's Years was
accomplished, and the Egyptian and Syrian Kingdoms had their period; God having
great compassion toward mankind, remembering his Promises and our great
Necessities, sent his Son into the world to take upon him our Nature, and all
that guilt of Sin which stuck close to our Nature, and all that Punishment
which was consequent to our Sin: which came to pass after this manner.

2. In the days of Herod the King, the Angel Gabriel was sent from God to a
City of Galilce named Nazareth, to a holy Maid called Mary, espoused to Joseph,
and found her in a capacity and excellent disposition to receive the greatest
Honor that ever was done to the daughters of men. Her employment was holy and
pious, her person young, her years florid and springing, her Body chaste, her
Mind humble, and a rare repository of divine Graces. She was full of grace and
excellencies. And God poured upon her a full measure of Honor, in making her
the Mother of the (...). For the Angel came to her and said, (...) thou that
art highly (...), the Lord is with thee; blessed art thou among women.

3. We cannot but imagine the great mixture of innocent disturbances and holy
passions that in the first address of the Angel did rather discompose her
settledness, and interrupt the silence of her spirits, than dispossess her
dominion which she ever kept over those subjects, which never had been taught
to rebel beyond the mere possibilities of natural imperfection. But if the
Angel appeared in the shape of a Man, it was an unusual arrest to the Blessed
Virgin, who was accustomed to retirements and solitariness, and had not known
an experience of admitting a comely person, but a stranger, to her closet and
privacies. But if the Heavenly Messenger did retain a Diviner form, more
symbolical to Angelical nature, and more proportionable to his glorious
Message, although her daily employment was a conversation with Angels, who in
their daily ministering to the Saints did behold her chaste conversation coupled
with (...), yet they used not any affrighting glories in the offices of their
daily attendances, but were seen only by spiritual discernings. However so it
happened, that when she saw him she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her
mind what manner of Salutation this should be.

4. But the Angel, who came with designs of honor and comfort to her, not
willing that the inequality and glory of the Messenger should, like too
glorious a light to a weaker eye, rather confound the Faculty than enlighten
the Organ, did, before her thoughts could find a tongue, invite her to a more
familiar confidence than possibly a tender Virgin (though of the greatest
serenity and composure) could have put on in the presence of such a Beauty and
such a Holiness. And the Angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary, for thou have
found favor with God. And behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring
forth a Son, and shall call his name JESUS.

5. The Holy Virgin knew her self a person very unlikely to be a Mother: For
although the desires of becoming a Mother to the MESSIAH were great in every of
the Daughters of Jacob, and about that time the expectation of his Revelation
was high and pregnant, and therefore she was espoused to an honest and a just
person of her kindred and family, and so might not despair to become a Mother;
yet she was a person of a rare Sanctity and so mortified a spirit, that for all
this Desponsation of her, according to the desire of her Parents, and the
custom of the Nation, she had not set one step toward the consummation of her
Marriage, so much as in thought; and possibly had set her self back from it by
a vow of Chastity and holy Coelibate. For Mary said unto the Angel, How shall
this be, seeing I know not a man?

6. But the Angel, who was a person of that nature which knows no conjunctions
but those of love and duty, knew that the Piety of her Soul and the Religion of
her chaste purposes was a great imitator of (...) Purity, and therefore
perceived where the Philosophy of her question did consist; and being taught of
God, declared, that the manner should be as miraculous as the Message it self
was glorious. For the Angel told her, that this should not be done by any way
which our sin and the shame of Adam had unhallowed, by turning Nature into a
blush, and forcing her to a retirement from a public attesting the means of
her own preservation; but the whole matter was from God, and so should the
manner be: For the Angel said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon (...),
and the power of the Highest shall over shadow thee: therefore also that Holy
thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.

7. When the Blessed Virgin was so ascertained that she should be a Mother --
(...) beato (...) Matris babens (...) honor, (...) visa (...).
and a Maid, and that two Glories, like the two Luminaries of Heaven, should
meet in her, that she might in such a way become the Mother of her Lord, that
she might with better advantages be his Servant; then all her hopes and all her
desires received such satisfaction, and filled all the corners of her Heart so
much, as indeed it was fain to make room for its reception. But she to whom the
greatest things of Religion and the transportations of Devotion were made
familiar by the assiduity and piety of her daily practices, however she was
full of joy, yet she was carried like a full vessel, without the violent
tossings of a tempestuous passion, or the wrecks of a stormy imagination: And
as the power of the Holy Ghost did descend upon her like rain into a fleece of
wool, without any obstreperous noises or violences to nature, but only the
extraordinariness of an exaltation: so her spirit received it with the
gentleness and tranquillity fitted for the entertainment of the spirit of love,
and a quietness symbolical to the holy Guest of her spotless womb, the Lamb of
God; for she meekly replied, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me
according unto thy word. And the Angel departed from her, having done his
message. And at the same time the holy Spirit of God did make her to conceive
in her womb the immaculate Son of God, the Savior of the World.

Ad SECT. I. Considerations upon the Annunciation of the Blessed MARY, and the
Conception of the Holy JESUS.
1. THat which shines brightest presents it self first to the eye; and the
devout Soul in the chain of excellent and precious things which are represented
in the counsel, (...) inter (...) and Deum (...) ad (...) prior (...) nos
(...), qui (...), ad (...) Dei (...).
design and first beginnings of the work of our Redemption, has not (...) to
attend the twinkling of the lesser Stars, till it has stood and admired the
glory and eminencies of the Divine Love, manifested in the Incarnation of the
Word eternal. God had no necessity in order to the conservation or the
heightning his own Felicity, but out of mere and perfect charity and the bowels
of compassion sent into the world his only Son for remedy to humane miseries,
to ennoble our Nature by an union with Divinity, to sanctify it with his
Justice, to enrich it with his Grace, to instruct it with his Doctrine, to
fortify it with his Example, to rescue it from servitude, to assert it into
the S. Greg.
liberty of the sons of God, and at last to make it partaker of a beatifical
Resurrection.

2. God, who in the infinite treasures of his wisdom and providence could have
found out many other ways for our Redemption than the Incarnation of his
eternal Son, was pleased to choose this, not only that the Remedy by Man might
have proportion to the causes of our Ruin, whose introduction and intromission
was by the prevarication of Man; but also that we might with freer dispensation
receive the influences of a Savior with whom we communicate in Nature:
although Abana and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, were of greater name and
current; yet they were not so salutary as the waters of Jordan to cure Naaman's
Leprosy. And if God had made the remedy of humane nature to have come all the
way clothed in prodigy, and every instant of its execution had been as
terrible, affrighting, and as full of Majesty as the apparitions upon Mount
Sinai; yet it had not been so useful and complying to humane necessities, as
was the descent of God to the susception of Humane Nature, whereby (as in all
Medicaments) the cure is best wrought by those instruments which have the
fewest dissonancies to our temper, and are the nearest to our constitution. For
thus the Savior of the world became humane, alluring, full of invitation and
the sweetnesses of love, exemplary, humble and medicinal.

3. And if we consider the reasonableness of the thing, what can be given more
excellent for the Redemption of Man, than the Blood of the Son of God? And what
can more ennoble our Nature, than that by the means of his holy Humanity it was
taken up into the Quod (...): quod si (...) in (...) alicujus (...) in (...).
Cabinet of the mysterious Trinity? What better Advocate could we have for us,
than he that is appointed to be our Judge? And what greater hopes of
Reconciliation can be imagined, than that God, in whose power it is to give an
absolute Pardon, has taken a new Nature, entertained an Office, and undergone
a life of Poverty, with a purpose to procure our Pardon? For now, though as the
righteous Judge he will judge the Nations righteously; yet by the susception of
our Nature, and its appendant crimes, he is become a party: and having obliged
himself as Man, as he is S. Primasius.
God he will satisfy, by putting the value of an infinite Merit to the actions
and sufferings of his Humanity. And if he had not been God, he could not have
given us remedy; if he had not been Man, we should have wanted the excellency
of Example.

4. And till now Humane nature was less than that of Angels; but by the
Incarnation of the Word was to be exalted above the Cherubims: yet the (...)
(...). in Pythag.
Archangel Gabriel being dispatched in embassy, to represent the joy and
exaltation of his inferior, instantly trims his wings with love and obedience,
and hastens with this Narrative to the Holy Virgin. And if we should reduce our
prayers to action, and do God's Will on earth as the Angels in Heaven do it, we
should promptly (...) every part of the Divine Will, though it were to be
instrumental to the exaltation of a Brother above our selves; knowing no end
but conformity to the Divine Will, and making simplicity of intention to be the
(...) and exterior borders of our garments.

5. When the eternal God meant to stoop so low as to be fixed to our center, he
chose for his Mother a Holy person and a Maid, but yet (...) to a Just man,
that he might not only be secure in the Innocence, but also provided sor in the
Reputation of his holy Mother: teaching us, That we must not only satisfy our
selves in the purity of our purposes and hearty Innocence, but that we must
provide also things honest in the (...) of all men, being free from the
suspicion and semblances of evil; so making provision for private Innocence and
public Honesty; it being necessary in order to Charity and edification of our
Brethren, that we hold forth no impure flames or smoking firebrands, but pure
and trimmed lamps, in the eyes of all the world.

6. And yet her Marriage was more mysterious: for as, besides the Miracle, it
was an eternal honor and advancement to the glory of Virginity, that he chose
a Virgin for his Mother; so it was in that manner (...), that the Virgin was
betrothed, lest honorable Marriage might be disreputed and seem inglorious by
a positive rejection from any participation of the honor. Diverse of the old
Doctors, from the authority (...). 6. in (...). in 1 Matthew. S. (...), and (...).
of (...), add another reason, saying, That the Blessed Jesus was therefore
born of a woman betrothed, and under the pretense of Marriage, that the Devil,
who knew the (...) was to be born of a Virgin, might not expect him there, but
so be ignorant of the person, till God had served many ends of Providence upon
him.

7. The Angel in his address needed not to go in inquisition after a wandering
fire, but knew she was a Star fixed in her own Orb: he found her at home; and
(...) that also might be too large a Circuit, she was yet confined to a more
intimate retirement, she was in her Oratory private and devout. There are some
S. Bernard.
Curiosities so bold and determinate as to tell the very matter of her Prayer,
and that she was praying for the Salvation of all the World, and the Revelation
of the (...), desiring she might be so happy as to kiss the feet of her who
should have the glory to be his Mother. We have no security of the particular:
but there is no piety so diffident as to require a sign to create a belief that
her employment at the instant was holy and religious; but in that disposition
she received a grace which the greatest Queens would have purchased with the
quitting of their Diadems, and has consigned an excellent Document to all
women, that they accustom themselves often to those Retirements, where none but
God and his Angels can have admittance. For the Holy Jesus can come to them
too, and dwell with them, hallowing their Souls, and consigning their bodies to
a participation of all his glories. But recollecting of all our scattered
thoughts and exterior extravagances, and a receding from the inconveniences of
a too free conversation, is the best circumstance to dispose us to a heavenly
visitation.

8. The holy Virgin, when she saw an Angel, and heard a testimony from Heaven
of her Grace and Piety, was troubled within her self at the Salutation, and the
manner of it. For she had learned, that the affluence of Divine comforts and
prosperous successes should not exempt us from fear, but make it the more
prudent and wary, lest it entangle us in a vanity of spirit: God having
ordered, that our spirits should be affected with dispositions in some degrees
contrary to exterior events, that we be fearful in the affluence of prosperous
things, and joyful in adversity; as knowing that this may produce benefit and
advantage; and the changes that are consequent to the other are sometimes full
of mischiefs, but always of danger. But her Silence and Fear were her
Guardians; that, to prevent excrescencies of Joy, this, of vainer complacency.

9. And it is not altogether inconsiderable to observe, that the holy Virgin
came to a great perfection and state of Piety by a few, and those modest and
even, exercises and external actions. S. Paul traveled over the World,
preached to the Gentiles, disputed against the Jews, confounded Heretics, writ
excellently-learned Letters, suffered dangers, injuries, affronts, and
persecutions to the height of wonder, and by these violences of life, action
and patience, obtained the Crown of an excellent Religion and Devotion. But the
holy Virgin, although she was engaged sometimes in an active life, and in the
exercise of an ordinary and small economy and government, or ministeries of a
Family, yet she arrived to her Perfections by the means of a quiet and silent
Piety, the internal actions of Love, Devotion and Contemplation: and instructs
us, that not only those who have opportunity and powers of a magnificent
Religion, or a pompous Charity, or miraculous Conversion of Souls, or assiduous
and effectual Preachings, or exterior demonstrations of corporal Mercy, shall
have the greatest crowns, and the addition of degrees and accidental rewards;
but the silent affections, the splendors of an internal Devotion, the unions of
Love, Humility and Obedience, the daily offices of Prayer and Praises sung to
God, the acts of Faith and Fear, of Patience and Meekness, of Hope and
Reverence, Repentance and Charity, and those Graces which walk in a veil and
silence, make great ascents to God, and as sure progress to favor and a Crown,
as the more ostentous and laborious exercises of a more solemn Religion. No
(...) needs to complain of want of power or opportunities for Religious
perfections: a devout woman in her Closet, praying with much zeal and
affections for the conversion of Souls, is in the same order to a shining like
the stars in glory, as he who by excellent discourses puts it into a more
forward disposition to be actually performed. And possibly her Prayers obtained
energy and force to my Sermon, and made the ground fruitful, and the seed
spring up to life eternal. Many times God is present in the still voice and
private retirements of a quiet Religion, and the constant spiritualities of an
ordinary life; when the loud and impetuous winds, and the shining fires of more
laborious and expensive actions are profitable to others only, like a tree of
Balsam, distilling precious liquor for others, not for its own use.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal and Almighty God, who did send thy holy Angel in embassy to the
Blessed Virgin Mother of our Lord, to manifest the actuating (...) eternal
Purpose of the (...) of Mankind by the Incarnation of thine eternal Son; put
me, by the (...) of thy Divine Grace, into such holy dispositions, that I may
never impede the event and effect of those mercies which in the counsels of thy
Predestination thou did design for me. Give me a promptness to obey thee to
the degree and semblance of Angelical alacrity; give me holy Purity and Piety,
Prudence and Modesty, like those Excellencies which thou did create in the
ever-blessed Virgin, the Mother of God: grant that my employment be always
holy, unmixt with worldly affections, and, as much as my condition of life will
bear, retired from secular interests and disturbances; that I may converse with
Angels, entertain the Holy JESUS, conceive him in my Soul, nourish him with the
expresses of most innocent and holy affections, and bring him forth and publish
him in a life of Piety and Obedience, that he may dwell in me for ever, and I
may for ever dwell with him in the house of eternal pleasures and glories world
without end.

Amen.
SECT. II. The Bearing of JESUS in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin.
MARY visiting ELIZABETH
S. LUKE. 1. 43.

And whence is this to me that ye Mother of my LORD should come to me.

Joseph's Dream.
S MAT: 1. 20.

Joseph, thou son of David, Fear not to (...) unto thee Mar^^ thy wife; for
that (...) is conceived in her is of the Holy (...)




1. ALthough the Blessed Virgin had a faith as prompt and ready as her Body was
chaste and her Soul pure; yet God, who uses to give full measure, shaken
together and running over, did by way of confirmation and fixing the confidence
of her assent give an instance of his Omnipotency in the very particular of an
extraordinary Conception: For the Angel said, Behold thy Cousin Elizabeth has
also conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month with her that
was called barren: For with God nothing shall be impossible. A less argument
would have satisfied the necessity of a Faith which had no scruple; and a
greater would not have done it in the incredulity of an ungentle and
pertinacious spirit. But the Holy Maid had complacency enough in the Message,
and holy desires about her to carry her understanding as far as her affections;
even to the fruition of the Angel's Message; which is such a sublimity of
Faith, that it is its utmost consummation, and shall be its Crown when our
Faith is turned into Vision, our Hopes into actual Possessions, and our Grace
into Glory.

2. And she, who was now full of God, bearing God in her Virgin-Womb, and the
Holy Spirit in her Heart, who had also over-shadowed her, enabling her to a
supernatural and miraculous Conception, arose with haste and gladness, to
communicate that joy which was designed for all the World; and she found no
breast to pour forth the first emanations of her over-joyed heart so fit as her
Cousin Elizabeth's, who had received testimony from God to have been righteous,
walking in all the Commandments of the Lord blameless, who also had a special
portion in this great honor; for she was designed to be the Mother of the
Baptist, who was sent as a forerunner to prepare the ways of the Lord, and to
make his paths straight. And Mary arose in those days, and went into the
Hill-countrey with haste into a City of Judah.

3. Her Haste was in proportion to her Joy and desires, but yet went no greater
pace than her Religion: for as in her journey she came near to Jerusalem, she
turned in, that she might visit His Temple whose Temple she her self was now;
and there, not only to remember the pleasures of Religion, which she had felt
in continual descents and showers falling on her pious heart for the space of
eleven years attendance there in her Childhood, but also to pay the
first fruits of her Thanks and Joy, and to lay all her glory at his feet whose
humble hand maid she was in the greatest honor of being his blessed Mother.
Having worshipped, she went on her journey, and entered into the house of
Zasharias, and saluted (...).

4. It is not easy to imagine what a collision of joys was at this blessed
Meeting: two Mothers of two great Princes, the one the greatest that was born
of woman, and the other was his Lord, and these made Mothers by two Miracles,
met together with joy and mysteriousness; where the Mother of our Lord went to
visit the Mother of his Servant, and the Holy Ghost made the meeting festival,
and descended upon Elizabeth, and she prophesied. (...) in Heaven was there
more joy and ecstasie. The persons, who were Women, whose fancies and
affections were not only hallowed, but made pregnant and big with Religion,
meeting together to compare and unite their joys, and their Eucharist, and then
made prophetical and inspired, must needs have discoursed like (...) and the
most ecstasied order of Intelligences; for all the faculties of Nature were
turned into Grace, and expressed in their way the excellent Solemnity. For it
came to pass when Elizabeth heard the Salutation of Mary, the (...) leaped in
her Womb; and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost.

5. After they had both prophesied and sang their Hymns, and re-saluted each
other with the religion of Saints and the joys of Angels, Mary abode with her
cousin Elizabeth about three mouths, and then returned to her own house. Where
when she appeared with her holy burden to her Husband Joseph, and that he
perceived her to be with child, and knew that he had never unsealed that holy
fountain of virginal purity, he was troubled. For although her deportment had
been pious and chaste to a miracle, her carriage reserved, and so grave, that
she drove away temptations and impure visits and all unclean purposes from the
neighborhood of her holy person: yet when he saw she was with child, and had
not yet been taught a lesson higher than the principles of Nature, he was
minded to put her away, for he knew she was with child; but yet privily,
because he was a good man, and knew her Piety to have been such that it had a
most done violence to his sense, and made him disbelieve what was visible and
notorious, and therefore he would do it privately. But while he thought on
these things, the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a Dream, saying,
Joseph thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy (...), for that
which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. Then Joseph, being raised from
sleep, did as the Angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his Wife.

Ad SECT. II. Considerations concerning the circumstances of the Interval
between the Conception and Nativity.
1. WHen the Blessed Virgin was ascertained of the manner of her becoming a
Mother, and that her tremblings were over upon the security she should preserve
her Virgin purity as a clean oblation to the honor of God, then she expressed
her consent to the Angelical message, and instantly she conceived the Holy
Jesus in her Womb, by the supernatural and divine influence of the Holy Ghost.
For she was highly zealous to reconcile her being Mother to the (...), with
those Purities and holy Coelibate which she had designed to keep as advantages
to the interests of Religion, and his honor who chose her from all the
daughters of Adam, to be instrumental of the restitution of grace and innocence
to all her Father's family. And we shall receive benefit from so excellent
example, if we be not so desirous of a Privilege as of a Virtue, of Honor as
of Piety: and as we submit to the weight and pressure of sadnesses and
infelicities, that God's will may be accomplished; so we must be also ready to
renounce an exterior grace or favor, rather than it should not be consistent
with exemplar and rare Piety.

2. When the Son of God was incarnate in the Womb of his Virgin Mother, the
Holy Maid arose; and though she was superexalted by an honor greater than the
world yet ever saw, she still dwelt upon the foundation of Humility; and to
make that virtue more signal and eminent, she arose and went hastily to visit
her Cousin Elizabeth, who also had conceived a son in her old age: for so we
all should be curious and watchful against vanities and transportations, when
we are advanced to the gayeties of prosperous accidents, and in the greatest
privileges descend to the lowest, to exercise a greater measure of Virtue
against the danger of those tentations which are planted against our heart to
ruin our hopes and glories.

3. But the Joys that the Virgin Mother had were such as concerned all the
world, and that part of them which was her peculiar she would not conceal from
persons apt to their entertainment, but go to publish God's mercy toward her to
another holy person, that they might join in the praises of God; as knowing,
that though it may be convenient to represent our personal necessities in
private, yet God's gracious returns and the blessings he makes to descend on us
are more fit, when there is no personal danger collaterally appendent, to be
published in the Communion of Saints; that the Hopes of others may receive
increase, that their Faith may have confirmation, that their Charity and
Eucharist may grow up to become excellent and great, and the praises of God may
be sung aloud, till the sound strike at Heaven, and join with the Hallelujahs
which the Morning-stars in their Orbs pay to their great Creator.

4. When the Holy Virgin had begun her journey, she made haste over the
Mountains, that she might not only satisfy the desires of her joy by a speedy
gratulation, but lest she should be too long abroad under the dispersion and
discomposing of her retirements: And therefore she hastens to an enclosure, to
her Cousin's house, as knowing that all virtuous women, like Tortoises, carry
their house on their heads, and their Chapel in their heart, and their danger
in their eye, and their Souls in their hands, and God in all their actions. And
indeed her very little burden which she bare hindered her not but she might
make haste enough; and as her spirit was full of cheerfulness and alacrity, so
even her body was made aerie and vegete: for there was no Sin in her burden to
fill it with natural inconveniences; and there is this excellency in all
spiritual things, that they do no disadvantage to our persons, nor retard our
just temporal interests. And the Religion by which we carry Christ within us is
neither so peevish as to disturb our health, nor so sad as to discompose our
just and modest cheerfulness, nor so prodigal as to force us to needs and
ignoble trades; but recreates our body by the medicine of holy Fastings and
Temperance, fills us full of serenities and complacencies by the sweetnesses of
a holy Conscience and joys spiritual, promotes our temporal interests by the
gains and increases of the rewards of Charity, and by securing God's providence
over us while we are in the pursuit of the Heavenly Kingdom. And as in these
dispositions she climbed the mountains with much facility; so there is nothing
in our whole life of difficulty so great but it may be managed by those
assistances we receive from the Holiest Jesus, when we carry him about us; as
the valleys are exalted, so the mountains are made plain before us.

5. When her Cousin Elizabeth saw the Mother of her Lord come to visit her, as
the Lord himself descended to visit all the world in great humility, she was
pleased and transported to the height of wonder and prophecy, and the Babe
sprang in her womb and was sanctified, first doing his homage and adoration to
his Lord that was in presence. And we also, although we can do nothing unless
the Lord first prevent us with his gracious visitation, yet if he first come
unto us, and we accept and entertain him with the expresses and
correspondencies of our duty, we shall receive the grace and honor of
Sanctification. But if S. Elizabeth, who received testimony from God, that she
walked in all the Commandments of the Lord blameless, was carried into
ecstasie, wondering at the dignation and favor done to her by the Mother of her
Lord; with what preparations and holy solemnities ought we to entertain his
addresses to us by his Holy Sacrament, by the immissions of his Spirit, by the
assistances of his Graces, and all other his vouchsafings and descents into our
hearts?

6. The Blessed Virgin hearing her Cousin full of spirit and prophecy, calling
her blessed, and praising her Faith, and confirming her Joy, instantly sang her
hymn to God, returning those praises which she received to him to whom they did
appertain. For so we should worship God with all ourpraises, being willing upon
no other condition to extend one hand to receive our own honor, but that with
the other we might transmit it to God, that as God is honored in all his
Creatures, so he may be honored in us too; looking upon the Graces which God
has given us but as greater instruments and abilities to serve him, being none
of ours, but talents which are entrusted into our Banks to be improved. But as
a precious Pearl is orient and medicinal, because God has placed those
excellencies in it for ends of his own, but it self is dcad to all
apprehensions of it, and knows no reflections upon its own value; only God is
magnified in his work: so is every pious person precious and holy, but
mortified to all vainer complacencies in those singularities and eminencies,
which God placed there because he was so pleased, saying, there he would have a
Temple built; because from thence he would take delight to receive glory and
adoration.

7. After all these holy and festival joys which the two glad Mothers feasted
themselves withal, a sad cloud did intervene and passed before the face of the
Blessed Virgin. The just and righteous Joseph, her espoused Husband, perceiving
her to be with child, was minded to put her away, as not knowing the Divinity
of the fountain which watered the Virgin's sealed and hallowed Womb, and made
it fruitful. But he purposed to do it privily, that he might preserve the
reputation of his Spouse, whose Piety he knew was great, and was sorrowful it
should now set in a sad night and be extinct. But it was an exemplar charity,
and reads to us a rule for our deportment toward erring and lapsed persons,
that we entreat them with meekness and pity and fear; not hastening their
(...), nor provoking their spirit, nor making their remedy desperate by using
of them rudely, till there be no worse thing for them to fear if they should be
dissolved into all licentiousness. For an open shame is commonly protested unto
when it is remediless, -- (...) sumit.
and the person either despairs and sinks under the burden, or else grows
impudent and tramples upon it. But the gentleness of a modest and charitable
remedy preserves that which is Virtue's girdle, Fear and Blushing; and the
beginning of a punishment chides them into the horror of remembrance and
guilt, but preserves their meekness and modesty, because they, not feeling the
worst of evils, dare not venture upon the worst of sins.

8. But it seems the Blessed Virgin, having received this greatest honor, had
not made it known to her Husband Joseph; and when she went to her Cousin
Elizabeth, the Virgin was told of it by her Cousin before she spoke of it her
self, for her Cousin had it by revelation and the spirit of prophecy. And it is
in some circumstances and from some persons more secure to conceal Visions, and
those heavenly Gifts which create estimations among men, than to publish them,
which may possibly minister to vanity; and those exterior Graces may do God's
work, though no observer note them but the person for whose sake they are sent:
like rain falling in uninhabited Valleys, where no eye observes showers; yet
the Valleys laugh and sing to God in their refreshment without a witness.
However, it is better to hear the report of our good things from the mouths of
others than from our selves: and better yet, if the beauty of the Tabernacle be
covered with skins, that none of our beauties be seen but by worshippers, that
is, when the glory of God and the interests of Religion or Charity are
concerned in their publication. For so it happened to be in the case of the
Blessed Virgin, as she related to her Cousin Elizabeth; and so it happened not
to be, as she referred to her Husband Joseph.

9. The Holy Virgin could not but know that Joseph would be troubled with
sorrow and insecure apprehensions concerning her being with child; but such was
her Innocence and her Confidence in God, that she held her peace, expecting
which way God would provide a remedy to the inconvenience: for if we commit our
selves to God in well doing as unto a faithful Creator, preserving the
tranquillity of our spirits and the evenness of our temper in the assault of
infamy and disreputation, God, who loves our Innocence, will be its Patron, and
will assert it from the scandal, if it be expedient for us; if it be not, it is
not fit we should desire it. But if the Holy Jesus did suffer his Mother to
fall into misinterpretation and suspect, which could not but be a great
affliction to her excellent spirit, rarely tempered as an Eye, highly sensible
of every ruder touch; we must not think it strange, if we be tried and pressed
with a calamity and unhandsome accidents: only remember, that God will find a
remedy to the trouble, and will sanctify the affliction, and secure the
person, if we be innocent, as was the Holy Virgin.

10. But Joseph was not hasty in the execution of his purposes, nor of making
his 1 John 1. 9.
Psalm. 111. 3.
thoughts determinate, but stood long in deliberation, and longer before he
acted it, (...) Philostr. (...) Appollon. l. 3. (...). 7.
because it was an invidious matter, and a rigor: He was first to have defamed
and accused her publicly, and, being convicted, by the Law she was to die, if
he had gone the ordinary way; but he who was a just man, that is, according to
the style of Scripture and other wise Writers, a good, a charitable man, found
that it was more agreeable to Justice, to treat an offending person with the
easiest sentence, than to put things to extremity, and render the person
desperate and without remedy, and provoked by the suffering of the worst of
what she could fear. No obligation to Justice does force a man to be cruel, or
to use the sharpest sentence. A just man does Justice to every man and to every
thing; and then, if he be also wise, he knows there is a debt of mercy and
compassion due to the infirmities of a man's nature, and that debt is to be Non
(...) ab (...), sed (...) ab (...) justifi (...). Ambros.
paid: and he that is cruel and ungentle to a sinning person, and does the
worst thing to him, dies in his debt, and is unjust. Pity, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, and fair interpretation, and excusing our brother, and taking
things in the best sense, and passing the gentlest sentence, are as certainly
our duty, and owing to every person that does offend and can repent, as calling
men to account can be owing to the Law, and are first to be paid; and he that
does not so is an unjust person: which because Joseph was not, he did not call
furiously for Justice, or pretend that God required it at his hands presently,
to undo a suspected person; but waved the killing letter of the Law, and
secured his own interest and his Justice too, by intending to dismiss her
privately. But before the thing was irremediable, God ended his Question by a
heavenly demonstration, and sent an Angel to reveal to him the Innocence of his
Spouse, and the Divinity of her Son; and that he was an immediate derivative
from Heaven, and the Heir of all the World. And in all our doubts we shall have
a resolution from Heaven or some of its Ministers, if we have recourse thither
for a Guide, and be not hasty in our discourses, or inconsiderate in our
purposes, or rash in judgment. For God loves to give assistances to us, when we
most fairly and prudently endeavor that Grace be not put to do all our work,
but to facilitate our labor; not creating new faculties, but improving those
of Nature. If we consider warily, God will guide us in the determination: But a
hasty person out-runs his guide, prevaricates his rule, and very often engages
upon error.

The PRAYER.
O Holy Jesu, Son of the Eternal God, thy Glory is far above all Heavens, and
yet thou did descend to Earth, that thy Descent might be the more gracious,
by how much thy Glories were admirable, and natural, and inseparable: I adore
thy holy Humanity with humble veneration, and the thankful addresses of
religious joy, because thou have personally united Humane nature to the Eternal
Word, carrying it above the seats of the highest Cherubim. This great and
glorious Mystery is the honor and glory of man: it was the expectation of our
Fathers, who saw the mysteriousness of thy Incarnation at great and obscure
distances: And blessed be thy Name, that thou have caused me to be born after
the fulfilling of thy Prophecies, and the consummation and exhibition of so
great a love, so great mysteriousness. Holy Jesu, though I admire and adore the
immensity of thy love and condescension, who were pleased to undergo our
burdens and infirmities for us; yet I abhor my self, and detest my own
impurities, which were so great and contradictory to the excellency of God,
that to destroy Sia, and save us, it became necessary that thou should be
sent into the World, to die our death for us, and to give us of thy Life.

2.
DEarest Jesu, thou did not breath one sigh, nor shed one drop of blood, nor
weep one tear, nor suffer one stripe, nor preach one Sermon for the salvation
of the Devils: and what sadness and shame is it then, that I should cause so
many insufferable loads of sorrows to fall upon thy sacred head? Thou art
wholly given for me, wholly spent upon my uses, and wholly for every one of the
Elect. Thou in the beginning of the work of our Redemption did suffer nine
months imprisonment in the pure Womb of thy Holy Mother, to redeem me from the
eternal servitude of Sin and its miserable consequents. Holy Jesu, let me be
born anew, receive a new birth and a new life, imitating thy Graces and
Excellencies by which thou art beloved of thy Father, and have obtained for us
a favor and atonement. Let thy holy will be done by me, let all thy will be
wrought in me, let thy will be wrought concerning me; that I may do thy
pleasure, and submit to the dispensation of thy Providence, and conform to thy
holy will, and may for ever serve thee in the Communion of Saints, in the
society of thy redeemed ones, now and in the glories of Eternity.

Amen.
SECT. III. The Nativity of our Blessed Savior JESUS.
The Birth of LESUS.
And she brought forth her first borne son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes
and laid him in a manger, because there was no room sor them in the Inn. Luke
2. 7.

The Virgin MOTHER
S LUKE. 11. 27

Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have Sucked. v.
28. Yea, rather Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.




1. THE Holy Maid longed to be a glad Mother, and she who carried a burden
whose proper commensuration is the days of Eternity counted the tedious
minutes, expecting when the Sun of Righteousness should break forth from his
bed, where nine months he hid himself as behind a fruitful cloud. About the
same time God, who in his infinite wisdom does concentre and tie together in
one end things of disparate and disproportionate natures, making things
improbable to cooperate to what wonder or to what truth he pleases, brought the
Holy Virgin to Bethlehem the City of David, to be taxed with her Husband
Joseph, according to a Decree upon all the World issuing from Augustus Caesar.
(...). Eusebius. l. 1. c. 6. Histor. Eccles. Anno scil. tertio Olympiad. 194.
Caesare Augusto and Plautio Silano Coss.
But this happened in this conjunction of time, that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the Prophet Micah, And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah
art not the least among the Princes of Judah; for out of thee shall come a
Governor that shall rule my people Israel. This rare act of Providence was
highly remarkable, because this Taxing seems wholly to have been ordered by God
to serve and minister ( (...). S. Chrysostom. hom. 8. in Matthew.
to the circumstances of this Birth. For this Taxing was not in order to
Tribute: Herod was now King, and received all the Revenues of the Fiscus, and
paid to Augustus an appointed Tribute after the manner of other Kings, Friends
and Relatives of the Roman Empire: neither does it appear that (...) Suidam in
verbo (...) Dio. lib. 50.
the Romans laid a new Tribute on the Jews before the Confiscation of the goods
of Archelaus. Augustus therefore sending special Delegates to tax every City,
made only an inquest after the strength of the Roman Empire in men and moneys;
and did himself (...)
no other advantage, but was directed by him who rules and turns the hearts of
Princes, that he might, by verifying a Prophecy, signify and publish the
Divinity of the Mission and the Birth of Jesus.

2. She that had conceived by the operation of that Spirit who dwells within
the element of Love, was no ways impeded in her journey by the greatness of her
burden, but arrived at Bethlehem in the throng of strangers, who had so filled
up the places of hospitality and public entertainment, that there was no room
for Joseph and Mary in the Inn. But yet she felt that it was necessary to
retire where she might softly lay her Burden, who began now to call at the
gates of his prison, and Nature was ready to let him forth. But she that was
Mother to the King of all the creatures could find no other but a Stable, Juxta
propheticum illud, Isa. 33. 16.
a Cave of a rock, whither she retired; where when it began to be with her
after the manner of women, she humbly bowed her knees, in the posture and guise
of worshippers, and in the midst of glorious thoughts and highest speculation
(...). Sed hanc periodum Judaei erasirunt ex Hebraeo textu. Sic and Symm^^bus,
(...) my^^^^ Bethlehem, sive Domus panis, indig^tatur.
brought forth her first born into the world.

3. As there was no sin in the Conception, so neither had she pains in the
Production, as the Church from the days of Gregory Nazianzen until now has
piously believed; though before his days there were some opinions to the
contrary, but certainly neither so pious, nor so reasonable. For to her alone
did not the punishment of Eve extend, Vide Waddingum page 270.
that in sorrow she should bring forth: For where nothing of Sin was an
ingredient, there Misery cannot cohabit. For though amongst the daughters of
men many Conceptions are innocent and holy, being sanctified by the Word of God
and Prayer, hallowed by Marriage, designed by Prudence, seasoned by Temperance,
conducted by Religion toward a just, an hallowed and a holy end, and yet their
Productions are in sorrow; yet this of the Blessed Virgin might be otherwise,
because here Sin was no relative, and neither was in the principle nor the
derivative, in the act nor in the habit, in the root nor in the branch: there
was nothing in this but the sanctification of a Virgin's Womb, and that could
not be the parent of sorrow, especially that gate not having been opened by
which the Curse always entered. And as to conceive by the Holy Ghost was
glorious, so to bring forth any of the fruits of the spirit is joyful, and full
of felicities. And he that came from his grave fast tied with a stone and
signature, and into the College of Apostles the doors being shut, and into the
glories of his Father through the solid orbs of all the Firmament, came also
(as the Church piously believes) into the World so, without doing violence to
the virginal and pure body of his Mother, that he did also leave her Virginity
entire, to be as a seal, that none might open the gate of that Sanctuary, that
it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 44. 2.
This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by
it; because the Lord God of Israel has entered by it, therefore it shall be
shut.

4. Although all the World were concerned in the Birth of this great Prince,
yet I find no story of any one that ministered at it save only Angels, who knew
their duty to their Lord, and the great Interests of that person; whom, as soon
as he was born, they presented to his Mother, who could not but receive him
with a joy next to the rejoycings of glory and beatifick vision, seeing him to
be born her Son who was the Son of God, of greater beauty than the Sun, purer
than Angels, more loving than the Seraphims, as dear as the eye and heart of
God, where he was from eternity engraven, his beloved and his onely-begotten.

5. When the Virgin Mother now felt the first tenderness and yernings of a
Mother's bowels and saw the Savior of the World born, poor as her fortunes
could represent him, naked as the innocence of Adam, she took him, and wrapped
him in swaddling clothes; and after she had a while cradled him in her arms, she
laid him in a manger: for so was the design of his Humility; that as the last
Scene of his life was represented among Hab. 3. v. 4. In medio animalicum
cognosceris.
Thieves, so the first was amongst Beasts, the sheep and the oxen; according to
that mysterious Hymn of the Prophet Habakkuk, His brightness was as the light,
he had horns coming out of his hand, and there was the hiding of his power. Sic
Lxx.


6. But this place, which was one of the great instances of his Humility, grew
to Vin. Beda de lotis sanctis, c. 8.
be as venerable as became an instrument, and it was consecrated into a Church,
the Crib into an Altar, where first lay that Lamb of God which afterward was
sacrificed for the sins of all the World. And when Adrian the Emperor, who
intended a great S. Hieron.
Epist. 48.
despite to it, built a Temple to Venus and Adonis in that place where the Holy
VirginMother and her more Holy Son were humbly laid; even so he could not
obtain, but that even amongst the Gentile inhabitants of the neighboring
Countries it was held in an account far above scandal and contempt. For God can
ennoble even the meanest of creatures, especially if it be but a relative and
instrumental to Religion, higher than the injuries of scoffers and malicious
persons. But it was then a Temple full of Religion, full of glory, when Angels
were the Ministers, the Holy Virgin was the Worshipper, and CHRIST the Deity.

Ad SECT. III. Considerations upon the Birth of our Blessed Savior JESUS.
1. ALthough the Blessed Jesus desired with the (...) of an inflamed love to be
born, and to finish the work of our Redemption; yet he did not prevent the
period of Nature, nor break the laws of the Womb, and antedate his own
sanctions which he had established (...) ever. He staid nine months, and then
brake forth as a Giant joyful to run his course. For premature and hasty
actions, and such counsels as know not how to expect the times appointed in
God's decree, are like hasty fruit, or a young person snatched away in his
florid age, sad and untimely. He that hastens to enjoy his wish before the
time, raises his own expectation, and yet makes it unpleasant by impatience,
and loses the pleasure of the fruition when it comes, because he has made his
desires bigger than the thing can satisfy. He that must eat an hour before his
time, gives probation of his intemperance or his weakness; and if we dare not
trust God with the Circumstance of the event, and stay his leisure, either we
disrepute the infinity of his Wisdom, or give clear demonstration of our own
vanity.

2. When God descended to earth, he chose to be born in the Suburbs and
retirement of a small Town; but he was pleased to die at Jerusalem, the
Metropolis of Judaea: Which chides our shame and pride, who are willing to
publish our gayeties in Piazza's and the corners of the streets of most
populous places; but our defects and the instruments of our humiliation we
carry into deserts, and cover with the night, and hide them under ground,
thinking no secrecy dark enough to hide our shame, nor any theater large enough
to behold our pompous vanities; for so we make provisions for Pride, and take
great care to exclude Humility.

3. When the Holy Virgin now perceived that the expectation of the Nations was
arrived at the very doors of revelation and entrance into the World, she
brought forth the Holy Jesus, who, like Light through transparent glass, past
through, or a ripe Pomegranate from a fruitful tree, fell to the earth, without
doing violence to its Nurse and Parent: She had no ministers to attend but
Angels, and neither her Poverty nor her Piety would permit her to provide other
Nurses; but her self did the offices of a tender and pious Parent. She kissed
him and worshipped him, and thanked him that he would be born of her, and she
suckled him, and bound him in her arms and swadlingbands; and when she had
(...) to God her first scene of joy and Eucharist, she softly laid him in the
manger, till her desires and his own necessities called her to take him, and to
rock him softly in her arms and from this deportment she read a lecture of
Piety and maternal care, which Mothers should perform toward their children
when they are born, not to neglect any of that duty which nature and maternal
piety requires.

4. Jesus was pleased to be born of a poor Mother in a poor place, in a cold
winter's night, far from home, amongst strangers, with all the circumstances of
humility and poverty. And no man will have cause to complain of his course
Robe, if he remembers the swadling-clothes of this Holy Child; nor to be
disquieted at his hard Bed, when he considers Jesus laid in a manger; nor to be
discontented at his thin Table, when he calls to mind the King of Heaven and
Earth was fed with a little breast-milk. But since the eternal wisdom of the
Father, who knew to choose the good and refuse the evil, did choose a life of
Poverty, it gives us demonstration, that Riches and Honors, those idols of the
World's esteem, are so far from creating true felicities, that they are not of
themselves eligible in the number of good things; however, no man is to be
ashamed of innocent Poverty, of which many wise men make Vows, and of which the
Holy Jesus made election, and his Apostles after him made public profession.
And if any man will choose and delight in the affluence of temporal good things,
suffering himself to be transported with caitive affections in the pleasures of
every day, he may well make a question whether he shall speed as well
hereafter; (...); Diphilus.
since God's usual method is, that they only who follow Christ here shall be
with him for ever.

5. The Condition of the person (...) was born is here of greatest
consideration. For he that cried in the Manger, that sucked the paps of a Woman
that has exposed himself to Poverty and a world of inconveniences, is the Son
of the living God, of the same substance with his Father, begotten before all
Ages, before the Morning-stars; he is GOD eternal. He is also, by reason of the
personal Union of the Divinity with his Humane nature, the Son of God; not by
Adoption, as good Men and beatified Angels are, but by an extraordinary and
miraculous Generation. He is the Heir of his Father's glories and possessions,
not by succession, (for his Father cannot die,) but by an equality of
communication. He is the express image of his Father's person according to both
Natures; the miracle and excess of his Godhead being, as upon wax, imprinted
upon all the capacities of his Humanity. And after all this, he is our Savior;
that to our duties of wonder and adoration we may add the affections of love
and union, as himself, besides his being admirable in himself, is become
profitable to us. Vere Verbum hoc est abbreviatum, says the Prophet; The
eternal Word of the Father is shortened to the dimensions of an infant.

6. Here then are concentred the prodigles of Greatness and Goodness, of Wisdom
and Charity, of Meekness and Humility, and march all the way in mystery and
incomprehensible mixtures; if we consider him in the bosom of his Father,
where he is seated by the postures of Love and essential Felicity; and in the
Manger, where Love also placed him, and an infinite desire to communicate his
Felicities to us. As he is God, his Throne is in the Heaven, and he fills all
things by his immensity: as he is Man, he is circumscribed by an uneasy
Cradle, and cries in a Stable. As he is God, he is seated upon a super-exalted
Throne; as Man, exposed to the lowest estate of uneasiness and need. As God,
clothed in a robe of Glory, at the same instant when you may behold and wonder
at his Humanity wrapped in cheap and unworthy Cradle-bands. As God, he is
incircled with millions of Angels; as Man, in the company of Beasts. As God, he
is the eternal Word of the Father, Eternal, sustained by himself,
all-sufficient, and without need: and yet he submitted himself to a condition
imperfect, inglorious, indigent and necessitous. And this consideration is apt
and natural to produce great affections of love, duty and obedience, desires of
union and conformity to his sacred Person, Life, Actions, and Laws; that we
resolve all our thoughts, and finally determine all our reason and our passions
and capacities upon that saying of St. Paul, He that loves not the Lord 1 Cor.
16. 22.
Jesus Christ, let him be accursed.

7. Upon the consideration of these Glories, if a pious soul shall upon the
supports of Faith and Love enter into the Stable where this great King was
born, and with affections behold every member of the Holy Body, and thence pass
into the Soul of Jesus, we may see a scheme of holy Meditations, enough to
entertain all the degrees of our love and of our understanding, and make the
mystery of the Nativity as fruitful of holy thoughts as it was of Blessings to
us. And it may serve instead of a description of the Person of Jesus conveyed
to us in imperfect and Apocryphal schemes. If we could behold his sacred Feet
with those affections which the Holy Virgin did, we have transmitted to us
those Mysteries in story which she had first in part by spiritual and divine
infused light, and afterward by observation. Those holy Feet, tender and
unable to support his sacred Body, should bear him over all the Province of his
Cure with great zeal for the gaining of Souls to the belief and obedience of
his holy Laws; those are the Feet that should walk upon seas and hills of water
as upon firm pavement; at which the Lepers and diseased persons should stoop,
and gather health up; which Mary Magdalen should wash with tears, and wipe with
her hair, and anoint with costly Nard, as expressions of love and adoration,
and there find absolution and remedy for her sins; and which finally should be
rent by the nails of the Cross, and afterward ascend above the Heavens, making
the earth to be his footstool. From hence take patterns of imitation, that our
Piety be symbolical, that our Affections be passionate and Eucharistical, full
of love, and wonder, and adoration, that our feet tread in the same steps, and
that we transfer the Symbol into Mystery, and the Mystery to Devotion, praying
the Holy Jesus to actuate the same mercies in us which were finished at his
holy feet, forgiving our sins, healing our sicknesses; and then place our
selves irremoveably, becoming his Disciples, and strictly observing the rules
of his holy Institution, sitting at the feet of this our greatest Master.

8. In the same manner a pious person may (with the Blessed Virgin) pass to the
consideration of his holy Hands, which were so often lifted up to God in
Prayer; whose touch was miraculous and medicinal, cleansing Lepers, restoring
perishing limbs, opening blind eyes, raising dead persons to life; those Hands
which fed many thousands by two Miracles of multiplication, that purged the
Temple from profaneness, that in a sacramental manner bare his own Body, and
gave it to be the food and refreshment of elect Souls, and after were cloven
and rent upon the Cross, till the Wounds became (after the Resurrection) so
many transparencies and glorious Instruments of solemn, spiritual and
efficacious benediction. Transmit this meditation into affections and
practices, lifting up pure hands in prayer, that our Devotions be united to the
merits of his glorious Intercession; and putting our selves into his hands and
holy providence, let us beg those effects upon our Souls and spiritual Cures
which his precious hands did operate upon their bodies, transferring those
Similitudes to our ghostly and personal advantages.

9. We may also behold his holy Breast, and consider, that there lay that
sacred Heart, like the Dove within the Ark, speaking peace to us, being the
regiment of love and sorrows, the fountain of both the Sacraments, running out
in the two holy streams of Blood and Water, when the Rock was smitten, when his
holy Side was pierced: and there with St. John let us lay our head, and place
our heart, and thence draw a treasure of holy revelations and affections, that
we may rest in him only, and upon him lay our burdens, filling every corner
of our heart with thoughts of the most amiable and beloved JESUS.

10. In like manner we may unite the Day of his Nativity with the day of his
Passion, and consider all the parts of his Body as it was instrumental in all
the work of our Redemption, and so imitate, and in some proportion partake of,
that great variety of sweetnesses and amorous reflexes and gracious
intercourses which passed between the Blessed Virgin and the Holy Child,
according to his present capacities, and the clarity of that light which was
communicated to her by Divine Infusion. And all the Members of this Blessed
Child, his Eyes, his Face, his Head, all the Organs of his Senses afford
variety of entertainment and motion to our Affections, according as they served
in their several employments and cooperations in the mysteries of our
Restitution.

11. But his Body was but his Soul's upper garment, and the considerations of
this are as immaterial and spiritual as the Soul it self, and more immediate to
the mystery of the Nativity. This Soul is of the same nature and substance with
ours; in this inferior to the Angels, that of it self it is incomplete, and
discursive in a lower order of ratiocination; but in this superior: 1. That it
is personally united to the Divinity, full of the Holy Ghost, overrunning with
Grace, which was dispensed to it without measure. (And by the mediation of this
Union, as it self is exalted far above all orders of Intelligences, so we also
have contracted alliance with God, teaching us not to unravel our excellencies
by infamous deportments.) 2. Here also we may meditate, that his Memory is
indeterminable and unalterable, ever remembering to do us good, and to present
our needs to God by the means of his holy intercession. 3. That his
Understanding is without ignorance, knowing the secrets of our hearts, full of
mysterious secrets of his Father's Kingdom, in which all the treasures of the
wisdom and knowledge of God are hidden. 4. That Col. 2. 3.
his Will is impeccable, entertained with an uninterrupted act of Love to God,
greater than all Angels and beatified spirits present to God in the midst of
the transportations and ravishments of Paradise: That this Will is full of Love
to us, of Humility in it self, of Conformity to God, wholly resigned by acts of
Adoration and Obedience. It was moved by six Wings; Zeal of the honor of God,
and Compunction for our sins, Pity to our miseries, and Hatred of our
impieties. Desires of satisfying the wrath of God, and great Joy at the
consideration of all the fruits of his Nativity, the appeasing of his Father,
the redemption of his brethren. And upon these wings he mounted up into the
throne of Glory, carrying our nature with him above the seats of Angels. These
second considerations present themselves to all that with Piety and Devotion
behold the Holy Babe lying in the obscure and humble place of his Nativity.

The PRAYER.
HOly and Immortal Jesus, I adore and worship thee with the lowest prostrations
and humility of Soul and body, and give thee all thanks for that great Love to
us whereof thy Nativity has made demonstration; for that Humility of thine
expressed in the poor and ignoble circumstances which thou did voluntarily
choose in the manner of thy Birth. And I present to thy holy Humanity inchased
in the adorable Divinity my Body and Soul; humbly desiring, that as thou did
clothe thy self with a Humane body, thou may invest me with the robes of
Righteousness, covering my sins, inabling my weaknesses, and sustaining my
mortality, till I shall finally in conformity to thy Beauties and Perfections
be clothed with the stole of Glory. Amen.

2.
VOuchsafe to come to me by a more intimate and spiritual approximation, that
so thou may lead me to thy Father; for of my self I cannot move one step
toward thee. Take me by the hand, place me in thy heart, that there I may
live, and there I may die: that as thou have united our Nature to thy Eternal
Being, thou might also unite my Person to thine by the interior adunations
of Love, and Obedience, and Conformity. Let thy Ears be open to my prayers, thy
merciful Eyes look upon my miseries, thy holy Hands be stretched out to my
relief and succor: let some of those precious distilling Tears which nature,
and thy compassion, and thy Sufferings did cause to distill and drop from those
sacred fontinels, water my stony heart, and make it soft, apt for the
impressions of a melting, obedient and corresponding love; and moisten mine
eyes, that I may upon thy stock of pity and weeping mourn for my sins, that so
my tears and sorrows, being drops of water coming from that holy Rock, may
indeed be united unto thine, and made precious by such holy mixtures. Amen.

3.
BLessed Jesus, now that thou have sanctified and exalted Humane nature, and
made even my Body precious by a personal uniting it to the Divinity, teach me
so reverently to account of it, that I may not dare to profane it with impure
lusts or caitive affections, and unhallow that ground where thy holy feet have
trodden. Give to me ardent desires, and efficacious prosecutions of these holy
effects which thou did design for us in thy Nativity, and other parts of our
Redemption: give me great confidence in thee, which thou have encouraged by the
exhibition of so glorious favors; great sorrow and confusion of face at the
sight of mine own imperfections, and estrangements, and great distances from
thee, and the perfections of thy Soul; and bring me to thee by the strictnesses
of a Zealous and affectionate imitation of those Sanctities which, next to the
hypostatical Union, added luster and excellency to thy Humanity, that I may
live here with thee in the expresses of a holy life, and die with thee by
mortification and an unwearied patience, and reign with thee in immortal
glories world without end. Amen.

DISCOURSE I. Of Nursing Children, in imitation of the Blessed Virgin Mother.
1. THese later Ages of the world have declined into a Softness above the
effeminacy of Asian Princes, and have contracted customs which those innocent
and healthful days of our Ancestors knew not, whose Piety was natural, whose
Charity was operative, whose Policy was just and valiant, and whose Economy
was sincere and proportionable to the dispositions and requisites of Nature.
And in this particular the good women of Quod si pudica (...) in (...) Domum
(...) dulces (...): (Sabina (...) solibus (...)) Non (...) Magis. etc. Hor.
Epod. 2.
old gave one of their instances; the greatest personages nursed their own
Children, did the work of Mothers, and thought it was unlikely women should
become virtuous by ornaments and superadditions of Morality, who did decline
the laws and prescriptions of Nature, whose principles supply us with the first
and most common rules of Manners and more perfect actions. In imitation of
whom, and especially of the Virgin Mary, who was Mother and Nurse to the Holy
Jesus, I shall endeavor to correct those softnesses and unnatural rejections
of Children, which are popular up to a custom and fashion, even where no
necessities of Nature or just Reason can make excuse.

2. And I cannot think the Question despicable, and the Duty of meanest
consideration; although it be specified in an office of small esteem, and
suggested to us by the principles of Reason, and not by express sanctions of
Divinity. For although other actions are more perfect and spiritual, yet this
is more natural and humane; other things being superadded to a full Duty rise
higher, but this builds stronger, and is like a part of the foundation, having
no luster, but much strength; and however the others are full of ornament, yet
this has in it some degrees of necessity, and possibly is with more danger and
irregularity omitted than actions which spread their leaves fairer, and look
more gloriously.

3. First, here I consider, that there are many sins in the scene of the Body
and the matter of Sobriety which are highly criminal, and yet the Laws of God
expressed in Scripture name them not; but men are taught to distinguish them by
that Reason which is given us by nature, and is imprinted in our understanding
in order to the conservation of humane kind. For since every creature has
something in it sufficient to propagate the kind, and to conserve the
individuals from perishing in confusions and general disorders, which in Beasts
we call Instinct, that is, an habitual or prime disposition to do certain
things which are proportionable to the End whither it is designed; Man also, if
he be not more imperfect, must have the like: and because he knows and makes
reflections upon his own acts, and understands the reason of it, that which in
them is Instinct, in him is natural Reason, which is, a desire to preserve
himself and his Natural (...): partim (...). Joseph. Orig. 16. 10.
own kind, and differs from Instinct, because he understands his Instinct and
the reasonableness of it, and they do not. But Man being a higher thing even in
the order of creation, and designed to a more noble End in his animal capacity,
his Argumentative Instinct is larger than the Natural Instinct of Beasts: for
he has Instincts in him in order to the conservation of Society, and therefore
has Principles, that is, he has natural desires to it for his own good; and
because he understands them, they are called Principles, and Laws of Nature,
but are no other than what I have now declared; for Beasts do the same things
we do, and have many the same inclinations, which in us are the Laws of Nature,
even all which we have in order to our common End. But that which in Beasts is
Nature and an impulsive force, in us must be duty and an inviting power: we
must do the same things with an actual or habitual designation of that End to
which God designs Beasts, (supplying by his wisdom their want of understanding)
and then what is mere Nature in them, in us is Natural reason. And therefore
Marriage in men is made sacred, when the mixtures of other creatures are so
merely natural, that they are not capable of being virtuous; because men are
bound to intend that End which God made. And this, with the superaddition of
other Ends, of which Marriage is representative in part, and in part effective,
does consecrate Marriage, and makes it holy and mysterious. But then there are
in marriage many duties which we are taught by Instinct; that is, by that
Reason whereby we understand what are the best means to promote the End which
we have assigned us. And by these Laws all unnatural mixtures are made
unlawful, and the decencies which are to be observed in Marriage are prescribed
us by this.

4. Secondly, Upon the supposition of this Discourse I consider again, that
although to observe this Instinct or these Laws of Nature (in which I now have
instanced) be no great virtue in any eminency of degree, (as no man is much
commended for not killing himself, or for not degenerating into beastly Lusts;)
yet to prevaricate some of these Laws may become almost the greatest sin in the
world. And therefore although to live according to Nature be a testimony fit to
give to a sober and a temperate man, and rises no higher; yet to do an action
against Nature is the greatest dishonor and impiety in the world, (I mean of
actions whose scene lies in the Body) and disentitles us to all relations to
God, and vicinity to Virtue.

5. Thirdly, Now amongst actions which we are taught by Nature, some concern
the being and the necessities of Nature, some appertain to her convenience and
advantage: and the transgressions of these respectively have their heightnings
or depressions; and therefore to kill a man is worse than some preternatural
pollutions, because more destructive of the end and designation of Nature, and
the purpose of instinct.

6. Fourthly, Every part of this Instinct is then in some sense a Law, when it
is in a direct order to a necessary End, and by that is made reasonable. I say
[ in some sence] it is a Law, that is, it is in a near disposition to become a
Law. It is a Rule without obligation to a particular punishment, beyond the
effect of the natural inordination and obliquity of the act; it is not the
measure of a moral good or evil, but of the natural, that is, of comely and
uncomely. For if in the individuals it should fail, or that there pass some
greater obligation upon the person in order to a higher end, not consistent
with those means designed in order to the lesser end, in that particular it is
no fault, but sometimes a virtue. And therefore although it be an Instinct, or
reasonable toward many purposes, that every one should beget a man in his own
image, in order to the preservation of nature: yet if there be a superaddition
of another and higher end, and contrary means persuaded in order to it, (such
as is holy Coelibate or Virginity in order to a spiritual life, in some
persons) there the instinct of Nature is very far from passing obligation upon
the Conscience, and in that instance ceases to be reasonable. And therefore the
Romans, who invited men to marriage with privileges, and punished morose and
ungentle natures that refused it, yet they had their chaste and unmarried
Vestals; the first, in order to the Commonwealth; these, in a nearer order to
Religion.

7. Fifthly, These Instincts or reasonable inducements become Laws, obliging us
in Conscience and in the way of Religion, and the breach of them is directly
criminal, when the instance violates any end of Justice, or Charity, or
Sobriety, either designed in Nature's first intention, or superinduced by God
or man. For every thing that is unreasonable to some certain purpose is not
presently criminal, much less is it against the Law of Nature, (unless every
man that goes out of his way sins against the Law of Nature;) and every
contradicting of a natural desire or inclination is not a sin against a law of
Nature. For the restraining sometimes of a lawful and a permitted desire is an
act of great Virtue, and pursues a greater reason; as in the former instance.
But those things only against which such a reason as mixes with Charity or
Justice, or something that is now in order to a farther end of a commanded
instance of Piety, may be without error brought, those things are only
criminal. And God having first made our instincts reasonable, has now made our
Reason and Instincts to be spiritual; and having sometimes restrained our
Instincts, and always made them regular, he has by the intermixture of other
principles made a separation of Instinct from Instinct, leaving one in the form
of natural inclination, and they rise no higher than a permission or a decency,
it is lawful, or it is comely so to do: (for no man can asfirm it to be a Duty
to kill him that assaults my life, or to maintain my children for ever without
their own industry, when they are able, what degrees of natural fondness (...)
I have toward them; nor that I sin, if I do not marry, when I can contain) and
yet every one of these may proceed from the affections and first inclinations
of Nature; but until they mingle with Justice, or Charity, or some instance of
Religion and Obedience, they are no Laws; the other that are so mingled being
raised to Duty and Religion. Nature inclines us, and Reason judges it apt and
requisite in order to certain ends; but then every particular of it is made to
be an act of Religion from some other principle: as yet, it is but fit and
reasonable not Religion and particular Duty, till God or man has interposed.
But whatsoever particular in nature was fit to be made a Law of Religion, is
made such by the superaddition of another principle: and this is derived to us
by tradition from Adam to Noah, or else transmitted to us by the consent of all
the world upon a natural and prompt reason, or else by some other instrument
derived to us from God, but especially by the Christian Religion, which has
adopted all those things which we call things honest, things comely, and things
of good report, into a law and a duty, as appears Phil. 4. 8.

8. Upon these Propositions I shall infer by way of Instance, that it is a Duty
that Women should nurse their own Children. For first, it is taught to women by
that Instinct which Nature has implanted in them. For, as Favorinus the
Philosopher discoursed, it is but to be half a Mother to bring forth Children,
and not to nourish them: and it is Apud A. (...) l. 12. c. 1.
some kind of Abortion, or an exposing of the Infant, which in the reputation
of all wise Nations is infamous and uncharitable. And if the name of Mother be
an appellative of affection and endearments, why should the Mother be willing
to divide it with a stranger? The Earth is the Mother of us all, not only
because we were made of her Red clay, but chiefly that she daily gives us food
from her bowels and breasts; and Plants and Beasts give nourishment to their
offsprings, after their production, with greater tenderness than they bare
them in their wombs: and yet Women give nourishment to the Embryo, which
whether it be deformed or perfect they know not, and cannot love what they
never saw; and yet when they do see it, when they have rejoiced that a Child is
born, and forgotten the sorrows of production, they who then can first begin to
love it, if they begin to divorce the Infant from the Mother, the Object from
the Affection, cut off the opportunities and occasions of their Charity or
Piety.

9. For why has Nature given to women two exuberant Fontinels, which like two
Rocs that are twins feed among the Lilics, and drop milk like dew from Hermon,
and has Cant. 4. 5.
(...) -- Si prohibes, furit in mammis, (...) Miscet, and (...). Sammatth,
(...).
invited that nourishment from the secret recesses where the Infant dwelt at
first, up to the Breast where naturally now the Child is cradled in the
entertainments of love and maternal embraces; but that Nature having removed
the Babe, and carried its meat after it, intends that it should be (...)
alimenta suis (...) bibunt (...). Id.
preserved by the matter and ingredients of its constitution, and have the same
diet prepared with a more mature and proportionable digestion? If Nature
intended them not for Nourishment, I am sure it less intended them for Pride
and wantonness; they are needless Excrescences and Vices of Nature, unless
employed in Nature's work and proper intendment. And if it be a matter of
consideration of what blood Children are derived: we may also consider, that
the derivation continues after the birth, and therefore, abating the
sensuality, the Nurse is as much the Mother as she that brought it forth; and
so much the more, as there is a longer communication of constituent nourishment
(for so are the first emanations) in this than in the other. So that here is
first the Instinct or prime intendment of Nature.

10. Secondly, And that this Instinct may also become humane and reasonable, we
see it by experience in many places, that Foster-Children are dearer to the
Nurse than to the Mother, as receiving and ministering respectively perpetual
prettinesses of love, and fondness, and trouble, and need, and invitations, and
all the instruments of indearment; besides a vicinity of dispositions and
relative tempers by the communication of blood and spirits from the Nurse to
the Suckling, which makes use the more natural, and nature more accustomed. And
therefore the affections which these exposed or derelict Children bear to their
Mothers have no grounds of nature or assiduity, but civility and opinion; and
that little of love which is abated from the Foster-parents upon public
Obliter (...) and (...) elementis, (...) patrem atque (...), magnam partem non
natural's ille (...) civilis and opinabilis.
report that they are not natural, that little is transferred to Mothers upon
the same opinion, and no more. Hence come those unnatural aversions, those
unrelenting dispositions, those carelessnesses and incurious deportments toward
their Children, which are such ill-sown seeds, from whence may arise up a
bitterness of disposition and mutual provocation. The affection which Children
bear to their Nurses was highly remarked in the instance of Scipio Asiaticus,
who rejected the importunity of his Brother Africanus in behalf of the ten
Captains who were condemned for offering violence to the Vestals, but pardoned
them at the request of his Foster-sister: and being asked why he did more for
his Nurse's Daughter than for his own Mother's Son, gave this answer, I esteem
her rather to be my Mother that brought me up, than her that bare me and
forsook me. And I Phavor. apud A. Gellium.
have read the observation, That many Tyrants have killed their Mothers, but
never any did violence to his Nurse; as if they were desirous to suck the blood
of their Mother raw, which she refused to give to them digested into milk. And
the Bastard-Brother of the Gracchi, returning from his Victories in Asia to
Rome, presented his Mother with a Jewel of Silver, and his Nurse with a Girdle
of Gold, upon the same account. Sometimes Children are exchanged, and
artificial Bastardies introduced into a Family, and the right Heir supplanted.
It happened so to Artabanus King of Epirus: his Child was changed at nurse, and
the Son of a mean Knight succeeded in the Kingdom. The event of which was this:
The Nurse too late discovered the Treason; a bloody War was commenced, both the
Pretenders slain in Battle, and the Kingdom it self was usurped by Alexander
the Brother to Olympias, the wife of Philip the Macedonian. At the best, though
there happen no such extravagant and rare accidents, yet it is not likely a
Stranger should love the Child better than the Mother: and if the Mother's care
could suffer it to be exposed, a Stranger's care may suffer it to be neglected.
For how shall an Hireling endure the inconveniences, the tediousnesses and
unhandsomnesses of a Nursery, when she, whose natural affection might have made
it pleasant, out of wantonness or softness has declined the burden? But the
sad accidents which by too frequent observation are daily seen happening to
Nurse-children give great probation, that this intendment of Nature designing
Mothers to be the Nurses, that their affection might secure and increase their
care, and the care best provide for their Babes, is most reasonable, and
proportionable to the discourses of Humanity.

11. But as this instinct was made reasonable, so in this also the reason is in
order to grace and spiritual effects; and therefore is among those things which
God has separated from the common Instincts of Nature, and made properly to be
Laws, by the mixtures of Justice and Charity. For it is part of that Education
which Mothers as a duty owe to their children, that they do in all
circumstances, and with all their powers which God to that purpose gave them,
Nam Gracchorum (...) accepimus (...) Matrem. Quint. l. 1. (...). 1. Protinus
(...) factus, acrem (...) curam impendat, ante omnia (...) sit vitiosus serme
(...), si (...) posset, (...). Quint. lib. 1. cap. 1. (...), (...). l. de
(...). (...). Aristoph.
promote their capacities and improve their faculties. Now in this also, as the
temper of the Body is considerable in order to the inclinations of the Soul, so
is the Nurse in order to the temper of the Body: and a Lamb sucking a Goat, or
a Kid sucking an Ewe, change their fleece and hair respectively, say
Naturalists. For if the Soul of Man were put into the body of a Mole, it could
not see nor speak, because it is not fitted with an Instrument apt and
organical to the faculty: and when the Soul has its proper Instruments, its
music is pleasant or harsh according to the sweetness or the unevenness of the
string it touches: for David himself could not have charmed Readiness melancholic
spirit with the strings of his Bow, or the wood of his Spear. And just so are
the actions or dispositions of the Soul, angry or pleasant, lustful or cold,
querulous or passionate, according as the Body is disposed by the various
intermixtures of natural qualities. And as the carelessness of Nurses has
sometimes returned Children to their Parents crooked, consumptive, half
starved, and unclean from the impurities of Nature: so their society and their
nourishment together have disposed them to peevishness, to lust, to
drunkenness, to pride; to low and base demeanours, to stubbornness. And as a
man would have been unwilling to have had a Child by Harpaste, Seneca's wife's
Fool; so he would in all reason be as unwilling to have had her to be the
Nurse: for very often Mothers by the birth do not transmit their imperfections,
yet it seldom happens but the Nurse does. Which is the more considerable,
because Nurses are commonly persons of no great rank, certainly lower than the
Mother, and by consequence liker to return their Children with the lower and
more servile conditions: and commonly those vainer people teach them to be
peevish and proud, to lie, or at least seldom give them any first principles
contrariant to the Nurse's vice. And therefore it concerns the Parents care, in
order to a virtuous life of the Child, to secure its first seasonings; because,
whatever it sucks in first, it swallows (...). (...) proverb.
and believes infinitely, and practices easily, and continues longest. And this
is more proper for a Mother's care, while the Nurse thinks that giving the
Child suck, and keeping its body clean, is all her duty. But the Mother cannot
think her self so easily discharged. And this consideration is material in all
cases, be the choice of the Nurse never so prudent and curious: and it is not
easily apprehended to be the portion of her care to give it spiritual milk, and
therefore it intrenches very much upon Impiety and positive relinquishing the
education of their Children, when Mothers expose the spirit of the Child either
to its own weaker inclinations, or the wicked principles of an ungodly Nurse,
or the carelessness of any less-obliged person.

12. And then let me add, That a Child sucks the Nurse's milk, and digests her
conditions, if they be never so (...). unt (...) tigres. Vir. (...).
bad, seldom gets any good. For Virtue being superaddition to Nature, and
Perfections not radical in the body, but contradictions to and meliorations of
natural indispositions, does not easily convey it self by ministrations of
food, as Vice does, which in most instances is nothing but mere Nature grown to
Custom, and not mended by Grace: so that it is probable enough, such natural
distemperatures may pass in the rivulets of milk, like evil spirits in a white
garment, when Virtues are of harder purchase, and dwell so low in the heart,
that they but rarely pass through the fountains of generation. And therefore
let no Mother venture her child upon a stranger, whose heart she less knows
than her own. And because few of those nicer women think better of others than
themselves, (since out of self-love they neglect their own bowels) it is but an
act of improvidence to let my Child derive imperfections from one of whom I
have not so good an opinion as of my self.

13. And if those many blessings and holy prayers which the Child needs, or his
askings or sicknesses, or the Mother's fears or joys respectively do occasion,
should not be cast into this account; yet those principles which in all cases
wherein the neglect is vicious are the causes of the exposing the Child, are
extremely against the Piety and Charity of Christian Religion, which prescribes
severity and austere deportment, and the labors of love, and exemplar
tenderness of affections, and piety to children, which are the most natural and
nearest relations the Parents have. That Religion which commands us to visit
and to tend sick strangers, and wash the feet of the poor, and dress their
ulcers, and sends us upon charitable embassies into unclean prisons, and bids
us lay down our lives for one another; is not pleased with a niceness and
sensual curiosity (that I may not name the wantonnesses of lusts) which denies
suck to our own children. What is more humane and affectionate than
Christianity? and what is less natural and charitable than to deny the
expresses of a Mother's affection? which certainly to good women is the
greatest trouble in the world, and the greatest violence to their desires, if
they should not express and minister.

14. And it would be considered, whether those Mothers who have neglected their
first Duties of Piety and Charity can expect so prompt and easy returns of
Duty and Piety from their Children, whose best foundation is Love, and that
love strongest which is most natural, and that most natural which is conveyed
by the first ministeries and impresses of Nourishment and Education. And if
Love descends more strongly than it ascends, and commonly falls from the
Parents upon the Children in Cataracts, and returns back again up to the
Parents but in gentle Dews; if the Child's affection keeps the same proportions
toward such unkind Mothers, it will be as little as atoms in the Sun, and
never express it self but when the Mother needs it not, that is, in the
Sunshine of a clear fortune.

15. This then is amongst those Instincts which are natural, heightened first by
Reason, and then exalted by Grace into the obligation of a Law: and being
amongst the Sanctions of Nature, its prevarication is a crime very near those
sins which Divines, in detestation of their malignity, call Sins against
Nature, and is never to be excused but in, cases of Necessitat, (...). Senec.
Necessity or greater Charity; as when the Mother cannot be a Nurse by reason
of natural disability, or is afflicted with a disease which might be (...) in
the milk, or in case of the public necessities of a Kingdom, for the securing
of Succession in the Royal Family. And yet concerning this last Lycurgus made a
Law, that the Noblest amongst the Spartan women, though their Kings Wives,
should at least nurse their Eldest son, and the Plebeians should nurse all
theirs: and Plutarch reports, that the second son of King Themistes inherited
the Kingdom in Sparta, only because he was nursed with his Mother's milk, and
the eldest was therefore rejected because a stranger was his Nurse. And that
Queens have suckled and nursed their own children, is no very unusual kindness
in the simplicity and hearty affections of elder Ages, as is to be seen in
Herodotus and other Historians. I shall only remark one instance out of the
Spanish Chronicles, which Henry Stephens in his Apology for Herodotus reports
to have heard from thence related by a noble personage, Monsieur Marillac; That
a Spanish Lady married into France nursed her child with so great a tenderness
and jealousy, that having understood the little Prince once to have sucked a
stranger, she was unquiet till she had forced him to vomit it up again. In
other cases the crime lies at their door who enforce neglect upon the other,
and is heightened in proportion to the motive of the omission; as if Wantonness
or Pride be the parent of the crime, the Issue, besides its natural deformity,
has the excrescencies of Pride or Lust to make it more ugly.

16. To such Mothers I propound the example of the Holy Virgin, who had the
honor to be visited by an Angel yet, after the example of the Saints in the
Old Testament, she gave to the Holy Jesus drink from those bottles which
himself had filled for his own drinking; and her Paps were as surely blessed
for giving him suck, as her Womb for bearing him; and reads a Lecture of Piety
and Charity, which if we deny to our children, there is then in the world left
no argument or relation great enough to kindle it from a cinder to a flame. God
gives dry breasts, for a curse to some, for an affliction to others; but those
that invite it to them by voluntary arts, love not blessing, therefore shall it
be far from them. And I remember that it was said concerning Annius Minutius
the Censor, that he thought it a prodigy and extremely ominous to Rome, that a
Roman Lady refused to nurse her Child, and yet gave suck to a Puppy, that her
milk might with more safety be dried up with artificial applications. Let none
therefore divide the interests of their own Children: for she that appeared
before Solomon, and would have the Child divided, was not the true Mother, and
was the more culpable of the two.

The PRAYER.
O Holy and Eternal God, Father of the Creatures, and King of all the World,
who have imprinted in all the sons of thy Creation principles and abilities to
serve the end of their own preservation, and to Men have superadded Reason,
making those first propensities of Nature to be reasonable in order to Society,
and a conversation in Communities and Bodies politic, and have by several laws
and revelations directed our Reasons to nearer applications to thee, and
performance of thy great End, the glory of our Lord and Father; teach me
strictly to observe the order of Creation, and the designs of the Creatures,
that in my order I may do that service which every creature does in its proper
capacity. Lord, let me be as constant in the ways of Religion as the Sun in his
course, as ready to follow the intimations of thy Spirit as little Birds are to
obey the directions of thy Providence and the conduct of thy hand; and let me
never by evil customs, or vain company, or false persuasions, extinguish those
principles of Morality and right Reason which thou have imprinted in my
understanding, in my creation and education, and which thou have ennobled by
the superadditions of Christian institution: that I may live according to the
rules of Nature in such things which she teaches, modestly, temperately and
affectionately, in all the parts of my natural and political relations; and
that I, proceeding from Nature to Grace, may henceforth go on from Grace to
Glory, the crown of all Obedience, prudent and holy walking, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
SECT. IV. Of the great and glorious Accidents happening about the Birth of
JESUS.
The Angels appearing to the Shepherds.
S. LUKE. 2. 14.

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

The Epiphanie.
S. MAT: 2. 11.

When they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts, Gold, and
Frank incense, and Myrrh.




1. ALthough the Birth of Christ was destitute of the usual excrescences and
less necessary Pomps which used to signify and illustrate the birth of
Princes; yet his first Humility was made glorious with Presages, Miracles, and
Significations from Heaven, which did not only, like the furniture of a
Princely Bedchamber, speak the riches of the Parent, or greatness of the Son
within its own walls, but did declare to all the world that their Prince was
born, publishing it with figures and representments almost as great as its
Empire.

2. For when all the world did expect that in Judaea should be born their
Prince, and that the incredulous world had in their observation slipped by their
true Prince, because he came not in pompous and secular illustrations; upon
that very stock Vespasian was Sueton. in vita, V. sp. (...) Ciceron. de Divin.
nursed up in hope of the Roman Empire, and that hope made him great in
designs, and they being prosperous made his fortunes correspond to his hopes,
and he was indeared and engaged upon that fortune by the Prophecy which was
never intended him by the Prophet. But the fortune of the Roman Monarchy was
not great enough for this Prince designed by the old Prophets. And therefore it
was not without the influence of a Divinity, that his Decessor Augustus about
the time of Christ's Nativity refused to be called LORD: possibly it was, to
entertain the people with some hopes of restitution (...), 1. 6. 1. 22.
of their Liberties, till he had gripped the Monarchy with a stricter and faster
hold; but the Christians were apt to believe, that it was upon the (...) of a
Sibyll foretelling the birth of a greater Prince, to whom all the world should
pay adoration; and that the Prince was about that time born in Judaea, the
Oracle which was dumb to Augustus's Suidas in (...) Verb. Augustus.
question told him unasked, the Devil having no tongue permitted him, but one
to proclaim that an Hebrew child was his Lord and Enemy.

3. At the Birth of which Child there was an universal Peace through all the
World. For then it was that Augustus Caesar, having composed all the Wars of
the Orosius.
World, did the third time cause the gates of Janus's Temple to be shut; and
this Peace continued for twelve years, even till the extreme old age of the
Prince, until rust had sealed the Temple doors, which opened not till the
Sedition of the (...) and the Rebellion of the Dacians caused Augustus to arm.
For he that was born was the Prince of Peace, and came to reconcile God with
man, and man with his brother; and to make, by the sweetness of his Example,
and the influence of a holy Doctrine, such happy atonements between disagreeing
natures, such confederations and (...) between Enemies, that the Wolf and the
Lamb should lie down together, and a little child Esa. 11. 6.
boldly and without danger put his finger in the nest and cavern of an Asp: and
it could be no less than miraculous, that so great a Body as the Roman Empire,
consisting of so many parts, whose Constitutions were differing, their Humors
contrary, their Interests contradicting each others greatness, and all these
violently oppressed by an usurping power, should have no limb out of joint, not
so much as an aching tooth or a rebelling humor in that huge collection of
parts: but so it seemed good in the eye of Heaven, by so great and good a
symbol to declare not only the Greatness, but the Goodness of the Prince that
was then born in Judaea, the Lord of all the World.

4. But because the Heavens, as well as the Earth, are his Creatures, and do
serve him, at his Birth he received a sign in Heaven above, as well as in the
Earth beneath, as an homage paid to their common Lord. For as certain Shepherds
were keeping watch over their slocks by night, near that part where Jacob did
use to feed his cattle when he was in the land of Canaan, the Angel of the Lord
came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them. Needs must
the Shepherds be afraid, when an Angel came arrayed in glory, and clothed their
persons in a robe of light, great enough to confound their senses and scatter
their understandings. But the Angel said unto them, Fear not, for I bring unto
you tidings of great joy which shall be to all people. For unto you is born
this day in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. The
Shepherds needed not be invited to go see this glorious sight; but lest their
fancy should rise up to an expectation of a Prince as externally glorious as
might be hoped for upon the consequence of so glorious an Apparition, the
Angel, to prevent the mistake, told them of a Sign, which indeed was no other
than the thing (...); but yet was therefore a Sign, because it was so remote
from the common probability and exspectation of such a birth, that by being a
Miracle, so great a Prince should be born so poorly, it became an instrument to
signify it self and all the other parts of mysterious consequence. For the
Angel said, This shall be a sign unto you, Ye shall find the Babe wrapped in
swadling-cloaths, lying in a manger.

5. But as Light, when it first begins to gild the East, scatters indeed the
darknesses from the earth, but ceases not to increase its (...) till it has
made perfect day: so it happened now in this Apparition of the Angel of light,
he appeared and told his message, and did shine, but the light arose higher and
higher, till midnight was as bright as midday; for suddenly there was with the
Angel a multitude of the heavenly (...): and after the Angel had told his
Message in plain-song, the whole Chorus joined in descant, and sang an Hymn to
the tune and sense of Heaven, where glory is paid to God in eternal and
never-ceasing offices, and whence good will descends upon men in perpetual and
never-stopping torrents. Their Song was, Glory be to God on high, on earth
peace, good will toward men: by this Song not only (...) to tempore, i. e.
(...) anno, quo (...) composuit, (...) est Christus; (...) Pax (...) famulata
(...): in cujus ortu audientibus hominibus exsultantes (...), Gloria in (...)
Dro, and in (...) a Pax, etc. P. Orosius.
referring to the strange Peace which at that time put all the World in (...),
but to the great Peace which this newborn Prince should make between his
Father and all Mankind.

6. As soon as these blessed Choristers had sung their Christmas Carol, and
taught the Church a Hymn to put into her Offices for ever in the anniversary of
this Festivity, the Angels returned into Heaven, and the Shepherds went to
Bethlehem, to see this thing which the Lord had made known unto them. And they
came with haste, and sound Mary and Joseph, and the Babe lying in a manger.
Just as the Angel had prepared their expectation, they found the narrative
verified, and saw the glory and the mystery of it by that representment which
was made by the heavenly Ministers, seeing GOD through the veil of a Child's
flesh, the Heir of Heaven wrapped in Swadling-clothes, and a person to whom the
Angels did minister laid in a Manger; and they beheld, and wondered, and
worshipped.

7. But as precious Liquor warmed and heightened by a flame first crowns the
vessel, and then dances over its brim into the fire, increasing the cause of
its own motion and extravagancy: so it happened to the Shepherds, whose hearts
being filled with the oil of gladness up unto the brim, the Joy ran over, as
being too big to be consined in their own breasts, and did communicate it self,
growing greater by such dissemination: for when they had seen it, they made
known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this Child. And (as well
they might) all that heard it wondered. But Mary, having first changed her joy
into wonder, turned her wonder into entertainments of the mystery, and the
mystery into a fruition and cohabitation with it: For Mary kept all these
sayings, and pondered them in her heart. And the Shepherds having seen what the
Angels did upon the publication of the news, which less concerned them than us,
had learnt their duty, to sing an honor to God for the Nativity of Christ: For
the Shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that
they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.

8. But the Angels had told the Shepherds that the Nativity was glad tidings of
great joy unto all people: and, that the Heavens might declare the glory of
God, and the firmament show his handiwork, this also was told abroad even to
the Gentiles by a sign from Heaven, by the message of a Star. For there was a
Prophecy of Balaam famous in all the Eastern Country, and recorded by Moses,
There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and Number. 24. 17.
a Scepter shall arise out of Israel: Out of Jacob shall come he that shall
have dominion. Which although in its first sense it signified David, who was
the conqueror of the Moabites; yet, in its more mysterious and chiefly-intended
sense, it related to the Epiphan. in Expos. sid. (...). 8.
Son of David. And in expectation of the event of this Prophecy, the Arabians,
the sons of Abraham by Keturah, whose portion given by their Patriarch was
Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, who were great lovers of Astronomy, did with
diligence expect the revelation of a mighty Prince in Judaea at such time when
a miraculous and extraordinary Star should appear: And therefore when Jesus was
born in Bethlehem of (...) in the days of Herod the King, there came wise men,
inspired by God, taught by Art, and persuaded by Prophecy, from the East to
Jerusalem, saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen
his Star in the East, and are come to worship him. The Greeks suppose this
which was called a Star to have been indeed an Angel in a pillar of fire, and
the semblance of a Star; and it is made the more likely, by coming and standing
directly over the humble roof of his Nativity, which is not discernible in the
station of a Star, though it be supposed to be lower than the Orb of the Moon.
To which if we add, that they only saw it, (so far as we know,) and that it
appeared as it were by voluntary periods, it will not be very improbable but
that it might be like the Angel that went before the sons of Israel in a pillar
of fire by night, or rather like the little shining Stars sitting upon the
Bodies of (...), Tharacus and Andronicus, Martyrs, when their bodies were
searched for, in the days of Diocletian, and pointed at by those bright Angels.

9. This Star did not trouble Herod, till the Levantine Princes expounded the
mysteriousness of it, and said it declared a King to be born in Jewry, and that
the Star was his, not applicable to any signification but of a King's birth.
And therefore although it was Et (...) in Timaeum Platonis.
no Prodigy nor Comet, foretelling Diseases, Plagues, War, and Death, but only
the happy Birth of a most excellent Prince; yet it brought affrightment to
Herod and all Jerusalem: For when Herod the King had heard these things, he was
troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. And thinking that the question of the
Kingdom was now in dispute, and an Heir sent from Heaven to lay challenge to
it, who brought a Star and the Learning of the East with him for evidence and
probation of his Title, Herod thought there was no security to his usurped
possession; unless he could rescind the decrees of Heaven, and reverse the
results and eternal counsels of Predestination. And he was resolved to venture
it, first by craft, and then by violence.

10. And first, he calls the chief Priests and Scribes of the people together,
and demanded of them, where CHRIST should be born; and found by their joint
determination that Bethlehem of Judaea was the place designed by ancient
Prophecy and God's Decree. Next he enquired of the Wise men concerning the
Star, but privily, what time it appeared. Leo (...): 4. de Epiphan.
For the Star had not motion certain and regular, by the laws of Nature; but it
so guided the Wise men in their journey, that it stood when they stood, moved
not when they rested, and went forward when they were able, making no more
haste than they did, who carried much of the business and employment of the
Star along with them. But when Herod was satisfied in his questions, he sent
them to Bethlehem, with instructions to search diligently for the young child,
and to bring him word, pretending that he would come and worship him also.

11. The Wise men prosecuted the business of their journey, and having heard
the King, they departed, and the Star (which, as it seems, attended their
motion) went before them, until it came and stood over where the young Child
was; where when they saw the Star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. Such
a Joy as is usual to wearied Travelers when they are entering into their Inn,
such a joy as when our hopes and greatest longings are laying hold upon the
proper objects of their desires, a joy of certainty immediately before the
possession: for that is the greatest Joy, which possesses before it is
satisfied, and rejoices with a joy not abated by the surfeits of possession,
but heightened with all the apprehensions and fancies of hope, and the
neighborhood of fruition; a joy of Nature, of Wonder, and of Religion. And now
their hearts labored with a throng of spirits and passions, and ran into the
house to the embracement of Jesus even before their feet: But when they were
come into the house, they saw the young Child with Mary his mother. And
possibly their expectation was something lessened and their wonder heightened,
when they saw their hope empty of pomp and gayety, the great King's Throne to
be a Manger, a Stable to his Chamber of presence, a thin Court, and no
Ministers, and the King himself a pretty Babe, and, but that he had a Star over
his head, nothing to distinguish him from the common condition of children, or
to excuse him from the miseries of a poor and empty fortune.

12. This did not scandalize those wise persons, but being convinced by that
Testimony from Heaven, and the union of all Circumstances, they fell down and
worshipped him, after the manner of the Easterlings when they do veneration to
their Kings; not with an empty Ave and gay blessing of fine words, but they
bring presents, and come into his Courts; for when they had opened their
treasures, they presented unto him gifts, Gold, (...). Ambros. in 2. Lu. 6.
Frankincense, and Myrrh. And if these Gifts were mysterious beyond the
acknowledgment Leo, (...).
of him to be the King of the Jews, and Christ that should come into the world;
Frankincense might signify him to be acknowledged a God, Myrrh to be a Man,
and Theophil. in (...). 2.
Gold to be a King: Unless we choose by Gold to signify the acts of Mercy, by
Myrrh S. Bernard, in Sermon. 2. de (...).
the Chastity of minds and Purity of our bodies, to the incorruption of which
Myrrh is especially instrumental, and by (...) we intend our Phil. 4. 18. Psalm.
141. 2.
Prayers, as the most apt presents and oblations to the honor and service of
this young King. But however the fancies of Religion may represent variety of
Idea's, the act of Adoration was direct and religious, Revel. 5. 8.
and the Myrrh was medicinal to his tender body; the Incense possibly no more
than was necessary in a Stable, the first throne of his Humility; and the Gold
was a good Antidote against the present indigencies of his Poverty: Presents
such as were used in all the Levant, (especially in Arabia and Saba, to which
the growth of Myrrh and Frankincense were proper) in their addresses to their
God and to their King, and were instruments with which under the veil of Flesh
they worshipped the Eternal Word; the Wisdom of God under infant Innocence, the
Almighty Power in so great Weakness, and under the lowness of Humane nature the
altitude of Majesty and the infinity of Divine Glory. And so was verified the
prediction of the Prophet (...). 8. 4. (...) M. Dial. (...). Tertul. (...). 3.
contra Marcion. c. 13.
Esaias under the type of the son of the Prophetess, Before a child shall have
knowledge to cry, My Father and my Mother, he shall take the spoil of Damascus
and Samaria from before the King of Assyria.

13. When they had paid the tribute of their Offerings and Adoration, Being
warned in their sleep by an Angel not to return to Herod, they returned into
their own country another way: where, having been satisfied with the pleasures
of Religion, and taught by that rare demonstration which was made by Christ,
how Man's Happiness did nothing at all consist in the affluence of worldly
Possessions, or the tumors of Honor; having seen the Eternal Son of God poor
and weak, and unclothed of all exterior Ornaments; they renounced the World,
and retired empty into the recesses of Religion, and the delights of Philosophy.

Ad SECT. IV. Considerations upon the Apparition of the Angels to the Shepherds.
1. WHen the Angels saw that come to pass which Gabriel the great Ambassador of
God had declared, that which had been prayed for and expected four thousand
years, and that by the merits of this newborn Prince their younger brethren
and inferiors in the order of Intelligent creatures were now to be redeemed,
that Men should partake the glories of their secret habitations, and should
fill up those void places which the fall of Lucifer and the third part of the
Stars had made, their joy was great as their understanding, and these mountains
did leap with joy, because the valleys were filled with benediction and a
fruitful shower from Heaven. And if at the Conversion of one sinner there is
jubilation and a festival kept among the Angels, how great shall we imagine
this rejoicing to be, when Salvation and Redemption was sent to all the World?
But we also, to whom the joy did more personally relate, (for they rejoiced for
our sakes) should learn to estimate the grace done us, and believe there is
something very extraordinary in the Piety and Salvation of a man, when the
Angels, who in respect of us are unconcerned in the communications, rejoice
with the joy of Conquerors, or persons suddenly (...) from tortures and death.

2. But the Angels also had other motions: for besides the pleasures of that
joy which they had in beholding Humane nature so highly exalted, and that God
was Man, and Man was God; they were transported with admiration at the
ineffable Counsel of God's Predestination, prostrating themselves with
adoration and modesty, seeing God so humbled, and Man so changed, and so full
of charity, that God stooped to the condition of Man, and Man was inflamed
beyond the love of Seraphims, and was made more knowing than Cherubims, more
established than Thrones, more happy than all the orders of Angels. The issue
of this consideration teaches us to learn their Charity, and to exterminate all
the intimations and beginnings of Envy, that we may as much rejoice at the good
of others as of our selves: for then we love good for God's sake, when we love
good wherever God has placed it; and that joy is charitable which overflows
our neighbors fields, when our selves are unconcerned in the personal
accruements; for so we are made partakers of all that fear God, when Charity
unites their joy to ours, as it makes us partakers of their common sufferings.

3. And now the Angels, who had adored the Holy Jesus in Heaven, come also to
pay their homage to him upon Earth; and laying aside their flaming swords they
take into their hands instruments of music, and sing, Glory be to God on high.
First signifying to us, that the Incarnation of the Holy Jesus was a very great
instrument of the glorification of God, and those divine Perfections in which
he is chiefly pleased to communicate himself to us were in nothing manifested
so much as in the mysteriousness of this work. Secondly, And in vain does man
satisfy himself with complacencies and ambitious designs upon earth, when he
sees before him God in the form of a servant, humble, and poor, and crying, and
an infant full of need and weakness.

4. But God has pleased to reconcile his Glory with our eternal Benefit; and
that also was part of the Angels song, In earth peace to men of good will. For
now we need not with Adam to fly from the presence of the Lord, saying, I heard
thy voice, and I was afraid, and hid my self; for he from whom our sins made us
once to fly now weeps, and is an infant in his Mother's arms, seeking strange
means to be reconciled to us, has forgotten all his anger, and is swallowed up
with love, and (...) with irradiations of amorous affections and good will: and
the effects of this good will are not referred only to persons of heroical and
eminent graces and operations, of vast and expensive charities, of prodigious
abstinencies, of eremitical retirements, of ascetical diet, of perfect
Religion, and canonized persons; but to all men of good will, whose Souls are
hallowed with holy purposes and pious desires, though the beauties of the
Religion and holy thoughts were not spent in exterior acts, nor called out by
the opportunities of a rich and expressive fortune.

5. But here we know where the seat and regiment of Peace is placed, and all of
it must pass by us and descend upon us as duty and reward. It proceeds from the
Word Incarnate, from the Son of God undertaking to reconcile us to his Father;
and it is ministered and consigned unto us by every event and act of Providence,
whether it be decyphered in characters of paternal Indulgence, or of
Correction, or Absolution. For that is not Peace from above, to have all things
according to our humane and natural wishes; but to be in favor with God, that
is Peace; always remembering, that to be chastised by him is not a certain
testimony of his mere wrath, but to all his servants a character of love and of
paternal provision, since he chastises every son whom he receives. Whosoever
seeks to avoid all this world's Adversity, can never find Peace: but he only
who has resolved all his Affections and placed them in the heart of God, he
who denies his own Will, and has killed Self-love, and all those enemies
within that make Afflictions to become Miseries indeed and full of bitterness,
he only enjoys this Peace; and in proportion to every man's Mortification and
Self-denial, so are the degrees of his Peace: and this is the Peace which the
Angel proclaimed at the enunciation of that Birth which taught Humility, and
Contempt of things below, and all their vainer glories, by the greatest
argument in the world, even the Poverty of God incarnate. And if God sent his
own, natural, only-begotten and beloved Son, in all the (...) of Poverty and
contempt; that person is vain who thinks God will love him better than he loved
his own Son, or that he will express his love any other or gentler way than to
make him partaker of the fortune of his eldest Son. There is one other postern
to the dwellings of Peace, and that is, good will to Men; for so much Charity
as we have to others, such a measure of Peace also we may enjoy at home: For
Peace was only proclaimed to Men of good will, to them that are at peace with
God and all the World.

6. But the Angel brought the Message to Shepherds, to persons simple and mean
and humble, persons likely to be more apprehensive of the Mystery, and less of
the Scandal, of the Poverty of the Messiah: for they whose custom or affections
dwell in secular Pomps, who are not used by Charity or Humility to stoop to an
Evenness and consideration of their brethren, of equal natures though of
unequal fortunes, are persons of all the world most indisposed and removed from
the understanding of spiritual excellencies, especially when they do not come
clothed with advantages of the world, and of such beauties which they admire.
God himself in Poverty comes in a prejudice to them that love Riches, and (...)
ipsas (...) vas incrustare. (...) homo, illi (...) pinguis damus -- Simplicior
si (...) -- (...) plane (...). -- (...) Sermon. (...) 1. (...) 3.
Simplicity is Folly to crafty persons, a Mean birth is an ignoble stain,
Beggary is a scandal, and the Cross an unanswerable objection. But the Angel's
moral in the circumstance of his address, and inviting the poor Shepherds to
Bethlehem, is, That none are fit to come to Christ but those who are poor in
spirit, despisers of the world, simple in their hearts, without craft and
secular designs; and therefore neither did the Angel tell the story to Herod,
nor to the Scribes and Pharisees, whose ambition had ends contradictory to the
simplicity and poverty of the Birth of Jesus.

7. These Shepherds when they conversed with Angels were watching over their
flocks by night; no Revellers, but in a painful and dangerous employment, the
work of an honest Calling, securing their Folds against incursions of wild
beasts, which in those Countries are not seldom or infrequent. And Christ being
the great Shepherd, (and possibly for the analogie's sake the sooner manifested
to Shepherds,) has made his Ministers overseers of their Flocks, distinguished
in their particular Folds, and conveys the mysteriousness of his Kingdom first
to the Pastors, and by their ministry to the Flocks: But although all of them
be admitted to the ministry, yet those only to the interior recesses and
nearer imitations of Jesus who are watchful over their Flocks, assiduous in
their labors, painful in their sufferings, present in the dangers of the
Sheep, ready to interpose their persons and sacrifice their lives; these are
Shepherds who first converse with Angels, and finally shall enter into the
presence of the Lord. But besides this symbol, we are taught in the
significations of the letter, That he that is diligent in the business of an
honest Calling, is then doing service to God, and a work so pleasing to him who
has appointed the sons of men to labor, that to these Shepherds he made a
return and recompense by the conversation of an Angel; and has advanced the
reputation of an honest and a mean employment to such a testimony of
acceptance, that no honest person, though busied in meaner offices, may ever
hereafter in the estimation of Christ's disciples become contemptible.

8. The signs which the Angel gave to discover the Babe were no marks of Luster
and Vanity, but they should find, 1. a Babe, 2. swadled, 3. lying in a Manger:
the first a testimony of his Humility, the second of his Poverty, the third of
his Incommodity and uneasiness; for Christ came to combat the whole body of
Sin, and to destroy every Province of Satan's Kingdom; for these are direct
antinomies to the Lusts of the flesh, the Last of the eyes, and the Pride of
life. Against the first Christ opposed his hard and uneasy Lodging; against
the second, the poorness of his Swadling-bands and Mantle; and the third is
combated by the great dignation and descent of Christ from a Throne of Majesty
to the state of a sucking Babe. And these are the first Lessons he has taught
us for our imitation; which that we may the better do, as we must take him for
our pattern, so also for our helper, and pray to the Holy Child, and he will
not only teach us, but also give us power and ability.

The PRAYER.
O Blessed and Eternal Jesu, at whose Birth the Quires of Angels sang praises
to God, and proclaimed peace to Men, sanctify my Will and inferior
Affections; make me to be within the conditions of Peace, that I be holy and
mortified, a despiser of the world and exterior vanities, humble and
charitable; that by thy eminent example I may be so fixed in the designs and
prosecution of the Ends of God and a blissful Eternity, that I be unmoved with
the terrors of the world, unaltered with its allurements and seductions, not
ambitious of its honor, not desirous of its fullness and plenty; but make me
diligent in the employment thou give me, faithful in discharge of my trust,
modest in my desires, content in the issues of thy Providence: that in such
dispositions I may receive and entertain visitations from Heaven, and
Revelations of the Mysteries and blisses Evangelical; that by such directions I
may be brought into thy presence, there to see thy Beauties and admire thy
Graces, and imitate all thy imitable Excellencies, and rest in thee for ever,
in this world by the perseverance of a holy and comfortable life, and in the
world to come in the participation of thy essential Glories and Felicities, O
Blessed and Eternal Jesus.

Considerations of the Epiphany of the B. Jesus by a Star, and the Adoration of
Jesus by the Eastern Magi.
1. GOD, who is the universal Father of all Men, at the Nativity of the Messiah
gave notice of it to all the World, as they were represented by the grand
Division of Jews and Gentiles; to the Jewish Shepherds by an Angel, to the
Eastern Magi by a Star. For the Gospel is of universal dissemination, not
confined within the limits of a national Prerogative, but Catholic and
diffused. As God's Love was, so was the dispensation of it, without respect of
persons: for all being included under the curse of Sin, were to him equal and
indifferent, undistinguishable objects of Mercy. And Jesus, descended of the
Jews, was also the expectation of the Gentiles, and therefore communicated to
all: the Grace of God being like the air we breathe, and it has Tit. 2. 11.
appeared to all men, says S. Paul; but the conveyances and communications of
it were different in the degrees of clarity and illustration. The Angel told
the Shepherds the story of the Nativity plainly and literally: The Star invited
the Wise men by its rareness and preternatural apparition; to which also, as by
a foot-path, they had been led by the Prophecy of Balaam.

2. But here first the Grace of God prevents us; without him we can do nothing;
he lays the first Stone in every Spiritual Building, and then expects by that
strength he first gave us that we make the Superstructures. But as a Stone
thrown into a River first moves the water, and disturbs its surface into a
Circle, and then its own force wafts the neighboring drops into a larger
figure by its proper weight: so is the Grace of God the first principle of our
spiritual motion, and when it moves us into its own figure, and has actuated
and ennobled our natural Powers by the influence of that first incentive, we
continue the motion, and enlarge the progress. But as the Circle on the face of
the waters grows weaker till it has smoothed it self into a natural and even
current, unless the force be renewed or continued: so does all our natural
endeavor, when first set a-work by God's preventing Grace, decline to the
imperfection of its own kind, unless the same force be made energetical and
operative by the continuation and renewing of the same supernatural influence.

3. And therefore the Eastern Magi, being first raised up into wonder and
curiosity by the apparition of the Star, were very far from finding Jesus by
such general and indefinite significations; but then the goodness of God's
Grace increased its own influence; (...) intellectum qui (...) signum. S. Leo,
Ser. 1. de (...).
for an inspiration from the Spirit of God admonished them to observe the Star,
showed the Star that they might find it, taught them to acknowledge it,
instructed them to understand its purpose, and invited them to follow it, and
never left them till they had found the Holy Jesus. Thus also God deals with
us. He gives us the first Grace, and adds the second; he enlightens our
Understandings, and actuates our Faculties, and sweetly allures us by the
proposition of Rewards, and wounds us with the arrows of his Love, and inflames
us with fire from Heaven; ever giving us new assistances or increasing the old,
refreshing us with comforts or arming us with patience; sometimes stirring our
affections by the lights held out to our Understanding, sometimes bringing
confirmation to our understanding by the motion of our Affections, till by
variety of means we at last arrive at Lethlehem, in the service and
entertainments of the Holy Jesus. Which we shall certainly do, if we follow the
invitations of Grace and exterior assistances which are given us to instruct
us, to help us, and to invite us, but not to force our endeavors and
cooperations.

4. As it was an unsearchable wisdom, so it was an unmeasurable grace of
Providence and dispensation which God did exhibit to the Wise men, to them, as
to all men, disposing the Ministeries of his Grace sweetly, and by proportion
to the capacities of the person suscipient. For God called the Gentiles by such
means which their Customs and Learning had made prompt and easy. For these
Magi were great Philosophers and Astronomers, and therefore God sent a
miraculous Star to invite and lead them to a new and more glorious light, the
lights of Grace and Glory. And God so blessed them in following the Star, to
which their innocent Curiosity and national Customs were apt to lead them; that
their Custom was changed to Grace, and their Learning heightened with
Inspiration, and God crowned all with a spiritual and glorious event. It was
not much unlike, which God did to the Princes and Diviners among the
Philistines, who sent the Ark back with five golden Emrods and five golden
Mice; an act proportionable to the Custom and sense of their Nation and
Religion: yet God accepted their opinion and divination to the utmost end they
designed it, and took the plagues of Emrods and Mice from them. For oftentimes
the Custom or the Philosophy of the opinions of a Nation are made instrumental,
through God's acceptance, to ends higher than they can produce by their own
energy and intendment. And thus the Astrological Divinations of the Magi were
turned into the order of a greater design than the whole Art could promise,
their employment being altered into Grace, and Nature into a Miracle. But then
when the Wise men were brought by this means, and had seen Jesus, then God
takes ways more immediate and proportionable to the Kingdom of Grace: the next
time God speaks to them by an Angel. For so is God's usual manner to bring us
to him; first, by ways agreeable to us, and then to increase, by ways agreeable
to himself. And when he has furnished us with new capacities, he gives new
Lights in order to more perfect employments: and, To him that has shall be
given full measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over; the
eternal kindness of God being like the Sea, which delights to run in its old
Chanel, and to fill the hollownesses of the Earth which it self has made, and
has once watered.

5. This Star, which conducted the Wise men to Bethlehem, (if at least it was
proproperly a Star, and not an Angel) was set in its place to be seen by all;
but was not observed, or not understood, nor its message obeyed, by any but the
three Wise men. And indeed no man has cause to complain of God, as if ever he
would be deficient in assistances necessary to his Service; but first the Grace
of God separates us from the common condition of incapacity and indisposition,
and then we separate our selves one from another by the use or neglect of this
Grace: and God doing his part to us, has cause to complain of us, who neglect
that which is our portion of the work. And however even the issues and the
kindnesses of God's Predestination and antecedent Mercy do very much toward the
making the Grace to be effective of its purpose, yet the manner of all those
influences and operations being moral, persuasive, reasonable and divisible, by
concourse of various circumstances, the cause and the effect are brought nearer
and nearer in various suscipients; but not brought so close together, but that
God expects us to do (...) AEschyl. Persis.
something toward it; so that we may say with S. Paul, It is not I, but the
Grace of God that is with me: and at the same time, when by reason of our
cooperation we actuate and improve God's Grace, and become distinguished from
other persons more negligent under the same opportunities, God is he who also
does distinguish us by the proportions and circumstantiate applications of his
Grace to every singular capacity; that we may be careful not to neglect the
Grace, and yet to AEschyl. (...).
return the entire glory to God.

6. Although God, to second the generous design of these wise personages in
their (...).
Enquiry of the new Prince, made the Star to guide them through the
difficulties of their journey, yet when they came to Jerusalem the Star
disappeared; God so resolving to try their Faith, and the activity of their
desires; to remonstrate to them that God is the Lord of all his Creatures, and
a voluntary Dispenser of his own favors, and can as well take them away as
indulge them; and to engage them upon the use of ordinary means and ministeries
when they are to be had: for now the extraordinary and miraculous Guide for a
time did cease, that they being at Jerusalem might enquire of them whose office
and profession of sacred Mysteries did oblige them to publish the MESSIAH. For
God is so great a lover of Order, so regular and certain an exactor (...) (...).
of us to use those ordinary ministeries of his own appointing, that he having
used the extraordinary but as Architects do frames of wood, to support the
Arches till they be built, takes them away when the work is ready, and leaves
us to those other of his designation; and has given such efficacy to these,
that they are as persuasive and operative as a Miracle; and S. Paul's Sermon
would convert as many, as if Moses should rise from the grave. And now the
Doctrines of Christianity have not only the same truth, but the same evidence
and virtue also they had in the midst of those prime demonstrations
extraordinary by Miracle and Prophecy, if men were equally disposed.

7. When they were come to the Doctors of the Jews, they asked confidently, and
with great openness, under the ear and eye of a Tyrant Prince, bloody and
timorous, jealous and ambitious, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? and
so gave evidence of their Faith, of their Magnanimity, and fearless confidence
and profession of it, and of their love of the mystery and object, in pursuance
of which they had taken so troublesome and vexatious journeys: and besides that
they upbraided the tepidity and (...) baseness of the Jewish Nation, who stood
unmoved and unconcerned by all the Circumstances of wonder, and stirred not one
step to make enquiry after or to visit the newborn King; they also teach us to
be open and confident in our Religion and Faith, and not to consider our
temporal, when they once come to contest against our Religious interests.

8. The Doctors of the Jews told the Wise men where Christ was to be born, the
Magi they address themselves with haste to see him and to worship, and the
Doctors themselves stir not; God not only serving himself with truth out of the
mouths of impious persons, but magnifying the recesses of his Counsel and
Wisdom and Predestination, who uses the same Doctrine to glorify himself and
to confound his enemies, to save the Scholars and to condemn the Tutors, to
instruct one and upbraid the other; making it an instrument of Faith, and a
conviction of Infidelity: the Sermons of the Doctors in such cases being like
the spoils of Bevers, Sheep and Silkworms, designed to clothe others, and are
made the occasions of their own nakedness, and the causes of their death. But
as it is a demonstration of the Divine Wisdom, so it is of humane Folly; there
being no greater imprudence in the world, than to do others advantage, and to
neglect our own. If thou do well unto thy (...), men will speak good of thee:
Piaga (...) si (...) puo (...) in (...), and in (...).
but if thou be like a Chanel in a Garden, through which the water runs to
cool and moisten the herbs, but nothing for its own use; thou buildest a
fortune to them upon the ruins of thine own house, while after thy preaching
to others, thou thy self do become a castaway.

9. When the Wise men departed from Jerusalem, the Star again appeared, and
they rejoiced with exceeding great joy: and indeed to new Converts and persons
in their first addresses to the worship of God such spiritual and exterior
Comforts are often indulged, because then God judges them to be most necessary,
as being invitations to Duty by the entertainments of our affections with such
sweetnesses, which represent the glory of the reward by the Antepasts and
refreshments dispensed even in the ruggedness of the way, and incommodities of
the journey. All other delights are the pleasures of Beasts, or the sports of
Children; these are the Antepasts and preventions of the full Feasts and
overflowings of Eternity.

10. When they came to Bethlehem, and the Star pointed them to a Stable, they
entered in, and being enlightened with a Divine Ray proceeding from the face of
the Holy Child, and seeing through the cloud, and passing through the scandal
of his mean Lodging and poor condition, they bowed themselves to the earth;
first giving themselves an Oblation to this great King, then they made offering
of their Gifts; for a man's person is first accepted, then his Gift; God first
regarded Abel, and then accepted his Offering: which we are best taught to
understand by the present instance; for it means no more, but that all outward
Services and Oblations are made acceptable by the prior presentation of an
inward Sacrifice. If we have first presented our selves, then our Gift is
pleasant, as coming but to express the truth of the first Sacrifice; but if our
Persons be not first made a Holocaust to God, the lesser Oblations of outward
Presents are like Sacrifices without Salt and Fire, nothing to make them
pleasant or religious. For all other senses of this Proposition charge upon God
the distinguishing and acceptance of Persons, against which he solemnly
protests: God regards no man's Person, but according to the doing of his Duty;
but then God is said first to accept the Person, and then the Gist, when the
Person is first sanctified and given to God by the vows and habits of a holy
life, and then all the actions of his Religion are homogeneal to their
principle, and accepted by the acceptance of the man.

11. These Magi presented to the Holy Babe Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh,
protesting their Faith of three Articles by the symbolical Oblation: By Gold,
that he was a King; by Incense, that he was a God; by Myrrh, that he was a Man.
And the Presents also were representative of interior Virtues: the Myrrh
signifying Faith, Mortification, Chastity, Compunction, and all the actions of
the Purgative way of Spiritual life; the Incense signifying Hope, Prayer,
Obedience, good Intention, and all the actions and Devotions of the
Illuminative; the giving the Gold representing Love to God and our Neighbors,
the Contempt of riches, Poverty of spirit, and all the eminencies and spiritual
riches of the Unitive life. And these Oblations if we present to the Holy
Jesus, both our Persons and our Gifts shall be accepted, our Sins shall be
purged, our Understandings enlightened, and our Wills united to this Holy Child,
and entitled to a communion of all his Glories.

12. And thus in one view and two Instances God has drawn all the world to
himself by his Son Jesus, in the Instance of the Shepherds and the Arabian
Magi, Jews and Gentiles, Learned and Unlearned, Rich and Poor, Noble and
Ignoble; that in him all Nations, and all Conditions, and all Families, and all
persons might be (...) animisqus duri, Et (...) sua Bessi (...) oves sacti,
duce (...), gregantur Pacis in (...). Nox ubi quondam (...) Angelorum, Et (...)
Justus quibus ipse (...) Vixit in autris. S. Paulinus in reditu (...).
blessed; having called all by one Star or other, by natural Reason or by the
secrets of Philosophy, by the Revelations of the Gospel or by the ministry of
Angels, by the Illuminations of the Spirit or by the Sermons and Dictates of
spiritual Fathers; and has consigned this Lesson to us, That we must never
appear before the Lord empty, offering Gifts to him by the expenses or by the
affections of Charity, either the worshipping or the oblations of Religion,
either the riches of the World or the love of the Soul: for if we cannot bring
Gold with the rich Arabians, we may with the poor Shepherds come and kiss the
Son, lest he be angry; and in all cases come and serve him with fear and
reverence, and spiritual rejoycings.

The PRAYER.
MOst Holy Jesu, Thou art the Glory of thy people Israel, and a light to the
Gentiles, and were pleased to call the Gentiles to the adoration and knowledge
of thy sacred Person and Laws, communicating the inestimable riches of thy holy
Discipline to all, with an universal undistinguishing Love; give unto us
spirits docible, pious, prudent and ductile, that no motion or invitation of
Grace be ineffectual, but may produce excellent effects upon us, and the secret
whispers of thy Spirit may prevail upon our Affections in order to Piety and
Obedience, as certainly as the loudest and most clamorous Sermons of the
Gospel. Create in us such Excellencies as are fit to be presented to thy
glorious Majesty; accept of the Oblation of my self, and my entire services:
but be thou pleased to verify my Offering, and secure the possession to thy
self, that the enemy may not pollute the Sacrifice, or divide the Gift, or
question the Title; but that I may be wholly thine, and for ever, clarify my
Understanding, sanctify my Will, replenish my Memory with arguments of Piety;
then shall I present to thee an Oblation rich and precious as the treble gift
of the Levantine Princes. Lord, I am thine, reject me not from thy favor,
exclude me not from thy presence; then shall I serve thee all the days of my
life, and partake of the glories of thy Kingdom, in which thou reignest
gloriously and eternally.

Amen.
SECT. V. Of the Circumcision of JESUS, and his Presentation in the Temple.
The Circumcision of Jesus.
S. LUKE. 2. 21.

And when eight days were accomphshed for the circumcising of the Child, his
name was called Jesus, which was so named of the angel, before he was conceived
in the Womb.

The Purification and Presentation.
S. LUKE. 2. 22.

And when the days of her purification were accomplished, they brought him to
Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord.




1. AND now the Blessed Savior of the World began to do the work of his
Mission and our Redemption: and because Man had prevaricated all the Divine
Commandments, to which all humane nature respectively to the persons of several
capacities was obliged, and therefore the whole Nature was obnoxious to the
just rewards of its demerits; first Christ was to put that Nature he had
assumed into a saveable condition, by fulfilling his Father's preceptive will,
and then to reconcile it actually, by suffering the just deservings of its
Prevarications. He therefore addresses himself to all the parts of an active
Obedience, and when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the
Child, he exposed his tender body to the sharpness of the circumcising stone,
and shed his blood in drops, giving an earnest of those rivers which he did
afterward pour out for the cleansing all Humane nature, and extinguishing the
wrath of God.

2. He that had no sin, nor was conceived by natural generation, could have no
adherences to his Soul or Body which needed to be pared away by a Rite, and
cleansed by a Mystery: neither indeed do we find it expressed, that (...).
(...). l. 9. c 22. (...).
Circumcision was ordained for abolition or pardon of original sin, (it is
indeed presumed so) but it was instituted to be a Seal of a Covenant between
God and Abraham, and Abraham's posterity, a seal of the righteousness of Faith,
and therefore was not improper for him to suffer who was the child of Abraham,
and who was the Prince of the Covenant, and the author and finisher of that
Faith which was consigned to (...) in Circumcision. But so mysterious were all
the actions of Jesus, that this one served many ends. For 1. It gave
demonstration of the verity of Humane nature. 2. So he began to fulfill the Law.
3. And took from himself the scandal of Uncircumcision, which would eternally
have prejudiced the Jews against his entertainment and communion. 4. And then
he took upon him that Name which declared him to be the Savior of the World;
which as it was consummate in the blood of the Cross, so was it inaugurated in
the blood of Circumcision: For when the eight days were accomplished for
circumcising of the Child, his name was called JESUS.

3. But this holy Family, who had laid up their joys in the eyes and heart of
God, longed till they might be permitted an address to the Temple, that there
they might present the Holy Babe unto his Father; and indeed that he, who had
no other, might be brought to his own house. For although, while he was a
child, he did differ nothing from a servant, yet he was the Lord of the place:
It was his Father's house, and he was the Lord of all; and therefore when the
days of the Purification were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem to
present him to the Lord, to whom he was holy, as being the firstborn; the
firstborn of his Mother, the only-begotten son of his Father, and the
firstborn of every creature. And they did with him according to the Law of
Moses, offering a pair of Turtle-doves for his redemption.

4. But there was no public act about this Holy Child but it was attended by
something miraculous and extraordinary. And at this instant the Spirit of God
directed a holy person into the Temple, that he might feel the fulfilling of a
Prophecy made to himself, that he might before his death behold the Lord's
CHRIST, and embrace the glory and consolation of Israel and the light of the
Gentiles in his arms: for old Simeon came by the Spirit into the Temple, and
when the Parents brought in the Child Jesus, then took he him up in his arms,
and blessed God, and prophesied, and spoke glorious things of that Child, and
things sad and glorious concerning his Mother; that the Child was set for the
rising and falling of many in Israel, for a sign that should be spoken against;
and the bitterness of that contradiction should pierce the heart of the holy
Virgin Mother like a Sword, that her joy at the present accidents might be
attempered with present revelation of her future trouble, and the excellent
favor of being the Mother of God might be crowned with the reward of
Martyrdom, and a Mother's love be raised up to an excellency great enough to
make her suffer the bitterness of being transfixed with his love and sorrow as
with a Sword.

5. But old Anna the Prophetess came also in, full of years and joy, and found
the reward of her long prayers and fasting in the Temple; the long-looked-for
redemption of Israel was now in the Temple, and she saw with her eyes the Light
of the World, the Heir of Heaven, the long-looked-for Messiah, whom the Nations
had desired and expected till their hearts were faint, and their eyes dim with
looking farther and apprehending greater distances. She also prophesied and
gave thanks unto the Lord. But Joseph and his Mother marvelled at those things
which were spoken of him.

Ad SECT. V. Considerations upon the Circumcision of the Holy Child JESUS.
1. WHen eight days were come, the Holy Jesus was circumcised, and shed the
firstfruits of his Blood, offering them to God like the prelibation of a
Sacrifice, and earnest of the great seas of effusion designed for his Passion,
not for the expiation of any stain himself had contracted, for he was spotless
as the face of the Sun, and had contracted no wrinkle from the aged and
polluted brow of Adam; but it was an act of Obedience, and yet of Choice and
voluntary susception, to which no obligation had passed upon him in the
condition of his own person. For as he was included in the vierge of Abraham's
posterity, and had put on the common outside of his Nation, his Parents had
intimation enough to pass upon him the Sacrament of the National Covenant, and
it became an act of excellent Obedience: but because he was a person
extraordinary, and exempt from the reasons of Circumcision, and himself in
person was to give period to the Rite, therefore it was an act of Choice in
him, and in both the capacities becomes a precedent of Duty to us, in the first
of Obedience, in the second of Humility.

2. But it is considerable, that the Holy Jesus, who might have pleaded his
exemption, especially in a matter of pain and dishonor, yet chose that way
which was more severe and regular; so teaching us to be strict in our duties,
and sparing in the rights of privilege and dispensation. We pretend every
indisposition of body to excuse us from penal duties, from Fasting, From going
to Church; and instantly we satisfy our selves with saying, God will have
mercy, and not sacrifice; so making our selves Judges of our own privileges, in
which commonly we are parties against God, and therefore likely to pass unequal
sentence. It is not an easy argument that will bring us to the severities and
rigours of Duty, but we snatch at occasions of dispensation, and therefore
possibly may mistake the justice of the opportunities by the importunities of
our desires. However, if this too much easiness be in any case excusable from
sin, yet in all cases it is an argument of infirmity, and the regular
observation of the Commandment is the surer way to Perfection. For not every
inconvenience of body is fit to be pleaded against the inconvenience of losing
spiritual advantages, but only such which upon prudent account does entrench
upon the Laws of Charity; or such whose consequent is likely to be impediment
of a duty in a greater degree of loss than the present omission. For the Spirit
being in many perfections more eminent than the Body, all spiritual
improvements have the same proportions; so that if we were just estimators of
things, it ought not to be less than a great incommodity to the Body which we
mean to prevent by the loss of a spiritual benefit, or the omission of a Duty:
he were very improvident, who would lose a Finger for the good husbandry of
saving a Ducat; and it would be an unhandsome excuse from the duties of
Repentance to pretend care of the Body. The proportions and degrees of this are
so nice and of so difficult determination, that men are more apt to untie the
girdle of Discipline with the loose hands of dispensation and excuse, than to
strain her too hard by the strictures and bindings of severity; but the error
were the surer on this side.

3. The Blessed Jesus refused not the signature of this bloody Covenant, though
it were the Character of a Sinner; and did Sacramentally rescind the impure
relics of Adam, and the contractions of evil customs; which was the greatest
descent of Humility that is imaginable, that he should put himself to pain to
be reckoned amongst sinners, and to have their Sacraments and their
Protestations, though his Innocence was purer than the flames of Cherubim. But
we use arts to seem more righteous than we are, desiring rather to be accounted
holy, than to be so; as thinking the vanity of Reputation more useful to us
than the happiness of a remote and far distant Eternity. But if (as it is said)
Circumcision was ordained, besides the signing of the Covenant, to abolish the
guilt of Original sin, we are willing to confess that, it being no act of
humiliation to confess a crime that all the world is equally guilty of, that
could not be avoided by our timeliest industry, and that serves us for so many
ends in the excuse and minoration of our actual impieties: so that as Diogenes
trampled upon Plato's pride with a greater fastuousness and humorous
ostentation; so we do with Original sin, declaim against it bitterly, to save
the others harmless, and are free in the publication of this, that we may be
instructed how to conceal the actual. The Blessed Jesus had in him no principle
of Sin, original nor actual, and therefore this designation of his in
submitting himself to the bloody Covenant of Circumcision, which was a just
express and Sacramental abscission of it, was an act of glorious Humility; yet
our charging of our selves so promptly with Adam's fault, whatever truth it
may have in the strictness of Theology, has ( forsitan) but an ill end in
Morality; and so I now consider it without any reflection upon the precise
Question.

4. For though the Fall of Adam lost to him all those supernatural assistences
which God put into our Nature by way of Grace, yet it is by accident that we
are more prone to many sins than we are to Virtue. Adam's sin did discompose
his Understanding and Affections; and every sin we do does still make us more
unreasonable, more violent, more sensual, more apt still to the multiplication
of the same or the like actions: the first rebellion of the inferior Faculties
against the Will and Understanding, and every victory the Flesh gets over the
Spirit, makes the inferior insolent, strong, tumultuous, domineering and
triumphant upon the proportionable ruins of the spirit, blinding our Reason
and binding our Will; and all these violations of our Powers are increased by
the perpetual ill customs, and false principles, and ridiculous guises of the
World; which makes the later Ages to be worse than the (...) Porphyr. l. 4. de
Non (...)
former, unless some other accident do intervene to stop the ruin and
declension of Virtue, such as are God's Judgments, the sending of Prophets, new
imposition of Laws, messages from Heaven, diviner Institutions, such as in
particular was the great Discipline of Christianity. And even in this sense
here is origination enough for sin, and impairing of the reasonable Faculties
of humane Souls, without charging our faults upon Adam.

5. But besides this, God, who has propounded to Man glorious conditions, and
designed him to an excellent state of Immortality, has required of him such a
duty as shall put man to labor, and present to God a service of a free and
difficult obedience. For therefore God has given us Laws which come cross and
are restraints to our natural inclinations, that we may part with something in
the service of God which we value. For although this is nothing in respect of
God, yet to Man it is the greatest he can do. What thanks were it to man to
obey God in such things which he would do though he were not commanded? But to
leave all our own desires, and to take up objects of God's propounding contrary
to our own, and desires against our Nature, this is that which GOD designed as
a sacrifice of our selves to him. And therefore God has made many of his Laws
to be prohibitions in the matter of natural pleasure, and restraints of our
sensitive appetite. Now this being become the matter of Divine Laws, that we
should in many parts and degrees abstain from what pleases our senses, by this
supervening accident it happens that we are very hardly weaned from sin, but
most easily tempted to a Vice. And then we think we have reason to lay the
fault upon Original sin and natural aversation from goodness, when this
inclination to Vice is but accidental, and occasional upon the matter and
sanction of the Laws. Our Nature is not contrary to Virtue, for the Laws of
Nature and right Reason do not only oblige us, but (...) (...). 2. 3.
incline us to it; but the instances of some Virtues are made to come cross to
our Nature, that is, to our natural appetites, by reason of which it comes to
pass that (as (...) (...). 2. 3.
S. Paul says) we are by nature the children of wrath, meaning, that by our
natural inclinations we are disposed to contradict those Laws which lay fetters
upon them, we are apt to satisfy the Lusts of the Flesh, for in these he there
instances.

6. But in things intellectual and spiritual, where neither the one nor the
other (...) the sensual part, we are indifferent to Virtue or to Vice, and when
we do amiss, it is wholly and in all degrees inexcusably our own fault. In the
Old Law, when it was a duty to swear by the God of Israel in solemn causes, men
were apt enough to swear by him only; and that sometimes the Israelites did
swear by the Queen of Heaven, it was by the ill example and desires to comply
with the neighbor Nations, whose Daughters they sometime married, or whose
arms they feared, or whose friendship they desired, or with whom they did
negotiate. It is indifferent to us to love our Fathers and to love strangers,
according as we are determined by custom or education. Nay, for so much of it
as is natural and original, we are more inclined to love them than to disrepute
them; and if we disobey them, it is when any injunction of theirs comes cross
to our natural desires and purposes. But if from our infancy we be told
concerning a stranger that he is our Father, we frame our affections to nature,
and our nature to custom and education, and are as apt to love him who is not,
and yet is said to be, as him who is said not to be, and yet indeed is our
natural Father.

7. And in sensual things, if GOD had commanded Polygamy or promiscuous
Concubinate, or unlimited Eatings and Drinkings, it is not to be supposed but
that we should have been ready enough to have obeyed God in all such
impositions; and the sons of Israel never murmured when God bad them borrow
jewels and earrings; and spoil the Egyptians: But because God restrained these
desires, our duties are the harder, because they are fetters to our Liberty,
and contradictions to those natural inclinations, which also are made more
active by evil custom and unhandsome educations. From which Premises we shall
observe in order to practice, That sin creeps upon us in our education (...).
so tacitly and undiscernibly, that we mistake the cause of it, and yet so
prevalently and effectually, that we judge it to be our very nature, and charge
it upon Adam, to lessen the imputation upon us, or to increase the license or
the confidence, when every one of us is the Adam, the man (...). Arist. 2. Top.
c. 3.
of sin, and the parent of our own impurities. For it is notorious that our own
iniquities do so discompose our naturals, (...) Stob. (...). 250.
and evil customs and examples do so encourage impiety, and the Law of God
enjoins such Virtues which do violence to Nature, that our proclivity to sin is
occasioned by the accident, and is caused by our selves; -- (...). Horat.
whatever mischief Adam did to us, we do more to our selves. We are taught to
be revengeful (...). l. 1. c. 2.
(...).
in our Cradles; and are taught to strike our Neighbor as a means to still our
frowardness, and to satisfy our wranglings. Our Nurses teach us to know the
greatness of our Birth, or the riches of our Inheritance, or they learn us to
be proud, or to be impatient, before they learn us to know God, or to say our
Prayers. And then, because the use of Reason comes at no definite time, but
insensibly and divisibly, we are permitted such acts with impunity too long,
deferring to repute them to be sins, till the habit is grown strong, natural
and masculine: and because from the infancy it began in inolinations, and
tender overtures and slighter actions, Adam is laid in the fault, and Original
sin did all: and this clearly we therefore confess, (...). (...) ep. Timoth.
that our faults may seem the less, and the misery be pretended natural, that
it may be thought to be irremediable, and therefore we not engaged to endeavor
a cure; so that the confession of our original sin is no imitation of Christ's
Humility in suffering Circumcision, but too often an act of Pride, Carelessness,
Ignorance and Security.

8. At the Circumcision his Parents imposed the Holy Name told to the Virgin by
the Angel, his Name was called JESUS; a Name above every name. For in old times
God was known by names of Power, of Nature, of Majesty: But his name of Mercy
was reserved till now, when God did purpose to pour out the whole treasure of
his Mercy by the mediation and ministry of his Holy Son. And because God gave
to the Holy Babe the name in which the treasures of Mercy were deposited, and
exalted this name above all names, we are taught that the purpose of his
Counsel was, to exalt and magnify his Mercy above all his other works, (...)
JESV (...) (...) (...):
he being delighted with this excellent demonstration of it, in the Mission,
and Manifestation, and Crucifixion of his Son; he has changed the ineffable
Name into a name utterable by man, and desirable by all the world, the Majesty
is all arrayed (...)
in robes of Mercy, the Tetragrammation or adorable Mystery of the Patriarchs
is made fit for pronunciation and expression when it becomes the name of the
Lord's CHRIST. And if JEHOVAH be full of majesty and terror, the name JESUS is
full of sweetness and mercy. It is GOD clothed with circumstances of facility,
and opportunities of approximation. The great and highest name of GOD could not
be pronounced truly, till it came to be sinished with a Guttural that made up
the name given by this Angel to the Holy Child; nor God received or entertained
by men, till he was made humane and sensible by the adoption of a sensitive
nature, like Vowels pronunciable by the intertexture of a Consonant. Thus was
his Person made tangible, and his Name utterable, and his Mercy brought home to
our necessities, and the Mystery made explicate, at the Circumcision of this
Holy Babe.

9. But now God's mercy was at full Sea, now was the time when God made no
reserves to the effusion of his mercy. For to the Patriarchs and persons of
eminent Sanctity and employment in the elder Ages of the World, God, according
to the degrees of his manifestation or present purpose, would give them one
letter of this ineffable Name. For the reward that Abraham had in the change of
his name was, that he had the honor done him to have one of the letters of
Jehovah put into it; and so had Joshua, when he was a type of Christ, and the
Prince of the Israelitish Armies: and when God took away one of these letters,
it was a curse. But now he communicated all the whole Name Isa. 21. 11. in casu
(...) H.
to this Holy Child, and put a letter more to it, to signify that he was the
glory of God, the express image of his Father's person, God Eternal; and then
manifested to the World in his Humanity, that all the intelligent world who
expected Beatitude, and had treasured all their hopes in the ineffable Name of
GOD, might find them all with ample returns in this Name of JESUS, which God
has exalted above every name, even above that by which God in the Old
Testament did represent the greatest awfulness of his Majesty. This miraculous
Name is above all the powers of Magical Enchantments, the nightly rites of
Sorcerers, the Secrets of Memphis, the Drugs of Thessaly, the silent and
mysterious Murmurs of the wise Chaldees, and the Spells of Zoroastres: This is
the Name at which the Devils did tremble, and pay their enforced and
involuntary adorations, by confessing the Divinity, and quitting their
possessions and usurped habitations. If our prayers be made in this Name, God
opens the windows of Heaven, and rains down benediction: at the mention of this
Name the blessed Apostles, and Hermione the daughter of St. Philip, and
Philotheus the son of Theophila, and St. Hilarion, and St. Paul the Eremite,
and innumerable other Lights who followed hard after the Sun of Righteousness.
wrought great and prodigious Miracles: Signs and wonders and healings were done
by the Name of the Holy Child JESUS. This is the Name which we should ingrave
in our hearts, and write upon our foreheads, and pronounce with our most
harmonious accents, and rest our faith upon, and place our hopes in, and love
with the overflowings of charity, and joy, and adoration. And as the revelation
of this Name satisfied the hopes of all the World, so it must determine our
worshippings, and the addresses of our exterior and interior Religion: it
being that Name whereby God and God's mercies are made presential to us, and
proportionate objects of our Religion and affections.

The PRAYER.
MOst Holy and ever-Blessed Jesu, who art infinite in Essence, glorious in
Mercy, mysterious in thy Communications, affable and presential in the descents
of thy Humanity; I adore thy glorious Name, whereby thou have shut up the
abysses, and opened the gates of Heaven, restraining the power of Hell, and
discovering and communicating the treasures of thy Father's mercies. O Jesu, be
thou a JESUS unto me, and save me from the precipices and ruins of sin, from
the expresses of thy Father's wrath, from the miseries and unsufferable
torments of accursed spirits, by the power of thy Majesty, by the sweetnesses
of thy Mercy, and sacred influences and miraculous glories of thy Name. I adore
and worship thee in thy excellent Obedience and Humility, who have submitted
thy Innocent and spotless flesh to the bloody Covenant of Circumcision. Teach
me to practice so blessed and holy a precedent, that I may be humble and
obedient to thy sacred Laws, severe and regular in my Religion, mortified in my
body and spirit, of circumcised heart and tongue; that what thou did
represent in symbol and mystery, I may really express in the exhibition of an
exemplar, pious and mortified life, cutting off all excrescences of my spirit,
and whatsoever may minister to the flesh, or any of its ungodly desires; that
now thy holy Name is called upon me, I may do no dishonor to the Name, nor
scandal to the Institution, but may do thee honor and worship and adorations
of a pure Religion, O most Holy and ever-Blessed JESU.

Amen.
DISCOURSE II. Of the Virtue of Obedience.
1. THere are certain Excellencies either of habit or consideration, which
Spiritual persons use to call General ways, being a dispersed influence into
all the parts of good life, either directing the single actions to the right
end, or managing them with right instruments, and adding special excellencies
and formalities to them, or morally inviting to the repetition of them; but
they are like the general medicaments in Physic, or the prime instruments in
Mathematical Disciplines: such as are the consideration of the Divine presence,
the Example of JESUS, right Intention; and such also is the virtue of
Obedience, which perfectly unites our actions to God, and conforms us to the
Divine will, which is the original of goodness, and sanctifies and makes a man
an holocaust to God, which contains in it eminently all other Graces, but
especially those Graces whose essence consists in a conformity of a part or the
whole, (such are Faith, Humility, Patience and Charity;) which gives quietness
and tranquillity to the spirit, and is an Antepast of Paradise, (where their
Jubilee is the perpetual joys of Obedience, and their doing is the enjoying the
Divine pleasure;) which adds an excellency and luster to pious actions, and
hallows them which are indifferent, and lifts up some actions from their
unhallowed nature to circumstances of good and of acceptance. If a man says
his prayers or communicates out of custom, or without intuition of the Precept
and divine Commandment, the act is like a Ship returning from her voyage
without her venture and her burden, as unprofitable as without stowage: But if
God commands us either to eat or to abstain, to sleep or to be waking, to work
or to keep a Sabbath; these actions, which are naturally neither good nor evil,
are sanctified by the Obedience, and ranked amongst actions of the greatest
excellency. And this also was it which made Abraham's offer to kill his Son,
and the Israelites spoiling the Egyptians, to become acts laudable, and not
unjust: they were acts of Obedience, and therefore had the same formality and
essence with actions of the most spiritual Devotions. God's command is all our
rule for practice, and our Obedience united to the Obedience of Jesus is all
our title to acceptance.

2. But by Obedience I do not here mean the exterior execution of the work,
for so, Obedience is no Grace distinct from the acting any or all the
Commandments: but besides the doing of the thing, (for that also must be
presupposed) it is a sacrifice of our proper Will to God, a choosing the duty
because God commands it. For beasts also carry burdens and do our commands by
compulsion: and the fear of slaves and the rigor of taskmasters made the
number of bricks to be completed, when Israel groaned and cried to God for
help. But sons that labor under the sweet paternal regiment of their Fathers,
and the influence of love, they love the precept, and do the imposition, with
the same purposes and compliant affections with which the Fathers made it. When
Christ commanded us to renounce the World, there were some that did think it
was a hard saying, and do so still; and the young rich man forsook him upon it:
but Ananias and Sapphira, upon whom some violences were done by custom, or the
excellent Sermons of the Apostles, sold their possessions too, but it was so
against their will, that they retained part of it: but St. Paul did not only
forsake all his secular fortunes, but counted all to be dross that he might
gain Christ; he gave his Will, made an offertory of that, as well as of his
goods, choosing the act which was enjoined. This was the Obedience the Holy
Jesus paid to his heavenly Father, so voluntary, that it was meat John 4. 34.
to him to do his Father's will.

3. And this was intended always by God, [ My son, give me thy heart;] and
particularly by the Holy Jesus, for in the saddest instance of all his
Precepts, even that of suffering persecution, we are commanded to rejoice, and
to be exceeding glad. And so did those holy Martyrs in the primitive Ages, who
upon just grounds, when God's glory or S. (...). episs. ad (...). Hispan.
the (...) of the Church had interest in it, they offered themselves to
Tyrants, and dared the violence of the most cruel and bowelless hang-men. And
this is the best oblation we can present to God. To offer Gold is a present fit
to be made by young beginners Idem in 19. Matthew, 28.
in Religion, not by men in Christianity; yea, Crates the Theban threw his gold
away, and so did Antisthenes: but to offer our Will to God, to give our selves,
is the act of an Apostle, the proper act of Christians. And therefore when the
Apostles made challenge of a reward for leaving all their possessions, Christ
makes no reply to the instance, nor says, You who have left all, but, You who
have followed me in the regeneration, shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge
the twelve Tribes of Israel: meaning, that the quitting the goods was nothing;
but the obedience to Christ, that they followed Jesus in the Regeneration,
going themselves in pursuit of him, and giving themselves to him, that was it
which entitled them to a Throne.

4. And this therefore God enjoins, that our offerings to him may be entire and
complete, that we pay him a holocaust, that we do his work without murmuring,
and that his burden may become easy, when it is born up by the wings of love
and alacrity of spirit. For in effect this obedience of the Will is in true
speaking and strict Theology nothing else but that Charity which gives
excellency to Alms, and energy to Faith, and acceptance to all Graces. But I
shall reduce this to particular and more minute considerations.

5. First, We shall best know that our Will is in the obedience by our prompt
undertaking, by our cheerful managing, by our swift execution; for all degrees
of delay are degrees of immorigerousness and unwillingness. And since Fidelis
(...) moras, fugit (...), ignorant tarditatem, (...), parat oculos visui, aures
(...) voci, manus (...) pedes: (...) se colligit, (...) colligat voluntatem. S.
Bernard. Sermon. de Obedient. Et barbaris (...) servilis, (...) exsequi Regium.
Tacit. l. 6. Annal.
time is extrinsecal to the act, and alike to every part of it, nothing
determines an action but the Opportunity without, and the desires and
Willingress within. And therefore he who deliberates beyond his first
opportunity, and exterior determination and appointment of the act, brings
fire and wood, but wants a Lamb for the sacrifice; and unless he offer up his
Isaac, his beloved Will, he has no ministry prepared for God's acceptance. He
that does not repent to day, puts it to the Question whether he will repent at
all or no. He that defers Restitution when all the Circumstances are fitted, is
not yet resolved upon the duty. And when he does it, if he does it against his
will, he does but do honorary Penance with a Paper upon his hat, and a Taper in
his hand; it may satisfy the Law, but not satisfy his Conscience; it neither
pleases himself, and less pleases God. A Sacrifice without a Heart was a sad
and ominous presage in the superstition of the Roman Augurs, and so it is in
the service of God; for what the exhibition of the work is to man, that the
presentation of the Will is to God. It is but a cold Charity to a naked beggar
to say, God help thee, and do nothing; give him clothes, and he feels your
Charity: But God, who is the searcher of the heart, his apprehension of actions
relative to him is of the inward motions and addresses of the Will; and without
this our exterior services are like the paying of a piece of money in which we
have defaced the image, it is not current.

6. Secondly, But besides the Willingness to do the acts of express command,
the readiness to do the Intimations and tacit significations of God's pleasure
is the best testimony in the world that our Will is in the obedience. Thus did
the Holy Jesus undertake a Nature of infirmity, and suffer a Death of shame and
sorrow, and became obedient from the Circumcision even unto the death of the
Cross; not staying for a Command, but because it was his Father's pleasure
Mankind should be redeemed. For before the susception of it he was not a person
subjicible to a Command: It was enough that he understood the inclinations and
designs of his Father's Mercies. And therefore God has furnished us with
instances of uncommanded Piety to be a touchstone of our Obedience. He that
does but his endeavor about the express commands has a bridle in his mouth,
and is restrained by violence: but a willing spirit is like a greedy eye,
devours all it sees, and hopes to make some proportionable returns and
compensations of duty for his infirmity, by taking in the intimations of God's
pleasure. When God commands Chastity, he that undertakes a holy Coelibate has
great obedience to the command of Chastity. God bids us give Alms of our
increase; he obeys this with great facility that sells all his goods, and gives
them to the poor. And, provided our hastiness to snatch at too much does not
make us let go our duty, like the indiscreet loads of too forward persons, too
big, or too inconvenient and uncombin'd, there is not in the world a greater
probation of our prompt Obedience, than when we look farther than the precise
Duty, swallowing that and more with our ready and hopeful purposes; nothing
being so able to do miracles as Love, and yet nothing being so certainly
accepted as Love, though it could do nothing in productions and exterior
ministeries.

7. Thirdly, but God requires that our Obedience should have another excellency
to make it a becoming present to the Divine acceptance; our Understanding must
be sacrificed too, and become an ingredient of our Obedience. We must also
believe that whatsoever God commands is most fitting to be commanded, is most
excellent in it self, and the best for us to do. The first gives our Affections
and desires to God, and this also gives our Reason, and is a perfection of
Obedience not communicable to the duties we owe to Man. For God only is Lord of
this faculty, and, being the fountain of all wisdom, therefore commands our
Understanding, because he alone can satisfy it. We are bound to obey humane
Laws, but not bound to think the Laws we live under are the most prudent
Constitutions in the World. But God's Commandments are not only a lantern to
our feet, and a light unto our paths, but a rule to our Reason, and
satisfaction to our Understandings, as being the instruments of our address to
God, and conveyances of his Grace, and manuductions to Eternity. And therefore
St. John Climacus defines Obedience to be An unexamined and unquestioned
motion, a voluntary death and sepulture of the Will, a life without curiosity,
a laying aside our own discretion in the midst of the riches of the most
excellent understandings.

8. And certainly there is not in the world a greater strength against
temptations than is deposited in an obedient Understanding, because that only
can regulary produce the same affections, it admits of fewer degrees, and an
infrequent alteration. But the actions proceeding from the Appetite, as it is
determined by any other principle than a satisfied Understanding, have their
heightnings and their declensions, and their changes and mutations according to
a thousand accidents. Reason is more lasting than Desire, and with fewer means
to be tempted; but Affections and motions of appetite, as they are procured by
any thing, so may they expire by as great variety of causes. And therefore to
serve God by way of Understanding is surer, and in it self, unless it be by the
accidental increase of degrees, greater, than to serve him upon the motion and
principle of passions and desires; though this be fuller of comfort and
pleasure than the other. When Lot lived amongst the impure (...), where his
righteous Soul was in a continual agony, he had few exterior incentives to a
pious life, nothing to enkindle the sensible flame of burning desires toward
Piety; but in the midst of all the discouragements of the world, nothing was
left him but the way and precedence of a truly-informed Reason and Conscience.
Just so is the way of those wise souls who live in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation: where Piety is out of countenance, where Austerity is
ridiculous, (...) under persecution, no Examples to lead us on; there the
Understanding is left to be the guide, and it does the work the surest, for
this makes the duty of many to be certain, regular, and chosen, constant,
integral, and perpetual: but this way is like the life of an unmarried or a
retired person, less of grief in it, and less of joy. But the way of serving
God with the affections, and with the pleasures and entertainments of desires,
is the way of the more passionate and imperfect, not in a man's power to choose
or to procure; but comes by a thousand chances, meeting with a soft nature,
credulous or weak, easy or ignorant, softened with fears or invited by forward
desires.

9. Those that did live amidst the fervours of the primitive Charity, and were
warmed by their fires, grew inflamed by contact and vicinity to such burning
and shining lights. And they therefore grew to high degrees of Piety, because
then every man made judgment of his own actions by the proportions which he saw
before him, and believed all descents from those greater examples to be so many
degrees from the Rule: And he that lives in a College of devout persons will
compare his own actions with the Devotion and customs of that Society, and not
with the remisness of persons he hears of in story, but what he sees and lives
with. But if we live in an Age of Indevotion, we think our selves well assoiled
if we be warmer than their Ice; every thing which is above our example being
eminent and conspicuous, though it be but like the light of a Gloworm or the
sparkling of a Diamond, yet if it be in the midst of darkness, it is a goodly
beauty. This I call the way of serving God by desires and affections: and this
is altered by example, by public manners, by external works, by the assignment
of (...), by designation of conventions for prayer, by periods and revolutions
of times of duty, by hours and solemnities; so that a man shall owe his Piety
to these chances, which although they are graces of God and instruments of
Devotion, yet they are not always in our power; and therefore they are but
accidental ministeries of a good life, and the (...) constant or durable. But
when the principle of our Piety is a conformity of our Understanding to God's
Laws, when we are instructed what to do, and therefore do it because we are
satisfied it is most excellent to obey God; this will support our Piety against
objections, lead it on in despite of disadvantages; this chooses God with
Reason, and is not determined from without: and as it is in some degree
necessary for all times, so it is the greatest security against the change of
Laws and Princes, and Religions and Ages: when all the incentives of affection
and exterior determinations of our Piety shall cease, and perhaps all external
offices, and the daily sacrifice, and Piety it self shall fail from the face of
the Land; then the obedience founded in the Understanding is the only lasting
strength is left us to make retreat to, and to secure our conditions. Thus from
the composition of the Will and Affections with our exterior acts of obedience
to God, our Obedience is made willing, swift and cheerful; but from the
composition of the Understanding, our Obedience becomes strong, sincere and
persevering; and this is that which S. Paul calls our reasonable service.

10. Fourthly, To which if we add that our Obedience be universal, we have all
the qualifications which make the duty to be pious and prudent. The meaning is,
that we obey God in all his Sanctions, though the matter be in common account
small and inconsiderable, and give no indulgence to our selves to recede from
the Rule in any matter whatsoever. For the veriest minute of Obedience is worth
our attention, as being by God esteemed the trial of our Obedience in a greater
affair. He that is unjust in a little Luke 16. 10.
will be unjust in a greater, said our Blessed Savior. And since to God all
matter is alike, and no more accrues to him in an Hecatomb than in a piece of
gumm, in an Ascetick severity than in a secular life, God regards not the
matter of a precept, but the Obedience, which in all instances is the same; and
he that will prevaricate when the matter is (...), and by consequence the
temptations to it weak and impotent, and soon confuted, will think he may
better be excused when the temptations are violent and importunate, as it
commonly happens in affairs of greater importance. He that will lie to save
sixpence, will not stick at it when a thousand pound is the purchase; and
possibly there is more contempt and despite done to the Divine authority, when
we disobey it in such particulars wherein the Obedience is most easy, and the
temptations less troublesome: I do not say there is more injustice or more
malice in a small Disobedience than in a greater, but there is either more
contempt, or more negligence and dissolution of discipline, than in the other.

11. And it is no small temptation of the Devil soliciting of us not to be
curious of scruples and grains, nor to disturb our peace for lighter
Disobediences; persuading us that something must be indulged to public
manners, something to the civilities of society, something to nature, and to
the approaches of our passions, and the motions of our first desires; but that
we be not over-righteous. And true it is, that sometimes such surreptions and
smaller undecencies are therefore pardoned and lessened almost to a nullity,
because they dwell in the confines of things lawful and honest, and are not so
notorious as to be separated from permissions by any public, certain and
universal cognizance, and therefore may pass upon a good man sometimes without
observation. But it is a temptation when we think of neglecting them by a
predetermined incuriousness, upon pretense they are small. But this must be
reduced to more regular Conclusions.

12. First, Although smaller Disobediences, expressed in slight mis-becoming
actions, when they come by surprise and sudden invasion, are through the
mercies of God dashed in the very approach, their bills of accusation are
thrown out, and they are not esteemed as competent instruments of separation
from God's love; yet when a smaller sin comes by design, and is acted with
knowledge and deliberation, (for then it is properly an act of Disobedience)
Malitia supplet defectum aetatis, The malice of the agent heightens the
smalness of the act, and makes up the iniquity. To drink liberally once, and
something more freely than the strict rules of Christian sobriety and
temperance permit, is pardoned the easier, when without deliberation and by
surprise the person was abused, who intended not to transgress a minute, but by
little and little was mistaken in his proportions: but if a man by design shall
estimate his draughts and his good fellowship, and shall resolve upon a little
intemperance, thinking, because it is not very much, it is therefore none at
all, that man has mistaken himself into a crime; and although a little wound
upon the finger is very curable, yet the smallest prick upon the heart is
mortal: So is a design and purpose of the smallest Disobedience in its
formality as malicious and destructive, as in its matter it was pardonable and
excusable.

13. Secondly, Although every lesser Disobedience, when it comes singly,
destroys not the love of God; (for although it may lessen the habit, yet it
takes not away its natural being, nor interrupts its acceptance, (...) parva,
tamen (...), si collecta (...) nos (...) nos (...) and (...) grande peccatum,
S. Aug. l. 50. (...). 50. (...) lib. de Poenit. (...) venialla si (...) nostrum
(...), ut a (...) sponsi (...) nos (...).
lest all the world should in all instants of time be in a damnable condition)
yet when these smaller obliquities are repeated, and no repentance intervenes,
this repetition combines and unites the lesser till they be concentred, and by
their accumulation make a crime: and therefore a careless reiterating and an
incurious walking in mis-becoming actions is deadly and damnable in the return,
though it was not so much at the setting forth. Every idle word is to be
accounted for, but we hope in much mercy; and yet he that gives himself over to
immoderate (...). (...).
talking will swell his account to a vast and mountainous proportion, and call
all the lesser escapes into a stricter judgment. He that extends his Recreation
an hour beyond the limits of Christian prudence, and the analogy of its
severity and employment, is accountable to God for that improvidence and waste
of Time; but he that shall mis-spend a day, and because that sin is not
scandalous like Adultery, or clamorous like Oppression, or unusual like
Bestiality, or crying for revenge like detaining the portion of Orphans, shall
therefore mis-spend another day without revocation of the first by an act of
repentance and redemption of it, and then shall throw away a week, still adding
to the former account upon the first stock, will at last be answerable for a
habit of Idleness, and will have contracted a vain and impertinent spirit. For
since things which in their own kind are lawful become sinful by the degree; if
the degree be heightened by intention, or become great like a heap of sand by a
coacervation of the innumerable atoms of dust, the actions are as damnable as
any of the natural daughters and productions of Hell, when they are entertained
without scruple, and renewed without repentance, and continued without
dereliction.

14. Thirdly, Although some inadvertencies of our life and lesser disobediences
accidentally become less hurtful, and because they are entailed upon the
infirmities of a good man, and the less wary customs and circumstances of
society, are also consistent with the state of Grace; yet all affection to the
smallest sins becomes deadly and damnable. (...) quod non (...) criminale dum
(...). 25. sect. (...) S. August.
He that loves his danger shall perish in it, says the Wise man; and every
friendly entertainment of an undecency invites in a greater Crime: for no man
can love a small sin, but there are in the greater crimes of its kind more
desirable flatteries, and more satisfactions of sensuality than in those
suckers and sprigs of sin. At first a little Disobedience is proportionable to
a man's temper, and his Conscience is not fitted to the bulk of a rude Crime:
but when a man has accepted the first insinuation of delight and swallowed it,
that little sin is past, and needs no more to dispute for entrance; then the
next design puts in and stands in the same probability to succeed the first,
and greater than the first had to make the entry. However, to love any thing
that God hates is direct enmity with him; and whatsoever the Instance be, it is
absolutely inconsistent with Charity, and therefore incompetent with the state
of Grace. So that if the sin be small, it is not a small thing that thou have
given thy love to it; every such person perishes like a Fool, cheaply and
ingloriously.

15. Fourthly, But it also concerns the niceness and prudence of Obedience to
God to stand at farther distance from a Vice than we usually attend to. For
many times (...) libidinum (...). Horat. Od. 18. l. 1.
Virtue and Vice differ but one degree, and the neighborhood is so dangerous,
that he who desires to secure his Obedience and Duty to God will remove farther
from the danger. For there is a rule of Justice, to which if one degree more of
severity be added it degenerates into Cruelty; and a little more Mercy is
Remissness and want of discipline, introduces licentiousness, and becomes
unmercifulness as to the public, and unjust as to the particular. Now this
Consideration is heightened, if we observe that Virtue and Vice consist not in
an indivisible point, but there is a latitude for either, which is not to be
judged by any certain rules drawn from the nature of the thing, but to be
estimated in proportion to the persons and other accidental Circumstances. He
that is burdened with a great charge, for whom he is bound under a Curse and
the crime of Infidelity to provide, may go farther in the acquisition, and be
more provident in the use of his money, than those persons for whom God has
made more ample provisions, and has charged them with fewer burdens and
engagements oeconomical. And yet no man can say, that just beyond such a degree
of Care stands Covetousness, and thus far on this side is Carelessness, and a
man may be in the confines of death before he be aware. Now the only way to
secure our Obedience and duty in such cases is, to remove farther off, and not
to dwell upon the confines of the enemies Country. My meaning is, that it is
not prudent nor safe for a man to do whatsoever he lawfully may do.

16. For besides that we are often mistaken in our judgments concerning the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of actions, he that will do all that he thinks he
may lawfully do, if ever he does change his station and increase in giving
himself liberty, will quickly arrive at doing things unlawful. It is good to
keep a reserve of our liberty, and to restrain our selves within bounds
narrower than the largest sense of the Commandment, that when our affections
wander and enlarge themselves, (as sometime or other they will do) then they
may enlarge beyond the ordinary, and yet be within the bounds of lawfulness.
That of which men make a scruple and a question at first, after an habitual
resolution of it stirs no more; but then their question is of something beyond
it. When a man has accustomed himself to pray seven times a day, it will a
little trouble his peace if he omits one or two of those times; but if it be
resolved then that he may please God with praying devoutly though but thrice
every day, after he has digested the scruples of this first question, possibly
some accidents may happen that will put his Conscience and Reason to dispute
whether three times be indispensably necessary: and still if he be far within
the bounds of lawfulness, it is well; but if he be at the margent of it, his
next remove may be into dissolution and unlawfulness. He that resolves to gain
all that he may lawfully this year, it is odds but next year he will be tempted
to gain something unlawfully. He that, because a man may be innocently angry,
will never restrain his passion, in a little time will be intemperate in his
anger, and mistake both his object and the degree. Thus facetiousness and
urbanity entertained with an open hand will turn into jestings that are
uncomely.

17. If you will be secure, remove your tent, dwell farther off. God has given
us more liberty than we may safely use; and although God is so gracious as to
comply much with our infirmities, yet if we do so too, as God's goodness in
indulging liberty to us was to prevent our sinning, our complying with our
selves will engage us in it: But if we imprison and confine our affections into
a narrower compass, then our (...) may be imperfect, but will not easily be
criminal. The dissolution of a scrupulous and strict person is not into a vice,
but into a less degree of virtue: he that makes a conscience of loud Laughter,
will not easily (...) drawn into the wantonnesses of Balls and Revellings, and
the longer and more impure Carnivalls. This is the way to secure our Obedience;
and no men are so curious of their health, as they that are scrupulous of the
Air they breathe in.

But now for our Obedience to Man, that has distinct considerations, and apart.

18. First, All obedience to Man is for God's sake; for God imprinting his
Authority upon the sons of men, like the Sun reflecting upon a cloud, produces
(...). (...). ad (...). 1.
a Parelius, or a representation of his own glory, though in great distances
and imperfection: it is the Divine Authority, though charactered upon a piece
of clay, and imprinted upon a weak and imperfect man. And therefore obedience
to our Superiors must be universal in respect of persons; to all Superiors.
This precept is expressly Apostolical, Be subject to every constitution and
authority of man for the Lord's sake: It is for God's 1 Pet. 13. 2.
sake, and therefore to every one, Whether it be to the King, as supreme, or to
his Ministers in subordination. That Is for Civil government. For Ecclesiastical
this; Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they
watch for your souls, as they that Heb. 13. 7.
must give account. All upon whom any ray of the Divine Authority is imprinted,
whether it be in greater or smaller Characters, are in proportion to their
authority to be obeyed; to all upon the same ground; [ for (...) in (...) ipsos
imperium (...). l. 3. Od. 1.
there is no power but of God.] So that no infirmity of person, no undervaluing
circumstance, no exterior accident is an excuse for Romans 13. 1.
disobedience: and to obey the Divine authority passing through the dictates of
a wise, excellent and prudent Governor, but to neglect the impositions of a
looser head, is to worship Christ only upon the Mount Tabor, and in the
glories of his (...), and to despise him upon Mount Calvary, and in the clouds
of his inglorious and humble Passion: Not only to the good and gentle, (so
(...).
S. Peter,) but to the harsh and rigid. And it was by Divine providence that
all those many and stricter precepts of obedience to Governors in the New
Testament were (...) by instances of Tyrants, Persecutors, Idolaters, and
Heathen Princes; and for others amongst whom there was variety of disposition,
there is no variety of imposition, but all excuses are removed, and all kinds
of Governors drawn into the sanction and sacredness of Authority.

19. Secondly, Not only to all Governors, but in all things we must obey.
Children, obey your Parents in all things: and Servants, obey your Masters in
all things. And this (...). 3. 20, 22. (...). 6. 5, 7.
also is upon the same ground; Do it as unto Christ; as unto the Lord, and not
unto men. But then this restrains the universality of obedience, that it may
run within its own chanel; as unto the Lord, therefore nothing against the
Divine Commandment. For if God speaks to us by man, transmitting Laws for
conservation of Civil society, for (...) policy, for Justice and personal
advantages, for the interests of Virtue and Religion, for discountenancing of
Vice, we are to receive it with the same Veneration as if God spoke himself to
us immediately. But because by his terror upon Mount Sinai he gave testimony
how great favor it is to speak to us by the ministration of our brethren, it
were a strange impudence, when we desire a proportionable and gentle instrument
of Divine commands, we should for this very proportion despise the Minister;
like the frogs in the Apologue insulting upon their wooden King. But then if
any thing come contrary to a Divine Law, know it is the voice of Jacob, of the
Supplanter, not of the right Heir; and though we must obey man for God's sake,
yet we must never disobey God for man's sake. In all things else we find no
exception; but according as the Superiors intend the obligation, and express
it by the signature of Laws, Customs, Interpretations, Permissions, and
Dispensations, that is, so far as the Law is obligatory in general, and not
dispensed with in particular, so far Obedience is a duty in all instances os
acts where no sin is ingredient.

20. Thirdly, And here also the smalness and cheapness of the duty does not
tolerate disobedience; for the despising the smallest Injunction is an act of
as formal and direct Rebellion as when the prevarication is in a higher
instance. It is here as in Divine Laws, but yet with some difference: For small
things do so little cooperate to the end of humane Laws, that a smaller reason
does by way of interpretation and tacit permission dispense, than can in a
Divine Sanction though of the lowest offices. Because God commands duties not
for the end to which they of themselves do cooperate; but to make sacred his
Authority, and that we by our obedience may confess him to be Lord: But in
humane Laws the Authority is made sacred not primarily for it self, but
principally that the Laws made in order to the conservation of Societies may be
observed. So that in the neglect of the smallest of Divine Ordinances we as
directly oppose God's great purpose and intendment as in greater matters; God's
dominion and authority (the (...) l. x.
conservation of which was his principal intention) is alike neglected: But in
omitting an humane Imposition of small concernment the case is different; it is
certain there is not any considerable violence done to the public interest by
a contemptible omission of a Law: the thing is not small, if the Commonwealth
be not safe, and all her great ends secured; but if they be, then the Authority
is inviolate, unless a direct contempt were intended, for its being was in
order to that end, not for it self, as it is in the case of Divine Laws, but
that the public interest be safe.

21. And therefore as great matters of humane Laws may be omitted for great
reasons, so may smaller matters for smaller reasons, but never without reason:
for, causelessly and contemptuously are all one. But in the application of the
particulars, either the Laws themselves, or Custom, or the prudence of a
sincere righteous man, or of a wise and disinterest person, is to be the Judge.
But let no man's confidence increase from the smalness of the matter to a
contempt of the Authority; for there are some sins whose malignity is
accidentally increased by the slightness of the subject matter; such are
Blasphemy, Perjury, and the contempt of Authority. To blaspheme God for the
loss of an Asper or a penny, to be forsworn in judgment for the rescuing of a
few Maravides or a fivegroats fine, is a worse crime than to be perjured for
the saving ten thousand pounds; and to despise Authority, when the obedience is
so easy as the wearing of a garment or doing of a posture, is a greater and
more impudent contempt, than to despise Authority imposing a great burden of a
more considerable pressure, where humane infirmity may tempt to a disobedience,
and lessen the crime. And let this caution also be inserted, that we do not at
all neglect small Impositions, if there be direct and signal injunction in the
particular instance. For as a great Body of Light transmitting his rays through
a narrow hollowness, does by that small Pyramid represent all the parts of its
magnitude and glory: so it may happen that a public Interest, and the
concernments of Authority, and the peace of a Church, and the integral
obedience of the Subjects, and the conservation of a Community, may be
transferred to us by an instance in its own nature inconsiderable; such as are
wearing of a Cognizance, remembering of a Word, carrying a Branch in time of
War, and things of the same nature: And therefore when the hand of Authority is
stretced out and held forth upon a Precept, and designs the duty upon
particular reason, or with actual intuition; there is not the same facility of
being dispensed with, as in the neglected and unconsidered instances of other
duties.

This only I desire to be observed; That if death or any violent accident,
imprisonment, loss of livelihood, or intolerable inconveniences be made
accidentally consequent to the observing of a Law merely humane, the Law binds
not in the particular instance. No man is bound to be a Martyr for a Ceremony,
or to die rather than break a Canon, or to suffer Confiscation of goods for the
pertinacious keeping of a civil Constitution. And it is not to be supposed that
a Lawgiver would have decreed a Rite, and bound the Lives of the subjects to
it, which are of a far greater value than a Rite; not only because it were
tyrannical and unreasonable, but because the evil of the Law were greater than
the good of it, it were against the reason of all Laws, and destroys the
privileges of Nature, and it puts a man into a condition as bad as the want of
all Laws; for nothing is civilly or naturally worse than Death, to which the
other evils arrive in their proportion. This is to be understood in particular
and positive Precepts, introduced for reasons particular, that is, less than
those are which combine all Societies, and which are the cement of all Bodies
political; I mean Laws ritual in the Church, and accidental and emergent in the
State. And that which is the best sign to distinguish these Laws from others,
is also the reason of the assertion. Laws decreed with a Penalty to the
transgressors cannot bind to an evil greater than that Penalty. If it be
appointed that we use a certain form of Liturgy under the forseiture of five
pound for every omission, I am bound in Conscience to obey it where I can; but
I am supposed legally to be disabled, if any Tyrant-power shall threaten to
kill me if I do, or make me pay an hundred pound, or any thing greater than the
forfeiture of the Law. For all the civil and natural power of the Law is by its
coercion, and the appendent punishment. The Law operates by rewards and
punishments, by hope and fear, and it is unimaginable that the Law under a less
penalty can oblige us in any case or accident to suffer a greater. For the
compulsion of the Tyrant is greater than the coercion of the Lawgiver; and the
Prince thinking the penalty annexed to be band sufficient, intended no greater
evil to the transgressour than the expressed penalty; and therefore much less
would he have them that obey the Law by any necessity be forced to a greater
evil: for then, Disobedience should escape better than (...). True it is, every
disobeying person that pays the penalty is not quite discharged from all his
Obligation; but it is then when his disobeying is criminal upon some other
stock besides the mere breach of the Law, as Contempt, Scandal, or the like:
for the Law binds the Conscience indirectly and by consequence; that is, in
plain language, God commands us to obey humane Laws, and the penalty will not
pay for the contempt, because that is a sin against God; it (...) pro (...) os
hominis liberi (...) assium (...), and (...) percusserat, jussit (...) 25
asses, (...) pro (...) (...). Tab. (...). A. Gel. l. 20. c. 1.
pays for the violation of the Law, because that was all the direct
transgression against Man. And then who shall make him recompense for suffering
more than the Law requires of him? Not the Prince; for it is certain, the
greatest value he set upon the Law was no bigger than the Penalty; and the
Commonwealth is supposed to be sufficiently secured in her interest by the
Penalty, or else the Law was weak, impotent, and unreasonable. Not God; for it
is not an act of obedience to him, for he binds us no farther to obey humane
Laws than the Lawgiver himself intends or declares; who cannot reasonably be
supposed so over-careful, as to bind Hay with cords of Silk and Gold, or
sumptuary Laws with the threads of Life; nor a Father commanding his Child to
wait on him every Meal, be thought to intend his Obligation, even though the
House be ready to fall on his head, or when he is to pass a sudden or
unfoordable flood before he can get to him. And that it may appear Man ought
not, it is certain God himself does not oblige us in all cases and in all
circumstances to observe every of his positive Precepts. For, assembling
together is a duty of God's commanding, which Heb, 10. 25.
we are not to neglect: but if Death waits at the door of these Assemblies, we
have the practice of the Primitive and best Christians to warrant us to serve
God in Retirements, and Cells, and Wildernesses, and leave the assembling
together till better opportunities. If I receive more benefit, or the
Commonwealth, or the Church and Religion any greater advantage by my
particular obedience in these circumstances, (which cannot easily be supposed
will be) it is a great act of charity to do it, and then to suffer for it: But
if it be no more, that is, if it be not expressly commanded to be done, (though
with Vide Par. 2.
loss of life or confiscation) it is a good charity to save my own life, or my
own estate: Dise. 10, (...). 11.
And though the other may be better, yet I am not in all cases obliged to do
that which is simply the best. It is a tolerable in (...), and allowed amongst
the very (...) permissions of Nature, that I may preserve my Life, unless it be
in a very few cases, which are therefore clearly to be expressed, or else the
contrary is to be presumed, as being a case most favorable. And it is
considerable, that nothing is worse than Death but Damnation, or something that
partakes of that in some of its worst ingredients; such as is a lasting
Torment, or a daily great misery in some other kind. And therefore since no
humane Law can bind a man to a worse thing than Death, if Obedience brings me
to death, I cannot be worse when I disobey it, and I am not so bad, if the
penalty of death be not expressed. And so for other penalties in their own
proportions.

This Discourse is also to be understood concerning the Laws of Peace, not of
War; not only because every disobedience in War may be punished with death,
(according as the reason may chance) but also because little things may be of
great and dangerous consequence. But in Peace it is observable, that there is
no humane positive superinduced Law but by the practice of all the world
(which, because the (...) of the Prince is certainly included in it, is the
surest interpretation) it is dispensed withal, by ordinary necessities, by
reason of lesser inconveniences and common accidents: thus the not saying of
our Office daily is excused by the study of Divinity, the publishing the banns
of Matrimony by an ordinary incommodity, the Fasting-days of the Church by a
little sickness or a journey; and therefore much rather if my Estate, and most
of all if my Life be in danger with it: and to say that in these cases there is
no interpretative permission to omit the particular action, is to accuse the
Laws and the Lawgiver, the one of unreasonableness, the other of
uncharitableness.

22. Fourthly, These Considerations are upon the execution of the duty: but
even toward Man our obedience must have a mixture of the Will and choice, like
as our injunction of obedience to the Divine Command. With good will doing
service (says the Apostle,) for it is impossible to secure the duty of
inferiors but by conscience and good will; unless provision could be made
against all their secret arts and concealments and escapings, which as no
providence can foresee, so no diligence can cure. It is but an eyeservice
whatsoever is compelled and involuntary: nothing rules a man in private but God
and his own desires; and they give Laws in a Wilderness, and accuse in a
Cloister, and do execution in a Closet, if there be any prevarication.

23. Fifthly, But obedience to humane Laws goes no farther, we are not bound to
obey with a direct and particular act of Understanding, as in all Divine
Sanctions: for so long as our Superiors are fallible, though it be highly
necessary we conform our wills to their innocent Laws, yet it is not a duty we
should think the Laws most prudent or convenient because all Laws are not so;
but it may concern the interest of humility and self-denial to (...) subject to
an inconvenient, so it be not a sinful, Command: for so we must choose an
affliction when God offers it, and give God thanks for it, and yet we may cry
under the smart of it, and call to God for ease and remedy. And yet it were
well if inferiors would not be too busy in disputing the prudence of their
Governors, and the convenience of their Constitutions: Whether they be sins or
no in the execution, and to our particulars, we are concerned to look to; I
say, as to our particulars; for an action may be a sin in the Prince commanding
it, and yet innocent in the person executing: as in the case of unjust Wars, in
which the Subject, who cannot, ought not to be a Judge, yet must be a Minister;
and it is notorious in the case of executing an unjust sentence, in which Is
(...). l. 130.
not the Executioner, but the Judge is only the unjust person; and he that
serves his Prince in an unjust War is but the executioner of an unjust
sentence: But whatever goes farther, does but undervalue the person, slight
the Government, and unloose the golden cords of Discipline. For we are not
entrusted in providing for degrees, so we secure the kind and condition of our
actions. And since God having derived rays and beams of Majesty, and
transmitted it in parts upon several states of men, has fixed humane authority
and dominion in the golden candlestick of Understanding, he that shall question
the prudence of his Governor, or the (...) (...).
wisdom of his Sanction, does unclasp the golden rings that tie the purple upon
the Prince's shoulder; he tempts himself with a reason to disobey, and
extinguish the light of Majesty by overturning the candlestick, and hiding the
opinion of his wisdom and understanding. And let me say this; He that is
confident of his own understanding and reasonable powers, (and who is more than
he that thinks himself wiser than the Laws?) needs no other Devil in the
neighborhood, no tempter but himself to pride and vanity, which are the
natural parents of Disobedience.

24. But a man's Disobedience never seems so reasonable as when the Subject is
forbidden (...) in to (...) est quod bonum (...). Sen. (...). 23.
to do an act of Piety, commanded indeed in the general, but uncommanded in
certain circumstances. And forward Piety and assiduous Devotion, a great and
undiscreet Mortifier, is often tempted to think no Authority can restrain the
fervours and distempers of zeal in such holy Exercises; and yet it is very
often as necessary to restrain the indiscretions of a forward person, as to
excite the remissness of the cold and frozen. Such persons were the Sarabaites
spoken of by (...), who were greater laborers and Collat. 18. c. 17.
stricter mortifiers than the Religious in Families and Colleges; and yet they
endured no Superior, nor Laws. But such customs as these are Humiliation
without Humility, humbling the body and exalting the spirit, or indeed
Sacrifices and no Obedience. It was an argument of the great wisdom of the
Fathers of the (...): when they heard (...). l. 1. c. (...). and 7. (...). and
(...). ad. A. D. (...).
of the prodigious Severities exercised by (...) Stylites upon himself, they
sent one of the Religious to him, with power to enquire what was his manner of
living, and what warrant he had for such a rigorous undertaking, giving in
charge to command him to give it over, and to live in a community with them,
and according to the common institution of those Religious families. The
Messenger did so, and immediately (...) removed his foot from his Pillar, with
a purpose to descend; but the other according to his Commission called to him
to stay, telling him his station and severity was from God. And he that in so
great a Piety was humble and obedient, did not undertake that Strictness out of
singularity, nor did it transport him to vanity; for that he had received from
the Fathers to make judgment of the man, and of his institution: whereas if
upon pretense of the great Holiness of that course he had refused the command,
the spirit of the person was to be declared caitive and imprudent, and the man
(...) from his troublesome and ostentous vanity.

25. Our Fasts, our Prayers, our Watchings, our Intentions of duty, our
frequent Communions, and all exterior acts of Religion, are to be guided by
our Superior, if he sees cause to restrain or assuage any (...). For a wound
may heal too fast, and then the tumor of the flesh is proud, not healthful;
and so may the indiscretions of Religion swell to vanity, when we think they
grow toward perfection: but when we can endure the causticks and correctives
of our Spiritual Guides in those things in which we are most apt to please our
selves, then our Obedience is regular and humble, and in other things there is
less of danger. There is a story told of a very Religious (...). (...). 4.
(...) (...). 20. and S. (...) (...). S (...) 35. (...) (...). S. B (...) D
(...) and (...). c. (...).
person, whose spirit in the ecstasie of Devotion was transported to the
clarity of a Vision, and he seemed to converse personally with the Holy Jesus,
feeling from such intercourse great spiritual delights and huge satisfactions:
in the midst of these joys the Bell called to Prayers, and he, used to the
strictness and well instructed in the necessities of Obedience, went to the
Church, and having finished his Devotions, returned, and found the Vision in
the same posture of glories and entertainment; which also said to him, Because
thou have left me, thou have found me; for if thou (...) not left me, I had
presently left thee. Whatever the story be, I am sure it is a (...) Parable;
for the way to increase spiritual comforts is, to be strict in the offices of
humble Obedience; and we never lose any thing of our joy by laying it aside to
attend a Duty: and Plutarch reports more honor of Agesilaus's prudence and
modesty, than of his gallantry and military fortune; (...) in (...) a (...).
for he was more honorable by obeying the Decree of the Spartan Senate
recalling him from the midst of his Triumphs, than he could have been by
finishing the War with prosperous success and disobedience.

26. Our Obedience, being guided by these Rules, is urged to us by the
consignation of Divine Precepts and the loud voice of thunder, even sealed by a
signet of God's right A. (...). l. 9. (...). 13.
hand, the signature of greatest Judgments. For God did with greater severity
punish the Rebellion of Korah and his company, than the express Murmurs against
himself, nay, than the high crime of Idolatry: for this Crime God visited them
with a sword; but for Disobedience and Mutiny against their Superiors, God
made the Earth to swallow some of them, and fire from Heaven to consume the
rest; to show that Rebellion is to be punished by the conspiration of Heaven
and Earth, as it is hateful and contradictory both to God and Man. And it is
not amiss to observe, that obedience to Man, being it is for God's sake, and
yet to a person clothed with the circumstances and the same infirmities with
our selves, is a greater instance of Humility, than to obey God immediately,
whose Authority is Divine, whose Presence is terrible, whose Power is infinite,
and not at all depressed by exterior disadvantages or lessening appearances:
just as it is both greater Faith and greater Charity to relieve a poor Saint
for Jesus sake, than to give any thing to Christ himself, if he should appear
in all the robes of Glory and immediate address. For it is to God and to
Christ, and wholly for their sakes, and to them that the Obedience is done, or
the Charity expressed; but themselves are persons whose awfulness, majesty and
veneration, would rather force than invite Obedience or Alms. But when God and
his Holy Son stand behind the cloud, and send their Servants to take the Homage
or the Charity, it is the same as if it were done to them, but receives the
advantage of acceptance by the accidental adherencies of Faith and Humility to
the several actions respectively. When a King comes to Rebels in person, it
strikes terror and veneration into them, who are too apt to neglect and
despise the person of his Ministers, whom they look upon as their
fellow subjects, and consider not in the exaltation of a deputed Majesty.
Charles the Fifth found a happy experience of it at Gaunt in Flanders, whose
Rebellion he appeased by his presence, which he could hardly have done by his
Army. But if the King's Authority be as much revered in his Deputy as it is
sacred in his own Person, it is the greater Humility and more confident
Obedience. And as it is certain that he is the most humble that submits to his
inferiors; so in the same proportion, the lower and meaner the instrument upon
which God's authority is born, the higher is the Grace that teaches us to stoop
so low. I do not say that a sin against humane Laws is greater than a
prevarication against a Divine Commandment; as the instances may be, the
distance is next to infinite, and to touch the earth with our foot within the
Octaves of Easter, or to taste flesh upon days of Abstinence, (even in those
places and to those persons where they did or do oblige) have no consideration,
if they be laid in balance against the crimes of Adultery, or Blasphemy, or
Oppression: because these Crimes cannot stand with the reputation and
sacredness of Divine Authority; but those others may in most instances very
well consist with the ends of Government, which are severally provided for in
the diversity of Sanctions respectively. But if we make our instances to other
purposes, we find, that to mutiny in an Army, or to keep private Assemblies in
a Monarchy, are worse than a single thought or morose delectation in a fancy of
impurity; because those others destroy Government more than these destroy
Charity of God or Obedience. But then though the instances may vary the
Conclusion, yet the formal reason is alike, and Disobedience to Man is a
disobedience against God; for God's Authority, and not Man's, is imprinted upon
the Superior; and it is like sacred fire in an earthen Censer, as holy as if
it were kindled with the fanning of a Cherub's wing, or placed just under the
Propitiatory upon a golden Altar; and it is but a gross conceit which cannot
distinguish Religion from its Porter, (...) from the Beast that carried it: so
that in all Disobedience to Men, in proportion to the greatness of the matter,
or the malice of the person, or his contradiction to the ends of Government and
combinations of Society, we may use the words by which the Prophet upbraided
Israel, (...) (...). 7. 13.
it not enough that you are grievous unto men, but will you grieve my God also?
It is a contempt of the Divinity, and the affront is transmitted to God
himself, when we despise the Power which God has ordained, and all power of
every lawful Superior is such; the Spirit of God being witness in the highest
1 Samuel 15. 23.
measure, Rebellion is as the sin of (...), and stubbornness as Idolatry.
(...). (...) in (...).
It is spoken of Rebellion against God, and all Rebellion is so, for, (...).
He that despiscth you, despises me, says the Blessed Jesus; that is menace
enough in the instance of Spiritual regiment. And, You are gathered together
against the Lord, says Moses to the rebellious Princes in the conspiracy of
Dathan; that is for the Temporal. And to encourage this Duty, I shall use no
other words than those of Achilles in Homer, (...).
They that obey in this world are better than they that command in Hell.

A PRAYER for the Grace of Holy OBEDIENCE.
O Lord and Blessed Savior Jesus, by whose Obedience many became righteous,
and reparations were made of the ruins brought to humane Nature by the
Disobedience of Adam; thou came into the world with many great and holy
purposes concerning our Salvation, and have given us a great precedent of
Obedience, which that thou might preserve to thy Heavenly Father, thou did
neglect thy Life, and becamest obedient even to the death of the Cross: O, let
me imit ate so blessed example, and by the merits of thy Obedience let me
obtain the grace of Humility and Abnegation of all my own desires in the
clearest Renunciation of my Will; that I may will and refuse in conformity to
thy sacred Laws and holy purposes; that I may do all thy will cheerfully;
chusingly, humbly, confidently, and continually; and thy will may be done upon
me with much mercy and fatherly dispensation of thy Providence. Amen.

2.
LOrd, let my Understanding adhere to and be satisfied in the excellent (...)
of thy Commandments; let my Affections dwell in their desires, and all my other
Faculties be set on daily work for performance of them: and let my love to obey
thee make me dutiful to my Superiors, upon whom the impresses of thy Authority
are set by thine own hand; that I may never despise their Persons, nor refuse
their Injunctions, nor choose mine own work, nor murmur at their burdens, nor
dispute the prudence of the Sanction, nor excuse my self, nor pretend (...) or
impossibilities; but that I may be (...) in my desires, and resigned to the
will of those whom thou have set over me; that since all thy Creatures obey thy
word, I alone may not disorder the Creation, and cancel those bands and
intermedial links of Subordination whereby my duty should pass to (...) and thy
glory, but that my Obedience being united to thy Obedience, I may also have my
portion in the (...) of thy Kingdom, O Lord and Blessed Savior Jesus.

Amen.
Considerations upon the Presentation of Jesus in the Temple.
1. THE Holy Virgin Mother, according to the Law of Moses, at the expiration of
a certain time came to the Temple to be purified: although in her sacred
Parturition she had contracted no Legal impurity; yet she exposed her self to
the public opinion and common reputation of an ordinary condition; and still
amongst all generations she is in all circumstances accounted blessed, and her
reputation no tittle altered, save only that it is made the more sacred by this
testimony of her Humility. But this we are taught from the consequence of this
instance; That if an End principally designed in any Duty should be supplied
otherwise in any particular person, the Duty is nevertheless to be observed;
and then the obedience and public order is reason enough for the observation,
though the proper End of its designation be wanting in the single person. Thus
is Fasting designed for mortification of the flesh and killing all its unruly
(...) Rodriquez in (...); and Sir Thom as More against (...).
appetites; and yet Married persons who have another remedy, and a Virgin whose
Temple is hallowed by a gift and the strict observances of Chastity, may be
tied to the Duty: and if they might not, then Fasting were nothing else but a
publication of our impure desires, and an exposing the person to the confidence
of a bold temptation, whilst the young men did observe the Faster to be tempted
from within. But the Holy Virgin from these acts (of which in signification she
had no need, because she sinned not in the Conception, nor was impure in the
production) expressed other Virtues besides Obedience; such as were humble
thoughts of her self, Devotion and Reverence to public Sanctions, Religion and
Charity, which were like the pure leaves of the whitest Lily, fit to represent
the beauties of her innocence, but were veiled and shadowed by that sacramental
of the Mosaic Law.

2. The Holy Virgin received the greatest favor that any of the Daughters of
Adam ever did, and knowing from whence and for whose glory she had received it,
returns the Holy Jesus in a Present to God again; for she had nothing so
precious as himself to make oblation of: and besides that, every firstborn
among the Males was holy to the Lord; this Child had an eternal and essential
Sanctity, and until he came into the World, and was made apt for her to make
present of him, there was never in the world any act of Adoration
proportionable to the honor of the great God; but now there was, and the Holy
Virgin made it, when she presented the Holy Child Jesus. And now, besides that
we are taught to return to God whatsoever we have received from him, if we
unite our Offerings and Devotions to this holy Present, we shall by the merit
and excellency of this Oblation exhibit to God an Offertory, in which he cannot
but delight for the combination's sake and society of his Holy Son.

3. The Holy Mother brought five Sicles and a pair of Turtle-doves to redeem
the Lamb of God from the Anathema; because every firstborn was to be
sacrificed to God, or redeemed if it was clean; it was the poor man's price,
and the Holy Jesus was never set at the greater prices when he was estimated
upon earth. For he that was Lord of the Kingdom chose his portion among the
poor of this World, that he might advance the poor to the riches of his
inheritance; and so it was from his Nativity hither. For at his Birth he was
poor, at his Circumcision poor, and in the likeness of a sinner; at his
Presentation poor, and like a sinner and a servant, for he chose to be redeemed
with an ignoble price. The five Sicles were given to the Priest for the
redemption of the Child; and if the Parents were not able, he was to be a
servant of the Temple, and to minister in the inferior offices to the Priest;
and this was God's seizure and possession of him: for although all the servants
of God are his inheritance; yet the Ministers of Religion, who derive their
portion of temporals from his title, who live upon the Corban, and eat the meat
of the Altar, which is God's peculiar, and come nearer to his Holiness by the
addresses of an immediate ministration, are God's own upon another and a
distinct challenge. But because Christ was to be the Prince of another
Ministry, and the chief Priest of another Order; he was redeemed from attending
the Mosaic Rites, which he came to (...), that he might do his Father's
business in establishing the Evangelical. Only remember, that the Ministers of
Religion are but God's (...): as they are not Lords of God's portion, and
therefore must dispense it like Stewards, not like Masters; so the People are
(...) their Patrons in paying, nor they their Beneficiaries in receiving Tithes
or other provisions of maintenance; they owe for it to none but to God himself:
and it would also be considered, that in all sacrilegious detentions of
Ecclesiastical rights God is the person principally injured.

4. The Turtle-doves (...) prima, and (...) conjugii sidem (...). Plin. l. 10.
(...). 33.
were offered also with the signification of another mystery. In the sacred
Rites of Marriage, although the permissions of natural desires are such as are
most ordinate to their ends, the avoiding Fornication, the alleviation of
Oeconomical cares and vexations, and the production of Children, and mutual
comfort and support; yet the apertures and permissions of Marriage have such
restraints of modesty and prudence, that all transgression of the just order to
such ends is a crime: and besides these, there may be degrees of inordination
or obliquity of intention, or too sensual complacency, or unhandsom
preparations of mind, or unsacramental thoughts; in which particulars, because
we have no determined rule but Prudence, and the analogy of the Rite, and the
severity of our Religion, which allow in some cases more, in some (...), and
always uncertain latitudes, for ought we know, there may be lighter
transgressions, something that we know not of: and for these at the
Purification of the woman it is supposed the Offering was made, and the
Turtures, by being an oblation, did deprecate a supposed irregularity; but by
being a chaste and marital Emblem, they professed the obliquity (if any were)
was within the protection of the sacred bands of Marriage, and therefore so
excusable as to be expiated by a cheap offering: and what they did in
Hieroglyphick, Christians must do in the exposition; be strict observers of the
main rites and principal obligations, and not neglectful to deprecate the
lesser unhandsomenesses of the too sensual applications.

5. God had at that instant so ordered that, for great ends of his own and
theirs, two very holy persons, of diverse Sexes and like Piety, (...) and Anna,
the one who lived an active and secular, the other a retired and contemplative
life, should come into the Temple by revelation and direction of the holy
Spirit, and see him whom they and all the World did look for, the Lord's
CHRIST, the consolation of Israel. They saw him, they rejoiced, they
worshipped, they prophesied, they sang Hymns; and old Simeon did comprehend and
circumscribe in his arms him that filled all the World, and was then so
satisfied that he desired to live no longer: God had verified his promise, had
shown him the Messiah, had filled his heart with joy, and made his old age
honorable; and now after all this sight, no object could be pleasant but the
joys of Paradise. For as a man who has stared too freely upon the face and
beauties of the Sun is blind and dark to objects of a less splendour, and is
forced to shut his eyes, that he may through the degrees of darkness perceive
the inferior beauties of more proportioned objects: so was old Simeon, his
eyes were so filled with the glories of this Revelation, that he was willing to
close them in his last night, that he might be brought into the communications
of Eternity; and he could never more find comfort in any other object this
world could minister. For such is the excellency of spiritual things, when they
have once filled the corners of our hearts, and made us highly sensible and
apprehensive of the interior beauties of God and of Religion, all things of
this World are flat and empty, and unsatisfying vanities, as unpleasant as the
lees of Vinegar to a tongue filled with the spirit of high Italick Wines. And
until we are so dead to the World as to apprehend no gust or freer complacency,
in exterior objects, we never have entertained Christ, or have had our cups
overflow with Devotion, or are filled with the Spirit. When our Chalice is
filled with holy oil, with the Anointing from above, it will entertain none of
the waters of bitterness; or if it does, they are thrust to the bottom, they
are the lowest of our desires, and therefore only admitted, because they are
natural and constituent.

6. The good old Prophetess Anna had lived long in chaste Widowhood, in the
service of the Temple, in the continual offices of Devotion, in Fasting and
Prayer; and now came the happy instant in which God would give her a great
benediction, and an earnest of a greater. The returns of Prayer and the
blessings of Piety are certain; and though not dispensed according to the
expectances of our narrow conceptions, (...) shall they so come, at such times
and in such measures, as shall crown the Piety, and (...) the desires, and
reward the expectation. It was in the Temple, the same place where she had for
so many years poured out her heart to God, that God poured forth his heart to
her, sent his Son from his bosom, and there she received his benediction.
Indeed in such places God does most particularly exhibit himself, and Blessing
goes along with him wherever he goes: In holy places God has put his holy
Name, and to holy persons God does oftentimes manifest the interior and more
secret glories of his Holiness; provided they come thither, as old Simeon and
Anna did, by the motions of the holy Spirit, not with designs of vanity, or
curiosity, or sensuality; for such spirits as those come to profane and
desecrate the house, and unhallow the person, and provoke the Deity of the
place, and blast us with unwholsom airs.

7. But Joseph and Mary wondered at these things which were spoken, and
treasured them in their hearts, and they became matter of Devotion and mental
Prayer, or Meditation.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal God, who by the Inspirations of thy Holy Spirit did direct thy
servants Simeon and Anna to the Temple at the instant of the Presentation of
the Holy Child Jesus, that so thou might verify thy promise, and manifest
thy Son, and reward the (...) of holy people, who longed for Redemption by the
coming of the Messiah; give me the perpetual assistance of the same Spirit to
be as a Monitor and a Guide to me, leading me to all holy actions, and to the
embracements and possessions of thy glorious Son; and remember all thy faithful
people, who wait for the consolation and redemption of the Church from all her
miseries and persecutions, and at last satisfy their desires by the
revelations of thy mercies and Salvation. Thou have advanced thy Holy Child,
and set him up for a sign of thy Mercies, and a representation of thy Glories.
Lord, let no act or thought or word of mine ever be in contradiction to this
blessed sign, but let it be for the ruin of all my vices, and all the powers
the Devil imploys against the Church, and for the raising up all those virtues
and Graces which thou did design me in the purposes of Eternity: but let my
portion never be amongst the (...), or the scornful, or the Heretical, or the
profane, or any of those who stumble at this Stone which thou have laid for the
foundation of thy Church, and the structures of a virtuous life. Remember me
with much mercy and compassion when the sword of Sorrows or Afflictions shall
pierce my heart; first transfix me with love, and then all the Troubles of this
world will be consignations to the joys of a better: (...) grant for the
mercies and the name sake of thy Holy Child Jesus.

Amen.
DISCOURSE III. Of Meditation.
1. IF in the Definition of Meditation I should call it an unaccustomed and
unpractised Duty, I should speak a truth, though somewhat inartificially: for
not only the interior beauties and brighter excellencies are as unfelt as
Idea's and Abstractions are, but also the practice and common knowledge of the
Duty it self are strangers to us, like the retirements of the Deep, or the
undiscovered treasures of the Indian Hills. And this is a very great cause of
the dryness and expiration of men's Devotion, because our Souls are so little
(...) with the waters and holy dews of Meditation. We go to our prayers by
chance, or order, or by determination of accidental occurrences; and we recite
them as we read a book; and sometimes we are sensible of the Duty, and a flash
of lightning makes the room bright, and our prayers end, and the lightning is
gone, and we as dark as ever. We draw our water from standing pools, which
never are filled but with sudden showers, and therefore we are dry so often:
Whereas if we would draw water from the Fountains of our Savior, and derive
them through the chanel of diligent and prudent Meditations, our Devotion would
be a continual current, and safe against the barrenness of frequent droughts.

2. For Meditation is an attention and application of spirit to Divine things;
a searching out all instruments to a holy life, a devout consideration of them,
and a production of those affections which are in a direct order to the love of
God and a pious conversation. Indeed Meditation is all that great instrument of
Piety whereby it is made prudent, and reasonable, and orderly, and perpetual.
For supposing our Memory instructed with the knowledge of such mysteries and
revelations as are apt to entertain the Spirit, the Understanding is first and
best employed in the consideration of them, and then the Will in their
reception, when they are duly prepared and so transmitted; and both these in
such manner and to such purposes, that they become the Magazine and great
Repositories of Grace, and instrumental to all designs of Virtue.

3. For the Understanding is not to consider the matter of any meditation in
itself, or as it determines in natural excellencies or unworthiness
respectively, or with a purpose to furnish it self with notion and riches of
knowledge; for that is like the Winter-Sun, it shines, but warms not; but in
such order as themselves are put in the designations of Theology, in the order
of Divine Laws, in their spiritual capacity, and as they have influence upon
Holiness: for the Understanding here is something else besides the Intellectual
power of the Soul, it is the Spirit, that is, it is celestial in its
application, as it is spiritual in its nature; and we may understand it well by
considering the beatifical portions of Soul and body in their future glories.
For therefore even our Bodies in the Resurrection shall be spiritual, because
the operation of them shall be in order to spiritual glories, and their natural
actions (such as are Seeing and Speaking) shall have a spiritual object and
supernatural end; and here as we partake of such excellencies and cooperate to
such purposes, men are more or less spiritual. And so is the Understanding
taken from its first and lowest ends of resting in notion and ineffective
contemplation, and is made Spirit, that is, wholly ruled and guided by God's
Spirit to supernatural ends and spiritual employments; so that it understands
and considers the motions of the Heavens, to declare the glory of God, the
prodigies and alterations in the Firmament, to demonstrate his handiwork; it
considers the excellent order of creatures, that we may not disturb the order
of Creation, or dissolve the golden chain of Subordination. Aristotle and
Porphyry, and the other Greek Philosophers, studied the Heavens to search out
their natural causes and production of Bodies; the wiser Chaldees and Assyrians
studied the same things, that they might learn their Influences upon us, and
make Predictions of contingencies; the more moral Egyptian described his
Theorems in Hieroglyphics and fantastic representments, to teach principles
of Policy, Economy, and other prudences of Morality and secular negotiation:
But the same Philosophy, when it is made Christian, considers as they did, but
to greater purposes, even that from the Book of the Creatures we may glorify
the Creator, and hence derive arguments of Worship and Religion; this is
Christian Philosophy.

4. I instance only in considerations natural to spiritual purposes; but the
same is the manner in all Meditation, whether the matter of it be Nature or
Revelation. For if we think of Hell, and consider the infinity of its duration,
and that its flames last as long as God lasts, and thence conjecture, upon the
rules of proportion, why a finite creature may have an infinite, unnatural
duration; or think by what ways a material fire can torment an immaterial
substance; or why the Devils, who are intelligent and wise creatures, should be
so foolish as to hate God from whom they know every rivulet of amability
derives; This is to study, not to meditate: for Meditation considers any thing
that may best make us to avoid the place, and to quit a vicious habit, or
master and (...) an untoward inclination, or purchase a virtue, or exercise
one: so that Meditation is an act of the Understanding put to the right use.

5. For the Holy Jesus, coming to redeem us from the bottomless pit, did it by
lifting us up out of the puddles of impurity and the unwholesome waters of
vanity; He redeemed us from our vain conversation; and our Understandings had
so many vanities, that they were made instruments of great impiety. The
unlearned and ruder Nations had fewer Virtues, but they had also fewer Vices
than the wise Empires, that ruled the World with violence and wit together. The
softer (...) Athen. l. 4.
Asians had Lust and Intemperance in a full Chalice; but their Understandings
were ruder than the finer Latins, for these men's understandings distilled
wickedness as through a Limbeck, and the Romans drank spirits and the sublimed
quintessences of Villainy, whereas the other made themselves drunk with the lees
and cheaper instances of sin: so that the Understanding is not an idle and
useless faculty, but naturally drives to practice, and brings guests into the
inward Cabinet of the Will, and there they are entertained and feasted. And
those Understandings which did not serve the baser end of Vices, yet were
unprofitable for the most part, and furnished their inward rooms with glasses
and beads, and trifles fit for an American Mart. From all these impurities and
vanities Jesus has redeemed all his Disciples, and not only thrown out of his
Temples all the impure rites of Flora and Cybele, but also the trifling and
unprofitable ceremonies of the more sober Deities, not only Vices, but useless
and unprofitable Speculations, and has consecrated our Head into a Temple, our
Understanding to Spirit, our Reason to Religion, our Study to Meditation: and
this is the first part of the Sanctification of our Spirit.

6. And this was the cause Holy Scripture commands the duty of Meditation in
proportion still to the excellencies of Piety and a holy life, to which it is
highly and aptly Psalm. 1. 2.
instrumental. Blessed is the man that meditates in the Law of the Lord day and
night. And the reason of the Proposition and the use of the Duty is expressed
to this purpose; Thy words have I hid in my heart, that I should not sin
against thee. The placing and fixing Psalm. 119. (...).
those divine Considerations in our understandings, and hiding them there, are
designs of high Christian prudence, that they with advantage may come forth in
the expresses of a holy life. For what in the world is more apt and natural to
produce Humility, than to meditate upon the low stoopings and descents of the
Holy Jesus, to the nature of a Man, to the weaknesses of a Child, to the
poverties of a Stable, to the ignobleness of a Servant, to the shame of the
Cross, to the pains of Cruelty, to the dust of Death, to the title of a Sinner,
and to the wrath of God? By this instance Poverty is made honorable, and
Humility is sanctified and made noble, and the contradictions of nature are
amiable and (...) for a wise election. Thus hatred of sin, shame of our selves,
confusion at the sense of humane misery, the love of God, confidence in his
Promises, desires of Heaven, holy resolutions, resignation of our own
appetites, (...) to Divine will, oblations of our selves, Repentance and
mortification, are the proper emanations from Meditation of the sordidness of
sin, our proneness to it, our daily miseries as issues of Divine vengeance, the
glories of God, his infinite unalterable Veracity, the satisfactions in the
vision of God, the rewards of Piety, the rectitude of the Laws of God, and
perfection of his Sanctions, God's supreme and paternal Dominion, and his
certain malediction of sinners: and when any one of these Considerations is
taken to pieces, and so placed in the rooms of application, that a piece of
duty is conjoined to a piece of the mystery, and the whole office to the
purchase of a grace, or the extermination of a vice, it is like opening our
windows to let in the Sun and the Wind; and Holiness is as proportioned an
effect to this practice, as Glory is to a persevering Holiness, by way of
reward and moral causality.

7. For all the Affections that are in Man are either natural, or by chance, or
by the incitation of Reason and discourse. Our natural affections are not
worthy the entertainments of a Christian; they must be supernatural and divine
that put us into the hopes of Perfection and Felicities: and these other that
are good, unless they come by Meditation, they are but accidental, and set with
the evening Sun: But if they be produced upon the strengths of pious
Meditation, they are as perpetual as they are reasonable, and excellent in
proportion to the Piety of the principle. A Garden that is watered with short
and sudden showrs is more uncertain in its fruits and beauties than if a
Rivulet waters it with a perpetual distilling and constant humectation: And
just such are the short emissions and unpremeditated resolutions of Piety
begotten by a dash of holy rain from Heaven, whereby God sometimes uses to call
the careless but to taste what excellencies of Piety they neglect; but if they
be not produced by the Reason of Religion, and the Philosophy of Meditation,
they have but the life of a Fly or a tall Gourd, they come into the World only
to say they had a Being, you could scarce know their length but by measuring
the ground they cover in their fall.

8. For since we are more moved by material and sensible objects than by things
merely speculative and intellectual, and generals even in spiritual things are
less perceived and less motive than particulars: Meditation frames the
understanding part of Religion to the proportions of our nature and our
weakness, by making some things more circumstantiate and material, and the more
spiritual to be particular, and therefore the more applicable; and the mystery
is made like the Gospel to the Apostles, Our eyes do see, and our ears do hear,
and our hands do handle thus much of the word of life as is prepared for us in
the Meditation.

9. First, And therefore every wise person, that intends to furnish himself
with affections of Religion, or detestation against a Vice, or glorifications
of a Mystery, still will proportion the Mystery, and fit it with such
circumstances of fancy and application, as by observation of himself he knows
aptest to make impression. It was a wise design of Mark Antony when he would
stir up the people to revenge the death of Caesar, he brought his body to the
pleading-place, he showed his wounds, held up the rent mantle, and showed them
the garment that he put on that night in which he beat the Nervii, that is, in
which he won a victory, for which his memory was dear to them; he showed them
that wound which pierced his heart, in which they were placed by so dear a
love, that he made them his heirs, and left to their public use places of
delight and pleasure: and then it was natural, when he had made those things
present to them which had once moved their love and his honor, that grief at
the loss of so honorable and so loved a person should succeed; and then they
were Lords of all, their sorrow and revenge seldom slept in two beds. And thus
holy Meditation produces the passions and desires it intends, it makes the
object present and almost sensible, it renews the first passions by a fiction
of imagination; it passes from the Paschal Parlour to Cedron, it tells the
drops of sweat, and measures them, and finds them as big as drops of blood, and
then conjectures at the greatness of our sins; it fears in the midst of
Christ's Agonies, it hears his groans, it spies Judas his Lantern afar off, it
follows Jesus to Gabbatha, and wonders at his innocence and their malice, and
feels the strokes of the Whip, and shrinks the head when the Crown of Thorns is
thrust hard upon his holy brows, and at last goes step by step with Jesus, and
carries part of the Cross, and is nailed fast with sorrow and compassion, and
dies with love. For if the Soul be principle of its own actions, it can produce
the same effects by reflex acts of the Understanding, when it is assisted by
the Imaginative part, as when it sees the thing acted: only let the Meditation
be as minute, particular and circumstantiate as it may; for a Widow by
representing the caresses of her dead Husband's love produces sorrow and the
new affections of a sad endearment. It is too sure, that the recalling the
circumstances of a past impurity does re-inkindle the flame, and entertain the
fancy with the burnings of an impure fire: And this happens not by any
advantages of Vice, but by the nature of the thing, and the efficacy of
Circumstances. So does holy Meditation produce those impresses and signatures
which are the proper effects of the Mystery, if presented in a right line and
direct representation.

10. Secondly, He that means to meditate in the best order to the productions
of Piety, must not be inquisitive for the highest Mysteries, but the plainest
Propositions are to him of the greatest use and evidence. For Meditation is the
duty of all, and therefore God has fitted such matter for it which is
proportioned to every understanding, and the greatest Mysteries of Christianity
are plainest, and yet most fruitful of Meditation, and most useful to the
production of Piety. High Speculations are as barren as the tops of Cedars; but
the Fundamentals of Christianity are fruitful as the Valleys or the creeping
Vine. For know, that it is no Meditation, but it may be an Illusion, when you
consider Mysteries to become more learned, without thoughts of improving Piety.
Let your affections be as high as they can climb toward God, so your
considerations be humble, fruitful, and practically mysterious. Oh that I had
the wings of a Dove, that I might fly away and be at rest, said David. The
wings of an Eagle would have carried him higher, but yet the innocent Dove did
furnish him with the better Emblem to represent his humble design; and lower
meditations might sooner bring him to rest in God. It was a saying of AEgidius,
That an old and a simple woman, if she loves Jesus, may be greater than was
Brother Bonaventure. Want of Learning and disability to consider great secrets
of Theology does not at all retard our progress to spiritual perfections; Love
to Jesus may be better promoted by the plainer understandings of honest and
unlettered people, than by the finer and more exalted speculations of great
Clerks that have less Devotion. For although the way of serving God by the
Understanding be the best and most lasting, yet it is not necessary the
Understanding should be dressed with troublesome and laborious Notions: the
Reason that is in Religion is the surest principle to engage our services, and
more perpetual than the sweetnesses and the motives of Affection; but every
honest man's Understanding is then best furnished with the discourses and the
reasonable parts of Religion, when he knows those mysteries of Religion upon
which Christ and his Apostles did build a holy life, and the superstructures of
Piety; those are the best materials of his Meditation.

11. So that Meditation is nothing else but the using of all those arguments,
motives and irradiations which God intended to be instrumental to Piety. It is
a composition of both ways; for it stirs up our Affections by Reason and the
way of Understanding, that the wise Soul may be satisfied in the Reasonableness
of the thing, and the affectionate may be entertained with the sweetnesses of
holy Passion; that our Judgment be determined by discourse, and our Appetites
made active by the caresses of a religious fancy. And therefore the use of
Meditation is, to consider any of the Mysteries of Religion with purposes to
draw from it Rules of life, or affections to Virtue, or detestation of Vice;
and from hence the man rises to Devotion, and mental Prayer, and Intercourse
with God; and after that he rests himself in the bosom of Beatitude, and is
swallowed up with the comprehensions of Love and Contemplation. These are the
several degrees of Meditation. But let us first understand that part of it
which is Duty; and then, if any thing succeed of a middle condition between
Duty and Reward, we will consider also how that Duty is to be performed, and
how the Reward is to be managed, that it may prove to be no Illusion: Therefore
I add also this Consideration.

12. Thirdly, Whatsoever pious purposes and deliberations are entertained in
the act of Meditation, they are carefully to be maintained and thrust forward
to actual performances, although they were indefinite and indeterminate, and no
other ways decreed but by resolutions and determinations of Reason and
Judgment. For God assists every pious action according to its exigence and
capacity, and therefore blesses holy Meditations with results of Reason, and
prepossessions dogmatically decreeing the necessity of Virtue, and the
convenience of certain exercises in order to the purchase of it. He then that
neglects to actuate such discourses, loses the benefit of his Meditation; he is
gone no farther than when he first set out, and neglects the inspirations of
the Holy Spirit. For if at any time it be certain what spirit it is that speaks
within the Soul, it is most certain that it is the good Spirit that moves us to
an act of Virtue in order to acquisition of the habit: and when God's grace
has assisted us so far in our Meditation that we understand our Duty, and are
moved with present arguments, if we put not forth our hand and make use of
them, we do nothing toward our Duty; and it is not certain that God will
create Graces in us as he does the Soul. Let every pious person think every
conclusion of Reason in his Meditation to have passed an obligation upon him:
and if he has decreed that Fasting so often, and doing so many Religious acts,
is convenient and conducing to the production of a Grace he is in pursuit of;
let him know that every such decree and reasonable proposition is the Grace of
God, instrumental to Piety, part of his assistance, and therefore in no case to
be extinguished.

13. Fourthly, In Meditation let the Understanding be restrained, and under
such prudent coercion and confinement that it wander not from one discourse to
another, till it has perceived some fruit from the first; either that his Soul
be instructed in a Duty, or moved by a new argument, or confirmed in an old, or
determined to some exercise and intermedial action of Religion, or has broke
out into some Prayers and intercourse with God in order to the production of a
Virtue. And this is the mystical design of the Spouse in the (...) of Solomon:
I adjure you, O you daughters of Jerusalem, (...). 3. (...).
by the (...) and by the Hinds of the field, that you stir not up nor awake my
love till he please. For it is lightness of spirit to pass over a field of
flowers and to fix nowhere, but to leave it without carrying some honey with
us; unless the subject be of it self barren and unfruitful, and then why was it
chosen? or that it is made so by our indisposition, and then indeed it is to be
quitted. But (it is S. Chrysostom's Simile) As a Lamb sucking the breast of its
dam and Mother moves the head from one part to another till it has found a
distilling fontinel, and then it fixes till it be satisfied, or the (...) cease
dropping: so should we in Meditation reject such materials as are barren like
the tops of hills, and six upon such thoughts which nourish and refresh, and
there dwell till the nourishment be drawn forth, or so much of it as we can
then temperately digest.

14. Fifthly, In Meditation strive rather for Graces than for Gifts, for
affections in the way of Virtue more than the overslowings of sensible
Devotion; and therefore if thou find any thing by which thou may be
better, though thy spirit do not actually rejoice or find any gust or relish in
the manducation, yet choose it greedily. For although the chief end of
Meditation be Affection, and not Determinations intellectual; yet there is
choice to be had of the Affections, and care must be taken that the affections
be desires of Virtue, or repudiations and aversions from something criminal;
not joys and transportations spiritual, comforts and complacencies, for they
are no part of our duty: sometimes they are encouragements, and sometimes
rewards; sometimes they depend upon habitude and disposition of body, and seem
great matters when they have little in them, and are more bodily than
spiritual, like the gift of tears, and yerning of the bowels; and sometimes
they are illusions and temptations, at which if the Soul stoops and be greedy
after, they may prove like Hippomenes's golden Apples to Atalanta, retard our
course, and possibly do some hazard to the whole race. And this will be nearer
reduced to practice, if we consider the variety of matter which is fitted to
the Meditation in several states of men traveling toward Heaven.

15. For the first beginners in Religion are employed in the mastering of their
first Appetites, casting out their Devils, exterminating all evil customs,
lessening the proclivity of habits, and countermanding the too-great
forwardness of vicious inclinations; and this, which Divines call the Purgative
way, is wholly spent in actions of Repentance, Mortification and Self-denial:
and therefore if a penitent person snatches at Comforts, or the tastes of
sensible Devotion, his Repentance is too delicate, it is but a rod of Roses and
Jessamine. If God sees the spirit broken all in pieces, and that it needs a
little of the oil of gladness for its support and restitution to the capacities
of its duty, he will give it; but this is not to be designed, nor snatched at
in the Meditation: Tears of joy are not good expressions nor instruments of
Repentance; we must not gather grapes from thorns, nor figs from thistles; no
refreshments to be looked for here, but such only as are necessary for support;
and when God sees they are, let not us trouble our selves, he will provide
them. But the Meditations which are prompt to this Purgative way and practice
of first beginners are not apt to produce delicacies, but in the sequel and
consequent of it. Afterward it brings forth the pleasant fruit of
righteousness, but for the present it has no joy in it, no joy of sense,
though much satisfaction to Reason. And such are Meditations of the Fall of
Angels and Man, the Ejection of them from Heaven, of our Parents from Paradise,
the Horror and obliquity of Sin, the Wrath of God, the severity of his Anger,
Mortification of our body and spirit, Self-denial, the Cross of Christ, Death,
and Hell, and Judgment, the terrors of an evil Conscience, the insecurities of
a Sinner, the unreasonableness of Sin, the troubles of Repentance, the Worm and
sting of a burdened spirit, the difficulties of rooting out evil Habits, and
the utter abolition of Sin: if these nettles bear honey, we may fill our
selves; but such sweetnesses spoil the operations of these bitter potions. Here
therefore let your addresses to God and your mental prayers be affectionate
desires of Pardon, humble considerations of our selves, thoughts of revenge
against our Crimes, designs of Mortification, indefatigable solicitations for
Mercy, expresses of shame and confusion of face; and he meditates best in the
purgative way that makes these affections most operative and high.

16. After our first step is taken, and the punitive part of Repentance is
resolved on, and begun, and put forward into good degrees of progress, we then
enter into the Illuminative way of Religion, and set upon the acquist of
Virtues, and the purchase of spiritual Graces; and therefore our Meditations
are to be proportioned to the design of that employment: such as are
considerations of the Life of Jesus, Examples of Saints, reasons of Virtue,
means of acquiring them, designations of proper exercises to every pious habit,
the Eight Beatitudes, the gifts and fruits of the Holy Ghost, the Promises of
the Gospel, the Attributes of God as they are revealed to represent God to be
infinite, and to make us Religious, the Rewards of Heaven, excellent and select
Sentences of holy persons, to be as incentives of Piety: These are the proper
matter for Proficients in Religion. But then the affections producible from
these are love of virtue, desires to imitate the Holy Jesus, affections to
Saints and holy persons, conformity of choice, subordination to God's will,
election of the ways of Virtue, satisfaction of the Understanding in the ways
of Religion, and resolutions to pursue them in the midst of all discomforts and
persecutions; and our mental prayers or intercourse with God, which are the
present emanations of our Meditations, must be in order to these affections,
and productions from those: and in all these yet there is safety and piety, and
no seeking of our selves, but designs of Virtue in just reason and duty to God,
and for his sake, that is, for his commandment. And in all these particulars,
if there be such a sterility of spirit that there be no end served but of
spiritual profit, we are never the worse; all that God requires of us is, that
we will live well, and repent in just measure and right manner, and he that
does so, has meditated well.

17. From hence if a pious Soul passes to affections of greater sublimity, and
intimate and more immediate, abstracted and immaterial love, it is well; only
remember that the love God requires of us is an operative, material, and
communicative love; If ye love me, keep my Commandments: so that still a good
life is the effect of the sublimest Meditation; and if we make our duty sure
behind us, ascend up as high into the Mountain as you can, so your ascent may
consist with the securities of your person, the condition of infirmity, and the
interests of your duty. According to the saying of Sermon. 1. de assumpt. (...)
(...).
(...), Our empty saying of (...), and reciting verses in honor of his Name,
please not God so well as the imitation of him does advantage to us; and a
devout (...) pleases the Spouse better than an idle Panegyric: Let your work
be like his, your Duty in imitation of his Precept and Example, and then sing
praises as you list; no heart is large enough, no voice pleasant enough, no
life long enough, nothing but an eternity of duration and a beatifical state
can do it well: and therefore holy David joins them both, Whosoever offers me
thanks and praise, he honors me; and to him that orders his Psalm. 50. (...)
conversation aright I will show the salvation of God. All thanks and praise
without a right-ordered conversation are but the Echo of Religion, a voice and
no substance; but if those praises be sung by a heart righteous and obedient,
that is, singing with the spirit and singing with understanding, that is the
Music God delights in.

18. Sixthly, But let me observe and press this caution: It is a mistake, and
not a little dangerous, when people religious and forward shall too promptly,
frequently and nearly spend their thoughts in consideration of Divine
Excellencies. God has shown thee merit enough to spend all thy stock of love
upon him in the characters of his Power, the book of the Creature, the great
tables of his Mercy, and the lines of his Justice; we have cause enough to
praise his Excellencies in what we feel of him, and are refreshed with his
influence, and see his beauties in reflection, though we do not put our eyes out
with staring upon his face. To behold the Glories and Perfections of God with a
more direct intuition is the privilege of Angels, who yet cover their faces in
the brightness of his presence: it is only permitted to us to consider the back
parts of God. And therefore those Speculations are too bold and imprudent
addresses, and minister to danger more than to Religion, when we pass away from
the direct studies of Virtue, and those thoughts of God which are the freer and
safer communications of the Deity, which are the means of intercourse and
relation between him and us, to those considerations concerning God which are
Metaphysical and remote, the formal objects of adoration and wonder, rather
than of virtue and temperate discourses: for God in Scripture never revealed
any of his abstracted Perfections and remoter and mysterious distances, but
with a purpose to produce fear in us, and therefore to chide the temerity and
boldness of too familiar and nearer intercourse.

19. True it is that every thing we see or can consider represents some
perfections of God; but this I mean, that no man should consider too much and
meditate too frequently upon the immediate Perfections of God, as it were by
way of intuition, but as they are manifested in the Creatures and in the
ministeries of Virtue: and also whenever God's Perfections be the matter of
Meditation, we should not ascend upwards into him, but descend upon our selves,
like fruitful vapors drawn up into a cloud, descending speedily into a shower,
that the effect of the consideration be a design of good life; and that our
loves to God be not spent in abstractions, but in good works and humble
Obedience. The other kind of love may deceive us; and therefore so may such
kind of considerations which are its instrument. But this I am now more
particularly to consider.

20. For beyond this I have described, there is a degree of Meditation so
exalted, that it changes the very name, and is called Contemplation, and it is
in the unitive way of Religion, that is, it consists in unions and adherences
to God; it is a prayer of quietness and silence, and a meditation
extraordinary, a discourse without variety, a vision and intuition of (...)
Excellencies, an immediate entry into an orb of light, and a resolution of all
our faculties into sweetnesses, affections and starings upon the Divine beauty;
and is carried on to ecstasies, raptures; suspensions, elevations,
abstractions, and apprehensions beatifical. In all the course of virtuous
meditation the Soul is like a Virgin invited to make a matrimonial contract, it
inquires the condition of the person, his estate and disposition, and other
circumstances of amability and desire: But when she is satissied with these
enquiries, and has chosen her Husband, she no more considers particulars, but
is moved by his voice and his gesture, and runs to his entertainment and
sruition, and spends her self wholly in affections, not to obtain, but enjoy
his love.

Thus it is said.

21. But this is a thing not to be discoursed of, but felt: And although in
other Sciences the terms must first be known, and then the Rules and
Conclusions scientifical; here it is otherwise: for first the whole experience
of this must be obtained, before we can so much as know what it is; and the end
must be acquired first, the Conclusion before the Premises. They that pretend
to these Heights call them the Secrets of the Kingdom; but they are such which
no man can describe, such which God has not revealed in the publication of the
Gospel, such for the acquiring of which there are no means prescribed, and to
which no man is obliged, and which are not in any man's power to obtain, nor
such which it is lawful to pray for or desire, nor concerning which we shall
ever be called to an account.

22. Indeed when persons have been long sostned with the continual droppings of
Religion, and their spirits made timorous and apt for impression by the
assiduity of Prayer, and perpetual alarms of death, and the continual dyings of
Mortification; the Fancy, which is a very great instrument of Devotion, is kept
continually warm and in a disposition and aptitude to take fire, and to flame
out in great ascents: and when they suffer transportations beyond the burdens
and support of Reason, they suffer (...) know not what, and call it what they
please, and other pious people that hear (...) of it admire that Devotion which
is so eminent and beatified, (for so they esteem (...)) and so they come to be
called Raptures and Ecstasies, which even amongst the A (...) were so seldom,
that they were never spoke of; for those Visions, Raptures and Intuitions of S.
Stephen, Acts 10. 10. (...) and Chapter 11. 5. (...), (...) vidit (...) dum
(...) averat.
S. Paul, S. Peter, and S. John, were not pretended to be of this kind, not
excesses of Religion, but prophetical and intuitive Revelations to great and
significant purposes, such as may be and are described in story; -- (...),
atque (...) toto sibi (...) -- quod de Apolline dixit Lucanus.
but these other cannot: for so Cassian reports and commends a saying of Antony
the Eremite, That is not a perfect Prayer Qualis erat (...) sive ecstasis
Balaami, qui (...) vidit, excidens, sed retectis oculis, Number. 24. 4, 16.
in which the Votary does either understand himself or the Prayer; meaning,
that persons eminently Religious were Divina patientes, as Dionysius Areopagita
said of his Master Hierotheus, Paticks in Devotion, suffering ravishments of
senses, transported beyond the uses of humanity (...) Plato in (...) (...) etc.
ibid (...) Plato in Apol.
into the suburbs of beatifical apprehensions: but whether or no this be any
thing besides a too intense and indiscreet pressure of the faculties of the
Soul to inconveniences of understanding, or else a credulous, busy and untamed
fancy, they that think best of it cannot give a certainty. There are and have
been some Religious who have acted Madness, and pretended Inspirations; and
when these are destitute of a Prophetic spirit, if they resolve to serve
themselves upon the pretenses of it, they are disposed to the imitation, if not
to the sufferings of Madness; and it would be a great folly to call such Dei
plenos, full of God, who are no better than fantastic and mad People.

23. This we are sure of, that many Illusions have come in the likeness of
Visions, and absurd fancies under the pretense of Raptures, and what some have
called the spirit of Prophecy has been the spirit of Lying, and Contemplation
has been nothing but Melancholy and unnatural lengths, and stilness of Prayer
has been a mere Dream and hypochondriacal devotion, and has ended in pride or
despair, or some sottish and dangerous temptation. It is reported of Heron the
Monk, that having lived a retired, mortified and religious life for many years
together, at last he came to that habit of austerity or singularity, that he
refused the festival refection and freer meals of Easter and other Solemnities,
that he might do more eminently than the rest, and spend his time in greater
abstractions and contemplations: but the Devil, taking advantage of the
weakness of his melancholic and unsettled spirit, gave him a transportation
and an ecstasie in which he fansied himself to have attained so great
perfection, that he was as dear to God as a crowned Martyr, and Angels would be
his security for indemnity, though he threw himself to the bottom of a Well.
He obeyed his fancy and temptation, did so, bruised himself to death, and died
possessed with a persuasion of the verity of that Ecstasie and transportation.

24. I will not say that all violences and extravagancies of a religious fancy
are Illusions, but I say that they are all unnatural, not hallowed by the
warrant of a Revelation, nothing reasonable, nothing secure: I am not sure that
they ever consist with Humility, but it is confessed that they are often
produced by Self-love, Arrogance, and the great opinion others have of us. I
will not judge the condition of those persons who are said to have suffered
these extraordinaries, for I know not the circumstances, or causes, or
attendants, or the effects, or whether the stories be true that make report of
them; but I shall only advise that we follow the intimation of our Blessed
Savior, that we sit down in the lowest place, till the Master of the Feast
comes and bids us sit up higher. If we entertain the inward Man in the
purgative and illuminative way, that is, in actions of Repentance, Virtue and
precise Duty, that is the surest way of uniting us to God, whilst it is done
by Faith and Obedience; and that also is Love: and in these peace and safety
dwell. And after we have done our work, it is not discretion in a servant to
hasten to his meal, and snatch at the refreshment of Visions, Unions, and
Abstractions; but first we must gird our selves, and wait upon the Master, and
not sit down our selves till we all be called at the great Supper of the Lamb.

25. It was therefore an excellent desire of St. Bernard, who was as likely as
any to have such altitudes of Speculation, if God had really dispensed them to
persons holy, fantastic and Religious; I pray God grant to me peace of
spirit, joy in the (...) Ghost, to compassionate others in the midst of my
mirth; to be charitable in simplicity, to rejoice with them that rejoice, and
to mourn with them that mourn; and with these I shall be content: other
Exaltations of Devotion I leave to Apostles and Apostolic men; the high Hills
are for the Hearts and the climbing Goats, the stony Rocks and the recesses of
the earth for the Conies. It is more healthful and nutritive to dig the earth,
and to eat of her fruits, than to stare upon the greatest glories of the
Heavens, and live upon the beams of the Sun: so unsatisfying a thing is Rapture
and transportation to the Soul; it often distracts the Faculties, but seldom
does advantage (...), and is full of danger in the greatest of its luster. If
ever a man be more in love with God by such instruments, or more indeared to
Virtue, or made more severe and watchful in his Repentance, it is an excellent
grace and gift of God; but then this is nothing but the joys and comfort of
ordinary Meditation: those extraordinary, as they have no sense in them, so are
not pretended to be instruments of Virtue, but are like, Jonathan's arrows shot
beyond it, to signify the danger the man is in toward whom such arrows are
shot; but if the person be made unquiet, unconstant, proud, pusillanimous, of
high opinion, pertinacious and confident in uncertain judgments, or desperate,
it is certain they are temptations and illusions: so that, as all our duty
consists in the ways of Repentance and acquist of Virtue; so there rests all
our safety, and by consequence all our solid joys; and this is the effect of
ordinary, pious, and regular Meditations.

26. If I mistake not, there is a temptation like this under another name
amongst persons whose Religion has less discourse and more fancy, and that is
a Familiarity with God, which indeed, if it were rightly understood, is an
affection consequent to the Illuminative way, that is, an act or an effect of
the virtue of Religion and Devotion, which consists in Prayers and addresses to
God, Lauds and Eucharists and Hymns, and confidence of coming to the throne of
Grace upon assurance of God's veracity and goodness infinite: so that
Familiarity with God, which is an affection of Friendship, is the intercourse
of giving and receiving blessings and graces respectively; and it is produced
by a holy life, or the being in the state of Grace, and is part of every man's
inheritance that is a friend of God. But when familiarity with God shall be
esteemed a privilege of singular and eminent persons not communicated to all
the faithful, and is thought to be an admission to a nearer intercourse of
secrecy with God, it is an effect of Pride, and a mistake in judgment
concerning the very same thing which the old Divines call the Unitive way, if
themselves that claim it understood the terms of art, and the consequents of
their own intentions.

27. Only I shall observe one Circumstance, That Familiarity with God is
nothing else but an admission to be of God's Family, the admission of a servant
or a son in minority, and implies Obedience, Duty and Fear on our parts; Care
and Providence and Love on God's part: And it is not the familiarity of Sons,
but the impudence of proud Equals, to express this pretended privilege in
(...), unmannerly and unreverent addresses and discourses: and it is a sure
rule, that whatsoever heights of Piety, union or familiarity any man pretends
to, it is of the Devil, unless the greater the pretense be, the greater also be
the Humility of the man. The highest flames are the most tremulous; and so are
the most holy and eminent Religious persons more full of awfulness, and fear,
and modesty, and humility: so that in true Divinity and right speaking there is
no such thing as the Unitive way of Religion, save only in the effects of
duty, obedience, and the expresses of the precise virtue of Religion.
Meditations in order to a good life let them be as exalted as the capacity of
the person and subject will endure, up to the height of Contemplation; but if
Contemplation comes to be a distinct thing, and something besides or beyond a
distinct degree of virtuous Meditation, it is lost to all sense and Religion
and prudence. Let no man be hasty to eat of the fruits of Paradise before his
time.

28. And now I shall not need to enumerate the blessed fruits of holy
Meditation; for it is a Grace that is instrumental to all effects, to the
production of all Virtues, and the extinction of all Vices, and, by
consequence, the inhabitation of the Holy Ghost within us is the natural or
proper emanation from the frequent exercise of this Duty, only it has
something particularly excellent, besides its general influence: for Meditation
is that part of Prayer which knits the Soul to its right object, and confirms
and makes actual our intention and Devotion. Meditation is the Tongue of the
Soul and the language of our spirit; and our wandering thoughts in prayer are
but the neglects of Meditation, and recessions from that Duty; and according as
we neglect Meditation, so are our Prayers imperfect, Meditation being the Soul
of Prayer, and the intention of our spirit. But in all other things Meditation
is the instrument and conveyance; it habituates our affections to Heaven, it
has permanent content, it produces constancy of purpose, despising of things
below, inflamed desires of Virtue, love of God, self-denial, humility of
understanding, and universal correction of our life and manners.

The PRAYER.
HOly and Eternal Jesus, whose whole Life and Doctrine was a perpetual Sermon
of Holy life, a treasure of Wisdom, and a repository of Divine materials for
Meditation; give me grace to understand, diligence and attention to consider,
care to lay up, and carefulness to reduce to practice all those actions,
discourses and pious lessons and intimations by which thou did expressly
teach, or tacitly imply, or mysteriously signify our Duty. Let my
Understanding become as spiritual in its employment and purposes as it is
immaterial in its nature: fill my Memory as a vessel of Election with
remembrances and notions highly compunctive, and greatly incentive of all the
parts of (...). Let thy holy Spirit dwell in my Soul, instructing my Knowledge,
sanctifying my Thoughts, guiding my Affections, directing my Will in the choice
of Virtue; that it may be the great employment of my life to meditate in thy
Law, to study thy preceptive will, to understand even the niceties and
circumstantials of my Duty, that Ignorance may neither occasion a sin, nor
become a punishment. Take from me all vanity of spirit, lightness of fancy,
curiosity and impertinency of inquiry, illusions of the Devil and fantastic
deceptions: Let my thoughts be as my Religion, plain, honest, pious, simple,
prudent and charitable, of great employment and force to the production of
Virtues and extermination of Vice, but suffering no transportations of sense
and vanity, nothing greater than the capacities of my Soul, nothing that may
minister to any intemperances of spirit; but let me be wholly inebriated with
Love, and that love wholly spent in doing such actions as best please thee in
the conditions of my infirmity and the securities of Humility, till thou shall
please to draw the curtain and reveal thy interior beauties in the Kingdom of
thine eternal Glories: which grant for thy mercie's sake, O Holy and Eternal
Jesu.

Amen.
The goodly CEDAR of Apostolic and Catholic EPISCOPACY, compared with the
modern Shoots and Slips of divided NOVELTIES, in the Church before the
Introduction of the Apostles Lives



In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation and weeping and great mourning,
^^^hel weeping for her Children, and would not be Comforted because they are
not.



SECT. VI. Of the Death of the Holy Innocents, or the Babes of Bethlehem, and
the Flight of JESUS into Egypt.
The killing the Infants
S. MAT. 2. 18

In Rama was there a voice heard Lamentation and weeping and great mourning
Rachel weeping for her children and would not be conforted because they are not

The flight into Egypt
S. MAT. 2. 14.

When he arose he took the young Child and his mother by night and departed
into egypt




1. ALL this while Herod waited for the return of the Wise men, that they might
give directions where the Child did lie, and his Sword might find him out with
a certain and direct execution. But when he saw that he was mocked of the Wise
men, he was exceeding wroth. For it now began to deserve his trouble, when his
purposes which were most secret began to be contradicted and diverted with a
prevention, as if they were resisted by an all-seeing and almighty Providence.
He began to suspect the hand of Heaven was in it, and saw there was nothing for
his purposes to be acted, unless he could dissolve the golden chain of
Predestination. Herod believed the divine Oracles, foretelling that a King
should be born in Bethlehem; and yet his Ambition had made him so stupid, that
he attempted to cancel the Decree of Heaven. For if he did not believe the
Prophecies, why was he troubled? If he did believe them, how could he possibly
hinder that event which God had foretold himself would certainly bring to pass?

2. And therefore since God already had hindered him from the executions of a
distinguishing sword, he resolved to send a sword of indiscrimination and
confusion, hoping that if he killed all the Babes of Bethlehem, this young
King's Reign also should soon determine. He therefore sent forth and (...) all
the children that were in Bethlehem and all the coasts thereof from two years
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the
Wise men. For this Execution was in the beginning of the second (...) dit (...)
ordinaria: sd Onuphrius in Fastis ait (...) post Christum natum (...).
year after Christ's Nativity, as in all probability we guess; not at the two
years end, as some suppose: because as his malice was subtle, so he intended
it should be secure; and though he had been diligent in his inquiry, and was
near the time in his computation, yet he that was never sparing of the lives of
others, would now to secure his Kingdom, rather over-act his severity for some
months, than by doing execution but just to the tittle of his account hazard
the escaping of the Messiah.

3. This Execution was sad, cruel and universal: no abatements made for the
dire shriekings of the Mothers, no tenderhearted soldier was employed, no
hard-hearted person was softened by the weeping eyes and pity-begging looks of
those Mothers, that wondered how it was possible any person should hurt their
pretty Sucklings; no connivences there, no protections, or friendships, or
consideration, or indulgences; but Herod caused that his own child which was at
nurse in the coasts of Bethlehem should bleed to death: which made Augustus
Caesar to say, that in Heroa's house it were better to (...). lib. 2. cap. 4.
be a (...) than a Child; because the custom of the Nation did secure a Hog
from Heroa's knife, but no Religion could secure his Child. The sword being
thus made sharp by Herod's commission killed 14000 pretty Babes, as the Greeks
in their Calendar, and the (...) of AEthiopia do commemorate in their offices
of Liturgy. For Herod, crafty and malicious, that is perfectly (...). (...),
etc.
Tyrant, had caused all the Children to be gathered together; which the
credulous Mothers (supposing it had been to take account of their age and
number in order to some taxing) hindered not, but unwittingly suffered
themselves and their Babes to be betrayed to an irremediable (...).

4. Then was (...) that which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, saying,
Lamentation and weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children,
and would not be comforted. All the synonyma's of sadness were little enough to
express this great weeping, when 14000 Mothers in one day saw their pretty
Babes pouring forth their blood into that bosom whence not long before they
had sucked milk, and instead of those pretty smiles which use to entertain the
fancy and dear affections of their Mothers, nothing but affrighting shrieks,
and then ghastly looks. The mourning was great, like the mourning in the valley
of Hinnom, and there was no comforter; their sorrow was too big to be cured
till it should lie down alone and rest with its own weariness.

5. But the malice of Herod went also into the Hill-countrey, and hearing that
of John the son of Zachary great things were spoken, by which he was designed
to a great ministry about this young Prince, he attempted in him also to
rescind the Prophecies, and sent a messenger of death toward him; but the
Mother's care had been early with him, and sent him into desert places, where
he continued till the time appointed of his manifestation unto (...). But as
the Children of Bethlehem died in the place of Christ, so did the Father of the
Baptist die for his Child. For Herod (...) Zachary between the Temple and the
Altar, (...). and (...) Martyr (...) and (...).
because he refused to betray his son to the fury of that rabid Bear. Though
some persons very eminent amongst the Stars of the Primitive Church ( (...) 23.
in Evang. Matthew. S. (...). homil. (...) Humana Christi (...), (...). in (...)
Christi, Cyril. adv. (...).
) report a Tradition, that a place being separated in the Temple for Virgins,
Zachary suffered the Mother of our Lord to abide there after the Birth of her
Holy Son, affirming her still to be a Virgin; and that for this reason, not
Herod, but the Scribes and Pharisees did kill Zachary.

6. Tertullian In (...), cap. 8.
reports, that the blood of Zachary had so (...) the stones of the pavement,
which was the Altar on which the good old Priest was sacrificed, that no art or
industry could wash the tincture out, the dye and guilt being both indeleble;
as if, because God did intend to exact of that Nation all the blood of
righteous persons from Abel to Zacharias, who was the last of the Martyrs of
the Synagogue, he would leave a character of their guilt in their eyes to
upbraid their Irreligion, Cruelty and (...). Some there are who affirm these
words of our Blessed Savior not to relate to any Zachary who had been already
slain; but to be a Prophecy of the last of all the Martyrs of the Jews, who
should be slain immediately before the destruction of the last Temple and the
dissolution of the Nation. Certain it is, that such a Zachary the son of (...)
(if we may believe Josephus) was slain in the middle of the Temple a little
before it was destroyed; and it is agreeable to the nature of the Prophecy and
reproof here made by our Blessed Savior, that [ from Abel to Zachary] should
take in all the righteous blood from first to last, till the iniquity was
complete; and it is not imaginable that the blood of our Blessed Lord and of S.
James their Bishop (for whose death many of themselves thought God destroyed
their City) should be left out of the account, which yet would certainly be
left out, if any other Zachary should be (...) than he whom they last slew: and
in proportion to this, Cyprian de (...) expounds that which we read in the past
tense, to signify the future, ye slew, i. e. shall slay; according to the
style often used by Prophets, and as the Aorist of an uncertain signification
will beat. But the first great instance of the Divine vengeance for these
Executions was upon Herod, who in very few years after was smitten of God with
so many plagues and tortures, that himself alone seemed like an Hospital of the
(...): For he was tormented with a soft slow fire, like that of burning Iron or
the cinders of Yew, in his body; in his bowels with intolerable Colicks and
Ulcers, in his natural parts with Worms, in his feet with Gout, in his nerves
with Convulsions, (...) of breathing; and out of diverse parts of his body
issued out so impure and ulcerous a steam, that the loathsomness, pain and
indignation made him once to snatch a knife with purpose to have killed
himself, but that he was prevented by a Nephew of his that stood there in his
attendance.

7. But as the flesh of Beasts grows callous by stripes and the pressures of
the yoke; so did the heart of Herod by the loads of Divine vengeance. God began
his Hell here, and the pains of Hell never made any man less impious: for Herod
perceiving that he must now die, (...).
first put to death his son Antipater, under pretense that he would have
poisoned him; and that the last scene of his life might for pure malice and
exalted spite outdo all the rest, because he believed the Jewish nation would
rejoice at his death, he assembled all the Nobles of the people, and put them
in prison, giving in charge to his Sister Salome, that when he was expiring his
last all the Nobility should be slain, that his death might be lamented with a
perfect and universal sorrow.

8. But God, that brings to naught the counsels of wicked Princes, turned the
design against the intendment of Herod; for when he was dead, and could not
call his Sister to account for disobeying his most bloody and unrighteous
commands, she released all the imprisoned and despairing Gentlemen, and made
the day of her Brother's death a perfect Jubilee, a day of joy, such as was
that when the Nation was delivered from the violence of Haman in the days of
(...).

9. And all this while God had provided a Sanctuary for the Holy Child Jesus.
For God seeing the secret purposes of blood which Herod had, sent his Angel,
who appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise and take the young Child and
his Mother, (...). 2. 13.
and fly into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word; for Herod will
seek the young Child to destroy him. Then he arose, and took the young Child
and his Mother by night, and departed into Egypt. And they made their first
abode in Hermopolis in the Eusebius. (...). c. 20. S. Athanas. lib. (...).
Palladius (...) S. (...).
Country of Thebais, whither when they first arrived, the Child Jesus being by
design or providence carried into a Temple, all the Statues of the Idol-gods
fell down, like Dagon at the presence of the Ark, and suffered their timely and
just dissolution and dishonor, according to the Prophecy of Isaiah, Isa. 19.
1. (...) (...). Pallad. in (...).
Behold the Lord shall come into Egypt, and the idols of Egypt shall be moved
at his presence. And in the Life of the Prophet Jeremy, written by Epiphanius,
it is reported, that he told the Egyptian Priests, that then their Idols should
be broken in pieces, when a Holy Virgin with her Child should enter into their
Country: which Prophecy possibly might be the cause that the Egyptians did,
besides their vanities, worship also an Infant in a manger, and a Virgin in her
bed.

10. From Hermopolis to Maturea went these Holy Pilgrims in pursuance of their
safety and provisions, where it was reported they dwelt in a garden of balsam,
till Joseph being at the end of seven years (as it is commonly believed)
ascertained by an Angel of the death of Herod, and commanded to return to the
land of Israel, he was obedient to the heavenly Vision, and returned. But
hearing that Archelaus did reign in the place of his Father, and knowing that
the Cruelty and Ambition of Herod was (...) or entailed upon Archelaus, being
also warned to turn aside into the parts of Galilee, which was of a distinct
jurisdiction, governed indeed by one of Herod's sons, but not by Archelaus,
thither he diverted, and there that Holy Family remained in the City of
Nazareth, whence the Holy Child had the appellative of a Nazarene.

Ad SECT. VI. Considerations upon the Death of the Innocents, and the Flight of
the Holy JESUS into Egypt.
1. HErod having called the Wise men, and received information of their design,
and the circumstances of the Child, pretended Religion too; and desired them to
bring him word when they had found the Babe, that he might come and worship
him; meaning to make a Sacrifice of him, to whom he should pay his Adoration;
and in stead of investing the young Prince with a Royal purple, he would have
stained his swadlingbands with his blood. It is ever dangerous when a wicked
Prince pretends Religion, his design is then foulest by how much it needs to
put on a fairer outside: but it was an early policy in the world, and it
concerned men's interests to seem Religious, when they thought that to be so was
an abatement of great designs. When Jezabel designed the robbing and destroying
Naboth, she sent to the Elders to proclaim a Fast; for the external and visible
remonstrances of Religion leave in the spirits of men a great reputation of the
seeming person, and therefore they will not rush into a furious sentence
against his actions, at least not judge them with prejudice against the man
toward whom they are so fairly prepared, but do some violence to their own
understanding, and either disbelieve their own Reason, or excuse the fact, or
think it but an error, or a less crime, or the incidencies of humanity; or
however, are so long in decreeing against him, whom they think to be religious,
that the rumor is abated, or the stream of indignation is diverted by other
laborious arts intervening before our zeal is kindled, and so the person is
unjudged, or at least the design secured.

2. But in this, humane Policy was exceedingly infatuated: and though Herod had
trusted his design to no keeper but himself, and had pretended fair, having
Religion for the word, and called the Wise men privately, and entrusted them
with no employment but a civil request, an account of the success of their
journey, which they had no reason or desire to conceal; yet his heart was
opened to the eye of Heaven, and the Sun was not more visible than his dark
purpose was to God, and it succeeded accordingly: the Child was sent away, the
Wise men warned not to return, Herod was mocked and enraged; and so his crast
became foolish and vain: and so are all counsels intended against God, or any
thing of which he himself has undertaken the protection. For although we
understand not the reasons of security, because we see not that admirable
concentring of infinite things in the Divine Providence, whereby God brings his
purposes to act by ways unlooked for, and sometimes contradictory; yet the
public and perpetual experience of the world has given continual
demonstrations, that all evil counsels have come to naught; that the succeeding
of an impious design is no argument that the man is prosperous; that the curse
is then surest, when his fortune spreads the largest; that the contradiction
and impossibilities of deliverance to pious persons are but an opportunity and
engagement for God to do wonders, and to glorify his power and to exalt his
mercy by the instances of miraculous or extraordinary events. And as the
Afflictions happening to good men are alleviated by the support of God's good
Spirit; and enduring them here are but consignations to an honorable amends
hereafter: so the succeeding Prosperities of fortunate impiety, when they meet
with punishment in the next or in the third Age, or in the deletion of a people
five Ages after, are the greatest arguments of God's Providence, who keeps
wrath in store, and forgets not to do judgment for all them that are oppressed
with wrong: It was laid up with God, and was perpetually in his eye, being the
matter of a lasting, durable and unremitted anger.

3. But God had care of the Holy Child; he sent his Angel to warn Joseph with
the Babe and his Mother to fly into Egypt. Joseph and Mary instantly arise, and
without inquiry how they shall live there, or when they shall return, or how be
secured, or what accommodations they shall have in their Journey, at the same
hour of the night begin the Pilgrimage with the cheerfulness of Obedience, and
the securities of Faith, and the confidence of Hope, and the joys of Love,
knowing themselves to be recompensed for all the trouble they could endure,
that they were instruments of the safety of the Holy Jesus, that they then were
serving God, that they were encircled with the securities of the Divine
Providence, and in these dispositions all places were alike; for every region
was a Paradise where they were in company with Jesus. And indeed that man wants
many (...). (...).
degrees of faith and prudence, who is solicitous for the support of his
necessities when he is doing the commandment of God. If he commands thee to
offer a Sacrifice, himself will provide a Lamb, or enable thee to find one; and
he would remove thee into a state of separation, where thy body needs no
supplies of provision, if he meant thou should serve him without provisions:
He will certainly take away thy need, or satisfy it: he will feed thee
himself, as he did the Israelites; or take away thy hunger, as he did to Heb.
13. 5, 6.
Moses; or send ravens to feed thee, as he did to Elias; or make charitable
people minister to thee, as the Widow to Elisha, or give thee his own portion,
as he maintained the Levites; or make thine enemies to pity thee, as the
Assyrians did the captive Jews: For whatsoever the World has, and whatsoever
can be conveyed by wonder or by providence, all that is thy security for
provisions, so long as thou do the work of God. And remember that the
assurance of Blessing and Health and Salvation is not made by doing what we
list, or being where we desire, but by doing God's will, and being in the place
of his appointment: we may be safe in Egypt, if we be there in obedience to
God; and we may perish among the Babes of Bethlehem, if we be there by our own
election.

4. Joseph and Mary did not argue against the Angel's message, because they had
a confidence of their charge, who with the breath of his mouth could have
destroyed Herod, though he had been abetted with all the Legions marching under
the Roman Eagles; but they, like the two Cherubims about the Propitiatory, took
the Child between them, and fled, giving way to the fury of Persecution, which
possibly when the materials are withdrawn might expire, and die like fire,
which else would rage for ever. Jesus fled, undertook a sad Journey, in which
the roughness of the ways, his own tenderness, the youth of his Mother, the old
age of his supposed Father, the smalness of their viaticum and accommodation
for their voyage, the no-kindred they were to go to, hopeless of comsorts and
exterior supplies, were so many circumstances of Poverty, and lesser strokes
of the Persecution; things that himself did choose to remonstrate the verity of
his Nature, the infirmity of his Person, the humility of his spirit, the
austerity of his undertaking, the burden of his charge, and by which he did
teach us the same virtues he then expressed, and also consigned this permission
to all his Disciples in future Ages, that they also may fly from their
persecutors, when the case is so that their work is not done, that is, they may
glorify God with their lives more than with their death. And of this they are
ascertained by the arguments of prudent account: For sometimes we are called to
glorisie God by dying, and the interest of the Church and the Faith of many may
be concerned in it; then we must abide by it. In other cases it is true that
Demosthenes said in apology for his own escaping from a lost field, A man that
runs away may (...)
fight again. And S. Paul made use of a guard of Soldiers to rescue him from
the treachery of the Jewish Rulers, and of a basket to escape from the
Inquisition of the Governor of Damascus, and the Primitive Christians of
Grotts and subterraneous retirements, and S. Athanasius of a fair Lady's
House, and others of deserts and graves; as knowing it was no shame to fly when
their Master himself had fled, that his time and his work might be fulfilled;
and when it was, he then laid his life down.

5. It is hard to set down particular Rules that may indefinitely guide all
persons in the stating of their own case; because all things that depend upon
circumstances are alterable unto infinite. But as God's glory and the good of
the Church are the great considerations to be carried before us all the way,
and in proportions to them we are to determine and judge our Questions; so also
our infirmities are allowable in the scrutiny: for I doubt not but God intended
it a mercy and a compliance with humane weakness when he gave us this
permission, as well as it was a design to secure the opportunities of his
service and the consummation of his own work by us. And since our fears, and
the incommodities of flight, and the sadness of exile, and the insecurities and
inconveniences of a strange and new abode are part of the Persecution; provided
that God's glory be not certainly and apparently neglected, nor the Church
evidently scandalized by our (...), all interpretations of the question in
favor of our selves, and the declension of that part which may tempt us to
apostasy, or hazard our confidence, and the choosing the lesser part of the
Persecution, is not against the rule of Faith, and always has in it less
glory, but oftentimes more security.

6. But thus far Herod's Ambition transported him, even to resolutions of
murder of the highest person, the most glorious and the most innocent upon
earth; and it represents that Passion to be the most troublesome and vexatious
thing that can afflict the sons of men. Virtue has not half so much trouble in
it, it sleeps quietly without startings and affrighting fancies, it looks
cheerfully, smiles with much (...), and though it laughs not often, yet it is
ever delightful in the apprehensions of some faculty; it fears no man, nor no
thing, nor is it discomposed, and has no concernments in the great alterations
of the World, and entertains Death like a Friend, and reckons the issues of it
as the greatest of its hopes: but Ambition is full of distractions, it teems
with stratagems, as Rebecca with struggling twins, and is swelled with
expectation as with a tympany, and sleeps sometimes as the wind in a storm,
still and quiet for a minute, that it may burst out into an impetuous blast
till the cordage of his heart strings crack; fears when none is (...), and
prevents things which never had intention, and falls under the inevitability of
such accidents which either could not be foreseen, or not prevented. It is an
infinite labor to make a man's self miserable, and the utmost acquist is so
goodly a purchase, that he makes his days full of sorrow to enjoy the troubles
of a three years reign; for Herod lived but three years, or five at the most,
after the flight of Jesus into Egypt. And therefore there is no greater
unreasonableness in the world than in the designs of Ambition: for it makes the
present certainly miserable, unsatisfied, troublesome and discontent, for the
uncertain acquist of an honor which nothing can secure; and besides a thousand
possibilities of miscarrying, it relies upon no greater certainty than our
life, and when we are dead, all the world sees who was the fool. But it is a
strange caitiveness and baseness of disposition of men so furiously and
unsatiably to run after perishing and uncertain interests, in defiance of all
the Reason and Religion of the world; and yet to have no appetite to such
excellencies which satisfy Reason, and content the spirit, and create great
hopes, and ennoble our expectation, and are advantages to Communities of men
and public Societies, and which all wise men teach, and all Religion commands.

7. And it is not amiss to observe how Herod vexed himself extremely upon a
mistake. Dubia pro (...) solent (...) inere (...). Seneca Oedip.
The Child Jesus was born a King, but it was a King of all the World, not
confined within the limits of a Province, like the weaker beauties of a Torch
to shine in one room, but, like the Sun, his Empire was over all the World; and
if Herod would have become but his Tributary, and paid him the acknowledgments
of his Lord, he should have had better conditions Hestis (...), Christum (...)
quid times? Non (...) terrestria Qui regna (...).
than under Caesar, and yet have been as absolute in his own Jewry as he was
before: His Kingdom was not of this World, and he that gives heavenly Kingdoms
to all his servants, would not have stooped to have taken up Herod's petty Qui
(...) duro saevus imperio regit, T (...), metus in authorem eadit, (...).
Coronet. But as it is a very vanity which Ambition seeks, so it is a shadow
that disturbs and discomposes all its motions and apprehensions.

8. And the same mistake caused calamities to descend upon the Church, for some
of the Persecutions commenced upon pretense Christianity was an enemy to
Government: But the pretense was infinitely unreasonable, and therefore had the
fate of senseless allegations, it disbanded presently; for no external accident
did so incorporate the excellency of Christ's Religion into the hearts of men,
as the innocence of the men, their inoffensive deportment, the modesty of their
designs, their great humility and obedience, a life expressly in enmity and
contestation against secular Ambition. And it is to be feared that the mingling
humane interests with Religion will deface the image Christ has stamped upon
it. Certain it is, the metal is much abated by so impure allay, while the
Christian Prince serves his end of Ambition, and bears arms upon his
neighbor's Country for the service of Religion, making Christ's Kingdom to
invade Herod's rights: and in the state Ecclesiastical secular interests have
so deep a (...). (...).
portion, that there are snares laid to tempt a Persecution, and men are
invited to Sacrilege, while the Revenues of a Church are a fair fortune for a
Prince. I make no scruple to find fault with Painters that picture the poor
Saints with rich garments; for though they deserved better, yet they had but
poor ones: and some have been tempted to cheat the Saint, not out of ill will
to his Sanctity, but love to his Shrine, and to the beauty of the clothes, with
which some imprudent persons have of old time dressed their Images. So it is in
the fate of the Church, Persecution and the robes of Christ were her portion
and her clothing, and when she is dressed up in gaudy fortunes, it is no more
than she deserves, but yet sometimes it is occasion that the Devil cheats her
of her Holiness, and the men of the world sacrilegiously cheat her of her
Riches: and then when God has reduced her to that Poverty he first promised
and intended to her, the Persecution ceases, and Sanctity returns, and God
curses the Sacrilege, and stirs up men's minds to religious Donatives; and all
is well till she grows rich again. And if it be dangerous in any man to be
rich, and discomposes his steps in his journey to Eternity; it is not then so
proportionable to the analogy of Christ's Poverty and the inheritance of the
Church, to be sedulous in acquiring great Temporalties, and putting Princes in
jealousy, and States into care for securities, lest all the Temporal should
run into Ecclesiastical possession.

9. If the Church have by the active Piety of a credulous, a pious and
less-observant Age, been endowed with great Possessions, she has rules enough,
and poor enough, and necessities enough to dispend what she has with
advantages to Religion: but then all she gets by it is, the trouble of an
unthankful, a suspected and unsatisfying dispensation; and the Church is made
by evil persons a Scene of ambition and stratagem; and to get a German
Bishopric is to be a Prince; and to defend with (...) quae dixit Ammian.
Marcel. l. 17. and Epistolas S. (...) M. l. 4. (...). 32, 34, 36. and l. 6.
(...). 30. l. 7. indict. 1. (...). 30. and Council. Africanum, quo (...) est
Cael stinus Papa, (...) in (...), quae lucem simplicitatis and (...) videre
(...), videamur inducere.
niceness and Suits of Law every Custom or lesser Rite, even to the breach of
Charity and the scandal of Religion, is called a Duty: and every single person
is bound to forgive injuries, and to quit his right rather than his Charity;
but if it is not a duty in the Church also, in them whose life should be
excellent to the degree of Example, I would fain know if there be not greater
care taken to secure the Ecclesiastical Revenue, than the public Charity and
the honor of Religion in the strict Piety of the Clergy; for as the not
engaging in Suits may occasion bold people to wrong the Church, so the
necessity of engaging is occasion of losing Charity and of great Scandal. I
find not fault with a free Revenue of the Church; it is in some sense necessary
to Governors, and to preserve the Consequents of their Authority; but I
represent that such things are occasion of much mischief to the Church, and
less Holiness, and in all cases respect should be had to the design of
Christianity, to the Prophecies of Jesus, to the promised lot of the Church, to
the dangers of Riches, to the excellencies and advantages and rewards of
Poverty; and if the Church have enough to perform all her duties and
obligations cheerfully, let her of all Societies be soonest content. If she
have plenty, let her use it temperately and charitably; if she have not, let
her not be querulous and troublesome. But however it would be thought upon,
that though in judging the quantum of the Church's portion the World thinks
every thing too much, yet we must be careful we do not judge every thing too
little; and if our fortune be safe between envy and contempt, it is much mercy.
If it be despicable, it is safe for Ecclesiastics, though it may be
accidentally inconvenient or less profitable to others; but if it be great,
public experience has made remonstrance that it mingles with the world, and
durties those fingers which are instrumental in Consecration and the more
solemn Rites of Christianity.

10. Jesus fled from the Persecution; as he did not stand it out, so he did not
stand out against it; he was careful to transmit no precedent or encouragement
of resisting tyrannous Princes, when they offer violence to Religion and our
lives: He would not stand disputing for privileges, nor calling in Auxiliaries
from the Lord of Hosts, who could have spared him many Legions of Angels, every
single Spirit being able to have defeated all Herod's power; but he knew it was
a hard lesson to learn Patience, and all the excuses in the world would be
sought out to discourage such a Doctrine by which we are taught to die, or lose
all we have, or suffer inconveniences at the will of a Tyrant: we need no
authentic examples, much less Doctrines, to invite men to War, from which we
see Christian Princes cannot be restrained with the engagements and peaceful
Theorems of an excellent and a holy Religion, nor Subjects kept from Rebelling
by the interests of all Religions in the world, nor by the necessities and
reasonableness of Obedience, nor the indearments of all public Societies of
men; one word or an intimation from Christ would have sounded an alarm, and put
us into postures of defense, when all Christ's excellent Sermons and rare
exemplar actions cannot tie our hands. But it is strange now, that of all men
in the World Christians should be such fighting people, or that Christian
Subjects should lift up a thought against a Christian Prince, when they had no
intimation of encouragement from their Master, but many from him to endear
Obedience, and Humility, and Patience, and Charity; and these four make up the
whole analogy, and represent the chief design and meaning of Christianity in
its moral constitution.

11. But Jesus, when himself was safe, could also have secured the poor Babes
of Bethlehem, with thousands of diversions and avocations of Herod's purposes,
or by discovering his own Escape in some safe manner not unknown to the Divine
wisdom; but yet it did not so please God. He is Lord of his Creatures, and
has absolute dominion over our lives, and he had an end of Glory to serve upon
these Babes, and an end of Justice upon Herod: and to the Children he made such
compensation, that they had no reason to complain that they were so soon made
Stars, when they shined in their little Orbs and participations of Eternity:
for so the sense of the Church has been, that AEtas (...) habills ad (...) ad
coronam; and ut appareret innocents esse qui propter Christum (...), infantia
innocens occisa est. S. Cyprian. Athenagoras dixit Infantes resurrectures, sed
non ventures in judicium.
they having dyed the death of Martyrs, though incapable of making the choice,
God supplied the defects of their will by his own entertainment of the thing;
that as the misery and their death, so also their glorification might have the
same Author in the same manner of causality, even by a peremptory and
unconditioned determination in these particulars. This sense is pious and
nothing unreasonable, considering that all circumstances of the thing make the
case particular; but the immature death of other Infants is a sadder story: for
though I have no warrant or thought that it is ill with them after death, and
in what manner or degree of well-being it is there is no revelation; yet I am
not of opinion, that the securing of so low a condition as theirs in all reason
is like to be, will make recompense, or is an equal blessing with the
possibilities of such an Eternity as is proposed to them who in the use of
Reason and a holy life glorify God with a free Obedience; and if it were
otherwise, it were no blessing to live till the use of Reason, and Fools and
Babes were in the best, because in the securest, condition, and certain
expectation of equal glories.

12. As soon as Herod was dead, (for the Divine Vengeance waited his own time
for his arrest) the Angel presently brought Joseph word. The holy Family was
full of content and indifferency, not solicitous for return, not distrustful of
the Divine Providence, full of poverty, and sanctity, and content, waiting
God's time, at the return of which God delayed not to recall them from Exile;
out of Egypt he called his Son, and directed Joseph's fear and course, that he
should divert to a place in the jurisdiction of Philip, where the Heir of
Herod's Cruelty, Archelaus, had nothing to do. And this very series of
Providence and care God expresses to all his sons by adoption; and will
determine the time, and set bounds to every Persecution, and punish the
instruments, and ease our pains, and refresh our sorrows, and give quietness to
our fears, and deliverance from our troubles, and sanctify it all, and give a
Crown at last, and all in his good time, if we wait the coming of the Angel,
and in the mean time do our duty with care, and sustain our temporals with
indifferency: and in all our troubles and displeasing accidents we may call to
mind, that God by his holy and most reasonable Providence has so ordered it,
that the spiritual advantages we may receive from the holy use of such
incommodities are of great recompense and interest, and that in such accidents
the Holy Jesus, having gone before us in precedent, does go along with us by
love and fair assistences; and that makes the present condition infinitely more
eligible than the greatest splendor of secular fortune.

The PRAYER.
O Blessed and Eternal God, who did suffer thy Holy Son to fly from the
violence of an enraged Prince, and did choose to defend him in the ways of his
infirmity by hiding himself, and a voluntary exile; be thou a defense to all
thy faithful people whenever Persecution arises against them, send them the
ministry of Angels to direct them into ways of security, and let thy holy
Spirit guide them in the paths of Sanctity, and let thy Providence continue in
custody over their persons till the times of refreshment and the day of
Redemption shall return. Give, O Lord, to thy whole Church Sanctity and Zeal,
and the confidences of a holy Faith, boldness of confession, Humility, content,
and resignation of spirit, generous contempt of the World, and unmingled
desires of thy glory and the edification of thy Elect; that no secular
interests disturb her duty, or discompose her charity, or depress her hopes, or
in any unequal degree possess her affections and pollute her spirit: but
preserve her from the snares of the World and the Devil, from the rapine and
greedy desires of Sacrilegious persons; and in all conditions, whether of
affluence or want, may she still promote the interests of Religion: that when
plenteousness is within her palaces, and peace in her walls, that condition may
then be best for her; and when she is made as naked as Jesus to his Passion,
then Poverty may be best for her: that in all estates she may glorify thee,
and in all accidents and changes thou may sanctify and bless her, and at
last bring her to the eternal riches and abundances of glory, where no
Persecution shall disturb her rest. Grant this for sweet Jesus sake, who
suffered exile and hard journeys, and all the inconveniences of a friendless
person, in a strange Province; to whom with thee and the eternal Spirit be
glory for ever, and blessing in all generations of the World, and for ever and
ever.

Amen.
SECT. VII. Of the younger years of JESUS, and his Disputation with the Doctors
in the Temple.
The House of Prayer.
It is written, My house shall be called of all Nations, the house of prayer.
Mark. 11. 17. If they return, confess thy name, and pray, and make supplication
before thee in this House: Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive. 2. Chron 6.
24. 26.

JESUS disputing with the Doctors
S. LUKE. 2. 46. 47.

They found him in the Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctors both hearing
them and asking them questions. And all that heard him were astonished at his
understanding and answers.




1. FRom the return of this holy Family to Judaea, and their habitation in
Nazareth, till the blessed Child Jesus was twelve years of age, we have nothing
transmitted to us out of any authentic Record, but that they went to Jerusalem
every year at the Feast of the Passover. And when Jesus was twelve years old,
and was in the Holy City attending upon the Paschal Rites and solemn Sacrifices
of the Law, his Parents, having fulfilled their days of Festivity, went
homeward, supposing the Child had been in the Caravan among his friends, and so
they erred for the space of a whole day's journey; and when they sought him,
and found him not, they returned to Jerusalem full of fears and sorrow.

2. No fancy can imagine the doubts, the apprehensions, the possibilities of
mischief, and the tremblings of heart which the Holy Virgin Mother felt
thronging about her fancy and understanding, but such a person who has been
tempted to the danger of a violent fear and transportation, by apprehension of
the loss of a hope greater than a Miracle; her discourses with her self could
have nothing of distrust, but much of sadness and wonder, and the
indetermination of her thoughts was a trouble great as the passion of her love:
Possibly an Angel might have carried him she knew not whither; or it may be the
son of Herod had gotten the prey, which his cruel Father missed; or he was
sick, or detained out of curiosity and wonder, or any thing but what was right.
And by this time she was come to Jerusalem, and having spent three days in her
sad and holy pursuit of her lost jewel, despairing of the prosperous event of
any humane diligence, as in all other cases she had accustomed, she made her
address to God, and entering into the Temple to pray, God, that knew her
desires, prevented her with the blessings of goodness, and there her sorrow was
changed into joy and wonder; for there she found her Holy Son sitting in the
midst of the Doctors, both hearing them and asking them questions.

3. And when they saw him, they were amazed, and so were all that heard him, at
his understanding and answers; beyond his education, beyond his experience,
beyond his years, and even beyond the common spirits of the best (...) up to
the height of a Prophet, with the clearness of an Angel, and the infallibility
of inspiration: for here it was verified in the highest and most literal
signification, that out of the (...) of babes God had ordained strength; but
this was the strength of (...), and science of the highest Mysteries of
Religion and secret Philosophy.

4. Glad were the Parents of the Child to find him illustrated with a Miracle,
concerning which when he had given them such an account which they understood
not, but yet Mary laid up in her heart, as that this was part of his employment
and his Father's business, he returned with them to Nazareth, and was subject
to his Parents; where he lived in all Holiness and Humility, showing great
signs of Wisdom, indearing himself to all that beheld his conversation, did
nothing less than might become the great expectation which his miraculous Birth
had created of him; for he increased in (...) and stature, and favor with God
and Man, still growing in proportion to his great beginnings to a miraculous
excellency of Grace, sweetness of demeanor, and excellency of understanding.

5. They that love to serve God in hard questions, use to dispute whether
Christ did truly or in appearance only increase in Wisdom. For being personally
united to the Word, and being the eternal Wisdom of the Father, it seemed to
them that a plenitude of Wisdom was as natural to the whole Person, as to the
Divine Nature. But others, fixing their belief upon the words of the story,
which equally affirms Christ as properly to have increased in favor with God
as with Man, in wisdom as in stature, they apprehend no inconvenience in
affirming it to belong to the verity of Humane Nature to have degrees of
Understanding as well as of other perfections: and although the Humanity of
Christ made up the same Person with the Divinity, yet they think the Divinity
still to be free, even in those communications which were imparted to his
inferior Nature, and the Godhead might as well suspend the emanation of all
the treasures of Wisdom upon the Humanity for a time, as he did the Beatifical
Vision, which most certainly was not imparted in the interval of his sad and
dolorous Passion. But whether it were truly or in appearance, in habit or in
exercise of act, by increase of notion or experience, it is certain the
promotions of the Holy Child were great, admirable, and as full of wonder as of
Sanctity, and sufficient to entertain the hopes and expectations of Israel with
preparations and dispositions, as to satisfy their wonder for the present, so
to accept him at the time of his publication, they having no reason to be
scandalized at the smalness, improbability, and indifferency of his first
beginnings.

6. But the Holy Child had also an employment which he undertook in obedience
to his supposed Father, for exercise and example of Humility, and for the
support of that holy Family which was dear in the eyes of God, but not very
splendid by the opulency of a free and indulgent fortune. He wrought in the
trade of a Carpenter, and when Joseph died, which happened before the
Manifestation of Jesus unto Israel, he wrought alone, and was no more called
the Carpenter's son, but the Carpenter himself. Is not this the Carpenter, the
son of Mary? said his offended Countrymen. And in this condition Mark 6. 3.
the Blessed Jesus did abide till he was thirty years old; for he that came to
fulfill the Law, would not suffer one tittle of it to pass unaccomplished; for
by the Law of the Nation and custom of the Religion no Priest was to officiate,
or Prophet was to preach, before he was thirty years of age.

Ad SECT. VII. Considerations upon the Disputation of JESUS with the Doctors in
the Temple.
1. JOseph and Mary, being returned unto Nazareth, were sedulous to enjoy the
privileges of their Country, the opportunities of Religion, the public
address to God, in the Rites of Festivals and Solemnities of the Temple: they
had been long grieved with the impurities and Idol-rites which they with sorrow
had observed to be done in Egypt; and being deprived of the blessings of those
holy Societies and employments they used to enjoy in Palestine, at their return
came to the offices of their Religion with appetites of fire, and keen as the
evening Wolf; and all the joys which they should have received in respersion
and distinct emanations, if they had kept their Anniversaries at Jerusalem, all
that united they received in the duplication of their joys at their return, and
in the fulfilling themselves with the resection and holy Viands of Religion.
For so God uses to satisfy the longings of holy people, when a Persecution has
shut up the beautiful gates of the Temple, or denied to them opportunities of
access: although God hears the Prayers they make with their windows toward
Jerusalem, with their hearts opened with desires of the public communions, and
sends them a Prophet with a private meal, as Habakkuk came to Daniel; yet he
fills their hearts when the year of Jubilee returns, and the people sing In
convertendo, the Song of joy for their redemption. For as of all sorrows the
deprivations and eclipses of Religion are the saddest, and of the worst and
most inconvenient consequence; so in proportion are the joys of spiritual
plenty and religious returns, the Communion of Saints being like the Primitive
Corban, a (...) to feed all the needs of the Church, or like a Taper joined to
a Torch, it self is kindled, and increases the other's flames.

2. They failed not to go to Jerusalem: for all those holy prayers and
ravishments of love, those excellent meditations and entercourses with God,
their private readings and discourses, were but entertainments and satisfaction
of their necessities, they lived with them during their retirements; but it was
a Feast when they went to Jerusalem, and the freer and more indulgent resection
of the Spirit; for in public Solemnities God opens his treasures, and pours
out his grace more abundantly. Private Devotions and secret Offices of Religion
are like refreshing of a Garden with the distilling and petty drops of a
Water-pot; but addresses to the Temple, and serving God in the public
communion of Saints, is like rain from Heaven, where the Offices are described
by a public spirit, heightened by the greater portions of assistance, and
receive advantages by the adunations and symbols of Charity, and increment by
their distinct title to Promises appropriate even to their assembling, and
mutual support, by the piety of Example, by the communication of Counsels, by
the awfulness of public Observation, and the engagements of (...) privilegium
(...), ut (...) quod publica lege (...) quod (...) dependitur. Leo De (...). 7.
(...) Sermon. A. Publica (...) privatis, and (...) devotio, (...) in (...) unus
est animus and (...) sensus.
holy Customs. For Religion is a public virtue, it is the ligature of Souls,
and the great instrument of the conservation of Bodies politic, and is united
in a common object, the God of all the World, and is managed by public
ministeries, by Sacrifice, Adoration, and Prayer, in which with variety of
circumstances indeed, but with infinite consent and union of design, all the
sons of Adam are taught to worship God; and it is a publication of God's
honor, its very purpose being to declare to all the World how great things God
has done for us, whether in public Donatives or private Missives; so that the
very design, temper and constitution of Religion is to be a public address to
God: and although God is present in Closets, and there also distills his
blessings in small rain; yet to the Societies of Religion and publication of
Worship as we are invited by the great blessings and advantages of Communion,
so also we are in some proportions more straightly limited by the analogy and
exigence of the Duty. It is a Persecution when we are forced from public
Worshippings; Heb. 10. 25.
no man can hinder our private addresses to God, every man can build a Chapel
in his breast, and himself be the Priest, and his heart the Sacrifice, and
every foot of glebe he treads on be the Altar; and this no Tyrant can prevent.
If then there can be Persecution in the offices of Religion, it is the
prohibition of public profession and Communions, and therefore he that denies
to himself the opportunities of public rites and conventions, is his own
Persecutor.

3. But when Jesus was twelve years old, and his Parents had finished their
Offices, and returned filled with the pleasures of Religion, they missed the
Child, and sought him amongst their kindred, but there they found him not; for
whoever seeks Jesus must seek him in the Offices of Religion, in the Temple,
not amongst the engagements and pursuit of worldly interests: I forgot also
mine own Father's house, said (...), the Father of this Holy Child; and so must
we, when we run in an enquiry after the Son of David. But our relinquishing
must not be a dereliction of duty, but of engagement; our affections toward
kindred must always be with charity, and according to the endearments of our
relation, but without immersion, and such adherencies as either contradict or
lessen our duty toward God.

4. It was a sad effect of their pious journey to lose the joy of their Family,
and the hopes of all the World: but it often happens that after spiritual
employments God seems to absent himself, and withdraw the sensible effects of
his presence, that we may seek him with the same diligence and care and holy
fears with which the Holy VirginMother sought the Blessed Jesus. And it is a
design of great mercy in God to take off the light from the eyes of a holy
person, that he may not be abused with complacencies and too confident opinions
and reflections upon his fair performances. For we usually judge of the well or
ill of our Devotions and services by what we feel; and we think God rewards
every thing in the present, and by proportion to our own expectations; and if
we feel a present rejoicing of Spirit, all is well with us, the smoke of the
Sacrifice ascended right in a holy Cloud: but if we feel nothing of comfort,
then we count it a prodigy and ominous, and we suspect our selves, (and most
commonly we have reason.) Such irradiations of cheerfulness are always welcome,
but it is not always anger that takes them away: the Cloud removed from before
the camp of Israel, and stood before the host of Pharaoh; but this was a design
of ruin to the Egyptians, and of security to Israel: and if those bright
Angels that go with us to direct our journeys, remove out of our sight and
stand behind us, it is not always an argument that the anger of the Lord is
gone out against us; but such decays of sense and clouds of spirit are
excellent conservators of Humility, and restrain those intemperances and vainer
thoughts which we are prompted to in the gayety of our spirits.

5. But we often give God cause to remove and for a while to absent himself,
and his doing of it sometimes upon the just provocations of our demerits makes
us at other times with good reason to suspect our selves even in our best
actions. But sometimes we are vain, or remiss, or pride invades us in the
darkness and incuriousness of our spirits, and we have a secret sin which God
would have us to enquire after; and when we suspect every thing, and condemn
our selves with strictest and most angry sentence, then, it may be, God will
with a ray of light break through the cloud; if not, it is nothing the worse
for us: for although the visible remonstrance and face of things in all the
absences and withdrawings of Jesus be the same, yet if a sin be the cause of
it, the withdrawing is a taking away his Favor and his love; but if God does
it to secure thy Piety, and to inflame thy desires, or to prevent a crime, then
he withdraws a Gift only, nothing of his Love, and yet the darkness of the
spirit and sadness seem equal. It is hard in these cases to discover the cause,
as it is nice to judge the condition of the effect; and therefore it is prudent
to ascertain our condition by improving our care and our Religion; and in all
accidents to make no judgment concerning God's Favor by what we feel, but by
what we do.

6. When the Holy Virgin with much Religion and sadness had sought her joy, at
last she found him disputing among the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them
questions; and besides that he now first opened a fontinel, and there sprang
out an excellent rivulet from his abyss of Wisdom, he consigned this Truth to
his Disciples, That they who mean to be Doctors and teach others, must in their
first accesses and degrees of discipline learn of those whom God and public
Order has set over us in the Mysteries of Religion.

The PRAYER.
BLessed and most Holy Jesus, Fountain of Grace and comfort, Treasure of Wisdom
and spiritual emanations, be pleased to abide with me for ever by the
inhabitation of thy interior assistances and refreshments; and give me a
corresponding love, acceptable and unstained purity, care and watchfulness over
my ways, that I may never, by provoking thee to anger, cause thee to remove thy
dwelling, or draw a cloud before thy holy face: but if thou art pleased upon a
design of charity or trial to cover my eyes, that I may not behold the bright
rays of thy Favor, nor be refreshed with spiritual comforts; let thy Love
support my spirit by ways insensible, and in all my needs give me such a
portion as may be instrumental and incentive to performance of my duty; and in
all accidents let me continue to seek thee by Prayers, and Humiliation, and
frequent desires, and the strictness of a Holy life; that I may follow thy
example, pursue thy footsteps, be supported by thy strength, guided by thy
hand, enlightened by thy favor, and may at last after a persevering holiness
and an unwearied industry dwell with thee in the Regions of Light and eternal
glory, where there shall be no fears of parting from the habitations of
Felicity, and the union and fruition of thy Presence, O Blessed and most Holy
Jesus.

Amen.
SECT. VIII. Of the Preaching of John the Baptist, preparative to the
Manifestation of JESUS.
ELIAS
Luke: 1: 17. And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias.

St JOHN the Baptist
Luk: 1: 15 And as the people were in expectation. ve: 16 John answered saying
unto them all, I indeed baptize you with water but one mightier then I comes
ye latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose he shall baptize you with
ye Holy Ghost and with fire




WHen Herod had drunk so great a draught of blood at Bethlehem, and sought for
more from the Hill-country, Elizabeth carried her Son into the Wilderness,
there in the desert places and recesses to hide him from the fury of that
Beast, where she attended him with as much care and tenderness as the
affections and fears of a Mother could express in the permission of those
fruitless Solitudes. The Child was about eighteen months old when he first sled
to Sanctuary; Niceph, lib. 1. c. 14.
but after forty days his Mother died, and his Father Zachary at the time of
his ministration, which happened about this time, was killed in the Court of
the Temple; so that the Child was exposed to all the dangers and infelicities
of an Orphan, in a place of solitariness and discomfort, in a time when a
bloody King endeavored his destruction. But when his Father and Mother were
taken from him, the Lord took him up. For, S. Chrysostom. Hom. de Nativ. S. Jo.
(...).
according to the tradition of the Greeks, God deputed an Angel to be his
nourisher and Guardian, as he had formerly done to Genesis 21. 17.
Ishmael who dwelt in the Wilderness, and to Elias when he fled from the rage
of Ahab; so to this Child, who came in the spirit of 1 King. 19. 5.
Elias, to make demonstration that there can be no want where God undertakes
the care and provision.

2. The entertainment that S. John's Proveditore the Angel gave him was such as
the Wilderness did afford, and such as might dispose him to a life of
Austerity; for there he continued spending his time in Meditations, (...) curvi
setis (...) cameli, Contra (...) molles (...) artus, As en (...) graves (...).
Paulinus.
Contemplation, Prayer, Affections and Colloquies with God, eating Flies and
wild Honey, not clothed in soft, but a hairy garment, and a leathern girdle,
till he was thirty years of age. And then, being the fifteenth year of
Tiberius, Pontius Pilate being Governor of Judaea, the Word of God came unto
John in the Wilderness. And he came into all the country about Jordan,
preaching and baptizing.

3. This John, according to the Prophecies of him and designation of his person
by the Holy Ghost, was the forerunner of Christ, sent to dispose the people
for his entertainment, and prepare his ways; and therefore it was necessary his
person should be so extraordinary and full of Sanctity, and so clarified by
great concurrences and wonder in the circumstances of his life, as might gain
credit and reputation to the testimony he was to give concerning his LORD the
Savior of the World. And so it happened.

4. For as the Baptist, while he was in the Wilderness, became the pattern of
solitary and contemplative life, a School of Virtue, and Example of Sanctity
and singular Austerity; so at his emigration from the places of his Retirement
he seemed, what indeed he was, a rare and excellent Personage: and the Wonders
which were great at his Birth, the prediction of his Conception by an Angel,
which never had before happened but in the persons of Isaac and Sampson, the
contempt of the world which he bore about him, his mortified countenance and
deportment, his austere and eremitical life, his vehement spirit and excellent
zeal in Preaching, created so great opinions of him among the people, that all
held him for a Prophet in his Office, for a heavenly person in his own
particular, and a rare example of Sanctity and holy life to all others: and all
this being made solemn and ceremonious by his Baptism, he prevailed so, that he
made excellent and apt preparations for the LORD's appearing; for there went
out to him Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and all the regions round about Jordan,
and were baptized of him, confessing their sins.

5. The Baptist having by so heavenly means won upon the affections of all men,
his Sermons and his testimony concerning Christ were the more likely to be
prevalent and accepted; and the sum of them was Repentance and dereliction of
sins, and bringing forth the fruits of good life; in the promoting of which
Doctrine he was a severe reprehender of the Pharisees and Sadducees, he
exhorted the people to works of mercy, the Publicans to do justice and to
decline oppression, the Soldiers to abstain from plundering, and doing
violence or rapine: and publishing that he was not the CHRIST, that he only
baptized with water, but the Messiah should baptize with the holy Ghost and
with fire; he finally denounced judgment and great severities to all the World
of impenitents, even abscission and fire unquenchable. And from this time
forward, viz. From the days of John the Baptist, the Kingdom of Heaven suffered
violence, and the violent take it by force. For now the Gospel began to dawn,
and John was like the Morningstar, or the blushings springing from the windows
of the East, foretelling the approach of the Sun of Righteousness: and as S.
John Baptist laid the first rough, hard and unhewen stone of this building in
Mortification, Self denial and doing violence to our natural affections; so it
was continued by the Master Builder himself, who propounded the glories of the
Crown of the heavenly Kingdom to them only who should climb the Cross to reach
it. Now it was that Multitudes should throng and crowd to enter in at the
strait gate, and press into the Kingdom; and the younger brothers should snatch
the inheritance from the elder, the unlikely from the more likely, the Gentiles
from the Jews, the strangers from the natives, the Publicans and Harlots from
the Scribes and Pharisees, who, like violent persons, shall by their
importunity, obedience, watchfulness and diligence snatch the Kingdom from them
to whom it was first offered; and Jacob shall be loved, and Esau rejected.

Ad SECT. VIII. Considerations upon the Preaching of John the Baptist.
1. FRom the Disputation of Jesus with the Doctors to the time of his
Manifestation to Israel, which was eighteen years, the Holy Child dwelt in
Nazareth in great obedience to his Parents, in exemplar Modesty, singular
Humility, working with his hands in his supposed Father's trade, for the
support of his own and his Mother's necessities, and that he might bear the
Curse of Adam, that in the sweat of his brows he should eat his bread: all the
while he increased in favor with God and man, sending forth excellent
testimonies of a rare Spirit and a wise Understanding in the temperate
instances of such a conversation to which his Humility and great Obedience had
engaged him. But all this while the stream ran under ground: and though little
bublings were discerned in all the course, and all the way men looked upon him
as upon an excellent person, diligent in his calling, wise and humble,
temperate and just, pious and rarely tempered; yet at the manifestation of John
the Baptist he brake forth like the stream from the bowels of the earth, or the
Sun from a cloud, and gave us a precedent that we should not show our lights to
minister to vanity, but then only when God, and public order, and just
dispositions of men call for a manifestation: and yet the Ages of men have been
so forward in prophetical Ministeries, and to undertake Ecclesiastical
employment, that the viciousness and indiscretions and scandals the Church of
God feels as great burdens upon the tenderness of her spirit, are in great
part owing to the neglect of this instance of the Prudence and Modesty of the
Holy Jesus.

2. But now the time appointed was come, the Baptist comes forth upon the
Theater of Palestine, a forerunner of the Office and publication of Jesus, and
by the great reputation of his Sanctity prevailed upon the affections and
judgment of the people, who with much case believed his Doctrine, when they had
reason to approve his Life; for the good Example of the Preacher is always the
most prevailing Homily, his Life is his best Sermon. He that will raise
affections in his Auditory must affect their eyes; for we seldom see the people
weep if the Orator laughs loud and loosely; and there is no reason to think
that his discourse should work more with me than himself. If his arguments be
fair and specious, I shall think them fallacies, while they have not faith with
him; and what necessity for me to be temperate, when he that tells me so sees
no such need, but hopes to go to Heaven without it? or if the duty be
necessary, I shall learn the definition of Temperance, and the latitudes of my
permission, and the bounds of lawful and unlawful, by the exposition of his
practice; if he binds a burden upon my shoulders, it is but reason I should
look for him to bear his portion too. Good works convince more than Miracles;
and the power of ejecting Devils is not so great S. (...). de S. Babyla.
probation that Christian Religion came from God, as is the holiness of the
Doctrine, and its efficacy and productions upon the hearty Professors of the
Institution. S. Pachomius, when he wore the military girdle under Constantine
the Emperor, came to a City of Christians, who having heard that the Army in
which he then marched was almost starved for want of necessary provisions, of
their own charity relieved them speedily and freely. He wondering at their so
free and cheerful dispensation, inquired what kind of people these were whom he
saw so bountiful. It was answered they were Christians, whose Profession it is
to hurt no man, and to do good to every man. The pleased Soldier was convinced
of the excellency of that Religion which brought forth men so good and so
pious, and loved the Mother for the Children's sake, threw away his girdle, and
became Christian, and Religious, and a Saint. And it was Tertullian's great
argument in behalf of Christians, See how they love one another, how every man
is ready to die for his brother: it was a living argument and a sensible
demonstration of the purity of the Fountain, from whence such lympid waters did
derive. But so John the Baptist made himself a fit instrument of preparation,
and so must all the Christian Clergy be fitted for the dissemination of the
Gospel of Jesus.

3. The Baptist had till this time, that is, about thirty years, lived in the
Wilderness under the Discipline of the Holy Ghost, under the tuition of Angels,
in conversation with God, in great mortification and disaffections to the
World, his garments rugged and uneasy, his meat plain, necessary, and without
variety, his employment prayers and devotion, his company wild beasts, in
ordinary, in extraordinary, messengers from Heaven; and all this not undertaken
of necessity to subdue a bold lust, or to punish a loud crime, but to become
more holy and pure from the lesser stains and insinuations of too free
infirmities, and to prepare himself for the great ministry of serving the Holy
Jesus in his Publication. Thirty years he lived in great austerity; and it was
a rare Patience and exemplar Mortification: we use not to be so pertinacious in
any pious resolutions, but our purposes disband upon the sense of the first
violence; we are free and confident of resolving to fast when our Satiatis and
expletis (...) est carere quam (...). Cicero de (...).
bellies are full, but when we are called upon by the first necessities of
nature, our zeal is cool, and dissoluble into air upon the first temptation;
and we are not upheld in the violences of a short Austerity without faintings
and repentances to be repented of, and enquirings after the vow is past, and
searching for excuses and desires to reconcile our nature and our Conscience;
unless our necessity be great, and our sin clamorous, and our Conscience
laden, and no peace to be had without it: and it is well if upon any
reasonable grounds we can be brought to suffer contradictions of nature, for
the advantages of Grace. But it would be remembered, that the Baptist did more
upon a less necessity; and possibly the greatness of the example may entice us
on a little farther than the customs of the World or our own indevotions would
engage us.

4. But after the expiration of a definite time John came forth from his
Solitude, and served God in Societies. He served God and the content of his own
spirit by his conversing with Angels and Dialogues with God, so long as he was
in the Wilderness, and it might be some trouble to him to mingle with the
impurities of Men, amongst whom he was sure to observe such recesses from
perfection, such violation of all things sacred, so great despite done to all
ministeries of Religion, that to him who had no experience or neighborhood of
actions criminal, it must needs be to his sublimed and clarified spirit more
punitive and affictive than his hairen shirt and his ascetick diet was to his
body; but now himself, that tried both, was best able to judge which state of
life was of greatest advantage and perfection.

5. In his Solitude he did breath more pure inspiration, Heaven was more open,
God was In (...).
more familiar and frequent in his visitations. In the Wilderness his company
was Angels, his employment Meditations and Prayer, his Temptations simple and
from within, from the impotent and lesser rebellions of a mortified body, his
occasions of sin as few as his examples, his condition such, that if his Soul
were at all busy, his life could not easily be other than the life of Angels;
for his work and recreation, and his visits, and his retirements, could be
nothing but the variety and differing circumstances of his Piety: his
inclinations to Society made it necessary for him to repeat his addresses to
God; for his being a sociable Creature, and yet in solitude, made that his
conversing with God, and being partaker of Divine communications, should be the
satisfaction of his natural desires, and the supply of his singularity and
retirement; the discomforts of which made it natural for him to seck out for
some refreshment, and therefore to go to Heaven for it, he having rejected the
solaces of the World already. And all this besides the innocencies of his (...)
(...).
silence, which is very great, and to be judged of in proportion to the
infinite extravagancies of our language, there being no greater James 3. Petrus
Cellensis, l. 4. (...). 12.
perfection here to be expected than not to offend in our tongue. It was
solitude and retirement in which Jesus kept his Vigils, the Desert places heard
him pray, in a privacy he was born, in the (...) he fed his thousands, upon a
Mountain apart he was transfigured, upon a Mountain he died, and from a
Mountain he (...) to his Father; in which Retirements his Devotion certainly
did receive the advantage of convenient circumstances, and himself in such
dispositions twice had the opportunities of Glory.

6. And yet after all these Excellencies the Spirit of God called the Baptist
forth to a more excellent Ministry: for in Solitude pious persons might go to
Heaven by the way of Prayers and Devotion, but in Society they might go to
Heaven by the way of Mercy and Charity and dispensations to others. In Solitude
there are fewer occasions of Vices, but there is also the exercise of fewer
Virtues; and the Temptations, though they be not from many Objects, yet are in
some Circumstances more dangerous, not only because the worst of evils,
spiritual Pride, does seldom miss to creep upon In (...). Ep. 4.
those goodly Oaks, like Ivy, and suck their heart out, and a great Mortifier
without some complacencies in himself, or affectations or opinions, or
something of singularity, is almost as unusual as virgin-purity and unstained
thoughts in the Bordelli, (S. Hierom had tried it and found it so by
experience, and he it was that said so;) but also because whatsoever temptation
does invade such retired persons, they have Non (...). Quint.
privacies enough to act it in, and no eyes upon them but the eye of Heaven, no
shame to Maxims pars (...) sol litur, (...). Senec. S (...). Malum quod (...),
nemo arguit; ubi (...), and (...).
encounter withal, no fears of being discovered: and we know by experience,
that a Witness of our conversation is a great restraint to the inordination of
our actions. Men seek out darknesses and secrecies to commit a sin; and The
evil that no man sees, no man reproves; and that makes the Temptation bold and
confident, and the iniquity easy and ready: So that as they have not so many
tempters as they have abroad, so neither have they so many restraints; their
vices are not so many, but they are more dangerous in themselves, and to the
World safe and opportune. And as they communicate less with the World, so they
do less Charity and fewer offices of Mercy: no Sermons there but when solitude
is made popular, and the City removes into the Wilderness; no comforts of a
public Religion, or visible remonstrances of the Communion of Saints; and of
all the kinds of spiritual Mercy, only one can there properly be exercised, and
of the corporal none at all. And this is true in lives and institutions of less
retirement, in proportion to the degree of the Solitude: and therefore Church
story reports of diverse very holy persons, who left their Wildernesses and
sweetnesses of Devotion in their retirement, to serve God in public by the
ways of Charity and exterior offices. Thus S. Antony and Acepsamas came forth
to encourage the fainting people to contend to Eusebius. hist. 11. 6.
death for the Crown of Martyrdom; and Aphraates in the time of Valens the
Arian c. 3. Theod. l. 4.
Emperor came abroad to assist the Church in the suppressing the flames kindled
by the c. 23, 24. (...) est illi (...) qui omnem (...) mundum (...) quod quid m
in terris (...) hominum jure sociali, (...). Cicer. Somn. (...).
Arian Faction. And upon this ground they that are the greatest admirers of
Eremitical life call the Episcopal Function the State of perfection, and a
degree of ministerial and honorary excellency beyond the pieties and
contemplations of Solitude, because of the advantages of gaining Souls, and
Religious conversation, and going to God by doing good to others.

7. John the Baptist united both these lives, and our Blessed Savior, who is
the great Precedent of Sanctity and Prudence, has determined this question in
his own instance; for he lived a life common, sociable, humane, charitable, and
public, and yet for the opportunities of especial Devotion retired to prayer
and contemplation, but came forth speedily; for the Devil never set upon him
but in the Wilderness, and by the advantage of retirement. For as God has
many, so the Devil has some opportunities of doing his work in our
solitariness. But Jesus reconciled both, and so did (...)
John the Baptist in several degrees and manners: and from both we are taught,
that Solitude is a good School, and the World is the best Theater; the
Institution is best there, but the Practice here; the Wilderness has the
advantage of Discipline, and Society opportunities of Perfection; Privacy is
the best for Devotion, and the Public for Charity. In both God has many
Saints and Servants, and from both the Devil has had some.

8. His Sermon was an Exhortation to Repentance and an Holy life: He gave
particular schedules of Duty to several states of persons; sharply reproved the
(...) for their Hypocrisy and Impiety, it being worse in them, because
contrary to their rule, their profession and institution; gently guided others
into the ways of Righteousness, calling them the straight ways of the Lord,
that is, the direct and shortest way to the Kingdom, for of all Lines the
straight is the shortest, and as every Angle is a turning out of the way, so
every Sin is an obliquity, and interrupts the journey. By such (...) and a
Baptism he disposed the spirits of men for the entertaining the (...), and the
Homilies of the Gospel. For John's Doctrine was to the Sermons of Jesus as a
Preface to a Discourse; and his Baptism was to the new Institution and
Discipline of the Kingdom as the Vigils to a Holy Day, of the same kind in a
less degree. But the whole Economy of it represents to us, that Repentance is
the first intromission into the Sanctities of Christian Religion. The Lord
treads upon no paths that are not hallowed and made smooth by the sorrows and
cares of Contrition, and the impediments of sin cleared by dereliction and the
succeeding fruits of emendation. But as it related to the Jews, his Baptism did
signify, by a cognation to their usual Rites and Ceremonies of Ablution and
washing Gentile Proselytes, that the Jews had so far receded from their duty
and that Holiness which God required of them by the Law, that they were in the
state of strangers, no better than Heathens, and therefore were to be treated,
as themselves received Gentile Proselytes, by a Baptism and a new state of
life, before they could be fit for the reception of the (...), or be admitted
to his Kingdom.

9. It was an excellent sweetness of Religion that had entirely (...) the Soul
of the Baptist, that in so great reputation of Sanctity, so mighty concourse of
people, such great multitudes of Disciples and confidents, and such throngs of
admirers, he was humble without mixtures of vanity, and confirmed in his temper
and Piety against the strength of the most impetuous temptation. And he was
tried to some purpose: for when he was tempted to confess himself to be the
CHRIST, he refused it, or to be Elias, or to be accounted that Prophet, he
refused all such great appellatives, and confessed himself only to be a Voice,
the lowest of Entities, whose being depends upon the Speaker, just as himself
did upon the pleasure of God, receiving form and publication and employment
wholly by the will of his Lord, in order to the manifestation of the Word
eternal. It were (...) that the spirits of men would not arrogate more than
their own, though they did not lessen their own just dues. It may concern some
end of Piety or Prudence, that our reputation be preserved by all just means;
but never that we assume the dues of others, or grow vain by the spoils of an
undeserved dignity. Honors are the rewards of Virtue, or engagement upon
Offices of trouble and public use; but then they must suppose a preceding
worth, or a fair employment. But he that is a Plagiary of others titles or
offices, and dresses himself with their beauties, has no more solid worth or
reputation, than he should have nutriment if he ate only with their mouth, and
slept their slumbers, himself being open and unbound in all the Regions of his
Senses.

The PRAYER.
O Holy and most glorious God, who before the publication of thy eternal Son,
the Prince of Peace, did send thy Servant John Baptist, by the examples of
Mortification, and the rude Austerities of a penitential life, and by the
Sermons of Penance, to remove all the impediments of sin, that the ways of his
Lord and ours might be made clear, ready and expedite; be pleased to let thy
Holy Spirit lead me in the straight paths of Sanctity, without deslections to
either hand, and without the interruption of deadly sin, that I may with
facility, Zeal, (...) and a persevering diligence walk in the ways of the Lord.
Be pleased that the Axe may be laid to the root of Sin, that the whole body of
it may be cut down in me, that no fruit of Sodom may grow up to thy
displeasure. Thoroughly purge the floor and (...) of my heart with thy Fan, with
the breath of thy Diviner Spirit, that it may be a holy repository of Graces,
and full of benediction and Sanctity; that when our Lord shall come, I may at
all times be prepared for the entertainment of so Divine a Guest, apt to lodge
him and to feast him, that he may for ever delight to dwell with me. And make
me also to dwell with him, sometimes retiring into his recesses and private
rooms by Contemplation, and admiring of his Beauties, and beholding the Secrets
of his Kingdom; and at all other times walking in the Courts of the Lord's
House by the diligences and labors of Repentance and an Holy life, till thou
shall please to call me to a nearer communication of thy Excellencies, which
then grant, when by thy gracious assistances I shall have done thy works, and
glorified thy holy Name, by the strict and never-failing purposes and
proportionable endeavors of Religion and Holiness, through the merits and
mercies of Jesus Christ.

Amen.
DISCOURSE IV. Of Mortification and corporal Austerities.
1. FRom the days of John the Baptist, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence,
and the violent take it by force, said our Blessed Savior. For now that the
new Covenant was to be made with Man, Repentance, which is so great a part of
it, being in very many actions a punitive duty, afflictive and vindicative,
from the days of the Baptist (who first, by office and solemnity of design,
published this Doctrine) violence was done to the inclinations and dispositions
of Man, and by such violences we were to be possessed of the Kingdom. And his
Example was the best (...) upon his Text; he did violence to himself; he lived
a life in which the rudenesses of Camel's hair, and the lowest nutriment of
Flies and Honey of the Desert, his life of singularity, his retirement from the
sweetnesses of Society, his resisting the greatest of Tentations, and despising
to assume false honors, were instances of that violence, and explications of
the Doctrine of Self-denial and Mortification, which are the Pedestal of the
Cross, and the Supporters of Christianity, as it distinguishes from all Laws,
Religions, and Institutions of the World.

2. Mortification is the one half of Christianity; it is a dying to the World,
it is a (...), S. Basil.
denying of the Will and all its natural desires: An abstinence from pleasure
and sensual complacencies, that the (...) being subdued to the spirit, both may
join in the service of God, and in the offices of holy Religion. It consists in
actions of Severity and Renunciation; it refuses to give entertainment to any
vanity, nor uses a freer license in things lawful, lest it be tempted to things
unlawful; it kills the lusts of the flesh by taking away its fuel and
incentives, and by using to contradict its appetite, does inure it with more
facility to obey the superior Faculties: and, in effect, it is nothing but a
great care we sin not, and a prudent and severe using such remedies and
instruments which in Nature and Grace are made apt for the production of our
purposes. And it consists in interior and exterior offices; these being but
instruments of the interior, as the Body is organical or instrumental to the
Soul, and no part of the Duty it self, but as they are advantages to the End,
the mortification of the Spirit; which by whatsoever means we have once
acquired and do continue, we are disobliged from all other exterior (...),
unless by accident they come to be obligatory, and from some other cause.

3. Mortification of the Will or the Spirit of Man, that is the Duty; that the
Will of Man may humbly obey God, and absolutely rule its inferior Faculties;
that the inordinations of our natural desires, begun by Adam's sin, and
continued and increased by our continuing evil customs, may be again placed in
the right order; that since many of the Divine Precepts are restraints upon our
natural desires, we should so deny (...) Appetites that covet after natural
satisfactions, that they may not serve themselves by disserving God. For
therefore our own Wills are our greatest dangers and our greatest enemies,
because they tend to courses contradictory to God. God commands us to be
humble; our own desires are to be great, considerable, and high; and we are
never secure enough from contempt, unless we can place our neighbors at our
feet: Here therefore we must deny our Will, and appetites of Greatness, for the
purchase of Humility. God commands Temperance and Chastity; our desires and
natural promptness breaks the bands asunder, and entertains dissolutions to the
licentiousness of Apicius, or the wantonness of a Mahumetan Paradise,
sacrificing meat and drink offerings to our appetites, as if our stomachs were
the Temples of (...), and making Women and the opportunities of Lust to be our
dwelling, and our employment, even beyond the common loosenesses of
entertainment: Here therefore we must deny our own Wills, our appetites of
Gluttony and Drunkenness, and our prurient beastly inclinations, for the
purchase of Temperance and Chastity. And every other Virtue is, either directly
or by accident, a certain instance of this great Duty, which is, like a
Catholicon, purgative of all distemperatures, and is the best preparative and
disposition to Prayer in the world.

4. For it is a sad consideration, and of secret reason, that since Prayer of
all Duties is certainly the sweetest and the (...), it having in it no
difficulty or (...) labor, no weariness of bones, no dimness of eyes or hollow
(...) is directly consequent to it, no natural desires of contradictory
quality, nothing of disease, but much of comfort and more of hope in it; yet we
are infinitely averse from it, weary of its length, glad of an occasion to
pretermit our offices; and yet there is no visible cause of such (...), nothing
in the nature of the thing, nor in the circumstances necessarily appendent to
the duty. Something is amiss in us, and it wanted a name, till the Spirit of
God by enjoining us the duty of Mortification has taught us to know that
Immortification of spirit is the cause of all our secret and spiritual
indispositions: we are so incorporated to the desires of sensual objects, that
we feel no relish or gust of the spiritual. It is as if a Lion should eat hay,
or an Ox venison, there is no proportion between the object and the appetite,
till by mortification of our first desires our Wills are made spiritual, and
our Apprehensions supernatural and clarified. For as a Cook told Dionysius the
Tyrant, the black Broth of Lacedaemon would not do well at Syracusa, unless it
be tasted by a Spartan's palate; so neither can the Excellencies of Heaven be
discerned but by a spirit disrelishing the sottish appetites of the world, and
accustomed to diviner banquets. And this was mystically signified by the two
Altars in Solomon's Temple, in the outer Court whereof Beasts were sacrificed,
in the inner Court an Altar of incense: the first representing Mortification or
slaying of our beastly appetites; the (...) the offering up our Prayers, which
are not likely to become a pleasant offertory, unless our impurities be removed
by the atonement made by the first Sacrifices; without (...) spirit be
mortified, we neither can love to pray, nor God love to hear us.

5. But there are three steps to ascend to this Altar. The first is, to abstain
from satisfying our carnal desires in the instances of sin; and although the
furnace flames with vehement emissions at some times, yet to walk in the midst
of the burning without being consumed, like the Children of the Captivity: that
is the duty even of the most imperfect, and is commonly the condition of those
good persons whose interest in secular employments speaks fair, and solicits
often, and tempts highly; yet they manage their affairs with habitual Justice,
and a Constant Charity, and are temperate in their daily meals, chaste in the
solaces of marriage, and pure in their spirits, unmingled with sordid
affections in the midst of their possessions and enjoyments. These men are in
the world, but they are strangers here: They have a City, but not an abiding
one; they are (...) 11. 13
Proselytes of the House, but have made no Covenant with the world. (...)
though they (...) Tim. 6. (...)
desire with secular desires, yet it is but for necessaries, and then they are
content; they use the creatures with freedom and modesty, but never to
intemperance and transgression: so that their hands are below tied there by the
necessities of their life; 2. Cor. 5. 6.
but their hearts are above, lifted up by the abstractions of this first degree
of Mortification. And this is the first and nicest distinction between a man of
the world and a man of God; for this state is a denying our affections nothing
but the sin, it enjoys as much of the World as may be consistent with the
possibilities of Heaven: a little less than this is the state of
Immortification, and a being in the (...), which ((...) the Apostle) cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God. The flesh must first be separated, and the
adherences pared off from the skin, before the parchment be fit to make a
schedule for use, or to transmit a Record: whatsoever in the sense of the
Scripture is (...), or an enemy to the spirit, if it be not rescinded and
mortified, makes that the Laws of God cannot be written in our hearts. This is
the Doctrine S. Paul taught the Church: For if ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of Romans 8. 13.
the body, ye shall live. This first Mortification is the way of life, if it
continues: but its continuance is not fecured, till we are advanced toward
life by one degree more of this Death. For this condition is a state of a daily
and dangerous warfare, and many inrodes are made by sin, and many times hurt is
done and booty carried off: for he that is but thus far mortified, although his
dwelling be within the Kingdom of Grace, yet it is in the borders of it, and
has a dangerous neighborhood. If we mean to be safe, we must remove into the
heart of the Land, or carry the war farther off.

6. Secondly, We must not only be strangers here, but we must be dead too, dead
unto the World: that is, we must not only deny our Vices, but our Passions; not
only O quam (...) res (...) super humana se (...).
contradict the direct immediate Persuasion to a sin, but also cross the
Inclination to it. So long as our Appetites are high and full, we shall never
have peace or safety, but the dangers and insecurities of a full War and a
potent Enemy; we are always disputing the Question, ever struggling for life:
but when our Passions are killed, when our desires are little and low, then
Grace reigns, then our life is hid with Christ in God, then we have fewer
interruptions in the way of Righteousness, then we are not so apt to be
surprised by sudden eruptions and transportation of Passions, and our Piety it
self is more prudent: and reasonable, chosen with a freer election, discerned
with clearer understanding, has more in it of Judgment than of Fancy, and is
more spiritual and Angelical. He that is apt to be angry, though he be
habitually careful and full of observation that he sin not, may at some time or
other be surprised, when his guards are undiligent and without actual
expectation of an enemy: but if his Anger be dead in him, and the inclination
lessened to the indisferency and gentleness of a Child, the man dwells safe,
because of the impotency of his Enemy, or that he is reduced to Obedience, or
has taken conditions of peace. He that has refused to consent to actions of
Uncleanness, to which he was strongly tempted, has won a victory by sine
force, God has blessed him well: but an opportunity may betray him instantly,
and the sin may be in upon him unawares; unless also his desires be killed, he
is betrayed by a party within. David was a holy person, but he was surprised by
the sight of Bathsheba, for his freer use of permitted beds had kept the fire
alive, which was apt to be put into a flame when so fair a beauty reflected
through his eyes. But Joseph was a Virgin, and kept under all his inclinations
to looser thoughts; opportunity, and command, and violence, and beauty did make
no breach upon his spirit.

7. He that is in the first state of Pilgrimage does not mutiny against his
Superiors, nor publish their faults, nor envy their dignities; but he that is
dead to the world sees no fault that they have, and when he hears an objection,
he buries it in an excuse, and rejoices in the dignity of their persons. Every
degree of Mortification endures reproof without murmur; but he that is quite
dead to the world and to his own will feels no regret against it, and has no
secret thoughts of trouble and unwillingness to the suffering, save only that
he is sorry he deserved it. For so a dead body resists not your violence,
changes not its posture you placed it in, strikes not his striker, is not moved
by your words, nor provoked by your scorn, nor is troubled when you shrink with
horror at the sight of it; only it will hold the head downward in all its
situations, unless it be hindered by violence: And a mortified spirit is such,
without indignation against scorn, without revenge against injuries, without
murmuring at low offices, not impatient in troubles, indifferent in all
accidents, neither transported with joy nor deprest with sorrow, and is humble
in all his thoughts. And thus he that is dead (says the Apostle) is justified
from sins. And this is properly a state of life, in Romans 6. 7.
which by the grace of Jesus we are restored to a condition of order and
interior beauty in our Faculties, our actions are made moderate and humane,
our spirits are even, and our understandings undisturbed.

8. For Passions of the sensitive Soul are like an Exnalation, hot and dry,
born up from the earth upon the wings of a cloud, and detained by violence out
of its place, causing thunders, and making eruptions into lightning and sudden
fires. There is a Tempest in the Soul of a passionate man; and though every
wind does not shake the earth, nor rend trees up by the roots, yet we call it
violent and ill weather, if it only makes a (...) and is harmless. And it is an
inordination in the spirit of a man, when his Passions are tumultuous and
mighty; though they do not determine directly upon a sin, they discompose his
peace, and disturb his spirit, and make it like troubled waters, in which no
man can see his own figure and just (...) portions, and therefore by being less
a man cannot be so much a Christian, in the midst (...) so great
indispositions. For although the Cause may hallow the Passion, (and if a man be
very angry for God's cause, it is Zeal, not Fury) yet the Cause cannot secure
the Person from violence, transportation and inconvenience. When Elisha was
consulted by three Kings concerning the success of their present 2 (...). 3
(...).
Expedition, he grew so angry against idolatrous soram, and was carried on to
so great degrees of disturbance, that when for Jehosaphat's sake he was content
to enquire of the Lord, he called for a minstrel, who by his harmony might
re-compose his disunited and troubled spirit, that so he might be apter sor
divination. And sometimes this zeal goes besides the intention of the man, and
beyond the degrees of prudent or lawful, and ingages in a sin, though at first
it was Zeal for Religion. For so it happened in Moses, at the waters of Massah
and Meribah he spoke foolishly; and yet it was when he was zealous for God, and
extremely careful of the people's interest. For his Passion, he was hindered
from entering into the Land of Promise. And we also, if we be not moderate and
welltempered, even in our (...) for God, may, like Moses, break the Tables of
the Law, and throw them out of our hands with zeal to have them preserved; for
Passion violently snatches at the Conclusion, but is inconsiderate and
incurious concerning the Premises. The sum and purpose of this Discourse is
that saying of our Blessed Savior, (...). 16 (...).
He that will be my Disciple must deny himself; that is, not only desires that
are sinful, but desires that are his own, pursuances of his own affections, and
violent motions, though to things not evil or in themselves contagious.

9. Thirdly, And yet there is a degree of Mortification of spirit beyond this:
for the condition of our security may require, that we not only deny to act our
temptations, or to please our natural desires, but also to seek opportunities
of doing displeasure to our affections, and violence to our inclinations; and
not only to be indifferent, but to choose a contradiction and a denial to our
strongest appetites, to rejoice in a trouble: and this was the spirit of S.
Paul, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulations; and, We glory in it. 2
Cor. 7. 4.
Romans 5. 3.
Which joy consists not in any sensitive pleasure any man can take in
asflictions and adverse accidents, but in a despising the present
inconveniences, and looking through the cloud unto those great felicities, and
graces, and consignations to glory, which are the effects of the Cross: Knowing
that tribulation works patience, and patience experience, Romans 5. 3. 4.
and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed; that was the incentive of S.
Paul's joy. And therefore as it may consist with any degree of Mortification to
pray for the taking away of the Cross, upon condition it may consist with God's
glory and our ghostly profit; so it is properly an act of this virtue to pray
for the Cross, or to meet it, if we understand it may be for the interest of
the spirit. And thus S. Basil prayed to God to remove his violent pains of
Headache: but when God heard him, and took away his pain, and Lust came in the
place of it, he prayed to God to restore him his Headache again; that cross was
gain and joy, when the removal of it was so full of danger and temptation. And
this the Masters of spiritual life call being crucified with Christ; because as
Christ chose the death, and desired it by the appetites of the spirit, though
his flesh smarted under it, and groaned and died with the burden; so do all
that are thus mortified, they place misfortunes and sadnesses amongst things
eligible, and set them before the eyes of their desire, although the flesh and
the desires of sense are factious and bold against such sufferings.

10. Of these three degrees of interior or spiritual Mortification, the first
is Duty, the second is Counsel, and the third is Perfection. We sin if we have
not the first; we are in danger without the second; but without the third we
cannot be perfect as our heavenly Father is, but shall have more of humane
infirmities to be ashamed of than can be excused by the accrescencies and
condition of our nature. The first is only of absolute necessity; the second is
prudent, and of greatest convenience; but the (...) Hierocl. (...).
third is excellent and perfect. And it was the consideration of a wise man,
that the Saints in Heaven, who understand the excellent glories and vast
differences of state and capacities amongst beatified persons, although they
have no envy nor sorrows, yet if they were upon earth with the same notion and
apprehensions they have in Heaven, would not for all the world lose any degree
of Glory, but mortify to the greatest (...), that their Glory may be a
derivation of the greatest ray of light; every degree being of compensation
glorious, and disproportionably beyond the inconsiderable troubles of the
greatest Self-denial. God's purpose is, that we abstain from sin; there is no
more in the Commandment; and therefore we must deny our selves, so as S. (...).
not to admit a sin, under pain of a certain and eternal curse: but the other
degrees of (...).
Mortification are by accident so many degrees of Virtue, not being enjoined or
counseled for themselves, but for the preventing of crimes, and for securities
of good life; and therefore are parts and offices of Christian prudence, which
whosoever shall positively reject, is neither much in love with Virtue, nor
careful of his own safety.

11. Secondly, But Mortification has also some designs upon the Body. For the
Body is the Shop and Forge of the Soul, in which all her designs which are
transient upon external objects are framed: and it is a good servant, as long
as it is kept in obedience (...). 29 21.
and under discipline; but he that breeds his servant delicately will find him
contumacious 1 Cor. 9. 27.
and troublesome, bold and confident as his son: and therefore S. Paul's
practice, Romans 6. 4.
Heb. 12. 1.
(as himself gives account of it) was, to keep his body under, and bring it
into subjection, 1 Pet. 2. 1. and 4. 1.
lest he should become a (...)-away; for the desires of the Body are in the
same things in which themselves are satisfied so many injuries to the Soul,
because upon every one of the appetites a restraint is made, and a law placed
sor Sentinel, that if we transgress the bounds fixed by the divine (...), it
becomes a sin; now it is hard for us to keep them within compass, because they
are little more than agents merely natural, and therefore cannot interrupt
their act, but covet and desire as much as they can without suspension or
coercion but what comes from without, which is therefore the more troublesome,
because all such restraints are against nature, and without Rom 7. 5.
sensual pleasure. And therefore this is that that S. Paul said, When we were
in the flesh, the (...) of sin which were by the Law did work in our members to
bring forth fruit unto Death. For these pleasures of the body draw us as
loadstones draw iron, not for love, but for prey and nutriment; it feeds upon
the iron, as the bodily pleasures upon the life of the spirit, which is
lessened and impaired according as the gusts of the flesh grow high and sapid.

12. He that seeds a Lion must obey him, unless he make his den to be his
prison: (...) (...), ad (...).
Our Lusts are as wild and as cruel Beasts, and, unless they feel the load of
fetters and of Laws, will grow unruly and troublesome, and increase upon us, as
we give them food and satisfaction. He that is used to drink high Wines, is
sick if he has not his proportion, to what degree soever his custom has
brought his appetite; and to some men Temperance becomes certain death, because
the inordination of their desires has introduced a custom, and custom has
increased those appetites, and made them almost natural in their degree: but he
that has been used to hard diet and the pure stream, his (...) are much within
the limits of Temperance, and his desires as moderate as his diet. S. Jerome
affirms, that to be continent in the state of Widowhood is barder than to keep
our Firgin pure: and there is reason that then the Appetite should be harder to
be restrained, when it has not been accustomed to be denied, but satisfied in
its freer solicitations. When a fontinel is once opened, all the symbolical
humors run thither, and issue out, and it is not to be stopped without danger,
unless the humor be purged or diverted: So is the satisfaction of an impure
desire, it opens the issue, and makes way for the emanation of all impurity,
and, unless the desire be mortified, will not be stopped by purposes and easy
desires.

13. Since therefore the Body is the instrument of sins, the fuel and the
incentive, our Mortification must reach thither also, at least in some degrees,
or it will be to small purpose to think of mortifying our spirit in some
instances of Temptation. In vain does that man think to keep his honor and
Chastity, that invites his Lust to an activeness by soft beds and high diet,
and idleness and opportunity: Make the Soul's instrument unapt, and half the
work is done. And this is true in all instances of Carnality or natural
desires, whose scene lies in the lower region of Passions, and are acted by the
Body; but the operation of the cure must be in proportion to the design; as the
mortification of the Spirit is in several degrees, so the mortification of the
Body also has its several parts of prudence, injunction and necessity. For the
prescribing all sorts of Mortifications corporal indefinitely and
indiseriminately to all persons, without separation of their ends and distinct
capacities, is a snare to men's Consciences, makes Religion impertinently
troublesome, occasions some men to glory in corporal Austerity, as if of it
self it were an act of Piety, and a distinction of the man from the more
imperfect persons of the world, and is all the way unreasonable and
inartificial.

14. First, Therefore such whose engagements in the world or capacities of
person confine them to the lowest and first step Huic (...), vie (...) super,
(...). --
of Mortification, those who fight only for life and liberty, not for
privileges and honor, that are in perpetual contestation and close fightings
with sin, it is necessary that their Body also De Catone dixit (...); and de
(...), (...) rigidam in (...) desc as (...),
be mortified in such a degree, that their desires transport them not beyond
the permissions of Divine and humane Laws: let such men be strict in the rules
of Temperance and Sobriety, be chaste within the laws of Marriage, cherish
their body to preserve their health, and their health to serve God, and to do
their offices. To these persons the best instruments of Discipline are the
strict laws of Temperance, denying all transgressions of the appetite boiling
over its margent and proper limit, assiduous Prayer and observation of the
public laws of (...), which are framed so moderate and even, as to be
proportionable to the common manner of living of persons secular and encumbered.
For though many persons of common employments and even manner of living have,
in the midst of worldly avocations, undertaken Austerities very rude and
rigorous, yet it was in order to a higher mortification of spirit; and it is
also necessary they should, if either naturally, or habitually, or easily they
suffer violent transportation of Passions: for since the occasions of anger and
disturbance in the world frequently occur, if such Passions be not restrained
by greater violence than is competent to the ordinary offices of a moderate
Piety, the cure is weaker than the humor, and so leaves the work imperfect.

15. Secondly, But this is coincident to the second degree of Mortification:
for if either out of desire of a farther step toward perfection, or out of the
necessities of nature or evil customs, it be necessary also to subdue our
Passions as well as the direct invitations to sin, in both these cases the Body
must suffer more Austerities, even such as directly are contrariant to every
passionate disturbance, though it be not ever sinful in the instance. All
Mortifiers must abstain from every thing that is unlawful; but these, that they
may abstain from things unlawful, must also deny to themselves satisfaction in
things lawful and pleasant: and this is in a just proportion to the End, the
subduing the Passions, lest their liberty and boldness become licentious. And
we shall easier deny their importunity to sin, when we will not please them in
those things in which we may: such in which the fear of God, and the danger of
our Souls, and the convictions of Reason and Religion do not immediately
cooperate. And this was the practice of David, when he had thirsted for the
water of Bethlehem, and some of his Worthies ventured their lives and brought
it, he refused to drink it, but poured it upon the ground 2 Samuel 23. 17.
unto the Lord, that is, it became a Drink Offering unto the Lord; an
acceptable Oblation, in which he (...) his desires to God, denying himself the
satisfaction of such a desire which was natural and innocent, save that it was
something nice, delicate and curious. Like this was the act of the Fathers in
the mountain Nitria, to one of which a Apud Pal'ad. in (...).
fair cluster of dried grapes being sent, he refused to taste them, lest he
should be too sensual and much pleased, but sent them to another, and he to a
third, and the same consideration transmitted the Present through all their
Cells, till it came to the first man again; all of them not daring to content
their appetite in a thing too much desired, lest the like importunity in the
instance of a sin should prevail upon them. To these persons the best
instruments of Discipline are subtractions rather than imposition of
Austerities; let them be great haters of corporal pleasures, eating for
necessity, diet (...) and cheap, abridging and making short the opportunities
of natural and permitted solaces, (...), a (...) plura (...). Hor.
refusing exterior comforts, not choosing the most pleasant object, nor
suffering delight to be the end of eating, and therefore separating delight
from it as much as prudently they may, not being too importunate with God to
remove his gentler hand of paternal correction, but inuring our selves to
patient suffering, and indifferent acceptance of the Cross that God lays upon
us, at no hand living delicately, or curiously, or impatiently. And this was
the condition of S. Paul, suffering with excellent temper all those
persecutions and inconveniences which the enemies of Religion loaded him
withal; which he called bearing the marks of the Lord Jesus in his body, and
carrying Gal. 6. 17.
about in his body the dying or mortification of the Lord Jesus: it was in the
matter of 2 Cor. 4. 10.
Persecution, which because he bare patiently, and was accustomed to, and he
accepted with indifference and renunciation, they were the mortifications and
the marks of Jesus, that is, a true (...) to the Passion of Christ, and of
great effect and interest for the preventing sins by the mortification of his
natural desires.

16. Thirdly, But in the pale of the Church there are and have been many tall
Cedars (...) tops have reached to Heaven; some there are that choose afflictions
of the Body, that by turning the bent and inclination of their affections into
sensual (...), they may not only cut off all pretensions of Temptation, but
grow in spiritual Graces, and perfections intellectual and beatified. To this
purpose they served themselves with the instances of Sackcloth, Hard lodging,
long Fasts, Pernoctation in prayers, Renunciation of all secular possessions,
great and expensive Charity, bodily Labors to great weariness and affiction,
and many other prodigies of voluntary suffering, which Scripture and the
Ecclesiastical stories do frequently mention. S. Lewis King of France wore
Sackcloth every day, unless sickness hindered; and S. Zenobius as long as he
was a Bishop. And when Severus Sulpitius sent a Sackcloth to S. Panlinus
Bishop of Nola, he returned to him a letter of thanks, and discoursed piously
concerning the use of corporal Austerities. And that I need not instance, it
was so general, that (...), and (...) est (...), Fp. 20. (...) l. 2. (...). 22,
(...). Alex, (...). l. 2. c. 1.
this was by way of appropriation called the Garment of the Church, because of
the frequent use of such instruments of exterior (...): and so it was in other
instances. S. James neither are flesh nor drank wine; S. Matthew lived upon
acorns, seeds and herbs; and, amongst the elder Christians, some rolled
themselves naked in snows, some upon thorns, some on burning coals, some chewed
bitter pills and masticated gumms, and sipped frequently of horrid potions, and
wore iron upon their skin and bolts upon their legs, and in witty torments
excelled the cruelty of many of their persecutors, whose rage determined
quickly in death, and had certainly less of torment than the tedious
afflictions and rude penances of Simeon surnamed Stylites. But as all great
examples have excellencies above the ordinary Devotions of good people, so have
they some danger and much consideration.

17. First, therefore, I consider, that these Bodily and voluntary self-(...)
can only be of use in carnal and natural Temptations, of no use in spiritual:
for ascetick diet hard lodging and severe disciplines, cannot be directly
operative upon the spirit, but only by mediation of the Body, by abating its
extravagancies, by subtracting its maintenance, by lessening its temptations;
these may help to preserve the Soul chaste or temperate, because the scene of
these sins lies in the Body, and thence they have their (...) (...).
maintenance, and from thence also may receive their abatements. But in actions
which are less material, such as Pride, and Envy, and Blasphemy, and
Impenitence, and all the kinds and degrees of Malice, external Mortifications
do so little cooperate to their cure, that oftentimes they are their greatest
(...) and incentives, and are like Cordials given to cure a cold fit of an
Ague, they do their work, but bring a hot fit in its place: and besides that
great Mortifiers have been soonest assaulted by the spirit of Pride, we find
that great Fasters are naturally angry and choleric. S. Hierom found it in
himself, and (...) felt some of the effects of it. And therefore this last part
of corporal Mortification, and the choosing such Afflictions by a voluntary
imposition, is at no hand to be applied in all cases, but in cases of Lust only
and Intemperance or natural Impatience, or such crimes which dwell in the
Senses: and then it also would be considered, whether or no rudeness to the
Body applied for the obtaining Patience be not a direct temptation to
Impatience, a provoking the spirit, and a running into that whither we pray
that God would not suffer us to be led. Possibly such Austerities, if applied
with great caution and wise circumstances, may be an exercise of Patience, when
the Grace is by other means acquired; and he that finds them so, may use them,
if he dares trust himself: but as they are dangerous before the Grace is
obtained, so when it is, they are not necessary. And still it may be enquired
in the case of temptations to Lust, whether any such Austerities which can
consist with health will do the work. So long as the Body is in health, it will
do its offices of nature; if it is not in health, it cannot do all offices of
Grace, nor many of our Calling. And therefore although they may do some
advantages to persons tempted with the lowest sins, yet they will not do it
all, nor do it alone, nor are they safe to all dispositions: and where they are
useful to these smaller and lower purposes, yet we must be careful to observe,
that the Mortification of the spirit to the greatest and most perfect purposes
is to be set upon by means spiritual and of immediate efficacy; for they are
the lowest operations of the Soul which are moved and produced by actions
corporal; the Soul may from those become lustful or chaste, cheerful or sad,
timorous or confident: but yet even in these the Soul receives but some
dispositions thence, and more forward inclinations: but nothing from the Body
can be operative in the begetting or increase of Charity, or the Love of God,
or Devotion, or in mortifying spiritual and (...) Vices: and therefore those
greater perfections and heights of the Soul, such as are designed in this
highest degree of (...), are not apt to be enkindled by corporal Austerities.
And Nigrinus in Lucian finds sault with those Philosophers (...) (...).
who thought Virtue was to be purchased by cutting the skin with whips, binding
the nerves, razing the (...) with iron: but he taught that (...) is to be
placed in the Mind by actions internal and immaterial, and that from thence
remedies are to be derived against perturbations and actions criminal. And this
is determined by the Apostle in fairest intimation, Mortify therefore your
carthly members; and he instances in carnal (...). 3. 5.
crimes, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence,
and covetousness, which are things may be something abated by corporal
Mortifications: and that these are by distinct manner to be helped from other
more spiritual Vices, he adds, But now therefore put off all these, anger,
wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication, (...) 8.
and lying. To both these sorts of sins, Mortification being the general
remedy, particular applications are to be made, Vt (...) and (...).
and it must be only spiritual, or also corporal in proportion Vt (...)?
to the nature of the sins: he seems to distinguish the remedy by separation of
the nature of the crimes, and possibly also by the differing words of [ (...)
(...)] applied to carnal sins, and [ (...)
put (...)] to crimes spiritual.

18. Secondly, But in the lesser degrees of Mortification, in order to subduing
of all Passions of the Sensitive appetite, and the consequent and symbolical
sins, (...) (...). 2.
bodily Austerities are of good use, if well understood and prudently
undertaken. To which purpose I also consider, No acts of corporal Austerity or
external Religion are of themselves to be esteemed holy or acceptable to God,
are nowhere precisely commanded, no instruments of union with Christ, no
immediate parts of Divine worship; and therefore to suffer corporal Austerities
with thoughts determining upon the external action or imaginations of Sanctity
inherent in the action, is against the purity, the spirituality and simplicity
of the Gospel. And this is the meaning of S. Paul, It is a good thing that Heb.
13. 9.
the heart be established with Grace, not with meats, which have not profited
them which Romans 14. 17.
have walked in them; and, The kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink,
but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; and, Bodily
exercise profits little, but 1 (...). 4. 8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things. Now if external Mortifications are
not for themselves, then they are to receive their estimate as they cooperate
to the End: Whatsoever is a prudent restraint of an extravagant Passion,
whatsoever is a direct denial of a sin, whatsoever makes provision for the
spirit, or withdraws the fuel from the impure fires of carnality, that is an
act of Mortification; but those Austerities which Baal's Priests did use, or
the (...), an ignorant Faction that went up and down Villages whipping
themselves, or those which return periodically on a set day of Discipline, and
using rudenesses to the Body by way of ceremony and solemnity, not directed
against the actual incursion of a pungent Lust, are not within the vierge of
the grace of (...). For unless the Temptation to a carnal sin be actually
incumbent and pressing upon the Soul, pains of (...) and smart do no benefit to
ward suppressing the habit or inclination: for such sharp disciplines are but
short and transient troubles; and although they take away the present fancies
of a Temptation, yet unless it be rash and uncharitable, there is no effect
remanent upon the body, but that the Temptation may speedily return. As is the
danger, so must be the application of the remedy. Actual Severities are not
imprudently undertaken in case of imminent danger; but to cure an habitual
Lust, such corporal Mortifications are most reasonable whose effect is
permanent, and which takes away whatsoever does minister more (...), and puts a
torch to the pile.

19. But this is (...) a discourse of Christian Prudence, not of precise Duty
and Religion; for if we do by any means provide for our indemnity and secure
our innocence, all other exterior Mortifications are not necessary, and they
are convenient but as they do facilitate or cooperate toward the (...). And if
that be well understood, it will concern us that they be used with prudence and
caution, with purity of intention, and without pride: for since they are
nothing in themselves, but are hallowed and adopted into the family of
Religious actions by participation of the End, the doing them not for
themselves takes off all complacency and fancy reflecting from an opinion of
the external actions, guides and purifies the intention and teaches us to be
prudent in the managing of those Austerities, which as they are in themselves
afflictive, so have in them nothing that is eligible, if they be imprudent.

20. And now supposing these premises as our guide to choose and enter into the
action, Prudence must be called into the execution and discharge of it, and the
manner of its managing. And for the prudential part, I shall first give the
advice of Nigrinus in the discipline of the old Philosophers: He that will best
institute and instruct men in the (...) (...).
studies of Virtue and true Philosophy, must have regard to the mind, to the
body, to the age, to the former education, and capacities or incapacities of
the person; to which all such circumstances may be added as are to be accounted
for in all prudent estimations; such as are national customs, dangers of
scandal, the presence of other remedies, or disbanding of the inclination.

21. Secondly, It may also concern the prudence of this duty, not to neglect
the smallest inadvertencies and minutes of Lust or spiritual inconvenience, but
to contradict them in their weakness and first beginnings. We see that great
disturbances are wrought from the smallest occasions meeting with an impatient
spirit, like great flames kindled from a little spark fallen into an heap of
prepared Nitre. S. Austin tells a Story of a certain person much vexed with
Flies in the region of his dwelling, and himself (...). 1. in (...).
heightened the trouble by too violent and busy reflections upon the
inconsiderableness of the instrument, and the greatness of the vexation
alighting upon a peevish spirit. In this disposition he was visited by a
Manichee, (an Heretic that denied God to be the Maker of things visible:) he
being busy to (...) Infection upon the next thing he met, asked the impatient
person whom he thought to be the Maker of Flies. He (...), I think the Devil
was; for they are instruments of great vexation and perpetual trouble. What he
rather sansied than believed, or expressed by anger rather than at all had
entertained within, the (...) (...) by such arguments, to which his adversary
was very apt to give consent by reason of his impatience and peevishness. The
Manichee having set his foot firm upon his first breach proceeded in his
Question, If the Devil made Flies, why not Bees, who are but a little bigger,
and have a sting too? The consideration of the Sting made him fit to think,
that the little difference in bigness needed not a distinct and a greater
Efficient, especially since the same workman can make a great as well as a
little vessel. The Manichee proceeded, If a Be, why not a Locust? if a Locust,
then a Lizzard? if a Lizzard, then a Bird? if a Bird, then a Lamb? and thence
he made bold to (...) to a Cow, to an Elephant, to a Man. His adversary by this
time being ensnared by granting so much, and now ashamed not to grant more,
lest his first concessions should seem unreasonable and impious, confessed the
Devil to be the Maker of all Creatures visible. The use which is made of this
Story is this Caution, that the Devil do not abuse us in Flies, and provoke our
spirits by trifles and impertinent accidents: for if we be unmortified in our
smallest motions, it is not imaginable we should stand the blast of an
impetuous accident and violent perturbation. Let us not therefore give our
Passions course in a small accident, because the instance is inconsiderable;
for though it be, the consequence may be dangerous, and a wave may follow a
wave, till the inundation be general and desperate. And therefore here it is
intended for advice, that we be observant of the accidents of our domestic
affairs, and curious that every trifling inadvertency of a servant, or slight
misbecoming action, or imprudent words, be not apprehended as instruments of
vexation; for so many small occasions, if they be productive of many small
disturbances, will produce an habitual churlishness and immortification of
spirit.

22. Thirdly, Let our greatest diligence and care be employed in mortifying our
predominant Passion: for if our care be so great as not to entertain the
smallest, and our resolution so strong and holy as not to be subdued by the
greatest and most passionate desires, the Spirit has done all its work,
secures the future, and sanctifies the present, and nothing is wanting but
perseverance in the same prudence and Religion. And this is typically commanded
in the Precept of God to Moses and Aaron in the matter of Peor; Vex the
Midianites, because they vexed you, and made you sin by their daughters: and
Phinehas did so, he killed a Prince of the house of Simeon and a Princess of
Midian, and God confirmed the Priesthood to him for ever; meaning, that we
shall for ever be admitted to a nearer relation to God, if we sacrifice to God
our dearest Lust. And this is not so properly an act, as the end of
Mortification. Therefore it concerns the prudence of the Duty, that all the
efficacy and violence of it be employed against the strongest, and there where
is the most dangerous hostility.

23. Fourthly, But if we mean to be Matters of the field, and put our victory
past dispute, let us mortify our morosity and natural aversations, reducing
them to an indifferency, having in our wills no fondnesses, in our spirits no
faction of persons or nations, being prepared to love all men, and to endure
all things, and to undertake all employments which are duty or counsel in all
circumstances and disadvantages. For the excellency of Evangelical Sanctity
does surmount all Antipathies, as a vessel climbs up and rides upon a wave; The
Wolf and the Lamb shall cohabit, and a Child shall play and put his fingers in
the Cavern of an Aspick; Nations whose interests are most contradictory must be
knit by the confederations of a mortified and a Christian Spirit, and single
persons must triumph over the difficulties of an indisposed nature, or else
their own will is unmortified, and Nature is stronger than can well consist
with the dominion and absolute empire of Grace. To this (...) reduce such
peevish and unhandsome nicenesses in matters of Religion, that are unsatisfied
unless they have all exterior circumstances trimmed up and made pompous for
their Religious offices; such who cannot pray without a convenient room, and
their Devotion is made active only by a wellbuilt Chapel, and they cannot sing
Lauds without Church-musick, and too (...) light dissolves their intention, and
too much dark promotes their melancholy; and because these and the like
exterior Ministeries are good advantages, therefore without them they can do
nothing, which certainly is a great intimation and likeness to Immortification.
Our Will should be like the Candle of the Eye, without all color in it self,
that it may entertain the species of all colors from without: and when we lust
after mandrakes and deliciousness of exterior Ministeries, we many times are
brought to betray our own interest, and prostitute our dearest affections to
more ignoble and stranger desires. Let us love all natures, and serve all
persons, and pray in all places, and fast without opportunities, and do alms
above our power, and set our selves heartily on work, to neglect and frustrate
those lower temptations of the Devil, who (...) frequently enough make our
Religion inopportune if we then will make it infrequent; and will present us
with objects enough and flies to disquiet our persons, if our natures be
petulant, peevish, curious, and unmortified.

24. It is a great mercy of God to have an affable, sweet and well-disposed
nature, and it does half the work of Mortification for us; we have the less
trouble to (...) our Passions and destroy our Lusts. But then as those whose
natures are morose, choleric, peevish and lustful, have greater difficulty; so
is their virtue of greater excellence, and returned with a more ample reward:
but it is in all men's natures as with them who gathered Manna, They that
gathered little had no lack, and they that gathered much had nothing over: they
who are of ill natures shall want (...). Si (...).
no assistance of God's grace to work their cure, though their flesh be longer
(...); and they who are sweetly tempered, being naturally meek and modest,
chaste or temperate, will find work enough to contest against their temptations
from without, though from within possibly they may have fewer. Yet there are
greater degrees of Virtue and heroical excellencies, and great rewards to which
God has designed them by so fair dispositions, and it will concern all their
industry to mortify their spirit, which though it be malleable and more
ductile, yet it is as bare and naked of imagery as the rudest and most iron
nature: so that Mortification will be every man's duty; no nature, nor piety,
nor wisdom, nor (...), but will need it, either to subdue a Lust, or a Passion;
to cut off an occasion, or to resist a Temptation; to persevere, or to go on;
to secure our present estate, or to proceed toward perfection. But all men do
not think so.

25. For there are some who have great peace, no fightings within, no troubles
without, no disputes or contradictions in their spirit: but these men have the
peace of tributaries or a conquered people, the gates of their city stand open
day and night, that all the carriages may enter without disputing the pass: the
flesh and the spirit dispute not, because the spirit is there in pupillage or
in bonds, and the flesh rides in triumph, with the tyranny and pride and
impotency of a female tyrant. For in the sense of Religion we all are Warriors
or Slaves; either our selves are stark dead in trespasses and sins, or we need
to stand perpetually upon our guards in continual observation, and in
contestation against our Lusts and our Passions; so long denying and
contradicting our own Wills, till we will and choose to do things against our
Wills, having an eye always to those infinite satisfactions which shall (...)
our Wills and all our Faculties, when we arrive to that state in which there
shall be no more contradiction, but only that our mortal shall put on
immortality.

26. But as some have a vain and dangerous peace, so others double their
trouble by too nice and impertinent scruples, thinking that every Temptation is
a degree of Immortification. As long as we live we shall have to do with
Enemies: but as this Life is ever a state of (...), so the very design and
purpose of Mortification is not to take away Temptations, but to overcome them;
it endeavors to facilitate the work, and secure our condition by removing all
occasions it can: but the opportunity of a crime and the solicitation to a sin
is no fault of ours, unless it be of our procuring, or finds entertainment when
it comes unsent for. To suffer a Temptation is a misery, but if we then set
upon the (...) of it, it is an occasion of Virtue; and never is criminal,
unless we give consent. But then also it would be considered, that it is not
good offering our selves to fire ordeal, to confirm our Innocence; nor prudent
to enter into Battle without need, and to show our valor; nor safe to procure
a Temptation, that we may have the reward of Mortification of it. For (...) of
the spirit is not commanded as a Duty finally resting in it self, or
immediately landing upon God's glory, such as are acts of Charity and Devotion,
Chastity and Justice: but it is the great instrument of Humility and all other
Graces; and therefore is to be undertaken to destroy a sin, and to secure a
virtuous habit. And besides that to call on a danger is (...) Disc. of (...).
to tempt God, and to invite the Devil, (and no man is sure of a victory:) it
is also great imprudence to create a need, that we may take it away again; to
drink poison, to make experiment of the antidote; and at the best it is but a
running back, to come just to the same place again: for he that is not tempted
does not sin, but he that invites a Temptation, that he might overcome it, or
provokes a Passion, that he may allay it, is then but in the same condition
after his pains and his (...): He was not sure he should come so far.

The PRAYER.
O Dearest God, who have framed Man of Soul and Body, and fitted him with
Faculties and proportionable instruments to serve thee according to all our
capacities, let thy holy Spirit rule and sanctify every power and member both
of Soul and Body, that they may keep that beauteous order which in our creation
thou did intend, and to which thou do restore thy people in the renovations
of Grace; that our Affections may be guided by Reason, our Understanding may be
enlightened with thy Word, and then may guide and persuade our Will; that we
suffer no violent transportation of Passions, nor be overcome by a Temptation,
nor consent to the impure solicitations of Lust; that Sin may not reign in our
mortal bodies, but that both Bodies and Souls may be conformable to the
Sufferings of the Holy Jesus; that in our Body we may bear the marks and dying
of our Lord, and in our spirits we may be humble and mortified, and like him in
all his imitable perfections; that we may die to sin and live to righteousness,
and after our suffering together with him in this world, we may reign together
with him hereafter, to whom in the unity of the most mysterious Trinity be all
glory and dominion and praise for ever and ever.

Amen.
SECT. IX. Of JESUS being Baptized, and going into the Wilderness to be Tempted.
The Baptism of Jesus
S. MAT. 3. 17.

And lo, a voice from heaven, saying This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. Luc. 3: 23. And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age.

The Temqtation of Jesus
S. MAT. 4: 10

Get thee behind me Satan For it is written Thou shall worship the Lord thy God
and him only shall thou sarue




1. NOW the full time was come, Jesus took leave of his Mother and his Trade,
to begin his Father's work and the Office Prophetical in order to the
Redemption of the World; and when John was baptizing in Jordan Jesus came to
John to be baptized of him. The Baptist had never seen his face, because they
had been from their infancy driven to several places, designed to several
employments, and never met till now. But immediately the Holy Ghost inspired S.
John with a discerning and knowing spirit, and at his first arrival he knew
him, and did him worship. And when Jesus desired to be baptized, John forbad
him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? For the
Baptism of John, although it was not a direct instrument of the Spirit for the
collation of Grace, neither find we it administered in any form of words, not so
much as in the name of Christ to come, (as (...), Sotus, Scotus, etc.
many dream) (because even after John had baptized, the Pharisees still doubted
if he were the Messiah, which they would not, if in his form of Ministration he
had published Christ to come after him; and also because it had not been proper
for Christ himself to have received that Baptism whose form had specified
himself to come hereafter; neither could it consist with the Revelation which
John had, and the confession which he made, to baptize in the name of Christ to
come, whom the Spirit marked out to him to be come already, and himself pointed
at him with his (...)) yet it was a ceremonious consignation of the Doctrine of
Acts 19. 4. (...).
Repentance, which was one great part of the Covenant Evangelical, and was a
Divine Institution, the susception of it was in order to the fulfilling all
righteousness, it was a sign of Humility, the persons baptized confessed their
sins, it was a sacramental disposing to the Baptism and Faith of Christ; but
therefore John wondered why the Messiah, the Lamb of God, pure and without spot,
who needed not the abstersions of Repentance or the washings of Baptism, should
demand it, and of him a sinner and his servant. And in the Hebrew Gospel of S.
Matthew Quast. ad Orthod. 37.
which the (...) used at (...) (as S. Hierom reports) these words are added; [
The Mother of the Lord and his brethren said unto him, John Baptist baptizeth
to the Remission of sins, let us go and be baptized of him. He said to them,
(...) have I sinned, that I should go and be baptized of him?] And this part of
the Story is also told by Justin Martyr. Dial. (...). advers. (...).
But Jesus wanted not a proposition to consign by his Baptism proportionable
enough to the analogy of its institution; for as others professed their return
toward Innocence, so he avowed his perseverance in it: and though he was never
called in Scripture [ a Sinner,] yet he was made Sin for us; that is, he did
undergo the shame and the punishment; and therefore it was proper enough for
him to perform the Sacrament of Sinners.

2. But the Holy Jesus who came (as himself in answer to the Baptist's question
professed) to sulfil all rightcousness, would receive that Rite which his
Father had instituted in order to the manifestation of his (...). Clem.
Constit. (...). 1. 7. c. 23.
Son. For although the Baptist had a glimpse of him by the first irradiations
of the Spirit, yet John professed, That he therefore came baptizing with water,
that Jesus might be manifested to Israel; and it was also a sign given to the
Baptist himself, that on whomsoever he saw the Spirit descending and remaining,
he is the person that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And God chose to actuate
the sign at the waters of Jordan in great and religious assemblies convened
there at John's Baptism, and therefore Jesus came to be baptized, and by this
Baptism became known to John, who as before he gave to him an indiscriminate
testimony, so now he pointed out the person in his Sermons and Discourses, and
by calling him the Symbolum (...). Just. Mart.
Lamb of God prophesied of his Passion, and preached him to be the World's
Redeemer, and the Sacrifice for mankind. He was now manifest to Israel, he
confirmed the Baptism of John, he (...) the water to become sacramental and
ministerial in the remission of sins, he by a real event declared, that to them
who should rightly be baptized the Kingdom of Heaven should certainly be
opened, he inserted himself by that Ceremony into the society and participation
of holy people, of which communion himself was Head and Prince; and he did in a
symbol purify Humane nature, whose stains and guilt he had undertaken.

3. As soon as John had performed his Ministry, and Jesus was baptized, he
prayed, and the heavens were opened, and the air clarified by a new and (...)
Ebion.
glorious light, and the holy Ghost in the manner of a Dove alighted upon his
sacred head, and God the Father gave a voice from Heaven, saying, Thou art my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. This was the inauguration and
proclamation of the Messiah, when he began to be the great Prophet of the new
Covenant. And this was the greatest meeting that ever was upon earth, where the
whole Cabinet of the mysterious Trinity was opened and shown, as much as the
capacities of our present imperfections will permit; the Second Person in the
veil of Humanity, the Third (...)
in the shape or with the motion of a Dove: but the First kept his primitive
state, and as to the Israelites he gave notice by way of caution, Matthew. 3. 16.
(...). 1. 10.
Ye saw no shape, but ye heard a voice; so now also God the Father gave
testimony (...) Luke 3. 22.
to his Holy Son, and appeared only in a voice without any visible representment.

4. When the Rite and the Solemnity was over, Christ ascended up out of the
waters, and left so much virtue behind him, that, as Gregorius Turonensis
reports, that creek Cap. 17. de gloria Martyr.
of the River where his holy body had been baptized was endued with a healing
quality, and a power of curing Lepers that bathed themselves in those waters,
in the faith and with invocation of the holy Name of Jesus. But the
manifestation of this power was not till afterward, for as yet Jesus did no
Miracles.

5. As soon as ever the Savior of the World was baptized, had opened the
Heavens, which yet never had been opened to Man, and was declared the Son of
God, Jesus was by the Spirit driven into the Wilderness, not by an unnatural
violence, but by the efficacies of Inspiration, and a supernatural inclination
and activity of resolution; for it was the Holy Spirit that bare him thither,
he was led by the good Spirit to be tempted by the evil: whither also he was
pleased to retire, to make demonstration that even in an active life, such as
he was designed to and intended, some recesses and temporary dimissions of the
world are most expedient, for such persons especially whose office is
Prophetical, and for institution of others, that by such vacancies in prayer
and contemplation they may be better enabled to teach others, when they have in
such retirements conversed with God.

6. In the Desert, which was four miles (...) the place of his Baptism, and
about twenty miles from Jerusalem, as the common computations are, he did abide
forty days and forty nights, where he was perpetually disturbed and assaulted
with evil spirits, in the midst of wild beasts, in a continual fast, without
eating bread or drinking water; And the Angels ministered to him, being
Messengers of comfort and sustentation sent from his Father for the support and
service of his Humanity, and employed in resisting and discountenancing the
assaults and temporal hostilities of the spirits of darkness.

7. Whether the Devils (...) in any horrid and affrighting shapes is not
certain; but it is more likely, to a person of so great Sanctity and high
designation they would appear more Angelical and immaterial, in representments
intellectual, in words and Idea's, temptations and inticements, because Jesus
was not a person of those low weaknesses to be affrighted or troubled with an
ugly (...), which can do nothing but abuse the weak and imperfect conceptions
of persons nothing extraordinary. And this was the way which Satan or the
Prince of the Devils took, whose Temptations were reserved for the last
assault, and the great day of trial; for at the expiration of his forty days,
Jesus being hungry, the Tempter invited him only to eat bread of his own
providing, which might refresh his Humanity and prove his Divinity, hoping that
his hunger, and the desire of convincing the Devil, might tempt him to eat
before the time appointed. But Jesus answered, It is written, Man shall not
live by Bread alone, but by every word that (...) out of the mouth of God;
meaning, that in every word of God, whether the Commandment be general or
special, a promise is either expressed or implied of the supply of all
provisions necessary for him that is doing the work of God; and that was the
present case of Jesus, who was then doing his Father's work, and promoting our
interest, and (...) was sure to be provided for: and therefore so are we.

8. The Devil, having failed in this assault, tries him again, requiring but a
demonstration of his being the Son of God. He sets him upon the (...)
battlement of the Temple, and invites him to throw himself down, upon a
pretense that God would send his Angels to keep his Son, and quotes Scripture
for it. But Jesus understood it well; and though he was secured of God's
protection, yet he would not tempt God, nor solicit his Providence to a
dereliction by tempting him to an unnecessary conservation. This assault was
silly and weak. But at last he unites all his power of stratagem, and places
the Holy Jesus upon an exceeding high mountain, and by an Angelical power draws
into one Center Species (...)
and Idea's from all the Kingdoms and glories of the World, and makes an
admirable Map of beauties, and represents it to the eyes of Jesus, saying, that
all that was put into his power to give, and he would give it him, if he would
fall down and worship him. But then the Holy Lamb was angry as a provoked Lion,
and commanded him away, when his temptations were violent, and his demands
impudent and blasphemous. Then the Devil leaves him, and the Angels came and
ministered unto him, bringing such things as his necessities required, after he
had by a forty days Fast done penance for our sins, and consigned to his Church
the Doctrine and Discipline of Fasting in order to a Contemplative life, and
the resisting and overcoming all the Temptations and allurements of the Devil,
and all our ghostly enemies.

Ad SECT. IX. Considerations upon the Baptizing, Fasting, and Temptation of the
Holy JESUS by the Devil.
1. WHen the day did break, and the Baptist was busy in his Offices, the Sun
of Righteousness soon entered upon our Hemisphere; and after he had lived a life
of darkness and silence for thirty years together, yet now that he came to do
the greatest work in the World, and to minister in the most honorable
Embassy, he would do nothing of singularity, but fulfill all righteousness, and
satisfy all Commands, and join in the common Rites and Sacraments, which all
people innocent or penitent did undergo either as deleteries of (...) or
instruments of Grace. For so he would needs be baptized by his servant; and
though he was of Purity sufficient to do it, and did actually by his Baptism
purify the Purifier, and sanctify that and all other streams to a holy
ministry and effect, yet he went in, bowing his head like a sinner,
uncloathing himself like an imperfect person, and craving to be washed, as if
he had been crusted with an impure Leprosy: thereby teaching us to submit our
selves to all those Rites which he would institute; and although (...) of them
be, like the Baptism of John, joined with confession of sins and publication of
our infirmities, yet it were better for us to lay by our loads and wash our
ulcers, than by concealing them, out of vainer desires of impertinent
reputation, cover our disease till we are heart-sick and die. But when so holy
a person does all the pious Ministeries of the more imperfect, it is a
demonstration to us, that a life common and ordinary, without affectation or
singularity, is the most prudent and safe. Every great change, every violence
of fortune, all eminencies and unevennesses whatsoever, whether of person or
accident or circumstance, puts us to a new trouble, requires a distinct care,
creates new dangers, objects more temptations, marks us out the object of envy,
makes our standing more insecure, and our fall more contemptible and
ridiculous. But an even life spent with as much rigor of duty to God as ought
to be, yet in the same manner of Devotions, in the susception of ordinary
Offices, in bearing public burdens, frequenting public Assemblies,
performing offices of civility, receiving all the Rites of an established
Religion, complying with national Customs and hereditary Solemnities of a
people, in nothing disquieting public peace, or disrelishing the great
instruments of an innocent communion, or dissolving the circumstantial
ligaments of Charity, or breaking Laws, and the great relations and
necessitudes of the World, out of fancy or singularity, is the best way to live
holily, and (...), and happily; safer from sin and envy, and more removed from
trouble and temptation.

2. When Jesus came to John to be baptized, John out of humility and modesty
refused him; but when Jesus by reduplication of his desire, fortifying it with
a command, made it in the Baptist to become a Duty, then he obeyed. And so also
did the primitive Clerks refuse to do offices of great dignity and highest
ministry, looking through the honor upon the danger, and passing by the
Dignity they considered the charge of the Cure, and knew that the eminency of
the Office was in all senses insecure to the person, till by command and
peremptory injunction of their Superiors it was put past a dispute, and became
necessary, and that either they must perish instantly in the ruins and
precipices of Disobedience, or put it to the hazard and a fair venture for a
brighter crown or a bigger damnation. I wish also this care were entailed and
did descend upon all Ages of the Church; for the ambitious seeking of Dignities
and Prelacies Ecclesiastical is grown the Pest of the Church, and corrupts the
Salt it self, and extinguishes the lights, and gives too apparent evidences to
the world that neither the end is pure, nor the intention sanctified, nor the
person innocent, but the purpose ambitious or covetous, and the person vicious,
and the very entrance into Church offices is with an impure torch, and a foul
hand, or a heart empty of the affections of Religion, or thoughts of doing
God's work. I do not think the present Age is to be treated with concerning
denying to accept rich Prelacies and pompous Dignities; but it were but
reasonable that the main intention and intellectual design should be to
appreciate and esteem the Office and employment to be of greatest
consideration. It is lawful to desire a Bishopric, neither can the
unwillingness to accept it be, in a prudent account, adjudged the aptest
disposition to receive it, (especially if done in In Pontifical Romans
ceremony, just in the instant of their entertainment of it, and possibly after
a long ambition:) but yet it were well if we remember that such desires must be
sanctified with holy care and diligence in the Office; for the honey is guarded
with thousands of little sharp stings and dangers, and it will be a sad
account, if we be called to audit for the crimes of our Diocese after our own
Talleys are made even; and he that believes his own load to be big enough, and
trembles at the apprehension of the horrors of Doomsday, is not very wise if
he takes up those burdens which he sees have crushed their Bearers, and
presses his own shoulders till the bones crack, only because the bundles are
wrapped in white linen and bound with silken cords. He that desires the Office of
a Bishop, desires a good work, says S. Paul; and therefore we must not look on
it for the fair-spreading Sails and the beauteous Streamers which the favor of
Princes has put to it, to make it sail fairer and more secure against the
dangers of secular discomforts; but upon the Burden it bears. Prelacy is a
good work, and a good work well done is very honorable, and shall be rewarded;
but he that considers the infinite dangers of miscarrying, and that the (...)
of the Ship will be imputed to the Pilot, may think it many times the safest
course to put God or his Superiors to the charge of a Command before he
undertakes such great Ministeries: And he that enters in by the force of
Authority, as he himself receives a testimony of his worth and aptness to the
employment, so he gives the world another, that his search for it was not
criminal, nor his person immodest, and by his weighty apprehension of his
dangers he will consider his work, and obtain a grace to do it diligently, and
to be accepted graciously. And this was the modesty and prudence of the Baptist.

3. When Jesus was baptized, he prayed, and the heavens were opened. External
Rites of Divine Institution receive benediction and energy from above, but it
is by the mediation of Prayer: (...) Cor. 10. (...). 2. 3.
for there is nothing ritual, but it is also joined with something moral, and
required on our part in all persons capable of the use of Reason, that we may
Gal. 3. 14. 27.
(...) Per. 3. 21.
(...) that the blessings of Religion are works and Graces too; God therefore
requiring (...) Cor. 12 7. 13.
us to do something, not that we may glory in it, but that we may estimate the
Matthew. 3. 2, 6.
Grace, and go to God for it in the means of his own hallowing. Naaman had been
stupid, if, when the Prophet bade him wash seven times in Jordan for his cure,
he had not confessed the cure to be wrought by the God of Israel and the
ministry of his Prophet, but had made himself the Author, because of his
obedience to the enjoined condition; and it is but a weak sancy to derogate
from God's grace, and the glory and the freedom of it, because he bids us wash
before we are cleansed, and pray when we are washed, and commands us to ask
before we shall receive. But this also is true from this instance, that the
external rite (...) Sacrament is so instrumental in a spiritual Grace, that it
never does it but with the conjunction of something moral: And this truth is of
Justin, Mart, (...). 2. (...).
so great persuasion in the Greek Church, that the mystery of Consecration in
the venerable (...).
Eucharist is amongst them attributed not to any mystical words and secret
operations (...). S. (...). 3. c. 4. (...).
of syllables, but to the efficacy of the prayers of the Church, in the just
imitation of the whole action and the rite of Institution. And the purpose of
it is, that we might secure the excellency and holiness of such predispositions
and concomitant Graces, which are necessary to the worthy and effectual
susception of the external Rites of Christianity.

4. After the Holy Jesus was baptized and had prayed, the Heavens opened, the
holy (...). 1. c. 1.
Ghost descended, and a voice from Heaven proclaimed him to be the Son of God,
and one in whom the Father was well pleased; and the same (...) that was cast
upon the head of our High Priest, went unto his (...), and thence sell to the
borders of his garment: for as Christ our Head felt these effects in
manifestation, so the Church believes God does to her and to her meanest
children in the susception of the holy Rite of Baptism in right, apt and holy
dispositions. For the Heavens open too upon us, and the Holy Ghost descends to
(...) the waters, and to hallow the Catechumen, and to pardon the passed and
repented sins, and to consign him to the inheritance of (...), and to put on
his military girdle, and give him the Sacrament and oath of fidelity; for all
this is understood (...). 5. 26.
to be meant by those frequent expressions of Scripture, calling Baptism the
Laver (...). 10. 32.
of Regeneration, Illumination, a washing away the filth of the flesh, and the
Answer of a (...). 3. 21.
good conscience, a being buried with Christ, and many others of the like
purpose and signification. Romans 6. 4.
But we may also learn hence sacredly to esteem the Rites of Religion, which he
first sanctified by his own personal susception, and then made necessary by his
own institution and command, and God has made to be conveyances of blessing
and ministeries of the Holy Spirit.

5. The Holy Ghost descended upon Jesus in the manner or visible representment
of a Dove: either in similitude of figure which he was pleased to assume, as
the Church more generally has believed; or at least he did descend like a
Dove, and in his robe of fire hovered over the Baptist's head, and then sat
upon him, as the Dove uses to sit upon the house of her dwelling; whose
proprieties of nature are pretty and modest Hieroglyphics of the duty of
spiritual persons, which are thus observed in both Philosophies. The Dove sings
not, but mourns, it has no Scil. in (...) in (...).
gall, strikes not with its bill, has no crooked talons, and forgets its young
ones soonest of any the inhabitants of the air. And the effects of the Holy
Spirit are symbolical in all the sons of Sanctification: For the voice of the
Church is sad in those accents which express her own condition: but as the Dove
is not so sad in her breast as in her note; so neither is the interior
condition of the Church wretched and miserable, but indeed her Song is most of
it Elegy within her own walls, and her condition looks sad, and her joys are
not pleasures in the public estimate, but they that afflict her think her
miserable, because they know not the sweetnesses of a holy peace and serenity
which supports her spirit, and plains the heart under a rugged brow, making the
Soul festival under the noise of a Threne and sadder groanings. But the Sons of
consolation are also taught their Duty by this Apparition: for upon whomsoever
the Spirit descends, he teaches him to be meek and charitable, neither
offending by the violence of hands, or looser language. For the Dove is
inoffensive in beak and foot, and feels no disturbance and violence of passions
when its dearest interests are destroyed; that we also may be of an even spirit
in the saddest accidents, which usually discompose our peace: and however such
symbolical intimations receive their efficacy from the fancy of the contriver;
yet here, whether this Apparition did intend any such moral representment or
no, it is certain that wherever the holy Spirit does dwell, there also Peace
and Sanctity, Meekness and Charity, a mortisied will and an active dereliction
of our desires do inhabit. But besides this hieroglyphical representment, this
Dove, like that which Noah sent out from the Ark, did aptly signify the World
to be renewed, and all to be turned to a new creation, and God has made a new
Covenant with us, that, unless we provoke him, he will never destroy us any
more.

6. No sooner had the voice of God pronounced Jesus to be the well-beloved Son
of God, but the Devil thought it of great concernment to attempt him with all
his malice and his art; and that is the condition of all those whom God's grace
has separated from the common expectations and societies of the world: and
therefore the Son of Sirach gave good advice, My son, if thou come to serve the
Lord, prepare thy Soul for temptation; for (...). 2. 1.
not only the Spirits of darkness are exasperated at the declension of their
own Kingdom, but also the nature and constitution of virtues and eminent
graces, which holy persons exercise in their lives, is such as to be easily
assailable by their contraries, apt to be lessened by time, to be interrupted
by weariness, to grow flat and insipid by tediousness of labor, to be omitted
and grow infrequent by the impertinent diversions of society and secular
occasions; so that to rescind the (...) of Vice made firm by nature and evil
habits, to acquire every new degree (...) Virtue, to continue the holy fires of
zeal in their just proportion, to (...) the Devil, and to reject the
invitations of the World, and the (...) embraces of the Flesh, which are the
proper employment of the sons of God, is a perpetual difficulty, and every
possibility of (...) the strictness of a Duty is a Temptation, and an
insecurity to them who have begun to serve God in hard battles.

7. The Holy Spirit did drive Jesus into the wilderness to be tempted by the
Devil. And (...) we are bound to pray instantly that we fall into no
Temptation; yet if by Divine permission or by an inspiration of the Holy Spirit
we be engaged in an action or course of life that is full of Temptation and
empty of comfort, let us apprehend it as an issue of Divine Providence, as an
occasion of the rewards of Diligence and Patience, as an instrument of Virtue,
as a designation of that way in which we must glorify God; but no argument of
disfavour, since our dearest Lord, the most Holy Jesus, who could have driven
the Devil away by the Breath of his mouth, yet was by the Spirit of his Father
permitted to a trial and molestation by the spirits of Darkness. And this is S.
James's counsel, My brethren, count it all joy when ye enter into diverse
temptations, Jam. 1. 2.
knowing that the trial of your Faith works Patience. So far is a Blessing,
when the Spirit is the instrument of our motion, and brings us to the trial of
our Faith: but if the Spirit leaves us, and delivers us over to the Devil, not
to be tempted, but to be abused and ruined, it is a sad condition, and the
greatest instance of their infelicity whom the Church upon sufficient reason
and with competent authority delivers over to Satan, by the infliction of the
greater Excommunication.

8. As soon as it was permitted to the Devil to tempt our Lord, he, like fire,
had no power to suspend his act, but was as entirely determined by the fullness
of his malice as a natural agent by the appetites of nature; that we may know
to whom we owe the happinesses of all those hours and days of peace in which we
sit under the trees of Paradise, and see no serpent encircling the branches,
and presenting us with fair fruit to ruin us. It is the mercy of God we have
the quietness of a minute; for if the Devil's chain were taken off, he would
make our very beds a torment, our tables to be a snare, our sleeps fantastic,
lustful and illusive, and every sense should have an object of delight and
danger, an Hyaena to kiss, and to perish in its embraces. But the Holy Jesus
having been assaulted by the Devil, and felt his malice by the experiments of
Humanity, is become so merciful a high Priest, and so sensible of our
sufferings and danger, by the apprehensions of compassion, that he has put a
hook into the nostrils of Leviathan; and although the relics of seven Nations
be in our borders and fringes of our Country, yet we live as safe as did the
Israelites, upon whom sometimes an inroad and invasion was made, and sometimes
they had rest forty years, and when the storm came, some remedy was found out,
by his grace by whose permission the tempest was stirred up: and we find many
persons who in seven years meet not with a violent temptation to a crime, but
their battles are against impediments and retardations of improvement; their
own rights are not directly questioned, but the Devil and Sin are wholly upon
the defensive. Our duty here is an act of affection to God, making returns of
thanks for the protection, and of duty to secure and continue the favor.

9. But the design of the Holy Ghost being to expose Jesus to the Temptation,
he arms himself with Fasting, and Prayer, and Baptism, and the Holy Spirit
against the day of battle; he continues in the Wilderness forty days and sorty
nights without meat or drink, attending to the immediate addresses and
colloquies with God, not suffering the interruption of meals, but representing
his own and the necessities of all mankind with such affections and instances
of spirit, love and wisdom, as might express the excellency of his person, and
promote the work of our Redemption; his conversation being in this interval but
a resemblance of Angelical perfection, and his (...). (...). 3.
Fasts not an instrument of Mortification, for he needed none, he had
contracted no stain from his own nor his Parents acts; neither do we find that
he was at all hungry, or asslicted with his (...), till after the expiration of
forty days. He was afterward an hungry (said the Evangelist,) and his
abstinence from meat might be a defecation of his faculties, and an opportunity
of Prayer, but we are not sure it intended any thing else: but it may concern
the prudence of Religion to snatch at this occasion of duty so far as the
instance is imitable, and in all violences of Temptation to fast and pray,
Prayer being a rare antidote against the poison, and Fasting a convenient
disposition to intense, actual and undisturbed Prayer. (...), (...). in S. Bapt.
And we may remember also that we have been baptized and consigned with the
Spirit of God, and have received the adoption of Sons, and the graces of
Sanctification in our Baptisms, and had then the seed of God put into us, and
then we put on Christ, and entering into battle put on the whole armor of
Righteousness; and therefore we may by observing our strength gather also our
duty and greatest obligation, to fight manfully, that we may triumph gloriously.

10. The Devil's first Temptation of Christ was upon the instances and first
necessities of Nature; Christ was hungry, and the Devil invited him to break
his fast upon the expense of a Miracle, by turning the stones into bread. But
the answer Jesus made was such as taught us, since the ordinary Providence of
God is sufficient for our provision or support, extraordinary ways of
satisfying necessities are not to be undertaken, but God must be relied upon,
his time attended, his manner entertained, and his measure thankfully received.
Jesus refused to be relieved, and denied to manifest the Divinity of his
Person, rather than he would do an act which had in it the intimation of a
diffident spirit, or might be expounded a disreputation to God's Providence.
And therefore it is an improvident care and impious security to take evil
courses, and use vile instruments to furnish our Table, and provide for our
necessities. God will certainly give us bread, and till he does, we can live by
the breath of his mouth, by the Word of God, by the light of his countenance,
by the refreshment of his Promises; for if God gives not provisions into our
granaries, he can feed us out of his own, that is, (...) of the repositories of
Charity. If the fleshpots be removed, he can also alter the appetite; and when
our stock is (...), he can also lessen the necessity; or if that continues, he
can drown the sense of it in a deluge of patience and resignation. Every word
of God's mouth can create a Grace, and every Grace can supply two necessities,
both of the body and the spirit, by the comforts of this to support that, that
they may bear each others burden, and alleviate the pressure.

11. But the Devil is always prompting us to change our Stones into Bread, our
sadnesses into sensual comfort, our drinesses into inundations of fancy and
exterior sweetnesses: for he knows that the ascetick Tables of Mortification
and the stones of the Desert are more healthful than the fulnesses of
voluptuousness and the corn of the valleys. He cannot endure we should live a
life of Austerity or Self-denial: if he can get us but to satisfy our Senses,
and a little more freely to please our natural desires, he then has a fair
Field for the Battle; but so long as we force him to fight in hedges and
morasses, encircling and crowding up his strengths into disadvantages, by our
stone-walls, our hardnesses of Discipline and rudenesses of Mortification, we
can with more facilities repel his flatteries, and receive fewer incommodities
of spirit. But thus the Devil will abuse us by the impotency of our natural
desires, and therefore let us go to God for satisfaction of our wishes: God
can, and does, when it is good for us, change our stones into bread: for he is
a Father so merciful, that if we ask him a Fish, he will not give us a
Scorpion; if we ask him bread, he will not offer us a stone; but will satisfy
all our desires by ministrations of the Spirit, making stones to become our
meat, and tears our drink; which although they are unpleasant and harsh to
natural appetites, yet by the operation and influences of God's Holy Spirit
they are made instruments of health, and life, and Salvation.

12. The Devil, perceiving Jesus to be a person of greater eminency and
perfection than to be moved by sensual and low desires, makes a second assault
by a Temptation something more spiritual, and tempts him to Presumption and
indiscreet confidence, to a throwing himself down from the pinnacles of the
Temple, upon the stock of Predestination, that God might secure him by the
ministry of Angels, and so prove his being the Son of God. And indeed it is
usual with the Devil, when severe persons have so much mortified their lower
appetites that they are not easily overcome by an invitation of carnality or
intemperance, to stir them to opinions of their own Sanctity, and make their
first escaping prove their second and greater dangers. But that the Devil
should persuade Jesus to throw himself down because he was the Son of God, was
an invitation to no purpose, save only that it gave occasion to this truth,
That God's Providence secures all his sons in the ways of Nature, and while
they are doing their duty; but loves not to be tempted to acts unreasonable and
unnecessary: God will protect his servants in or from all evils happening
without their knowledge, or against their will; but not from evils of their own
procuring. Heron, an inhabitant of the Desert, suffered the same Temptation,
and was overcome by it; for he died with his fall, sinfully and ingloriously.
For the caresses of God's love to his Saints and servants are security against
all but themselves. The Devil and all the World offer to do them mischief, but
then they shall be safe, because they are innocent; if they once offer to do
the same to themselves, they lose their Protection, because they lost their
Prudence and their Charity. But here also it will concern all those who by
their eminent employment and greater ministeries in Ecclesiasticals are set
upon the pinnacle of the Temple, to take care that the Devil tempt not them to
a precipice; a fall from so great a height will break the bones in pieces: and
yet there also the station is less firm, the posture most uneasy, the prospect
vertiginous, and the Devil busy and desirous to thrust us headlong.

13. S. Hierom here observes well, the Devil intending mischief to our Blessed
Savior, invited him to cast himself down. He may persuade us to a fall, but
cannot precipitate S. Hie. on. in 4. cap. Matt.
us without our own act. And it is an infinite mercy in God, that the Devil,
who is of malice infinite, is of so restrained and limited a power, that he can
do us no ghostly disadvantage, but by persuading us to do it our selves. And
then it will be a strange imprudence to lay violent and unreasonable hands upon
our selves, and do that mischief which our strongest and most malicious
Adversary cannot; or to be invited by the only Rhetoric of a dog's barking, to
come near him, to untie his chain, to unloose his muzzle, for no other end but
that we may be bitten. Just such a fool is every person that consents to the
Temptations of the Devil.

14. By this time the Devil began to perceive that this was the Son of God, and
designed to be the King of all the World, and therefore resolved for the last
assault to profer him the Kingdoms of the World; thinking Ambition more likely
to ruin him, because he knew it was that which prevailed upon himself, and all
those fallen Stars, the Angels of Darkness. That the Devil told a lie it is
most likely, when he said, he had power to dispose the Kingdoms of the World;
for originally and by proper inherent right God alone disposes all Governments:
but it is also certain, that the Devil is a person capable of a delegate
employment in some great mutation of States; and many probabilities have been
observed by wise personages, persuading that the Grandeur of the Roman Empire
was in the degrees of increment and decrement permitted to the power and
managing of the Devil, that the greatness of that Government, being in all
appearance full of advantage to Satan's Kingdom, and employed for the
dis-improvement of the weak beginnings and improbable increase of Christianity,
might give luster and demonstration to it that it came from God, since the
great permissions of power made to the Devil, and acted with all art and malice
in defiance of the Religion, could produce no other effect upon it but that it
made it grow greater; and the greatness was made more miraculous, since the
Devil, when his chain was off, fain would, but could not suppress it.

15. The Lamb of God, that heard him with patience tempt him to do himself a
mischief, and to throw himself headlong, could by no means endure it when he
tempted to a direct dishonouring of God. Our own injuries are opportunities of
patience; but when the glory of God and his immediate Honor is the question,
then is the occasion and precise minute for the (...) of a clear-shining and
unconsuming Zeal. But the care of God's Glory had so filled and employed all
the Faculties of Jesus, that he takes no notice of the offer: and it were well
also that we had fewer opinions of the luster of worldly dignities, or at least
that we in imitation of our Blessed Master should resuse to accept all the
World, when it is to be bought of the Devil at the expense of a deadly sin. For
that Government cannot be very honorable that makes us slaves to the worst of
Tyrants; and all those Princes and great personages, who by injury and
usurpation possess and invade others rights, would do well to consider, that a
Kingdom is too dearly paid for if the condition be first to worship the Devil.

16. When the Devil could do no good, he departed for a time. If he could ever
have spied a time of returning, he wanted not will nor malice to observe and
use it: And although Jesus was a person without danger, yet I doubt not but the
Holy Ghost described that circumstance, that we should not have the securities
of a deep peace when we have had the success of conquerors, for a surprise is
most full of horror and of more certain ruin; so that we have no security, but
a perpetual observation; that, together with the grace of God, ( who takes care
of all his servants, and will drive away the Tempter when he pleases, and help
us always when we need) is as great an argument for our confidence and
encouragement to our prayers and address to God, as it is safety to our person,
and honor to our victory. And let us account it our honor, that the trials of
Temptation, which is the greatest sadness of our condition, are hallowed by the
Temptation of Jesus, and our condition assured by his assistances, and the
assistances procured by our Prayers most easily upon the advantage of his
sufferings and compassion. And we may observe that Poverty, Predestination and
Ambition are the three quivers from which the Devil drew his arrows which ( as
the most likely to prevail) he shot against Christ: but now he shot in vain,
and gave probation that he might be overcome; our Captain has conquered for
himself and us. By these instances we see our danger, and how we are provided
of a remedy.

The PRAYER,
O Holy Jesus, who did fulfill all Righteousness, and did live a life of
evenness and obedience and community, submitting thy self to all Rites and
Sanctions of Divine ordinance; give me grace to live in the fellowship of thy
holy Church, a life of Piety, and without singularity, receiving the sweet
influence of thy Sacraments and Rites, and living in the purities and
innocencies of my first Sanctification. I adore thy goodness infinite, that
thou have been pleased to wash my Soul in the Laver of Regeneration, that thou
have consigned me to the participation of thy favors by the holy (...). Let me
not return to the infirmities of the Old Man, whom thou have crucified on thy
Cross, and who was buried with thee in Baptism; nor (...) the crimes of my
sinsul years, which were so many recessions from (...) purities: but let me
ever receive the emissions of thy Divine Spirit, and be a Son of God, a partner
of thine immortal inheritance; and when thou see it needful, I may receive
testimony from Heaven, that I am thy servant and thy child. And grant that I
may so walk, that I neither disrepute the honor of the Christian Institution,
nor stain the whitenesses of that Innocence which thou did invest my Soul
withal when I put on the Baptismal Robe, nor break my holy Vow, nor lose my
right of inheritance which thou have given me by promise and grace; but that
thou may love me with the love of a Father, and a Brother, and a Husband,
and a Lord, and I serve thee in the communion of Saints, in the susception of
Sacraments, in the actions of a holy life, and in a never-failing love or
uninterrupted Devotion; to the glory of thy Name, and the promotion of all
those Ends of Religion which thou have designed in the excellent Economy of
Christianity. Grant this, Holy Jesus, for thy mercie's sake, and for the honor
of thy Name, which is and shall be adored for ever and ever.

Amen.
DISCOURSE V. Of Temptation.
1. GOD, who is the Fountain of good, did choose rather to bring good out of
evil, than not to suffer any evil to be: not only because variety of accidents
and natures do better entertain our affections and move our spirits, who are
transported and suffer great impressions by a circumstance, by the very
opposition and accidental luster and eminency of contraries; but also that the
glory of the Divine Providence in turning the nature of things into the designs
of God might be illustrious, and that we may in a mixed condition have more
observation, and after our danger and our labor may obtain a greater reward:
for Temptation is the opportunity of Virtue and a Crown; God having disposed us
in such a condition, that our Virtues must be difficult, our inclinations (...)
and corrigible, our avocations many, our hostilities bitter, our dangers
proportionable, that our labor might be great, our inclinations suppressed and
corrected, our intentions be made actual, our enemies be resisted, and our
dangers pass into security and honor, after a contestation, and a victory, and
a perseverance. It is every man's case; (...), mi (...), si (...) unquam (...),
S. (...) ad (...).
Trouble is as certainly the lot of our nature and inheritance, and we are so
sure to be tempted, that in the deepest peace and silence of spirit oftentimes
is our greatest danger; not to be tempted is sometimes our most subtle
Temptation. It is certain then, we cannot be secure when our Security is our
enemy; but therefore we must do as God himself does, make the best of it, and
not be sad at that which is the public portion and the case of all men, but
order it according to the intention, place it in the eye of virtue, that all
its actions and motions may tend thither, there to be changed into felicities.
But certain it is, unless we first be cut and hewn in the mountains, we shall
not be fixed in the Temple of God; but by incision and contusions our
roughnesses may become plain, or our sparks kindled, and we may be either for
the Temple or the Altar, spiritual building or holy fire, something that God
shall delight in, and then the Temptation was not amiss.

2. And therefore we must not wonder that oftentimes it so happens, that
nothing will remove a Temptation, no diligence, no advices, no labor, no
prayers; not because these are ineffectual, but because it is most fit the
Temptation should abide for ends of God's designing: and although S. Paul was a
person whose prayers were likely to be prevalent, and his industry of much
prudence and efficacy toward the drawing out of his thorn; yet God would not do
it, but continued his war, only promising to send him succor, My grace is
sufficient for thee: meaning, he should have an enemy to 2 Cor. 12. 9.
try his spirit and improve it, and he should also have God's grace to comfort
and support it; but as without God's grace the Enemy would spoil him, so
without an Enemy God's grace would never swell up into glory and crown him. For
the caresses of a pleasant Fortune are apt to swell into extravagancies of
spirit, and burst into the dissolution of manners; and unmixt Joy is dangerous:
but if in our fairest Flowers we spy a Locust, or feel the uneasiness of a
Sackcloth under our fine Linen, or our Purple be tied with an uneven and a rude
Cord; any little trouble, but to correct our wildnesses, though it be but a
Death's Head served up at our Feasts, it will make our Tables fuller of health
and freer from snare, it will allay our spirits, making them to retire from the
weakness of dispersion, to the union and strength of a sober recollection.

3. Since therefore it is no part of our employment or our care to be free from
all the attempts of an enemy, but to be safe in despite of his hostility; it
now will concern us to inform our selves of the state of the War in general,
and then to make provisions and to put on Armor accordingly.

4. First, S. (...).
(...) often observes, and makes much of the discourse, that the Devil, when he
intends a Battery, first views the Strengths and Situation of the place. His
sense drawn out of the cloud of an Allegory is this; The Devil first considers
the Constitution and temper of the person he is to tempt, and where he observes
his natural inclination apt for a Vice, he presents him with objects, and
opportunity, and arguments (...) to his caitive disposition; from which he is
likely to receive the smaller opposition, since there is a party within that
desires his intromission. Thus to Lustful natures he represents the softer
(...) the (...) of Fornication; to the Angry and revengeful he offers to
consideration the satisfactions and content of a full Revenge, and the
emissions of anger; to the Envious he makes Panegyricks of our Rivals, and
swells our fancies to opinion, our opinion to self-love, self-love to
arrogance, and these are supported by contempt of others, and all determine
upon Envy, and expire in Malice. Now in these cases, when our natures are
caitive and unhandsome, it were good we were conscious of our own weaknesses,
and by special arts and strengths of Mortification fortify that part where we
are apt and exposed to danger: we are sure enough to meet a Storm there, and we
also are likely to perish in it, unless we correct those a versenesses and
natural indispositions, and reduce them to the evennesses of Virtue, or the
affections and moderation of a good nature. Let us be sure that the Devil take
not a helve from our own branches to (...) his axe, that so he may cut the tree
down: and certainly he that does violence to his nature, will not be easy to
the entertainment of affections preternatural and violent.

5. Secondly, But the Devil also observes all our exterior Accidents,
Occasions and Opportunities of action; he sees what Company we keep, he
observes what degrees of love we have to our Wives, what looseness of affection
toward Children, how prevalent their persuasions, how inconvenient their
discourses, how trifling their interests, and to what degrees of determination
they move us by their importunity or their power. The Devil tempted Adam by his
Wife, because he saw his affections too pliant, and encirling her with the
entertainment of fondness, joy, wonder, and amorous fancy: It was her hand that
made the fruit beauteous to Adam; She saw it (...) of it self, and so she ate;
but Adam was not moved by that argument, but, The Woman gave it me, and I did
eat: she gave vivacity to the Temptation, and efficacy to the argument. And the
severity of the Man's understanding would have given a reasonable answer to the
(...) of the Serpent; That was an ugly Beast, and his arguments not being of
themselves convincing to a wise person, either must put on advantages of a fair
insinuation and representment, or they are returned with scorn: But when the
(...) hands of his young Virgin. Mistress became the Orators, the Temptation
was an amorevolezza, Habet (...) quandam admonitio (...), quum (...) quod
(...). S. Chrysostom.
he kisses the presenter, and hugs the ruin. Here therefore it is our safest
course, to make a retrenchment of all those excrescences of Affections which,
like wild and irregular Suckers, draw away nourishment from the Trunk, making
it as sterile as it self is unprofitable. As we must restrain the inclinations
of Nature, so also of Society and Relation, when they become inconvenient, and
let nothing of our Family be so adopted or naturalized into our affections, as
to create within us a new concupiscence, and a second time spoil our nature:
What God intended to us for a Help, let not our fondnesses convert into a
Snare; and he that is not ready to deny the importunities and to reject the
interests of a Wife or Child or Friend, when the question is for God, deserves
to miss the comforts of a good, and to feel the troubles of an imperious woman.

6. Thirdly, We also have Ends and designs of our own, some great purpose upon
which the greatest part of our life turns; it may be we are to raise a Family,
to recover a sunk Estate, or else Ambition, Honor, or a great Employment is
the great hindge of all our greater actions; and some men are apt to make haste
to be rich, or are to pass through a great many difficulties to be honorable:
and here the Devil will swell the hopes, and obstruct the passages; he will
heighten the desire, and multiply the business of access, making the
concupiscence more impatient, and yet the way to the purchase of our purposes
so full of employment and variety, that both the implacable desire and the
multitude of changes and transactions may increase the danger, and multiply the
sin. When the Enemy has observed our Ends, he makes his Temptations to reflect
from that angle which is direct upon them, provoking to malice and impatience
against whomsoever we find standing in our way, whether willingly or by
accident; then follow naturally all those sins which are instrumental to
removing the impediments, to facilitating the passage, to endearing our
friends, to procuring more confidents, to securing our hopes, and entering upon
possession. Simon Magus had a desire to be accounted some great one; and by
that purpose he was tempted to Sorcery and Divination; and with a new object he
brought a new sin into the world, adding Simony to his Sorcery, and taught
posterity that crime, which till then had neither name nor being. And those
Ecclesiastics who violently affect rich or pompous Prelacies, pollute
themselves with worldly Arts, growing covetous as Syrian Merchants, ambitious
as the Levantine Princes, factious as the people, revengeful as (...), and
proud as Conquerors and Usurpers; and by this means Beasts are brought into the
Temple, and the Temple it self is exposed to sale, and the holy Rites as well
as the beasts of Sacrifice are made venial. To prevent the (...)
inconveniences that thrust themselves into the common and great roads of our
life, the best course is to cut our great Chanel into little Rivulets, making
our Ends the more, that we may be indifferent to any, proposing nothing great,
that our desires may be little; for so we shall be better able to digest the
troubles of an Enemy, the contradictions of an unhandsome accident, the
crossing of our hopes, because our desires are even, and our ends are less
considerable, and we can with much readiness divert upon another purpose,
having another ready with the (...) proportion to our hopes and desires as the
(...). Thus (...) we propound to our selves an honest employment or a quiet
retirement, a work of Charity abroad or of Devotion at home, if we miss in our
first setting sorth, we return to shore, where we can (...) with content, it
being alike to us either to (...) abroad with more gain, or trade at home with
more (...): But when we once grow great in our desires, fixing too earnestly
upon one object, we either grow (...), (as Rachel, Give me children, or I die;)
or take ill courses and use (...) means, (as Thamar, choosing rather to lie with
her Father than to die without issue;) or else are (...) in the loss and
frustration of our hopes, (like the Women of Ramah, who would (...) be
comforted,) Let therefore our life be moderate, our desires reasonable, our
hopes little, our Ends none in eminency and (...) above others: for as the rays
of Light passing through (...) Dii quoque (...) In (...) Omne (...).
the thin air end in a small and undiscerned Pyramid, but (...) upon a wall are
doubled and increase the warmth to a scorching and troublesome heat; so the
desires of Man, if they pass through an even and an indifferent life toward
the issues of an ordinary and necessary course, they are little and within
command, but if they pass upon an end or aim of difficulty or ambition, they
duplicate and grow to a (...): and we have seen the even and temperate lives of
indifferent persons continue in many degrees of Innocence; but the Temptation
of busy designs is too great even for the best of dispositions.

7. But these Temptations are crasse and material, and soon discernible; it
will require some greater observation to arm against such as are more spiritual
and immaterial. For he has Apples to cosen Children, and Gold for Men; the
Kingdoms of the World for the Ambition of Princes, and the Vanities of the
World for the Intemperate; he has Discourses and fair-spoken Principles to
abuse the pretenders to Reason, and he has common Prejudices for the more
vulgar understandings. Amongst these I choose to consider such as are by way of
Principle or Proposition.

8. The first great Principle of Temptation I shall note, is a general mistake,
which excuses very many of our crimes upon pretense of Infirmity, calling all
those sins to which by natural disposition we are inclined (though by
carelessness and evil customs they are heightened to a habit) by the name of Sins
of infirmity; to which men suppose they have reason and title to pretend. If,
when they have committed a crime, their Conscience checks them, and they are
troubled, and, during the interval and abatement of the heats of desire,
resolve against it, and commit it readily at the next opportunity; then they
cry out against the weakness of their Nature, and think, as long as this body
of death is about them, it must be thus, and that this condition may stand with
the state of Grace: And then the Sins shall return periodically, like the
revolutions of a Quartan Ague, well and ill for ever, till Death surprises the
mistaker. This is a Patron of sins, and makes the Temptation prevalent by an
authentic instrument: and they pretend the words of S. Paul, For the good that
I would, that I do not; but the evil Romans 7. 19. 23
that I would not, that I do. For there is a law in my members (...) against
the law of my mind, bringing me into captivity to the law of Sin. And thus the
(...) of Sin is mistaken for a state of Grace, and the imperfections of the Law
are miscalled the affections and necessities of Nature, that they might seem to
be incurable, and the persons apt for an excuse therefore, because for Nature
there is no absolute cure. But that these words of S. Paul may not become a
(...) of death and instruments of a temptation to us, it is observable, that
the Apostle by a siction of person (as is usual (...), Romans 3. 7.
with him) speaks of himself not as in the state of Regeneration under the
Gospel, but under the (...), Gal. 2 18.
1 Cor. 6. 12. and 10. 23, 29, 30. and 13. 2.
obscurities, insufficiencies and imperfections of the Law, which indeed he
there contends to have been a Rule good and holy, apt to remonstrate our
misery, because by its prohibitions, and limits given to natural desires, it
made actions (before indifferent) now to be sins, it added many curses to the
breakers of it, and by an (...) of contrariety it made us more desirous of what
was now unlawful: but it was a Covenant in which our Nature was restrained, but
not helped; it was provoked, but not sweetly assisted; our Understandings were
instructed, but our Wills not sanctified, and there were no suppletories of
Repentance; every greater sin was like the fall of an Angel, irreparable by any
mystery, or express recorded or enjoined. Now of a man under this Govenant he
describes the condition to be such, that he understands his Duty, but by the
infirmities of Nature he is certain to fall, and by the helps of the Law not
strengthened against it, nor restored after it; and therefore he calls himself
under that notion a miserable man sold under sin, not doing according to the
rules of the Law or the dictates of his Reason, but by the unaltered misery of
his Nature certain to prevaricate. But the person described here is not S.
Paul, is not any justified person, not so much as a Christian, but one who is
under a state of direct opposition to the state of Grace; as will manifestly
appear if we observe the antithesis from S. Paul's own characters. For the Man
here named is such, as in whom sin wrought all concupiscence, in Romans 7. 8, 11.
whom sin lived, and slew him, (so that he was dead in trespasses and sins;)
and although (...) 22.
he did delight in the Law after his inwardman, that is, his understanding had
intellectual complacencies and satisfactions, which afterward he calls serving
the Law of God verse 25.
with his mind, (that is, in the first dispositions and preparations of his
spirit) yet he could act nothing; for the law in his members did inslave him,
and brought him into captivity verse 23.
to the law of sin: so that this person was full of actual and effective lusts,
he was a slave to sin and dead in trespasses: But the state of a regenerate
person is such, as to have (...) the flesh with the affections and lusts; in
whom sin did not reign, not only in Gal. 5. 24.
Romans (...). 6, 12, 14.
the mind, but even also not in the mortal body; over whom sin had no dominion;
in whom the old man was crucified, and the body of sin was destroyed, and sin
not at all served. And to make the antithesis yet clearer, in the very
beginning of the next Chapter the Apostle says, that the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus had made him free from the law of sin Romans 8. 2.
and death; under which law he complained immediately before, he was sold and
killed, to show the person was not the same in these so different and
contradictory representments. No man in the state of Grace can say, The evil
that I would not, that I do: if by evil he means any evil that is habitual, or
in its own nature deadly.

9. So that now let no man pretend an inevitable necessity to sin: for if ever
it comes to a custom or to a great violation, though but in a single act, it is
a condition of Carnality, not of spiritual life; and those are not the
infirmities of Nature, but the weaknesses of Grace, that make us sin so
frequently; which the Apostle truly affirms to the same purpose, The flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and these Gal. 5.
17.
are contrary the one to the other: so that [ ye cannot] or [ that ye (...)
do not do] the things that ye would. This disability proceeds from the
strength of the flesh, and weakness of the spirit: For he adds, But if ye be
led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law: saying plainly, that the state of
such a combat, and disability of doing good, is a state of a man under the
Law, or in the flesh, which he accounts all one; but every man that is
sanctified under the Gospel is led by the Spirit, and walks in the Spirit, and
brings forth the fruits of the Spirit. It is not our excuse, but the
aggravation of our sin, that we fall again in despite of so many resolutions to
the contrary. And let us not flatter our selves into a confidence of sin, by
supposing the state of Grace can stand with the Custom of any sin: for it is
the state either of an animalis homo, (as the Apostle calls him) that is, a man
in pure naturals, without the clarity of divine Revelations, who cannot Romans 7.
14.
perceive or understand the things of God; or else of the carnal man, that is,
a person, who though in his mind he is convinced, yet he is not yet freed from
the dominion of sin, but only has his eyes opened, but not his bonds loosed.
For by the perpetual analogy and frequent expresses in Scripture, the spiritual
person, or the man redeemed by the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, is free from
the Law, and the Dominion, and the Kingdom, and the Power of all sin. For to be
carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is Romans 8. 6.
life and peace.

10. But sins of Infirmity in true sense of Scripture signify nothing but the
sins of an unholy and an unsanctified nature, when they are taken for actions
done against the strength of resolution out of the strength of natural appetite
and violence of desire: and therefore in Scripture the state of Sin and the
state of Infirmity is all one. For when we Romans 5. 6.
were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly, (says the
Apostle:) (...), without strength, that is, ungodly.
the condition in which we were when Christ became a sacrifice for us was
certainly a condition of sin and enmity with God, and yet this he calls a being
without strength, or in a state of weakness and infirmity; which we, who
believe all our strength to be derived from Christ's death, and the assistance
of the holy Spirit, the fruit of his Ascension, may soon apprehend to be the
true meaning of the word. And in this sense is that saying of our Blessed
Savior, The whole have no need of a Physician, but they that are weak: for
therefore Christ came into the world to save sinners, those are the persons of
Christ's Infirmary, whose restitution and reduction to a state of life and
health was his great design. So that whoever sin habitually, that is,
constantly, periodically, at Vide August. l. 2. c 17. de (...), and Anchir. 81.
the revolution of a temptation, or frequently, or easily, are persons who
still remain in the state of sin and death; and their intervals of Piety are
but preparations to a state of Grace, which they may then be when they are not
used to countenance or excuse the sin, or to flatter the person. But if the
intermediate resolutions of emendation (though they never run beyond the next
assault of passion or desire) be taken for a state of Grace blended with
infirmities of Nature, they become destructive of all those purposes, through
our mistake, which they might have promoted if they had been rightly
understood, observed and cherished. Sometimes indeed the greatness of a
Temptation may become an instrument to excuse some degrees of the sin, and make
the man pitiable, whose ruin seems almost certain, because of the greatness
and violence of the enemy, meeting with a natural aptness: but then the
question will be, whither and to what actions that strong Temptation carries
him; whether to a work of a mortal nature, or only to a small irregularity,
that is, whether to death, or to a wound: for whatever the principle be, if the
effect be death, the man's case was therefore to be pitied, because his ruin
was the more inevitable; not so pitied, as to excuse him from the state of
death. For let the Temptation be never so strong, every Christian man has
assistances sufficient to support him, so as that, without his own yielding, no
Temptation is stronger than that grace which God offers him; for if it were, it
were not so much as a sin of infirmity, it were no sin at all. This therefore
must be certain to us; When the violence of our Passions or desires overcomes
our resolutions and fairer purposes, against the dictate of our Reason, that
indeed is a state of Infirmity, but it is also of sin and death, a state of
Immortification; because the offices of Grace are to crucify the Old man, that
is, our former and impurer conversation, to subdue the petulancy of our
Passions, to reduce them to reason, and to restore Empire and dominion to the
superior Faculties. So that this condition in proper speaking is not so good
as the Infirmity of Grace, but it is no Grace at all: for whoever are Christ's,
have crucified the Gal. 5. 24.
flesh with the affections and lusts: those other imperfect, ineffective
resolutions are but the first approaches of the Kingdom of Christ, nothing but
the clarities of lightning, dark as (...) as light; and they therefore cannot
be excuses to us, because the contrary weaknesses (as we call them) do not make
the sin involuntary, but chosen and pursued, and in true speaking is the
strength of the Lust, not the infirmity of a state of Grace.

11. But yet there is a condition of Grace which is a state of little and
imperfect ones, such as are called in Scripture Smoking flax and bruised
reeds; which is a state of the first dawning of the Sun of Righteousness, when
the lights of Grace new rise upon our eyes; and then indeed they are weak, and
have a more dangerous neighborhood of S. August. lib. de (...) and (...). c.
17. etc. 19.
Temptations and desires, but they are not subdued by them: they sin not by
direct election; their actions criminal are but like the slime of Nilus,
leaving rats half formed; they sin but seldom, and when they do, it is in small
instances, and then also by surprise, by inadvertency, and then also they
interrupt their own acts, and lessen them perpetually; and never do an act of
sinfulness, but the principle is such as makes it to be involuntary in many
degrees. For when the Understanding is clear, and the dictate of Reason
undisturbed and determinate, whatsoever then produces an irregular action
excuses not, because the action is not made the less voluntary by it; for the
action is not made involuntary from any other principle but from some defect of
Understanding, either in act, or habit, or faculty. For where there is no such
defect, there is a full deliberation according to the capacity of the man, and
then the act of election that follows is clear and full, and is that proper
disposition which makes him truly capable of punishment or reward respectively.
Now although in the first beginnings of Grace there is not a direct Ignorance
to excuse totally; yet because a sudden surprise or an inadvertency is not
always in our power to prevent, these things do lessen the election and freedom
of the action: and then because they are but seldom, and never proceed to any
length of time, or any great instances of crime, and are every day made still
more infrequent, because Grace growing stronger, the observation and advertency
of the spirit and the attendance of the inner man grows more effectual and
busy; this is a state of the imperfection of Grace, but a state of Grace it
is. And it is more commonly observed to be expressed in the imperfection of our
good actions, than in the irregularity of bad actions: and in this sense are
those words of our Blessed Savior, The Spirit (...) is willing, but the flesh
is weak; which in this instance was not expressed in sin, but in a natural
imperfection, which then was a recession from a civility, a not watching with
the Lord. And this is the only Infirmity that can consist with the state of
Grace.

12. So that now we may lay what load we please upon our Nature, and call our
violent and unmortified desires by the name of an imperfect Grace; but then we
are dangerously mistaken, and flatter our selves into an opinion of Piety, when
we are in the gall of bitterness; so making our misery the more certain and
irremediable, because we think it needs nothing but a perpetuity and
perseverance to bring us to Heaven. The violence of Passion and Desires is a
misery of Nature, but a perfect principle of Sin; multiplying and repeating the
acts, but not lessening the malignity: But sins of Infirmity, when we mean sins
of a less and lower malice, are sins of a less and imperfect choice, because of
the unavoidable imperfection of the Understanding. Sins of Infirmity are always
infirm sins, that is, weak and imperfect in their principle, and in their
nature, and in their design; that is, they are actions incomplete in all their
capacities: but then Passions and periodical inclinations consisting with a
regular and determined and actual understanding must never be their principle;
for whatsoever proceeds thence is destructive of spiritual life, and
inconsistent with the state of Grace. But sins of infirmity, when they pretend
to a less degree of malignity and a greater degree of excuse, are such as are
little more than sins of pure and inculpable ignorance; for in that degree in
which any other principle is mixed with them, in the same degree they are
criminal and inexcusable. For as a sin of infirmity is pretended to be little
in its value and malignity: so it is certain, if it be great in the instance,
it is not a sin of infirmity, that is, it is a state or act of death, and
absolutely inconsistent with the state of Grace.

13. Secondly, Another Principle of Temptation pregnant with sin, and fruitful
of monsters, is a weaker pretense which less wary and credulous persons abuse
themselves withal, pretending as a ground for their confidence and
incorrigible pursuance of their courses, that they have a Good meaning, that
they intend sometimes well, and sometimes not ill, and this shall be sufficient
to sanctify their actions, and to hallow their sin. And this is of worse
malice, when Religion is the color for a War, and the preservation of Faith
made the warrant for destruction of Charity, and a Zeal for God made the false
light to lead us to Disobedience to Man, and hatred of Idolatry is the usher of
Sacrilege, and the (...) of Superstition the introducer of Profaneness, and
Reformation made the color for a Schism, and Liberty of conscience the way to
a (...) and saucy Heresy: for the End may indeed hallow an indifferent action,
but can never make straight a crooked and irregular. It was not enough for Saul
to cry for God and the Sacrifice, that he spared the fat flocks of Amalek: and
it would be a strange zeal and forwardness, that rather than the Altar of
incense should not smoke, will burn Assa foetida, or the marrow of a man's
bones. For as God will be honored Vide (...).
by us, so also in ways of his own appointment: for we are the makers of our
Religion, if we in our zeal for God do what he has forbidden us. And every sin
committed for 2 Samuel 6. cap. 6, 7, 8, 9. verse.
Religion is just such a violence done to it as it seeks to prevent or remedy.

14. And so it is if it be committed for an end or pretense of Charity as well
as of Religion. We must be curious that no pretense engage us upon an action
that is certainly criminal in its own nature. Charity may sometimes require our
Lives, but no obligation can endear a Damnation to us; we are not bound to the
choice of an eternal ruin, to save another. Indeed so far as an Option will
go, it may concern the excrescences of Piety to choose by a tacit or express
act of volition to become Anathema for Romans 9. 3.
our brethren, that is, by putting a case and fiction of Law, to suppose it
better, and wish it rather, that I should perish than my Nation. Thus far is
charitable, because it is innocent; for as it is great love to our Country, so
it is no uncharitableness to our selves: for such Options always are
ineffective, and produce nothing but rewards of Charity, and a greater glory.
And the Holy Jesus himself, who only could be and was effectively accursed to
save us, got by it an exceeding and mighty glorification; and S. Paul did
himself advantage by his charitable Devotion for his Countrymen. But since God
never puts the question to us, so that either we or our Nation must be damned,
he having xt every man's final condition upon his own actions in the virtue and
obedience of Christ, if we mistake the expresses of Charity, and suffer our
selves to be damned indeed for God's glory or our Brethrens good, we spoil the
Duty, and ruin our selves when our Option comes to act. But it is observable,
that although Religion is often pretended to justify a sin, yet Charity is but
seldom; which makes it full of suspicion, that Religion is but the cover to the
Death's Head, and at the best is but an accusing of God, that he is not willing
or not able to preserve Religion without our irregular and impious
cooperations. But however, though it might concern us to wish our selves rather
(...) than Religion, or our Prince, or our Country should perish, (for I find
no instances that it is lawful so much as to (...) it for the preservation of a
single friend;) yet it is against Charity to bring such a (...) to (...), and
by sin to damn our selves really for a good end either (...) Religion or
Charity.

15. Let us therefore serve God as he has (...) the way; for all our accesses
to him, being acts of his free concession and grace, must be by his (...)
designation and appointment. We might as well have chosen what shape our (...)
should be of, as of what instances the substance of our Religion should consist.

16. Thirdly, a third Principle of Temptation is, an opinion of prosecuting
actions of Civility, Compliance and Society, to the luxation of a point of
Piety and (...) Duty: and good natures, persons of humane and sweeter
dispositions, are too apt to dash upon this rock of offense. But the evil that
I would note is, that there are some conditions of men to whom a Vice is so
accustomed, that he that (...) with them must handle the crime and touch the
venom. There are some Vices which are National, there are some that are points
of Honor, some are Civilities of entertainment; and they are therefore
accounted unavoidable, because the understandings of men are degenerous as
their manners, and it is accounted sottish and (...) not to (...) in their
accustomed loosenesses. Amongst some men all their first addresses are (...),
their entertainments intemperate beyond the permissions of Christian austerity;
their drink is humorous, and their humors quarrellous, and it is dishonorable
not to engage in Duel, and venture your Soul to (...) an empty Reputation.
These inconveniences (...) upon false opinions and vain fancies, having no
greater foundation than the sottish discourses of ignorant and (...) persons;
and they have no peculiar and appropriate remedy, but a (...) of manners, and a
consideration what is required of us as Christians to (...) against (...)
fonder customs and expectations from us, as we engage in the puddles of the
world and are blended in society.

17. To which purposes we must be careful not to engage too freely in looser
company, never without business or unavoidable accidents; and when we mingle in
affairs, it will concern our safety to watch, lest multitude of talk, (...) and
(...) of nature, the delight of company, and the freedom and ill-(...)
civilities do by degrees draw us away from our guards and (...) of spirit. For
in these cases every degree of dissolution disarms us of our strengths; and if
we give way (...) far as we think it tolerable, we instantly and undiscernibly
pass into unlawful and criminal. But our best defenses are deposited in a
severe and prudent understanding, and discerning the sottishness of such
principles which represent Vice in civil (...), and propound a crime to you
under the cover of kindness; which is just so much recompense as it is
satisfaction to a condemned person that he was accused by a witty Orator, and
sentenced by an eloquent Judge. Remember always, that the friendships of the
world are enmity with God; and that those Societies which are combined by
relations of drink, and wantonness, and impertinency, and crimes, are either
inconsiderable in civility, or reason, or reputation; no wise man is moved by
their testimony or discourses; and they are so impotent, rude and undiscerning
a theater, that most commonly he is the best man who from thence is the worst
reported and represented.

18. But in all the instances of this great evil, the very stating the question
right is above half the victory. For it is a question between mistaken Civility
and certain Duty; Piety on one side, and the disguises of Humanity on the
other. God and Man are the parties interested: and to counterpoise the
influence of the sight and face of Man, (which being in a visible
communication, it is not in some natures to neglect or contradict) there are
all the Excellencies of God, the effects of his Power, his certain Presence and
Omniscience, the severities of his Judgment, and the sweetness and invitation
of his Mercies; besides the prudence, wisdom and satisfaction to the spirit
when we wisely neglect such sottish and low abuses and temptations, to conform
to the rules of Reason and Duty in compliance with the purposes of God and our
own (...).

19. Thirdly, These ill-managed Principles are dangers as universal as an
infected air; yet there are some diseases more proper to the particular state
of Religion. First, To young beginners in Religion he represents the
Difficulties of Religion, and propounds the greater Examples of holy persons,
and affrights them with those mountains of Piety, observing where and upon what
instance of Severity his fancy will be most apprehensive and (...): and this he
fails not often to represent with a purpose, that by believing no Piety less
than the greatest can be good, he may despair of those heights, and retire into
the securities and indifferencies of a careless life. But this is to be cured
by all those instruments of Piety which in special are incentives of the love
of God, and endearments of spiritual and religious affections; and particularly
by consideration of the Divine goodness, who knows whereof we are made, and
remembers that we are but dust, and will require no more of us than according
to our powers and present capacities. (...). 2. in Explicat. of the (...).
But the subject matter of this Temptation is considered and refuted in the
Discourse of the Love of God. 1. Com.


20. But most commonly young beginners are zealous and high, and not so easily
tempted to a recession, till after a long time by a revolution of affections
they are abated by a defervescency in holy actions. The Devil uses to prompt
them on, not that he loves the Piety and the progress, but that he would engage
the person in imprudences and such forwardness of expresses, which either are
in their own nature indiscretions, or from which, by reason of the incapacity
of the person, it is necessary for him to retire. A new Convert is like a Bird
newly entered into a Net, through which possibly she might pass without danger,
if her fears and unreasonable strivings did not entangle her; but when by busy
and disturbed slutterings she discomposes the order of it, she is entangled and
unpenned, and made a prey to her treacherous enemy. Such are the undiscreet
strivings and too (...) enterprises of new Penitents, whom we shall observe too
often undertaking great Austerities, making Vows and casting bands upon their
liberty, and snares upon their persons, thinking nothing great enough to
expiate their sin, or to present to God, or to endear their services, or secure
their perseverance; and therefore they lay a load of fetters upon themselves,
or rather cut off their legs that they may never go back; therefore laying an
obligation of Vows and intolerable burdens on themselves, that by these they
may by a compendium of Piety redeem the time, and by those make it impossible
to prevaricate. But the observation of the sad events and (...) accidents of
these men has given probation of the indiscretion of such furious addresses
and beginnings. And it was prudently done of Mcletius of Antioch, when he
Theod. l. 5. (...).
visited the Dioceses of Syria, and the several Religious persons famous for
severe undertakings; espying that Simeon Stylites dwelt upon a Pillar, and had
bound his leg with a strong chain of iron, he sent for a Smith, causing it to
be knocked off, and said, To (...) man that loves God, his Mind is a sufficient
chain. For the loads of voluntary Austerities rashly undertaken make Religion a
burden when their first heats expire; and their Vows, which are intended to
secure the practice and perpetuate the Piety, are but the occasions of an
aggravate crime; and the Vow does not secure the Piety, but the weariness and
satiety of the Duty tempts to the breaking of the Vow, or at least makes the
man impatient, when he cannot persist with content, nor retire with (...).

21. It therefore concerns all Spiritual Guides, to manage their new Converts
with sober counsels and moderate permissions, knowing that sublime speculations
in the Metaphysics are not fit entertainment for an infant-understanding.
There is milk for babes, and strong meat for men of riper Piety; and it will
employ all the regular strength of young beginners to contest against the
relics of those mischiefs which remain since the expulsion of the Old man,
and to master those difficulties which by the nature of the state are certainly
consequent to so late mutation. And if we by the furies of Zeal and the
impatience of mistaken Piety are violent and indiscreet in the destroying of
our Enemies, we probably may tread the thistle down, and trample upon all its
appearances, and yet leave the root in the ground with haste and imprudent
forwardness. Gentle and soft counsels are the surest Enemies to your Vice, and
the best conservators and (...) of a virtuous state: but a hasty charge and the
conduct of a young Leader may engage an early spirit in dangers and dishonours.
And this Temptation is of so much greater danger, because it (...) a face of
Zeal, and meets with all encouragements from without; every man being apt to
cherish a Convert, and to inflame his new (...): but few consider (...)
inconveniences that are consequent to indiscreet beginnings, and the worse
events usually appendent to (...) inconveniences.

22. Indeed it is not usual that Prudence and a new-kindled Zeal meet in the
(...) person: but it will therefore concern the safety of new Converts, who
cannot guide themselves, to give themselves up to the conduct of an experienced
Spiritual person, who being disinterest in those heats of the (...)
apprehensions, and being long taught by the observation of the accidents of a
spiritual life upon what rocks Rashness and Zeal usually do engage us, can best
tell what degrees and what instances of Religion they may with most safety
undertake: but for the general, it is best in the addresses of Grace to follow
the course of Nature; let there be an Infancy, and a Childhood, and a vigorous
Youth, and by the diverse and distant degrees of increment let the persons be
established in Wisdom and Grace. But above all things let them be careful that
they do not lay upon themselves Necessities of any lasting course, no Vows of
perpetuity in any instance of uncommanded action or degree of Religion: for he
may alter in his capacity and exterior condition; he may see by experience,
that the particular engagement is imprudent; he may by the virtue of Obedience
be engaged on a duty inconsistent with the conveniences and advantages of the
other; and his very loss of liberty in an uncommanded instance may tempt him to
inconvenience. But then, for the single and transient actions of Piety,
although in them the danger is less, even though the imprudence be great, yet
it were well if new beginners in Religion would attempt a moderate and an even
Piety, rather than actions of eminency, lest they retire with shame, and be
(...) with scruple, when their first heats are spent, and expire in weariness
and temptation. It is good to keep within the circuits of a man's affections,
not stretching out all the degrees of fancy and desire, but leaving the
appetites of Religion rather unsatisfied, and still desiring more, than by
stretching out the whole faculty leave no desires but what are fulfilled and
wearied.

23. Thirdly, I shall not need here to observe such Temptations which are
direct invitations to sin, upon occasion of the Piety of holy persons; such as
are Security, too much Confidence, Pride and Vanity: these are part of every
man's danger, and are to be considered upon their several arguments. Here I was
only to note the general instruments of mischief. It remains now that I speak
of such Remedies and general Antidotes, not which are proportioned to Sins in
special, but such as are preventions or remedies and good advices in general.

24. First, Let every man abstain from all Occasions of sin as much as his
condition will permit. And it were better to do some violence to our secular
affairs, than to procure apparent or probable danger to our Souls. For if we
see not a way open and ready prepared to our iniquity, our desires oftentimes
are not willing to be troubled, but Opportunity gives life and activeness to
our appetites. If David had not from his towers beheld the private beauties of
Bathsheba, Uriah had lived, and his Wife been unattempted; but sin was brought
to him by that chance, and entering at the casements of his eyes set his heart
on fire, and despoiled him of his robes of honor and innocence. The riches of
the wedge of gold and the beauty of the Babylonish garment made Achan
sacrilegious upon the place, who was innocent enough in his preceding purposes:
and therefore that Soul that makes it self an object to sin, and invites an
Enemy to view its possessions and live in the vicinage, loves the sin it self;
and he that is pleased with the danger, would willingly be betrayed into the
necessity and the pleasure of the sin: for he can have no other ends to
entertain the hazards, but that he has a farther purpose to serve upon them;
he loves the pleasure of the sin, and therefore he would make the condition of
sinning certain and unavoidable. And therefore Holy Scripture, which is
admirable and curious in the cautions and securities of Virtue, does not
determine its Precepts in the precise commands of virtuous actions, but also
binds up our senses, obstructs the passage of Temptation, blocks up all the
ways and avenues of Vice, commanding us to make a covenant with our eyes; not
to look upon a Maid; not to sit with a woman that is a singer; not to consider
the wine when it sparkles, and gives its color rightly in the cup; but to set
a watch before our mouths, to keep the door of our lips, and many more
instances to this purpose, that sin may not come so near as to be repulsed; as
knowing sin has then prevailed too far, when we give the denial to its
solicitations.

25. We read a Story of a virtuous Lady, that desired of S. Athanasius to
procure for her, out of the number of the Widows fed from the Ecclesiastical
Corban, an old woman, morose, peevish and impatient, that she might by the
society of so ungentle a person have often occasion to exercise her Patience,
her Forgiveness and Charity. I know not how well the counsel succeeded with
her; I am sure it was not very safe: and to invite the trouble to triumph over
it, is to wage a war of an uncertain issue for no end but to get the pleasures
of the victory, which oftentimes do not pay for the trouble, never for the
danger. An Egyptian, who acknowledged Fire for his God, one day doing his
devotions kissed his God after the manner of Worshippers, and burnt his lips.
It was not in the power of that false and imaginary Deity to cure the real hurt
he had done to his devoutest worshipper. Just such a fool is he that kisses a
danger, though with a design of virtue, and hugs an opportunity of sin for an
advantage of Piety; he burns himself in the neighborhood of the flame, and
twenty to one but he may perish in its embraces: And he that looks out a danger
that he may overcome it, does as did the Persian, who (...) the Sun, looked
upon him when he prayed him to cure his sore eyes. The Sun may as well cure a
weak eye, or a great burden knit a broken arm, as a danger can do him
advantage that seeks such a combat which may ruin him, and after which he
rarely may have this reward, that it may be said of him, he had the good (...)
not to perish in his folly. It is easier to prevent a mischief than to cure it;
and besides the pain of the wound, it is infinitely more full of (...) to cure
a broken leg, which a little care and observation would have preserved whole.
To recover from a sin is none of the (...) labors that concern the sons of
men; and therefore it concerns them rather not to enter into such a narrow
strait, from which they can never draw back their head, without leaving their
hair and skin and their ears behind. If God please to try us, he means us no
hurt, and he does it with great reason and great mercy; but if we go to try our
selves, we may mean well, but not wisely: For as it is simply unlawful for weak
persons to seek a Temptation, so for the more perfect it is dangerous. We have
enemies (...) quid (...) omne malum mundique (...) ad (...) Ex (...), genus,
and (...), and vim, Quid sint, (...). Prud. (...).
enough without, and one of our own within: but we become our own tempter, when
we run out to meet the World or invite the Devil home, that we may throw holy
water upon his flames, and call the danger nearer, that we may run from it. And
certainly (...). 21. 27.
men are more guilty of many of their temptations than the Devil, through their
(...).
incuriousness or (...) doing as much mischief to themselves as he can: For he
can but offer; and so much we do when we run into danger. Such were those
Stories of S. Antony provoking the Devil to battle: If the Stories had been as
true as the actions were rash and ridiculous, the Story had (...) a note of
indiscretion upon that good man; though now I think there is nothing but a mark
of (...) and (...) on the Writer.

26. Secondly, Possibly without (...) we may be engaged in a (...), but then we
must be diligent to resist the first Beginnings: For when our strength is yet
entire and unabated, if we suffer our selves to be overcome, and consent to its
(...) and weakest attempts, how shall we be able to resist when it has tired
our contestation, and wearied our patience, when we are weaker and prevailed
upon, and the Temptation is stronger and triumphant in many degrees of victory?
By how much a Hectic Fever is harder to be cured than a Tertian, or a
Consumption of the Lungs than a little Distillation of Rheum upon the throat;
by so much is it harder to prevail upon a (...) Lust than upon its first
insinuations. But the ways of resisting are of a different consideration,
proportionably to the nature of the crimes.

27. First, If the Temptation be to crimes of Pleasure and Sensuality, let the
resistance (...) cadere; (...). S. Aug.
be by flight: For in case of Lust, even to consider the arguments against it
is half as great Temptation as to press the arguments for it: For all
considerations of such allurements make the Soul perceive something of its
relish, and entertain the fancy. Even the pulling pitch from our clothes
defiles the fingers; and some adherences of pleasant and carnal sins will be
remanent even from those considerations which stay within the circuit of the
flames, though but with purpose to quench the fire and preserve the house.
Chastity cannot suffer the least thought of the reproaches of the spirit of
impurity: and it is necessary to all that will keep their purity and innocence
against sensual Temptations, to avoid every thing that may prejudice decorum.
Libanius (...) Sophister reports, that a Painter being one day desirous to
paint Apollo upon a Laurelboard, the colors would not stick, but were
rejected: out of which his fancy found (...)
out this extraction; That the (...) Daphne (concerning whom the Poets feign
that, flying from Apollo, who attempted to (...) her, she was turned into a
Laurel-tree) could not endure him even in painting, and rejected him after the
loss of her sensitive powers. And indeed chaste Souls do even to death resent
the least image and offer of impurity: whatsoever is like a sin of uncleanness,
he that means to preserve himself chaste must avoid, as he would avoid the sin;
in this case there being no difference but of degrees between the inward
Temptation and the Crime.

28. Secondly, If the Temptation be to crimes of troublesome and preternatural
desires or intellectual nature, let the resistance be made (...), by a perfect
fight, by the amassing of such arguments in general and remedies in particular
which are apt to become deleteries to the Sin, and to abate the Temptation. But
in both these instances the resistance must at (...) be as soon as the attempt
is, lest the violence of the Temptation outrun our powers: for if against our
full strength it has prevailed to the first degrees, its progress to a
complete victory is not so improbable as were its successes at the first
beginnings. But to serve this and all other ends in the resisting and subduing
a Temptation, these following Considerations have the best and most universal
influence.

29. First, Consideration of the Presence of God, who is witness of all our
actions, and a revenger of all Impiety. This is so great an instrument of fear
and Religion, that whoever does actually consider God to be present, and
considers what the first consideration signifies, either must be restrained
from the present Temptation, or must have thrown off all the possibilities and
aptnesses for Virtue; such as are Modesty, and Reverence, and holy Fear. For if
the face of a Man scatters all base machinations, and we dare not act our
crimes in the Theater, unless we be impudent as well as criminal; much more
does the sense of a present Deity fill the places of our heart with veneration
and the awe of Religion, when it is thoroughly apprehended and actually
considered. We see not God, he is not in our thoughts, when we run into
darkness to act our impurities. For we dare not commit Adultery if a Boy be
present; behold the Boy is sent off with an excuse, and God abides there, but
yet we commit the crime: it is because, as Jacob said at Bethel, God was in
that place, and we knew not of it; and yet we neither breath nor move an artery
but in him and by his assistance; ( Act. 17. 28.
) In him we live, and move, and have our being. And, ( Heb. 4. 13.
) All things are naked and open in his sight. ( (...). 9, 9. Jer. 23. 24.
) The iniquity of my people is very great; for they say, The Lord sees not. (
Psalm. 94. 9.
) Shall not he that made the eye see? ( Psalm. 139. 12.
) To him the night and day are both alike. These and many more to the same
design are the voices of Scripture, that our spirits may retire into the
beholding of God, to the purposes of fear and holiness, with whom we do cohabit
by the necessities of nature, and the condition of our essence wholly in
dependence; and then only we may sin securely, when we can contrive to do it so
that God may not see us.

30. There are many men who are servants of the eyes, as the Apostle's phrase
is, who (...) 6. 6.
(...)
when they are looked on act virtue with much pompousness and theatrical
bravery; but these men when the Theater is empty, put off their upper garment,
and retire into their primitive baseness. Diogenes Non n. (...) ac studiis ut
haberentur phils. sophi laberabant; sed (...) and tristitiam, and dissentientem
a cater is habitum, pessimis meribus praetendebant. Quintil. l. 1. (...).
endured the extremity of winter's cold, that the people might wonder at his
austerity and philosophical patience: but Plato seeing the people admiring the
man, and pitying the susserance, Ambitio and (...) and impotentia sienam
desiderans; sanabis ista, si (...). Sense. (...). 95.
told them, that the way to make him warm himself Magna vobis, si dissimular
(...) vultis, injecta (...) probitatis, (...) agitis (...) judicis (...)
cernentis. Boeth. l. 5. Censol. presa ult.
was for them to be gone and to take no notice of him. For they that walk as in
the sight of men, serve that design well enough when they fill the public
voice with noises and opinions, and are not by their purposes engaged to act in
private; but they who are servants of the eyes of God, and walk as in the
Divine presence, perceive the same restraints in darkness, and closets, and
grots, as in the light and midst of theaters; and that consideration imposes
upon us a happy necessity of doing virtuously, which presents us placed in the
eyes of our Judge. And therefore it was not unhandsomely said of a Jewish
Doctor, If every man would consider God to be the great Eye of the World
watching perpetually over all our actions, and that his Hand is indefatigable,
and his Ear ever open, possibly sin might be extirpated from off the face of
the earth. And this is the condition of Beatitude; and the blessed Souls within
their regions of light and felicity cannot sin, because of the Vision
beatifical, they always behold the face of God: and those who partake of this
state by way of consideration, which is essential to the condition of the
Blessed, and derive it into practice and discourse, in proportion to this shall
retain an innocence and a part of glory.

31. For it is a great declension of humane Reason, and a disreputation to our
spirits, that we are so wholly led by Sense, that we will not walk in the
regions of the Spirit, and behold God by our eyes of Faith and Discourse,
suffering our course of life to be guided by such principles which distinguish
our natures from Beasts, and our conditions from vicious, and our spirits from
the World, and our hopes from the common satisfactions of Sense and corruption.
The better half of our Nature is of the same constitution with that of Angels;
and therefore although we are drenched in Matter and the communications of
Earth, yet our better part was designed to converse with God: and we had,
besides the eye of Reason, another eye of Faith put into our Souls, and both
clarified with revelations and demonstrations of the Spirit, expressing to us
so visible and clear characters of God's presence, that the expression of the
same Spirit is, We may feel Acts 17. 27.
him, for he is within us, and about us, and we are in him, and in the
comprehensions of his embracings, as birds in the (...)
Air, or Infants in the wombs of their pregnant Mothers. And that God is
pleased not to communicate himself to the eyes of our Body, but still to remain
invisible, besides that it is his own glory and perfection, it is also no more
to us but like a retreat behind a curtain, where when we know our Judge stands
as an Espial and a watch over our actions, we shall be sottish if we dare to
provoke his jealousy, because we see him not, when we know that he is close
by, though behind the cloud.

32. There are some general impressions upon our spirits, which by way of
presumption and custom possess our persuasions, and make restraint upon us to
excellent purposes; such as are the Religion of Holy places, reverence of our
Parents, presence of an austere, an honorable, or a virtuous Aliquem habeat
animus (...). Quid prodest (...) Deo. Senec. l. 1. ep. 15.
person. For many sins are prevented by the company of a witness, especially if
besides the ties of modesty we have also toward him an indearment of (...)
lera simulac (...) pudore and (...), suo (...), Tacit. (...). 6. (...). 51.
reverence and fair opinion; and if he were with us in our privacies, he would
cause our retirements to be more holy. S. Ambrose reports of the Virgin Mary,
that she had so much Piety and Religion in her Countenance and deportment, that
diverse persons, moved by the veneration and regard of her Person, in her
presence have (...) commenced their resolutions of Chastity and sober living.
However the story be, her person certainly was of so express and great Devotion
and Sanctity, that he must needs have been of a very impudent disposition and
firm immodesty who durst have spoken unhandsome language in the presence of so
rare a person. And why then any rudeness in the presence of God, if that were
as certainly believed and considered? For whatsoever amongst men can be a
restraint of Vice or an endearment of Virtue, all this is highly verisied in
the presence of God, to whom our Conscience in its very concealments is as a
fair Table written in capital letters by his own finger; and then if we fail of
the advantage of this exercise, it must proceed either from our dishonorable
opinion of God, or our own fearless inadvertency, or from a direct spirit of
reprobation: for it is certain, that this consideration (...). Sophocl.
is in its own nature apt to correct our manners, to produce the fear of God,
and Humility, and spiritual and holy thoughts, and the knowledge of God and of
our selves, and the consequents of all these, holy walking, and holy comforts.
And by this only argument S. Paphnutius and S. Ephrem are reported in
Churchstory to have converted two Harlots from a course of Dissolution to great
Sanctity and Austerity.

33. But then this Presence of God must not be a mere speculation of the
Understanding; though so only it is of very great benefit and immediate
efficacy, yet it must reflect as well from the Will as from discourse: and then
only we walk in the presence of God, when by Faith we behold him present, when
we speak to him in frequent and holy Prayers, when we beg aid from him in all
our needs, and ask counsel of him in all our doubts, and before him bewail our
sins, and tremble at his presence. This is an entire exercise of Religion. And
beside that the Presence of God serves to all this, it has also especial
influence in the disimprovement of Temptations, because it has in it many
things contrariant to the nature and efficacy of Temptations; such as are
Consideration, Reverence, Spiritual thoughts, and the Fear of God: for
wherever this consideration is actual, there either God is highly despised,
or certainly feared. In this case we are made to declare; for our purposes are
concealed only in an incuriousness and inconsideration; but whoever considers
God as present, will in all reason be as religious as in a Temple, the
Reverence of which place Custom or Religion has imprinted in the spirits of
most men: so that as Ahasuerus said of Haman, Will he ravish the Queen in my
own house? aggravating the crime by the incivility of the circumstance; God may
well say to us, whose Religion compells us to believe God everywhere present;
since the Divine Presence has made all places holy, and every place has a
Numen in it, even the Eternal God, we unhallow the place, and desecrate the
ground whereon we stand, supported by the arm of God, placed in his heart, and
enlightened by his eye, when we sin in so sacred a Presence.

34. The second great instrument against Temptation is Meditation of Death.
Raderus Tota philosophia nihil est (...). Plato.
reports, that a certain Virgin, to restrain the inordination of intemperate
desires, which were like thorns in her flesh, and disturbed her spiritual
peace, shut her self up in a Sepulcher, and for twelve years dwelt in that
Scene of death. It were good we did so too, making Tombs and Coffins presential
to us by frequent meditation. For God has given us all a definitive arrest in
Adam, and from it there lies no appeal, (...)(...) A. (...). (...). 2.
but it is infallibly and unalterably (...) for all men once to die, or to be
changed, to pass from hence to a condition of Eternity, good or bad. Now
because this law is (...). (...), Phil.
certain, and the time and the manner of its execution is uncertain, and from
this moment Eternity depends, and that after this life the final sentence is
irrevocable, that all the pleasures here are sudden, transient, and
unsatisfying, and vain; he must needs be a (...) that knows not to distinguish
moments from Eternity: and since it is a condition of necessity, established by
Divine decrees, and fixed by the indispensable Laws of Nature, that we shall
after a very little duration pass on to a condition strange, not understood,
then unalterable, and yet of great mutation from this, even of greater distance
from (...) in which we are here than this is from the state of Beasts; Dies
(...) quod ab (...) in (...), in (...). S. (...). (...). 102.
this, when it is considered, must in all reason make the same impression upon
our understandings and affections which naturally all strange things and all
great considerations are apt to do, that is, create resolutions and results
passing through the heart of man, such as are reasonable and prudent, in order
to our own (...), that we neglect the vanities of the present Temptation, and
secure our future condition, which will, till Eternity it self expires, remain
such as we make it to be by our deportment in this short transition and passage
through the World.

35. And that this Discourse is reasonable I am therefore confirmed, because I
find it to be to the same purpose used by the Spirit of God, and the wisest
personages in the world. My soul is always in my hand, therefore do I keep thy
Commandments, said David: Psalm. 119. 109.
he looked upon himself as a dying person, and that restrained all his
inordinations, and Psalm. 90. 12.
so he prayed, Lord, teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto
wisdom. And therefore the Egyptians used to serve up a Skeleton to their
Feasts, that the dissolutions (...). (...) 28.
and vapors of wine might be restrained with that bunch of myrrh, and the
vanities of their eyes chastised by that sad object: for they thought it
unlikely a man should be transported far with any thing low or vicious that
looked long and often into the hollow eye-pits of a Death's head, or dwelt in a
Charnel-house: And such considerations make all the importunity and violence of
sensual desires to disband. For when a man stands perpetually at the door of
Eternity, and, as did John the Almoner, every day is building of his Sepulcher,
and every night one day of our life is gone and passed into the possession of
death, it will concern us to take care that the door leading to Hell do not
open upon us, that we be not crushed to ruin by the stones of our grave, and
that our death become not a consignation to us to a sad Eternity. For all the
pleasures of the whole world, and in all its (...), and (...), and (...) que
(...). l. 2. (...). 14.
duration, cannot make recompense for one hour's torment in Hell: and yet if
wicked persons were to (...) in Hell for ever without any change of posture, or
variety of torment beyond that session, it were unsufferable beyond the
indurance of nature: and therefore where little less than infinite misery in an
infinite duration shall punish the pleasures of sudden and transient crimes,
the gain of pleasure and the exchange of banks here for a condition of eternal
and miserable death is a permutation (...) to be made by none but fools and
desperate persons, who made no use of a reasonable Soul, but that they in their
perishing might be convinced of unreasonableness, and die by their own fault.

36. The use that wise men have made when they reduced this consideration to
practice is to believe every day to be the last of their life, for so it may
be, and for ought we know it will; and then think what you would avoid, or what
you would do, if you were dying, or were to day to suffer death by sentence and
conviction; and that in all reason; and in proportion to the strength of your
consideration, you will do every day. For that is the sublimity of Wisdom, to
do those things living, which are to be desired (...).
and chosen by dying persons. An alarm of death every day renewed, and pressed
earnestly, will watch a man so tame and soft, that the precepts of Religion
will dwell deep in his spirit. But they that make a covenant with the grave,
and put the (...) day far (...) them, they are the men that eat spiders and
toads for meat greedily, and a Temptation to them is as welcome as joy, and
they seldom dispute the point in behalf of Piety or Mortification: for they
that look upon Death at distance apprehend it not, but in such general lines
and great representments that describe it only as future and possible, but
nothing of its terrors or (...) or circumstances of advantage are discernible
by such an eye that disturbs its (...) and discomposes the posture, that the
object may seem another thing than what it is truly and really. S. Austin with
his Mother Monica was led one day by a Roman Prator to (...) the tomb of
Caesar. Himself thus describes (...). (...).
the Corpse. It looked of a blew mould, the bone of the nose laid bare, the
flesh of the nether lip quite fallen off, his mouth full of worms, and in his
eye-pits two hungry Toads feasting upon the remanent portion of flesh and
moisture; and so he dwelt in his house of darkness. And if every person tempted
by an opportunity of Lust or intemperance would choose such a room for his
privacy, that company for his witness, that object to allay his appetite, he
would soon find his spirit more sober, and his desires (...). (...). Theog. In
(...) monach.
obedient. I end this with the counsel of S. Bernard, Let every man in the
first address to his actions consider, whether if he were now to die he might
safely and prudently do such an act, and whether he would not be infinitely
troubled that death should surprise him in the present dispositions, and then
let him proceed accordingly. For since our treasure is in earthen vessels,
which may be broken in pieces by the collision of ten thousand accidents, it
were not safe to treasure up wrath in them; for if we do, we shall certainly
drink it in the day of recompense.

37. Thirdly, Before, and in, and (...) all this the Blessed Jesus propounds
Prayer as a remedy against Temptations; Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation: For Matthew. 26. 41.
besides that Prayer is the great instrument of obtaining victory by the grace
of God, as a fruit of our desires and of God's natural and essential goodness;
the very praying against a Temptation, if it be hearty, servent and devout, is
a denying of it, and part of the victory: for it is a (...) the entertainment
of it, it is a positive rejection of the crime; and every consent to it is a
ceasing to pray, and to desire remedy. And we shall observe that whenever we
begin to listen to the whispers of a tempting spirit, our Prayers against it
lessen, as the consent increases; there being nothing a more direct enemy to
the Temptation than Prayer, which as it is of it self a professed hostility
against the crime, so it is a calling in auxiliaries from above to make the
victory more certain. If Temptation sets upon thee, do thou set upon God; for
he is as soon overcome as thou art, as soon moved to good as thou art to evil,
-- His (...). Hor. l. 2. (...). 18.
he is as quickly invited to pity thee as thou to ask him; provided thou do
not finally rest in the petition, but pass into action, and endeavor by all
means humane and moral to quench the (...) newly kindled in thy bowels, before
it come to devour the marrow of the bones. For a strong Prayer, and a lazy,
incurious, unobservant walking, are contradictions in the discourses of
Religion. Lib. 3. 13.
(...) tells us a story of a young man solicited by the spirit of Uncleanness,
who came to an old Religious person, and begged his prayers. It was in that Age
when God used to answer Prayers of very holy persons by more clear and familiar
significations of his pleasure than he knows now to be necessary. But after
many earnest prayers sent up to the throne of Grace, and the young man not at
all bettered, upon consideration and enquiry of particulars, he found the cause
to be, because the young man relied so upon the Prayers of the old Eremite,
that he did nothing at all to discountenance his Lust or contradict the
Temptation. But then he took another course, enjoined him Austerities and
exercises of Devotion, gave him rules of prudence and caution, tied him to work
and to stand upon his guard; and then the Prayers returned in triumph, and the
young man trampled upon his Lust. And so shall I and you, by God's grace, if we
pray earnestly and frequently, if we watch carefully that we be not surprised,
if we be not idle in secret, nor talkative in public, if we read Scriptures,
and consult with a spiritual Guide, and make Religion to be our work, that
serving of God be the business of our life, and our designs be to purchase
Eternity; then we shall walk safely or recover speedily, and, by doing
advantages to (...), secure a greatness of Religion and spirituality to our
spirits and understanding. But remember that when Israel fought against Amalek,
Moses's prayer and Moses's hand secured the victory, his Prayer grew
ineffectual when his Hands were slack; to remonstrate to us, that we must
cooperate with the grace of God, praying devoutly, and watching carefully, and
observing prudently, and laboring with diligence and assiduity.

The PRAYER.
ETernal God and most merciful Father, I adore thy Wisdom, Providence, and
admirable Dispensation of affairs in the spiritual Kingdom of our Lord Jesus,
that thou, who art infinitely good, do permit so many sadnesses and dangers
to discompose that order of things and spirits which thou did create innocent
and harmless, and do design to great and spiritual perfections; that the
emanation of good from evil by thy overruling power and excellencies may force
glory to thee from our shame, and honor to thy Wisdom by these contradictory
accidents and events. Lord, have pity upon me in these sad disorders, and with
mercy know my infirmities. Let me, by suffering what thou please, cooperate
to the glorification of thy Grace and magnifying thy Mercy; but never let me
consent to sin, but with the power of thy Majesty, and mightiness of thy
prevailing Mercy, rescue me from those (...) of dangers and enemies which daily
seck to (...) that Innocence with which thou did cloth my Soul in the New
birth. Behold, O God, how all the Spirits of Darkness endeavor the extinction
of our hopes, and the dispersion of all those Graces, and the prevention of all
those (...) which the Holy Jesus has purchased for every loving and obedient
Soul. Our very (...) and drink are full of poison, our Senses are snares, our
(...) is various Temptatio.., our sins are inlets to more, and our good actions
made occasions of sins. Lord, deliver me from the Malice of the Devil, from the
Fallacies of the World, from my own Folly; that I be not devoured by the first,
nor cheated by the second, nor betrayed by my self: but let thy Grace, which is
sufficient for me, be always present with me; let thy Spirit (...) me in the
spiritual (...), arming my Understanding, and securing my Will, and (...) my
Spirit with resolutions of Piety, and incentives of Religion, and deleteries of
Sin; that the dangers I am encompassed withal may become unto me an occasion
of victory and trimph, through the aids of the Holy Ghost, and by the Cross of
the Lord Jesus, who has for himself and all his servants triumphed over Sin
and Hell and the Grave, even all the powers of Darkness, from which by the
mercies of Jesus and the merits of his Passion now and ever deliver me and all
thy (...) people.

Amen.
DISCOURSE VI.
Of Baptism.
Part I.
1. WHen the Holy Jesus was to begin his Prophetical Office, and to lay the
foundation of his Church on the Cornerstone, he first tempered the Cement with
Water, and then with Blood, and afterward built it up by the hands of the
Spirit: Himself entered at that door by which his Disciples for ever after were
to follow him; for therefore he went in at the door of Baptism, that he might
hallow the entrance which himself made to the House he was now building.

2. As it was in the old, so it is in the new Creation; out of the waters God
produced every living creature: and when at first the Spirit moved upon the
waters, and gave life, it was the type of what was designed in the Renovation.
Every thing that lives now is born of Water and the Spirit; and Christ, who is
our Creator and Redeemer in the New birth, opened the fountains and hallowed
the stream: Christ, who is our Life, went down into the waters of Baptism; and
we, who descend thither, find the effects of life: it is living Water, of which
whose drinks needs not to drink of it again, for it shall be in him a Well of
water springing up to life eternal. John 4. 14.


3. But because every thing is resolved into the same principles from whence
they are taken; the old World, which by the power of God came from the Waters,
by their own sin fell into the Waters again, and were all drowned, and only
eight persons were saved by an Ark: and the World renewed upon the stock and
reserves of that mercy consigned the Sacrament of Baptism in another figure;
for then God gave his sign from Heaven, that by water the World should never
again perish: but he meant that they should be saved by water; for Baptism,
which is a figure like to this, does also now save us 1 Pet. 3 21.
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

4. After this the Jews report that the World took up the doctrine of Baptisms,
in remembrance that the iniquity of the old world was purged by water; and they
washed all that came to the service of the true God, and by that Baptism bound
them to the observation of the Precepts which God gave to Noah.

5. But when God separated a Family for his own special service, he gave them a
Sacrament of Initiation, but it was a Sacrament of blood, the Covenant of
Circumcision: and this was the forerunner of Baptism, but not a Type; when
that was abrogated, this came into the place of it, and that consigned the same
Faith which this professes. But it could not properly be a Type, whose nature
is by a likeness of matter or ceremony to represent the same Mystery. Neither
is a Ceremony, as Baptism truly is, properly capable of having a Type, it self
is but a Type of a greater mysteriousness. And the nature of Types is, in
shadow to describe by dark lines a future substance: so (...) in (...), imago
in (...) in (...). S. Ambr.
that although Circumcision might be a Type of the effects and graces bestowed
in Baptism, yet of the Baptism or Ablution it self it cannot be properly,
because of the unlikeness of the symbols and configurations, and because they
are both equally distant from substances, which Types are to consign and
represent. The first Bishops of Jerusalem and all the Christian Jews for many
years retained Circumcision together with Baptism; and Christ himself, who was
circumcised, was also baptized; and therefore it is not so proper to call
Circumcision a Type of Baptism: it was rather a Seal and Sign of the same
Covenant to Abraham and the Fathers and to all Israel, as Baptism is to all
Ages of the Christian Church.

6. And because this Rite could not be administered to all persons, and was not
at all times after its institution, God was pleased by a proper and specific
Type to consign this Rite of Baptism, which he intended to all, and that for
ever: and God, when the family of his Church grew separate, notorious, numerous
and distinct, sent them into their own Country by a Baptism through which the
whole Nation passed; for all the 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2.
Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all
baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea; so by a double figure
foretelling, that as they were initiated to Moses's Law by the Cloud above and
the Sea beneath, so should all the persons of the Church, men, women and
children, be initiated unto Christ by the Spirit from above and the Water
below: for it was the design of the Apostle in that discourse, to represent
that the Fathers and we were equal as to the privileges of the Covenant; he
proved that we do not exceed them, and it ought therefore to be certain that
they do not exceed us, nor their children ours.

7. But after this, something was to remain which might not only consign the
Covenant which God made with Abraham, but be as a passage from the Fathers
through the Synagogue to the Church, from Abraham by Moses to Christ: and that
was Circumcision, which was a Rite which God chose to be a mark to the
posterity of Abraham, to distinguish them from the Nations which were not
within the Covenant of Grace, and to be a Seal of the righteousness of Faith,
which God made to be the spirit and life of the Covenant.

8. But because Circumcision, although it was ministered to all the males, yet
it was not to the females, although they and all the Nation were baptized and
initiated into Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea; therefore the Children of
Israel by imitation of the Patriarchs, the posterity of Noah, used also
Ceremonial Baptisms to their Women and to their Proselytes, and to all that
were circumcised; and the Jews deliver, That Sarah and Rebecca, when they were
adopted into the family of the Church, that is, of Abraham and Isaac, were
baptized: and so were all strangers that were married to the sons of Israel.
And that we may think this to be typical of Christian Baptism, the Doctors of
the Jews had a Tradition, that when the Messiah would come, there should be so
many Proselytes, that they could not be circumcised, but should be baptized.
The Tradition proved true, but not for their reason.

But that this Rite of admitting into Mysteries, and Institutions, and Offices
of Religion by Baptisms, was used by the posterity of Noah, or at least very
early among the Jews, besides the testimonies of their own Doctors, I am the
rather induced to believe, because the Heathens had the same Rite in many
places and in several Religions: so they initiated disciples into the Secrets
of (...). de (...). c. 40
Mithra; and the Priests of (...) were called (...). in (...). S. (...). 2.
(...) 1.
(...), because by Baptism they were admitted into the Religion; and they
(...), qui (...)
thought Muther, Incest, Rapes, and the worst of crimes, were purged by dipping
in the Sea or fresh Springs; and a Proselyte is called in (...) (...), (...), a
Baptized person.

9. But this Ceremony of Baptizing was so certain and usual among the Jews in
their (...).
admitting Proselytes and adopting into Institutions, that to baptize and to
make Disciples are all one; and when John the Baptist by an order from Heaven
went to prepare the way to the coming of our Blessed Lord, he preached
Repentance, and baptized all that professed they did repent. He taught the Jews
to live good lives, and baptized with the Baptism of a Prophet, such as was not
unusually done by extraordinary and holy persons in the change or renewing of
Discipline or Religion. Whether (...)'s Baptism was from heaven, or os men,
Christ asked the Pharisees. That it was from heaven the people therefore
believed, because he was a Prophet and a holy person: but it implies also, that
such Baptisms are sometimes from men, that is, used by (...) of an eminent
Religion, or extraordinary fame for the gathering of Disciples and admitting
Proselytes: and the Disciples of Christ did so too; even before Christ had
instituted the (...) 4. 2.
Sacrament for the Christian Church, the Disciples that came to Christ were
baptized by his Apostles.

10. And now we are come to the gates of Baptism. All these till John were but
Types and preparatory Baptisms, and John's Baptism was but the prologue to the
Baptism of Christ. The Jewish Baptisms admitted Proselytes to Moses and to the
Law of Ceremonies; John's Baptism called them to (...) in the Messiah now
appearing, and to repent of their sins, to enter into the Kingdom which was now
at (...), and preached that Repentance which should be for the (...) os (...).
His Baptism remitted no sins, but preached and consigned Repentance, which in
(...).
the belief of the (...), whom he pointed to, should pardon sins. But because
he was taken from his Office before the work was completed, the Disciples of
Christ (...) it: They went forth preaching the same Sermon of Repentance, and
the approach of the Kingdom and baptized, or (...) or Disciples, as John did;
only they (as it is probable) baptized in the Name of Jesus, which it is not so
likely John did. And this very thing might be the cause of the (...) 9. (...).
1.
different forms of Baptism recorded in the Acts, of Acts 8. 16. Acts 2. 38.
baptizing in the Name of (...), and at other times Matthew. 28. 19.
In the (...) of the Father, Son, and (...) Ghost; the sormer being the manner
of doing it in pursuance of the design of John's Baptism, and the latter the
form of Institution by Christ for the whole Christian Church, appointed after
his Resurrection; the Disciples at first using promiscuously what was used by
the same Authority, though with some difference of Mystery.

11. The Holy Jesus having found his way ready prepared by the Preaching of
(...) and by his Baptism, and the (...) manner of adopting Proselytes and
Disciples into the Religion a way chalked out for him to initiate Disciples
into his Religion, took what was so prepared, and changed it into a perpetual
Sacrament. He kept the Ceremony, that they who were led only by outward things
might be the better called in and easier enticed into the Religion, when they
entered by a Ceremony which their Nation always used in the like cases: and
therefore without change of the outward act he put into it a new spirit, and
gave it a new grace and a proper efficacy; he sublimed it to higher ends, and
adorned it with Stars of Heaven; he made it to signific greater Mysteries, to
convey greater Blessings, to consign the bigger Promises, to cleanse deeper
than the skin, and to carry Proselytes farther than the gates of the
Institution. For so he was pleased to do in the other Sacrament: he took the
Ceremony which he found ready in the Custom of the Jews, where the Major-domo
after the Paschal Supper gave Bread and Wine to every person of his family; he
changed nothing of it without, but transferred the Rite to greater Mysteries,
and put his own Spirit to their Sign, and it became a Sacrament Evangelical. It
was so also in the matter of Excommunication, where the Jewish practice was
made to pass into Christian discipline: without violence and noise old things
became new, while he fulfilled the Law, making it up in full measures of the
Spirit.

12. By these steps Baptism passed on to a Divine Evangelical institution,
which we find to be consigned by three Evangelists; Go ye therefore, and teach
all Nations, baptizing Mat h. 28. 19.
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. It was
one of the last Commandments the Holy Jesus gave upon the earth, when he taught
his Apostles the things which concerned his Kingdom. For he that believes and
is baptized Mark 16. 16.
shall be saved: but, (...) a man be born of Water and the Holy Spirit, he
cannot enter into John 3. 5.
the Kingdom of Heaven; agreeable to the decretory words of God by Abraham in
the Circumcision, to which Baptism does succeed in the consignation of the same
Covenant and the same Spiritual Promises, The uncircumcised child whose flesh
is not circumcised, Gen 17. 14.
that soul shall be cut off from his people; he has broken my Covenant. The
Manichees, Selencas, Hermias, and their followers, people of a day's abode and
small interest, S. Aug. (...). 46, 59.
but of malicious doctrine, taught Baptism not to be necessary, not to be used,
upon this ground, because they supposed that it was proper to John to baptize
with water, and reserved for Christ, as his peculiar, to baptize with the Holy
Ghost and with fire. Indeed Christ baptized none otherwise; he sent his Spirit
upon the Church in Pentecost and baptized them with fire, the Spirit appearing
like a flame: but he appointed his Apostles to baptize with water, and they did
so, and their successors after them, everywhere and for ever, not expounding,
but obeying the preceptive words of their Lord, which were almost the last that
he spoke upon earth. And I cannot think it needful to prove this to be
necessary by any more Arguments; for the words are so plain that they need no
exposition: and yet if they had been obscure, the universal practice of the
Apostles and the Church for ever is a sufficient declaration of the
Commandment: No Tradition is more universal, no not of Scripture it self; no
words are plainer, no not the Ten Commandments: and if any suspicion can be
superinduced by any jealous or less discerning person, it will need no other
refutation, but to turn his eyes to those lights by which himself fees
Scripture to be the Word of God, and the Commandments to be the declaration of
his Will.

13. But that which will be of greatest concernment in this affair is, to
consider the great benefits are conveyed to us in this Sacrament; for this will
highly conclude, that the Precept was (...) ever, which God so seconds with his
grace and mighty blessings; and the susception of it necessary, because we
cannot be without those excellent things which are the Graces of the Sacrament.

14. First, The first fruit is, That in Baptism we are admitted to the Kingdom
of Christ, presented unto him, consigned with his Sacrament, enter into his
Militia, give up our Understandings and our choice to the obedience of Christ,
and in all senses that we can become his Disciples, witnessing a good
confession, and undertaking a holy life: and therefore in Scripture (...) and
(...) are conjoined in the significations, as they are in the mystery; it is a
giving up our names to Christ, and it is part of the foundation or the first
Principles of the Religion, as appears in S. Paul's Catechism; it is so the
Heb. 6. 1.
first thing, that it is for babes and Neophytes, in which they are
matriculated and adopted into the house of their Father, and taken into the
hands of their Mother. Upon this account Baptism is called in antiquity (...)
janua, porta Gratiae, and primus introitus S. August. (...). 2. (...). 1. de
Cat. (...).
Sanctorum adaeternam Dei and Ecclesiae consuetudinem; The gate of the Church,
the door of Grace, the first entrance of the Saints to an eternal conversation
with God and the Church. Sacramentum initiationis, and intrantium
Christianismum investituram, S. Bernard calls it; The Sacrament of initiation,
and the investiture of them that enter into the Religion. And the person so
entering is called (...) and (...), one of Just. Martyr. Apol. 2.
the Religion, or a Proselyte and Convert, and one added to the number of the
Church, in imitation of that of S. Luke, (...), God added to Acts 2. 47.
the Church those that should be saved; just as the Church does to this day and
for ever, baptizing Infants and Catechuments: (...), they are added to the
Church, that they may be added to the Lord, and the number of the Inhabitants
of Heaven.

15. Secondly, The next step beyond this is Adoption into the Convenant, which
is an (...) Cyril. Hierosol. (...). 2.
immediate consequent of the first Presentation; this being the first act of
man, that the first act of God. And this is called by S. Paul a being 1 Cor.
12. 13.
baptized in one spirit into one body, that is, we are made capable of the
Communion of Saints, the blessings of the faithful, the privileges of the
Church: by this we are, as S. Luke calls it, Acts 13. 48.
(...), ordained, or disposed, put into the order of Eternal Life, being made
members of the mystical Body under Christ our Head.

16. Thirdly, And therefore Baptism is a new birth, by which we enter into the
new world, the new Creation, the blessings and spiritualities of the Kingdom:
and this is the expression which our Savior himself used John 3. 5.Titus 3. 5.
(...) Damasc. l. 4. Orth. fid. c. 10.
Nicodemus, Unless a man be born of Water and the Spirit; and it is by S. Paul
called (...), the laver of Regeneration; for now we begin to be reckoned in new
Census or account, God is become our Father, Christ our elder Brother, the
Spirit the earnest of our Inheritance, the Church our Mother, our food is the
body and blood of our Lord, Faith is our learning, Religion our employment, and
our whole life is spiritual, and Heaven the object of our Hopes, and the mighty
price of our high Calling. And from this time forward we have a new principle
put into us, the Spirit of Grace, which, besides our Soul and body, is a
principle of action, of one nature, and shall with them enter into the portion
of our Inheritance. And therefore the Primitive Christians, who consigned all
their affairs and goods and writings with some marks of their Lord, usually
writing (...), Jesus Christ, the Son of God, our Savior, made it an
abbreviature by writing only the Capitals thus, (...); which the Heathens in
mockery and derision made (...), which signifies a Fish, and they used it for
Christ as a name of reproach: but the Christians owned the name, and turned it
into a pious Metaphor, and were content that they should enjoy their pleasure
in the Acrostich; but upon that occasion Tertullian speaks pertinently to this
Article, Nos pisciculi, sccundum Lib. (...) 1.
(...) nostrum Jesum Christum, in aqua nascimur, Christ, whom you call a Fish,
we knowledge to be our Lord and Savior; and we, if you please, are the little
fishes, for we are born in water, thence we derive our spiritual life. And
because from henceforward we are a new Creation, the Church uses to assign new
relations to the Catechumens, Spiritual Fathers and Susceptors; and, at their
entrance into Baptism, the Christians and Jewish Proselytes did use to cancel
all secular affections to their temporal relatives. Nec quicquam prius (...)
quam contemnere Deos, exuere patriam, parents, Lib 5. (...).
liberos, fratres vilia habere, said Tacitus of the Christians: which was true
in the sense only that Christ said, He that does not hate father or mother for
my sake, is not worthy of me; that is, he that does not hate them praeme,
rather than forsake me, forsake them, is unworthy of me.

17. Fourthly, In Baptism all our sins are pardoned, according to the words of
a Prophet, Ezekiel. 36. 25. (...). Symb. (...).
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness. The Catechumen descends into the Font a Sinner, he arises purified;
he goes down the son of Death, he comes up the son of the Resurrection; he
enters in the son of Folly and prevarication, he returns the son of
Reconciliation; he stoops down the child of Wrath, and ascends the heir of
Mercy; he was the child of the Devil, and now he is the servant and the son of
God. They are the words of Venerable Bede Lib. 1. c. 3. in (...).
concerning this Mystery. And this was ingeniously signified by that Greek
inscription upon a Font, which is so prettily contrived, that the words may be
read after the Greek or after the Hebrew manner, and be exactly the same;
(...), Lord, wash my sin, and not my face only. And so it is intended and
promised: Acts 22. 16.
Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, and call on the Name of the
Lord, said Ananias to Saul; for Ephesians. 5. 26.
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it, (...) with the washing of water in the word, that is, Baptism in
the Christian Religion: and therefore Lib. 5. adv. (...). c. 9. (...) Gr. prove.
Annon (...), quia (...) ad (...)? Origin. (...) 15. in (...) and expiare vix
(...) submersum est, and de (...) cum (...) creditore transactum est. Ambros.
lib. 1. (...) 7. de (...) in Baptismo non (...) in mari (...). AEgyptios non
(...). S. Greg. M. l. 9. (...). 39.
Tertullian calls Baptism lavacrum compendiatum, a compendious Laver, that is,
an entire cleansing the Soul in that one action justly and rightly performed.
In the rehearsal of which Doctrine it was not an unpleasant Etymology that
(...) Sinaita gave of Baptism, (...), in which our sins are thrown off; and
they fall like leeches when they are full of blood and water, or like the
chains from S. Peter's hands at the presence of the Angel. Baptism is (...) an
entire full forgiveness of sins, so that they shall never be called again to
scrutiny. -- Omnia Daemonis armae
His merguntur aquis, quibus ille renascitur Infans Arator l. 2. Hist. Apostol.

Qui captivus erat --


The captivity of the Soul is taken away by the blood of Redemption, and the
fiery darts of the Devil are quenched by these salutary waters; and what the
flames of Hell are expiating or punishing to eternal ages, that is washed off
quickly in the Holy Font, and an eternal debt paid in an instant. For so sure
as the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea, so sure are our Sins washed in
this Holy flood: for this is a Red Sea too; these waters signify the blood of
Christ; These are they that have washed their Robes, and Rev. 7. 14.
made them white in the blood of the Lamb. (...) (...), The Blood of Christ 1
John 1. 7.
cleanses us, the Water cleanses us, the Spirit purifies us; the Blood by the
Spirit, the (...) 22. 16. Tu. 3. 5.
Spirit by the Water, all in Baptism, and in pursuance of that Baptismal state.
(...) John 5. 8.
These Heb 9 14.
three are they that bear record in Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the
Blood, (...) these three agree in one, or are to one purpose; they agree in
Baptism, and in the whole pursuance of the assistances which a Christian needs
all the days of his life. And therefore S. Cyrill calls Baptism (...), the
Antitype of the Passions of Christ: it does preconsign the death of Christ, and
does the infancy of the work of Grace, but not weakly; it brings from death to
life; and though it brings us but to the birth in the New life, yet that is a
greater change than is in all the periods of our growth to manhood, to a
perfect man in Christ Jesus.

18. Fifthly, Baptism does not only pardon our sins, but puts us into a state
of Pardon for the time to come. For Baptism is the beginning of the New life,
and an admission of us into the Evangelical Covenant, which on our parts
consists in a sincere and timely endeavor to glorify God by Faith and
Obedience; and on God's part, he will pardon what is past, assist us for the
future, and not measure us by grains and scruples, or exact our duties by the
measure of an Angel, but by the span of a man's hand. So that by Baptism we are
consigned to the mercies of God and the Graces of the Gospel; that is, that our
Pardon be continued, and our Piety be a state of Repentance. And therefore that
Baptism which in the Nicene Creed we (...) to be for the remission of sins, is
called in the Jerusalem (...) The Baptism of Repentance; that is, it is the
entrance of a new life, the gate to a perpetual change and reformation, all the
way continuing our title to and hopes of forgiveness of sins. And this
excellency is clearly recorded by S. Paul; (...). 3. 4, 5.
The kindness and love of God our Savior toward man has appeared, Not by
works of righteousness which we have done: that is the formality of the
Gospel Covenant, not to be exacted by the strict measures of the Law: but
according to his mercy he saved us, that is, by gentleness and remissions, by
pitying and pardoning us, by relieving and supporting us, because he remembers
that we are but dust; and all this mercy we are admitted to, and is conveyed to
us, (...), by the laver of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost.
And this plain evident Doctrine was observed, explicated and urged against the
Messalians, who said that Baptism was like a razor, that cuts away all the sins
that were past, or presently adhering, but not the sins of our future life:
(...). Theodor. (...). de div. (...). cap. de Bapt.
This Sacrament promises more and greater things; It is the earnest of future
good things, the type of the Resurrection, the communication of the Lord's
Passion, the partaking of his Resurrection, the robe of Righteousness, the
garment of Gladness, the vestment of Light, or rather Light it self. And for
this reason it is that Baptism is not to be repeated, because it does at once
all that it can do at an hundred times: for it admits us to the condition of
Repentance and Evangelical mercy, to a state of Pardon for our infirmities and
sins, which we timely and effectually leave; and this is a thing that can be
done but once, as a man can begin but once; he that has once entered in at this
gate of Life is always in possibility of Pardon, if he be in a possibility of
working and doing after the manner of a man that which he has promised to the
Son of God. And this was expressly delivered and observed by S. Austin: Lib. de
(...) c. 23. and (...). 124. in Joan.
That which the Apostle says, Cleansing him with the washing of water in the
word, is to be understood, that in the same Laver of Regeneration and word of
Sanctification all the evils of the regenerate are cleansed and healed; not
only the sins that are past, which are all now remitted in Baptism, but also
those that are contracted afterward by humane ignorance and infirmity: not
that Baptism be repeated as often as we sin, (...). 13. p. 487.
but because by this which is once administered is brought to pass that pardon
of all sins, not only of those that are past, but also those which will be
committed afterward, is obtained. The Messalians denied this, and it was part
of their Heresy in the undervaluing of Baptism; and for it they are most
excellently confuted by Isidore Pelusiot, in his third Book, 195 Epistle to the
Count Hermin, whither I refer the Reader.

19. In proportion to this Doctrine it is that the Holy Scripture calls upon us
to live a holy life, in pursuance of this grace of Baptism. And S. Paul recalls
the lapsed Galatians to their Covenant, and the grace of God stipulated in
Baptism: Ye are all Gal. 3. 26.
children of God by faith in Jesus Christ; that is, heirs of the promise, and
Abraham's Verse 29.
seed; that promise which cannot be disannulled, increased or diminished, but
is the same to us as it was to Abraham, the same before the Law and after.
Therefore do not you hope to be (...) by the Law, for you are entered into the
Covenant of Faith, and are to be justified thereby. This is all your hope, by
this you must stand for ever, or you cannot stand at all; but by this you may:
for you are God's children by Faith, that is, not by the Law, or the Covenant
of Works. And that you may remember whence you are going, and return again, he
proves that they are the Children of God by (...) in Jesus Christ, because they
have been baptized into Christ, and so put on Christ. Verse 27.
This makes you Children, and such as are to be saved by Faith, that is, a
Covenant, not of Works, but of Pardon in Jesus Christ, the Author and
Establisher of this Covenant. For this is the Covenant made in Baptism, that
being justified by his grace, we shall be heirs of life eternal: for by grace,
that is, by favor, remission and forgiveness in Jesus Christ, ye are saved.
This is the only way that we have of being justified, and this must remain as
long as we are in hopes of Heaven; for besides this we have no hopes: and all
this is stipulated and consigned in Baptism, and is of force after our (...)
into sin and risings again. In pursuance of this the same Apostle declares,
that the several states of sin are so many recessions from the state of
Baptismal grace; and if we arrive to the direct Apostasy, and renouncing of or
a contradiction to the state of Baptism, we are then unpardonable, because we
are fallen from our state of Pardon. This S. Paul conditions most strictly in
his Epistle to the Hebrews; This is the Covenant I will Heb. 10. 16, etc.
make in those days: I will put my Laws in their hearts; And their sins and
iniquities will I remember no more. Now where remission of these is, there is
no more offering for sin; that is, our sins are so pardoned that we need no
more oblation, we are then made partakers of the death of Christ; which we
afterward renew in memory and Eucharist and representment. But the great work
is done in Baptism; for so it follows, Having boldness to (...) (...) 19 etc.
into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus by a new and living way, that is, by
the veil of his flesh, his Incarnation. But how do we enter into this? Baptism
is the door, and the ground of this confidence for ever: for so he adds, Let us
draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. This
is the consignation of this blessed state, and the gate to all this mercy. Let
us hold fast the profession of our faith, that is, the Religion of a Christian,
the Faith into which we were baptized; for that is the Faith that justifies and
saves us: Let us therefore (...). (...). ad (...).
hold fast this profession of this Faith, and do all the intermedial works in
order to the conservation of it such as are assembling in the Communion of
Saints, (the use of the Word (...).
and Sacrament is included in the Precept) mutual Exhortation, good Example,
and the like: For if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of
the truth, that is, if we sin against the profession of this Faith, and hold it
not fast, but let the Faith and the profession go wilfully, (which afterward
he calls a treading under foot the Son of God, accounting the blood of the
Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and a doing (...) 29.
despite to the spirit of grace, viz. which moved upon those waters, and did
illuminate him in Baptism) if we do this, there is no more sacrifice for sins,
no more deaths of Christ into which you may be baptized; that is, you are
fallen from the state of Pardon and Repentance into which you were admitted in
Baptism, and in which you continue so long as you have not quitted your
baptismal Rights and the whole Covenant. Contrary to this is that which S.
Peter calls making our Calling and Election sure, that is, a doing all that
which may continue us in our state of Baptism and the grace of the Covenant.
And between these two states, of absolute Apostasy from, and entirely adhering
to and securing, this state of Calling and Election, are all the intermedial
sins, and being overtaken in single faults, or declining toward vicious
habits, which in their several proportions are degrees of danger and
insecurity; which S. Peter calls (...), a forgetting our Baptism or
purification from our sins. And in this sense are 2 Pet. 1. 9. (...) Par. 2.
(...). 9. of Repentance, (...). 9. ad 31.
those words, The just shall live by Faith, that is, by that profession which
they made in Baptism; from which if they swerve not, they shall be supported in
their spiritual life. It is a Grace which, by virtue of the Covenant consigned
in Baptism, does like a center (...) to all the periods and portions of our
life; our whole life, all the periods of our succeeding hopes are kept alive by
this. This consideration is of great use, besides many other things, to reprove
the folly of those who in the Primitive Church deferred their Baptism till
their deathbed; because Baptism is a Laver of Sanctification, and drowns all
our sins, and buries them in the grave of our Lord, they thought they might sin
securely upon the stock of an after-Baptism; for unless they were strangely
prevented by a sudden accident, a deathbed Baptism they thought would secure
their condition: but early some of them durst not take it, much less in the
beginning of their years, that they might at least gain impunity for their
follies and heats of their youth. Baptism has influence into the pardon of all
our sins committed in all the days of our folly and infirmity; and so long as
we have not been baptized, so long we are out of the state of Pardon: and
therefore an early Baptism is not to be avoided upon this mistaken fancy and
plot upon Heaven; it is the greater security toward the pardon of our sins, if
we have taken it in the beginning of our days.

20. Fifthly, The next benefit of Baptism, which is also a verification of
this, is a Sanctification of the baptized person by the Spirit of Grace.
Sanctus in hunc coelo descendit Spiritus amnem,
Coelestique sacras font maritat aquas: Paul. Ep. 12. ad S^enum

Concipit unda Deum, sanctamque liquoribus almis
Edit ab aeterno semine progeniem.
The Holy Ghost descends upon the waters of Baptism, and makes them prolifical,
apt to produce children unto God: and therefore S. Leo compares the Font of
Baptism to the Womb of the Blessed Virgin when it was replenished with the Holy
Spirit. And this is the Baptism of our dearest Lord: his Ministers baptize with
Water, our Lord at the same time verifies their Ministry with giving the Holy
Spirit. They are joined together by S. Paul, We are by one Spirit baptized into
one body; that is, admitted into 1 Cor. 12. 13.
the Church by baptism of Water and the Spirit. This is that which our Blessed
Lord calls a being born of Water and of the Spirit; by Water we are
sacramentally dead and (...). 5.
buried, by the Spirit we are made alive. But because these are mysterious
expressions, S. (...). de (...). S. c. 15.
and, according to the style of Scripture, high and secret in spiritual
significations, therefore, that we may understand what these things signify,
we must consider it by its real effects, and what it produces upon the Soul of
a man.

21. First, It is the suppletory of original Righteousness, by which Adam was
at first gracious with God, and which he lost by his prevarication. It was in
him a principle of Wisdom and Obedience, a relation between God and himself, a
title to the extraordinary mercies of God, and a state of Friendship: When he
fell, he was discomposed in all, the links of the golden chain and blessed
relation were broken; and it so continued in the whole life of Man, which was
stained with the evils of this folly and the consequent mischiefs: and
therefore when we began the world again, entering into the Articles of a new
life, God gave us his Spirit to be an instrument of our becoming gracious
persons, and of being in a condition of obtaining that supernatural End which
God at first designed to us. And therefore as our Baptism is a separation of us
from unbelieving people; so the descent of the Holy Spirit upon us in our
Baptism is a consigning or marking us for God, as the Sheep of his pasture, as
the Soldiers of his Army, as the Servants of his household: we are so separated
from the world, that we are appropriated to God, so that God expects of us Duty
and Obedience; and all Sins are acts of Rebellion and Undutifulness. Of this
nature was the sanctification of Jeremy and John the Baptist from their mothers
womb; that is, God took them to his own service by an early designation, and
his Spirit marked them to a holy Ministry. To this also relates that of S.
Paul, whom God by a decree separated from his mother's womb to the Ministry of
the Gospel: the (...) did antedate the act of the Spirit, which did not descend
upon him until the day of his Baptism. What these persons were in order to
exterior Ministeries, that all the faithful are in order to Faith and
Obedience, consigned in Baptism by the Spirit of God to a perpetual relation to
God, in a continual service and title to his Promises. And in this sense the
Spirit of God is called (...), 2 Cor. 1. 22.
a Seal, (...). 1. 13.
In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of
Promise: Ephesians. 4. 30.
(...) The Water washes the body, John 6. 27.
and the Spirit seals the Soul, viz. to a participation of those Promises which
he has S. (...). Hieros (...). 3.
made, and to which we receive a title by our Baptism.

22. Secondly, The second effect of the Spirit is Light or Illumination; that
is, the holy Spirit becomes unto us the Author of holy thoughts and firm
persuasions, and sets to his seal that the Word of God is true, into the belief
of which we are then baptized, and makes Faith to be a Grace, and the
Understanding resigned, and the Will confident, and the Assent stronger than
the premises, and the Propositions to be believed, because they are beloved;
and we are taught the ways of Godliness after a new manner, that is, we are
made to perceive the Secrets of the Kingdom, and to love Religion, and to long
for Heaven and heavenly things, and to despise the World, and to have new
resolutions, and new perceptions, and new delicacies, in order to the
establishment of Faith, and its increments and perseverance. (...) S. (...). in
(...). 28.
God sits in the Soul when it is illuminated in (...), as if he sat in his
Throne; that is, he rules by a firm persuasion, and entire principles of
Obedience. And therefore Baptism is called in Scripture (...) and the baptized
(...); illuminated; Call to mind the former days, in (...). 10. 32.
which you were illuminated: and the same phrase is in the (...) 4.
6. to the Hebrews, where the parallel places expound each other. For that
which S. Paul calls (...), (...) illuminated, he calls after, (...), a
receiving the knowledge of the truth: and that you may perceive this to be
wholly meant of Baptism, the (...) expresses it still by Synonyma's, Tasting of
the heavenly gift, and made partakers (...). 6. 4.
of the Holy Ghost, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and washed
in our bodies with pure water; all which also are a syllabus or collection of
the several effects of the graces bestowed in Baptism. But we are now
instancing in that which relates most properly to the Understanding, in which
respect the Holy Spirit also is called Anointing 1 John 2. 20.
or Unction; and the mystery is explicated by S. John, The Anointing which ye
have received (...) 27.
of him abides in you; and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same
Anointing teaches you of all things.

23. Thirdly, The Holy Spirit descends upon us in Baptism, to become the
principle of a 1 John 3. 9.
new life, to become a holy seed, springing up to Holiness, and is called by S.
John (...), the (...) of God; and the purpose of it we are taught by him,
Whosoever is (...) of God (that is, he that is regenerated and entered into this
New birth) does not (...) sin; for his seed remains in him, and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God. The Spirit of God is the Spirit of life; and
now that he by the Spirit is born anew, he has in him that principle which, if
it be cherished, will grow up to life, to life eternal. And this is the Spirit
of Sanctification, the victory over the World, the deletery of Concupiscence,
the life of the Soul, and the perpetual principle of Grace sown in our spirits
in the day of our Adoption to be the sons of God, and members of Christ's body.
But take this Mystery in the words of S. Basil. There are two Ends proposed in
Baptism; (...). 13.
to wit, to abolish the body of Sin, that we may no more bring forth fruit unto
death; and to live in the Spirit, and to have our fruit to Sanctification. The
Water represents the image of death, receiving the body in its bosom, as in a
Sepulcher: but the quickening Spirit sends upon us a vigorous (...) power or
(...), even from the beginning renewing our Souls from the death of sin unto
life: For as our Mortification is (...) in the water, so the Spirit works life
in us. To this purpose is the discourse of S. Paul, having largely discoursed
of our being baptized into the death of (...), he adds this as the Corollary of
all, Romans 6. 7.
He that is (...) Plutarch.
dead is freed from sin; that is, being mortified and ib. (...).
buried in the waters of Baptism, we have a new life of Righteousness put into
us, we are quitted from the dominion of Sin, and are (...). 5.
planted together in the likeness of Christ's Resurrection, (...). 6.
that henceforth we should not serve sin. Vide Disc 9. of Repentance, n. 46.


24. Fourthly, But all these intermedial Blessings tend to a glorious
Conclusion, for Baptism does also consign us to a holy Resurrection. It takes
the sting of death from us, by burying us together with Christ; and takes (...)
Sin, which is the sting of death, and then we shall be partakers of a blessed
Resurrection. This we are taught by S. Paul, (...) ye not that so many of us as
were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his (...). 6. 3, 5.
Death? For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his Death, we
shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection. That declares the real event
in its due season. But because Baptism consigns it, and admits us to a title to
it, we are said with S. Paul, to be risen with Christ in Baptism; Buried with
him in Baptism, wherein also you Col. 2. 12.
are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, which has
raised him from the dead. Which expression I desire to be remembered, that by it
we may better understand those other sayings of the Apostle, of putting on
Christ in Baptism, putting on the new man, etc. for these only signify (...),
or the design on God's part, and the endeavor and duty on Man's: we are then
consigned to our Duty, and to our Reward; we undertake one, and have a title to
the other. And though men of ripeness and Reason enter instantly into their
portion of Work, and have present use of the assistances, and something of
their Reward in hand; yet we cannot conclude, that those that cannot do it
(...) are not baptized rightly, because they are not in capacity to put on the
New man in Righteousness, that is, in an actual holy life; for they may put on
the New man in Baptism, just as they are risen with Christ: which because it
may be done by Faith before it is done in real event, and it may be done by
Sacrament and design before it be done by a proper Faith; so also may our
putting on the New man be; it is done sacramentally, and that part which is
wholly the work of God does only antedate the work of man, which is to succeed
in its due time, and is after the (...) of preventing grace. But this is by the
bye. In order to the present Article, Baptism is by (...) called (...), a
participation of the Lord's Resurrection.

25. Fifthly and lastly, By Baptism we are saved: that is, we are brought from
death to life (...), and that is the first Resurrection; and we are brought
from death to life hereafter, by virtue of the Covenant of the state of Grace
into which in Baptism we enter, and are preserved from the second Death, and
receive a glorious and an eternal life. He that believes and is baptized shall
be saved, said our Blessed Savior; and, According (...) 16. 16. (...). 3. 5.
to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration and renowing of the
Holy Ghost.

26. After these great Blessings so plainly testified in Scripture and the
Doctrine of the Primitive Church, which are regularly consigned and bestowed in
Baptism, I shall less need to descend to temporal Blessings, or rare
contingencies, or miraculous events, or probable notices of things less
certain. Of this nature are those Stories recorded in the Writings of the
Church, that Constantine was cured of a Leprosy in Baptism; Niceph. 1. 7. c.
35. (...). 5. (...). 6. (...), lib. 7. (...). 7.
Theodosius recovered of his disease, being baptized by the Bishop of
Thessalonica; and a paralytick Jew was cured as soon as he became a Christian,
and was baptized by Atticus of CP. and Bishop Arnulph baptizing a Leper also
cured him, said Vincentius Bellovacensis. It is more considerable which is
generally and piously believed by very many eminent persons in the Church, that
at our Baptism God assigns an Angel-Guardian, (for then the Catechumen, being
made a Servant and a Brother to the Lord of Angels, is sure not to want the
aids of them who pitch their tents round about them that Psalm. 34. 7.
fear the Lord) and that this guard and ministry is then appointed when
themselves are admitted into the inheritance of the Promises: and their title
to Salvation is hugely agreeable to the words of S. Paul, Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister Heb. 1. 14.
to them who shall be heirs of Salvation? where it appears, that the title to
the inheritance is the title to this ministry, and therefore must begin and
end together. But I insist not on this, though it seems to me hugely probable.
All these Blessings put into one Syllabus have given to Baptism many honorable
appellatives in Scripture and other Basil. Theod. Epiphan. Nazianz. Col. 2.
Divine Writers, calling it (...) 2. Cyril. (...). Dionyl.
Sacramentum (...) and (...) salutis: A New birth, a Regeneration, a
Renovation, a Chariot Areop. Aug. (...). 2. c. 13. contra Crescon. Gram.
carrying us to God, the great Circumcision, a Circumcision made without hands,
the Key of the Kingdom, the Paranymph of the Kingdom, the Earnest of our
inheritance, the Answer of a good Conscience, the Robe of light, the Sacrament
of a new life and of eternal Salvation. (...). This is celestial water,
springing from the sides of the Rock upon which the Church was built, when the
Rock was smitten with the Rod of God.

27. It remains now that we enquire what concerns our Duty, and in what persons
or in what dispositions Baptism produces all these glorious effects: for the
Sacraments of the Church work in the virtue of Christ, but yet only upon such
as are servants of Christ, and hinder not the work of the Spirit of Grace. For
the water of the Font and the Spirit of the Sacrament are indeed to wash away
our Sins, and to purify our Souls; but not unless we have a mind to be
purified. The Sacrament works pardon for them that hate their sin, and procures
Grace for them that love it. They that are guilty of sins must repent of them,
and renounce them, and they must make a profession of the Faith of Christ, and
give or be given up to the obedience of Christ; and then they are rightly
disposed. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, says Christ; and
S. Peter called (...) 16. 16.
out to the whole assembly, Repent, and be baptized every one of you.
Concerning this Acts 2. 38.
Justin Martyr gives the same account of the Faith and practice of the Church;
(...) (...).
etc. Whosoever are persuaded and believe those things to be true which are
delivered and spoken by us, and undertake to live accordingly, they are
commanded to fast and pray, and to ask of God remission for their former sins,
we also praying together with them, and fasting. Then they are brought to us
where water is, and are regenerated in the same manner of Regeneration by which
we our selves are regenerated. For in Baptism S. Peter observes there are two
parts, the Body and the Spirit: that is (...), the putting away the (...) 1
(...). 3. (...).
of the flesh, that is the material washing; and this is Baptism no otherwise
than a dead corpse is a man: the other is (...), the answer of a good conscience
toward God, that is, the conversion of the Soul to God; that is the effective
disposition in which Baptism does save us. And in the same sense are those
sayings of the Primitive Doctors to be understood; Anima non lavatione, sed
(...) sancitur, The Soul is not healed by washing, viz. alone, but by the
answer, the (...) (...) Res. (...).
in S. Peter, the correspondent of our part of the Covenant: sor that is the
perfect (...) of this unusual expression. And the effect is attributed to this,
and denied to the other, when they are distinguished. So Justin Martyr affirms;
The only Baptism Ad (...). Jul.
that can heal us is Kepentance, and the knowledge of God. For what need is
there of that Baptism that can only (...) the flesh and the body? Be washed in
your flesh from wrath and (...), from envy and hatred; and behold the body is
pure. And Clemens Alexandrinus upon that Proverbial saying, (...), Be not pure
in the laver, but in the mind, adds, I suppose that an exact and a firm
Repentance is a sufficient purification to a man; if judging and considering
our selves for the facts we have done before, we proceed to that which is
before us, considering that which follows, and cleansing or washing our mind
from sensual affections and from former sins. Just as we use to deny the effect
to the instrumental cause, and attribute it to the principal, in the manner of
speaking, when our purpose is to affirm this to be the principal, and of chief
(...). So we say, It is not the good Lute, but the skilful hand, that makes the
music: It is not the Body, but the Soul, that is the Man: and yet he is not
the man without both. For Baptism is but the material part in the Sacrament, it
is the Spirit that gives life; whose work is Faith and Repentance begun by
himself without the Sacrament, and consigned in the Sacrament, and actuated and
increased in the cooperation of our whole life. And therefore Baptism is called
in the Jerusalem Creed (...), one Baptism of Repentance for the remission of
sins: and by Justin Martyr, (...), (...).
The Baptism of Repentance and the knowledge of God, which was made for the
sins of the people of God. He explains himself a little after, (...), Baptism
that can only cleanse them that are penitent. In Sacrament is (...) Fides
credentium and professio, quae apud Act a conficitur Angelorum, (...) miscentur
(...) and spiritualia semina; ut sancto germine nova possit renascentium
indoles procreari, ut dum Trinitas cum Fide concordat, qui natus fuerit seculo
renascatur spiritualiter Deo. Sic fit hominum Pater Deus, sancta fit Matter
Ecclesia, said Optatus: The Faith and Profession of the Believers meets with
the ever-blessed Trinity, (...). 2. adv. Parm.
and is recorded in the Register of Angels, where heavenly and spiritual seeds
are mingled; that from so holy a Spring may be produced a new nature of the
Regeneration, that while the Trinity ( viz. that is invocated upon the
baptized) meets with the Faith of the Catechumen, he that was born to the world
may be born spiritually to God. So God is made a Father to the man, and the
holy Church a Mother. Faith and Repentance stripped the Old man naked, and make
him fit for Baptism; and then the Holy Spirit moving upon the waters cleanses
the Soul, and makes it to put on the New man, who grows up to perfection and a
spiritual life, to a life of glory, by our verification of our undertaking in
Baptism on our part, and the Graces of the Spirit on the other. For the waters
pierce no farther than the skin, till the person puts off his affection to the
sin that he has contracted; and then he may say, Aquae intraverunt (...) ad
animam meam, The waters are entered even unto my Soul, to purify and cleanse
Clem. Alex, lib. 1. (...). c. 6.
it, by the washing of water, and the renewing by the Holy Spirit. The sum is
this; (...) Being baptized we are illuminated, being illuminated we are adopted
to the inheritance of sons, being adopted we are promoted toward perfection,
and being perfected we are made immortal. Quisquis in hos fontes vir venerit,
exeat inde
Semideus, tactis cito nobilitetur in undis.


28. This is the whole Doctrine of Baptism, as it is in it self considered,
without relation to rare Circumstances or accidental cases: and it will also
serve to the right understanding of the reasons why the Church of God has in
all Ages baptized all persons that were within her power, for whom the Church
could stipulate that they were or might be relatives of Christ, sons of God,
heirs of the Promises, and partners of the Covenant, and such as did not hinder
the work of Baptism upon their Souls. And such were not only persons of age and
choice, but the Infants of Christian Parents. For the understanding and
verifying of which truth, I shall only need to apply the parts of the former
Discourse to their particular case, premising first these Propositions.

Of Baptizing Infants.
Part II.
1. BAPTISM is the Key in Christ's hand, and therefore opens as he opens, and
shuts by his rule: and as Christ himself did not do all his Blessings and
effects unto every one, but gave to every one as they had need; so does
Baptism. Christ did not cure all men's eyes, but them only that were blind;
Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners, to (...): that is, They
that lived in the fear of God, according to the Covenant in which they were
debtors, were indeed improved and promoted higher by Christ, but not called to
that Repentance to which he called the vicious Gentiles, and the Adulterous
persons among the Jews, and the hypocritical Pharisees. There are some so
innocent that they need no repentance, (says the Scripture;) meaning, that
though they do need Contrition for their single acts of sin, yet they are
within the state of Grace, and need not Repentance as it is a Conversion of the
whole man. And so it is in Baptism, which does all its effects upon them that
need them all, and some upon them that need but some: and therefore as it
pardons sins to them that have committed them, and do repent and believe; so to
the others, who have not committed them, it does all the work which is done to
the others above or besides that Pardon.

2. Secondly, When the ordinary effect of a Sacrament is done already by some
other efficiency or instrument, yet the Sacrament is still as obligatory as
before, not for so many reasons or necessities, but for the same Commandment.
Baptism is the first ordinary Current in which the Spirit moves and descends
upon us; and where God's Spirit is, they are the Sons of God, for Christ's
Spirit descends upon none but them that are his: and yet Cornelius, who had
received the holy Spirit, and was heard by God, Acts 10. (...).
and visited by an Angel, and accepted in his Alms and Fastings and Prayers,
was tied to the susception of Baptism. To which may be added. That the
receiving the effects of Baptism beforehand was used as an argument the rather
to administer Baptism. The effect of which consideration is this, That Baptism
and its effect may be separated, and do not always go in conjunction; the
effect may be before, and therefore much rather may it be after its susception;
the Sacrament operating in the virtue of Christ, even Aug. de moribus (...).
as the Spirit shall move: according to that saying of S. Austin, Sacrosancto
lavacro inchoata Cath. l. 1. c. 35. Bern. Sermon. (...) Dom.
innovatio novi hominis perficiendo perficitur in aliis citius, in aliis
taraius; and S. Bernard, Lavari quidem cito possumus, sed ad sanandum multa
curatione opus est. The work of Regeneration, that is begun in the ministry of
Baptism, is perfected in some sooner, in some later: We may soon be washed, but
to be healed is a work of a long cure.

3. Thirdly, The Dispositions which are required to the ordinary susception of
Baptism are not necessary to the efficacy, or required to the nature of the
Sacrament, but accidentally, and because of the superinduced necessities of
some men; and therefore the Conditions are not regularly to be required. But in
those accidents it was necessary for a Gentile Proselyte to repent of his sins,
and to believe in Moses's Law, before he could be circumcised: but Abraham was
not tied to the same Conditions, but only to Faith in God; but Isaac was not
tied to so much; and Circumcision was not of Moses, but of the Fathers: and yet
after the sanction of Moses's Law, men were tied to conditions, which were then
made necessary to them that entered into the Covenant, but not necessary to the
nature of the Covenant it self. And so it is in the susception of Baptism: If a
sinner enters into the Font, it is necessary he be stripped of those appendages
which himself sewed upon his Nature, and then Repentance is a necessary
disposition: if his Understanding has been a stranger to Religion, polluted
with evil Principles and a false Religion, it is necessary he have an actual
Faith, that he be given in his Understanding up to the obedience of Christ. And
the reason of this is plain, Because in these persons there is a disposition
contrary to the state and effects of Baptism; and therefore they must be taken
off by their contraries, Faith and Repentance, that they may be reduced to the
state of pure Receptives. And this is the sense of those words of our Blessed
Savior, Unless ye become like one of these little ones, ye shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, Ye cannot be admitted into the
Gospel Covenant, unless all your contrarieties and impediments be taken from
you, and you be as apt as children to receive the new immissions from Heaven.
And this Proposition relies upon a great Example, and a certain Reason. The
Example is our Blessed Savior, who was (...) debtor, he had committed no sin,
and needed no Repentance; he needed not to be saved by Faith, for of Faith he
was the Author and Finisher, and the great object, and its perfection and
reward: and yet he was baptized by the Baptism of John, the Baptism of
Repentance. And therefore it is certain that Repentance and Faith are not
necessary to the susception of Baptism, but necessary to some persons that are
baptized. For it is necessary we should much consider the difference. If the
Sacrament by any person may be justly received in whom such Dispositions are
not to be sound, then the Dispositions are not necessary or intrinsecal to the
susception of the Sacrament; and yet some persons coming to this Sacrament may
have such necessities of their own as will make the Sacrament ineffectual
without such Dispositions. These I call necessary to the person, but not to the
Sacrament; that is, necessary to all such, but not necessary to all absolutely.
And Faith is necessary sometimes where Repentance is not, sometimes Repentance
and Faith together, and sometimes otherwise. When Philip baptized the Eunuch,
he only required of him to believe, not to repent. But S. Peter, Acts 8. 37.
when he preached to the Jews and converted them, only required Repentance;
Acts 2. 38.
which although it in their case implied Faith, yet there was explicit
stipulation for it: Acts 3. 15.
they had crucified the Lord of life, and if they would come to God by Baptism,
they must renounce their sin; that was all was then stood upon. It is as the
case is, or as the persons have superinduced necessities upon themselves. In
Children the case is evident as to the one part, which is equally required, I
mean, Repentance; the not doing of which cannot prejudice them as to the
susception of Baptism, because they having done no evil are not bound to
repent; and to repent is as necessary to the susception of Baptism as Faith is:
But this shows that they are accidentally necessary, that is, not absolutely,
not to all, not to Insants: and if they may be excused from one duty which is
indispensably necessary to Baptism, why they may not from the other, is a
secret which will not be found out by these whom it concerns to believe it.

4. And therefore when our Blessed Lord made a stipulation and express
Commandment for Faith, with the greatest annexed penalty to them that had it
not, He that believes not shall be damned, the proposition is not to be
verified or understood as relative to every period of time; for then no man
could be converted from Insidelity to the Christian Faith, and from the power
of the Devil to the Kingdom of Christ, but his present Infidelity shall be his
final ruin. It is not therefore (...), but (...), not a Sentence, but a (...),
a Prediction and Intermination. It is not like that saying, God is true, and
every man a lier, and, Every good and every perfect gift is from above; for
these are true in every instant, without reference to circumstances: but, He
that believes not shall be damned, is a Prediction, or that which in Rhetoric
is called (...), or a Use, because this is the affirmation of that which
usually or frequently comes to pass; such as this, He that strikes with the
sword shall perish by the sword; He that robs a Church shall be like a wheel,
of a vertiginous and unstable estate; He that loves wine and oil shall not be
rich: and therefore it is a declaration of that which is universally or
commonly true; but not so, that in what instant soever a man is not a believer,
in that instant it is true to say he is damned; for some are called the third,
some the sixth, some the ninth hour, and they that come in, being first called,
at the eleventh hour, shall have their reward: so that this sentence stands
true at the day and the judgment of the Lord, not at the judgment or day of
man. And in the same necessity as Faith stands to Salvation, in the same it
stands to Baptism, that is, to be measured by the whole latitude of its extent.
Our Baptism shall no more do all its intention, unless Faith supervene, than a
man is in possibility of being saved without Faith; it must come in its due
time, but is not indispensably necessary in all instances and periods. Baptism
is the seal of our Election and adoption; and as Election is brought to effect
by Faith and its consequents, so is Baptism: but to neither is Faith necessary
as to its beginning and first entrance. To which also I add this Consideration,
That actual Faith is necessary, not to the susception, but to the consequent
effects of Baptism, appears, because the Church, and particularly the Apostles,
did baptize some persons who had not Faith, but were Hypocrites; such as were
Simon Magus, Alexander the Copper-smith, Demas and Diotrephes; and such was
Judas when he was baptized, and such were the Gnostick Teachers. For the effect
depends upon God, who knows the heart, but the outward susception depends upon
them who do not know it: which is a certain argument, That the same Faith which
is necessary to the effect of the Sacrament is not necessary to its susception;
and if it can be administered to Hypocrites, much more to Infants; if to those
who really hinder the effect, much rather to them that hinder not. And if it be
objected, that the Church does not know but the Pretenders have Faith, but she
knows Infants have not: I reply, that the Church does not know but the
Pretenders hinder the effect, and are contrary to the grace of the Sacrament,
but she knows that Infants do not: The first possibly may receive the Grace,
the other cannot hinder it.

5. But besides these things it is considerable, that, when it is required,
persons have Faith: It is true, they that require Baptism should give a reason
why they do; so it was in the case of the Eunuch baptized by Philip: but this
is not to be required of others that do not ask it, and yet they may be of the
Church, and of the Faith; for by Faith is also understood the Christian
Religion, and the Christian Faith is the Christian Religion, and of this a man
may be though he make no confession of his Faith, as a man may be of the
Church, and yet not be of the number of God's secret ones; and to this more is
required than to that: to the first it is sufficient that he be admitted by a
Sacrament or a Ceremony; which is infallibly certain, because Hypocrites and
wicked people are in the visible Communion of the Church, and are reckoned as
members of it, and yet to them there was nothing done but the Ceremony
administered; and therefore when that is done to Insants, they also are to be
reckoned in the ChurchCommunion. And indeed, in the examples of Scripture, we
find more inserted into the number of God's family by outward Ceremony than by
the inward Grace. Of this number were all those who were circumcised the eighth
day, who were admitted thither, as the woman's daughter was cured in the
Gospel, by the Faith of their mother, their natural parents, or their
spiritual; to whose Faith it is as certain God will take heed, as to their
Faith who brought one to Christ who could not come himself, the poor
Paralytick; for when Christ saw their faith, he cured their friend: and yet it
is to be observed, that Christ did use to exact faith, actual faith, of them
that came to him to be cured, [ According to your faith be it unto you.] The
case is equal in its whole kind. Matthew. 9. 29.
And it is considerable what Christ says to the poor man that came in behalf
of his son, All things are possible to him that believes: it is possible for a
son to receive the blessing Mark 9. 23.
and benefit of his father's faith; and it was so in his case, and is possible
to any; for to Faith all things are possible. And as to the event of things it
is evident in the story of the Gospel, that the faith of their relatives was
equally effective to children and friends or servants, absent or sick, as the
faith of the interested person was to himself: as appears beyond all exception
in the case of the friends of the Paralytick, let down with cords through the
tiles; of the Centurion, in behalf of his servant; of the nobleman, for his son
sick at Capernaum; of the (...), for her daughter: and Christ required Matthew.
8. 13.
says of no sick man, but of Matthew. 9. 28.
him that presented himself to him, and desired for himself John 4. 50.
that he might be cured, as it was in the case of the blind man. Though they
could not believe, yet Christ required belief of them that came to him on their
behalf. And why then it may not be so, or is not so, in the case of Infants
Baptism, I confess it is past my skill to conjecture. The Reason on which this
farther relies is contained in the next Proposition.

6. Fourthly, No disposition or act of man can deserve the first Grace, or the
grace of Pardon: for so long as a man is unpardoned, he is an enemy to God, and
as a dead person, and, unless he be prevented by the grace of God, cannot do a
single act in order to his pardon and restitution; so that the first work which
God does upon a man is so wholly his own, that the man has nothing in it, but
to entertain it, that is, not to hinder the work of God upon him. And this is
done in them that have in them nothing that can hinder the work of Grace, or in
them who remove the hindrances. Of the latter sort are all Sinners, who have
lived in a state contrary to God; of the first are they who are prevented by
the grace of God before they can choose, that is, little Children, and those
that become like unto little Children. So that Faith and Repentance are not
necessary at first to the reception of the first grace, but by accident. If Sin
have drawn curtains, and put bars and coverings to the windows, these must be
taken away; and that is done by Faith and Repentance: but if the windows be not
shut, so that the light can pass through them, the eye of Heaven will pass in
and dwell there. No man can come unto me, unless my Father draw him: that is,
The first access to Christ is nothing of our own, but wholly of God; and it is
as in our creation, in John 6. 44.
which we have an obediential capacity, but cooperate not; only if we be
contrary to the work of Grace, that contrariety must be taken off, else there
is no necessity. And if all men, according to Christ's saying, must receive the
Kingdom of God as little children, Mark 10. 15.
it is certain, little children do receive it; they receive it as all men
ought, that is, without any impediment or obstruction, without anything within
that is contrary to that state.

7. Fifthly, Baptism is not to be estimated as one act, transient and effective
to single purposes; but it is an entrance to a conjugation and a state of
Blessings. All our life is to be transacted by the measures of the
Gospel Covenant, and that Covenant is consigned by Baptism, there we have our
title and adoption to it; and the grace that is then given to us is like a
piece of Leven put into a lump of dough, and Faith and Repentance do in all the
periods of our life put it into fermentation and activity. Then the seed of God
is put into the ground of our hearts, and Repentance waters it, and Faith makes
it subactum solum, the ground and surrows apt to produce fruits: and therefore
Faith and Repentance are necessary to the effect of Baptism, not to its
susception; that is, necessary to all those parts of life in which Baptism does
operate, not to the first sanction or entering into the Covenant. The seed may
lie long in the ground, and produce fruits in its due season, if it be
refreshed with the former and the later rain, that is, the Repentance that
first changes the state, and converts the man, and afterward returns him to
his title, and recalls him from his wanderings, and keeps him in the state of
Grace, and within the limits of the Covenant: and all the way Faith gives
efficacy and acceptance to this Repentance, that is, continues our title to
the Promise of not having Righteousness exacted by the measures of the Law, but
by the Covenant and promise of Grace, into which we entered in Baptism, and walk
in the same all the days of our life.

8. Sixthly, The Holy Spirit which descends upon the waters of Baptism does not
instantly produce its effects in the Soul of the baptized; and when he does, it
is irregularly, and as he pleases. The Spirit blows where it lists, and no
man knows whence it comes, nor whither it goes: and the Catechumen is
admitted into the Kingdom, yet the Kingdom of God comes not with observation:
and this saying of our Blessed Savior (...) 17. 20.
was spoken of (...) 21.
the Kingdom of God that is within us, that is, the Spirit of Grace, the power
of the Gospel put into our hearts, concerning which he affirmed, that it
operates so secretly, that it comes not with outward show; neither shall they
say, Lo here, or lo there. Which thing I desire the rather to be observed,
because in the same discourse, which our Blessed Savior continued to that
assembly, he affirms this Kingdom of God to belong unto little children, this
Kingdom that comes not with outward significations Luke 18. 16.
or present expresses, this Kingdom that is within us. For the present, the use
I make of it is this, That no man can conclude that this Kingdom of Power, that
is, the Spirit of Sanctification, is not come upon Infants, because there is no
sign or expression of it. It is within us, therefore it has no signification.
It is the seed of God; and it is no good Argument to say, Here is no seed in
the bowels of the earth, because there is nothing green upon the face of it.
For the Church gives the Sacrament, God gives the Grace of the Sacrament. But
because he does not always give it at the instant in which the Church gives the
Sacrament, (as if there be a secret impediment in the suscipient) and yet
afterward does give it when the impediment is removed, (as to them that repent
of that impediment) it follows, that the Church may administer rightly even
before God gives the real Grace of the Sacrament: and if God gives this Grace
afterward by parts, and yet all of it is the effect of that Covenant which was
consigned in Baptism; he that desers some may defer all, and verify every part
as well as any part. For it is certain, that in the instance now made all the
Grace is deferred; in Infants it is not certain but that some is collated or
infused: however, be it so or no, yet upon this account the administration of
the Sacrament is not hindered.

9. Seventhly, When the Scripture speaks of the effects of or dispositions to
Baptism, it speaks in general expressions, as being most apt to signify a
common duty, or a general effect, or a more universal event, or the proper
order of things: but those general expressions do not supponere universaliter,
that is, are not to be understood exclusively to all that are not so qualified,
or universally of all suscipients, or of all the subjects of the Proposition.
When the Prophets complain of the Jews, that they are fallen from God, and
turned to Idols, and walk not in the way of their Fathers; and at other times
the Scripture speaks the same thing of their Fathers, that they walked
perversely toward God, starting aside like a broken bow; in these and the like
expressions the Holy Scripture uses a Synecdoche, or signifies many only, under
the notion of a more large and indesinite expression: for neither were all the
Fathers good, neither did all the sons prevaricate; but among the Fathers there
were enough to recommend to posterity by way of example, and among the Children
there were enough to stain the reputation of the Age; but neither the one part
nor the other was true of every single person. S. John the Baptist spoke to the
whole audience, saying, O generation of (...)! and yet he did not mean that all
Jerusalem and Judaea that went out to be baptized of him were such; but he,
under an undeterminate reproof, intended those that were such, that is,
especially the Priests and the Pharisees. And it is more considerable yet in
the story of the event of Christ's Sermon in the Synagogue, upon his Text taken
out of Isaiah, All wondered at his gracious words, and bare him witness; and a
little after, All Luke 4. (...);
they in the Synagogue were filled with wrath: that is, it was generally so,
but hardly to be supposed true of every single (...), in both the contrary
humors and usages. Thus Christ said to the Apostles, To have abidden with me in
my temptations; and yet Judas was all the way a follower of interest and the
bag, rather than Christ, and afterward none of them all did abide with Christ
in his greatest Temptations. Thus also, to come nearer the present Question,
the secret effects of Election and of the Spirit are in Scripture attributed to
all that are of the outward Communion. So S. Peter calls all the Christian
strangers of the Eastern dispersion, Elect according to the sore-knowledge of
God 1 (...) 1. 2.
the Father; and S. Paul says of all the Roman Christians, and the same of the
(...), that their Faith was spoken of in all the world: and yet amongst them it
is not to be supposed that all the (...) had an unreproveable Faith, or that
every one of the Church of (...) was an excellent and a charitable person; and
yet the (...) uses this expression, (...) faith grows exceedingly, and the
charity of every one of you 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
all toward each other abounds. These are usually significant of a general
custom or order of things, or duty of men, or design, and natural or proper
expectation of events. Such are these also in this very Question, As many of
you as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; that is, so it is
regularly, and so it will be in its due time, and that is the order of things,
and the designed event: but from hence we cannot conclude of every person, and
in every period of time, This man has been baptized, therefore now he is (...)
with Christ, he has put on Christ; nor thus, This person cannot in a spiritual
sense as yet put on Christ, therefore he has not been baptized, that is, he
has not put him on in a (...) sense. Such is the saying of S. Paul, Whom he
has predestined, them he Romans 8. 30.
also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified: this also declares the regular event, or at
least the order of things, and the design of God, but not the actual
verification of it to all persons. These sayings concerning Baptism in the like
manner are to be so understood, that they cannot exclude all persons from the
(...) that have not all those real effects of the Sacrament at all times which
some men have at some times, and all men must have at some time or other, viz.
when the Sacrament obtains its last intention. But he that shall argue from
hence, That Children are not rightly baptized, because they cannot in a
spiritual sense put on Christ, concludes nothing, unless these Propositions did
signify universally, and at all times, and in every person, and in every
manner: which can no more pretend to truth, than that all Christians are God's
Elect, and all that are baptized are Saints, and all that are called are
justified, and all that are once justified shall be saved finally. These things
declare only the event of things, and their order, and the usual effect, and
the proper design, in their proper season, in their limited proportions.

10. Eighthly, A Negative Argument for matters of fact in Scripture cannot
conclude a Law, or a necessary or a regular event. And therefore supposing that
it be not intimated that the Apostles did baptize Insants, it follows not that
they did not; and if they did not, it does not follow that they might not, or
that the Church may not. For it is unreasonable to argue, The Scripture speaks
nothing of the Baptism of the Holy Virgin Mother, therefore she was not
baptized. The words and deeds of Christ are infinite which are not recorded,
and of the Acts of the Apostles we may suppose the same in their proportion:
and therefore what they did not is no rule to us, unless they did it not
because they were forbidden. So that it can be no good Argument to say, The
Apostles are not read to have baptized Infants, therefore Infants are not to be
baptized: but thus, We do not find that Infants are excluded from the common
Sacraments and Ceremonies of Christian institution, therefore we may not
presume to exclude them. For although the Negative of a Fact is no good
Argument, yet the Negative of a Law is a very good one. We may not say, The
Apostles did not, therefore we may not: but thus, They were not forbidden to do
it, there is no Law against it, therefore it may be done. No man's deeds can
prejudicate a Divine Law expressed in general terms, much less can it be
prejudiced by those things that were not done. That which is wanting cannot be
numbered, cannot be effectual; therefore, Baptize all Nations, Eccles. 1. 15.
must signify all that it can signify, all that are reckoned in the
Capitations and accounts of a Nation. Now since all contradiction to this
Question depends wholly upon these two Grounds, the Negative Argument in matter
of Fact, and the Pretenses that Faith and Repentance are required to Baptism;
since the first is wholly nothing, and infirm upon an infinite account, and the
second may conclude, that Infants can no more be saved than be baptized,
because Faith is more necessary to Salvation than to Baptism; it being said, He
that believes not shall be damned, and it is not said, He that believes not
shall be excluded from Baptism: it follows, that the Doctrine of those that
resuse to baptize their Infants is upon both its legs weak and broken and
insufficient.

11. Upon the supposition of these Grounds, the Baptism of Infants, according
to the perpetual practice of the Church of God, will stand firm and unshaken
upon its own Base. For, as the Eunuch said to Philip, What hinders them to be
baptized? If they can receive benefit by it, it is infallibly certain, that it
belongs to them also to receive it, and to their Parents to procure it; for
nothing can deprive us of so great a Grace but an Unworthiness, or a
Disability. They are not disabled to receive it, if they need it, and if it
does them good; and they have neither done good nor evil, and theresore they
have not sorseited their right to it. This theresore shall be the first great
Argument or Combination of inducements, Infants receive many benefits by the
(...) of (...), and theresore in charity and in duty we are to bring them to
Baptism.

12. First, The first Effect of Baptism is, That in it we are admitted to the
Kingdom of Christ, offered and presented unto him. In which certainly there is
the same act of Worship to God, and the same blessing to the Children of
Christians, as there was in presenting the firstborn among the Jews. For our
Children can be God's own portion as well as theirs: And as they presented the
firstborn to God, and so acknowledged that God might have taken his life in
Sacrifice, as well as the Sacrifice of the Lamb or the Oblation of a Beast; yet
when the right was consessed, God gave him back again, and took a Lamb in
exchange, or a pair of Doves: so are our Children presented to God as forseit,
and God might take the forfeiture, and not admit the Babe to the Promises of
Grace; but when the Presentation of the Child and our acknowledgment is made to
God, God takes the Lamb of the World in exchange, and he has paid our
forfeiture, and the Children are holy unto the Lord. And what hinders here?
Cannot a Cripple receive an alms at the Beautiful Gate of the Temple, unless he
go thither himself? or cannot a Gift be presented to God by the hands of the
owners, and the Gift become holy and pleasing to God, without its own consent?
The Parents have a portion of the possession: Children are blessings, and God's
gifts, and the Father's greatest wealth, and therefore are to be given again to
him. In other things we give something to God of all that he gives us; all we
do not, because our needs force us to retain the greater part, and the less
sanctifies the whole: but our Children must all be returned to God; for we may
love them, and so may God too, and they are the better our own by being made
holy in their Presentation. Whatsoever is given to God is holy, every thing in
its proportion and capacity; a Lamb is holy when it becomes a Sacrifice, and a
Table is holy when it becomes an Altar, and an House is holy when it becomes a
Church, and a Man is holy when he is consecrated to be a Priest, and so is
every one that is dedicated to Religion: these are holy persons, the others are
holy Things. And Infants are between both: they have the Sanctification that
belongs to them, the Holiness that can be of a reasonable nature offered and
destined to God's service; but not in that degree that is in an understanding,
choosing person. Certain it is that Infants may be given to God; and if they may
be, they must be: for it is not here as in Goods, where we are permitted to use
all or some, and give what portion we please out of them; but we cannot do our
duty toward our Children unless we give them wholly to God, and offer them to
his service and to his grace. The first does honor to God, the second does
charity to the Children. The effects and real advantages will appear in the
sequel. In the mean time this Argument extends thus sar, That Children may be
presented to God acceptably in order to his service. And it was highly
preceptive, when our Blessed Savior commanded that we should (...) little
children to come to him: and when they came, they carried away a Blessing along
with them. He was desirous they should partake of his Merits: he is not
willing, neither is it his Father's will, that any of these little ones should
perish. And therefore he died for them, and loved, and blessed them: and so he
will now, if they be brought to him, and presented as Candidates of the
Religion and of the Resurrection. Christ has a Blessing for our Children; but
let them come to him, that is, be presented at the doors of the Church to the
Sacrament of Adoption and Initiation; for I know no other way for them to come.

13. Secondly, Children may be adopted into the Covenant of the Gospel, that
is, made partakers of the Communion of Saints, which is the second Effect of
Baptism; parts of the Church, members of Christ's Mystical body, and put into
the order of eternal life. Now concerning this, it is certain the Church
clearly has power to do her offices in order to it. The faithful can pray for
all men, they can do their piety to some persons with more regard and greater
earnestness, they can admit whom they please in their proper dispositions to a
participation of all their holy Prayers, and Communions, and Preachings, and
Exhortations: and if all this be a blessing, and all this be the actions of our
own Charity, who can hinder the Church of God from admitting Infants to the
communion of all their pious offices, which can do them benefit in their
present capacity? How this does necessarily infer Baptism, I shall Sect. 25,
etc.
afterward discourse. But for the present I enumerate, That the blessings of
Baptism are communicable to them; they may be admitted into a fellowship of all
the Prayers and Privileges of the Church, and the Communion of Saints, in
blessings, and prayers, and holy offices. But that which is of greatest
persuasion and convincing efficacy in this particular is, That the Children of
the Church are as capable of the same Covenant as the children of the Jews: But
it was the same Covenant that Circumcision did consign, a spiritual Covenant
under a veil, and now it is the same spiritual Covenant without the veil; which
is evident to him that considers it, thus:

14. The words of the Covenant are these, [ I am the Almighty God, walk before
me, (...). 17. 1, etc.
and be thou perfect: I will multiply thee exceedingly: Thou shall be a Father
of many Nations: Thy name shall not be Abram, but Abraham: Nations and Kings
shall be out of thee: I will be a God unto thee and unto thy seed after thee:
and, I will give all the Land of Canaan to thy seed: and, All the Males shall
be circumcised; and it shall be a token of the Covenant between me and thee:
and, He that is not circumcised shall be cut off from his people.] The Covenant
which was on (...)'s part was, To walk before God, and to be perfect; on God's
part, To bless him with a numerous issue, and them with the Land of Canaan: and
the sign was Circumcision, the token of the Covenant. Now in all this here was
no duty to which the posterity was obliged, nor any blessing which (...) could
perceive or feel, because neither he nor his posterity did enjoy the Promise
for many hundred years after the Covenant: and therefore as there was a duty
for the posterity which is not here expressed; so there was a blessing for
Abraham, which was concealed under the leaves of a temporal Promise, and which
we shall better understand from them whom the Spirit of God has taught the
mysteriousness of this transaction. The argument indeed and the observation is
wholly S. Paul's. Abraham and (...). 11. 13,
the Patriarchs died in faith, not having received the Promises, viz. of a
possession in Canaan. They saw the Promises afar off, they embraced them, and
looked through the Cloud, and the temporal veil: this was not it; they might
have returned to Canaan, if 15.
that had been the object of their desires, and the design of the Promise: but
they desired and did seek a Country, but it was a better, and that a heavenly.
This was the object 14. 16.
of their desire, and the end of their seach, and the reward of their Faith,
and the secret of their Promise. And therefore Circumcision was a seal of the
righteousness of Faith Ron. 4. 11.
which he had before his Circumcision, before the making this Covenant; and
therefore it must principally relate to an effect and a blessing greater than
was afterward expressed in the temporal Promise: which effect was forgiveness
of sins, a not imputing to us 7, 8.
our infirmities, Justification by Faith, accounting that for righteousness:
and these effects 3, 5,
or graces were promised to Abraham, not only for his posterity after the
flesh, but his children after the spirit, even to all that shall believe and
walk in the steps 12.
of that faith of our father Abraham which he walked in being yet uncircumcised.

15. This was no other but the Covenant of the Gospel, though afterward
otherwise consigned: for so the Apostle expressly affirms, that Abraham was the
father of Circumcision ( viz. by virtue of this Covenant) not only to them that
are circumcised, but Romans 4. 11, 13.
to all that believe: for this promise was not through the Law of Works, or of
Circumcision, but of Faith. And therefore, as S. Paul observes, God promised
that Abraham 17,
should be a father (not of that Nation only, but) of many Nations, and the
heir of the 13.
world; that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ; that Gal. 3. 14.
we might receive the promise of the Spirit through Faith. And if ye be
Christ's, then 29.
ye are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the Promise. Since then the
Covenant of the Gospel is the Covenant of Faith, and not of Works; and the
Promises are spiritual, not secular; and Abraham the father of the faithful
Gentiles as well as the circumcised Jews; and the heir of the world, not by
himself, but by his seed, or the Son of Man, our Lord Jesus: it follows, that
the Promises which Circumcision did seal were the same Promises which are
consigned in Baptism; the Covenant is the same, only that God's people are not
impaled in (...), and the veil is taken away, and the Temporal is passed into
Spiritual; and the result (...) (...) l. 1. (...). 8. (...).
will be this, That to as many persons, and in as many capacities, and in the
same dispositions as the Promises were applied and did relate in Circumcision,
to the same they do belong and may be applied in Baptism. And let it be
remembered, That the Covenant which Circumcision did sign was a Covenant of
Grace and (...); the Promises were of the Spirit, or spiritual; it was made
before the Law, and could not be rescinded by the Legal Covenant; nothing could
be added to it, or taken from it: and we that are partakers of this grace are
therefore partakers of it by being Christ's servants, united to Christ, and so
are become Abraham's seed, (as the Apostle at large and prosessedly proves in
diverse places, but especially in the fourth to the (...), and the third to the
Galatians.) And therefore if Infants were then admitted to it, and consigned to
it by a Sacrament which they understood not any more than ours do, there is not
any reason why ours should not enter in at the ordinary gate and door of grace
as well as they. Their Children were circumcised the eighth day, but were
instructed afterward, when they could enquire what these things meant. Indeed
their Proselytes were first taught, then circumcised; so are ours baptized: but
their Infants were consigned first; and so must ours.

16. Thirdly, In Baptism we are born again; and this Infants need in the
present circumstances, and for the same great reason that men of age and reason
do. For our natural birth is either of it self insufficient, or is made so by
the Fall of Adam and the consequent evils, that Nature alone, or our first
birth, cannot bring us to Heaven, which is a supernatural end, that is, an end
above all the power of our Nature as now it is. So that if Nature cannot bring
us to Heaven, Grace must, or we can never get thither; if the first birth
cannot, a second must: but the second birth spoken of in Scripture is Baptism,
A man must be born of (...) and the Spirit. And therefore Baptism is (...), the
laver of a new birth. Either then Infants cannot go to Heaven (...) 3. 5.
any way that we know of, or they must be baptized. To say they are to be left
to God, is an excuse, and no answer: for when God has opened the door, and
calls that the entrance into Heaven, we do not leave them to God, when we will
not carry them to him in the way which he has described, and at the door which
himself has opened: we leave them indeed, but it is but helpless and
destitute: and though God is better than man, yet that is no warrant to us;
what it will be to the children, that we cannot warrant or conjecture. And if
it be objected, that to the New birth are required dispositions of our own,
which are to be wrought by and in them that have the use of Reason: Besides
that this is wholly against the Analogy of a New birth, in which the person to
be born is wholly a passive, and has put into him the principle that in time
will produce its proper actions; it is certain that they that can receive the
new birth are capable of it. The effect of it is a possibility of being saved,
and arriving to a supernatural felicity. If Infants can receive this effect,
then also the New birth, without which they cannot receive the effect. And if
they can receive Salvation, the effect of the New birth, what hinders them but
they may receive that that is in order to that effect, and ordained only for
it, and which is nothing of it self, but in its institution and relation, and
which may be received by the same capacity in which one may be created, that
is, a passivity, or a capacity obediential?

17. Fourthly, Concerning pardon of sins, which is one great effect of Baptism,
it is certain that (...) have not that benefit which men of sin and age may
receive. He that has a sickly stomach drinks wine, and it not only refreshes
his spirits, but cures his stomach: He that drinks wine and has not that
disease, receives good by his wine, though it does not minister to so many
needs; it refreshes, though it does not cure him: and when oil is poured upon a
man's head, it does not always heal a wound, but sometimes makes him a cheerful
countenance, sometimes it consigns him to be a King or a Priest. So it is in
Baptism: it does not heal the wounds of actual sins, because they have not
committed them: but it takes off the evil of Original sin: whatsoever is
imputed to us by Adam's prevarication, is washed off by the death of the second
Adam into (...). 5. 17, 18.
which we are baptized. But concerning original sin, because there are so many
disputes which may intricate the Question, I shall make use only of that which
is confessed on both sides, and material to our purpose. Death came upon all
men by Adam's sin, and the necessity of it remains upon us as an evil
consequent of the Disobedience. For though death is natural, yet it was kept
off from man by God's favor, which when he lost, the banks were broken, and
the water reverted to its natural course, and our nature became a curse, and
death a punishment. Now that this also relates to Infants (...). 4. (...). 4.
(...). 4.
so far is certain, because they are sick, and die. This the Pelagians denied
not. But to whomsoever this evil descended, for them also a remedy is provided
by the second Adam; That as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be
made alive; that is, at the day of Judgment: then death shall be destroyed. In
the mean time, Death has a sting and a bitterness, a curse it is, and an
express of the Divine anger: and if this sting be not taken away here, we shall
have no participation of the final victory over death. Either therefore Infants
must be for ever without remedy in this evil consequent of their Father's sin,
or they must be adopted into the participation of Christ's death, which is the
remedy. Now how can they partake of Christ's death, but by Baptism into his
death? For if there be any spiritual way (...), it will by a stronger argument
admit them to Baptism: for if they can receive spiritual effects, they can also
receive the outward Sacrament; this being denied only upon pretense they cannot
have the other. If there be no spiritual way extraordinary, then the ordinary
way is only left for them. If there be an extraordinary, let it be shown, and
Christians will be at rest concerning their Children. One thing only I desire
to be observed, That Pelagius denied Original Sin, but yet denied not the
necessity of Infants Baptism; and being accused of it in an Epistle to Pope
Innocent the First, he purged himself of the suspicion, and allowed the
practice, but denied the inducement of it: which shows, that their arts are
weak that think Baptism to be useless to Infants, if they be not formally
guilty of the prevarication of Adam. By which I also gather, that it was so
universal, so primitive a practice, to baptize Infants, that it was greater
than all pretenses to the contrary: for it would much have conduced to the
introducing his opinion against Grace and Original Sin, if he had destroyed
that practice which seemed so very much to have its greatest necessity from the
doctrine he denied. But against Pelagins, and against all that follow the parts
of his opinion, it is of good use which S. Austin, Prosper and Fulgentius
argue; If Infants are punished for Adam's sin, then they are also guilty of it
in some sense. Nimis enim impium est hoc de Dei sentire (...), quod a
praevaricatione liberos cum reis (...) Prosper (...). 20.
esse (...): So Prosper. Dispendia quae slentes nascendo testantur, dicito quo
merito sub (...) and (...) judice (...), sinullum peccatum (...), arrogentur,
said S. Austin. For the guilt of it signifies nothing but the obligation to the
punishment; and he that feels the evil consequent, to him the sin is imputed;
not as to all the same dishonor, or moral accounts, but to the more material,
to the natural account: and in Holy Scripture the taking off the punishment is
the pardon of the sin; and in the same degree the punishment is abolished, in
the same God is appeased, and then the person stands upright, being reconciled
to God by his grace. Since therefore Infants have the punishment of sin, it is
certain the sin is imputed to them; and therefore they need being reconciled to
God by Christ: and if so, then when they are baptized into Christ's Death and
into his Resurrection, their sins are pardoned, because the punishment is taken
off, the sting of natural death is taken away, because God's anger is removed,
and they shall partake of Christ's Resurrection; which because Baptism does
signify and consign, they also are to be baptized. To which also add this
appendent Consideration, That whatsoever the Sacraments do consign, that also
they do convey and minister: they do it, that is, God by them does it; lest we
should think the Sacraments to be mere illusions, and abusing us by deceitful
ineffective signs: and therefore to Infants the grace of a title to a
Resurrection and Reconciliation to God by the death of Christ is conveyed,
because it signifies and consigns this to them more to the life and analogy of
resemblance than Circumcision to the Infant sons of Israel. I end this
Consideration with the words of (...). (...)
Our birth by Baptism does cut off every unclean appendage of our natural
birth, and leads us to a celestial life. And this in Children is therefore more
necessary, because the evil came upon them without their own act of reason and
choice, and therefore the grace and remedy ought not to stay the leisure of
dull Nature and the formalities of the Civil Law.

18. Fifthly, The Baptism of Insants does to them the greatest part of that
benefit which belongs to the remission of sins: For Baptism is a state of
Repentance and Pardon for ever. This I suppose to be already proved; to which I
only add this Caution, That the Pelagians, to undervalue the necessity of
Supervening grace, affirmed, that Baptism did minister to us Grace sufficient
to live perfectly, and without sin for ever. Against this S. Jerome sharply
declaims, and affirms, Baptismum praeterita Lib. 3. a lv. Pelag. Lib. 1. in
initio.
donare peccata, non suturam servare justitiam; that is, non statim justum
facit and omni plenum justitia, as he expounds his meaning in another place.
Vetera peccata conscindit, novas virtutes non tribuit; dimittit a carcere, and
dimisso, si laboraverit, praemia pollicetur. Baptism does not so forgive future
sins that we may do what we please, or so as we need not labor and watch, and
fear perpetually, and make use of God's grace to actuate our endeavors; but
puts us into a state of Pardon, that is, in a Covenant of Grace, in which so
long as we labor and repent, and strive to do our duty, so long our
infirmities are pitied, and our sins certain to be pardoned upon their certain
conditions; that is, by virtue of it we are capable of Pardon, and must work
for it, and may hope it. And therefore Infants have a most certain capacity and
proper disposition to Baptism: for sin creeps before it can go; and little
undecencies are soon learned, and malice is before their years, and they can do
mischief and irregularities betimes; and though we know not when, nor how far
they are imputed in every month of their lives, yet it is an admirable art of
the Spirit of grace, to put them into a state of Pardon, that their remedy may
at least be as soon as their necessity. And therefore Tertullian and Gregory
Nazianzen advised the Baptism of Children to be at three or four years of age;
meaning, that they then begin to have little inadvertencies and hasty follies,
and actions so evil as did need a Lavatory. But if Baptism has an influence
upon sins in the succeeding portion, of our life, then it is certain, that
their being presently innocent does not hinder and ought not to retard the
Sacrament: and therefore Tertullian's Quid festinat Lib. de Baptis. c. 18.
innocens aetas ad remissionem peccatorum? What need Innocents hasten to the
remission of sin? is soon answered. It is true, they need not in respect of any
actual sins, for so they are innocent: but in respect of the evils of their
nature derived from their original, and in respect of future sins in the whole
state of their life, it is necessary they be put into a state of Pardon before
they sin, because some sin early, some sin later; and therefore unless they be
baptized so early as to prevent the first sins, they may chance die in a sin,
to the pardon of which they have ^^t derived no title from Christ.

19. Sixthly, The next great effect of Baptism which Children can have is the
Spir it of Sanctification; and it they can be baptized with Water and the
Spirit, it will be sacrilege to rob them of so holy treasures. And concerning
this, although it be with them as S. Paul says of Heirs, The Heir so long as he
is a child differs nothing from a Servant, though he be Lord of all; and
Children, although they receive the Spirit of Promise, and the Spirit of Grace,
yet in respect of actual exercise they differ not from them that have them not
at all: yet this hinders not but they may have them. For as the reasonable Soul
and all its Faculties are in Children, Will, and Understanding, Passions, and
Powers of Attraction and Propulsion, yet these Faculties do not operate or come
ahead till time and art, observation and experience have drawn them forth into
action: so may the Spirit of Grace, the principle of Christian life, be
infused, and yet lie without action, till in its own day it is drawn forth. For
in every Christian there are three parts concurring to his integral
constitution, Body, and Soul, and Spirit; and all these have their proper
activities and times; but every one in his own order, first that which is
natural, then that which is spiritual. And what Aristotle said, A man first
lives the life of a Plant, then of a Beast, and lastly of a Man, is true in
this sense: and the more spiritual the principle is, the longer it is before it
operates, because more things concur to spiritual actions than to natural: and
these are necessary, and therefore first; the other are perfect, and therefore
last. And who is he that so well understands the Philosophy of this third
principle of a Christian's life, the Spirit, as to know how or when it is
infused, and how it operates in all its periods, and what it is in its being
and proper nature; and whether it be like the Soul, or like the faculty, or
like a habit; or how or to what purposes God in all varieties does dispense it?
These are secrets which none but bold people use to decree, and build
propositions upon their own dreams. That which is certain is, * That the Spirit
is the principle of a new life, or a new birth. * That Baptism is the Laver of
this new birth. * That it is the seed of God, and may lie long in the furrows
before it springs up. * That from the faculty to the act the passage is not
always sudden and quick. * That the Spirit is the earnest of our Inheritance,
that is, of Resurrection to eternal life: which inheritance because Children we
hope shall have, they cannot be denied to have its Seal and earnest; that is,
if they shall have all, they are not to be denied a part. * That Children have
some effects of the Spirit, and therefore do receive it, and are baptized with
the Spirit, and therefore may with Water: which thing is therefore true and
evident, because some Children are sanctified, as Jeremy and the Baptist, and
therefore all may. And because all Sanctification of persons is an effect of
the Holy Ghost, there is no peradventure but they that can be (...) by God, can
in that capacity receive the Holy Ghost: and all the ground of dissenting here
is only upon a mistake; because Infants do no act of Holiness, they suppose
them incapable of the grace of (...). Now (...) of Children is their Adoption
to the Inheritance of sons, their Presentation to Christ, their Consignation to
Christ's service and to Resurrection, their being put into a possibility of
being saved, their restitution to God's favor, which naturally, that is, as
our Nature is depraved and punished, they could not have. And in short the case
is this: * Original righteousness was in Adam (...) the manner of Nature, but
it was an act or effect of Grace, and by it men were not made, but born
Righteous; the inferior Faculties obeyed the superior, the Mind was whole and
right, and conformable to the Divine Image, the Reason and the Will always
concurring, the Will followed Reason, and Reason followed the Laws of God; and
so long as a man had not lost this, he was pleasing to God, and should have
(...). (...).
passed to a more perfect state. Now because this, if Adam had stood, should
have been born with every child, there was in Infants a principle which was the
seed of holy life here, and a blessed hereafter; and yet the children should
have gone in the road of Nature then as well as now, and the Spirit should have
operated at Nature's leisure; God being the giver of both, would have made them
instrumental to and perfective of each other, (...)
but not destructive. Now what was lost by Adam is restored by Christ, the same
Righteousness, only it is not born, but superinduced, not integral, but
interrupted; but such as it is, there is no difference, but that the same or
the like principle may be derived to us from Christ as there should have been
from Adam, that is, a principle of Obedience, a regularity of (...), a beauty
in the Soul, and a state of acceptance with God. And we see also in men of
understanding and reason, the Spirit of God (...) in them, (which Tatianus
describing uses these words, (...), (...) Soul is possessed with sparks, or
materials, of the power of the Spirit) and yet it is sometimes ineffective and
unactive, sometimes more, sometimes less, and does no more do its work at all
times than the Soul does at all times understand. Add to this, that if there be
in (...) naturally an evil principle, a proclivity to sin, an ignorance and
pravity of mind, a disorder of affections, (as experience teaches us there is,
and the perpetual Doctrine of the Church, and the universal mischiefs issuing
from mankind, and the sin of every man does witness too much) why cannot
Infants have a good principle in them, though it works not till its own season,
as well as an evil principle? If there were not by nature some evil principle,
it is not possible that all the world should choose sin. In free Agents it was
never heard that all individuals loved and chose the same thing, to which they
were not naturally inclined. Neither do all men choose to marry, neither do all
choose to abstain; and in this instance there is a natural inclination to one
part. But of all the men and women in the world there is no one that has never
sinned: If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, 1 John 1. (...).
and the truth is not in us, said an Apostle. If therefore Nature has in
Infants an evil principle, which operates when the child can choose, but is all
the while within the Soul; either Infants have by Grace a principle put into
them, or else Sin abounds where Grace does not superabound, expressly against
the doctrine of the Apostle. The event of this discourse is, That if Infants be
capable of the Spirit of Grace, there is no reason but they may and ought to be
baptized as well as men and women; unless God had expressly forbidden them,
which cannot be pretended: and that Infants are capable of the Spirit of Grace,
I think is made very credible. Christus infantibus infans (...), Ep. a l (...),
l. 3. ep. 8.
sanctificans (...), said Irenaeus; Christ became an Infant among the Infants,
and does sanctify Infants: and S. Cyprian affirms, Esse apud omnes, (...)
Infantes (...) majores (...), unam divini muneris aequitatem; There is the same
dispensation of the Divine grace to all alike, to Infants as well as to men.
And in this Royal Priesthood, as it is in the secular, Kings may be anointed in
their Cradles. Dat (Deus) sui S. (...) b. (...) and (...). 9.
Spiritus (...) gratiam, quam etiam latenter infundit in parvulis; God gives
the most secret Grace of his Spirit, which he also secretly infuses into
Infants. And if a secret infusion be rejected, because it cannot be proved at
the place and at the instant, many men that hope for Heaven will be very much
to (...) for a proof of their earnest, and need an earnest of the earnest. For
all that have the Spirit of God cannot in all instants prove it, or certainly
know it: neither is it defined by how many indices the Spirit's presence can be
proved or fig^^ed. And they limit the Spirit too much, and understand it too
little, who take ac^^unts of his secret workings, and measure them by the
material lines and methods of natural and animal effects. And yet because
whatsoever is holy is made so by the Holy Spirit, we are certain that the
Children of believing, that is, of Christian, Parents are holy. S. Paul
affirmed it, and by it has distinguished ours from the Children of
unbelievers, and our Marriages from theirs. And because the Children of the
Heathen, when they come to choice and Reason, may enter into Baptism and the
Covenant, if they will; our Children have no privilege beyond the Children of
Turks or Heathens, unless it be in the present capacity, that is, either by
receiving the Holy Ghost immediately, and the Promises, or at least having a
title to the Sacrament, and entering by that door. If they have the Spirit,
nothing can hinder them from a title to the (...) ater; and if they have only a
title to the water of the Sacrament, then they shall receive the promise of the
Holy Spirit, the benefits of the Sacrament: else their privilege is none at
all, but a dish of cold water, which every Village-Nurse can provide for her
newborn babe.

20. But it is in our case as it was with the Jews Children: Our Children are a
holy seed; for if it were not so with Christianity, how could S. Peter move the
Jews to Christianity by telling them the Promise was to them and their
Children? For if our Children be not capable of the Spirit of Promise and
Holiness, and yet their Children were holy, it had been a better Argument to
have kept them in the Synagogue, than to have called them to the Christian
Church. Either therefore, 1. there is some Holiness in a reasonable nature,
which is not from the Spirit of Holiness; or else, 2. our Children do receive
the Holy Spirit because they are holy; or if they be not holy, they are in
worse condition under Christ than under Moses: or if none of all this be true,
then our Children are holy by having received the holy Spirit of Promise, and
consequently nothing can hinder them from being baptized.

21. And indeed if the Christian (...), whose Children are circumcised, and
made partakers of the same Promises and Title, and Inheritance and Sacraments,
which themselves had at their Conversion to the Faith of Christ, had seen their
Children now shut out from these new Sacraments, it is not to be doubted but
they would have raised a strom greater than could easily have been suppressed,
since about their Circumcisions they (...) raised such Tragedies and implacable
disputations. And there had been great reason to look for a storm; for their
Children were circumcised, and if not baptized, then they were left under a
burden which their fathers were quit of, for S. Paul said, Whosoever is
circumcised is a debtor to keep the whole Law. These Children therefore that
were circumcised stood obliged, for want of Baptism, to perform the Law of
Ceremonies, to be presented into the Temple, to pay their price, to be redeemed
with silver and gold, to be bound by the Law of pollutions and carnal
Ordinances: and therefore, if they had been thus left, it would be no wonder if
the Jews had complained and made a tumult: they used to do it for less matters.

22. To which let this be added, That the first book of the New Testament was
not written till eight years after Christ's Ascension, and S. Mark's Gospel
twelve years. In the mean time, to what Scriptures did they appeal? By the
Analogy or proportion of what writings did they end their Questions? Whence did
they prove their Articles? They only appealed to the Old Testament, and only
added what their Lord superadded. Now either it must be said that our Blessed
Lord commanded that Infants should not be baptized, which is nowhere
pretended; and if it were, cannot at all be proved: or if by the proportion of
Scriptures they did serve God, and preach the Religion, it is plain, that by
the Analogy of the Old Testament, that is, of those Scriptures by which they
proved Christ to be come and to have suffered, they also approved the Baptism
of Infants, or the admitting them to the society of the faithful Jews, of which
also the Church did then principally consist.

23. Seventhly, That Baptism, which consigns men and women to a blessed
Resurrection, does also equally consign Infants to it, has nothing, that I
know of, pretended against it, there being the same signature and the same
grace, and in this thing all being alike passive, and we no way cooperating to
the consignation and promise of Grace: and Infants have an equal necessity, as
being liable to sickness and groaning with as sad accents, and dying sooner
than men and women, and less able to complain, and more apt to be pitied, and
broken with the unhappy consequents of a short life and a speedy death, and
infelicitate priscorum hominum, with the infelicity and folly of their first
Parents; and therefore have as great need as any: and that is capacity enough
to receive a remedy for the evil which was brought upon them by the fault of
another.

24. Eighthly, And after all this, if Baptism be that means which God has
appointed to save us, it were well if we would do our parts toward Infants
final interest: which whether it depends upon the Sacrament and its proper
grace, we have nothing to rely upon but those Texts of Scripture which make
Baptism the ordinary way of entering into the state of Salvation: save only we
are to add this, that because of this law since Infants are not personally
capable, but the Church for them, as for all others indefinitely, we have
reason to believe that their friends neglect shall by some way be supplied; but
Hope has in it nothing beyond a Probability. This we may be certain of, that
naturally we cannot be heirs of Salvation, for by nature we are children of
wrath; and therefore an eternal separation from God is an infallible consequent
to our evil nature: either therefore Children must be put into the state of
Grace, or they shall dwell for ever where God's face does never shine. Now
there are but two ways of being put into the state of Grace and Salvation; the
inward, by the Spirit, and the outward, by Water; which regularly are together.
If they be renewed by the Spirit, what hinders them to be baptized, who receive
the Holy Ghost as well as we? If they are not capable of Nisi quis (...), etc.
(...), non infantem, (...). Ambr. (...) Abrah. Patrlib. 2. (...) 11.
the Spirit, they are capable of Water; and if of neither, where is their title
to Heaven, which is neither internal nor external, neither spiritual nor
sacramental, neither secret nor manifest, neither natural nor gracious, neither
original nor derivative? And well may we lament the death of poor babes that
are (...), concerning whom if we neglect what is regularly prescribed to all
that enter Heaven, without any difference expressed or case reserved, we have
no reason to be comforted over our dead children, but may weep as they that
have no hope. We may hope when our neglect was not the hinderance, because God
has wholly taken the matter into his own hand, and then it cannot miscarry;
and though we know nothing of the Children, yet we know much of God's goodness:
but when God has permitted it to us, that is, offered and permitted Children
to our ministry, whatever happens to the Innocents, we may well fear (...)
God will require the Souls at our hands: and we cannot be otherwise secure, but
that it will be said concerning our children which S. Ambrose used in a case
like this, Lib. 2. c. 11. (...) Abrah. (...).
Anima illa potuit salva fieri, si habuisset purgationem, This Soul might have
gone to God, if it had been purified and washed. We know God is good,
infinitely good; but we know it is not at all good to tempt his goodness: and
he tempts him that leaves the usual way, and pretends it is not made for him,
and yet hopes to be at his journey's end, or expects to meet his Child in
Heaven, when himself shuts the door against him, which, for ought he knows, is
the only one that stands open. S. Austin was severe in this Question against
unbaptized Infants, therefore he is called durus Pater Infantum: though I know
not why the original of that Opinion should be attributed to him, since S.
Ambrose said the same before him, as appears in his words before quoted in the
margent.

25. And now that I have enumerated the Blessings which are consequent to
Baptism, and have also made apparent that Infants can receive these Blessings,
I suppose I need not use any other persuasions to bring Children to Baptism. If
it be certain they may receive these good things by it, it is certain they are
not to be hindered of them without the greatest impiety and sacrilege and
uncharitableness in the world. Nay, if it be only probable that they receive
these Blessings, or if it be but possible they may, nay, unless it be
impossible they should, and so declared by revelation or demonstratively
certain; it were intolerable unkindness and injustice to our pretty Innocents,
to let their crying be unpitied, and their natural misery eternally
irremediable, and their sorrows without remedy, and their Souls no more capable
of relief than their bodies of Physic, and their death left with the sting in,
and their Souls without Spirits to go to God, and no Angel-guardian to be
assigned them in the Assemblies of the faithful, and they not to be reckoned in
the accounts of God and God's Church. All these are sad stories.

26. There are in Scripture very many other probabilities to persuade the
Baptism of Infants; but because the places admit of diverse interpretations, the
Arguments have so many diminutions, and the certainty that is in them is too
fine for (...) understandings, I have chosen to build the ancient Doctrines
upon such principles which are more easy and certain, and have not been yet
sullied and rifled with the contentions of an adversary. This only I shall
observe, That the words of our Blessed Lord [ Unless a man be born of Water and
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven] cannot be expounded to
the exclusion of Children, but the same expositions will also make Baptism not
necessary for men: for if they be both necessary ingredients, Water and the
Spirit, then let us provide water, and God will provide the Spirit; if we bring
wood to the Sacrifice, he will provide a Lamb. And if they signify distinctly,
one is ordinarily as necessary as the other; and then Infants must be baptized,
or not be saved. But if one be exegetical and explicative of the other, and by
Water and the Spirit is meant only the purification of the Spirit, then where
is the necessity of Baptism (...) men? It will be, as the other Sacrament, at
most but highly convenient, not simply necessary; and all the other places will
easily be answered, if this be avoided. But however, these words being spoken
in so (...) a manner are to be used with fear and reverence; and we must be
infallibly sure by some certain infallible arguments, that (...) ought not to
be baptized, or we ought to fear concerning the (...) of these decretery words.
I shall only add two things by way of Corollary to this Discourse.

27. That the Church of God, ever since her (...), has for very many Ages
consisted almost wholly of Assemblies of them who have been (...) in their
Infancy: and although in the (...) callings of the Gentiles the chiefest and
most frequent Baptisms were of converted and (...) persons and believers, yet
from the beginning also the Church has baptized the Infants of Christian
Parents; according to the Prophecy of Isaiah, Behold, I will list up my hands
to the Gentiles, and set up a standard to the people, and they shall bring thy
sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried (...). 49. 22.
upon their shoulders. Concerning which I shall not only bring the testimonies
of the matter of (...), but either a report of an Apostolical Tradition, or
some Argument from the Fathers, which will make their testimony more effectual
in all that shall relate to the Question.

28. The Author of the Book of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, attributed to S. Denis
the (...), takes notice, that certain unholy persons and enemies to the
Christian Religion think it a ridiculous thing that Infants, who as yet cannot
understand the Divine Mysteries, should be partakers of the Sacraments; and
that Professions and Abrenunciations should be made by others for them and in
their names. He answers, that Holy men, Governors of Churches, have so taught,
having received a Tradition from their Fathers and Elders in Christ. By which
answer of his, as it appears that he himself was later than the Areopagite; so
it is so early by him affirmed, that even then there was an ancient Tradition
for the Baptism of Infants, and the use of Godfathers in the ministry of the
Sacrament. Concerning which, it having been so ancient a Constitution of the
Church, it were well if men would rather humbly and modestly observe, than like
scorners deride it, in which they show their own folly as well as immodesty.
For what (...) or incongruity is it, that our Parents, natural or spiritual,
should stipulate for us, when it is agreeable to the practice of all the laws
and transactions of the world, an effect of the Communion of Saints and of
Christian Economy? For why may not Infants be stipulated for as well as we?
All were included in the stipulation made with Adam; he made a losing bargain
for himself, and we smarted for his folly: and if the faults of Parents, and
Kings, and relatives, do bring evil upon their Children, and subjects, and
correlatives, it is but equal that our children may have benefit also by our
charity and (...). But concerning making an agreement for them, we find that
God was confident concerning Abraham, that he would teach his children: and
there is no doubt but Parents have great power, by strict education and prudent
discipline, to efform the minds of their children to Virtue. (...) did expressly
undertake for his household, I and my house will serve the Lord: and for
children we may better do it, because, till they are of perfect choice, no
Government in the world is so great as that of Parents over their children, in
that which can concern the parts of this Question; for they rule over their
Understandings, and children know nothing but what they are told, and they
believe it infinitely. And it is a rare art of the Spirit, to engage Parents to
bring them up well in the (...) and admonition of the Lord; and they are
persons obliged by a superinduced band, they are to give them instructions and
holy principles as they give them meat. And it is certain that Parents may
better stipulate for their Children than the Church can for men and women: For
they may be present Impostors and Hypocrites, as the Church story tells of
some, and consequently are (...), not really converted, and ineffectively
baptized; and the next day they may change their resolution, and grow weary of
their Vow: and that is the most that Children can do when they come to age: and
it is very much in the Parents whether the Children shall do any such thing or
no. -- purus and insons Horat. l. b. 1. 8. at. 6.

(Ut me collandem) si and vivo charus amicis,
Causa fuit Pater his --
Ipse mihi custos incorruptissimus omnes
Circum Doctores aderat: quid multa? pudicum
(Qui primus virtutis honos) servavit ab omni
Non solum facto, verum opprobrio quoque turpi:
-- ob hoc nunc
Laus illi debetur, and a me gratia major.
For education can introduce a habit and a second nature, against which
Children cannot kick, unless they do some violence to themselves and their
inclinations. And although it fails too (...) whenever it fails, yet we
pronounce prudently concerning future things when we have a less influence into
the event than in the present case, (and therefore are more unapt persons to
stipulate) and less reason in the thing it self, (and therefore have not so
much reason to be confident.) Is not the greatest prudence of Generals
instanced in their foreseeing (...) events, and guessing at the designs of
their enemies? concerning which they have less reason to be confident, than
Parents of their childrens belief of the Christian Creed. To which I add this
consideration, That Parents or Godfathers may therefore safely and prudently
promise that their Children shall be of the Christian Faith, because we not
only see millions of men and women who not only believe the whole Creed only
upon the stock of their education, but there are none that ever do renounce the
Faith of their Country and breeding, unless they be violently tempted by (...)
or weakness, antecedent or consequent. He that sees all men almost to be
Christians because they are bid to be so, need not question the fittingness of
Godfathers promising in behalf of the Children for whom they answer.

29. And however the matter be for Godfathers, yet the tradition of baptizing
Infants L. 2 c. 39.
passed through the hands of (...): Omnem aetatem sanctificans per illam quae
ad (...) similitudinem. Omnes (...) venit per semetipsum salvare, omnes,
inquam, qui per (...) in Deum, infantes, and parvulos, and (...), and juvenes,
and seniores. Ideo per (...) venit (...), and infantibus infans factus,
sanctificans infantes; in parvulis (...), etc. Christ did sanctify every age
by his own susception of it, and similitude (...). Clementis. (...). (...). 5.
(...). c. 6. (...) 14. in (...), and (...). 8. Hom. 8. in (...).
to it. For he came to save all men by himself, I say, all who by him are born
again unto God, infants, and children, and boys, and young men, and old men. He
was made an Infant to Infants, sanctifying Infants; a little one to the little
ones, etc. And Origin is express, (...) traditionem ab Apostolis suscepit (...)
parvulis dare Baptismum, The Church has received a Tradition from the (...) to
give Baptism to Children. And S. (...) in his Epistle to (...) gives account of
this Article: for being questioned by some less (...) persons whether it were
lawful to baptize Children before the eighth day, he gives account of the whole
Question: And a whole Council of sixty six Bishops upon very good reason
decreed, that their Baptism should at no hand be deferred; though whether six
or eight or ten days, was no matter, so there be no danger or present
necessity. The whole Epistle is worth the reading.

30. But besides these Authorities of such who writ before the starting of the
Pelagian Questions, it will not be useless to bring the discourses of them and
others, I mean, the reason upon which the Church did it both before and after.

31. (...) his Argument was this: Christ took upon him our Nature to sanctific
(...).
and to save it, and passed through the several periods of it, even unto death,
which is the symbol and effect of old age; and therefore it is certain he did
sanctify all the periods of it: and why should he be an Infant, but that
Infants should receive the crown of their age, the (...) of their stained
nature, the sanctification of their persons, and the saving of their (...) by
their Infant Lord and elder Brother?

32. Omnis (...) anima (...) in Adam censetur, (...) in Christo recenseatur;
(...) (...),
(...): Every Soul is accounted in Adam, till it be new accounted in Christ;
and so long as it is accounted in Adam, so long it is unclean; and we know no
unclean thing (...) enter into Heaven, and therefore our Lord has desined it,
Unless (...) be born of Water and the Spirit, ye cannot (...) into the Kingdom
of Heaven; that is, ye cannot be holy. It was the argument of (...); which the
rather is to (...). de (...), c. 39, and (...).
be received, because he was one less favorable to the Custom of the Church in
his time of baptizing Infants, which Custom he noted and acknowledged, and has
also in the preceding discourse fairly proved. And indeed, (that S. Cyprian may
superadd his S. Cyprian. op. ad Fidum.
symbol) God, who is no accepter of persons, will also be no accepter of ages.
For if to the greatest delinquents (...) long before against God remission of
sins be given when afterward they believe, and from Baptism and from Grace no
man is forbidden; how much more ought not an (...) be forbidden, who being new
born has (...) nothing, save only that being in the (...), born of Adam, in
his first birth he has contracted the contagion of an old death? who therefore
comes the easier to obtain (...) of sins, because to him are forgiven not his
own, but the (...) of another man. None ought to be driven from Baptism and the
Grace of God, who is (...) gentle, and pious unto all; and therefore much less
Infants, who more (...) our aid, and more need the Divine mercy, because in the
first beginning of their birth, crying and (...), they can do nothing but call
for mercy and relief. (...) this reason (...). c. 6.
it was, (says (...)) that they to whom the secrets of the Divine (...) were
committed (...) their (...), because there was born with them the impurities of
sin, which did need material Ablution, as a Sacrament of spiritual
purification. For that it may appear that our sins have a proper analogy to
this Sacrament, the Body it self is called the (...) of (...): and therefore
the washing of the Body is not ineffectual toward the great work of Pardon and
abolition. Indeed after this Ablution there remains (...), or the material part
of our misery and sin: For Christ by his death only took away that which, when
he did die for us, he bare in his own body upon the tree. Now Christ only bare
the punishment of our sin, and therefore we shall not die for it; but the
material part of the sin Christ bare not: Sin could not come so near him; it
might make him sick and die, but not disordered and stained. He was pure from
Original and Actual sins; and therefore that remains in the body, though the
guilt and (...) be (...) off, and changed into advantages and grace; and the
Actual are (...) by the Spirit of Grace descending afterward upon, the Church,
and sent by our Lord to the same purpose.

33. But it is not rationally to be answered what S. Ambrose says, Quia omnis
peccato (...).
(...): For it were strange that sin and misery (...). l. 2. c. (...).
should seize upon the innocent and most (...) persons; and that they only
should be left without a Sacrament, and an instrument of expiation. And
although they cannot consent to the present susception, yet neither do they
refuse; and yet they consent as much to the grace of the Sacrament as to the
prevarication of Adam; and because (...) under this, it were but reason they
should be relieved by that. And (...). (...) (...). 40. (...) S. (...)
it (...) (as Gregory (...) (...)) that they should be consigned and sanctified
without their own knowledge, than to die without their being sanctified; for so
it happened to the (...) of Israel: and if the conspersion and washing the
door-posts with the blood of a Lamb did sacramentally preserve all the
firstborn of Goshen; it cannot (...) thought impossible or unreasonable, that
the want of understanding in Children should hinder them from the blessing of a
Sacrament, and from being redeemed and washed with the blood of the Holy Lamb,
who was (...) for all from the beginning of the world.

34. After all this it is not inconsiderable, that we say the Church has great
power and authority about the Sacraments; which is observable in many
instances. She appointed what persons she pleased, and in equal power made an
unequal dispensation and ministry. The Apostles first dispensed all things,
and then they left off exterior ministeries to attend to the Word of God and
Prayer: and S. Paul accounted it no part of his office to Baptize, when he had
been separated by imposition of hands at Antioch to the work of Preaching and
greater ministeries; and accounted that act of the Church the act of Christ,
saying, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. They used
various forms in the ministration of Baptism: sometimes baptizing in the name
of Christ, sometimes expressly invocating the Holy and ever-Blessed Trinity; one
while [ (...) baptize (...),] as in the Latin Church, but in the Greek, [ Let
the servant of Christ be baptized.] And in all Ecclesiastical ministeries the
Church invented the forms, and in most things has often changed them, as in
Absolution, Excommunication. And sometimes they baptized people under their
profession of Repentance, and then taught them; as it happened to the Jailer
and his family; in whose case there was no explicit Faith (...) in the
mysteries of Religion, so far as appears, and yet he, and not only he, but all
his house were baptized at that hour of the night when the Earthquake was
terrible, and the (...) was pregnant upon them; and this upon their Master's
account, as it is likely: but others were baptized in the conditions of a
previous Faith, and a new-begun (...) as (...) it.
Repentance. They baptized in Rivers or in Lavatories, by dipping or by
sprinkling: for so we find that S. Laurence did as he went to martyrdom; and so
the Church did sometimes to Clinicks; and so it is highly convenient to be done
in Northern Countries; according to the Prophecy of (...), So shall (...)
(...). 52. 15.
sprinkle many Nations, according as the typical expiations among the Jews were
usually by sprinkling. And it is fairly relative to the mystery, to the
sprinkling with the (...) 1 (...). 1. 2.
of Christ, and the watering of the furrows of our Souls with the dew of
Heaven, to make them to bring forth fruit unto Aqua (...). and (...) anima
(...). m. 23. (...). 2.
the Spirit and unto Holiness. The Church sometimes dipped the Catechumen three
times, sometimes but once. Some Churches use Fire in their Baptisms; so do the
Ethiopians; (...), (...). Alex.
and the custom was ancient in (...) places. And so in the other Sacrament:
sometimes they stood, and sometimes kneeled; and sometimes received it in the
mouth, and sometimes in the hand; one while in (...), another while in
unlevened bread: sometimes the wine and water were mingled, sometimes they were
pure; and they admitted some persons to it sometimes, which at other times they
rejected: sometimes the Consecration was made by one form, sometimes by
another: and, to conclude, sometimes it was given to Infants, sometimes not.
And she had power so to do; for in all things where there was not a Commandment
of Christ expressed or implied in the nature and in the end of the Institution,
the Church had power to alter the particulars as was most expedient, or
conducing to edification. And although the after-Ages of the Church, which
refused to communicate Infants, have (...) some little things against the
lawfulness, and those Ages that used it found out some pretenses for its (...);
yet both the one and the other had liberty to follow their own necessities, so
in all things they followed Christ. Certainly there is (...) more reason why
Insants may be Communicated, than why they may not be Baptized. And that this
discourse may (...) to its first intention; although there is no record extant
of any Church in the world, and from the Apostles days inclusively to this very
day ever refused to Baptize their Children, yet if they had upon any present
reason, they might also change (...) practice, when the reason should be (...);
and therefore if there were nothing else in it, yet the universal practice of
all Churches in all Ages, is abundantly sufficient to determine us, and to
legitimate the practice, since Christ has not forbidden it. It is sufficient
confutation to disagreeing people to use the words of S. Paul, We have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God, to suffer Children to be strangers from the
Covenant of Promise, till they shall enter into it as (...) or Turks may enter,
that is, by choice and disputation. But although this (...) to modest and
obedient, that is, to Christian Spirits, be sufficient, yet this is more than
the question did need. It can stand upon its proper foundation.

(...) recentes ab uteris matrum baptizandos negat, anathema (...). Council
(...). 2.
He that refuses to baptize his Infants, shall be in danger of the Council.

The PRAYER.
OHoly and Eternal Jesus, who in thine own person were pleased to sanctify the
waters of Baptism, and by thy Institution and Commandment did make them
effectual to excellent purposes of grace and remedy, be pleased to verify the
holy effects of Baptism to me and all thy servants whose names are dedicated to
thee in an early and timely presentation, and enable us with thy grace to
verify all our promises, by which we are bound, then when thou did first
make us thy own proportion and (...) in the consummation of a holy Covenant. O
be pleased to pardon all those undecencies and unhandsome interruptions of that
state of favor in which thou did plant us by thy grace, and admit us by the
gates of Baptism: and let that Spirit which moved upon (...) holy Waters never
be absent from us, but call upon us and invite us by a perpetual argument and
daily solicitations and inducements to holiness; that we may never return to
the (...) of sin, but by the answer of a good Conscience may please thee and
glorify thy name and do honor to thy Religion and Institution in this world,
and may receive the blessings and the rewards of it in the world to come, being
presented to thee pure and spotless in the day of thy power when thou shall
lead thy Church to a Kingdom, and endless glories.

Amen.
Appendix ad Sect. 9. numb. 3. of JESUS being Baptized, etc.
Christ' s Prayer at his Baptism.
(...) (...) transcripsit and transmisit Eruditissimus vir, and linguarum
orientallium (...) gnarus, Du. (...), J. V. D. and Juris (...) publicus in
Academia Dull (...) apud Hi bernos, prosessor (...) uarum Orientalium apud
eosdem.


O Father, according to the good pleasure of thy will I am made a Man, and from
the time in which I was born of a Virgin unto this day I have finished those
things which are agreeing to the nature of Man, and with due observance have
performed all thy Commandments, the mysteries and types of the Law: and now
truly I am baptized, and so have I ordained Baptism, that from thence, as from
the place of spiritual birth, the Regeneration of men may be accomplished: and
as John was the last of the Legal Priests, so am I the first of the
Evangelical. Thou therefore, O Father, by the mediation of my Prayer open the
Heavens, and from thence send thy Holy Spirit upon this womb of Baptism; that
as he did untie the womb of the Virgin, and thence form me, so also he would
loose this Baptismal womb, and so sanctify it unto men, that from thence new
men may be begotten, who may become thy Sons, and my Brethren, and Heirs of thy
Kingdom. And what the Priests under the Law until John could not do, grant unto
the Priests of the New Testament, (whose chief I am in the oblation of this
Prayer) that whenever they shall celebrate Baptism, or pour forth Prayers
unto thee, as the Holy Spirit is seen with me in open vision, so also it may be
made manifest that the same Spirit will adjoyn himself in their society a more
secret way, and will by them persorm the ministeries of the New Testament, for
which I am made a Man; and as the High Priest I do offer these Prayers in thy
sight.

This Prayer was transcribed out of the Syriack Catena upon the third Chapter
of S. Luke's Gospel, and is by the Author of that Catena reported to have been
made by our Blessed Savior immediately before the opening of the Heavens at
his Baptism; and that the Holy Spirit did (...) upon him while he was thus
praying: and for it he cites the Authority of S. Philoxenus. I cannot but
foresee that there is one clause in it which will be used as an objection
against the authority of this Prayer; viz. [ as John was the last of Legal
Priests:] For he was no Priest at all, nor ever officiated in the Temple, or at
the Mosaic Rites. But this is nothing: because, that the Baptist was of the
family of the Priests, his Father Zachary is a demonstration; that he did not
(...), his being employed in another Ministry is a sufficient answer; that he
was the last of the Priests is to be understood in this sense, that he was the
period of the Law, the common term between the Law and the Gospel: by him the
Gospel was first preached solemnly, and therefore in him the Law first ended.
And as he was the last of the Prophets, so he was the last of the Priests: not
but that after him many had the gift of Prophecy, and some did officiate in the
Mosaical Priesthood; but that his Office put the first period to the solemnity
of Moses's Law, that is, at him the Dispensation Evangelical did first enter.

That the Ministers of the Gospel are here called Priests, ought not to be a
prejudice against this Prayer in the persuasions of any men; because it was
usual with our Blessed Savior to retain the words of the Jews his Countrymen
before whom he spoke, that they might by words to which they were used be
instructed in the notice of persons and things, offices and ministeries
Evangelical, which afterward were to be represented under other, that is,
under their proper, names.

And now all that I shall say of it is this: 1. That it is not unlikely but our
Blessed Savior prayed when he was baptized, and when the Holy Ghost descended
upon him; not only because it was an employment symbolical to the Grace he was
to receive, but also to become to us a precedent by what means we are to
receive the Holy Spirit of God. 2. That it is very likely our Blessed Lord
would consecrate the Waters of Baptism to those mysterious ends whither he
designed them, as well as the Bread and Chalice of the Holy Supper. 3. That it
is most likely the Easterlings did preserve a record of many words and actions
of the Holy Jesus which are not transmitted to us. 4. It is certain that our
Blessed Lord did do and say many more things than are in the Holy Scriptures;
and that this was one of them we have the credit of this ancient Author, and
the Authority of S. Philoxenus. However, it is much better to make such good
use of it as the matter and piety of the Prayer will minister, than to quarrel
at it by the imperfection of uncertain conjectures.

The End of the First Part.
THE HISTORY OF THE Life and Death OF THE HOLY JESUS: BEGINNING At the time of
his first MIRACLE, until the Second Year of his PREACHING: WITH CONSIDERATIONS
and DISCOURSES upon the several parts of the Story; And PRAYERS fitted to the
several MYSTERIES.

THE SECOND PART.

Chrysostom. ad Demet. (...)

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for R. Royston, 1675.

TO The Right Honorable and Excellent Lady, THE LADY MARY Countess Dowager of
NORTHAMPTON.
I AM now to present to your Honor part of that Production of which your great
love to Sanctity was Parent, and which was partly designed to satisfy those
great appetites to Virtue which have made you hugely apprehensive and forward
to entertain any Instrument whereby you may grow and increase in the Service of
God, and the Communion and Charities of holy people. Your Honor best knows in
what Soil the first Design of these Papers grew; and but that the Excellent
Personage who was their first Root is transplanted for a time, that he may not
have his righteous Soul vexed with the impurer Conversation of illminded men, I
am confident you would have received the fruits of his abode to more excellent
purposes. But because he was pleased to leave the managing of this to me, I
hope your Honor will for his sake entertain what that rare Person conceived,
though I was left to the pains and danger of bringing forth; and that it may
dwell with you for its first relation, rather than be rejected for its
appendent imperfections, which it contracted not in the fountain, but in the
channels of its progress and emanation. Madam, I shall beg of God that your
Honor may receive as great increment of Piety and ghostly strength in the
reading this Book, as I receive honor if you shall be pleased to accept and
own this as a confession of your great Worthiness, and a testimony of the
Service which ought to be paid to your Honor by,

Madam, Your Honor's most humble and most obliged Servant, JER. TAILOR.

SECT. X. Of the first Manifestation of JESUS, by the Testimony of John, and a
Miracle.
John points to Jesus.
The next day John sees Jesus coming unto him, and says, Behold the Lamb of
God, which takes away the sin of the world. This is he of whom. I said, after
me comes a man, which is preserred before me; for he was before me. And I knew
him not, but that he should be made manifest to Israel. Ioh. 1. 29, 30, 31.

Christ turns water into wine.
There was a marriage in Cana of Galilee. And there were set there six water
pots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews, containing two
or three firkins a piece. Jesus says unto them, fill the water pots with
water, and they filled them to the brim. Jesus says unto them draw out now
etc. This begin^ing of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested
forth his glory. Ioh. 2 6, 7, 8-11.




1. AFTER that the Baptist by a sign from Heaven was confirmed in spirit and
understanding that Jesus was the Messiah, he immediately published to the Jews
what God had manifested to him; and first to the Priests and (...), sent in
legation from the Sanhedrim, he professed indefinitely, in answer to their
question, that himself was John 1. 20, 21.
not the CHRIST, nor Elias, nor that Prophet whom they by a special Tradition
did expect to be revealed they knew not when. And concerning himself definitely
he said nothing, but that he was V. 23.
the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord.
He it was who was then V. 26.
amongst them, but not known, a person of great dignity, to whom the Baptist
was V. 27.
not worthy to do the office of the lowest Ministry, V. 15, 27, 30.
who coming after John was preferred far before him, who Chap. 3. 30.
was to increase, and the Baptist was to decrease, who did Matt. 3. 11.
baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire.

2. This was the Character of his personal Prerogatives; but as yet no
demonstration was made of his Person, till after the descent of the Holy Ghost
upon Jesus, and then whenever the Baptist saw Jesus, he points him out with
his finger, Behold the Lamb Joh 11. 29, 36.
of God which takes away the sins of the World: This is he. Then he shows him
to Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, with the same designation, and to another
Disciple with V. 37, 39.
him, who both followed Jesus, and abode with him all night: Andrew brings his
brother Simon with him, and then Christ changes his name from Simon to Peter,
or Cephas, which signifies a Stone. Then Jesus himself finds out Philip of
Bethsaida, and bad him follow him; and Philip finds out Nathanael, and calls
him to see. Thus persons bred in a dark cell, upon their first ascent up to the
chambers of light, all run staring upon the beauties of the Sun, and call the
partners of their darkness to communicate in their new and stranger revelation.

3. When Nathanael was come to Jesus, Christ saw his heart, and gave him a
testimony to be truly honest, and full of holy simplicity, a true Israelite
without guile. And Nathanael, being overjoyed that he had found the Messiah,
believing out of love, and loving by reason of his joy, and no suspicion, took
that for a proof and verification of his person, which was very insufficient to
(...) a doubt, or ratify a probability: But so we believe a story which we
love, taking probabilities for demonstrations, and casual accidents for
probabilities, and any thing creates vehement presumptions; in which cases our
guides are not our knowing faculties, but our (...), and if they be holy, God
guides them into the right persuasions, as he does little birds to make rare
nests, though they understand not the mystery of operation, nor the design and
purpose of the action.

4. But Jesus took his will and forwardness of affections in so good part, that
he promised him greater things; and this gave occasion to the first Prophecy
which was made by Jesus. For Jesus said (...) him, (...) I said I saw thee
under the Fig Tree, believe thou? Thou shall see greater things than these:
and then he prophesied that he S. Aug. (...). 17. c. 1. in Joan.
should see Heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon
the Son of Man. But, being a Doctor of the Law, Christ chose him not at all to
the College of Apostles.

5. Much about the same time there happened to be a Marriage in Cana (...)
Galilee, in the vicinage of his dwelling, where John the Evangelist is by some
supposed to have been the Bridegroom; (but of this there is no certainty:) and
thither Jesus being with his (...) invited, he went to do civility to the
persons espoused, and to do honor to the holy rite of Marriage. The persons
then married were but of indifferent fortunes, richer in love of neighbors
than in the (...) of rich possessions; they had more company than wine. For the
Master of the Feast (whom, according to the order and piety of the Nation, they
chose (...) the order of (...). (...) (...). in (...).
Priests to be the president of the Feast, by the reverence of his person to
restrain all inordination, by his discretion to govern and order the
Circumstances, by his religious knowledge to direct the solemnities of
Marriage, and to retain all the persons and actions in the bounds of prudence
and modesty) complained to the Bridegroom that the Guests wanted (...).

6. As soon as the Holy Virgin Mother had notice of the want, out of charity,
that uses to be employed in (...) even the minutes and smallest articles of
necessity as well as the clamorous importunity of extremities and great
indigencies, she complained to her Son by an indefinite address; not desiring
him to make supply, for she knew not how he should; but either out of an
habitual commiseration she complained without hoping for remedy, or else she
looked on him who was a fountain of holiness and of plenty, as expecting a
derivation from him either of discourses or Miracles. But Jesus answered her,
Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come. By this answer
intending no denial to the purpose of his Mother's intimation, to whom he
always bare a religious and pious reverence; but to signify that he was not
yet entered into his period and years of Miracles; and when he did, it must be
not for respect of kindred or civil relations, but as it is a derivation of
power from above, so it must be in pursuit of that service and design which he
had received in charge together with his power.

7. And so his Mother understood him, giving express charge to the ministers to
do whatsoever he commanded. Jesus therefore bad them fill the water-pots which
stood there for the use of frequent washings, which the Jews did use in all
public meetings, for fear of touching pollutions, or contracting legal
impurities: which they did with a curiousness next to superstition, washing the
very beds and tables used at their Feasts. The ministers filled them to the
brim, and, as they were commanded, drew out, and bare (...) the Governor of
the Feast, who knew not of it, till the Miracle grew public, and like light
showed it self: for while they wondered at the economy of that Feast in keeping
the best wine till the last, it grew apparent that he who was the Lord of the
Creatures, who in their first seeds have an obediential capacity to receive the
impresses of what forms he pleases to imprint, could give new natures, and
produce new qualities in that subject in which he chooses to glorify his Son.

8. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee. For all those
Miracles which are reported to be done by Christ in his Infancy, and interval
of his younger years, are Apocryphal and spurious, feigned by trifling
understandings, (who think to serve God with a well-meant lie,) and promoted by
the credulity of such persons in whose hearts easiness, folly, and credulity
are bound up and tied fast with silken thread, and easy softnesses of
religious affections, not made severe by the rigours of wisdom and experience.
This first Miracle manifested his Glory, and his Disciples believed in him.

Ad SECT. X. Considerations touching the Vocation of five Disciples, and of the
first Miracle of JESUS, done at Cana in Galilee.
Christ calling Peter and Andrew.
Matthew. 4. 18, 19, 20. Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee saw two brethren,
Simon called Peter and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, (for
they were fishers). And he says unto them, follow me, and I will make you
fishers of men. And they straightway left their nets, and followed him.

Nathanaels coming to Christ.
John 45, 46. Philip finds Nathanael and says unto him, we have found him,
of whom Moses in ye ^ and ye prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth ye son of
Joseph, Nathanael said unto him, can any good thing come out of Nazareth?
Philip says unto him, come and see. Jesus saw Nathanael coming, and said,
Behold an Israelite indeed, etc.




1. AS soon as ever John the Baptist was taught by the descent of the Holy
Spirit that this was Jesus, he instantly preaches him to all that came near
him. For the Holy Ghost was his Commission and instruction; and now he was a
Minister Evangelical, and taught all those that have the honor to be servants
in so sacred employment, that they must not go till they be sent, nor speak
till they be instructed, (...) yet hold their peace when their Commission is
signed by the consignation of the Spirit in ordinary Ministry. For all power
and all wisdom is from above, and in spiritual ministrations is a direct
emanation from the Holy Spirit: that as no man is fit to speak the Mysteries of
Godliness, be his person never so holy, unless he derive wisdom in order to
such ministeries; so be he never so instructed by the assistance of art or
infused knowledge, yet unless he also have derived power as well as skill,
authority as well as knowledge from the same Spirit, he is not enabled to
minister in public in ordinary ministrations. The Baptist was sent by a prime
designation to prepare the way to Jesus, and was instructed by the same (...),
which had sanctified or consecrated him in his Mother's womb to this holy
purpose.

2. When the Baptist had showed Jesus to Andrew and another Disciple, they
immediately followed him with the distances and fears of the first approach,
and the infirmities of new Converts; but Jesus seeing them follow their first
light, invited them to see the Sun: For God loves to cherish Infants in grace,
and having sown the immortal seed in their hearts, if it takes root downwards,
and springs out into the verdure of a leaf, he still waters it with the gentle
rain of the Holy Spirit, in graces and new assistances, till it brings forth
the fruits of a holy conversation. And God, who knows that Infants have need of
pleasant, and gentle, and frequent nutriment, has given to them this comfort,
that himself will take care of their first beginnings, and improve them to the
strength of men, and give them the strengths of nature, and the wisdom of the
Spirit, which ennoble men to excellencies and perfections. By the preaching of
the Baptist they were brought to seek for Christ, and when they did, Christ
found them, and brought them home, and made them stay all night with him; which
was more favor than they looked for. For so God usually dispenses his mercies,
that they may run over our thoughts and expectations, and they are given in no
proportion to us, but according to God's measures; he considering not what we
are worthy of, but what is fit for him to give; he only requiring of us
capacities to receive his favor, and fair reception and entertainment of his
graces.

3. When Andrew had found Jesus, he calls his Brother Simon to be partaker of
his joys, which (as it happens in accidents of greatest pleasure) cannot be
contained within the limits of the possessor's thoughts. But this calling of
Peter was not to a beholding, but to a participation of his felicities: for he
is strangely covetous who would enjoy the Sun, or the Air, or the Sea, alone;
here was treasure sor him and all the world: and by lighting his brother
Simon's taper, he made his own light the greater and more glorious. And this is
the nature of Grace, to be diffusive of its own excellencies; for here no (...)
can inhabit: the proper and personal ends of holy persons in the contract and
transmissions of Grace are increased by the participation and communion of
others. For our Prayers are more effectual, our aids increased, our
encouragement and examples more prevalent, God more honored, and the rewards
of glory have accidental advantages, by the superaddition of every new Saint
and beatified person; the members of the mystical body, when they have received
nutriment from God and his Holy Son, supplying to each other the same which
themselves received, and live on, in the communion of Saints. Every new Star
gilds the firmament, and increases its first glories: and those who are
instruments of the Conversion of others, shall not only introduce new beauties,
but when themselves shine like the stars in glory, they shall have some
reflections from the light of others, to whose fixing in the Orb of Heaven
themselves have been instrumental. And this consideration is not only of use in
the exaltations of the dignity Apostolical and Clerical, but for the enkindling
even of private charities; who may do well to promote others interests of
Piety, in which themselves also have some concernment.

4. These Disciples asked of Christ where he (...): Jesus answered, Come and
see. It was an answer very expressive of our duty in this instance. It is not
enough for us to understand where Christ inhabits, or where he is to be found;
for our understandings may follow him afar off, and we receive no satisfaction
unless it be to curiosity; but we must go where he is, eat of his meat, wash in
his Lavatory, rest on his beds, and dwell with him: for the Holy Jesus has no
kind influence upon those who stand at distance, save only the affections of a
Loadstone, apt to draw them nigher, that he may transmit his virtues by union
and confederations; but if they persist in a sullen distance, they shall learn
his glories as Dives understood the peace of Lazarus, of which he was never to
participate. Although the Son of man has not where to lay his head, yet he
has many houses where to convey his Graces; he has nothing to cover his own,
but he has enough to sanctify ours: and as he dwelt in such houses which the
charity of good people then afforded for his entertainment; so now he loves to
abide in places which the Religion of his servants has vowed to his honor,
and the advantages of Evangelical ministrations. Thither we must come to him,
or any-where else where we may enjoy him: He is to be found in a Church, in his
ordinances, in the communion of Saints, in every religious duty, in the heart
of every holy person; and if we go to him by the addresses of Religion in Holy
places, by the ministry of Holy rites, by Charity, by the adherences of Faith,
and Hope, and other combining Graces, the Graces of union and society, or
prepare a lodging for him within us, that he may come to us, then shall we see
such glories and interior beauties, which none (...) and (...). Clem. Alex,
(...).
know but they that dwell with him. The secrets of spiritual benediction are
understood only by them to whom they are conveyed, even by the children of his
house. Come and see.

5. S. Andrew was first called, and that by Christ immediately, his Brother
Simon next, and that by Andrew; but yet Jesus changed Simon's name, and not the
other's; and by this change designed him to an eminency of Office, at least in
signification, principally above his Brother, or else separately and distinctly
from him: to show that these Graces and favors which do not immediately
cooperate to eternity, but are gifts and offices, or impresses of authority,
are given to men irregularly, and without any order of predisponent causes, or
probabilities on our part, but are issues of absolute predestination; and as
they have efficacy from those reasons which God conceals, so they have some
purposes as conccal'd as their causes; only if God pleases to make us vessels
of fair employment and of great capacity, we shall bear a greater burden, and
are bound to glorify God with special offices. But as these exterior and
ineffective Graces are given upon the same good will of God which made this
matter to be a humane Body, when, if God had so pleased, it was as capable of
being made a Fungus or a Sponge: so they are given to us with the same
intentions as are our Souls, that we might glorify God in the distinct
capacity of Grace, as before of a reasonable nature. And besides that it
teaches us to magnify God's free mercy, so it removes every such exalted
person from being an object of envy to others, or from pleasing himself in
vainer opinions: for God has made him of such an employment as freely and
voluntarily as he has made him a Man, and he no more cooperated to this Grace
than to his own creation, and may as well admire himself for being born in
Italy, or from rich parents, or for having two hands or two feet, as for having
received such a designation extraordinary. But these things are never
instruments of reputation among severe understandings, and never but in the
sottish and unmanly apprehensions of the vulgar. Only this, when God has
imprinted an authority upon a person, although the man has nothing to please
himself withal but God's grace, yet others are to pay the duty which that
impression demands; which duty because it rapports to God, and touches not the
man, (...) as it passes through him to the fountain of authority and grace, it
extinguishes all (...) of opinion and pride.

6. When Jesus espied (...) (who also had been called by the first Disciples)
coming toward him, he gave him an excellent character, calling him a true
Israelite in whom was no guile, and admitted him amongst the first Disciples of
the Institution; by this character in one of the first of his Scholars
hallowing Simplicity of spirit, and receiving it into his Discipline, that it
might now become a virtue and duty Evangelical. For although it concerns us as
a Christian duty to be prudent, yet the Prudence of Christianity is a duty of
spiritual effect, and in instances of Religion with no other purposes than to
avoid giving offense to those that are without and within; that we cause no
disreputation to Christianity; that we do nothing that may encourage enemies to
the Religion; and that those that are within the communion and obedience of the
Church may not suffer as great inconveniences by the indiscreet conduct of
religious actions as by direct temptations to a sin. These are the purposes of
private Prudence, to which in a greater measure and upon more variety of rules
the Governors of Churches are obliged. But that which Christian Simplicity
prohibits is the mixing arts and unhandsome means for the purchase of our ends;
witty counsels that are underminings of our neighbor, destroying his just
interest to serve our own, stratagems to deceive, infinite and insignificant
answers with fraudulent design, unjust and unlawful concealment of our
purposes, fallacious promises and false pretenses, flattery and unjust and
unreasonable praise, saying one thing and meaning the contrary, pretending
Religion to secular designs, breaking faith, taking false oaths, and such other
instruments of humane purposes framed by the Devil, and sent into the world to
be perfected by man. Christian Simplicity speaks nothing but its thoughts; and
when it concerns Prudence that a thought or purpose should be concealed, it
concerns Simplicity that silence be its cover, and not a false vizor; it rather
suffers inconvenience than a lie; it destroys no man's right, though it be
inconsistent with my advantages; it reproves freely, palliates no man's
wickedness; it intends what it ought, and does what is bidden, and uses courses
regular and just, sneaks not in corners, and walks always in the eye of God and
the face of the world.

7. Jesus told Nathanael that he knew him, when he saw him under the Fig Tree;
and Nathanael took that to be probation sufficient that he was the (...), and
believed rightly upon an insufficient motive: which because Jesus did accept,
it gives testimony to us, that however Faith be produced, by means regular or
by arguments incompetent, whether it be proved or not proved, whether by chance
or deliberation, whether wisely or by occasion, so that Faith be produced by
the instrument, and love by Faith, God's work is done, and so is ours. For if
S. Paul rejoiced that Christ was preached, though by the (...) of peevish
persons; certainly God will not reject an excellent product because it came
from a weak and sickly parent: and he that brings good out of evil, and
rejoices in that good, having first triumphed upon the evil, will certainly
take delight in the Faith of the most ignorant persons, which his own grace
has produced out of innocent, though insufficient, beginnings. It was folly in
Naaman to refuse to be cured, because he was to recover only by washing in
Jordan. The more incompetent the means is, the greater is the glory of God, who
has produced waters from a rock, and fire from the collision of a sponge and
wool; and it is certain, the end, unless it be in products merely natural, does
not take its estimate and degrees from the external means. Grace does miracles,
and the productions of the Spirit in respect of its instruments are equivocal,
extraordinary, and supernatural; and ignorant persons believe as strongly,
though they know not why, and love God as (...), as greater spirits and more
excellent understandings: and when God pleases, or if he sees it expedient, he
will do to others as to Nathanael, give them greater arguments and better
instruments for the confirmation and heightning of their (...), than they had
for the first production.

8. When Jesus had chosen these few Disciples to be witnesses of succeeding
accidents, every one of which was to be a probation of his mission and
Divinity, he entered into the theater of the world at a Marriage Feast, which he
now first hallowed to a Sacramental signification, and made to become
mysterious: he now began to choose his Spouse out from the communities of the
world, and did mean to endear her by unions ineffable and glorious, and consign
the Sacrament by his blood, which he first gave in a secret (...), and
afterward in (...) and apparent effusion. And although the Holy Jesus did in
his own person consecrate Coelibate, and Abstinence, and Chastity in his
Mother's: yet by his (...) he also hallowed Marriage, and made it honorable,
not only in civil account and the rites of Heraldry, but in a spiritual sense,
he having new sublimed it by making it a Sacramental representment of the union
of Christ and his (...) the Church. And all married persons should do (...) to
remember what the conjugal society does represent, and not break the
matrimonial bond, which is a (...) ligament of Christ and his Church; for
whoever dissolves the sacredness of the Mystery, and unhallows the Vow by
violence and impurity, he dissolves his relation to Christ. To break faith with
a Wife or Husband is a divorce from Jesus, and that is a separation from all
possibilities of Felicity. In the time of the (...) Statutes, to violate
Marriage was to do injustice and dishonor and a breach to the sanctions of
Nature, or the first constitutions: But two bands more are added in the Gospel,
to make Marriage more sacred. For now our Bodies are made Temples of the Holy
Ghost, and the Rite of Marriage is made significant and Sacramental, and every
act of Adultery is Profanation and Irreligion, it (...) a Temple, and deflours
a Mystery.

9. The Married pair were holy, but poor, and they wanted wine, and the Blessed
Virgin Mother, pitying the (...) of the young man, complained to Jesus of the
want; and (...) gave her an answer which promised no satisfaction to her
purposes. For now that Jesus had lived thirty years, and done in person nothing
answerable to (...) glorious Birth and the miraculous accidents of his Person,
she longed till the time (...) in which he was to manifest himself by actions
as miraculous as the Star of his Birth: She knew by the rejecting of his Trade,
and his going abroad, and probably by his own (...) to her, that the time was
near; and the forwardness of her love and holy desires (...) might go some
minutes before his own precise limit. However (...) answered to this purpose,
to show, that the work he was to do was done not to satisfy her importunity,
which is not occasion enough for a Miracle, but to prosecute the great work of
Divine designation. For in works spiritual and religious all exterior relation
ceases. The world's order, and the manner of our nature, and the infirmities of
our person have produced Societies, and they have been the parents of Relation;
and God has tied them fast by the knots of duty, and made the duty the
occasion and opportunities of reward: But in actions spiritual, in which we
relate to God, our relations are sounded upon the Spirit, and therefore we must
do our duties upon considerations separate and spiritual, but never suffer
temporal relations to impede our Religious duties. Christian Charity is a
higher thing than to be confined within the terms of dependence and
correlation, (...). (...) in exposit. general.
and those endearments which leagues or nature or society have made, pass into
spiritual, and, like Stars in the presence of the Sun, appear not when the
heights of the Spirit are in place. Where duty has prepared special instances,
there we must for Religion's sake promote them; but even to our Parents or our
Children the charities of Religion ought to be greater than the affections of
Society: And though we are bound in all offices exterior to prefer our
Relatives before others, because that is made a Duty; yet to purposes
spiritual, all persons eminently holy put on the efficacy of the same
relations, and pass a duty upon us of religious affections.

10. At the command of Jesus the Water-pots were filled with water, and the
water was by his Divine power turned into wine; where the different economy of
God and the world is highly observable. Every man sets forth good wine at
first, and then the worse: But God not only turns the water into wine, but into
such wine that the last draught is most pleasant. The world presents us with
fair language, promising (...), convenient fortunes, pompous honors, and these
are the outsides of the bole; but when it is swallowed, these dissolve in the
instant, and there remains (...), and the malignity of Coloquintida. Every sin
(...) in the first address, and carries light in the face, and honey in the lip;
but when we have well drunk, then comes that which is worse, a whip with six
strings, fears and terrors of Conscience, and shame and displeasure, and a
caitive disposition, and diffidence in the day of death. But when after the
manner of the purifying of the Christians we fill our Water-pots with water,
watering our couch with our tears, and moistening our cheeks with the perpetual
distillations of Repentance; then Christ turns our water into wine; first
Penitents, and then Communicants; first waters of sorrow, and then the wine of
the Chalice; first the justifications of Correction, and then the
sanctifications of the Sacrament, and the effects of the Divine power, joy, and
peace, and serenity, hopes full of confidence, and confidence without shame,
and boldness without presumption: for Jesus keeps the best wine till the last;
not only because of the direct reservations of the highest joys till the nearer
approaches of glory, but also because our relishes are higher after a long
(...) than at the first Essays; such being the nature of Grace, that it
increases in relish as it does in fruition, every part of Grace being new Duty
and new Reward.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal and ever-Blessed Jesu, who did choose Disciples to be witnesses of
thy Life and Miracles, so adopting man into a participation of thy great
employment of bringing us to Heaven by the means of a holy Doctrine; be pleased
to give me thy grace, that I may (...) and revere their Persons whom thou have
set over me, and follow their Faith, and imitate their Lives, while they
imitate thee; and that I also in my capacity and proportion may do some of the
meaner offices of spiritual building, by Prayers, and by holy Discourses, and
(...) Correption, and friendly Exhortations, doing advantages to such Souls
with whom I shall converse. And since thou were pleased to enter upon the stage
of the World with the commencement of Mercy and a Miracle, be pleased to visit
my Soul with thy miraculous grace, turn my water into wine, my natural desires
into supernatural perfections, and let my sorrows be turned into joys, my sins
into virtuous habits, the weaknesses of humanity into communications of the
(...) nature; that since thou keep the best unto the last, I may by thy
assistance grow from Grace to Grace, till thy Gifts be turned to Reward, and
thy Graces to participation of thy Glory, O Eternal and ever-Blessed Jesu.

Amen.
DISCOURSE VII. Of Faith.
1. NAthanael's Faith was produced by an argument not demonstrative, not
certainly concluding; Christ knew him when he saw him first, and he believed
him to be the Messiah: His Faith was excellent, whatever the argument was. And
I believe a GOD, because the Sun is a glorious body; or because of the variety
of Plants, or the fabric and rare contexture of a man's Eye: I may as fully
assent to the Conclusion, as if my belief dwelt upon the Demonstrations made by
the Prince of Philosophers in the 8. of his Physics and 12. of his
Metaphysics. This I premise as an inlet into the consideration concerning the
Faith of ignorant persons. For if we consider upon what (...) terms most of us
now are Christians, we may possibly suspect that either Faith has but little
excellence in it, or we but little Faith, or that we are mistaken generally in
its definition. For we are born of Christian parents, made Christians at ten
days old, interrogated concerning the Articles of our Faith by way of
anticipation, even then when we understand not the difference between the Sun
and a Tallow-candle: from thence we are taught to say our Catechism, as we are
taught to speak, when we have no reason to judge, no discourse to dilcern, no
arguments to contest against a Proposition, in case we be catechized into False
doctrine; and all that is put to us we believe infinitely, and without choice,
as children use not to choose their language. And as our children are made
Christians, just so are thousand others made Mahumetans, with the same
necessity, the same facility. So that thus sar there is little thanks due to us
for believing the Christian Creed; it was indifferent to us at first, and at
last our Education had so possessed us, and our interest, and our no temptation
to the contrary, that as we were disposed into this condition by Providence, so
we remain in it without praise or excellency. For as our beginnings are
inevitable, so our progress is imperfect and insufficient; and what we begun by
Education, we retain only by Custom: and if we be instructed in some slighter
Arguments to maintain the Sect or Faction of our Country Religion as it
disturbs the unity of Christendom; yet if we examine and consider the account
upon what slight arguments we have taken up Christianity it self, (as that it
is the Religion of our Country, or that our Fathers before us were of the same
Faith, or because the Priest bids us, and he is a good man, or for something
else, but we know not what) we must needs conclude it the good providence of
God, not our choice, that made us Christians.

2. But if the question be, Whether such a Faith be in it self good and
acceptable that relies upon insufficient and unconvincing grounds; I suppose
this case of Nathanael will determine us: and when we consider that Faith is an
(...) Grace, if God pleases to behold his own glory in our weakness of
understanding, it is but the same thing he does in the instances of his other
Graces. For as God enkindles Charity upon variety of means and instruments, by
a thought, by a chance by a text of Scripture, by a natural tenderness, by the
sight of a dying or a tormented beast: so also he may produce Faith by
arguments of a differing quality, and by issues of his Providence he may engage
us in such conditions, in which as our Understanding is not great enough to
choose the best, so neither is it furnished with powers to reject any
proposition; and to believe well is an effect of a singular predestination, and
is a Gift in order to a Grace, as that Grace is in order to Salvation. But the
insufficiency of an argument or disability to prove our Religion is so far from
disabling the goodness of an ignorant man's Faith, that as it may be as strong
as the Faith of the greatest Scholar, so it has full as much excellency, not
of nature, but in order to Divine acceptance. For as he who believes upon the
only stock of Education made no election of his Faith; so he who believes what
is demonstrably proved is forced by the demonstration to his choice. Neither of
them did (...) and both of them may equally love the Article.

3. So that since a (...) Argument in a weak understanding does the same work
that a strong Argument in a more (...) and learned, that is, it convinces and
makes Faith, and yet neither of them is matter of choice; if the thing believed
be good, and matter of (...) or necessity, the Faith is not rejected by God
upon the weakness of the first, nor accepted upon the strength of the latter
principles: when we are once in, it will not be enquired by what entrance we
passed thither; whether God leads us or drives us in, whether we come by
Discourse or by Inspiration, by the guide of an Angel or the conduct of Moses,
whether we be born or made Christians, it is indifferent, so we be there where
we should be; for this is but the gate of Duty, and the entrance to Felicity.
For thus far Faith is but an act of the Understanding, which is a natural
Faculty, serving indeed as an instrument to Godliness, but of it self no part
of it; and it is just like fire producing its act inevitably, and burning as
long as it can, without power to interrupt or suspend its action; and therefore
we cannot be more pleasing to God for understanding rightly, than the fire is
for burning clearly: which puts us evidently upon this consideration, that
Christian Faith, that glorious Duty which gives to Christians a great degree of
approximation to God by Jesus Christ, must have a great proportion of that
ingredient which makes actions good or bad, that is, of choice and effect.

4. For the Faith of a Christian has more in it of the Will than of the
Understanding. Faith is that great mark of distinction which separates and
gives formality to the Covenant of the Gospel, which is a Law of Faith. The
Faith of a Christian is his Religion, that is, it is that whole conformity to
the Institution or Discipline of Jesus Christ which distinguishes him from the
believers of false Religions. And to be one of the faithful signifies the same
with being a Disciple; and that contains Obedience as well as believing. For to
the same sense are all those appellatives in Scripture, [ the Faithful,
Brethren, Believers, the Saints, Disciples,] all representing the duty of a
Christian. A Believer and a Saint, or a holy person, is the same thing;
Brethren signifies Charity, and Believers Faith in the intellectual sense: the
Faithful and Disciples signify both; for besides the consent to the
Proposition, the first of them is also used for Perseverance and Sanctity, and
the greatest of Charity mixed with a confident Faith up to the height of
Martyrdom. Be faithful unto the death, (said the Holy Spirit) and I Rev. 2. 10.
will give thee the Crown of life. And when the Apostles by way of abbreviation
express all the body of Christian Religion, they call it Faith working by Love;
which also (...). 5 6.
S. Paul in a parallel place calls a New Creature; it is a keeping of the
Commandments of Chapter 6. 15.
1 (...). 7. 19.
God: that is the Faith of a Christian, into whose desinition Charity is
ingredient, whose sense is the same with keeping of God's Commandments; so that
if we desine Faith, we must first distinguish it. The faith of a natural
person, or the says of Devils, is a (...) believing a certain number of
Propositions upon conviction of the Understanding: But the Faith of a
Christian; the Faith that justifies and saves him, is Faith working by Charity,
or Faith keeping the Commandments of God. They are distinct Gal. 5. 6.
Faiths in order to different ends, and therefore of different constitution;
and the instrument of distinction is Charity or Obedience.

5. And this great Truth is clear in the perpetual testimony of Holy Scripture.
For Abraham is called the Father of the Faithful; and yet our Blessed Savior
told the Jews, that if they had been the sons of Abraham, they would have done
the works of Abraham; John 8. 39.
and therefore Good works are by the Apostle called the sootsteps of the Faith
of our Father Romans 4. 12.
Abraham. For Faith in every of its stages, at its first beginning, at its
increment, at its greatest perfection, is a Duty made up of the concurrence of
the Will and the Understanding, when it pretends to the Divine acceptance;
Faith and Repentance begin the Christian course. Repent and believe the Gospel
was the sum of the Apostles Sermons; and all the way after it is, Faith
working by Love. Repentance puts the first spirit and life into Faith, and
Charity preserves it, and gives it nourishment and increase; it self also
growing by a mutual supply of spirits and nutriment from Faith. Whoever does
heartily believe a Resurrection and Life eternal upon certain Conditions, will
certainly endeavor to acquire the Promises by the Purchase of Obedience and
observation of the Conditions. For it is not in the nature or power of man
directly to despise and reject so (...) a good: So that Faith supplies Charity
with argument and maintenance, and Charity supplies Faith with life and motion;
Faith makes Charity reasonable, and Charity makes Faith living and effectual.
And therefore the old Greeks called Faith (...)
and Charity a miraculous Chariot or Yoke, they bear the burden of the Lord
with an equal consederation: these are like (...) twins, they live and die
together. Indeed Faith is the firstborn of the twins; but they must come both
at a birth, or else they die, being strangled at the gates of the womb. But if
Charity, like Jacob, lays hold upon his elder brother's heel, it makes a timely
and a prosperous birth, and gives certain title to the eternal Promises. For
let us give the right of primogeniture to Faith, yet the Blessing, yea and the
Inheritance too, will at last fall to Charity. Not that Faith is disinherited,
but that Charity only enters into the possession. The nature of Faith passes
into the excellency of Charity before they can be rewarded; and that both may
have their estimate, that which justifies and saves us keeps the name of Faith,
but does not do the deed till it has the nature of Charity. (...). (...).
For to think well, or to have a good opinion, or an excellent or a fortunate
understanding, entitles us not to the love of God, and the consequent
inheritance; but to choose the ways of the Spirit, and to relinquish the paths
of darkness, this is the way of the Kingdom, and the purpose of the Gospel, and
the proper work of Faith. (...). (...). l. 4. (...).


6. And if we consider upon what stock Faith it self is instrumental and
operative of Salvation, we shall find it is in it self acceptable, because it
is a Duty and commanded; and therefore it is an act of Obedience, a work of the
Gospel, a submitting the Understanding, a denying the Affections, a laying
aside all interests, and a bringing our thoughts under the obedience of Christ.
This the Apostle calls Romans 16. (...).
the Obedience of Faith. And it is of the same condition and constitution with
other Graces, all which equally relate to Christ, and are as firm instruments
of union, and are washed by the blood of Christ, and are sanctified by his
Death, and apprehend him in their capacity and degrees, some higher and some
not so high: but Hope and Charity apprehend Christ in a measure and proportion
greater than Faith, when it distinguishes from them. So that if Faith does the
work of Justification, as it is a mere relation to Christ, (...) so also does
Hope and Charity; or if these are Duties and good works, so also is Faith: and
they all being alike commanded in order to the same end, and encouraged by the
same reward, are also accepted upon the same stock, which is, that they are
acts of Obedience and relation too; they obey Christ, and lay hold upon
Christ's merits, and are but several instances of the great duty of a
Christian, but the actions of several faculties of the (...) Creature. But
(...) Faith is the beginning Grace, and has insluence and causality in the
production of the other, (...) all the other, as they are united in Duty, are
also united in their Title and appellative; they are all called by the name of
Faith, because they are parts of Faith, as Faith is taken in the larger sense:
and when it is taken in the strictest and distinguishing sense, they are (...)
and proper products by way of natural emanation.

7. That a good life is the genuine and true-born issue of Faith, no man
questions that knows himself the Disciple of the Holy Jesus; but that Obedience
is the same thing with (...)
Faith, and that all Christian Graces are parts of its bulk and constitution,
is also the doctrine of the Holy Ghost, and the Grammar of Scripture, making
Faith and Obedience to be terms coincident and expressive Romans 1. 16, 17.
of each other. For Faith is not a single Star, but a Constellation, a chain of
Graces, called by S. Paul the power of God unto salvation to every believer;
that is, Faith is all that great instrument by which God intends to bring us to
Heaven: and he gives this reason, In the Gospel the (...) cousness of God is
revealed from faith to faith, for it is written, The (...) shall live by Faith.
Which discourse makes Faith to be a course of Sanctity and holy (...), a
continuation of a Christian's duty, such a duty as not only gives the first
breath, but by which a man lives the life of Grace. The just shall live by
Faith; that is, such a Faith as grows from step to step, till the whole
righteousness of (...) in (...) S. (...).
God be fulfilled in it. From faith to faith, (says the Apostle) which S.
(...) expounds, From Faith believing, to Faith obeying; from imperfect Faith,
to Faith made perfect by the animation of Charity; that he who is justified may
be justified still. For as there are several degrees and parts of
Justification, so there are several degrees of Faith answerable to it; that in
all senses it may be true, that by Faith we are justified, and by Faith we
live, and by Faith we are saved. For if we proceed from Faith to Faith, from
believing to obeying, from Faith in the Understanding to Faith in the Will,
from Faith barely assenting to the revelations of God to Faith obeying the
Commandments of God, from the body of Faith to the soul of Faith, that is, to
Faith sormed and made alive by Charity; then we shall proceed from
Justification to Justification, that is, from Remission of Sins to become the
Sons of God, and at last to an actual possession of those glories to which we
were here consigned by the fruits of the Holy Ghost.

8. Heb. 12. 2.
And in this sense the Holy Jesus is called by the Apostle the Author and (...)
of our Faith: he is the principle, and he is the promoter; he begins our Faith
in Revelations, and perfects it in Commandments; he leads us by the assent of
our Understanding, Ibid. v. 1.
and finishes the work of his grace by a holy life: which S. Paul there
expresses by its several constituent parts; as laying aside every weight and
the sin that so easily besets us, (...) 4.
and running with patience the race that is set before us, resisting unto
blood, striving against sin; for in these things Jesus is therefore made our
example, because he is the Author and Finisher of our Faith; without these
Faith is imperfect. But the thing is something Jam. 2. 20, 26.
plainer yet, for S. James says that Faith lives not but by Charity; and the
life or essence of a thing is certainly the better part of its constitution, as
the Soul is to a Man. And if we mark the manner of his probation, it will come
home to the main point. For he proves that Abraham's says was therefore
imputed to him for Righteousness, because Verse 21.
he was justified by Works; Was not Abraham our Father justified by Works, when
he Verse 23.
offered up his son? And the Scripture was fulfilled, saying, Abraham believed
God, and it Verse 22.
was imputed to him for righteousness. For Faith wrought with his Works, and
made his Faith perfect. It was a dead and an imperfect Faith, unless Obedience
gave it being, and all its integral or essential parts. So that Faith and
Charity in the sense of a Christian are but one duty, as the Understanding and
the Will are but one reasonable Soul; only they produce several actions in
order to one another, which are but diverse (...), and the same spirit.

9. Thus S. Paul, describing the 1 Thessalonians. 1, 8, 9.
Faith of the Thessalonians, calls it that whereby they turned from Idols, and
whereby they served the living God; and the Heb 11. (...).
Faith of the Patriarchs believed the world's Creation, received the Promises,
did Miracles, wrought Rightcousness, and did and suffered so many things as
make up the integrity of a holy life. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
And therefore Col. 3. 6.
disobedience and unrighteousness is called want of Faith; and Gal. 5. 20.
Heresy, which is opposed to Faith, is a work of the flesh, because Faith it
self is a work of Righteousness. And, that I may enumerate no more particulars,
the thing is so known, that the word (...), 2. and 5. 6.
(...) which in propriety of language signifies (...) or (...), is rendered
disobedience; and the not providing for our families is an 1 Timothy 5. 8.
act of (...), by the same reason and analogy that (...) or Charity and a holy
life are the duties of a Christian, of a justifying Faith. And although in the
natural or philosophical sense Faith and Charity are distinct habits; yet in
the sense of a Christian and the signification of duty they are the same; for
we cannot believe aright, as Believing is in the Commandment, unless we live
aright; for our Faith is put upon the account just as it is made precious by
Charity; according to that rare saying of S. (...), recorded by the supposed S.
Denis, Charity is the greatest and the least (...) (...).
Theology: all our Faith, that is, all our Religion, is completed in the
duties of universal Charity; as our Charity or our manner of living is, so is
our Faith. If our life be unholy, it may be the faith of Devils, but not the
Faith of Christians. For this is the difference.

10. The faith of the Devils has more of the Understanding in it, the Faith of
Christians more of the Will: The Devils in their says have better Discourse,
the Christians better affections: They in their faith have better Arguments, we
more Charity. So that Charity or a good life is so necessary an ingredient into
the definition of a Christian's Faith, that we have nothing else to distinguish
it from the faith of Devils: and we need no trial os our Faith, but the
examination of our lives. If you keep the Commandments Apoc. 14. 12.
of God, then have you the Faith of Jesus, (they are immediate in S. John's
expression:) but if you be (...) and ungodly, you are in S. Paul's list amongst
2 (...). 3. 2.
them that have no says. Every Vice, that rules amongst us and sullies the
fair beauty of our Souls, is a conviction of Infidelity.

11. For it was the Faith of Moses that made him despise the riches of Egypt;
the Faith of (...), that made him valiant; the Faith of Joseph, that made him
chaste: Abraham's Faith made him obedient; S. Mary Magdalen's Faith made her
penitent; and the Faith of S. Paul made him travel so far, and suffer so much,
till he became a prodigy both of zeal and patience. Faith is a Catholicon, and
cures all the distemperatures of the Soul; 1 (...) 5. 4.
it (...) the World, (says S. John) it Heb. 11. 33
works rightcousness, (says S. Paul) it Acts 15. 9.
purifies the heart, (says S. Peter) it works Miracles, (says our Blessed
Savior) Miracles in Grace always, as it did Miracles in nature at its first
publication: and whatsoever is good, if it be a Grace, it is an act of Faith;
if it be a reward, it is the fruit of Faith. So that as all the actions of man
are but the productions of the Soul, so are all the actions of the new man the
effects of Faith. For Faith is the life of Christianity, and a good life is the
life of Faith.

12. Upon the grounds of this discourse we may understand the sense of that
Question Luke 18 8.
of our Blessed Savior, When the son of man comes, shall he find Faith on
earth? Truly just so much as he finds Charity and holy living, and no more. For
then only we can be confident that Faith is not failed from among the children
of men, when we seel the heats of the primitive Charity return, and the
calentures of the first old Devotion are renewed; when it shall be accounted
honorable to be a servant of Christ, and a shame to commit a sin: then, and
then only, our Churches shall be Assemblies of the faithful, and the Kingdoms
of the world Christian Countries. But so long as it is notorious that we have
made Christian Religion another thing than what the Holy Jesus designed it to
be; when it does not make us live good lives, but it self is made a pretense to
all manner of impiety, a stratagem to serve ends, the ends of covetousness, of
ambition and revenge; when the Christian Charity ends in killing one another
for Conscience sake, so that Faith is made to cut the throat of Charity, and
our Faith kills more than our Charity preserves; when the Humility of a
Christian has indeed a name amongst us, but it is like a mute person, talked
of only; while Ambition and Rebellion, Pride and Scorn, Self-seeking and proud
undertakings transact most of the great affairs of Christendom; when the
custody of our Senses is to no other purposes but that no opportunity of
pleasing them pass away; when our Oaths are like the fringes of our discourses,
going round about them, as if they were ornaments and trimmings; when our
Blasphemies, Profanation, Sacrilege and Irreligion are become scandalous to
the very Turks and Jews; while our Lusts are always habitual, sometimes
unnatural; (...) (...).
will any wise man think that we believe those Doctrines of Humility and
Obedience, of Chastity and Charity, of Temperance and Justice, which the
Savior of the World made sacred by his Sermon and example, or indeed any thing
he either said or did, promised or threatened? For is it possible, a man with
his wits about him, and believing that he should certainly be damned, (that is,
be eternally tormented in body and Soul with terments greater than can be in
this world) if he be a Swearer, or Lier, or Drunkard, or cheats his neighbor,
that this man should dare to do these things, to which the temptations are so
small, in which the delight is so inconsiderable, and the satisfaction so none
at all?

13. We see by the experience of the whole world, that the belief of an honest
man in a matter of temporal advantage makes us do actions of such danger and
difficulty, that half so much industry and (...) would ascertain us into a
possession of all the Promises Evangelical. Now let any man be asked, whether
he had rather be rich or be saved, he will tell you, without all doubt, Heaven
is the better option by infinite degrees: for it cannot be that Riches, or
Revenge, or Lust should be directly preferred, that is, be thought more
eligible than the glories of Immortality. That therefore men neglect so great
Salvation, and so greedily run after the satisfaction of their baser appetites,
can be attributed to nothing but want of Faith; they do not heartily believe
that Heaven is worth so much; there is upon them a stupidity of spirit, and
their Faith is dull, and its actions suspended most commonly, and often
interrupted, and it never enters into the Will: so that the Propositions are
considered nakedly and precisely in themselves, but not as referring to us or
our interests; there is nothing of Faith in it, but so much as is the first and
direct act of Understanding; there is no consideration nor reflection upon the
act, or upon the person, or upon the subject. So that even as it is seated in
the Understanding, our Faith is commonly lame, mutilous and imperfect; and
therefore much more is it culpable, because it is destitute of all cooperation
of the rational appetite.

14. But let us consider the power and efficacy of worldly Belief. If a man
believes that there is gold to be had in Peru for fetching, or Pearls and rich
Jewels in India for the exchange of trifles, he instantly, if he be in
capacity, leaves the wife of his bosom, and the pretty delights of children,
and his own security, and ventures into the dangers of waters and unknown seas,
and freezings and calentures, thirst and hunger, Pirates and shipwrecks, and
has within him a principle strong enough to answer all objections, because he
believes that Riches are desirable, and by such means likely to be had. Our
Blessed Savior, comparing the Gospel to a Merchant-man that found a pearl of
great price, and sold all to buy it, has brought this instance home to the
present discourse. For if we did as verily believe that in Heaven those great
Felicities which transcend all our apprehensions are certainly to be obtained
by leaving our Vices and lower desires, what can hinder us but we should at
least do as much for obtaining those great Felicities as for the lesser, if the
belief were equal? For if any man thinks he may have them without Holiness and
Justice and Charity, then he wants Faith, for he believes not the saying of S.
Paul, Follow peace with all men, and Holiness, without which (...). 12. 14.
no man shall ever see God. If a man believes Learning to be the only or
chiefest ornament and beauty of Souls, that which will ennoble him to a fair
employment in his own time, and an honorable memory to succeeding ages; this
if he believes heartily it has power to make him endure Catarrhs, Gouts,
Hypochondriacal passions, to read till his eyes almost fix in their orbs, to
despise the pleasures of idleness or tedious sports, and to undervalue
whatsoever does not cooperate to the end of his Faith, the desire of Learning.
Why is the Italian so abstemious in his drinkings, or the Helvetian so valiant
in his fight, or so true to the Prince that imploys him, but that they believe
it to be noble so to be? If they believed the same, and had the same honorable
thoughts of other Virtues, they also would be as national as these. For Faith
will do its proper work. And when the Understanding is peremptorily and fully
determined upon the persuasion of a Proposition, if the Will should then
dissent and choose the contrary, it were unnatural and monstrous, and possibly
no man ever does so; for that men do things without reason and against their
Conscience is, because they have put out their light, and discourse their Wills
into the election of a sensible good, and want faith to believe truly all
circumstances which are necessary by way of predisposition for choice of the
(...).

15. But when men's Faith is confident, their resolution and actions are in
proportion: For thus the Faith of Mahumetans makes them to abstain from Wine
for ever; and therefore, if we had the Christian Faith, we should much rather
abstain from Drunkenness for ever; it being an express Rule Apostolical, Be not
drunk with wine, wherein is excess. The Faith of the Circumcellians made them
to run greedily to violent (...). 5. 18.
and horrid deaths as willingly as to a Crown: for they thought it was the
King's highway to Martyrdom. And there was never any man zealous for his
Religion, and of an imperious bold Faith, but he was also willing to die for
it; and therefore also by as much reason to live in it, and to be a strict
observer of its prescriptions. And the stories of the strict Sanctity, and
prodigious Sufferings, and severe Disciplines, and expensive Religion, and
compliant and laborious Charity of the primitive Christians, is abundant
argument to convince us, that the Faith of Christians is infinitely more
fruitful and productive of its univocal and proper issues than the Faith of
Heretics, or the false religions of Misbelievers, or the persuasions of
Secular persons, or the Spirit of Antichrist. And therefore when we see men
serving their Prince with such difficult and ambitious services, because they
believe him able to reward them, though of his will they are not so certain,
and yet so supinely negligent and incurious of their services to God, of whose
power and will to reward us infinitely there is certainty absolute and
irrespective; it is certain probation that we believe it not: for if we believe
there is such a thing as Heaven, and that every single man's portion of Heaven
is far better than all the wealth in the world, it is morally impossible we
should prefer so little before so great profit.

16. I instance but once more. The Faith of Abraham was instanced in the matter
of confidence or trust in the Divine Promises; and he being the father of the
faithful, we must imitate his Faith by a clear dereliction of our selves and
our own interests, and an entire confident relying upon the Divine goodness in
all cases of our needs or danger. Now this also is a trial of the verity of our
Faith, the excellency of our condition, and what title we have to the glorious
names of Christians, and Faithful, and (...). If our Fathers when we were in
pupillage and minority, or a true and an able Friend when we were in need, had
made promises to supply our necessities; our confidence was so great that our
care determined. It were also well that we were as confident of God, and as
secure of the event, when we had disposed our selves to reception of the
blessing, as we were of our Friend or Parents. We all profess that God is
Almighty, that all his Promises are certain, and yet, when it comes to a pinch,
we find that man to be more confident that has ten thousand pounds in his
purse than he that reads God's Promises over ten thousand (...) non (...), re
(...) non (...) quae in nobis est cum mortali compage (...). Ab his (...):
omnibus -- uni autem (...) and (...) animi (...), and ejus qui (...) capiatur
(...) rerum illecebris. Phil. (...). Quis (...) Div. haeres.
times. Men of a common spirit, (says S. Chrysostom) of an ordinary Sanctity,
will not steal, or kill, or lie, or commit Adultery; but it requires a rare
Faith, and a sublimity of pious affections, to believe that God will work a
(...) which to me seems impossible. And indeed S. (...) hit upon the right. He
had need be a good man and love God (...) that puts his trust in him. For those
we (...). (...).
love we are most apt to trust; and although trust and confidence is sometime
founded upon experience, yet it is also begotten and increased by love, as
often as by reason and discourse. And to this purpose it was excellently said
by S. Basil, That the (...) which one man learneth of another is made perfect
by continual Use and Exercise; but that which through the grace of God is
engrassed in the mind of man is made absolute by Justice, (...) and Charity. So
that if you are willing even in death to confess not only the Articles, but in
affliction and death to trust the Promises; if in the lowest nakedness of
Poverty you can cherish your selves with the expectation of God's promises and
dispensation, being as confident of food and raiment and deliverance or support
when all is in God's hand, as you are when it is in your own; if you can be
cheerful in a storm, smile when the world frowns, be content in the midst of
spiritual desertions and anguish of spirit, expecting all should work together
for the best, according to the promise; if you can strengthen your selves in
God when you are weakest, believe when you see no hope, and entertain no
jealousies or suspicions of God though you see nothing to make you confident;
then, and then only, you have Faith, which in conjunction with its other parts
is able to save your Souls. For in this precise duty of trusting God there are
the rays of hope, and great proportions of Charity and Resignation.

17. The sum is that pious and most Christian sentence of the Author of the
ordinary Gloss: To believe in God through Jesus Christ is, by believing to love
him, to adhere to him, to be united to him by Charity Credere in (...),
credendo diligere, (...) in (...) ire, and membris ejus (...). Gloss. ord. in
Romans 4.
and Obedience, and to be incorporated into Christ' s mystical body in the
Communion of Saints. I conclude this with a collation of certain excellent
words of S. Paul highly to the present purpose: Examine your selves, 2 Cor. 13.
5.
Brethren, whether ye be in the Faith; prove your own selves. Well, but how?
Know you not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
Reprobates? There Is the touchstone of Faith. If Jesus Christ dwells in us, then
we are true Believers; if he does not, we are Reprobates, we have no Faith. But
how shall we know whether Christ be in us or no? Saint Paul tells us that too:
If Christ be in you, the body is dead, by Romans 8. 10.
reason of sin; but the spirit is life, because of righteousness. That Is the
Christian's mark, and the Characteristick of a true Believer; A death unto sin,
and a living unto righteousness; a mortified body, and a quickened spirit. This
is plain enough, and by this we see what we must trust to. A man of a wicked
life does in vain hope to be saved by his Faith, for indeed his Faith is but
equivocal and dead, which as to his purpose is just none at all; and therefore
let him no more deceive himself. For (that I may still use the words of S.
Paul) This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain
good works. For Titus 3. 8.
such, and such only, in the great scrutiny for Faith in the day of Doom, shall
have their portion in the bosom of faithful Abraham.

The PRAYER.
I.
O Eternal GOD, (...) of all Truth and Holiness, in whom to believe is life
eternal; let thy Grace descend with a mighty power into my Soul, beating down
every strong hold and vainer imagination, and bringing every proud thought and
my confident and ignorant understanding into the obedience of Jesus: Take from
me all disobdience and refractoriness of spirit, all ambition and private and
baser interests; remove from me all prejudice and weakness of persuasion, that
I may wholly resign my Understanding to the persuasions of Christianity,
acknowledging Thee to be the principle of Truth, and thy Word the measure of
Knowledge, and thy Laws the rule of my life, and thy Promises the satisfaction
of my hopes, and an union with thee to be the consummation of Charity in the
fruition of Glory. Amen.

II.
HOly JESUS, make me to acknowledge thee to be my Lord and Master, and my self
a Servant and Disciple of thy holy Discipline and Institution; let me love to
sit at thy feet, and suck in with my ears and heart the sweetness of thy holy
Sermons. Let my Soul be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, with
a peaceable and docile disposition. Give me great boldness in the public
Confession of thy Name and the Truth of thy Gospel, in despite of all
hostilities and temptations. And grant I may always remember that thy Name is
called upon me, and I may so behave my self, that I neither give scandal to
others, nor cause disreputation to the honor of Religion; but that thou may
be glorified in me, and I by thy mercies after a strict observance of all the
holy Laws of Christianity. Amen.

III.
O Holy and ever-Blessed SPIRIT, let thy gracious influences be the perpetual
guide of my rational Faculties: Inspire me with Wisdom and Knowledge, spiritual
Understanding and a holy Faith; and sanctify my Faith, that it may arise up to
the confidence of Hope, and the adherencies of Charity, and be fruitful in a
holy Conversation. Mortify in me all peevishness and pride of spirit, all
heretical dispositions, and whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine; that when
the eternal Son of God, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, shall come to
make scrutiny and an inquest for Faith, I may receive the Promises laid up for
them that believe in the Lord Jesus, and wait for his coming in holiness and
purity: to whom with the Father and thee, O Blessed Spirit, be all honor and
eternal adoration paid with all sanctity and joy and Eucharist now and for
ever.

Amen.
SECT. XI. Of CHRIST's going to Jerusalem to the Passover the first time after
his Manifestation, and what followed till the expiration of the Office of John
the Baptist.
The Visitation of the Temple.
Mark. 11. 15. And Jesus went into ye Temple and began to cast out them that
sold and bought in ye Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers.
16. And would not suffer that any man should carry any vessel through the
Temple.

The Conference with Nicodemus.
John. 3. 9. Nicodemus answered and said unto him. How can these things be? 10.
Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a Master of Israel, and know not
these things?




1. IMmediately after this Miracle Jesus abode a few days in Capernaum, but
because of the approach of the great Feast of Passover he ascended to
Jerusalem; and the first public act of record that he did was an act of holy
Zeal and Religion in behalf of the honor of the Temple. For diverse Merchants
and Exchangers of money made the Temple to be the Market and the Bank, and
brought Beasts thither to be sold for sacrifice against the great Paschal
Solemnity. At the sight of which Jesus, being moved with zeal and indignation,
made a whip of cords, and drove the Beasts out of the Temple, overthrew the
accounting Tables, and commanded them that sold the Doves to take them from
thence. For his anger was holy, and he would mingle no injury with it; and
therefore the Doves, which if let loose would be detrimental to the owners, he
caused to be fairly removed; and published the Religion of Holy places,
establishing their Sacredness for ever by his first Gospel-Sermon that he made
at Jerusalem. Take these things hence: Make not my Father's House a house of
merchandise; for it shall be called a house of Prayer to all Nations. And being
required to give a sign of his Vocation, (for this, being an action like the
Religion of the Zelots among the Jews, if it was not attested by something
extraordinary, might be abused into an excess of liberty) he only foretold the
Resurrection of his body after three days death, but he expressed it in the
metaphor of the Temple: Destroy this Temple, and I will build it again in three
days. He spoke of the Temple of his Body, and they understood him of the Temple
at Jerusalem; and it was never rightly construed till it was accomplished.

2. At this public Convention of the Jewish Nation Jesus did many Miracles,
published himself to be the Messiah, and persuaded many Disciples, amongst whom
was Nicodemus, a Doctor of the Law, and a Ruler of the Nation: he came by night
to Jesus, and affirmed himself to be convinced by the Miracles which he had
seen; for no man could do those miracles except God be with him. When Jesus
perceived his understanding to be so far disposed, he began to instruct him in
the great secret and mysteriousness of Regeneration, telling him that every
production is of the same nature and condition with its parent; from flesh
comes flesh and corruption, from the Spirit comes spirit and life and
immortality; and nothing from a principle of nature could arrive to a
supernatural end; and therefore the only door to enter into the Kingdom of God
was Water by the manuduction of the Spirit; and by this Regeneration we are put
into a new capacity, of living a spiritual life in order to a spiritual and
supernatural end.

3. This was strange Philosophy to Nicodemus; but Jesus bad him not to wonder:
for this is not a work of humanity, but a fruit of God's Spirit, and an issue
of Predestination. For the Spirit blows where it lists, and is as the wind,
certain and notorious in the effects, but secret in the principle and in the
manner of production. And therefore this Doctrine was not to be estimated by
any proportions to natural principles or experiments of sense, but to the
secrets of a new Metaphysick, and abstracted, separate Speculations. Then
Christ proceeds in his Sermon, telling him there are yet higher things for him
to apprehend and believe; for this, in respect of some other mysteriousness of
his Gospel, was but as Earth in comparison of Heaven. Then he tells of his own
descent from Heaven, foretells his Death and Ascension, and the blessing of
Redemption, which he came to work for mankind; he preaches of the Love of the
Father, the Mission of the Son, the rewards of Faith, and the glories of
Eternity; he upbraids the unbelieving and impenitent, and declares the
differences of a holy and a corrupt Conscience, the shame and fears of the one,
the confidence and serenity of the other. And this is the sum of his Sermon to
Nicodemus, which was the fullest of mystery and speculation and abstracted
senses of any that he ever made, except that which he made immediately before
his Passion; all his other Sermons being more practical.

4. From Jerusalem Jesus goes into the Country of Judaea, attended by diverse
Disciples, whose understandings were brought into subjection and obedience to
Christ upon confidence of the divinity of his Miracles. There his Disciples did
receive all comers, and baptized them, as John at the same time did, and by
that Ceremony admitted them to the Discipline and Institution, according to the
custom of the Doctors and great Prophets among the Jews, whose Baptizing their
Scholars was the ceremony of their Admission. As soon as John heard it, he
acquitted himself in public by renewing his former testimony concerning Jesus,
affirming him to be the Messiah, and now the time was come that Christ must
increase, and the Baptist suffer diminution; for Christ came from above, was
above all, and the sum of his Doctrine was that which he had heard and seen
from the Father, whom God sent to that purpose, to whom God had set his seal,
that he was true, who spoke the words of God, whom the Father loved, to who^ he
gave the Spirit without measure, and into whose hands God had delivered all
things; this was he, whose testimony the world received not. And that they
might know not only what person they slighted, but how great Salvation also
they neglected, he sums up all his Sermons and finishes his Mission with this
saying, He that believes John 3. 36.
on the Son has everlasting life; and he that believes not on the Son shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

5. For now that the Baptist had fulfilled his Office of bearing witness unto
Jesus, God was pleased to give him his writ of ease, and bring him to his
reward upon this occasion. John, who had so learned to despise the world and
all its exterior vanities and impertinent relations, did his duty justly, and
so without respect of persons, that as he reproved the people for their
prevarications, so he spared not Herod for his, but abstaining from all
expresses of the spirit of scorn and asperity, mingling no discontents,
interests nor mutinous intimations with his Sermons, he told Herod it was not
lawful for him to have his Montanistae, and cum bis Tertul. adv. Ma^^ion l. 4.
c. 34. aiunt Philippum desconctum fuisse, and in^^ probare satagunt secondas
nuptiaes illicitas esse. Sed haec tam aperta fraud, ut ag^ns adv. Catholices
Tertulllianus abstineat abs sam iniqua recitatic^^ Marioni autem Evangelicum
neganti hoc obs^udere in facili erat.
Brother's wife. For which Sermon he felt the furies and malice of a woman's
spleen, was cast into prison, and about a year after was sacrificed to the
scorn and pride of a lustful woman and her immodest daughter, being at the end
of the second year of Christ's Preaching beheaded by Herod's command, who would
not retract his promise, because of his honor, and a rash vow he made in the
gayety of his Lust and complacencies of his riotous dancings. His head was
brought up in a dish, and made a Festival-present to the young girl, (who gave
it to her mother:) a Cruelty that was not known among the Barbarisms of the
worst of people, to mingle banquetings with blood and sights of death; an
insolency and inhumanity for which the (...) Orators accused Q. Flaminius of
Treason, because, to satisfy the wanton cruelty (...). l. 5. (...), l 39.
Plut. in (...).
of Placentia, he caused a condemned slave to be killed at supper; and which
had no precedent but in the furies of Marius, who caused the head of the Consul
Antonius to be brought up to him in his Feasts, which he handled with much
pleasure and insolency.

6. But God's Judgments, which sleep not (...). (...).
long, found out Herod, and marked him for a Curse. For the Wise of Herod, who
was the Daughter of Aretas a King of Arabia Petraea, being repudiated by
paction with Herodias, provoked her Father to commence a War with Herod; who
prevailed against Herod in a great Battle, defeating his whole Army, and
forcing him to an inglorious flight: which the Jews generally expounded to be a
Judgment on him for the unworthy and barbarous execution and murder of John
the Baptist; God in his wisdom and severity making one sin to be the punishment
of another, and neither of them both to pass without the signature of a Curse.
And Nicephorus reports, that the dancing daughter of Herodias passing over a
frozen lake, the ice brake, and she fell up to the neck in water, and her head
was parted from her body, by the violence of the fragments shaked by the water
and its own fall, and so perished; God having fitted a Judgment to the Analogy
and representment of her Sin. Herodias her self with her adulterous Paramour
Herod Jos. Ant. (...).
were banished to Lions in France by decree of the Roman Senate, where they
lived ingloriously 18. c. 7 lib. Hist. c. 20.
and died miserably, so paying dearly for her triumphal scorn superadded to her
crime of murder: for when she saw the Head of the Baptist, which her Daughter
Salome had presented to her in a charger, she thrust the tongue through with a
needle, as Fulvia had formerly done to Cicero. But her self paid the charges of
her triumph.

Ad SECT. XI. Considerations upon the first Journey of the Holy Jesus to
Jerusalem, when he whipped the Merchants out of the Temple.
1. WHen the Feast came, and Jesus was ascended up to Jerusalem, the first
place we find him in is the Temple, where not only was the Area and Court of
Religion, but, by occasion of public Conventions, the most opportune scene for
transaction of his Commission and his Father's business. And those Christians
who have been religious and affectionate even in the circumstances of Piety
have taken this for precedent, and accounted it a good express of the
regularity of their Devotion and order of Piety, at their first arrival to a
City to pay their first visits to God, the next to his servant the President of
Religious Rites; first they went into the Church and worshipped, then to the
Angel of the Church, to the Bishop, and begged his blessing: and having thus
commenced with the auspiciousness of Religion, they had better hopes their just
affairs would succeed prosperously, which after the rites of Christian
Countries had thus been begun with Devotion and religious order.

2. When the Holy Jesus entered the Temple, and espied a Mart kept in the Holy
Sept, a Fair upon Holy ground, he, who suffered no transportations of Anger in
matters and accidents temporal, was born high with an ecstasie of Zeal, and,
according to the custom of the Zelots of the Nation, took upon him the office
of a private insliction of punishment in the cause of God, which ought to be
dearer to every single person than their own interest and reputation. What the
exterminating Angel did to (...), who came into the Temple upon design of
Sacrilege, that the meekest Jesus did to them who came with acts of
Profanation; he whipped them forth: and as usually good Laws spring from ill
Manners, and excellent Sermons are occasioned by men's (...); now also our great
Master upon this accident asserted the Sacredness of Holy places in the words
of a Prophet, which now he made a Lesson Evangelical, My House shall be called
a house of Prayer to all Nations.

3. The Beasts and Birds there sold were brought for Sacrifice, and the Banks
of money were for the advantage of the people that came from far, that their
returns might be safe and easy when they came to Jerusalem upon the
employments of Religion. But they were not yet fit for the Temple; they who
brought them thither purposed their own gain, and meant to pass them through an
unholy usage, before they could be made Anathemata, Vows to God: and when
Religion is but the purpose at the second hand, it cannot hallow a Lay-design,
and make it fit to become a Religious ministry, much less sanctify an
unlawful action. When Rachel stole her Father's gods, though possibly she might
do it in zeal against her Father's Superstition, yet it was occasion of a sad
accident to her self. For the Jews say that Rachel died in Childbirth of her
second Son, because of that imprecation of Jacob, With whomsoever thou find
thy gods, let him G. n. 31. 32.
not live. Saul pretended Sacrifice when he spared the fat cattle of Amalek;
and Micah was zealous when he made him an Ephod and a Teraphim, and meant to
make himself an Image for Religion when he stole his mother's money: but these
are colors of Religion, in which not only the world but our selves also are
deceived by a latent purpose, which we are willing to cover with a remote
design of Religion, lest it should appear unhandsome in its own dressing. Thus
some believe a Covetousness allowable, it they greedily heap treasure with a
purpose to build Hospitals or Colleges; and sinister acts of acquiring
Church Livings are not so soon condemned, if the design be to prefer an able
person; and actions of Revenge come near to Piety, if it be to the ruin of an
(...) man; and indirect proceedings are made sacred, if they be for the good of
the Holy Cause. This is profaning the Temple with Beasts brought for
Sacrifices, and dishonours God by making himself accessory to his own
dishonor, as far as lies in them; for it disserves him with a pretense of
Religion: and, but that our hearts are deceitful, we should easily perceive
that the greatest business of the Letter is written in Postscript; the great
pretense is the least purpose; and the latent Covetousness or Revenge, or the
secular appendix, is the main engine to which the end of Religion is made but
instrumental and pretended. But men, when they sell a Mule, use to speak of the
Horse that begat him, not of the Ass that bore him.

4. The Holy Jesus made a whip of cords, to represent and to chastise the
implications and enfoldings of sin and the cords of vanity. 1. There are some
sins that of themselves are a whip of cords: those are the crying sins, that by
their degree and malignity speak loud for vengeance; or such as have great
disreputation, and are accounted the basest issues of a caitive disposition; or
such which are unnatural and unusual; or which by public observation are
marked with the signature of Divine Judgments. Such are Murder, Oppression of
widows and orphans, detaining the Labourer's hire, Lusts against nature,
Parricide, Treason, Betraying a just trust in great instances and base manners,
Lying to a King, Perjury in a Priest: these carry Cain's mark upon them, or
Judas's sting, or Manasses's sorrow, unless they be made impudent by the spirit
of Obduration. 2. But there are some sins that bear shame upon them, and are
used as correctives of pride and vanity, and if they do their cure, they are
converted into instruments of good by the great power of the Divine grace; but
if the spirit of the man grows impudent and hardened against the shame, that
which commonly follows is the worst string of the whip, a direct consignation
to a reprobate spirit. 3. Other sins there are for the chastising of which
Christ takes the whip into his own hand; and there is much need; when sins are
the Customs of a Nation, and marked with no exterior disadvantage, or have
such circumstances of encouragement that they are unapt to disquiet a
Conscience, or make our beds uneasy, till the pillows be softened with
penitential showers. In both these cases the condition of a sinner is sad and
miserable. For it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God;
his hand is heavy, and his sword is sharp, and pierces to the dividing the
marrow and the bones: and he that considers the infinite distance between God
and us must tremble, when he remembers that he is to feel the issues of that
anger, which he is not certain whether or no it will destroy him infinitely and
eternally. 4. But if the whip be given into our hands, that we become
executioners of the Divine wrath, it is sometimes worse; for we seldom strike
our selves for emendation, but add sin to sin, till we perish miserably and
inevitably. God scourges us often into Repentance; but when a Sin is the whip
of another sin, the rod is put into our hands, who like blind men strike with a
rude and undiscerning hand, and, because we love the punishment, do it without
intermission or choice, and have no end but ruin.

5. When the Holy Jesus had whipped the Merchants in the Temple, they took away
all the instruments of their sin. For a Judgment is usually the commencement of
Repentance: Love is the last of Graces, and (...) at the beginning of a new
life, but is reserved to the perfections and ripeness of a Christian. We begin
in Pear; The Psalm. (...). 34.
fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom: (...) hen he smote them, then
they turned, and enquired early after God. And afterward the impresses of Fear
continue like a hedge of thorns about us, to restrain our dissolutions within
the awfulness of the Divine Majesty, that it may preserve what was from the
same principle begun. This principle of their emendation was from God, and
therefore innocent and holy; and the very purpose of Divine Threatenings is,
that upon them, as upon one of the great hindges, the Piety of the greatest
part of men should turn: and the effect was answerable; but so are not the
actions of all those who follow this precedent in the tract of the letter. For
indeed there have been some reformations which have been so like this, that the
greatest alteration which has been made was, that they carried all things out
of the Temple, the Money, and the Tables, and the Sacrifice; and the Temple it
self went at last. But these men's scourge is to follow after, and Christ, the
Prince of the Catholic Church, will provide one of his own contexture,
moresevere than the stripes which (...) felt from the infliction of the
exterminating Angel. But the Holy Spirit of God, by making provision against
such a Reformation, has prophetically declared the aptnesses which are in
pretenses of religious alterations to degenerate into sacrilegious desires:
Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege? In this case there is
no (...). 22.
amendment, only one sin resigns to another, and the person still remains under
its power and the same dominion.

The PRAYER.
OEternal Jesu, thou bright Image of thy Father's glories, whose light did
shine to all the world, when thy heart was inflamed with zeal and love of God
and of Religion, let a coal from thine Altar, fanned with the wings of the Holy
Dove, kindle in my Soul such holy flames, that I may be zealous of thy honor
and glory, forward in Religious duties, earnest in their pursuit, prudent in
their managing, ingenuous in my purposes, making my Religion to serve no end
but of thy glories, and the obtaining of thy promises: and so sanctific my Soul
and my Body, that I may be a holy Temple, fit and prepared for the inhabitation
of thy ever-blessed Spirit, whom grant that I may never grieve by admitting any
impure thing to desecrate the place, and unhallow the Courts of his abode; but
give me a pure Soul in a chaste and healthful (...), a spirit full of holy
simplicity, and designs of great ingenuity, and perfect Religion, that I may
intend what thou command, and may with proper instruments (...) what I so
intend, and by thy aids may obtain the end of my labors, the rewards of
obedience and holy living, even the society and inheritance of Jesus in the
participation of the joys of thy Temple, where thou dwell and reignest with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, O Eternal Jesus.

Amen.
DISCOURSE VIII. Of the Religion of Holy Places.
1. THE Holy Jesus brought a Divine warrant for his Zeal. The selling
Sacrifices, and the exchange of Money, and every Lay-employment did violence
and dishonor to the Temple, which was hallowed to Ecclesiastical ministeries,
and set apart for Offices of Religion, for the use of holy things; for it was
God's House: and so is every house by public designation separate for Prayer
or other uses of Religion, it is God's House. [ My house:] God had a propriety
in it, and had set his mark on it, even his own Name. And therefore it was in
the Jews Idiome of speech called the Mountain of the Lord's House, and the
House of the Lord by David frequently: God had put his Name into all places
appointed for solemn Worship; In all places where (...), 20. (...).
I record my Name, I will come unto thee, and bless thee. For God, who was
never visible to mortal eye, was pleased to make himself presential by
substitution of his Name; that is, in certain places he has appointed that his
Name shall be called upon, and by promising and imparting such Blessings which
he has made consequent to the invocation of his Name, has made such places to
be a certain determination of some special manner of his Presence. For God's
Name is not a distinct thing from himself, not an Idea, and it cannot be put
into a place in literal signification; the expression is to be resolved into
some other sense: God's Name is that whereby he is known, by which he is
invocated, that which is the most immediate publication of his Essence, nearer
than which we cannot go unto him: and because God is essentially present in all
places, when he makes himself present in one place more than another, it cannot
be understood to any other purpose, but that in such places he gives special
Blessings and Graces, or that in those places he appoints his Name, that is,
himself, specially to be invocated.

2. So that when God puts his Name in any place by a special manner, it
signifies that there himself is in that manner: But in separate and hallowed
places God has expressed that he puts his Name with a purpose it should be
called upon; therefore in plain signification it is thus, In Consecrate places
God himself is present to be invoked, that is, there he is most delighted to
hear the Prayers we make unto him. For all the expressions of Scripture, of
God's (...), the Tabernacle of God, God's Dwellings, putting his Name there,
his Sanctuary, are resolved into that saying of God to Solomon, who prayed that
he would hear the Prayers of necessitous people in that place: God granting the
request expressed it thus; I have sanctified the House which thou have built:
that is, 1 (...) 9. 3.
the House which thou have designed for my Worship, I have designed for your
Blessing; what you have dedicated, I have accepted; what you have consecrated,
I have hallowed; I have taken it to the same purpose to which your desires and
designation pretended it in your first purposes and expense. So that since the
purpose of man in separating places of Worship is, that thither by order and
with convenience and in communities of men God may be worshipped and prayed
unto, God having declared that he accepts of such separate places to the same
purposes, says, that there he will be called upon, that such places shall be
places of advantage to our Devotions in respect of humane order and Divine
acceptance and benediction.

3. Now these are therefore God's Houses, because they were given by men, and
accepted by God, for the service of God and the offices of Religion. And this
is not the effect or result of any distinct Covenant God has made with man in
any period of the world, but it is merely a favor of God, either hearing the
Prayer of Dedication, or complying with humane order or necessities. For there
is nothing in the Covenant of Moses's Law that by virtue of special stipulation
makes the assignment of a house for the service of God to be proper to Moses's
rite. Not only because God had memorials and (...)
determinations of this manner of his Presence before Moses's Law, as at (...),
where Jacob laid the first stone of the Church, (nothing but a Stone was God's
memorial) and the beginning and first rudiments of a Temple; but also because
after Moses's Law was given, as long as the Nation was ambulatory, so were
their places and instruments of Religion: and although the Ark was not confined
to a place till Solomon's time, yet God was pleased in this manner to confine
himself to the Ark; and in all places wherever his Name was put, even in
Synagogues and Oratories and Threshingfloors, when they were hallowed with an
Altar and Religion, thither God came, that is, there he heard them pray, and
answered and blessed accordingly, still in proportion to that degree of
Religion which was put upon them. And those places, when they had once
entertained Religion, grew separate and sacred for ever. For therefore David
bought the Threshing-floor of Araunah, that it might never return to common use
any more: for it had been no trouble or inconvenience to Araunah to have used
his floor for one solemnity; but he offered to give it, and David resolved to
buy it, because it must of necessity be aliened from common uses, to which it
could never return any more when once it had been the instrument of a religious
solemnity: and yet this was no part of Moses's Law, that every place of a
temporary Sacrifice should be holy for ever. David had no guide in this but
right Reason and the Religion of all the world. For such things which were
great instruments of public ends, and thing; of highest use, were also in all
societies of men of greatest honor, and immured by reverence and the security
of Laws. For honor and reputation is not a thing inherent in any creature, but
depends upon the estimate of God or men, who either in diffusion or
representation become fountains of a derivative honor. Thus some Men are
hohourable; that is, those who are fountains of Honor in civil account have
commanded that they shall be honored. And so Places and Things are made
honorable, that as honorable Persons are to be distinguished from others by
honorable usages and circumstances proper to them, so also should Places and
Things (upon special reason separate) have an usage proper to them, when by a
public Instrument or Minister they are so separated. No common usage then;
something proper to tell what they are, and to what purposes they are designed,
and to signify their separation and extraordinariness. Such are the Person of
the Prince, the Archives and Records of a Kingdom, the Walls and great Defenses
of the Imperial City, the Eagles and Ensigns of war amongst the (...), and
above all things, though not above all persons, the Temples and Altars, and all
the instruments of Religion. And there is much reason in it. For thus a servant
of a King, though his employment be naturally mean, yet is more honorable,
because he relates to the most excellent person: and therefore much more those
things which relate to God. And though this be the reason why it should be so;
yet for this and other reasons they that have power, that is, they who are
acknowledged to be the fountains and the channels of Honor, I mean the Supreme
power, and public fame have made it actually to be so. For whatsoever all wise
men, and all good men, and all public societies, and all supreme Authority
has commanded to be honored or revered, that is honorable and reverend; and
this Honor and Reverence is to be expressed according to the Customs of the
Nation, and instruments of honor proper to the nature of the thing or person
respectively. Whatsoever is (...) so is so; because Honor and Noble
separations are relative actions and terms, creatures and productions of Fame,
and the voice of Princes, and the sense of people: and they who will not honor
those things or those persons which are thus decreed to be honorable, have no
communications with the civilities of humanity, or the guises of wise Nations;
they do not give honor to whom honor belongs. Now that which in civil account
we call [ honorable,] the same in religious account we call [ sacred:] for by
both these words we mean things or persons made separate and retired from
common opinion and vulgar usages by reason of some excellency really inherent
in them, (such as are excellent men;) or for their relation to excellent
persons, or great ends, public or Religiosum est quod (...) Gel. l. 4. c. 9.
religious, (and so servants of Princes, and Ministers of Religion, and its
Instruments and Utensils, are made honorable or sacred:) and the expressions
of their honor are all those actions and usages which are contrary to despite,
and above the usage of vulgar Things or Places. ( (...) Regum, Jul. (...) apud
(...).
Whatsoever is sacred, that is honorable for its religious relation; and
whatsoever is honorable, that also is sacred (that is, separate from the
vulgar usages and account) for its civil excellency or relation. The result is
this, That when public Authority, or the consent ( (...) (...)
of a Nation has made any Place sacred for the uses of Religion, we must
esteem it sacred, just as we esteem Persons honorable who are so honored. And
thus are Judges and the very places of Judicature, the King's Presence Chamber,
the Chair of State, the Senate House, the royal Ensigns of a Prince, whose Gold
and Purple in its natural capacity has in it no more dignity than the Money of
the bank, or the Cloth of the Mart; but it has much more for its signification
and relative use. And it is certain, these things whose excellency depends upon
their relation must receive the degree of their Honor in that proportion they
have to their term and foundation: and therefore what belongs to God (as holy
Places of Religion) must rise highest in this account; I mean higher than any
other places. And this is besides the honor which God has put upon them by
his presence and his title to them, which in all Religions he has signified to
us.

4. Indeed among the Jews, as God had confined his Church and the rites of
Religion to be used only in communion and participation with the Nation, so
also he had limited his Presence, and was more sparing of it than in the time
of the Gospel his Son declared he would be. It was said of old, that at
Jerusalem men ought to worship, that is, by a solemn, public and great address
in the capital expresses of Religion, in the distinguishing rites of Liturgy;
for else it had been no new thing. For in ordinary Prayers God was then, and
long before, pleased to hear Jeremy in the dungeon, Manasses in prison, Daniel
in the Lion's den, Jonas in the belly of the deep, and in the offices yet more
solemn in the Proseuchae, in the houses of prayer which the Jews had, not only
in their dispersion, but even in Palestine, for their diurnal and nocturnal
offices. But when the Holy Jesus had broken down the partition wall, then the
most solemn Offices of Religion were as unlimited as their private Devotions
were before; for wherever a Temple should be built, thither God would come,
if he were worshipped spirituallly and in truth, that is, according to the
rites of Christ, (who is Grace and Truth) and the dictate of the Spirit, and
analogy of the Gospel. All places were now alike to build Churches in, or
Memorials for God, God's houses. And that our Blessed Savior discourses of
places of public Worship to the woman of Samaria is notorious, because the
whole question was concerning the great addresses of Moses's rites, whether at
Jerusalem or Mount Gerizim, which were the places of the right and the (...)
Temple, the (...) of the whole Religion: and in antithesis Jesus said, Nor here
nor there shall be the solemnities of address to God, but in all places you may
build a Temple, and God will dwell in it.

5. And this has descended from the first beginnings of Religion down to the
consummation of it in the perfections of the Gospel. For the Apostles of our
Lord carried the Offices of the Gospel into the Temple of Jerusalem, there they
preached and prayed, and paid Vows, but never, that we read of, offered
Sacrifice: which (...), that the Offices purely Evangelical were proper to be
done in any of God's proper places, and that thither they went not in
compliance with Moses's Rites, but merely for Gospel-duties, or for such
Offices which were common to Moses and Christ, such as were Prayers and Vows.
While the Temple was yet standing they had peculiar places for the Assemblies
of the faithful, where either by accident, or observation, or Religion, or
choice, they met regularly. And I instance in the house of John surnamed Mark,
which, as Alexander reports in the life of S. Barnabas, was consecrated by many
actions of Religion, by our Blessed Savior's eating the (...), his Institution
of the holy Eucharist, his Farewell-Sermon; and the Apostles met there in the
Octaves of Easter, whither Christ came again, and hallowed it with his
presence; and there, to make up the relative Sanctification complete, the Holy
Ghost descended upon their heads in the (...) of (...): and this was erected
into a fair (...), and is mentioned as a famous Church by S. Jerome and V.
Bid; in which, as (...) (...) 3. (...).
adds, S. Peter preached that (...) which was miraculoasly prosperous in the
Conversion of three thousand; there S. James Brother of our Lord was (...)
first Bishop of Jerusalem, S. Stephen and the other six were there ordained
Deacons; there the Apostles kept their first Council, and (...) their Creed: by
these actions and their frequent conventions showing the same reason, order and
prudence of Religion in (...) of special places of Divine service, which were
ever observed by all the Nations, and Religions, and wise men of the world. And
it were a strange imagination to (...) that in Christian Religion there is any
principle contrary to that wisdom or God and all the world, which for order,
for necessity, for convenience, for the solemnity (...) (...).
of Worship, has set apart Places for God and for Religion. Private Prayer had
always an unlimited residence and relation, even under Moses's Law; but the
public solemn Prayer of (...) in the Law of Moses was restrained to one
Temple: In the Law of Nature it was not confined to one, but yet determined to
public and solemn places; and when the Holy Jesus disparked the enclosures of
Moses, we all returned to the permissions and liberty of the Natural Law, in
which although the public and solemn Prayers were confined to a Temple, yet
the Temple was not consined to a place; but they might be any-where, so they
were at all; instruments of order, conveniences of assembling, residences of
Religion: and God, who always loved order, and was apt to hear all holy and
prudent Prayers, (and therefore also the Prayers of Consecration) has often
declared that he loves such Places, that he will dwell in them; not that they
are advantages to him, but that he is pleased to make them so to us. And
therefore all Nations of the world built public Houses for Religion; and since
all Ages of the Church (...) ad crandum in (...) loci (...): sit una communis
(...), una men's, una sies in charitate and side (...) in Christum Jesum; quo
(...) est (...). Omnes velut unus quispiam ad Templum Dei concurrite, velut ad
unum altar, ad unum Jesum Christum, etc. S. Ignat. ad Magnes.
did so too, it had need be a strong and a convincing argument that must show
they were deceived. And if any man list to be (...), he must be answered with
S. Paul's reproof, We have no such custom, nor the Churches of God.

6. Thus S. Paul reproved the Corinthians for despising the Church of God by
such uses, 1 Cor. 11. 22.
which were therefore unsit for God's, because they were proper for their own,
that is, for common houses. And although they were at first and in the
descending Ages so afflicted by the tyranny of enemies, that they could not
build many Churches; yet some they did, and the Churches themselves suffered
part of the persecution. For so (...) reports, that when under Severus and
Gordianus, (...) and Galienus, the Christian affairs were in a tolerable
condition, they built Churches in great number and expense. But when the
Persecution waxed hot under Diocletian, down went the Churches, upon a design
to extinguish or disadvantage the Religion. Maximinus gave leave to re-build
them. Upon which Rescript (says the story) the Christians were overjoyed, and
raised them up to an incredible height and (...) Lucian, (...).
incomparable beauty. This was Christian Religion then, and so it has
continued-ever since, and, unless we should have new reason and new revelation,
it must continue so till our Churches are exchanged for Thrones, and our
Chapels for seats placed before the Lamb in the eternal Temple of celestial
Jerusalem.

7. And to this purpose it is observed, that the Holy Jesus first ejected the
Beasts of Sacrifice out of the Temple, and then proclaimed the Place holy, and
the scene of representing Prayers, which in type intimates the same thing which
is involved in the expression of the next words, My House shall be called the
House of Prayer to all Nations; now and for ever, to the Jews and to the
Gentiles, in all circumstances and variety of Time and Nation, God's Houses are
holy in order to holy uses; the time as unlimited as the (...) omnibus (...).
Nations were indefinite and universal. Which is the more observable, because
it (...) (...). l. 6.
was of the outward Courts, not whither Moses's Rites alone were admitted, but
the natural Devotion of Jews and Gentile-Proselytes, that Christ affirmed it to
be holy, to be the House of God, and the place of Prayer. So that the Religion
of public places of Prayer is not a Rite of Levi, but a natural and prudent
circumstance and advantage of Religion in which all wise men agree, who
therefore must have some common principle with influence upon all the World
which must be the univocal cause of the consent of all men: which common
principle must either be a dictate of natural or prime Reason, or else some
Tradition from the first Parents of mankind; which because it had order in it,
beauty, Religion, and confirmation from Heaven, and no reason to contest
against it, it has surprised the understanding and practices of all Nations.
And indeed we find that even in Paradise God had that which is analogical to a
Church, a distinct place where he manifested himself present in proper manner:
For Adam and Eve, when they had sinned, hid themselves from the Presence of the
Lord; and this was the word in all descent of the Church, for the being of God
in holy places, the Presence of the Lord was there. And probably when Adam from
this intimation, or a greater direction, had taught Cain and Abel to offer
sacrifice to God in a certain place, where they were observed of each in their
several Offerings, it became one of the rules of Religion which was derived to
their posterity by tradition, the only way they had to communicate the dictates
of Divine commandment.

8. There is no more necessary to be added in behalf of Holy Places, and to
assert them into the family and relatives of Religion; our estimate and
deportment toward them is matter of practice, and therefore of proper
consideration. To which purpose I consider, that Holy Places being the
residence of God's Name upon earth, there where he has put it, that by fiction
of Law it may be the Psalm, 27 4, (...), 6.
sanctuary and the last resort in all calamities and need, God has sent his
Agents to possess them in person for him. Churches and Oratories are regions
and courts of Angels, and they are there not only to minister to the Saints,
but also they possess them in the right of God. There they Isa. 6. 1.
are: so the greatest and Prince of Spirits tells us, the Holy Ghost; I saw the
Lord sitting upon his throne, and his train filled the Temple; Above it stood
the Seraphim; that was God's train, and therefore holy David knew that his
addresses to God were in the presence of Angels: I will praise thee with my
whole heart, before Psalm. 138. 1. 2.
the gods will i sing praise unto thee: (...), LXX. (...) c. 16. (...).
before the Angels, so it is in the Septuagint And that we might know where or
how the Kingly worshipper would pay this adoration, he adds, I will worship
toward thy holy (...). And this was so known by him, that it became expressive
of God's manner of presence in Heaven: The Chariots of God are twenty thousand,
even thousands of Angels, and the Lord is among them Psalm. (...). 17.
as in Sinai, in the holy place; God in the midst of Angels, and the Angels in
the midst of the (...) place; and God in Heaven in the midst of that holy
circle, as (...) as he is amongst Angels in the recesses of his Sanctuary. Were
the rudiments of the Law worthy of an attendance of Angels? and are the
memorials of the Gospel destitute of so brave a retinue? Did the beatisied
Spirits wait upon the Types? and do (...) decline the office at the
ministration of the Substance? Is the nature of Man made worse since the
Incarnation of the Son of God? and have the Angels purchased an exemption from
their ministry since Christ became our brother? We have little reason to think
so: And therefore S. Paul still makes use of the argument to press women to
modesty and (...) 16. in (...) and de (...). S. (...), in c. 1. (...). Non
(...) quando (...), Christus (...). R. Canutus in Leg. (...). c. 4. Angeli
siquidem (...), and (...).
humility in Churches, because of the Angels. And upon the same stock S.
Chrysostom chides the people of his Diocese for walking, and laughing, and
prating in Churches: The Church is not a shop of manufactures or merchandise,
but the place of Angels and of Archangels, the Court of God, and the image or
representment of Heaven it self.

9. For if we consider that Christianity is something more than ordinary, that
there are Mysteries in our Religion and in none else, that God's Angels are
ministering spirits for (...) good, and especially about the conveyances of our
Prayers; either we must think very low of Christianity, or that greater things
are in it than the presence of Angels in our Churches: and yet if there were no
more, we should do well to behave our selves there with the thoughts and
apprehensions of Heaven about us; always remembering, that our business there is
an errand of Religion, and God is the object of our Worshippings; and therefore
although by our weakness we are fixed in the lowness of men, yet because God's
infinity is our object, it were very happy if our actions did bear some few
degrees of a proportionable and commensurate address.

10. Now that the Angels are there in the right of God, and are a manner and an
exhibition of the Divine Presence, is therefore certain, because whenever it
is said in the Old Testament that God appeared, it was by an Angel; and the Law
it self, in the midst of all the glorious terrors of its manisestation, was
ordained by Angels, and a word spoken by Angels; and yet God is said to have
descended upon the Mount: and in the greatest glory that ever shall be revealed
till the consummation of all things, the instrument of the Divine splendor is
the apparition of Angels; for when the Holy Jesus shall come in the glory of
his Father, it is added by way of explication, that is, with an (...) of Angels.

11. The result is those words of God to his people, Reverence my (...). For
(...). 19. 30.
what God loves in an especial manner, it is most fit we should esteem
accordingly. God loves the gates of Sion more than all the (...) of Jacob. The
least turf of hallowed glebe Psalm. 87. 2.
is with God himself of more value than all the Champain of common possession;
it is Matthew, 23. 17.
better in all senses: The Temple is better than gold, said our Blessed
Savior; and therefore it were well we should do that which is expressed in the
command of giving reverence to it, for we are too apt to pay undue devotions to
gold. Which precept the holiest of that Nation expressed by worshipping toward
the Sanctuary, by (...) (...) an (...) (...). (...), in omne (...) non (...) in
(...)? (...), de (...). c. 1. Con. Gang. c. 5.
pulling off their shoes when they went into it, by making it the determination
of their Religious addresses, by falling down low upon the earth in their
accesses, by opening their windows toward it in their private Devotions, by
calling it the glory of their Nation; as is certain in the instances of David,
Daniel, and the wife of Phinehas. I shall not need to say, that the devouter
Christians in the first Ages did worship God with solemnities of address
whenever they entered into their Oratories. It was a civility Jesus commanded
his Disciples to use to common houses, When ye enter into a house, salute it: I
suppose he means the dwellers in it. And it is certain, whatever those
devouter people did in their religious approaches, they designed it to God, who
was the Major-domo, the Master of those Assemblies: and thus did the convinced
Christian in S. Paul's discourse, when he came into the Church where they were
prophesying in a known language; The secrets of his heart are made manifest,
and so falling down on his face he will 1 Cor. 14. 25
worship God.

12. It was no unhandsome expression of reverencing God's Sanctuary, that pious
people ever used in bestowing costly and (...) Ornaments upon it: for so all
the Christians did; as soon as themselves came from contempt and scorn, they
raised Christian Oratories to an equal portion of their honor; and by this way
they thought they did honor to God, who was the Numen of the place. Not that a
rich house or costly (...) (...), in (...).
Offertory is better in respect of God, for to him all is alike, save that in
equal abilities our Devotion is distinguished by them; and be the Offering
pl^bs devota veni, perque haec (...). Simplicius P. in expositione Ecclesiae S.
Andreanae in Roma.
never so contemptible, it is a rich Devotion that gives the best we have:
because although if all the wealth of the Levant were united into a Present, it
were short of God's infinity; yet such an Offertory, or any best we have, makes
demonstration, that if we had an Offering infinitely better, we should give it,
to express our love and our belief of God's infinite merit and perfection. And
therefore let not the widow's two mites become a Precedent to the instance and
value of our Donation; and because she, who gave no more, was accepted, think
that two farthings is as fit to be cast into the Corban as two thousand pound.
For the reason why our Blessed Savior commended the Widow's oblation was for
the greatness of it, not the smallness; she gave all she had, even all her
living, therefore she was accepted. And indeed since God gives to us more than
enough, beyond our necessities, much for our convenience, much for ease, much
for repute, much for public compliances, for variety, for content, for
pleasure, for ornament; we should deal unworthily with God Almighty, if we
limit and restrain our returns to him, by confining them within the Delicta
Majorum im^^eritus l^^s,
Roman, donec templa refeceris,
AEdesque labentes Deorum, and
Foeda nigro simulachro ^^^o.

narrow bounds of mere necessity. Certainly beggarly services and cheapness is
not more pleasing to God than a rich and magnificent address. To the best of
Essences the best of Presents Hor. l. 3. cd. 6. In pictatis notatur Zeno, qu^d
dixerit (...). Et (...) Gentium mos erat aras (...), nemoribus, and montium
jugis, io quo (...) includendos non esse dix^^ant.
is most proportionable: and although the service of the Soul and Spirit is
most delectable and esteemed by God; yet because our Souls are served by things
perishing and material, and we are of that constitution, that by the Body we
serve the Spirit, and by both we serve God, as the Spirit is chiefly to be
offered to God, because it is better than the Body, so the richest Oblation is
the best in an equal power and the same person, because it is the best of
things material: and although it has not the excellency of the Spirit, it has
an excellency that a cheap Oblation has not; and besides the advantage of the
natural value, it can no otherwise be spoiled than a meaner Offering may, it is
always capable of the same commendation from the Piety of the presenter's
spirit, and may be as much purified and made holy as the cheaper or the more
contemptible. God has nowhere expressed that he accepts of a cheaper
Offering, but when we are not able to give him better. When the people brought
Offerings more than enough for the Tabernacle, Moses restrained their
forwardness, by saying it was enough, but yet commended the disposition highly,
and wished it might be perpetual: But God chid the people when they let his
House lie waste without reparation of its decaying beauty; and therefore sent
famines upon the Land and a curse into their estate because they would not by
giving a portion to Religion sanctify and secure all the rest. For the way for
a man to be a saver by his Religion is to deposite one part of his estate in
the Temple, and one in the hands of the Poor; for these are God's treasury and
stewards respectively: and this is laying up treasures in Heaven; and besides
that it will procure blessing to other parts, it will help to save our Souls;
and that is good husbandry, that is worth the saving.

13. For I consider that those riches and beauties in Churches and Religious
solemnities, which add nothing to God, add much Devotion to us, and much honor
and efficacy to Devotion. For since impression is made upon the Soul by the
intervening of (...). Philo.
corporal things, our Religion and Devotion of the Soul receives the addition
of many degrees by such instruments. Insomuch that we see persons of the
greatest fancy, and such who are most pleased with outward fairnesses, are most
Religious. Great Understandings make Religion lasting and reasonable; but great
Fancies make it more scrupulous, strict, operative, and effectual. And
therefore it is strange, that we shall bestow such great expenses to make our
own houses convenient and delectable, that we may entertain our selves with
complacency and appetite; and yet think that Religion is not worth the
ornament, nor our fancies fit to be carried into the choice and prosecution of
religious actions with sweetness, entertainments, and fair propositions. If we
say that God is not the better for a rich House or a costly service: we may
also remember that neither are we the better for rich Clothes; and the Sheep
will keep us as modest, as warm, and as clean as the Silkworm; and a Gold
chain or a carkenet of Pearl does no more contribute to our happiness than it
does to the service of Religion. For if we reply, that they help to the esteem
and reputation of our Persons, and the distinction of them from the vulgar,
from the servants of the lot of Issachar, and add reverence and veneration to
us: how great a shame is it, if we study by great expenses to get reputation
and accidental advantages to our selves, and not by the same means to purchase
reverence and esteem to Religion, since we see that Religion amongst persons of
ordinary understandings receives as much external and accidental advantages by
the accession of exterior ornaments and accommodation, as we our selves can by
rich clothes and garments of wealth, ceremony and distinction? And as in
Princes Courts the reverence to Princes is quickened and increased by an
outward state and glory; so also it is in the service of God: although the
Understandings of men are no more satisfied by a pompous magnificence than by a
cheap plainness; yet the Eye is, and the Fancy, and the Affections, and the
Senses; that is, many of our Faculties are more pleased with Religion, when
Religion by such instruments and conveyances pleases them. And it was noted by
Sozomen concerning Valens the Arrian Emperor, that when he came to Caesarea in
Cappadocia he praised S. Basil their Bishop, and upon more easy terms revoked
his Banishment, Quid cum tanto (...) sacerdotio (...) convent^sque ageret.
because he was a grave person, and did his holy Offices with reverent and
decent addresses, and kept his Church Assemblies with much ornament and
solemnity.

14. But when I consider that saying of S. Gregory, that the Church is Heaven
within (...).
the Tabernacle, Heaven dwelling among the sons of men, and remember that God
has studded all the Firmament and paved it with stars, because he loves to
have his House beauteous, and highly representative of his glory; I see no
reason we should not do as Apollinaris says God does, In earth do the works of
Heaven. For he is the God (...). (...).
of beauties and perfections, and every excellency in the Creature is a portion
of influence from the Divinity, and therefore is the best instrument of
conveying honor to him who made them for no other end but for his own honor,
as the last resort of all other ends for which they were created.

15. But the best manner to reverence the Sanctuary is by the continuation of
such actions which gave it the first title of Gravitas honesta, diligentia
attonita, cura solicita, apparitio devota, and processio modesta. Terr. de
praescript. Confluunt ad Ecclesiam costa celebri^ate, honesta utriusque sexus
discretione. S. Aug. l. 2. c. 28. de Civit. Dei.
Holiness. Holiness becomes thine House for ever, said David: Sancta sanc^tis,
Holy persons and holy rites in holy places; that as it had the first relation
of Sanctity by the consecration of a holy and reverend Minister and President
of Religion, so it may be perpetuated in holy Offices, and receive the daily
consecration by the assistance of sanctified and religious persons. Foris
canes, dogs and criminal persons are unfit for Churches; the best ornament and
beauty of a Church is a holy Priest and a sanctified people. (...) Philo legate.
ad Caium. (...) Idem.
For since Angels dwell in Churches, and God has made his Name to dwell there
too; if there also be a holy people, that there be Saints as well as Angels, it
is a holy fellowship and a blessed communion: But to see a Devil there, would
scare the most confident and bold fancy, and disturb the good meeting; and such
is every wicked and graceless person: Have I not chosen twelve of you, and one
of you is a Devil? An evil Soul is an evil spirit, and such are no good
ornaments for Temples: and Quin demus id superis --
Compositum jus s^sque animus, sanct^sque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto:
Hec cedo ut admoveam templis, and ^arre litabo.
Pers. Sat. 2.
it is a shame that a goodly Christian Church should be like an Egyptian
Temple; without, goodly buildings, within, a Dog or a Cat for the Deity they
adore: It is worse, if in our addresses to Holy Places and Offices we bear our
Lusts under our garments. For Dogs and Cats are of God's making, but our Lusts
are not, but are God's enemies; and therefore, besides the Unholiness, it is an
affront to God to bring them along, and it defiles the place in a great degree.

16. For there is a defiling of a Temple by insinuation of impurities, and
another by direct and positive profanation, and a third by express Sacrilege:
This defiles a Temple to the ground. Every small sin is an unwelcome guest, and
is a spot in those Feasts of Charity which entertain us often in God's Houses:
but there are some (and all great crimes are such) which desecrate the place,
unhallow the ground, as to our particulars, stop the ascent of our Prayers,
obstruct the current of God's blessing, turn Religion into bitterness, and
Devotion into gall; such as are marked in Scripture with a distinguishing
character, as enemies to the peculiar dispositions of Religion: And such are
Unchastity, which defiles the Temples of our Bodies; Covetousness, which sets
up an Idol in stead of God; and Unmercifulness, which is a direct enemy to the
Mercies of God, and the fair return of our Prayers. He that shows not the
mercies of Alms, of Forgiveness and Comfort, is forbid to hope for comfort,
relief or forgiveness from the hands of God. (...) gratiorem existimari qui
delubris Deorum param (...), quam qui (...) carmen (...). Plin. Sec, Pan.
Trajan. (...) Porphyr. de Non esu (...). l. 2. Optimus animus (...). (...).
(...). (a) Psalm. 26. 6. (b) 1 Cor. 3. 17.
A pure Mind is the best manner of worship, and the impurity of a crime is the
greatest contradiction to the honor and religion of Holy Places. And therefore
let us imitate the Precedent of the most religious of Kings, ( a) I will wash
my hands in innocence, O Lord, and so will I go to thine Altar; always
remembering those decretory and final words of ( b) S. Paul, He that defiles a
Temple, him will God destroy.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal God, who dwell not in Temples made with hands, the Heaven of
Heavens is not able to contain thee, and yet thou art pleased to manifest thy
presence amongst the sons of men by special issues of thy favor and
benediction; make my Body and Soul to be a Temple pure and holy, apt for the
entertainments of the Holy Jesus, and for the habitation of the Holy Spirit.
Lord, be pleased with thy rod of paternal discipline to cast out all impure
Lusts, all worldly affections, all covetous desires from this thy Temple, that
it may be a place of Prayer and Meditation, of holy appetites and chaste
thoughts, of pure intentions and zealous desires of pleasing thee; that I may
become also a Sacrifice as well as a Temple, eaten up with the zeal of thy
glory, and consumed with the fire of love; that not one thought may be
entertained by me but such as may be like perfume breathing from the Altar of
Incense, and not a word may pass from me but may have the accent of Heaven upon
it, and sound pleasantly in thy ears. O dearest God, fill every Faculty of my
Soul with impresses, dispositions, capacities and aptnesses of Religion; and do
thou hallow my Soul, that I may be possessed with zeal and religious affections,
loving thee above all things in the world, worshipping thee with the humblest
adorations and frequent addresses, continually feeding upon the apprehensions
of thy divine sweetness, and consideration of thy infinite excellencies, and
observations of thy righteous Commandments, and the feast of a holy Conscience,
as an antepast of Eternity, and consignation to the joys of Heaven, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
SECT. XII. Of JESVS's departure into Galilee; his manner of Life, Miracles,
and Preaching; his calling of Disciples; and what happened until the Second
Passover.
Jesus and the Woman of Samaria
Joh. 4. 5, 6. 7. He comes to a City of Samaria called Sychar: now Jacob's
well was there. There comes a woman of Samaria to draw water. Jesus says etc.
For his disciples were gone into the city to buy meat V. 27. His disciples came
and marvelled yt he talked with the woman, yet no man said, what seek thou?
or, why talkest thou with her?

The Samaritans coming to Jesus
V. 28. The woman left her water pot and went her way into the city, and says
to the men, Come see a man which told me all things that ever I did: is not
this the Christ? Then they went out of the city, and came unto him. V. 39. Many
of the Samaritans believed on him, for the saying of the woman; and when they
were come to him, many more believed because of his own word.




1. WHen Jesus understood that John was cast into prison, and that the
Pharisees Matthew. (...).
were envious at him for the great multitudes of people that resorted to his
Baptism, which he ministered not in his own person, but by the deputation of his
Disciples, they finishing the ministration which himself began, (who, as
Euodins Bishop of Antioch reports, baptized the Blessed Virgin his Mother
Eurhym. (...) in Joan. Apud (...) l. 2. c. 3. (...).
there and Peter only, and Peter baptized Andrew, James and John, and they
others) he left Judaea, and came into Galilee; and in his passage he must touch
Sychar a City of Samaria, where in the heat of the day and the weariness of his
journey he sat himself down upon the margent of Jacob's Well; whither, when
his Disciples were gone to buy meat, a Samaritan woman comes to draw water, of
whom Jesus asked some to cool his thirst, and refresh his weariness.

2. Little knew the woman the excellency of the person that asked so small a
charity; neither had she been taught, that a cup of cold water given to a
Disciple should be rewarded, and much rather such a present to the Lord
himself. But she prosecuted (...) Sacra (...) ad (...) solos deducere verpos.
the spite of her Nation, and the interest and quarrel of the Schism; and in
stead of washing Jesus's feet, and giving him drink, demanded, why he being a
Jew should ask water of a Samaritan: for the Jews have no intercourse with the
Samaritans.

3. The ground of the quarrel was this. In the sixth year of Hezekiah
Salmanasar Juv. (...). 14.
King of Assyria sacked Samaria, transported the Israelites to Assyria, and
planted an Assyrian Colony in the Town and Country, who by Divine vengeance
were destroyed by Lions, which no power of man could restrain or lessen. The
King thought the cause was, their not serving the God of Israel according to
the Rites of Moses; and therefore sent a Jewish captive Priest to instruct the
remanent inhabitants in the Jewish Religion; who so learned and practiced it,
that they still retained the Superstition of the Gentile rites; till Manasses,
the Brother of Jaddi the high Priest at Jerusalem, married the daughter of
Sanballat, who was the Governor under King Darius. Manasses being reproved for
marrying a stranger, the daughter of an uncircumcised Gentile, and admonished
to dismiss her, flies to Samaria, persuades his Father-in-law to build a Temple
in Mount Gerizim, introduces the Rites of daily Sacrifice, and makes himself
high Priest, and began to pretend to be the true successor of Aaron, and
commences a Schism in the time of Alexander the Great. From whence the Question
of Religion grew so high, that it begat disassections, anger, animosities,
quarrels, bloodshed and murders, not only in Palestine, but where ever a Jew
and Samaritan had the ill fortune to meet: Such being the nature of men, that
they think it the greatest injury in the world when other men are not of their
minds; and that they please God most when they are most furiously zealous; and
no zeal better to be expressed than by hating all those whom they are pleased
to think God hates. This Schism was prosecuted with the greatest spite that
ever any was, because both the people were much given to Superstition; and this
was helped forward by the constitution of their Religion, consisting much in
externals and Ceremonials, and which they cared not much to hallow and make
moral by the intertexture of spiritual senses and Charity. And therefore
Joseph, (...), l. 18. c. 3.
the Jews called the Samaritans accursed; the Samaritans at the Paschal
solemnity would at midnight, when the Jews Temple was open, scatter dead men's
bones to (...)
profane and desecrate the place; and both would fight, and eternally dispute
the Question: sometimes referring it to Arbitrators, and then the conquered
party would decline the Arbitration after sentence; which they did at
Alexandria before Ptolemaeus Philometor, when Andronicus had by a rare and
exquisite Oration procured sentence against Theodosius and Sabbaeus, the
Samaritan Advocates: The sentence was given for Jerusalem, and the Schism
increased, and lasted till the time of our Savior's conference with this woman.

4. And it was so implanted and woven in with every understanding, that when
the woman perceived Jesus to be a Prophet, she undertook this Question with
him: Our Fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say that Jerusalem is the
place where men ought to worship. Jesus knew the Schism was great enough
already, and was not willing to make the rent wider: and though he gave
testimony to the truth by saying, Salvation is of the Jews; and we know what we
worship, ye do not; yet because the subject of this Question was shortly to be
taken away, Jesus takes occasion to preach the Gospel, to hasten an expedient,
and by way of anticipation to reconcile the disagreeing interests, and settle a
revelation to be verified for ever. Neither here nor there by way of
confinement, not in one Country more than another, but wherever any man
shall call upon God in spirit and truth, there he shall be heard.

5. But all this while the Holy Jesus was athirst, and therefore hastens at
least to discourse of water, though as yet he got none. He tells her of living
water, of eternal satisfactions, of never thirsting again, of her own personal
condition, of matrimonial relation, and professes himself to be the Messiah:
And then was interrupted by the coming of his Disciples, who wondered to see him
alone talking with a woman, besides his custom and usual reservation. But the
Woman full of joy and wonder left her waterpot, and ran to the City, to publish
the Messiah: and immediately all the City came out to see, and many believed on
him upon the testimony of the Woman, and more when they heard his own
discourses. They invited him to the Town, and received him with hospitable
civilities for two days, after which he departed to his own Galilee.

6. Jesus therefore came into the Country, where he was received with respect
and fair entertainment, because of the Miracles which the Galileans saw done by
him at the Feast; and being at Cana, where he wrought the first Miracle, a
Noble personage, a little King say some, a Palatine says S. Hierome, a Kingly
person certainly, came to Jesus with much reverence, and desire that he would
be pleased to come to his house, and cure his Son now ready to die; which he
seconds with much importunity, fearing left his Son be dead before he get
thither. Jesus, who did not do his Miracles by natural operations, cured the
child at distance, and dismissed the Prince, telling him his Son lived; which
by narration of his servants he found to be true, and that he recovered at the
same time when Jesus spoke these'salutary and healing words. Upon which
accident he and all his house became Disciples.

7. And now Jesus left Nazareth, and came to Capernaum, a maritime Town, and of
great resort, choosing that for his scene of Preaching, and his place of
dwelling. For now the time was fulfilled, the office of the Baptist was
expired, and the Kingdom of God was at hand. He therefore preached the sum of
the Gospel, Faith and Repentance, Repent ye, and believe the Gospel. And what
that Gospel was, the sum and series of all his Sermons afterward did declare.

8. The work was now grown high and pregnant, and Jesus saw it convenient to
choose Disciples to his ministry and service in the work of Preaching, and to
be witnesses of all that he should say, do or teach, for ends which were
afterward made public and excellent. Jesus therefore, as he walked by the Sea
of Galilee, called Simon and Andrew, who knew him before by the preaching of
John, and now left all, their ship and their net, and followed him. And when he
was gone a little farther, he calls the two sons of Zebedee, James and John;
and they went after him. And with this family he goes up and down the whole
Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, healing all manner of diseases,
curing Demoniacks, cleansing Lepers, and giving strength to Paralyticks and
lame people.

9. But when the people pressed on him to hear the word of God; he stood by the
Lake of Genesareth, and presently entering into Simon's ship, commanded him to
lanch into the deep, and from thence he taught the people, and there wrought a
Miracle; for, being Lord of the Creatures, he commanded the fishes of the sea,
and they obeyed. For when Simon, who had fished all night in vain, let down his
net at the command of Jesus, he enclosed so great a multitude of fishes, that
the Net brake, and the fishermen were amazed and fearful at so prodigious a
draught. But beyond the Miracle it was intended, that a representation should
be made of the plenitude of the Catholic Church, and multitudes of Believers
who should be taken by Simon and the rest of the Disciples, whom by that
Miracle he consigned to become fishers of men; who by their artifices of
prudence and holy Doctrine might gain Souls to God, that when the Net should be
drawn to shore, and separation made by the Angels, they and their Disciples
might be differenced from the reprobate portion.

10. But the light of the Sun uses not to be confined to a Province or a
Kingdom; so great a Prophet, and so divine a Physician, and so great Miracles
created a same loud as thunder, but not so full of sadness and presage.
Immediately the fame of Jesus went into all Syria, and there came to him
multitudes from Galilee, Decapolis, Jerusalem and Judaea. And all that had any
sick with diverse deseases brought them to him; and he laid his hands on every
one of them, and healed them. And when he cured the Lunaticks and persons
possessed with evil spirits, the Devils cried out and confessed him to be
CHRIST the Son of God; but he suffered them not, choosing rather to work Faith
in the persuasions of his Disciples by moral arguments and the placid
demonstrations of the Spirit, that there might in Faith be an excellency in
proportion to the choice, and that it might not be made violent by the
conviction and forced testimonies of accursed and unwilling spirits.

11. But when Jesus saw his assembly was grown full, and his audience numerous,
he went up into a mountain, and when his Disciples came unto him, he made that
admirable Sermon, called the Sermon upon the Mount; which is a Divine
repository of such excellent Truths and mysterious Dictates of secret Theology,
that contains a Breviary of all those Precepts which integrate the Morality of
Christian Religion; pressing the Moral Precepts given by Moses, and enlarging
their obligation by a stricter sense and more severe exposition, that their
righteousness might exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees;
preaches Perfection, and the doctrines of Meekness, Poverty of spirit,
Christian mourning, desire of holy things, Mercy and Purity, Peace and
toleration of injuries; affixing a special promise of blessing to be the
guerdon and inheritance of those Graces and spiritual excellencies. He
explicates some parts of the Decalogue, and adds appendices and precepts of his
own. He teaches his Disciples to Pray, how to Fast, how to give Alms, contempt
of the world, not to judge others, forgiving injuries, an indifferency and
incuriousness of temporal provisions, and a seeking of the Kingdom of God and
its appendent righteousness.

12. When Jesus had finished his Sermon, and descended from the mountain, a
poor leprous person came and worshipped, and begged to be cleansed; which Jesus
soon granted, engaging him not to publish it where he should go abroad, but
sending him to the Priest to offer an oblation according to the Rites of
Moses's Law; and then came directly to Capernaum, and taught in their
Synagogues upon the Sabbath Days: where in his Sermons he expressed the dignity
of a Prophet, and the authority of a person sent from God, not inviting the
people by the soft arguments and insinuations of Scribes and Pharisees, but by
demonstrations and issues of Divinity. There he cures a Demoniack in one of
their Synagogues, and by and by after going abroad he heals Peter's wives (...)
of a Fever; insomuch that he grew the talk of all men and their wonder, till
they flocked so to him to see him, to hear him, to satisfy their curiosity and
their needs, that after he had healed those multitudes which beset the house of
Simon, where he cured his Mother of the Fever, he retired himself into a desert
place very early in the morning, that he might have an opportunity to pray,
free from the oppressions and noises of the multitude.

13. But neither so could he be hid, but, like a light shining by the fringes
of a curtain, he was soon discovered in his solitude; for the multitude found
him out, imprisoning him in their circuits and undeniable attendances. But
Jesus told them plainly, he must preach the Gospel to other Cities also, and
therefore resolved to pass to the other side of the Lake of Genesareth, so to
quit the throng. Whither as he was going, a Scribe offered himself a Disciple
to his Institution; till Jesus told him his condition to be worse than foxes
and birds, for whom an habitation is provided, but none for him, no not a place
where to bow his head and find rest. And what became of this forward Professor
afterward we find not. Others that were Probationers of this fellowship Jesus
bound to a speedy profession, not suffering one to go home to bid his Friends
farewell, nor another so much as to bury his dead.

14. By the time Jesus got to the Ship it was late, and he, heavy to sleep,
rested on a pillow, and slept soundly, as weariness, meekness, and innocence
could make him; insomuch that a violent storm, the chiding of the winds and
waters, which then happened, could not awake him; till the ship being almost
covered with broken billows and the impetuous dashings of the waters, the men
already sunk in their spirits, and the ship like enough to sink too, the
Disciples awaked him, and called for help: Master, carest thou not that we
perish? Jesus arising reproved their infidelity, commanded the wind to be still
and the seas peaceable, and immediately there was a great calm; and they
presently arrived in the land of the Gergesenes or Gerasenes.

15. In the land of Gergesites or Gergesenes, which was the remaining name of
an extinct people, being one of the Nations whom the sons of Jacob drove from
their inheritance, there were two Cities; Gadara from the tribe of Gad, to whom
it fell by lot in the Division of the Land, (which, having been destroyed by
the Jews, was rebuilt by Pompey at the request of Demetrius Gadarensis,
Pompey's freed man) and near Joseph, de (...). Jud. l. 1. c 5. and l. 3. c. 2.
and l. 5. c. 3.
to it was Gerasa, as Josephus reports: which diversity of Towns and names is
the cause of the various recitation of this story by the Evangelists. Near the
City of Gadara there were many sepulchers in the hollownesses of rocks, where
the dead were buried, Epiph. contr. Eb. bares. 30.
and where many superstitious persons used Memphitick and Thessalick rites,
invocating evil spirits; insomuch that at the instant of our Savior's arrival
in the Country there met him two possessed with Devils from these tombs,
exceeding fierce, and so had been long, insomuch that no man durst pass that
way.

16. Jesus commanded the Devils out of the possessed persons: but there were
certain men feeding swine, which though extremely abominated by the Jewish
Religion, yet for the use of the Roman armies and quarterings of soldiers they
were permitted, and diverse privileges Cod. Theod. de (...), Joseph. l. 2.
(...). Jud. (...). 33.
granted to the Masters of such herds: and because Gadara was a Greek City, and
the company mingled of Greeks, Syrians and Jews, these last in all likelihood
not making the greatest number; the Devils therefore besought Jesus, he would
not send them into the abyss, but permit them to enter into the Swine. He gave
them leave; and the swine ran violently down a steep place into the hot baths,
which were at the foot of the hill on which Gadara was built, (which smaller
congregation of waters (...) Mare (...) templi ad aquarum (...).
the Jews used to call [ Sea;]) or else, as others think, into the Lake of
Genesareth, and perished in the waters. But this accident so troubled the
inhabitants, that they came and entreated Jesus to depart out of their coasts.
And he did so; leaving Galilee of the Gentiles, he came to the lesser Galilee,
and so again to the City of Capernaum.

17. But when he was come thither, he was met by diverse Scribes and Pharisees,
who came from Jerusalem, and Doctors of the Law from Galilee; and while they
were sitting in a house, which was encompassed with multitudes, that no
business or necessity could be admitted to the door, a poor Paralytick was
brought to be cured, and they were fain to uncover the tiles of the house, and
let him down in his bed with cords in the midst before Jesus sitting in
conference with the Doctors. When Jesus saw their Faith, he said, Man, thy sins
be forgiven thee. At which saying the Pharisees being troubled, thinking it to
be blasphemy, and that none but God could forgive sins; Jesus was put to (...)
his absolution, which he did in a just satisfaction and proportion to their
understandings. For the Jews did believe that all afflictions were punishments
(...) sin; ( Who sinned, this man or his Father, that he was born blind?) and
that removing of the punishment was forgiving of the sin. And therefore Jesus,
to prove that his sins were forgiven, removed that which they supposed to be
the effect of his sin, and by curing the Palsy prevented their farther murmur
about the Pardon; That ye might know the Son of man has power on earth to
forgive sins, ( he says to the sick of the Palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed,
and walk. And the man arose, was healed, and glorified God.

18. A while after Jesus went again toward the Sea, and on his way, seeing
Matthew the Publican sitting at the receipt of custom, he bad him follow him.
Matthew first feasted Jesus, and then became his Disciple. But the Pharisees
that were with him began to be troubled that he ate with Publicans and sinners.
For the office of Publican, though amongst the Romans it was honest and of
great account, and Cicero (...). l. 13. and in (...). pro Plancic.
the flower of the Roman Knights, the ornament of the City, the security of the
Commonwealth, was accounted to consist in the society of Publicans; yet amongst
both the (...) ad Quint. Fratrem de (...) Asian.
Jews and Greeks the name was odious, and the persons were accursed: not only
because they were strangers that were the chief of them, who took in to them
some of the Nation where they were employed; but because the Jews especially
stood upon the Charter of their Nation and the privilege of their Religion,
that none of them should pay tribute; and also because they exercised great
injustices and Vita Publicanorum (...), impunita rapina, (...) nulla (...), V.
(...), (...)
oppressions, having a power unlimited, and a covetousness wide as hell, and
greedy as the fire or the grave. But Jesus gave so fair an account concerning
his converse with these persons, that the Objection Apud (...) textum D. (...)
dicti Parisim, (...) proprio (...) qui (...) and (...) dicti Gabaim; (...)
Gabella.
turned to be his Apology: for therefore he conversed with them because they
were sinners; and it was as if a Physician should be reproved for having so
much to do with sick persons; for therefore was he sent, not to call the
righteous, but sinners, to Repentance, to advance the reputation of Mercy above
the rites of Sacrifice.

19. But as the little bubbling and gentle murmurs of the water are presages of
a Storm, and are more troublesome in their prediction than their violence: so
were the arguings of the Pharisees symptoms of a secret displeasure and an
ensuing war; though at first represented in the civilities of Question and
scholastical (...), yet they did but fore-run vigorous objections and bold
calumnies, which were the fruits of the next Summer. But as yet they discoursed
fairly, asking him why John's Disciples fasted often, but the Disciples of
Jesus did not fast. Jesus told them, it was because these were the days in
which the Bridegroom was come in person to espouse the Church unto himself; and
therefore for the children of the bride-chamber to fast then, was like the
bringing of a dead corpse to the joys of a Bride or the pomps of Coronation; the
days should come, that the Bridegroom should retire into his chamber and draw
the curtains, and then they should fast in those days.

20. While Jesus was discoursing with the Pharisees, Jairus, a Ruler of the
Synagogue, came to him, desiring he would help his Daughter, who lay in the
confines of death ready to depart. Whither as he was going, a woman met him who
had been diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, without hope of remedy
from art or nature; and therefore she runs to Jesus, thinking, without
precedent, upon the confident persuasions of a holy Faith, that if she did but
touch the hem of his garment, she should be whole. She came trembling, and full
of hope and reverence, and touched his garment, and immediately the (...) of
her unnatural emanation was stopped, and reverted to its natural course and
offices. S. Ambrose says that this woman was Martha. But it is not likely that
she was a Jewess, but a Gentile, because of that return which she made in
memory of her cure and honor of Jesus according to the Gentile rites. For Lib.
7. (...). c. 14. (...) apud Sozomen. l. 5. c. 20. Johan. Damas. (...) imagine.
(...). 3. ex (...) Johan. (...) (...). ait, (...) Philippo (...) Trachonitidis
(...), ut liceret (...) in memoriam (...) beneficii.
Eusebius reports that himself saw at Caesarea Philippi a Statue of (...)
representing a woman kneeling at the feet of a goodly personage, who held his
hand out to her in a posture of granting her request, and doing favor to her;
and the inhabitants said it was erected by the care and cost of this woman,
adding (whether out of truth or easiness is not certain) that at the pedestal
of this Statue an usual plant did grow, which when it was come up to that
maturity and height as to arrive at the fringes of the brass monument, it was
medicinal in many dangerous diseases: So far Eusebius. Concerning which story I
shall make no censure but this, that since S. Mark and S. Luke affirm that this
woman before her cure had spent all her substance upon Physicians, it is not
easily imaginable Mark 5. 26.
(...) 8. 43.
how she should become able to dispend so great a sum of money as would
purchase two so great Statues of brass: and if she could, yet it is still more
unlikely that the Gentile Princes and Proconsuls, who searched all places
public and private, and were curiously diligent to destroy all honorary
monuments of Christianity, should let this alone; and that this should escape
not only the diligence of the Persecutors, but the fury of such Wars and
changes as happened in Palestine, and that for three hundred years together it
should stand up in defiance of all violences and changeable fate of all things.
However it be, it is certain that the Book against Images, published by the
command of Charles the Great 850 years ago, gave no credit to the story: and if
it had been true, it it more than probable that Justin Martyr, who was born and
bred Lib. 4. (...) Imagine. cap. 15.
in Palestine, and Origin, who lived many years in Tire, in the neighborhood
of the place where the Statue is said to stand, and were highly diligent to
heap together all things of advantage and reputation to the Christian cause,
would not have omitted so notable an instance. It is therefore likely that the
Statues which Eusebius saw, and concerning which he heard such stories, were
first placed there upon the stock of a heathen story or Ceremony, and in
process of time, for the likeness of the figures, and its capacity to be
translated to the Christian story, was by the Christians in after-Ages
attributed by a fiction of fancy, and afterward by credulity confidently
applied, to the present Narrative.

21. When Jesus was come to the Ruler's house, he found the minstrels making
their funeral noises for the death of Jairus's daughter, and his servants had
met him, and acquainted him of the death of the child; yet Jesus turned out the
minstrels, and entered with the parents of the child into her chamber, and
taking her by the hand called her, and awakened her from her sleep of death,
and commanded them to give her to eat, and enjoined them not to publish the
Miracle. But as (...) suppressed by violent detentions break out and rage with
a more impetuous and rapid motion: so it happened to Jesus, who endeavoring to
make the noises and reports of him less popular, made them to be (...); for not
only we do that most greedily from which we are most restrained, but a great
merit enameled with humility, and restrained with modesty, grows more
beauteous and florid, up to the heights of wonder and glories.

22. As he came from Jairus's house, he cured two blind men upon their
petition, and confession that they did believe in him, and cast out a dumb
Devil, so much to the wonder and amazement of the people, that the Pharisees
could hold no longer, being ready to burst with envy, but said, he cast out
Devils by help of the Devils: Their malice being, as usually it is,
contradictory to its own design, by its being unreasonable; nothing being more
sottish than for the Devil to divide his kingdom upon a plot; to ruin his
certainties upon hopes future and contingent. But this was but the first
eruption of their malice; all the year last past, which was the first year of
Jesus's Preaching, Epiphan. in Panar. lib. 2. (...). 51.
all was quiet, neither the Jews nor the Samaritans nor the Galileans did
malign his Doctrine or Person, but he preached with much peace on all hands;
for this was the year which the Prophet Isaiah called in his prediction the
acceptable year of the Lord.

Ad SECT. XII. Considerations upon the Intercourse happening between the Holy
Jesus and the Woman of Samaria.
The Woman of Samaria.
John. 4: 7. There cemeth a woman of Samaria to draw water. Jesus says unto
her, give me to drink.

9. Then says the Woman of Samaria unto him, How is it, that thou being a Jew,
ask drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria?

The great draught of Fishes.
Luke 5. 4. 5. etc. He said unto Simon, Let down your nets for a draught. And
they enclosed a great multitude of fishes: and when Simon Peter saw it he fell
down at Jesus knees -- for he was astonished, and all that were with him, at
the draught of the fishes. And Jesus said to Simon, Fear not from henceforth
thou shall catch men.




1. WHen the Holy Jesus, perceiving it unsafe to be at Jerusalem, returned to
Galilee, where the largest scene of his Prophetical Office was to be
represented, he journeyed on foot through Samaria, and being weary and faint,
hungry and thirsty, he sat down by a Well, and begged water of a Samaritan
woman that was a Sinner; who at first refused him with some incivility of
language. But he, in stead of returning anger and passion to her rudeness,
which was commenced upon the interest of a mistaken (...) in (...), adversus
(...) alios (...) odium. Tacit.
Religion, preached the coming of the Messiah to her, unlocked the secrets of
her heart, and let in his Grace, and made a fountain of living water to spring
up in her Soul, to extinguish the impure flames of Lust which had set her on
fire, burning like Hell ever since the death of her Quae nubis toties non
(...). Offender (...) simpliciore (...). Martial. (...).
fifth Husband, she then becoming a Concubine to the sixth. Thus Jesus
transplanted Nature into Grace, his hunger and thirst into religious appetites,
the darkness of the Samaritan into a clear revelation, her Sin into Repentance
and Charity, and so quenched his own thirst by relieving her needs: and as it
was meat to him to do his Father's will, so it was drink to him to bring us to
drink of the fountain of living water. For thus God declared it to be a delight
to him to see us live, as if he were refreshed by those felicities which he
gives to us as communications of his grace, and instances of mercy, and
consignations to Heaven. Upon which we can look with no eye but such as sees
and admires the excellency of the Divine Charity, which being an emanation from
the mercies and essential compassion of Eternity, God cannot choose but (...) in
it, and love the works of his Mercy, who was so well pleased in the works of
his Power. He that was delighted in the Creation, was highly pleased in the
nearer conveyances of himself, when he sent the Holy Jesus to bear his image,
and his mercies, and his glories, and offer them to the use and benefit of Man.
For this was the chief of the works of God, and therefore the Blessed Master
could not but be highliest pleased with it, in imitation of his heavenly Father.

2. The woman observing our Savior to have come with his face from (...), was
angry at him upon the quarrel of the old Schism. The Jews and the Samaritans
had differing Rites, and the zealous persons upon each side did commonly
dispute themselves into Uncharitableness: and so have Christians upon the same
confidence, and zeal, and mistake. For although righteousness has no
fellowship with unrighteousness, nor Christ with Belial; yet the consideration
of the crime of Heresy, which is a spiritual wickedness, is to be separate
from the person, who is material. That is, no spiritual communion is to be
endured with Heretical persons, when it is certain they are such, when they are
convinced by competent authority and sufficient argument. But the persons of
the men are to be pitied, to be reproved, to be redargued and convinced, to be
wrought upon by fair compliances and the offices of civility, and invited to
the family of Faith by the best arguments of Charity, and the instances of a
holy life; having your conversation honest among them, that they may, beholding
your good works, glorify 1 Pet. 2. 12.
God in the day when he shall visit them. Indeed if there be danger, that is, a
weak Tit. 3. 10.
understanding may not safely converse in civil society with a subtle
Heretic; in such 2 Epjst. John 10.
cases they are to be avoided, not saluted: But as this is only when the danger
is by reason of the unequal capacities and strengths of the person; so it must
be only when the article is certainly Heresy, and the person criminal, and
interest is the ingredient in the persuasion, and a certain and a necessary
Truth destroyed by the opinion. We Irenae. l. 3. (...). 3.
read that S. John, spying Cerinthus in a Bath, refused to wash there where the
enemy Eusebius. l. 3. c. 13.
of God and his Holy Son had been. This is a good precedent for us when the
case is equal. S. John could discern the spirit of Cerinthus, and his Heresy
was notorious, fundamental and highly criminal, and the Apostle a person
assisted up to infallibility. And possibly it was done by the whisper of a
Prophetic spirit, and upon a miraculous design; for immediately upon his
retreat the Bath fell down, and crushed Cerinthus in the ruins. But such acts
of aversation as these are not easily by us to be drawn into example, unless in
the same or the parallel concourse of equally-concluding accidents. We must not
quickly, nor upon slight grounds, nor unworthy instances, call Heretic; there
had need be a long process, and a high conviction, and a competent Judge, and a
necessary Article, that must be ingredients into so sad and decretory
definitions, and condemnation of a person or opinion. But if such instances
occur, come not near the danger nor the scandal. And this advice S. Cyprian
gave to the Lay People of his Lib. 1. (...) p. 3.
Diocese: Let them decline their discourses, whose Sermons creep and corrode
like a Cancer; (...). 5. de Jejun, decimi (...).
let there be no colloquies, no banquets, no commerce with such who are
excommunicate and justly driven from the Communion of the Church. For such
persons (as S. Leo descants upon the Apostle's expression of heretical
discourses) creep in humbly, and with small and modest beginnings, they catch
with flattery, they bind gently, and kill privily. Let therefore all persons
who are in danger secure their persons and Persuasions by removing far from the
infection. And for the scandal, S. Herminigilda gave an heroic example, which
in her persuasion, and the circumstances of the Age and action, deserved the
highest testimony of zeal, religious passion, and confident persuasion. For she
rather chose to die by the mandate of her tyrant-Father Leonigildus Gregor. l.
3.
the Goth, than she would at the Paschal solemnity receive the blessed
Sacrament at the dial. 3. 13.
hand of an Arrian Bishop.

3. But excepting these cases, which are not to be judged with forwardness, nor
rashly taken measure of, we find that conversing charitably with persons of
differing Persuasions has been instrumental to their Conversion and God's
glory. The believing wife may sanctify the unbelieving husband; and we find it
verified in Churchstory. S. Cecily converted her husband Valerianus; S.
Theodora converted Sisinius; S. Monica converted Patricius, and Theodelinda
Agilulphus; S. Clotilda persuaded King Clodoveus to be a Christian; and S.
Natolia persuaded Adrianus to be a Martyr. For they, having their conversation
honest and holy amongst the unbelievers, shined like virgin Tapers in the midst
of an impure prison, and amused the eyes of the sons of darkness with the
brightness of the flame. For the excellency of a holy life is the best argument
of the inhabitation of God within the Soul: and who will not offer up his
understanding upon that Altar, where a Deity is placed as the President and
author of Religion? And this very intercourse of the Holy Jesus with the Woman
is abundant argument, that it were well we were not so forward to refuse
Communion with dissenting persons upon the easy and confident mistakes of a
too-forward zeal. They that call Heretic may themselves be the mistaken
persons, and by refusing to communicate the civilities of hospitable
entertainment may shut their doors upon Truth, and their windows against Light,
and refuse to let Salvation in. For sometimes Ignorance is the only parent of
our Persuasions, and many times (...) has made an impure commixture with it,
and so produced the issue.

4. The Holy Jesus gently insinuates his discourses. If thou had known who it
is that asks thee water, thou would have asked water of him. Oftentimes we
know not the person that speaks, and we usually choose our Doctrine by our
affections to the man: but then if we are uncivil upon the stock of prejudice,
we do not know that it is Christ that calls our understandings to obedience,
and our affections to duty and compliances. The Woman little thought of the
glories which stood right against her. He that sat upon the Well had a Throne
placed above the heads of Cherubims. In his arms who there rested himself was
the Sanctuary of rest and peace, where wearied Souls were to lay their heads,
and dispose their cares, and there to turn them into joys, and to gild their
thorns with glory. That holy tongue which was parched with heat streamed forth
rivulets of holy Doctrine, which were to water all the world, to turn our
Deserts into Paradise. And though he begged water at Jacob's Well, yet Jacob
drank at his: For at his charge all Jacob's flocks and family were sustained,
and by him Jacob's posterity were made honorable and redeemed. But because
this Well was deep, and the woman had nothing to draw water with, and of her
self could not fathom so great a depth, therefore she refused him; just as we
do, when we refuse to give drink to a thirsty Disciple. Christ comes in that
humble manner of address, under the veil of poverty or contempt, and we cannot
see Christ from under that robe, and we send him away without an alms; little
considering, that when he begs an alms of us in the instance of any of his poor
relatives, he asks of us but to give him occasion to give a blessing for an
alms. Thus do the Ministers of Religion ask support, but when the Laws are not
more just than many of the people are charitable, they shall fare as their
Master did; they shall preach, but, unless they can draw water themselves, they
shall not drink: but, si scirent, if men did but know who it is that asks them,
that it is Christ either in his Ministers or Christ in his poor servants,
certainly they could not be so obstructed in the issues of their Justice and
Charity, but would remember that no honor could be greater, no love more
fortunate, than to meet with an opportunity to be expressed in so noble a
manner, that God himself is pleased to call his own relief.

5. When the Disciples had returned from the Town, whither they went to buy
provision, they wondered to see the Master talking alone with a woman. They knew
he never did so before, they had observed him to be of a reserved deportment,
and not only innocent, but secure from the dangers of Malice, and suspicion in
the matter of Incontinence. The Jews were a jealous and froward people: and as
nothing will more blast the reputation of a Prophet than effeminacy and wanton
affections; so he knew no crime was sooner objected or harder cleared than
that: Of which, because commonly it is acted in privacy, men look for no
probation, but pregnant circumstances and arguments of suspect: so nothing can
wash it off, until a man can prove a negative; and if he could, yet he is
guilty enough in the estimate of the vulgar for having been accused. But then,
because nothing is so destructive of the reputation of a Governor, so
contradictory to the authority and dignity of his person, as the low and baser
appetites of Uncleanness, and the consequent shame and scorn, (insomuch that
David, having fallen into it, prayed God to confirm or establish him spiritu
principali with the spirit of a Prince, the spirit of Lust being uningenuous
and slavish) the Holy Jesus, who was to establish a new Law in the authority of
his person, was highly curious so to demean himself, that he might be a person
incapable of any such suspicions, and of a temper apt not only to answer the
calumny, but also to prevent the jealousy. But yet, now he had a great design
in hand, he meant to reveal to the Samaritans the coming of the Messiah; and to
this his discourse with the Woman was instrumental. And in imitation of our
great Master, Spiritual persons and the Guides of others have been very prudent
and reserved in their societies and intercourse with women. Heretics have
served their ends upon the impotency of the Sex, and having led captive silly
women, led them about as triumphs of Lust, and knew no scandal greater than the
scandal of Heresy, and therefore sought not to decline any, but were infamous
in their unwary and lustful mixtures. Simon Magus had his Helena partner of his
Lust and Heresy; the author of the Sect of the Nicolaitans (if S. Hierom was
not misinformed) had whole troops of women; Marcion sent a woman as his
Emissary to Rome; Apelles had his Philomene; Montanus, Prisca and Maximilla;
Donatus was served by Lucilla, Helpidius by Agape; Priscillian by Galla, and
(...) spreads his nets by opportunity of his conversation with the Prince's
Sister, and first he corrupted her, then he seduced the world.

6. But holy persons, Preachers of true Religion and holy Doctrines, although
they were careful by public Homilies to instruct the female Disciples, that
they who are heirs together with us of the same Hope may be servants in the
same Discipline and Institution; yet they remitted them to their 1 (...). 14. 35
Husbands and Guardians to be taught at home. And when any personal
transactions concerning the needs of their spirit were of necessity to
intervene between the Priest and a woman, the action was done most commonly
under public test; or if in private, yet with much caution and observation of
circumstance, which might as well prevent suspicion as preserve their
innocence. Conversation and frequent and familiar address does too much rifle
the ligaments and reverence of Spiritual authority, and amongst the best
persons is matter of danger. When the Cedars of Libanus have been observed to
fall, when David and Solomon have been dishonored, he is a bold man that will
venture farther than he is sent in errand by necessity, or invited by charity,
or warranted by prudence. I deny not but some persons have made holy
friendships with women; S. Athanasius with a devout and religious Virgin, S.
Chrysostom with Olympia, S. Hierome with Paula Romana, S. John with the elect
Lady, S. Peter and S. Paul with Quam B. (...) probat Baronius.
Petronilla and Tecla. And therefore it were a jealousy beyond the suspicion
of Monks and Eunuchs to think it impossible to have a chaste conversation with
a distinct Sex. 1. A pure and right intention, 2. an intercourse not extended
beyond necessity or holy ends, 3. a short stay, 4. great modesty, 5. and the
business of Religion, will by God's grace hallow the visit, and preserve the
friendship in its being spiritual, that it may not degenerate into carnal
affection. And yet these are only advices useful when there is danger in either
of the persons, or some scandal incident to the Profession, that to some
persons and in the conjunction of many circumstances are oftentimes not
considerable.

7. When Jesus had resolved to reveal himself to the Woman, he first gives her
occasion to reveal her self to him, fairly insinuating an opportunity to
confess her sins, that, having purged her self from her impurity, she might be
apt to entertain the article of the revelation of the Messiah. And indeed a
crime in our Manners is the greatest indisposition of our Understanding to
entertain the Truth and Doctrine of the Gospel: especially when the revelation
contests against the Sin, and professes open hostility to the Lust. For Faith
being the gift of God and an illumination, the Spirit of God will not give this
light to them that prefer their darkness before it; either the Will must open
the windows, or the light of Faith will not shine into the chamber of the Soul.
How can ye believe (said our Blessed Savior) that receive honor one of
another? Ambition John 5. 44.
and Faith, believing God and seeking of our selves, are incompetent and
totally incompossible. And therefore Serapion Bishop of Thmuis spoke like an
Angel, (says Socrates) saying, that the Mind, which feeds upon spiritual
knowledge, must thoroughly (...). 4. Hist. (...). 23.
be cleansed. The Irascible faculty must first be cured with brotherly Love and
Charity, and the Concupiscible must be suppressed with Continency and
Mortification. Then may the Understanding apprehend the mysteriousness of
Christianity. For since Christianity is a holy Doctrine, if there be any
remanent affections to a sin, there is in the Soul a party disaffected to the
entertainment of the Institution, and we usually believe what we have a mind
to: Our Understandings, if a crime be lodged Lurida (...) -- (...) in little
(...). Lucret. lib. 4.
in the Will, being like icterical eyes, transmitting the species to the Soul
with prejudice, disaffection, and colors of their own framing. If a Preacher
should discourse that there ought to be a Parity amongst Christians, and that
their goods ought to be in common, all men will apprehend that not Princes and
rich persons, but the poor and the servants would soonest become Disciples, and
believe the Doctrines, because they are the only persons likely to get by them;
and it concerns the other not to believe him, the Doctrine being destructive of
their interests. Just such a persuasion is every persevering love to a vicious
habit; it having possessed the Understanding with fair opinions of it, and
surprised the Will with Passion and desires, whatsoever Doctrine is its enemy
will with infinite difficulty be entertained. And we know a great experience of
it in the article of the Messiah dying on the Cross, which though infinitely
true, yet because to the Jews it was a scandal, and to the Greeks (...), it
could not be believed, they remaining in that indisposition; that is, unless
the Will were first set right, and they willing to believe any Truth, though
for it they must disclaim their interest: Their Understanding was blind,
because the Heart was hardened and could not receive the impression of the
greatest moral demonstration in the world.

8. The Holy Jesus asked water of the Woman, unsatisfying water; but promised
that himself, to them that ask him, would give waters of life, and satisfaction
infinite; so distinguishing the pleasures and appetites of this world from the
desires and complacencies spiritual. Here we labor, but receive no (...); we
sow many times, and reap not; or reap, and do not gather in; or gather in, and
do not (...); or possess, but do not enjoy; or if we enjoy, we are still (...),
it is with (...) of spirit and circumstances of vexation. A great heap of
riches make (...) our (...) warm, nor our meat more nutritive, nor our beverage
more (...); and it seeds the eye, but never fills it, but, like drink to an
hydropick person, increases the thirst, and promotes the torment. But the Grace
of (...), though but like a grain of (...) dseed, fills the furrows of the
heart; and as the capacity increases, it self grows up in equal degrees, and
never suffers any emptiness or dissatisfaction, but carries content and fullness
all the way; and the degrees of augmentation are not steps and near approaches
to satisfaction, but increasings of the capacity; the (...) is satished all the
way, and receives more, not because it wanted any; but that it can now hold
more, is more receptive of (...): and in every minute of (...) there is so
excellent a condition of joy and high satisfaction, that the very calamities
the afflictions and persecutions of the world are turned into (...) by the
activity of the prevailing ingredient; like a drop of water falling into a tun
of wine, it is ascribed into a new family, losing its own nature by a
conversion into the more noble. For now that all passionate desires are dead,
and there is nothing remanent that is vexatious, the peace, the (...), the
quiet sleeps, the evenness of spirit and contempt of things below, remove the
Soul from all neighborhood of displeasure, and place it at the foot of the
throne, whither when it is ascended, it is possessed of Felicities eternal.
These were (...) waters which were given to us to drink, when with the rod of
God the Rock (...) was smitten: the Spirit of God moves for ever upon these
waters; and when the Angel of the Covenant has stirred the pool, who ever
descends hither shall find health and peace, joys spiritual and the
satisfactions of Eternity.

The PRAYER.
O Holy Jesus, Fountain of eternal life, thou Spring of joy and spiritual
satisfactions, let the holy stream of blood and water issuing from thy sacred
side cool the thirst, soften the hardness, and refresh the barrenness of my
desert Soul; that I thirsting after thee, as the wearied Heart after the cool
stream, may despise all the vainer complacencies of this world, refuse all
societies but such as are safe, pious and charitable, mortify all (...)
appetites, and may desire nothing but thee, seek none but thee, and rest in
thee with entire (...) of my own caitive inclinations; that the desires of
Nature may pass into desires of Grace, and my thirst and my hunger may be
spiritual, and my hopes placed in thee, and the expresses of my Charity upon
thy relatives, and all the parts of my life may speak thy love and obedience to
thy Commandments: that thou possessing my Soul and all its Faculties, during my
whole life, I may possess thy glories in the fruition of a blessed Eternity; by
the light of thy Gospel here and the streams of thy Grace being guided to thee
the fountain of life and glory, there to be inebriated with the waters of
Paradise, with joy and love and contemplation, adoring and admiring the
beauties of the Lord for ever and ever.

Amen.
Considerations upon Christ's first Preaching, and the Accidents happening
about that time.
Jesus preaching to the people.
Mauh. 4. 17. From that time Jesus began to preach saying, Repent. for the
Kingodm of heaven is at hand. V. 29. And he went about all Gallilee teaching
and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness,
etc. V. 25. And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee, and
from D^^apolis, and from Jerusalem, etc.

Christ sending forth his Apostles.
Mark. 6. 7. And he called unto him ye twelve and began to send them forth by
two and two and gave them power over unclean spirits, And conunanded them that
they should take nothing for their journey, etc. V. 12 And they went out, and
preached that men should repent.




1. WHen John was cast into Prison, then began Jesus to preach; not only
because the Ministry of John by order of Divine designation was to precede the
Publication of Jesus, but also upon prudent considerations and designs of
Providence, lest two great personages at once upon the theater of Palestine
might have been occasion of divided thoughts, and these have determined upon a
Schism, some professing themselves to be of Christ, some of John. For once an
offer was made of a dividing Question by the spite of the Pharisees, Why do the
Disciples of John fast often, and thy Disciples fast not? But when John went
off from the scene, then Jesus appeared like the Sun in (...) to the
Morning Star, and there were no divided interests upon mistake, or the fond
adherencies of the Followers. And although the Holy Jesus would certainly have
cured all accidental inconveniences which might have happened in such
accidents; yet this may become a precedent to all Prelates, to be prudent in
avoiding all occasions of a Schism, and rather than divide a people, submit and
relinquish an opportunity of Preaching to their inferiors, as knowing that God
is better served by Charity than a Homily; and if my modesty made me resign to
my inferior, the advantages of honor to God by the cession of Humility are of
greater consideration than the smaller and accidental advantages of
better-penned and more accurate discourses. But our Blessed Lord, designing to
gather Disciples, did it in the manner of the more extraordinary persons and
Doctors of the Jews, and particularly of the Baptist, he initiated them into
the Institution by the solemnity of a Baptism; but yet he was pleased not to
minister it in his own person. His Apostles were baptized in John's Baptism,
Lib. de Baptis.
said Tertullian; or else, S. Peter only was baptized by his Lord, and he
baptized the rest. However, the Lord was pleased to depute the ministry of his
servants, that so he might constitute a Ministry; that he might reserve it to
himself as a specialty to baptize with the Spirit, as his servants did with
water; that he might declare that the efficacy of the Rite did not depend upon
the Dignity of the Minister, but his own Institution, and the holy Covenant;
and lastly, lest they who were baptized by him in person might please
themselves above their brethren whose needs were served by a lower ministry.

2. The Holy Jesus, the great Physician of our Souls, now entering upon his Cure
and the Diocese of Palestine, which was afterward enlarged to the pale of the
Catholic Church, was curious to observe all advantages of prudence for the
benefit of Souls, by the choice of place, by quitting the place of his
education, (which, because it had been poor and humble, was apt to procure
contempt to his Doctrine and despite to his Person) by fixing in Capernaum,
which had the advantage of popularity, and the opportunity of extending the
benefit, yet had not the honor and ambition of Jerusalem; that the Ministers
of Religion might be taught to seek and desire employment in such circumstances
which may serve the end of God, but not of Ambition; to promote the interest of
Souls, but not the inordination of lower appetites. Jesus quitted his natural
and civil interests, when they were less consistent with the end of God and his
Prophetical Office, and considered not his Mother's house, and the vicinage in
the accounts of Religion, beyond those other places in which he might better do
his Father's work: In which a forward piety might behold the insinuation of a
duty to such persons, who by rights of Law and Custom were so far instrumental
to the cure of Souls, as to design the persons; they might do but duty if they
first considered the interests of Souls before the advantages of their kindred
and relatives: and although, if all things else be alike, they may in equal
dispositions prefer their own before strangers; yet it were but reason that
they should first consider sadly if the men be equal, before they remember that
they are of their kindred, and not let this consideration be ingredient into
the former judgment. And another degree of liberty yet there is; if our kindred
be persons apt and holy, and without exceptions either of Law, or Prudence, or
Religion, we may do them advantages before others who have some degrees of
Learning and improvement beyond the other: or else no man might lawfully prefer
his kindred, unless they were absolutely the ablest in a Diocese or Kingdom;
which doctrine were a snare apt to produce scruples to the Consciences, rather
than advantages to the Cure. But then also Patrons should be careful that they
do not account their Clerks by an estimate taken from comparison with unworthy
Candidates, set up on purpose, that when we choose our kindred we may abuse our
consciences by saying, We have fulfilled our trust, and made election of the
more worthy. In these and the like cases let every man who is concerned deal
with justice, nobleness and sincerity, with the simplicity of a Christian and
the wisdom of a man, without tricks and stratagems, to disadvantage the Church
by doing temporal advantages to his friend or family.

3. The Blessed Master began his Office with a Sermon of Repentance, as his
Decessor John the Baptist did in his Ministration, to tell the world that the
new Covenant, which was to be established by the Mediation and Office of the
Holy Jesus, was a Covenant of grace and favor, not established upon Works, but
upon Promises, and remission of right on God's part, and remission of sins on
our part. The Law was a Covenant of Works, and who-ever prevaricated any of its
Sanctions in a considerable degree, he stood sentenced by it without any hopes
of restitution supplied by the Law. And therefore it was the Covenant of Works;
not because Good works were then required more than now, or because they had
more efficacy than now; but because all our hopes did rely upon the perfection
of Works and Innocence, without the suppletories of Grace, Pardon, and
Repentance. But the Gospel is therefore a Covenant of Grace, not that works are
excluded from our duty, or from cooperating to Heaven; but that, because there
is in it so much mercy, the imperfections of the Works are made up by the grace
of Jesus, and the defects of Innocence are supplied by the substitution of
Repentance. Abatements are made for the infirmities and miseries of humanity;
and if we do our endeavor now after the manner of men, the Faith of Jesus
Christ, that is, conformity to his Laws, and submission to his Doctrine,
entitles us to the grace he has purchased for us, that is, our sins for his
sake shall be pardoned. So that the Law and the Gospel are not opposed barely
upon the title of Faith and Works, but as the Covenant of Faith and the
Covenant of Works. In the Faith of a Christian Works are the great ingredient
and the chief of the constitution, but the Gospel is not a Covenant of Works,
that is, it is not an agreement upon the stock of Innocence without allowances
of Repentance, requiring Obedience in rigor and strictest estimate. But the
Gospel requires the Holiness of a Christian, and yet after the manner of a man;
for, always provided that we do not allow to our selves a liberty, but
endeavor with all our strength, and love with all our Soul, that which, if it
were upon our allowance, would be required at our hands, now that it is against
our will, and highly contested against, is put upon the stock of Christ, and
allowed to us by God in the accounts of Pardon by the merits of Jesus, by the
Covenant of the Gospel. And this is the Repentance and Remission of sins which
John first preached upon the approximation of the Kingdom, and Christ at the
first manifestation of it, and the Apostles afterward in the name of Jesus.

4. Jesus now having begun his Preaching, began also to gather his Family; and
first called Simon and Andrew, then James and John; at whose vocation he
wrought a Miracle, which was a signification of their Office and the success of
it; a draught of fishes so great and prodigious, that it convinced them that he
was a person very extraordinary, whose voice the Fishes heard, and came at his
call: and since he designed them to become fishers of men, although themselves
were as unlikely instruments to persuade men as the voice of the Son of man to
command fishes, yet they should prevail in so great numbers, that the whole
world should run after them, and upon their Summons come into the Net of the
Gospel, becoming Disciples of the glorious Nazarene. S. Peter the first time
that he threw his net, at the descent of the Holy Ghost in Pentecost, catched
three thousand men; and at one Sermon sometimes the Princes of a Nation have
been converted, and the whole Land presently baptized; and the multitudes so
great, that the Apostles were forced to design some men to the ministration of
Baptism by way of peculiar office; and it grew to be work enough, the easiness
of the ministry being made busy and full of employment where a whole Nation
became Disciple. And indeed the Doctrine is so holy, the Principle so Divine,
the Instruments so supernatural, the Promises so glorious, the Revelations so
admirable, the Rites so mysterious, the whole fabric of the Discipline so full
of wisdom, persuasion and energy, that the infinite number of the first
Conversions were not so great a wonder, as that there are so few now: every man
calling himself Christian, but few having that power of godliness which
distinguishes Christian from a word and (...) empty name. And the Word is now
the same, and the arguments greater, (for some have been growing ever since, as
the Prophecies have been fulfilled) and the Sermons more, and the Spirit the
same; and yet such diversity of operations, that we hear and read the Sermons
and Dictates Evangelical as we do a Romance, but that it is with less passion,
but altogether as much unconcerned as with a story of Salmanasar or Ibrahim
Bassa: For we do not leave one Vice, nor reject one Lust, nor deny one
impetuous Temptation the more for the four Gospels sake, and all S. Paul's
Epistles mingled in the argument. And yet all think themselves fishes within
Christ's Net, and the prey of the Gospel: and it is true they are so; for the
Kingdom is like unto a Net, which enclosed fishes good and bad; but this shall
be of small advantage when the Net shall be drawn to the shore, and the
separation made.

5. When Jesus called those Disciples, they had been fishing all night, and
caught nothing; but when Christ bad them let down the Net, they took
multitudes: to show to us, that the success of our endeavors is not in
proportion to our labors, but the divine assistence and benediction. It is not
the excellency of the Instrument, but the capacity of the Subject, nor yet this
alone, but the aptness of the application, nor that without an influence from
Heaven, can produce the fruits of a holy Persuasion and Conversion. Paul may
plant, and Apollo may water; but God gives the increase. Indeed when we let
down the Nets at the Divine appointment, the success is the more probable, and
certainly God will bring benefit to the place, or Honor to himself, or
Salvation to them that will obey, or Conviction to them that will not: But
whatever the fruit be in respect of others, the reward shall be great to
themselves. And therefore S. Paul did not say he had profited, but, he had
labored more than they all, as knowing the Divine acceptance would take its
account in proportion to our endeavors and intendments; not by commensuration
to the effect, which being without us, depending upon God's blessing and the
cooperation of the recipients, can be no ingredients into our account. But this
also may help to support the weariness of our hopes, and the protraction and
deferring of our expectation, if a laborious Prelate and an assiduous Preacher
have but few returns to his many cares and greater labors. A whole night a man
may labor, (the longest life is no other) and yet catch nothing, and then the
Lord may visit us with his special presence, and more forward assistences, and
the harvest may grow up with the swiftness of a Gourd, and the fruitfulness of
Olives, and the plaisance of the Vine, and the strength of Wheat; and whole
troops of Penitents may arise from the darkness of their graves at the call of
one Sermon, even when he pleases: and till then we must be content that we do
our duty, and lay the consideration of the effect at the feet of Jesus.

6. In the days of the Patriarchs the Governors of the Lord's people were
called Shepherds; so was Moses, and so was David. In the days of the Gospel
they are Shepherds still, but with the addition of a new appellative, for now
they are called Fishers. Both the callings were honest, humble and laborious,
watchful and full of trouble; but now that both the titles are conjunct, we may
observe the symbol of an implicit and folded duty. There is much simplicity and
care in the Shepherd's Trade; there is much craft and labor in the Fisher's:
and a Prelate is to be both full of Piety to his Flock, careful of their
welfare; and, because in the political and spiritual sense too feeding and
governing are the same duty, it concerns them that have cure of Souls to be
discrect and wary, observant of advantages, laying such baits for the people as
may entice them into the nets of Jesus's Discipline. But being crafty I caught
you, says S. Paul; for he was a Fisher too. And so must Spiritual persons be
Fishers to all spiritual senses of watchfulness and care and prudence: only
they must not fish for preferment and ambitious purposes, but must say with the
King of Sodom, Date nobis animas, caetera vobis tollite; which S. Paul renders,
We seek not yours, but you. And in order to such acquist, the purchase of
Souls, let them have the diligence and the craft of Fishers, the watchfulness
and care of Shepherds, the prudence of Politics, the tenderness of Parents,
the spirit of Government, the wariness of Observation, great knowledge of the
dispositions of their people, and experience of such advantages by means of
which they may serve the ends of God, and of Salvation upon their Souls.

7. When Peter had received the fruits of a rich Miracle in the prodigious and
prosperous draught of fishes, he instantly falls down at the feet of Jesus, and
confesses himself a sinner, and unworthy of the presence of Christ. In which
confession I not only consider the conviction of his Understanding by the
testimony of the Miracle, but the modesty of his spirit, who in his exaltation,
and the joy of a sudden and happy success, retired into Humility and
consideration of his own unworthiness, lest, as it happens in sudden joys, the
lavishness of his spirit should transport him to intemperance, to looser
affections, to vanity and garishness, less becoming the severity and government
of a Disciple of so great a Master. For in such great and sudden accidents men
usually are dissolved and melted into joy and inconsideration, and let fly all
their severe principles and discipline of manners, till, as Peter here did,
though to another purpose, they say to Christ, Depart from me, O Lord; as if
such excellencies of joys, like the lesser Stars, did disappear at the presence
of him who is the fountain of all joys regular and just. When the spirits of
the Body have been bound up by the cold Winter air, the warmth of the Spring
makes so great an aperture of the passages, and by consequence such dissolution
of spirits, in the presence of the Sun, that it becomes the occasion of Fevers
and violent diseases. Just such a thing is a sudden Joy, in which the spirits
leap out from their cells of austerity and sobriety, and are warmed into Fevers
and wildnesses, and forfeiture of all Judgment and vigorous understanding. In
these accidents the best advice is to temper Simul and quod gaudes and quod
times (...). Seneca.
and allay our joys with some instant consideration of the vilest of our sins,
the shamefulness of our disgraces, the most dolorous accidents of our lives,
the worst of our fears, with meditation of Death, or the terrors of Doomsday,
or the unimaginable miseries of damned and accursed spirits. For such
considerations as these are good instruments of Sobriety, and are correctives
to the malignity of excessive Joys or temporal prosperities, which, like
Minerals, unless allayed by art, prey upon the spirits, and become the union of
a contradiction, being turned into mortal medicines.

8. At this time Jesus preached to the people from the Ship, which in the
fancies and tropical discoursings of the old Doctors signifies the Church, and
declares that the Homilies of order and authority must be delivered from the
Oracle; they that preach must be sent, and God has appointed Tutors and
Instructors of our Consciences by special designation and peculiar appointment:
if they that preach do not make their Sermons from the Ship, their discourses
either are the false murmurs of Heretics and false Shepherds, or else of
Thieves and invaders of Authority, or corrupters of Discipline and Order. For
God, that loves to hear us in special places, will also be heard himself by
special persons; and since he sent his Angels Ministers to convey his purposes
of old, then when the Law was ordained by Angels, as by the hands of a
Mediator, now also he will send his servants Gal. 3. 19.
the sons of men, since the new Law was ordained by the Son of man, who is the
Mediator between God and man in the New Covenant. And therefore in the Ship
Jesus preached, but he had first caused it to put off from land; to represent
to us, that the Ship in which we preach must be put off from the vulgar
communities of men, (...) (...). in (...).
separate from the people, by the designation of special appointment and of
special Holiness; that is, they neither must be common men, nor of common
lives, but consecrated by order, and hallowed by holy living, lest the person
want authority in destitution of a Divine Character, and his Doctrine lose its
energy and power when the life is vulgar, and has nothing in it holy and
extraordinary.

9. The Holy Jesus in the choice of his Apostles was resolute and determined to
make election of persons bold and confident, (for so the Galilaeans were
observed naturally to be, and Peter was the boldest of the Twelve, and a good
Sword-man, till the spirit of his Master had fastened his sword within the
scabbard, and charmed his spirit into quietness) but he never chose any of the
Scribes and Pharisees, none of the Doctors of the Law, but persons ignorant and
unlearned; which, in design and institutions whose divinity is not demonstrated
from other Arguments, would seem an art of concealment and distrust. But in
this, which derives its rays from the fountain of wisdom most openly and
infallibly, it is a contestation against the powers of the world upon the
interests of God, that he who does all the work might have all the glory, and
in the productions in which he is fain to make the instruments themselves, and
give them capacity and activity, every part of the operation and causality and
effect may give to God the same honor he had from the Creation, for his being
the only workman; with the addition of those degrees of excellency which in the
work of Redemption of Man are beyond that of his Creation and first being.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal Jesu, Lord of the Creatures, and Prince of the Catholic Church, to
whom all Creatures obey in acknowledgment of thy supreme Dominion, and all
according to thy disposition cooperate to the advancement of thy Kingdom, be
pleased to order the affairs and accidents of the world, that all things in
their capacity may do the work of the Gospel, and cooperate to the good of the
Elect, and retrench the growth of Vice, and advance the interests of Virtue.
Make all the states and orders of men Disciples of thy holy Institution: Let
Princes worship thee and defend Religion; let thy Clergy do thee honor by
personal zeal, and vigilance over their Flocks; let all the world submit to thy
Scepter, and praise thy Righteousness, and adore thy Judgments, and revere thy
Laws: and in the multitudes of thy people within the enclosure of thy Nets let
me also communicate in the offices of a strict and religious duty, that I may
know thy voice, and obey thy call, and entertain thy Holy Spirit, and improve
my talents; that I may also communicate in the blessings of the Church; and
when the Nets shall be drawn to the shore, and the Angels shall make separation
of the good Fishes from the bad, I may not be rejected, or thrown into those
Seas of fire which shall afflict the enemies of thy Kingdom, but be admitted
into the societies of Saints, and the everlasting communion of thy (...) and
Glories, O Blessed and Eternal Jesu.

Amen.
DISCOURSE IX. Of Repentance.
1. THE whole Doctrine of the Gospel is comprehended by the Holy Ghost in these
two Summaries, Faith and Repentance; that those two potent and imperious Act.
20. 21.
Faculties which command our lower powers, which are the fountain of actions,
the occasion and capacity of Laws, and the title to reward or punishment, the
Will and the Understanding, that is, the whole man considered in his superior
Faculties, may become subjects of the Kingdom, servants of Jesus, and heirs of
glory. Faith supplies our imperfect conceptions, and corrects our Ignorance,
making us to distinguish good from evil, not only by the proportions of Reason
and Custom and old Laws, but by the new standard of the Gospel; it teaches us
all those Duties which were enjoined us in order to a participation of mighty
glories; it brings our Understanding into subjection, making us apt to receive
the Spirit for our Guide, Christ for our Master, the Gospel for our Rule, the
Laws of Christianity for our measure of good and evil: and it supposes us
naturally ignorant, and comes to supply those defects which in our
Understandings were left after the spoils of Innocence and Wisdom made in
Paradise upon Adam's prevarication, and continued and increased by our neglect,
evil customs, voluntary deceptions, and infinite prejudices. And as Faith
presupposes our Ignorance, so Repentance presupposes our Malice and Iniquity.
The whole design of Christ's coming and the Doctrines of the Gospel being to
recover us from a miserable condition, from Ignorance to spiritual Wisdom, by
the conduct of Faith; and from a vicious habitually-depraved life and ungodly
manners to the purity of the Sons of God, by the instrument of Repentance.

2. And this is a loud publication of the excellency and glories of the Gospel,
and the felicities of man over all the other instances of Creation. The Angels,
who were more excellent Spirits than humane Souls, were not comprehended and
made safe within a Covenant and Provisions of Repentance. Their first act of
volition was their whole capacity of a blissful or a miserable Eternity: they
made their own sentence when they made their first election; and having such
excellent Knowledge, and no weaknesses to prejudge and trouble their choice,
what they first did was not capable of Repentance; because they had at first in
their intuition and sight all which could afterward bring them to Repentance.
But weak Man, who knows first by elements, and after long study learns a
syllable, and in good time gets a word, could not at first know all those
things which were sufficient or apt to determine his choice, but as he grew to
understand more, saw more reasons to rescind his first elections. The Angels
had a full peremptory Will and a satisfied Understanding at first, and
therefore were not to mend their first act by a second contradictory: But poor
Man has a Will always strongest when his Understanding is weakest, and
chooses most when he is least able to determine; and therefore is most
passionate in his desires, and follows his object with greatest earnestness,
when he is blindest, and has the least reason so to do. And therefore God,
pitying Man, begins to reckon his choices to be criminal just in the same
degree as he gives him Understanding. The violences and unreasonable actions of
Childhood are no more remembered by God than they are understood by the Child.
The levities and passions of Youth are not aggravated by the imputation of
Malice, but are sins of a lighter dye, because Reason is not yet impressed, and
marked upon them with characters and tincture in grain. But he who (when he may
choose, because he understands) shall choose the evil and reject the good, stands
marked with a deep guilt, and has no excuse left to him, but as his degrees of
Ignorance left his choice the more imperfect. And because every sinner in the
style of Scripture is a fool, and has an election as imperfect as is the
action, that is, as great a declension from Prudence as it is from Piety, and
the man understands as imperfectly as he practices: therefore God sent his Son
to take upon him (not the nature of Heb. 2. 16.
Angels, but) the (...) of Abraham, and to propound Salvation upon such terms
as were possible, that is, upon such a Piety which relies upon experience, and
trial of good and evil; and has given us leave, if we choose amiss at first, to
choose again, and choose better; Christ having undertaken to pay for the issues
of their first follies, to make up the breach made by our first weaknesses and
abused understandings.

3. But as God gave us this mercy by Christ, so he also revealed it by him. He
first used the Authority of a Lord and a Creator and a Lawgiver: he required
Obedience indeed upon reasonable terms, upon the instance of but a few
Commandments at first, which when he afterward multiplied, he also appointed
ways to expiate the smaller irregularities; but left them eternally bound
without remedy who should do any great violence or a crime. But then he bound
them but to a Temporal death. Only this, as an eternal death was also tacitly
implied, so also a remedy was secretly ministered, and Repentance particularly
preached by Homilies distinct from the Covenant of Moses's Law. The Law allowed
no Repentance Lev. 20. 10.
for greater crimes; he that was convicted of Adultery was to die without
mercy: but God pitied the miseries of man, and the inconveniences of the Law,
and sent Christ to suffer for the one, and remedy the other; for so it behoved
Christ to suffer, and Luke 24. 46.
to rise from the dead, and that Repentance and Remission of sins should be
preached in his Name among all Nations. And now this is the last and only hope
of Man, who in his natural condition is imperfect, in his customs vicious, in
his habits impotent and criminal. Because Man did not remain innocent, it
became necessary he should be penitent, and that this Penitence should by some
means be made acceptable, that is, become the instrument of his (...) and
infrequens, (...) dum sapientiae Consultus erro, (...), atque (...) cursus
(...).
Pardon, and restitution of his hope. Which because it is an act of favor, and
depends wholly upon the Divine dignation, and was revealed to us by Jesus
Christ, who was Hor. l. 1. (...). 34.
made not only the Prophet and Preacher, but the Mediator of this New
Covenant and mercy; it was necessary we should become Disciples of the Holy
Jesus, and servants of his Institution; that is, run to him to be made
partakers of the mercies of this new Covenant, and accept of him such
conditions as he should require of us.

4. This Covenant is then consigned to us when we first come to Christ, that
is, when we first profess our selves his Disciples and his servants, Disciples
of his Doctrine and servants of his Institution; that is, in Baptism, in which
Christ who died for our sins Romans 6. 4.
makes us partakers of his death. For we are buried by Baptism into his death,
says S. Paul. Which was also represented in ceremony by the Immersion
appointed to be the Rite of that Sacrament. And then it is that God pours forth
together with the Sacramental waters a salutary and holy fountain of Grace to
wash the Soul from all its stains and impure adherences. And therefore this
first access to Christ is in the style of Scripture 1 Pet. 3. 21.
Romans 5. 1.
called Regeneration, the New Birth, Redemption, Renovation, Expiation, or
Atonement (...) 3. 5. 7.
with God, and Justification. And these words in the New Testament relate
principally Romans 3. 26.
Gal. 2. 16.
and properly to the abolition of sins committed before Baptism. For we are
Romans 3. 24. 25, 26.
justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ;
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, to declare his Rightcousness for
the remission of sins that are past: To declare, I say, at this time his
righteousness. And this is that which S. Paul Verse. 28.
calls Justification by Faith, that boasting might be excluded, and the grace
of God by Jesus Verse. 27.
made exceeding glorious. For this being the proper work of Christ, the first
entertainment of a Disciple, and manifestation of that state which is first
given him as a favor, and next intended as a duty, is a total abolition of the
precedent guilt of sin, and leaves nothing remaining that can condemn; we then
freely receive the entire and perfect effect of that Atonement which Christ
made for us, we are put into a condition of innocence and favor. And this, I
say, is done regularly in Baptism, and S. Paul expresses it to this sense;
after he had enumerated a series of Vices subjected in many, he adds, 1 Cor. 6.
11.
and such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified. There is
nothing of the old guilt remanent, when ye were washed ye were sanctified, or,
as the Scripture 1 (...). 1. 18.
calls it in another place, Ye were redeemed from your vain conversation.

5. For this Grace was the formality of the Covenant: Repent, and believe the
Gospel. Mar. 1. 15.
Repent and be converted, (so it is in S. Peter's Sermon,) and your sins shall
be done away, Act. 3. 19.
that was the Covenant. But that Christ chose Baptism for its signature appears
in the Parallel; Repent, and be baptized, and wash away your sins: For Christ
loved his Church, Act. 2. 38.
Mar. 16. 16.
and gave himself for it; That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.
by the Word; That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without
blemish. The Sanctification is integral, the Pardon is universal and immediate.

6. But here the process is short, no more at first but this, Repent, and be
baptized, and wash away your sins; which Baptism because it was speedily
administered, and yet not without the preparatives of Faith and Repentance, it
is certain those predispositions (...) (...). Mart. Dial. cum (...).
were but instruments of reception, actions of great facility, of small
employment, and such as, supposing the Act. 8. 37. and 10. 47. and 16. 15, 33.
person not unapt, did confess the infiniteness of the Divine mercy, and
fullness of the redemption and is called by the Apostle ( Romans 3. 24.
) a being justified freely.

7. Upon this ground it is that, by the Doctrine of the Church, heathen
persons, strangers from the (...) of grace, were invited to a confession (...)
ratio (...) in (...) quos Dominus in (...), Mauh. 20. (...) dimum (...). Ratio
(...) non (...): (...) nos conduxerat, verse. 7. (...) Cui respondes Christus,
(...) Cyril. Hier of.
of Faith, and dereliction of false Religions, with a promise, that at the very
first resignation of their persons to the service of Jesus they should obtain
full pardon. It was S. Cyprian's counsel to old Demetrianus, Now in the evening
of thy days, when thy Soul'is almost expiring, repent of thy sins, believe in
Jesus, and turn Christian; and although thou art almost in the embraces of
death, yet thou shall be comprehended of immortality. Baptizatus ad horam
securus bine exit, says S. Austin; A baptized person dying immediately shall
live eternally and gloriously. And this was the case of the Thief upon the
Cross, he confessed Christ, and repented of his sins, and begged pardon, and
did acts enough to facilitate his first access to Christ, and but to remove the
hindrances of God's favor; then he was redeemed and reconciled to God by the
death of Jesus, that is, he was pardoned with a full, instantaneous, integral
and clear Pardon; with such a pardon which declared the glory of God's mercies,
and the infiniteness of Christ's merits, and such as required a more reception
and entertainment on man's part.

8. But then we, having received so great a favor, enter into Covenant to
correspond with a proportionable endeavor; the benefit of absolute Pardon,
that is, Salvation of our Souls, being not to be received till the times of
refreshing shall come from the Act. 3. 19.
presence of the Lord: all the intervall we have promised to live a holy life
in obedience to the whole Discipline of Jesus. That Is the condition on our
part: And if we prevaricate that, the mercy shown to the blessed Thief is no
argument of hope to us, because he was saved by the mercies of the first
access, which corresponds to the Remission of sins we receive in Baptism; and
we shall perish by breaking our own promises and obligations, (...) latio (...)
meruisset in fine de (...) suo (...), non (...) baptiz (...) and (...). Tune
enim baptizatus est, qui tune (...) in Cruce confessus est: (...) enim, si in
extremo (...) hiatu (...), sanat and liberat in ablutione Baptismi. IBi (...)
qul, (...), nunquam (...) cum jam (...), won sie (...) acquirunt quod volunt.
S. Aug. cap. Nullus de (...). did. 7.
which Christ passed upon us when he made with us the Covenant of an entire and
gracious Pardon.

9. For in the precise Covenant there is nothing else described, but Pardon so
given and ascertained upon an Obedience persevering to the end. And this is
clear in all those places of Scripture which express a holy and innocent life
to have been the purpose Vide Part 3. Consid. of Crucifix, of Jesus.
and design of Christ's death for us, and redemption of us from the former
estate. Christ bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead
unto sins, should live unto 1 Pet, 2. 24.
righteousness; by whose stripes ye are healed. [ Exinde] from our being
healed, from our dying unto sin, from our being buried with Christ, from our
being baptized into his death; the end of Christ's dying for us is, that we
should live unto righteousness. Which was also highly and prophetically
expressed by S. Zachary in his divine Ecstasie: This was the oath which he
swear to our Fore-father Abraham, That he would grant unto us, Luke 1. 73, and
(...).
that we being delivered out of the hands of our Enemies might serve him
without fear, In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our
life. And S. Paul discourses to this purpose pertinently and largely: For the
grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to all men, Teaching us,
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, [ Hi sunt Tit. 2. 11, 12.
Angeli quibus in lavacro renunciavimus, says Tertullian, Those are the evil
Angels, the Devil and his works, which we deny or renounce in Baptism] we
should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, that is, lead
a whole life in the pursuit of universal holiness, [Sobriety, Justice and
Godliness being the proper language to signify our Religion and respects to
God, to our neighbors, and to our selves.] And that this was the very end of
our dying in Baptism, and the design of Christ's manifestation of our
Redemption, he adds, Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing
of the Verse. 13. 14.
great God and our Savior Jesus, Who gave himself for us, to this very
purpose, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works. Purifying a people peculiar to himself
is cleansing it in the Laver of Regeneration, and appropriating it to himself
in the rites of Admission and Profession. Which plainly designs the first
consignation of our Redemption to be in Baptism, and that Christ, there
cleansing his Church from every spot or wrinkle, made a Covenant with us, that
we should renounce all our sins, and he should cleanse them all, and then that
we should abide in that state. Which is also very explicitly set down by the
same Apostle in that divine and mysterious Epistle to the Romans: How shall we
that are dead Romans 6. 2, 3, 4.
to sin live any longer therein? Know ye not, that so many of us as were
baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? Well, what then?
Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into his death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life. That Is the end and mysteriousness of Baptism, it is a
consignation into the Death of Christ, and we die with him that once, that is,
die to sin, that we may for ever after live the life of righteousness. Knowing
this, that our old man is crucified with him; that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that Ib. v. 6.
henceforth we should not serve sin; that is, from the day of our Baptism to
the day of our death. And therefore God, who knows the weaknesses on our part,
and yet the strictness and necessity of conserving Baptismal grace by the
Covenant Evangelical, has appointed the auxiliaries of the Holy Spirit to be
ministered to all baptized people in the holy Rite of Confirmation, that it
might be made possible to be done by Divine aids, which is necessary to be done
by the Divine Commandments.

10. And this might not be improperly said to be the meaning of those words of
our Blessed Savior, He that speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him; but he that speaks a word against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him: That is, those sins which were committed in Infidelity, before we
became Disciples of the Holy Jesus, are to be remitted in Baptism and our first
profession of the Religion; but the sins committed after Baptism and
Confirmation, in which we receive the Holy Ghost, and by which the Holy Spirit
is grieved, are to be accounted for with more severity. And therefore the Vitia
Catechumeno non (...) fidell, imd and Polygamia ante (...) sacerdotibus non
(...) obicem. S. (...) in fin. Apol. 1. centra (...). S. Aug. de (...)
conjugali, (...) agitur, non (...). Nam in Baptismo omnia peccata (...). Can.
Apost. 17. Council. Eliber. c. 30, 31. (...) post (...) rursus (...) igni
destinatur: sicut and homo qui post (...). Tertul. de Baptis.
Primitive Church, understanding our obligations according to this discourse,
admitted not any to holy Orders who had lapsed and fallen into any sin of which
she could take cognizance, that is, such who had not kept the integrity of
their Baptism; but sins committed before Baptism were no impediments to the
susception of Orders, because they were absolutely extinguished in Baptism.
This is the nature of the Covenant we made in Baptism, that is the grace of the
Gospel, and the effect of Faith and Repentance; and it is expected we should so
remain. For it is nowhere expressed to be the mercy and intention of the
Covenant Evangelical, that this Redemption should be any more than once, or
that Repentance, which is in order to it, can be renewed to the same or so
great purposes and present effects.

11. But after we are once reconciled in Baptism and put entirely into God's
favor, Nune (...) aliam (...), alios mores (...).
when we have once been redeemed, if we then fall away into sin, we must expect
God's dealing with us in another manner and to other purposes. Never must we
expect to be so again justified, and upon such terms as formerly; the best days
of our Repentance are interrupted: not that God will never forgive them that
sin after Baptism, and recover by Repentance; but that Restitution by
repentance after Baptism is another thing than the first Redemption. No such
entire, clear, and integral, determinate, and presential effects of Repentance;
but an imperfect, little, growing, uncertain, and hazardous Reconciliation: a
Repentance that is always in production, a Renovation by parts, a Pardon that
is revocable, a Salvation to be wrought by fear and trembling: all our remanent
life must be in bitterness, our hopes allayed with fears, our meat attempered
with Coloquintida, and death is in the pot: as our best actions are imperfect,
so our greatest Graces are but possibilities and aptnesses to a Reconcilement,
and all our life we are working our selves into that condition we had in
Baptism, and lost by our relapse. As the habit lessens, so does the guilt; as
our Virtues are imperfect, so is the Pardon; and Ante obitum (...)
because our Piety may be interrupted, our state is uncertain, till our
possibilities of sin are ceased, till our fight is finished, and the victory
therefore made sure because there is no more fight. And it is remarkable, that
S. Peter gives counsel to live holily in pursuance 2 Pet. 1. 4.
of our redemption, of our calling, and of our escaping from that corruption
that is in the world through Lust, lest we lose the benefit of our purgation,
to which by way of antithesis he opposes this. Wherefore the rather give
diligence to make your calling and election Verse 10.
sure. And, if ye do these things, ye shall never fall. Meaning, by the
perpetuating (...) Col. 1. 21, 22, 23.
our state of Baptism and first Repentance we shall never fall, but be in a
sure estate; our calling and election shall be sure. But not, if we fall; 2
Pet. 1. 9.
if we forget we were purged from our old sins; if we forfeit our calling, we
have also made our election unsure, movable and disputable.

12. So that now the hopes of lapsed sinners rely upon another bottom. And as
in Moses's Law there was no revelation of Repentance, but yet the Jews had
hopes in God, and were taught the succors of Repentance by the Homilies of the
Prophets and other accessory notices: So in the Gospel the Covenant was
established upon Faith and Repentance, but it was consigned in Baptism, and was
verifiable only in the integrity of a following holy life according to the
measures of a man; not perfect, but sincere; not faultless, but heartily
endeavored: but yet the mercies of God in pardoning sinners lapsed after
Baptism was declared to us by collateral and indirect occasions; by the Sermons
of the Apostles, and the Commentaries of Apostolical persons, who understood
the meaning of the Spirit, and the purposes of the Divine mercy, and those
other significations of his will which the blessed Jesus left upon record in
other parts of his Testament, as in Codicills annexed, besides the precise
Testament it self. And it is certain, if in the Covenant of Grace there be the
same involution of an after-Repentance as there is of present Pardon upon past
Repentance and future Sanctity, it is impossible to justify that a holy life
and a persevering Sanctity is enjoined by the Covenant of the Gospel: if, I
say, in its first intention it be declared that we may as well, and upon the
same terms, hope for Pardon upon a Recovery hereafter, as upon the perseverance
in the present condition.

13. From these premises we may soon understand what is the Duty of a
Christian in all his life, even to pursue his own undertaking made in Baptism
or his first access to Christ, and redemption of his person from the guilt and
punishment of sins. The state of a Christian is called in Scripture
Regeneration, Spiritual life, Walking after the Spirit, Walking in newness of
life, that is, a bringing forth fruits meet for Repentance. That Repentance
which tied up in the same ligament with Faith was the disposition of a
Christian to his Regeneration and Atonement, must have holy life in perpetual
succession; for that is the apt and proper fruit of the first Repentance which
John the Baptist preached as an introduction to Christianity, and as an
entertaining the Redemption by the blood of the Covenant. And all that is
spoken in the New Testament is nothing but a calling upon us to do what we
promised in our Regeneration, to perform that which was the design of Christ,
who therefore redeemed us, and bare our sins in his own body, that we might die
unto sin, and live unto righteousness.

14. This is that saying of S. Paul, Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which Heb. 12. 14, 15.
no man shall see the Lord: Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the grace
of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you: Plainly saying,
that unless we pursue the state of Holiness and Christian communion into which
we were baptized when we received the grace of God, we shall fail of the state
of Grace, and never come to see the glories of the Lord. And a little before,
Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Heb. 10. 22.
Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water. That Is the first state of our Redemption, that is the
Covenant God made with us, (...). 16, 17.
to remember our sins no more, and to put his laws in our hearts and minds. And
this was done when our bodies were washed with water, and our hearts sprinkled
from an evil conscience, that is, in Baptism. It remains then that we persist
in the condition, that we may continue our title to the Covenant; for so it
follows, Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering: For if
we sin wilfully after the profession, there remains no more Heb. 10. 23, 26.
sacrifice: that is, If we hold not fast the profession of our Faith, and
continue not the condition of the Covenant, but fall into a contrary state, we
have forfeited the mercies of the Covenant. So that all our hopes of
Blessedness, relying upon the Covenant made with God in Jesus Christ, are
ascertained upon us by holding fast that profession, by retaining our hearts
still sprinkled from an evil conscience, by following peace with all men and
holiness: For by not failing of the grace of God, we shall not fail of our
hopes, the mighty price of our high calling; but without all this we shall
never see the face of God.

15. To the same purpose are all those places of Scripture which entitle us to
Christ and the Spirit upon no other condition but a holy life, and a
prevailing, habitual, victorious Grace. Know you not your own selves, Brethren,
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except 2 Cor. 13. 5.
ye be reprobates? There are but two states of being in order to Eternity,
either a state of the Inhabitation of Christ, or the state of Reprobation:
Either Christ is in us, or we are reprobates. But what does that signify, to
have Christ dwelling in us? That also we learn at the feet of the same Doctor;
If Christ be in you, the body is dead by reason of sin, but the spirit is life
because of righteousness. The body of Sin is mortified, and the Romans 8. 10.
life of Grace is active, busy, and spiritual in all them who are not in the
state of Reprobation. The Parallel with that other expression of his; They that
are Christ's have crucified Gal. 5. 24.
the flesh with the affections and lusts. If sin be vigorous, if it be
habitual, if it be beloved, if it be not dead or dying in us, we are not of
Christ's portion, we belong not to him, nor he to us. For whoever is born of
God does not commit sin, for his seed remains 1 John 3. 9.
in him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of God: that is, every
Regenerate person is in a condition whose very being is a contradiction and an
opposite design to Sin. When he was regenerate and born anew of water and the
spirit, the seed of God, the original of Piety, was put into him, and bidden to
increase and multiply. The seed of God (in S. John) is the same with the word
of God (in S. James) by which he begat us; and as Jam. 1. 18.
long as this remains, a Regenerate person cannot be given up to sin; for when
he is, he quits his Baptism, he renounces the Covenant, he alters his relation
to God in the same degree as he enters into a state of sin.

16. And yet this discourse is no otherwise to be understood than according to
the design of the thing it self and the purpose of God, that is, that it be a
deep engagement and an effectual consideration for the necessity of a holy
life: but at no hand let it be made an instrument of Despair, nor an argument
to lessen the influences of the Divine Mercy. For although the nicety and
limits of the Covenant being consigned in Baptism are fixed upon the condition
of a holy and persevering uninterrupted Sanctity; and our Redemption is wrought
but once, completed but once, we are but once absolutely, entirely and
presentially forgiven, and reconciled to God, this Reconciliation being in
virtue of the Sacrifice, and this Sacrifice applied in Baptism is one, as
Baptism is one, and as the Sacrifice is one: yet the Mercy of God besides this
great Feast has fragments, which the Apostles and Ministers spiritual are to
gather up in baskets, and minister to the afterneeds of indigent and
necessitous Disciples.

17. And this we gather, as fragments are gathered, by respersed sayings,
instances and examples of the Divine mercy recorded in Holy Scripture. The Holy
Jesus commands us to forgive our brother seventy times seven times, when he
asks our pardon and implores our mercy; and since the Divine mercy is the
pattern of ours, and is also procured by ours, the one being made the measure
of the other by way of precedent and by way of reward, God will certainly
forgive us as we forgive our brother: and it cannot be imagined God should
oblige us to give pardon oftener than he will give it himself, especially since
he has expressed ours to be a title of a proportionable reception of his; and
has also commanded us to ask pardon all days of our life, even in our daily
offices, and to beg it in the measure and rule of our own Charity and
Forgiveness to our Brother. And therefore God in his infinite wisdom foreseeing
our frequent relapses, and considering our infinite infirmities, appointed in
his Church an ordinary ministry of Pardon, designing the Minister to pray for
sinners, and promising to accept him in that his advocation, or that he would
open or shut Heaven respectively to his act on earth, that is, he would hear
his prayers, and verify his ministry, to whom he has committed the word of
Reconciliation. This became a duty to Christian Ministers, Spiritual persons,
that they should restore a person overtaken in a fault, that is, reduce him to
the condition Gal. 6. 1.
James 5. 14.
he begins to lose; that they should pray over sick persons, who are also
commanded to confess their sins, and God has promised that the sins they have
committed shall be forgiven them. Thus S. Paul (...). Can. Apost. 51.
absolved the incestuous excommunicate Corinthian; in the person of Christ he
forgave him. And this also is the confidence S. John taught the Christian
Church upon the stock of the excellent (...). S. (...). Can. (...).
mercy of God and propitiation of Jesus: 1 John 1. 9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all (...). Which discourse he directs to them who were
Christians already initiated into the Institution of Jesus. And the Epistles
which the Spirit sent to the Seven Asian Churches, and were particularly
addressed to the Bishops, the Angels, of those Churches, are exhortations, some
to Perseverance, some to Repentance, that Apocal. 2. 5.
they may return from whence they are fallen. And the case is so with us, that
it is impossible we should be actually and perpetually free from sin in the
long succession of a busy, and impotent, and a tempted conversation. And
without these reserves of the Divine grace and after-emanations from the
Mercy-seat, no man could be saved; and the death of Christ would become
inconsiderable to most of his greatest purposes: for none should have received
advantages but newly-baptized persons, whose Albs of Baptism served them also
for a winding sheet. And therefore our Baptism, although it does consign the
work of God presently to the baptized person in great, certain and entire
effect in order to the remission of what is past, in case the Catechumen be
rightly disposed or hinders not; yet it has also influence upon the following
periods of our life, and has admitted us into a lasting state of Pardon, to be
renewed and actually applied by the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and all
other Ministeries Evangelical, and so long See Discourse 6. of Baptism.
as our Repentance is timely, active, and affective.

18. But now although it is infinitely certain that the gates of Mercy stand
open to sinners after Baptism; yet it is with some variety, and greater
difficulty. He that renounces Christianity, and becomes Apostate from his
Religion, not by a seeming abjuration under a storm, but by a voluntary and
hearty dereliction, he seems to have quitted all that Grace which he had
received when he was illuminated, and to have lost the benefits of his
Redemption and former expiation. And I conceive this is the full meaning of
those words of S. Paul, which are of highest difficulty and latent sense; For
it is Heb. 6. 4, 6.
impossible for those who were once enlightened, etc. if they shall fall away,
to renew them again unto Repentance. The reason is there subjoyned, and more
clearly explicated a little after: For if we sin wilfully after we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there Heb. 10. 26, 29.
remains no more sacrifice for sins; For he has counted the blood of the
Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite
to the Spirit of Grace. The meaning is diverse, according to the degrees of
apostasy or relapse. They who fall away after they were once enlightened in
Baptism, and felt all those blessed effects of the sanctification and the
emanations of the Spirit, if it be into a contradictory state of sin and
mancipation, and obstinate purposes to serve Christ's Quid igitur? (...) est
(...)? Haud. quaquam: sed (...) per novum (...) est; (...) Apestolo (...) and
renovationis (...) sancti. Theophyl. in hunc locum. (...) S. Chrysostom. (...). in
10. (...)
enemies; then there remains nothing but a fearful expectation of Judgment: but
if the backsliding be but the interruption of the first Sanctity by a single
act, or an unconformed, unresolved, unmalicious habit; then also it is
impossible to renew them unto Repentance, viz. as formerly, that is, they can
never be reconciled as before, integrally, fully, and at once, during this
life. For that Redemption and expiation was by Baptism into Christ's death, and
there are no more deaths of Christ, nor any more such sacramental consignations
of the benefit of it; there is no more sacrifice for sins, but the Redemption
is one, as the Sacrifice is one in whose virtue the Redemption does operate.
And therefore the Novatians, who were zealous men denied to the first sort of
persons the peace of the Church, and remitted them to the Divine Judgment. The
(...) in (...) quae (...), sed jam (...); sed (...), quia (...). lib. de (...).
c. 7. Hujus (...) and (...), and (...). c. 9.
Church her self was sometimes almost as zealous against the second sort of
persons lapsed into capital crimes, granting to them Repentance but once; by
such disciplines consigning this truth, That every recession from the state of
Grace, in which by Baptism we were established and consigned, is a farther step
from the possibilities of Heaven, and so near a ruin, that the Church thought
them persons fit to be transmitted to a Judicature immediately Divine; as
supposing either her power to be too little, or the others malice too great, or
else the danger too violent, or the scandal insupportable. For concerning such
persons, who once were pious, holy, and forgiven, (for so is every man and
woman worthily and aptly baptized) and afterward fell into dissolution of
manners, extinguishing the Holy Ghost, doing despite to the Spirit of Grace,
crucisying again the Lord of Life, that is, returning to such a condition from
which they were once recovered, and could not otherwise be so but by the death
of our dearest Lord; I say, concerning such persons the Scripture speaks very
suspiciously, and to the sense and signification of an infinite danger. For if
the speaking a word against the Holy Ghost be not to be pardoned here nor
hereafter, what can we imagine to be the end of such an impiety which crucifies
the Lord of Life, and puts him to an open shame, which quenches the Spirit,
doing despite to the Spirit of Grace? Certainly that is worse than speaking
against him. And such is every person who falls into wilful Apostasy from the
Faith, or does that violence to Holiness which the other does to Faith; that
is, extinguishes the sparks of Illumination, quenches the Spirit, and is
habitually and obstinately criminal in any kind. For the same thing that (...)
was in the first period of the world, and Idolatry in the second, the same is
Apostasy in the last; it is a state wholly contradictory to all our religious
relation to God according to the nature and manner of the present
communication. Only this last, because it is more malicious, and a declension
from a greater grace, is something like the fall of Angels. And of this the
Emperor Julian was a sad example.

19. But as these are degrees immediately next, and a little less; so the hopes
of pardon are the more visible. Simon Magiss spoke a word, or at least thought,
against the Holy Ghost, he thought he was to be bought with money. Concerning
him S. Peter pronounced, Thou art in Act. 8. 22, 23.
the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity: Yet repent, and pray God,
if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. Here the matter was
of great difficulty; but yet there was a possibility (...), at least no
impossibility of recovery declared. And therefore S. Jude (...). 22, 23,
bids us, of some to have compassion, making a difference; and others save with
fear, pulling them out of the fire: meaning that their condition is only not
desperate. And still in descent, retaining the same proportion, every lesser
sin is easier pardoned, as better consisting with the state of Grace; the whole
Spirit is not destroyed, and the body of sin is not introduced: Christ is not
quite ejected out of possession, but, like an oppressed Prince, still continues
his claim; and such is his mercy that he will still do so, till all be lost, or
that he is provoked by too much violence, or that Antichrist is put in
substitution, and sin reigns in (...) mortal body. So that I may use the words
of Saint John, These things I write unto 1 (...) 2, 1, 2.
you, that' you sin not. But if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
(...), Jesus Christ the Righteous: And he is a propitiation for our sins; and
not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. That is plainly,
Although the design of the Gospel be, that we should erect a Throne for Christ
to reign in our spirits, and this doctrine of Innocence be therefore preached
that ye sin not; yet if one be overtaken in a fault, despair not, Christ is our
Advocate, and he is the Propitiation: he did propitiate the Father by his
death, and the benefit of that we receive at our first access to him; but then
he is our Advocate too, and prays perpetually for our perseverance or
restitution respectively. But his purpose is, and he is able so to do, to keep
you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his Glory.

20. This consideration I intend should relate to all Christians of the world:
And although by the present custom of the Church, we are baptized in our
infancy, and do not actually reap that fruit of present Pardon which persons of
a mature age in the primitive Church did, (for we yet need it not, as we shall
when we have past the calentures of Youth, which was the time in which the
wisest of our Fathers in Christ chose for their Baptism, as appears in the
instance of S. Ambrose, S. Austin, and diverse others;) yet we must remember,
that there is a Baptism of the Spirit as well as of water: and whenever this
happens, whether it be together with that Baptism of water, as usually it was
when only men and women of years of discretion were baptized; or whether it be
ministered in the rite of Confirmation, which is an admirable suppletory of an
early Baptism, and intended by the Holy Ghost for a corroborative of Baptismal
grace, and a defensative against danger; or that, lastly, it be performed by an
internal and merely spiritual Ministry, when we by acts of our own election
verify the promise made in Baptism, and so bring back the Rite by receiving
the effect of Baptism; that is, whenever the filth of our flesh is washed away,
and that we have the answer of a pure conscience toward God, which S. Peter
affirms to be the true Baptism, and which by the purpose and design of God it
is expected we should not defer longer than a great reason or a great necessity
enforces; when our sins are first explated, and the sacrifice and death of
Christ is made ours, and we made God's by a more immediate title, (which at
some time or other happens to all Christians, that pretend to any hopes of
Heaven:) then let us look to our standing, and take heed lest we fall. When we
once have tasted of the heavenly gift, and are made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to
come, that is, when we are redeemed by an actual mercy and presential
application, which every Christian that belongs to God is at some time or other
of his life; then a fall into a deadly crime is highly dangerous, but a relapse
into a contrary estate is next to desperate.

21. I represent this sad, but most true, Doctrine in the words of S. Peter:
If, after 2 (...). 2, 20, 21.
they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the
Lord and Savior (...) amissos (...) Lana resert (...) fuco: Nee (...) virtus,
(...) semel excidit. Curat (...). Hor. (...). 3. Od. 5.
Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome; the latter end
is worse with them than the beginning. For it had been better for them not to
have known the way of righteousness, than after they have known it to turn from
the holy Commandment delivered unto them. So that a relapse after a state of
Grace into a state of sin, into confirmed habits, is to us a great sign, and
possibly in it self it is more than a sign, even a state, of reprobation and
final abscission.

22. The sum of all is this. There are two states of like opposite terms.
First, Christ redeems us from our vain conversation, and reconciles us to God,
putting us into an entire condition of Pardon, Favor, Innocence and
Acceptance, and becomes our Lord and King, his Spirit dwelling and reigning in
us. The opposite state to this is that which in Scripture is called a
crucifying the Lord of Life, a doing despite to the Spirit of grace, a being
entangled in the pollutions of the world, the Apostasy or falling away, an
impotency or disability to do good, viz. of such who cannot cease from sin, who
are 2 Pet. 2. 14.
slaves of sin, and in whom sin reigns in their bodies. This condition is a
full and integral deletery of the first; it is such a condition, which as it
has no Holiness or remanent affections to Virtue, so it has no hope or
revelation of a mercy, because all that benefit is lost which they received by
the death of Christ; and the first being lost, there remains no more sacrifice
for sins, but a certain fearful expectation of Judgment. But between these two
states stand all those imperfections and single delinquencies, those slips and
falls, those parts of recession and apostasy, those grievings of the Spirit:
and so long as any thing of the first state is left, so long we are within the
Covenant of grace, so long we are within the ordinary limits of mercy and the
Divine compassion, we are in possibilities of recovery, and the same sacrifice
of Christ has its power over us; Christ is in his possession, though he be
disturbed: but then our restitution consists upon the only condition of a
renovation of our integrity; as are the degrees of our Innocence, so are our
degrees of Confidence.

23. Now because the intermedial state is divisible, various, successive, and
alterable; so also is our condition of Pardon. Our flesh shall no more return
as that of a little child, our wounds shall never be perfectly cured; but a
scar, and pain, and danger of a relapse shall for ever afflict us; our sins
shall be pardoned by parts and degrees, to uncertain purposes, but with certain
danger of being recalled again; and the Pardon shall never be (...) till that
day in which all things have their consummation.

24. And this is evident to have been God's usual dealing with all those upon
whom his Name is called. God pardoned David's sins of Adultery and Murder: but
the Pardon was but to a certain degree, and in a limited expression; God has
taken away thy sin, thou shall not die: but this Pardon was as imperfect as his
condition was, Nevertheless the child that is born unto thee, that shall die.
Thus God pardoned the Israelites 2 Samuel 12. 13, 14.
at the importunity of Moses, and yet threatened to visit that sin upon them in
the day of Visitation. And so it is in Christianity: when once we have broke
and discomposed the golden chain of Vocation, Election and Justification, which
are entire links and methodical periods of our happiness when we first give up
our names to Christ, for ever after our condition is imperfect; we have broken
our Covenant, and we must be saved by the excrescencies and overflowings of
mercy. Our whole endeavor must be to be reduced to the state of our Baptismal
innocence and integrity, because in that the Covenant was established. And
since our life is full of defailances, and all our endeavors can never make us
such as Christ made us, and yet upon that condition our hopes of happiness were
established, I mean, of remaining such as he had made us; as are the degrees of
our Restitution and access to the first federal condition, so also are the
degrees of our Pardon: but as it is always in imperfection during this life,
and subject to (...) Sophoel.
change and defailance; so also are the hopes of our felicity, never certain
till we are taken from all danger, never perfect till all that is imperfect in
us is done away.

25. And therefore in the present condition of things our pardon was properly
expressed Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
by David, and S. Paul, by a covering, and a not imputing. For because the body
Romans 4. 7.
of sin dies visibly, and fights perpetually, and disputes with hopes of
victory, and may also prevail, all this life is a condition of suspense; our
sin is rather covered, than properly pardoned; God's wrath is suspended, not
satisfied; the sin is not to all purposes of anger imputed, but yet is in some
sense remanent, or at least lies ready at the door. Our condition is a state of
Imperfection; and every degree of imperfection brings a degree of Recession
from the state Christ put us in; and every recession from our Innocence is also
an abatement of our Confidence; the anger of God hovers over our head, and
breaks out into temporal Judgments; and he retracts them again; and threatens
worse, according as we approach to or retire from that first Innocence, which
was the first entertainment of a Christian, and the Crown of the Evangelical
Covenant. Upon that we entertained the mercies of Redemption; and God
established it upon such an Obedience which is a constant, perpetual and
universal sincerity and endeavor: and as we perform our part, so God verifies
his, and not only gives a great assistance by the perpetual influences of his
Holy Spirit, by which we are consigned to the day of Redemption, but also takes
an account of Obedience, not according to the standard of the Law and an exact
scrutiny, but by an Evangelical proportion; in which we are on one side looked
upon as persons already redeemed and assisted, and therefore highly engaged;
and on the other side as compassed about with infirmities and enemies, and
therefore much pitied. So that as at first our Calling and Election is
presently good, and shall remain so, if we make it sure; so if we once
prevaricate it, we are rendered then full of hazard, difficulty and uncertainty,
and we must with pains and sedulity work out our Salvation with fear and
trembling; first by preventing a fall, or afterward by returning to that
excellent condition from whence we have departed.

26. But although the pardon of sins after Baptism be, during this life,
difficult, imperfect, and revocable; yet because it is to great effects for the
present, and in order to a complete Pardon in the day of Judgment, we are next
to enquire, what are the parts of duty to which we are obliged after such
prevarications which usually interrupt the state of Baptismal innocence, and
the life of the Spirit. S. John gives this account: If we say we have
fellowship with God, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. 1 John
1. 6, 7.
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have communion one with
another, and the blood of Jesus cleanses us from all sin. This state of duty
S. Paul calls a casting off the Romans 13. 12, 13, 14.
works of darkness, a putting on the armor of light, a walking honestly, a
putting on the Lord Jesus Christ. And to it he confronts, making provision for
the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. S. Peter, describing the duty of a
Christian, relates the proportion of it as high as the first precedent, even
God himself. As he which has called you is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 14.
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation: Not fashioning your selves
according to the former lusts. And again, Seeing then that all these things
shall be dissolved, what manner of persons 2 Pet. 3. 11.
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? And S. John, with the
same severity and perfection, Every one that has this hope (that is, every one
who either does 1 John 3. 3.
not, or has no reason to despair) purifieth himself, even as God is pure;
meaning, that he is pure by a Divine purity, which God has prescribed as an
imitation of his Holiness, according to our capacities and possibilities. That
Purity must needs be a laying 1 Pet. 2. 1.
aside all malice, and guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings;
so S. Peter expresses it: a laying aside every weight, and the sin that does so
easily beset us; so S. Paul. Heb. 12. 1.
This is to walk in the light, as he is in the light; for in him is no darkness
at all; which we 1 John 1. 5. 7.
have then imitated, when we have escaped the corruption that is in the world
through 2 Pet. 1. 4.
lusts, that is, so as we are not held by them, that we take them for our
enemies, for the object and party of our contestation and spiritual fight, when
we contend earnestly against them, and resist them unto blood, if need be;
that is being pure as he is pure. But besides this positive rejection of all
evil, and perpetually contesting against sin, we must pursue the interests of
Virtue and an active Religion.

27. And besides this, says S. Peter, giving all diligence, add to your Faith
Virtue, to Ibid. v. 5, etc. Very boni aviditas tuta est. Quid sit istud,
interrogas, aut unde subeat? dicam: ex bona conscientia, ex honestis consiliis,
ex rectis actionibus, ex contemptra fortuitorum, ex placido vitae and continuo
tenore unam prementis viam. Sen. ep. 23.
your Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience,
and to Patience Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly kindness, and to
Brotherly kindness Charity. All this is an evident prosecution of the first
design, the holiness and righteousness of a whole life, the being clear from
all spots and blemishes, a being pure, and so presented unto Christ: for upon
this the Covenant being founded, to this all industries must endeavor, and
arrive in their proportions. Verse 8, 9.
For if these things be in you and abound, they shall make that you be neither
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that
lacks these things is blind, and has forgotten he was purged from his old
sins; that is, he has lost his Baptismal grace, and is put from the first
state of his Redemption toward that state which is contradictory and
destructive of it.

28. Now because all these things are in latitude, distance and divisibility,
and only enjoin a sedulity and great endeavor, all that we can dwell upon is
this, That he who endeavors most is most secure, and every degree of
negligence is a degree of danger; and although in the intermedial condition
between the two states of Christianity and a full impiety there is a state of
recovery and possibility, yet there is danger in every part of it, and it
increases according as the deflection and irregularity comes to its height,
position, state and finality. So that we must give all diligence to work out
our Salvation, and it would ever be with fear and trembling: with fear, that we
do not lose our innocence; and with trembling, if we have lost it, for fear we
never recover, or never be accepted. But Holiness of life and uninterrupted
Sanctity being the condition of our Salvation, the ingredient of the Covenant,
we must proportion our degrees of hope and confidence of Heaven according as we
have obtained degrees of Innocence, or Perseverance, or Restitution. Only this:
As it is certain he is in a state of reprobation who lives unto sin, that is,
whose actions are habitually criminal, who gives more of his consent to
wickedness than to Virtue: so it is also certain he is not in the state of
God's favor and Sanctification, unless he lives unto righteousness, that is,
whose desires, and purposes, and endeavors, and actions, and customs are
spiritual, holy, sanctified, and obedient. When sin is dead, and the spirit is
life; when the Lusts of the flesh are mortified, and the heart is purged from
an evil conscience, and we abound in a whole Systeme of Christian Virtues; when
our hearts are right to God, and with our affections and our wills we love God
and keep his Commandments; when we do not only cry, Lord, Lord, but also do his
will; then Christ dwells in us, and we in Christ. Now let all this be taken in
the lowest sense that can be imagined, all I say which out of Scripture I have
transcribed; [ casting away every weight; laying aside all malice, mortifying
the deeds of the flesh, crucifying the old man with all his affections and
lusts, and then having escaped the corruption that is in the world through
lust, besides this, adding virtue to virtue till all righteousness be fulfilled
in us, walking in the light, putting on the Lord Jesus, purifying our selves as
God is pure, following peace with all men and holiness, resisting unto blood,
living in the Spirit, being holy in all manner of conversation as he is holy,
being careful and excellent in all conversation and godliness,] all this, being
a pursuit of the first design of Christ's death and our reconcilement, can mean
no less but that, 1. We should have in us no affection to a sin; of which we
can best judge, when we never choose it, and never fall under it but by
surprise, and never lie under it at all, but instantly recover, judging our
selves severely: and 2. That we should choose Virtue with great freedom of
spirit and alacrity, and pursue it earnestly, Bonum ex (...) causa, malum ex
(...).
integrally, and make it the business of our (...). (...).
lives: and that, 3. The effect of this be, that sin be crucified in us, and
the desires to it dead, flat and useless; and that our desires of serving
Christ be quick-spirited, active, and effective, inquisitive for opportunities,
apprehensive of the offer, cheerful in the action, and persevering in the
employment.

29. Now let a prudent person imagine what infirmities and over-sights can
consist with a state thus described, and all that does no violence to the
Covenant; God pities us, and calls us not to an account for what (...), (qued
(...) Diodorum Siculum) (...). (...) dixit (...) (...). (...).
morally cannot, or certainly will not with great industry be prevented. But
whatsoever is inconsistent with this condition is an abatement from our hopes,
as it is a retiring from our duty, and is with greater or less difficulty
cured, as are the degrees of its distance from that condition which Christ
stipulated with us when we became his Disciples. For we are just so restored to
our state of grace and favor as we are restored to our state of purity and
holiness. Now this redintegration or renewing of us into the first condition is
also called Repentance, and is permitted to all persons who still remain within
the powers and possibilities of the Covenant, that is, who are not in a state
contradictory to the state and portion of Grace; but with a difficulty
increased by all circumstances, and incidences of the crime and person. And
this I shall best represent in repeating these considerations. 1. Some sins are
past hopes of Pardon in this life. 2. All that are pardoned are pardoned by
parts, revocably and imperfectly during this life, not quickly, nor yet
manifestly. 3. Repentance contains in it many operations, parts and
employments, its terms and purpose being to redintegrate our lost condition,
that is, in a second and less perfect sense, but, as much as in such
circumstances we can, to verify our first obligations of innocence and
holiness in all manner of conversation and godliness.

30. Concerning the first, it is too sad a consideration to be too dogmatical
and conclusive in it; and therefore I shall only recall those expresses of
Scripture which may without envy decree the article: such as are those of S.
Paul, that there is a certain sort of men, whom he twice describes, whom it is
impossible to renew again unto Repentance; or those of S. Peter, such whose
latter end is worse than the beginning, because after they once had escaped the
pollutions of the world, they are entangled therein; such who, as our Blessed
Savior threatens, shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to
come. For there is an unpardonable estate, by reason of its malice and
opposition to the Covenant of Grace; and there is a state unpardonable, because
the time of Repentance is past. There are days and periods of Grace: If thou
had known, at least in this thy day, said the weeping Savior of the world to
foreknown and determined Jerusalem. When God's decrees are gone out, they are
not always revocable: and therefore it was a great caution of the Apostle, that
we should follow peace and holiness, and look diligently Heb. 12. 14, 15, 16.
that we fall not from the grace of God, lest any of us become like (...), to
whose Repentance there was no place left, though he sought it carefully with
tears: meaning, that we also may put our selves into a condition, when it shall
be impossible we should be renewed unto Repentance: and those are they who sin
a sin unto death, for whom we have 1 John 5. 16.
from the Apostle no encouragement to pray. And these are in so general and
conclusive terms described in Scripture, that every persevering sinner has
great reason to suspect himself to be in the number: If he endeavors, as soon
as he thinks of it, to recover, it is the best sign he was not arrived so far;
but he that lives long in a violent and habitual course of sin is at the
margin and brim of that state of final reprobation, and some men are in it
before they be aware, and to some God reckons their days swifter and their
periods shorter. The use I make of this consideration is, that if any man has
reason to suspect, or to be certain that his time of Repentance is past, it is
most likely to be a deathbed Penitent after a vicious life, a life contrary to
the mercies and grace of the Evangelical Covenant; for he has provoked God as
long as he could, and rejected the offers of Grace as long as he lived, and
refused Virtue till he could not entertain her, and has done all those things
which a person rejected from hopes of Repentance can easily be imagined to have
done. And if there be any time of rejection, although it may be earlier, yet it
is also certainly the last.

31. Concerning the second I shall add this to the former discourse of it, that
perfect Pardon of sins is not in this world at all after the first emission and
great efflux of it in our first Regeneration. During this life we are in
imperfection, minority, and under conditions, which we have prevaricated, and
our recovery is in perpetual flux, in heightnings and declensions, and we are
highly uncertain of our acceptance, because we are not certain of our
restitution and innocence; we know not whether we have done all that is
sufficient to repair the breach made in the first state of favor and Baptismal
grace. But he that is dead, says S. Paul, is justified from sin; not till
then. And Rom 6. 7.
therefore in the doctrine of the most learned Jews it is affirmed; He that is
guilty of the profanation of the Name of God, he shall not interrupt the
apparent malignity of it by his present Repentance, nor make atonement in the
day of Expiation, nor wath the stains away by chastising of himself, but during
his life it remains wholly in suspense, and before death is not extinguished;
according to the saying of the Prophet Esaias, This iniquity shall not be blotted
out till ye die, says the LORD of Hosts. Esaias 22 14.
And some wise persons have affirmed, that Jacob related to this in his
expression and appellatives of God, whom he called the God of Abraham, and the
fear of his father Isaac, Genesis 31. 42.
because (as the Doctors of the Jews tell us) Abraham being dead was ascribed
into the final condition of God's family; but Isaac, being living, had
apprehensions of God not only of a pious, but also of a tremulous fear: he was
not sure of his own condition, much less of the degrees of his reconciliation,
how far God had forgiven his sins, and how far he had retained them. And it is
certain, that if every degree of the Divine favor be not assured by a holy
life, those sins of whose pardon we were most hopeful return in as full vigor
and clamorous importunity as ever, and are made more vocal by the appendent
ingratitude, and other accidental degrees. And this Christ taught us by a
Parable: For as the lord made his uncharitable servant pay all that debt which
he had formerly forgiven him; even so will God do to us, if we from our hearts
forgive not one Matthew. 18. 35.
another their trespasses. Behold the goodness and severity of God, says S.
Paul: on them which Romans 11. 22.
fell severity; but on thee goodness, if thou continue in that goodness;
otherwise thou shall be cut off. For this is my Covenant which I shall make
with them, when I shall take away their Verse 27.
sins. And if this be true in those sins which God certainly has forgotten,
such as were all those which were committed before our illumination; much
rather is it true in those which we committed after, concerning whose actual
and full pardon we cannot be certain without a revelation. So that our pardon
of sins, when it is granted after the breach of our Covenant, is just so secure
as our perseverance is: concerning which because we must ascertain it as well
as we can, but ever with fear and trembling so also is the estate of our
Pardon, hazardous, conditional, revocable and uncertain; and therefore the best
of men do all their lives ask pardon even of those sins for which they have
wept bitterly and done the sharpest and severest penance. And if it be
necessary we pray that we may not enter into temptation, because temptation is
full of danger, and the danger may bring a sin, and the sin may ruin us: it is
also necessary that we understand the condition of our pardon to be, as is the
condition of our person, variable as will, sudden as affections, alterable as
our purposes, revocable as our own good intentions, and then made as
ineffective as our inclinations to good actions. And there is no way to secure
our confidence and our hope but by being perfect, and holy, and pure, as our
heavenly Father is; that is, in the sense of humane capacity, free from the
habits of all sin, and active and industrious and continuing in the ways of
godliness. For upon this only the Promise is built, and by our proportion to
this state we must proportion our confidence, we have no other revelation.
Christ reconciled us to his Father upon no other conditions, and made the
Covenant upon no other articles, but of a holy life, in obedience universal and
perpetual: and the abatements of the rigorous sense of the words, as they are
such as may infinitely testify and prove his mercy, so they are such as must
secure our duty and habitual graces; an industry manly, constant and Christian:
and because these have so great latitude, (and to what degrees God will accept
our returns he has nowhere punctually described) he that is most severe in
his determination does best secure himself, and by exacting the strictest
account of himself, shall obtain the easier scrutiny at the hands of God. The
use I make of this consideration is to the same purpose with the former: For if
every day of sin and every criminal act is a degree of recess from the
possibilities of Heaven, it would be considered at how great distance a
deathbed Penitent after a vicious life may apprehend himself to stand for
mercy and pardon: and since the terms of restitution must in labor, and in
extension of time, or intension of degrees, be of value great enough to restore
him to some proportion or equivalence with that state of Grace from whence he
is fallen, and upon which the Covenant was made with him; how impossible, or
how near to impossible, it will appear to him to go so far, and do so much in
that state, and in those circumstances of disability.

32. Concerning the third particular, I consider that Repentance, as it is
described in Scripture, is a system of holy Duties, not of one kind, not
properly consisting of parts as if it were a single Grace; but it is the
reparation of that estate into which Christ first put us, a renewing us in the
spirit of our mind, so the Apostle calls it; and the Holy Ghost has taught
this truth to us by the implication of many appellatives, and also by express
discourses. For there is in Scripture (...)
a Repentance to be repented of, and (...), Acts 3. 19.
a Repentance never to be repented of. The first is mere Sorrow for what is
past, an ineffective trouble producing nothing good; such as was the Repentance
of Judas, he repented, and hanged himself; and such was that of Esau, when it
was too late; and so was the Repentance of the five foolish Virgins: which
examples tell us also when ours is an impertinent and ineffectual Repentance.
To this Repentance Pardon is nowhere promised in Scripture. But there is a
Repentance which is called Conversion or Hnit (...) promittitur (...) remissio
in seq. (...)
Amendment of life, a Repentance productive of holy fruits, such as the Baptist
and our Blessed Savior preached, such as himself also propounded in the
example of the Matt. 12. 41
Ninivites; they repented at the preaching of Jonah, that is, (...). 3. 8.
(...). 10.
they fasted, they covered them in sackcloth, they cried mightily unto God,
yea, they turned every one from his evil way, and from the violence that was in
their hands. And this was it that appeased God in that instance. God saw their
works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, and
did it not.

33. The same Character of Repentance we find in the Prophet Ezekiel: When the
Ezekiel. 18. 27.
wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has committed, and does
that which is lawful and right; If the wicked restore the pledge, give again
that he had robbed, walk in Ezekiel. 33. 15.
the statutes of life without committing iniquity, he has done that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. And in the Gospel
Repentance is described with as full and entire comprehensions as in the old
Prophets. For Faith and Repentance are the whole duty of the Gospel. (...)
Polybius. Vide (...) Clem. Alexan. (...). l. 2. ubi ad (...).
Faith when it is in conjunction with a practical grace signifies an
intellectual. Faith signifies the submission of the understanding to the
Institution; and Repentance includes all that whole practice which is the
entire duty of a Christian after he has been overtaken in a fault. And
therefore Repentance first includes a renunciation and abolition of all evil,
and then also enjoins a pursuit of every virtue, and that till they arrive at
an habitual confirmation.

34. Of the first sense are all those expressions of Scripture which imply
Repentance to be the deletery of sins. Repentance from dead works S. Paul
affirms to be the prime (...)
Fundamental of the Religion, that is, conversion or returning from dead works:
for unless Repentance be so construed, it is not good sense. And this is
therefore highly Heb. 6. 1.
verified, because Repentance is intended to set us into the condition of our
first undertaking, and articles covenanted with God. And therefore it is a
redemption of the time, that is, a recovering what we lost, and making it up by
our doubled industry. Remember whence thou art fallen, repent, that is, return,
and do thy first works, said the Apocal. 2. 5.
Spirit to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus; or else I will remove the
Candlestick, except Gal. 6. 1.
thou repent. It is a restitution; If a man be overtaken in a fault, restore
such a one, that is, put him where he was. And then, that Repentance also
implies a doing all good, is certain by the Sermon of the Baptist, Bring forth
fruits meet for Repentance: Do thy Matthew. 3. 8.
first works, was the Sermon of the Spirit; Laying aside every weight, and the
sin that easily encircles us, let us run with patience the race that is set
before us, So S. Paul taught. And S. Peter gives charge, that when we have
escaped the corruptions of the world and 2 Pet. 1. 4. 5.
of lusts, besides this, we give all diligence to acquire the rosary and
conjugation of Christian virtues. And they are proper effects, or rather
constituent parts, of a holy Repentance. For godly sorrow works Repentance
(says S. Paul) not to be repented of: 2 Cor. 7. 10.
and that ye may know what is signified by Repentance, behold the product was
carefulness, clearing of themselves, indignation, fear, vehement desires, zeal
and revenge; to which if we add the Epithet of holy, (for these were the
results of a godly sorrow, and the members of a Repentance not to be repented
of) we are taught that Repentance, besides the purging out the malice of
iniquity, is also a sanctification of the whole man, a turning Nature into
Grace, Passions into Reason, and the flesh into spirit.

35. To this purpose I reckon those Phrases of Scripture calling it a To. 12. 2.
renewing of our minds; a Tit. 3. 5.
renewing of the Holy Ghost; a Jam. 4. 8.
cleansing of our hands and purifying our hearts, that is, a becoming holy in
our affections and righteous in our actions; a ( a) transformation or utter
change; a Gal. 5. 24.
crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts; a Col. 3. 5.
mortified state; a 1 Cor. 5. 7.
purging out the old leven, and becoming a new conspersion; a Ephesians. 5. 14.
waking out of sleep, and Romans 13. 13.
walking honestly as in the day; a Joh. 3. 3.
being born again, and being born from above; a new life. And I consider that
these Romans 13. 11.
preparative actions of Repentance, such as are Sorrow, and -- (...), Eradenda
Cupidinis Pravi sunt (...); and (...) -- Hor. l. 3. (...). 24.
Confession of sins, and Fasting, and exterior Mortifications and severities,
are but forerunners of Repentance, some of the retinue, and they are of the
family, but they no more complete the duty of Repentance than the harbingers
are the whole Court, or than the Fingers are all the body. There is more joy in
Heaven, said our Blessed Savior, over one sinner that repents, than over
ninety nine just persons who need no repentance. There is no man but needs a
tear and a sorrow even for his daily weaknesses, and possibly they are the
instrumental expiations of our sudden and frequent and lesser surprises of
imperfection; but the just persons need no repentance, that is, need no
inversion of state, no transformation from condition to condition, but from the
less to the more perfect the best man has. And therefore those are vain
persons who when they owe God a hundred will write fourscore, or a thousand
will write fifty. It was the saying of an excellent person, that Repentance is
the beginning of Philosophy, a flight and renunciation of (...) Hierocl. in
Pythag.
evil works and words, and the first preparation and entrance into a life which
is never to be repented of: And therefore a penitent is not taken with umbrages
and appearances, nor quits a real good for an imaginary, or chooses evil for
fear of enemies and adverse accidents; but peremptorily conforms his sentence
to the Divine Laws, and submits his whole life in a conformity with them. He
that said those excellent words had not been taught the Christian Institution,
but it was admirable reason and deep Philosophy, and most consonant to the
reasonableness of Virtue, and the proportions and designs of Repentance, and no
other than the doctrine of Christian Philosophy.

36. And it is considerable, since in Scripture there is a Repentance mentioned
which is impertinent and ineffectual as to the obtaining Pardon, a Repentance
implied which is to be repented of, and another expressed which is never to be
repented of, and this is described to be a new state of life, a whole
conversion and transformation of the man; it follows, that whatsoever in any
sense can be called Repentance, and yet is less than this new life, must be
that ineffective Repentance. A Sorrow is a Repentance, and all the acts of
dolorous expression are but the same sorrow in other characters, and they are
good when they are parts or instruments of the true Repentance: but when they
are the whole Repentance, that Repentance is no better than that of Judas, nor
more prosperous than that of Esau. Every sorrow is not a godly sorrow, and that
which is, is but instrumental and in order to Repentance. Godly sorrow works
repentance, says S. Paul; that is, it does its share toward it, as every
Grace does toward the Pardon, as every degree of Pardon does toward Heaven. By
godly sorrow it is probable S. Paul means the same thing which the School has
since called Contrition; a grief proceeding from a holy principle, from our
love of God, and anger that we have offended him: and yet this is a great way
off from that Repentance without the performance of which we shall certainly
perish: But no Contrition alone is remissive of sins, but as it (...) (...). 2.
(...).
cooperates toward the integrity of our duty. (...) conversus ingemuerit, is
the Prophet's expression; When a man mourns and turns from all his evil way,
that is a godly sorrow, and that is Repentance too: but the tears of a dolorous
person, though running over with great effusions, and shed in great bitterness,
and expressed in actions of punitive justice, all being but the same sense in
louder language, being nothing but the expressions of sorrow, are good only as
they tend farther; and if they do, they may by degrees bring us to Repentance,
and that Repentance will bring us to Heaven; but of -- (...) Hierocl.
themselves they may as well make the Sea swell beyond its margin, or water and
refresh the Sunburned earth, as move God to merey and pierce the heavens. But
then to the consideration we may add, that a sorrow upon a deathbed after a
vicious life is such as cannot easily be understood to be ordinarily so much as
the beginning of Virtue, or the first instance toward a holy life. For he that
till then retained his sins, and now when he is certain and believes he shall
die, or is fearful lest he should, is sorrowful that he has sinned, is only
sorrowful because he is like to perish: and such a sorrow may perfectly consist
with as great an affection to sin as ever the man had in the highest caresses
and invitation of his Lust. For even then in certain circumstances he would
have refused to have acted his greatest temptation. The boldest and most
pungent Lust would refuse to be satisfied in the Marketplace, or with a dagger
at his heart; and the greatest intemperance would refuse a pleasant meal, if he
believed the meat to be mixed with poison: and yet this restraint of appetite is
no abatement of the affection, any more than the violent fears which by being
incumbent upon the deathbed Penitent make him grieve for the evil consequents
more than to hate the malice and irregularity. He that does not grieve till his
greatest fear presses him hard, and damnation treads upon his heels, feels
indeed the effects of fear, but can have no present benefit of his sorrow,
because it had no natural principle, but a violent, unnatural and intolerable
cause, inconsistent with a free, placid and moral election. But this I speak
only by way of caution: for God's merey is infinite, and can, if he please,
make it otherwise. But it is not good to venture, unless you have a promise.

37. The same also I consider concerning the Purpose of a new life, which that
any man should judge to be Repentance, that Duty which restores us, is more
unreasonable than to think sorrow will do it. For as a man may sorrow, and yet
never be restored, (and he may sorrow so much the more, because he shall never
be restored, as Esan did, as the five (...) Virgins did, and as many more do:)
so he that purposes to lead a Nam (...) qui ex (...) propesisis in alia (...)
ne transiliunt (...), sed (...) quodam (...) habere (...) pessunt, suspensi and
vagi? Seneca (...).
new life has convinced himself that the Duty is undone, and therefore his
pardon not granted, nor his condition restored. As a letter is not a word, nor
a word an action; as an Embryo is not a man, nor the seed the fruit: so is a
purpose of Obedience but the element of Repentance, the first imaginations of
it, differing from the Grace it self as a disposition from a habit, or (because
it self will best express it self) as the purpose does from the act. For either
a holy life is necessary, or it is not necessary. If it be not, why does any
man hope to escape the wrath to come by resolving to do an unnecessary thing?
or if he does not purpose it, when he pretends he does, that is a mocking of
God, and that is a great way from being an instrument of his restitution. But
if a holy life be necessary, as it is certain by infinite testimonies of
Scriptures, it is the unum necessarium, the one great necessary; it cannot
reasonably be thought that any thing less than doing it shall serve our turns.
That which is only in purpose is not yet done, and yet it is necessary it
should be done, because it is necessary we should purpose it. And in this we
are sufficiently concluded by that ingeminate expression used by S. Paul: Gal.
6. 15. 5. 6.
In Jesus Christ nothing can avail but a new Creature; nothing but Faith
working by Charity, (...) Cor. 7. 19.
nothing but a keeping the Commandments of God. Gal. 6. 16.
And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, they
are the Israel of God.

38. This consideration I intended to oppose against the carnal security of
Deathbed penitents, who have (it is to be feared) spent a vicious life, who
have therefore mocked themselves, because they meant to mock God, they would
reap what they (...).
sowed not. But be not deceived, says the Apostle, he that sows to the
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he (...) sows to the Spirit,
shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. Only this, let us not be weary of
well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we (...) 9.
faint not: meaning, that by a persevering industry, and a long work, and a
succession of religious times, we must sow to the Spirit; a work of such
length, that the greatest danger is of fainting and intercision: but he that
sows to the Spirit, not being weary of well-doing, not fainting in the long
process, he, and he only, shall reap life everlasting. But a purpose is none
Matatus -- (...)! (quoties (...) in (...) videris (...)) Quae men's est (...),
cur (...) non (...) non redeunt (...)? Hor. lib. 4. Od. (...)
of all this. If it comes to act, and be productive of a holy life, then it is
useful, and it was like the Eve of a Holiday, festival in the midst of its
abstinence and vigils, it was the beginnings of a Repentance. But if it never
come to act, it was to no purpose, a mocking of God, an act of direct
hypocrisy, a provocation of God, and a deceiving our own selves; you are
unhappy you began not early, or that your earlier days return not together with
your good purposes.

39. And neither can this have any other sentence, though the purpose be made
upon our deathbed. For God has made no Covenant with us on our deathbed
distinct from that he made with us in our life and health. And since in our
life and present abilities good purposes and resolutions and vows (for they are
but the same thing in differing degrees) did signify nothing till they came to
act, and no man was reconciled to God by good intentions, but by doing the will
of God; can we imagine that such purposes can more prevail at the end of a
wicked life than at the beginning? that less piety will serve our turns after
50 or 60 years impiety, than after but 5 or 10? that a wicked and sinful life
should by less pains be expiated than an unhappy year? For it is not in the
state of Grace as in other exterior actions of Religion or Charity, where God
will accept the will for the deed, when the external act is inculpably out of
our powers, and may also be supplied by the internal: as bendings of the body,
by the prostration of the Soul; Alms, by Charity; Preaching, by praying for
conversion. These things are necessary, because they are precepts, and
obligatory (...). Epict. c. 75.
only in certain circumstances, which may fail, and we be innocent and
disobliged. But it is otherwise in the essential parts of our duty, which God
has made the immediate and next condition of our Salvation, such which are
never out of our power but by our own fault. Such are Charity, Forgiveness,
Repentance, and Faith; such to which we are assisted by God, such which are
always put by God's grace into our power, therefore because God indispensably
demands them. In these cases, as there is no revelation God will accept the
will for the deed, the purpose for the act, so it is unreasonable to expect it;
because God did once put it into our powers, and, if we put it out, we must not
complain of want of fire which our selves have quenched, nor complain we cannot
see, when we have put our own lights out; and hope God will accept the will for
the deed, since we had no will to it when God put it into our powers. These are
but fig leaves to cover our nakedness, which our sin has introduced.

40. For either the reducing such vows and purposes to act is the duty, without
which the purpose is ineffectual; or else that practice is but the sign and
testimony of a sincere intention, and that very sincere intention was of it
self accepted by God in the first spring. If it was nothing but a sign, then
the Covenant which God made with Man in Jesus Christ was Faith and Good
meaning, not Faith and Repentance, and a man is justified as soon as ever he
purposes well, before any endeavors are commenced, or any act produced, or
habit ratified; and the duties of a holy life are but shadows and
significations of a Grace, no part of the Covenant, not so much as smoke is of
fire, but a mere sign of a person justified as soon as he made his vow: but
then also a man may be justified five hundred times in a year, as often as he
makes a new vow and confident resolution, which is then done most heartily,
when the Lust is newly satisfied, and the pleasure disappears for the instant,
though the purpose disbands upon the next temptation. Yea but, unless it be a
sincere purpose, it will do no good; and although we cannot discern it, nor the
man himself, yet God knows the heart, and if he sees it would have been reduced
to act, then he accepts it, and this is the hopes of a dying man. But faint
they are and dying, as the man himself.

41. For it is impossible for us to know but that what a man intends (as
himself thinks) heartily, is sincerely meant, and if that may be insincere, and
is to be judged only by a never-following event, (in case the man dies) it
cannot become to any man the ground of hope, nay, even to those persons who do
mean sincerely it is still an instrument of distrust and fears infinite, since
his own sincere meaning has nothing in the nature of the thing, no distinct
formality, no principle, no sign to distinguish it from the unsincere vows of
sorrowful, but not truly penitent, persons. 2. A purpose acted and not acted
differ not in the principle, but in the effect, which is extrinsecal and
accidental to the purpose, and each might be without the other: a man might
live holily, though he had not made that vow; and when he has made the vow, he
may fail of living holily. Et quis (...) qui, quod ad sese (...), aquum censeat
quenquam poenas dare ob tam rem quod arguatur male (...), opinor. -- (...) si
henorem non (...) est habere ob eam rem, quod (...) facere (...) quis dicit,
(...) tamin; (...) tale (...), non quod male (...), sed quia (...) dicuntur
(...). Orat. M. Catonis (...). apud A. Gellium, l. 7. c. 3.
And as we should think it hard measure to have a damnation increased upon us
for those sins which we would have committed if we had lived; so it cannot be
reasonable to build our hopes of Heaven upon an imaginary Piety, which we never
did, and, if we had lived, God knows whether we would or not. 3. God takes away
the godly, lest malice should corrupt their Understandings, and for the Elects
sake those days are shortened, which if they should continue, no flesh should
escape: but now shall all that be laid upon their score which, if God (...) ex
(...) facto (...) astimatio. D. dereg. Jur.
had not so prevented by their death, God knows they would have done? And God
deals with the wicked in a proportionable manner, to the contrary purpose, he
shortens their days, and takes a way their possibilities and opportunities,
when the time of Repentance is past, because he will not do violence to their
Wills; and this Matr. 13. 15. ex Isa. 6. 9, 10.
lest they should return, and be converted, and I should heal them: so that it
is evident, some persons Mark 4. 12.
are by some acts of God, after a vicious life and the frequent rejection of
the Divine Luke 8. 10.
grace, at last prevented from mercy, who, without such courses and in contrary
Joh. 12. 40.
Acts 28. 27.
circumstances, might possibly do acts of Repentance, and return, and then God
would Romans 11. 8.
healthem. 4. Let their purposes and vows be never so sincere in the principle,
yet since a man who is in the state of Grace may again fail of it, and forget
he was purged from his old sins, (and every dying sinner did so, if ever he was
washed in the laver of Regeneration and sanctified in his spirit;) then much
more may such a sincere purpose fail, and then it would be known to what
distance of time or state from his purpose will God give his final sentence.
Whether will he quit him, because in the first stage he will correspond with
his intention, and act his purposes; or condemn him, because in his second
stage he would prevaricate? And when a man does fail, it is not because his
first principle was not good; for the Holy Spirit, which is certainly the best
principle of spiritual actions, may be extinguished in a man, and a sincere or
hearty purpose may be lost, or it may again be recovered, and be lost again: so
that it is as unreasonable as it is unrevealed, that a sincere purpose on a
deathbed shall obtain pardon or pass for a new state of life. Few men are at
those instants and in such pressures hypocritical and vain; and yet to perform
such purposes is a new work and a new labor; it comes in upon a new stock
differing from that principle, and will meet with temptations, difficulties and
impediments; and an honest heart is not sure to remain so, but may split upon a
rock of a violent invitation. A promise is made to be faithful or unfaithful ex
post (...) by the event, but it was sincere or insincere in the principle, only
if the person promising did or did not respectively at that time mean what he
said. A sincere promise many times is not truly performed.

42. Concerning all the other acts which it is to be supposed a dying person
can do, I have only this consideration: If they can make up a new Creature,
become a new state, be in any sense a holy life, a keeping the Commandments of
God, a following of peace and holiness, a becoming holy in all conversation; if
they can arrive to the lowest sense of that excellent condition Christ intended
to all his Disciples, when he made keeping the Commandments to be the condition
of entering into life, and not crying Lord, Lord, but doing the will of God; if
he that has served the Lusts of the flesh and taken pay under all God's
enemies during a long and malicious life, can for any thing a dying person can
do be said in any sense to have lived holily; then his hopes are fairly built:
if not, they rely upon a sand, and the (...) of Death and the Divine
displeasure will beat (...) violently upon them. There are no suppletories of
the Evangelical Covenant: If we walk according to the Rule, then shall peace
and righteousness kiss each other; if we have sinned and prevaricated the Rule,
Repentance must bring us into the ways of Righteousness, and then we must go on
upon the old stock; but the deeds of the (...) must be mortified, and Christ
must dwell in us, and the Spirit must reign in us, and Virtue must be habitual,
and the habits must be confirmed: and this as we do by the Spirit of Christ, so
it is hallowed and accepted by the grace of God, and we put into a condition of
favor, and redeemed from sin, and reconciled to God. But this will not be put
off with single acts, nor divided parts, nor newly-commenced purposes, nor
Audies plorosque dicontes, A quinquagesimo (...) annul (...) me (...). Et
(...)? Senec.
fruitless sorrow; it is a great folly to venture Eternity upon dreams: so that
now let me represent the condition of a dying person after a vicious life.

43. First, He that considers the srailty of humane bodies, their incidences
and aptness to sickness, casualties, death sudden or expected, the condition of
several diseases, that some are of too quick a sense and are intolerable, some
are dull, stupid and Lethargical; then adds the prodigious Judgments which fall
upon many sinners in the act of sin, and are marks of our dangers and God's
essential justice and severity; and that security which possesses such persons
whose lives are vicious, and that habitual carelessness, and groundless
confidence, or an absolute inconsideration, which is generally the condition
and constitution of such minds, every one whereof is likely enough to (...).
(...).
confound a persevering sinner in miseries eternal; will soon apprehend the
danger of a delayed Repentance to be infinite and unmeasurable.

44. Secondly, But suppose such a person, having escaped the antecedent
circumstances of the danger, is set fairly upon his Deathbed with the just
apprehension of his sins about him and his addresses to Repentance; consider
then the strength of his Lusts, that the sins he is to mortify are inveterate,
habitual and confirmed, having had the growth and stability of a whole life;
that the liberty of his Will is impaired, (the 2 Pet. 2. 14.
Scripture saying of such persons, whose eyes are full of lust, and that cannot
cease from sin; and that his servants they are whom they obey; that they are
slaves to sin, and so not sui juris, not at their own dispose) that his
Understanding is blinded, his Appetite is mutinous and of a long time used to
rebel and prevail; that all the inferior Faculties are in disorder; that he
wants the helps of Grace proportionable to his necessities, (for the longer he
has continued in sin the weaker the Grace of God is in him; so that, in
effect, at that time the more need he has the less he shall receive, it being
God's rule to give to him that has, and from him that has not to take even
what he has:) then add the innumerable parts and great burdens of Repentance,
that it is not a Sorrow, nor a Purpose, because both these suppose that to be
undone which is the only necessary support of all our hopes in Christ when it
is done; the innumerable difficult cases of Conscience that may then occur,
particularly in the point of Restitution, (which, among many other necessary
parts of Repentance, is indispensably required of all persons that are able,
and in every degree in which they are able;) the many Temptations of the Devil,
the strength of Passions, the impotency of the Flesh, the illusions of the
spirits of darkness, the tremblings (...) (...) de Repub.
of the heart, the incogitancy of the mind, the implication and intanglings of
ten thousand thoughts, and the impertinences of a disturbed fancy, and the
great Nequit (...) ut (...) aut (...) ex (...), si adversu (...). cap. 4.
hindrances of a sick body and a sad and weary spirit: All these represent a
Deathbed to be but an ill station for a Penitent. If the person be suddenly
snatched away, he is not left so much as to dispute; if he be permitted Ante
(...) curandum (...) ut homo been (...); in senectute (...), ut (...) moriatur.
Seneca.
to languish in his sickness, he is either stupid, and apprehends nothing, or
else miserable, and has reason to apprehend too much. However, all these
difficulties are to be passed and overcome before the man be put into a
saveable condition. From this consideration (though perhaps it may infer more,
yet) we cannot but conclude this difficulty to be as great as the former
danger, that is, vast, and ponderous, and insupportable.

45. Thirdly, Suppose the Clinick or deathbed Penitent to be as forward in
these employments, and as successful in the mastering many of the Objections,
as reasonably can be thought: yet it is considerable, that there is a
Repentance which is to be repented of, and that is a Repentance which is not
productive of fruits of amendment of life; that there is a period set down by
God in his Judgment, and that many, who have been profane as Esau was, are
reduced into the condition of Esau, and there is no place left for their
Repentance, though they seek it carefully with tears; that they who have long
refused to hear God calling them to Repentance, God will refuse to hear them
calling for grace and mercy; that he will laugh at some men when their calamity
comes; that the five foolish Virgins addressed themselves at the noise of the
Bridegroom's coming, and begged oil, and O si compunct as (...) Ante (...)
mutare, (...) exspectare (...) Fata (...) -- (...); ergd (...) spatium nobis
dum (...), Dum (...) cl-mentia sese (...) plangamus (...) licet, and (...) Avit.
went out to buy oil, and yet for want of some more time and an early diligence
came too late, and were shut out for ever; that it is nowhere revealed that
such late endeavors and imperfect practices shall be accepted; that God has
made but one Covenant with us in Jesus Christ, which is Faith and Repentance
consigned in (...), and the signification Bis jam pene tibi consul (...)
irstat, Et numeras paucos vix iua vita dies. Mart. l. 1. ep. 16.
of them and the purpose of Christ is, that we should henceforth no more serve
sin, but mortify and kill him perpetually, Vide S. Ambros. l. 2. de (...). c.
1. and 11.
S. Aug in l. (...). 41. S. Basil. orat. 4.
and destroy his kingdom, and extinguish as much as S. Bernard, in parvis
(...). ser. 38.
in us lies his very title; that we should live holily, justly, and soberly in
this present world, in all holy conversation and godliness; and that either we
must be continued or reduced to this state of holy living and habitual
sanctity, or we have no title to the Promises; that every degree of recession
from the state Christ first put us in is a recession from our hopes, and an
insecuring our condition, and we add to our (...) only as our Obedience is
restored: All this is but a sad story to a dying person, who sold himself to
work wickedness in an habitual iniquity and aversation from the conditions of
the holy Covenant in which he was sanctified.

46. And certainly it is unreasonable to plant all our hopes of Heaven upon a
Doctrine that is destructive of all Piety, which supposes us in such a
condition that God has been offended at us all our life long, and yet that we
can never return our duties to him unless he will unravel the purposes of his
Predestination, or call back time again and begin a new computation of years
for us; and if he did, it would be still as uncertain. For what hope is there
to that man who has fulfilled all iniquity, and has not fulfilled
righteousness? Can a man live to the Devil; and die to God? sow to the flesh,
and reap to the Spirit? hope God will in mercy reward him who has served his
enemy? Sure it is, the Doctrine of the avail of a deathbed Repentance cannot
easily be reconciled with God's purposes and intentions to have us live a good
life, for it would reconcile us to the hopes of Heaven for a few thoughts or
words or single actions when our life is done; it takes away the benefit of
many Graces, and the use of more, and the necessity of all.

47. For let it be seriously weighed, To what purpose is the variety of God's
Grace? what use is there of preventing, restraining, concomitant, subsequent,
and persevering Grace, unless it be in order to a religious conversation? And
by deferring Repentance to the last we despoil our Souls, and rob the Holy
Ghost of the glory of many rays and holy influences with which the Church is
watered and refreshed, that it may grow from grace to grace, till it be
consummate in glory. It takes away the very being of Chastity and Temperance;
no such Virtues, according to this Doctrine, need to be named among Christians.
For the dying person is not in capacity to exercise these; and then either they
are troublesome, without which we may do well enough, or else the condition of
the unchaste and intemperate Clinick is sad and deplorable. For how can he
eject those Devils of Lust and Drunkenness and Gluttony, from whom the disease
has taken all powers of election and variety of choice, unless it be possible
to root out long-contracted habits in a moment, or acquire the habits of
Chastity, Sobriety and Temperance, those self-denying and laborious Graces,
without doing a single act of the respective virtues in order to obtaining of
habits; unless it be so that God will infuse habits into us more immediately
than he creates our reasonable Souls, in an instant, and without the
cooperation of the suscipient, without the working out our Salvation with fear,
and without giving all diligence, and running with patience, and resisting unto
blood, and striving to the last, and enduring unto the end in a long fight and
a long race? If God infuses such habits, why have we laws given us, and are
commanded to work, and to do our duty with such a succession and lasting
diligence as if the habits were to be acquired, to which indeed God promises
and ministers his aids, still leaving us the persons obliged to the law and the
labor, as we are capable of the reward? I need not instance any more. But this
doctrine of a deathbed Repentance is inconsistent with the duties of
Mortification, with all the vindictive and punitive parts of Repentance in
exterior instances, with the precepts of waiting and watchfulness and
preparation, and standing in a readiness against the coming of the Bridegroom,
(...) temporis (...). Horat. l. 3. Od. 29.
with the patience of well-doing, with exemplary living, with the imitation of
the Life of Christ, and conformities to his Passion, with the kingdom and
dominion and growth of Vita (...), data est sine (...) nobis Mutua, (...).
Grace. And lastly, it goes about to defeat one of God's (...) quod sit (...)
vitae spatium?
great purposes; for Cod therefore concealed the time of our (...) ad (...).
Qui ad illam (...) non longissimum (...), sed maximum. Senec.
death, that we might always stand upon our guard; the Holy Jesus told us so,
Watch, for ye know not what hour the Lord will come: but this makes men seem
more crafty in their late-begun Piety, than God was provident and mysterious in
concealing the time of our dissolution,

48. And now if it be demanded, How long time must our Repentance and holy
living take up? what is the last period of commencement of our Piety, after
which it will be unaccepted or ineffectual? will a month, or a year, or three
years, or seven suffice? For since every man fails of his first condition, and
makes violent recessions from the state of his Redemption Male vivunt qui (...)
vivere (...). Non (...) stare paratus ad mortem, qui (...) vivere. Quidam
vivere (...); quidam (...) quam (...). Senec. (...). 23.
and his Baptismal grace, how long may he lie in that state of recession with
hopes of Salvation? To this I answer, He cannot lie in sin a moment without
hazarding his Eternity; every instant is a danger, and all the parts of its
duration do increase it; and there is no answer to be given antecedently, and
by way of rule, but all the hopes of our restitution depends upon the event. It
is just as if we should ask, How long will it be before an Infant comes to the
perfect use of Reason, or before a fool will become wise, or an ignorant person
become excellently learned? The answer to such questions must be given
according to the capacity of the man, to the industry of his person, to his
opportunities or hindrances, to his life and health, and to God's blessing
upon him. Only this; every day of deferring it lessens our hopes, and increases
the difficulty; and when this increasing, divisible difficulty comes to the
last period of impossibility, God only knows, because he measures the thoughts
of man, and comprehends his powers in a span, and himself only can tell how he
will correspond in those assistences without which (...) est locus solvendi
aeris alieni. Serec. ibid. Mortem (...) hilaris (...) qui (...) ad (...) diu
(...). Idem ep. 30.
we can never be restored. Agree with thy adversary quickly, while thou art in
the way: Quickly. And therefore the Scripture -- Qui (...), and (...) in serum
tempus (...), Non (...) ab (...).
sets down no other time than to day, while it is yet called to day. But
because it will every day be called to day, we must remember that our duty is
such as requires a time, a duration, Non potest stare paratus ad mortem qui
(...). Id (...) est, ut (...). Quidam (...) est. (...) quod (...). Senec.
(...). 23.
it is a course, a race that is set before us, a duty requiring patience, and
longanimity, and perseverance, and great care and diligence, that we faint not.
And supposing we could gather probably by circumstances when the last period of
our hopes begins; yet he that stands out as long as he can, gives probation
(...) victurum, (...) dicis, (...) istud, (...) vivis? (...) jam vivere, (...),
serum (...): Ille sapit quisquis, (...), vixit (...). l. 5. (...). 59.
that he came not in of good will or choice, that he loves not the present
service, that his body is present, but his heart is estranged from the yoke of
his present employment; and Non (...) quae (...) negari; Et solum hoc ducat,
quod suit, (...). Non est, creed mihi, (...), Vivam. (...) vita est (...); vive
(...). l. 1. (...). 16.
then all that he can do is odious to God, being a sacrifice without a heart,
an offertory of shells and husks, while the Devil and the Man's Lusts have
devoured the Kernels.

49. So that this question is not to be asked beforehand, but after a man has
done much of the work, and in some sense lived holily, then he may enquire into
his condition, whether, if he persevere in that, he may hope for the mercies of
Jesus. But he that enquires beforehand, as commonly he means ill, so he can be
answered by none but God, because the satisfaction of such a vain question
depends upon future contingencies, and accidents depending upon God's secret
pleasure and predestination. He that repents but to day, repents late enough,
that he put it off from yesterday. It may be that some may begin to day, and
find mercy, and to another person it may be too late; but no man is safe or
wise that puts it off till to morrow. And that it may appear how necessary it
is to begin early, and that the work is of difficulty and continuance, and that
time still increases the objections, it is certain that all the time that is
lost must be redeemed by something in the sequel equivalent, or sit to make up
the breach, and to cure the wounds long since made, and long festering; and
this must be done by doing the first works, by something that God has declared
he will accept in stead of them: the intension of the following actions and the
frequent repetition must make up the defect in the extension and coexistence
with a longer time. It was an act of an heroical Repentance and great
detestation of the crime which Thomas Cantipratanus relates of a young
Gentleman condemned to die for robberies who endeavoring to testify his
Repentance, and as far as was then permitted him to expiate the crime, begged
of the Judge that tormentors might be appointed him, that he might be long a
dying, and be cut in small pieces, that the severity of the execution might be
proportionable to the immensity of his sorrow and greatness of the iniquity.
Such great acts do facilitate our Pardon, and hasten the Restitution, and in a
few days comprise the elapsed duty of many month's: but to rely upon such
acts is the last remedy, and like unlikely Physic to a despairing person: if
it does well, it is well; if it happen otherwise, he must thank himself, it is
but what in reason he could expect. The Romans sacrificed a Dog to Mana Geneta,
and prayed Ne quis domi natorum bonus fiat, that none of their Domestics might
be good; (...)
that is, that they might not die, (says Plutarch) because dead people are
called good. But if they be so only when they die, they will hardly find the
reward of goodness in the reckonings of Eternity, when to kill and to make good
is all one, (as Aristole observed (...) Plutor. ibid. ex Aristotele.
it to be in the Spartan Covenant with the Tegeatae, and as it is in the case
of Penitents never mending their lives till their lives be done;) that goodness
is fatal, and the prologue of an eternal death.

50. I conclude this point with the words of S. Paul, God will render to every
man according Romans 2. 6, 7, 8, 9.
to his deeds: To them (...) by patient continuance in well-doing seek for
glory and honor and immortality; [to them] (...) life. But to them that are
contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness; [to them]
indignation and wrath: Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does
evil.

51. Having now discoursed of Repentance upon distinct principles, I shall not
need to consider upon those particulars which are usually reckoned parts or
instances of Repentance; such as are Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction.
Repentance is the fulfilling all righteousness, and includes in it whatsoever
is matter of Christian duty and expressly commanded; such as is Contrition or
godly Sorrow, and Confession to God, both which are declared in Scripture to be
in order to Pardon and purgation of our sins. A contrite and a broken heart, O
God, thou will not despise; and, If we consess our sins, God is just and
righteous to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all iniquity. To which
add concerning Satisfaction, that it is a judging and punishing of our selves;
that it also is an instrument of Repentance, and a fruit of godly sorrow, and
of good advantage for obtaining mercy of God. For indignation and revenge are
reckoned by S. Paul effects of a godly sorrow, and the blessing which
encourages its practice is instanced (...) (...). 2.
by the same Saint; When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord; but if we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged: where he expounds judged by
chastened; if we were severer to our selves, God would be gentle and (...). And
there are only these two cautions to be annexed, and then the direction is
sufficient. 1. That when promise of Pardon is annexed to any of these or
another Grace, or any good action, it is not to be understood as if alone it
were effectual either to the abolition or pardon of sins, but the promise is
made to it as to a member of the whole body of Piety. In the coadunation and
conjunction of parts the title is firm, but not at all in distinction and
separation. For it is certain, if we fail in one, we are guilty of all, and
therefore cannot be repaired by any one Grace, or one action, or one habit. And
therefore Charity hides a multitude of sins with men and God too; Alms deliver
from death; (...) pierces Jam. 5. 20.
the clouds, and will not depart before its answer be gracious; and Hope
purifieth, Tob. 4. 10.
and makes not ashamed; and Patience, and Faith, and Piety to parents, and
Prayer, 1 (...). 3. 3.
Romans 5. 5.
and the eight Beatitudes, have promises of this life, and of that which is to
come respectively: 1 Timothy 4. 8.
and yet nothing will obtain these promises but the harmony and uniting of
these Graces in a holy and habitual confederation. And when we consider the
Promise as singularly relating to that one Grace, it is to be understood
comparatively; that is, such persons are happy if compared with those who have
contrary dispositions. For such a capacity does its portion of the work toward
complete Felicity, from which the contrary quality does estrange and disintitle
us. 2. The special and minute actions and instances of these three preparatives
of Repentance are not under any command in the particulars, but are to be
disposed of by Christian prudence in order to those ends to which they are most
aptly instrumental and designed: such as are Fasting, and corporal severities
in Satisfaction, or the punitive parts of Repentance; they are either
vindictive of what is past and so are proper acts or effects of Contrition and
godly sorrow; or else they relate to the present and future estate, and are
intended for correction or emendation, and so are of good use as they are
medicinal, and in that proportion not to be omitted. And so is Confession to a
Spiritual person an excellent instrument of Discipline, a bridle of intemperate
Passions, an opportunity of Restitution; Ye which are spiritual (...) such a
person overtaken in a fault, (says the Apostle;) it is the application (...).
6. 1.
of a remedy, the consulting with a guide, and the best security to a weak or
lapsed or an ignorant person, in all which cases he is (...) to judge his own
questions, and in these he is also committed to the care and conduct of
another. But these special instances of Repentance are capable of suppletories,
and are like the corporal works of Mercy, necessary only in time and place, and
in accidental obligations. He that relieves the poor, or visits the sick,
choosing it for the instance of his Charity, though he do not redeem captives,
is charitable, and has done his Alms. And he that cures his sin by any
instruments, by external, or interior and spiritual remedies, is penitent,
though his diet be not (...) and afflictive, or his lodging hard, or his sorrow
bursting out into tears, or his expressions passionate and dolorous. I only add
this, that acts of public Vide (...). of (...), Part 1. and (...). of (...),
Part 2.
Repentance must be by using the instruments of the Church, such as she has
appointed; of private, such as by experience, or by reason, or by the counsel
we can get, we shall learn to be most effective of our penitential purposes.
And yet it is a great argument that the exterior expressions of corporal
severities are of good benefit, because in all Ages wise men and severe
Penitents have chosen them for their instruments.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal God, who were pleased in mercy to look upon us when we were in our
(...), to reconcile us when we were enemies, to forgive us in the midst of our
provocations of thy infinite and eternal Majesty, finding out a remedy for us
which mankind could never ask, even making an atonement for us by the death of
thy Son, sanctifying us by the blood of the everlasting Covenant and thy
all-hallowing and Divinest Spirit; let thy (...) so perpetually assist and
encourage my endeavors, conduct my will, and fortify my intentions, that
(...) may persevere in that holy condition which thou have put me in by the
grace of the Covenant, and the mercies of the Holy Jesus. O let me never fall
into those sins, and retire to that vain conversation, from which the eternal
and merciful Savior of the World has redeemed me; but let me grow in Grace,
adding Virtue to virtue, reducing my purposes to act, and increasing my acts
till they grow into habits, and my habits till they be confirmed, and still
confirming them till they be consummate in a blessed and holy perseverance. Let
thy Preventing grace dash all Temptations in their approach; let thy
Concomitant grace enable me to resist them in the assault, and overcome them in
the fight: that my hopes be never discomposed, nor my Faith weakened, nor my
confidence made remiss, or my title and portion in the Covenant be lessened. Or
if thou permittest me at any time to (...), (which, Holy Jesu, avert for thy
mercy and compession sake) yet let me not sleep in sin, but recall me instantly
by the clamours of a nice and tender Conscience, and the quickening Sermons of
the Spirit, that I may never pass from sin to sin, from one degree to another;
lest sin should get the dominion over me, lest thou be angry with me, and
reject me from the Covenant, and I perish. Purify me from all (...), sanctify
my spirit, that I may be holy as thou art, and let me never provoke thy
jealousy, nor presume upon thy goodness, nor distrust thy mercies, nor (...)
my Repentance, nor rely upon vain confidences; but that I may by a constant,
sedulous and timely endeavor make my calling and election sure, living to thee
and dying to thee, that having sowed to the Spirit, I may from thy mercies reap
in the Spirit bliss, and eternal sanctity, and everlasting life, through Jesus
Christ our Savior, our hope, and our mighty and ever-glorious Redeemer.

Amen.
Upon Christ' s Sermon on the Mount, and of the Eight Beatitudes.
Moses delivers the Law.
Joh. 1. 17. The Law was given by Moses but Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ. These words the Lord spoke unto all the Assembly in the mount out of
the midst of the fire with a great voice, and he wrote them in two Tables of
stone, delivered them unto me. Deuteronomy. 5. 22.

Christ preaches in the Mount.
He went up into a mountain, and opened his mouth and taught them saying
Blessed are the poor in spirit, etc. Blessed are they that mourn, etc. Blessed
are the meek, etc. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst, etc. Blessed are
the merciful, etc. Math. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, and




1. THe Holy Jesus, being entered upon his Prophetical Office, in the first
solemn Sermon gave testimony that he was not only an Interpreter of Laws then
in being, but also a Lawgiver, and an Angel of the new and everlasting
Covenant; which because God meant to establish with mankind by the mediation of
his Son, by his Son also he now began to publish the conditions of it: and that
the publication of the Christian Law might retain some proportion at least and
analogy of circumstance with the promulgation of the Law of Moses, Christ went
up into a Mountain, and from thence gave the Oracle. And here he taught all the
Disciples; for what he was now to speak was to become a Law, a part of the
condition on which he established the Covenant, and founded our hopes of
Heaven. Our excellent and gracious Lawgiver, knowing that the great argument
in all practical disciplines is the proposal of the end, which is their crown
and their reward, begins his Sermon, as David began his most divine collection
of Hymns, with Blessedness. And having enumerated Eight Duties, which are the
rule of the spirits of Christians, he begins every Duty with a Beatitude, and
concludes it with a Reward; to manifest the reasonableness, and to invite and
determine our choice to such Graces which are circumscribed with Felicities,
which have blessedness in present possession and glory in the consequence,
which in the midst of the most passive and afflictive of them tells us that we
are blessed, which is indeed a felicity, as a hope is good, or as a rich heir
is rich, who in the midst of his Discipline and the severity of Tutors and
Governors knows he is designed to and certain of a great inheritance.

2. The Eight Beatitudes, which are the duty of a Christian, and the rule of
our spirit, and the special discipline of Christ, seem like so many paradoxes
and impossibilities reduced to Reason; and are indeed Virtues made excellent by
rewards, by the sublimity of Grace, and the mercies of God, hallowing and
crowning those habits which are despised by the world, and are esteemed the
conditions of lower and less considerable people. But God sees not as man sees,
and his rules of estimate and judgment are not borrowed from the exterior
splendor, which is apt to seduce children, and cosen fools, and please the
appetites of sense and abused fancy; but they are such as he makes himself,
excellencies which by abstractions and separations from things below land us
upon (...). And they are states of suffering rather than states of life: for
the great employment of a Christian being to bear the Cross, Christ laid the
Pedestal so low, that the rewards were like rich mines interred in the deeps
and inaccessible retirements, and did choose to build our (...) upon the
torrents and violences of affliction and sorrow. Without these Graces we (...)
get Heaven; and without sorrow and sad accidents we cannot exercise these
Graces. Such are,

3. First, Blessed are the Poor in spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven. Poverty of spirit is in respect of secular affluence and abundance, or
in respect of great opinion (...).
and high thoughts; either of which have diverse acts and offices. That the
first is one of the meanings of this Text is certain, because S. Luke,
repeating this Beatitude, delivers it plainly, Blessed are the poor; and to it
he opposes riches. And our Blessed Savior Luke 6. 20.
speaks so suspiciously of riches and rich men, that he represents the
condition to (...) 24.
be full of danger and temptation: and S. James calls it full of sin,
describing rich men to be oppressors, litigious, proud, spightful, and
contentious; which sayings, like all others Jam. 2. 6, etc. 5. 1, etc.
of that nature, are to be understood in common and most frequent accidents,
not regularly, but very improbable to be otherwise. For if we consider our
Vocation, S. Paul informs us, That not many mighty, not many noble are called;
but God has chosen the poor of this world rich in faith: And how hard it is
for a rich man to enter into Heaven, our great Master has taught us, by
saying, it is more easy for a Camel to pass through a needle's eye. And the
reason is, because of the infinite (...) minus (...) quam (...) creditur, Alia
(...) ad (...). Sen.(...) Timocr. (...).
temptation which Riches minister to our spirits, it being such an opportunity
of vices, that nothing remains to countermand the act but a strong, resolute,
unaltered and habitual purpose, and pure love of (...); Riches in the mean Vil
nos in mare proximum (...) and lapides, (...) and inutile, Summi (...) mali,
(...). Hor. lib. 3. (...). 24.
time offering to us occasions of Lust, fuel for Revenge, instruments of Pride,
entertainment of our desires, engaging them in low, worldly and sottish
appetites, inviting us to (...). (...).
show our power in oppression, our greatness in vanities, our wealth in
prodigal expenses, and to answer the importunity (...)
of our Lusts, not by a denial, but by a correspondence and satisfaction, till
they become our mistresses, imperious, arrogant, (...) (...) de (...) and
(...), l. 13. (...). Ju (...) and (...) dixit qui (...). and (...).
tyrannical and vain. But Poverty is the sister of a good mind, it ministers
aid to wisdom, industry to our spirit, severity to our thoughts, soberness to
counsels, modesty to our desires; it restrains extravagancy and dissolution of
appetites; the next thing above our present condition, which is commonly the
object of our wishes, being temperate and little, proportionable enough to
nature, not wandering beyond the limits of necessity or a moderate convenience,
or at (...) but to a free (...) and recreation. And the (...) of Poverty are
single and mean, rather a sit imploiment to correct our levities, than a
business to impede our better thoughts; since a little thing supplies the needs
of nature, and -- (...). Lucan. (...) (...).
the earth and the fountain with little trouble minister food to us, and God's
common providence and daily dispensation cases the cares, and makes them
portable. But the cares and businesses of rich men are violences to our whole
man, they are loads of memory, business for the understanding, work for two or
three arts and sciences, employment for many servants to assist in, increase
the appetite and heighten the thirst; and by making their dropsy bigger, and
their capacities large, they destroy all those opportunities and possibilities
of Charity in which only Riches can be useful.

4. But it is not a (...) poverty of possession which intitles us to the
blessing, but a poverty of spirit; that is, a contentedness in every state, an
aptness to renounce all when we are obliged in duty, a refusing to continue a
possession when we for it must quit a virtue or a noble action, a divorce of
our affections from those gilded vanities, a generous contempt of the world;
and at no hand heaping riches, either with injustice or with avarice, either
with wrong or impotency, of action or -- (...), and (...) nil (...) Forte minus
locuples uno (...) sibi -- Horat.
affection. Not like Laberius described by the Poet, who thought nothing so
criminal as Poverty, and every spending of a sesterce was the loss of a moral
(...), and every gaining of a talent was an action glorious and heroical. But
Poverty of spirit accounts Riches to be the servants of God first, and then of
our selves, being sent by God, and to return when he pleases, and all the while
they are with us to do his business. It is a looking upon riches and things of
the earth, as they do who look upon it from Heaven, to whom it appears little
and unprofitable. And because the residence of this blessed Poverty is in the
mind, it follows that it be here understood, that all that exinanition and
renunciation, abjection and humility of mind, which depauperates the spirit,
making it less worldly and more spiritual, is the duty here enjoined. For if a
man throws away his gold, as did Crates the Theban, or the proud Philosopher
Diogenes, and yet leaves a spirit high, aerie, fantastical and vain, pleasing
himself, and with complacency reflecting upon his own act, his Poverty is but a
circumstance of Pride, and the opportunity of an imaginary and a secular
greatness. Ananias and Sapphira renounced the world by selling their
possessions; but because they were not poor in spirit, but still retained the
affections to the world, therefore they kept back part of the price, and lost
their hopes. The Church of Laodicea was possessed with a spirit of Pride, and
flattered themselves in Apocal. 3. 17.
imaginary riches; they were not poor in spirit, but they were poor in
possession and condition. These wanted Humility, the other wanted a generous
contempt of worldly things; and both were destitute of this Grace.

5. The acts of this Grace are; 1. To cast off all inordinate affection to
(...). (...).
Riches. 2. In heart and spirit, that is, preparation of mind, to quit the
possession of all Riches, and actually so to do when God requires it, that is,
when the retaining Riches loses a Virtue. 3. To be well pleased with the whole
economy of God, his providence and dispensation of all things, being contented
in all estates. 4. To employ that wealth God has given us in actions of
Justice and Religion. 5. To (...) Recte beatum: (...) Nomen beati, qui (...)
call. (...), etc. Hor. lib. 4. Od. 9.
be thankful to God in all temporal losses. 6. Not to distrust God, or to be
solicitous and fearful of want in the future. 7. To put off the spirit of
vanity, pride and fantastic complacency in our selves, thinking lowly or
meanly of whatsoever we are or do. 8. To prefer others before our selves, doing
honor and prelation to them, and either contentedly receiving affronts done to
us, or modestly undervaluing our selves. 9. Not to praise our selves, but when
God's glory and the edification of our neighbor is concerned in it, nor
willingly to hear others praise us. 10. To despoil our selves of all interior
propriety, denying our own will in all instances of subordination to our
Superiors, and our own judgment in matters of difficulty and question,
permitting our selves and our affairs to the advice of wiser men, and the
decision of those who are trusted with the cure of our Souls. 11. Emptying our
selves of our selves, and throwing our selves wholly upon God, relying upon his
Providence, trusting his Promises, craving his Grace, and depending upon his
strength for all our actions, and deliverances, and duties.

6. The reward promised is the Kingdom of Heaven. Fear not little Flock, it is
your Father's pleasure to give you a Kingdom. To be little in our (...) regnes
avidum domando Spiritum, (...) si Libyam remotis Gadibus jung as, and (...).
Hor. l 2. Od. 2.
own eyes is to be great in God's; the Poverty of the spirit shall be rewarded
with the Riches of the Kingdoms, of both Kingdoms: that of Heaven is expressed.
Poverty is the (...), qui parvo (...). Hor.
highway of Eternity. But therefore the Kingdom of Grace is taken in the way,
the way to our Country; and it being the forerunner of Matt. 11. 11. and 18. 4.
glory, and nothing else but an antedated Eternity, is part of the reward as
well as of our duty. And therefore whatsoever is signified by Kingdom in the
appropriate Evangelical sense, is there intended as a recompense. For the
Kingdom of the Gospel is a congregation and society of Christ's poor, of his
little ones: they are the Communion of Saints, and their present entertainment
is knowledge of the truth, remission of sins, the gift of the Holy Ghost, and
what else in Scripture is signified to be a part or grace or condition of the
Kingdom. For to the Matt. 11. 5.
poor the Gospel is preached: that is, to the poor the Kingdom is promised and
ministered.

7. Secondly, Blessed are they that Mourn; for they shall be comforted. This
duty of Christian mourning is commanded not for it self, but in order to many
good ends. Romans 5. 3.
It is in order to Patience: Tribulation works Patience; and therefore we
glory in (...).
them, (says S. Paul;) and S. James, Jam: 1. 2, 3.
My brethren, count it all joy when ye enter into diverse temptations, Knowing
that the trial of your faith (viz. by afflictions) works Patience. 2. It is
in order to Repentance: 2 Cor. (...), 10.
Godly sorrow works Repentance. By consequence it is in order to Pardon; for
a contrite heart God will not reject. And after all this it leads to Joy. And
therefore S. (...). 4. 9. 10.
James Sic (...); and fit (...) de (...) culpae disciplina (...), S. Ambros.
preached a Homily of Sorrow; Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, that is, in
penitential mourning; for he adds, Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord,
and he shall lift you up. The acts of this duty are; 1. To bewail our own sins.
2. To lament our infirmities, as they are principles of sin, and recessions
from our first state. 3. To weep for our own evils and sad accidents, as they
are issues of the Divine anger. 4. To be sad for the miseries and calamities of
the Church, or of any member of it, and indeed to weep with every one that
weeps; that is, not to rejoice in his evil, but to be compassionate, and
pitiful, and apt to bear another's burden. 5. To avoid all loose and
immoderate laughter, all dissolution of spirit and manners, uncomely jestings,
free revellings, carnivals and balls, which are the perdition of precious
hours, (allowed us for Repentance and possibilities of Heaven) which are the
instruments of infinite vanity, idle talking, impertinency and lust, and very
much below the severity and retiredness of a Christian spirit. Of this Christ
became to us the great example; for S. Basil reports a tradition of him, that
he never laughed, but wept often. And if we mourn with him, we also shall
rejoice in the joys of eternity.

8. Thirdly, Blessed are the Meek; for they shall possess the earth: That is,
the gentle and softer spirits, persons not turbulent or unquiet, not clamorous
or impatient, not over-bold or impudent, not querulous or discontented, not
brawlers or contentious, not nice or curious, but men who submit to God, and
know no choice of fortune or employment or success but what God chooses for
them, having peace at home, because nothing from without does discompose their
spirit. In sum, Meekness is an indifferency to any exterior accident, a
being reconciled to (...) S. (...), in Psalm. 33.
all conditions and instances of Providence, a reducing our selves to such an
evenness and interior satisfaction, that there is the same conformity of
spirit and fortune by complying with my fortune, as if my fortune did comply
with my spirit. And therefore in the order of Beatitudes, Meekness is set
between Mourning and Desire, that it might balance and attemper those actions
by indifferency which by reason of their abode are apt to the transportation of
passion. The reward expressed is a possission of the earth, that is, a (...),
and (...) (...) Pythag. Carm. aur.
possession of all which is excellent here below, to consign him to a future
glory, as Canaan was a type of Heaven. For Meekness is the best cement and
combining of friendships, AEquam (...) in (...); non (...) in bonis (...) li.
Horat (...). l. 2. (...). 3.
it is a great endearment of us to our company. It is an 1 (...). 3. 4.
ornament to have a meek and quiet spirit, a (...). (...).
prevention of quarrels, and pacifier of wrath; it purchases (...). -- ad Euse.
peace, and is it self a quietness of spirit: it is the greatest affront to all
injuries in the world; for it returns them upon the injurious, and makes them
useless, ineffective, and innocent: and is an antidote against all the evil
consequents of anger and adversity, and tramples upon the usurping passions of
the irascible faculty.

9. But the greatest part of this Paisage and Landtschap is Sky: and as a man
in all countries can see more of Heaven than of the earth he dwells on; so also
he may in this Promise. For although the Christian hears the promise of the
inheritance of the Earth, yet he must place his eye and fix his heart upon
Heaven, which by looking downward also upon this Promise, as in a vessel of
limpid water, he may see by reflection, without looking upwards by a direct
intuition. It is Heaven that is designed by this Promise as well as by any of
the rest; though this Grace takes in also the refreshments of the earth by
equivalence and a suppletory (...). But here we have no abiding city, and
therefore no inheritance; this is not our Country, and therefore here cannot
be our portion: unless we choose, as did the Prodigal, to go into a strange
Country, and spend our portion with riotous and beastly living, and forfeit
our Father's blessing. The Devil carrying our Blessed Savior to a high
mountain showed him all the Kingdoms of the world; but, besides that they were
offered upon ill conditions, they were not eligible by him upon any. And
neither are they to be chosen by us for our inheritance and portion
Evangelical: for the Gospel is founded upon better promises, and therefore the
hopes of a Christian ought not to determine upon any thing less than Heaven.
Indeed our Blessed Savior chose to describe this Beatitude in the words of the
Psalmist, so inviting his Disciples to an excellent precept by the insinuation
of those Scriptures which themselves admitted. But as the earth which was
promised to the meek man in David's Psalm was no other earth but the terra
(...), the Land of Canaan; if we shall remember that this Land of promise was
but a transition and an allegory to a greater and more noble, that it was but a
type of Heaven, we shall not see cause to wonder why the Holy Jesus intending
Heaven for the reward of this Grace also, together with the rest, did call it
the inheritance of the earth. For now is revealed to us a new heaven and a new
earth, an habitation made without hands, (...) in the heavens. And he
understands nothing of the excellency of Christian Religion whose affections
dwell below, and are satisfied with a portion of dirt and corruption. If we be
risen with Christ, let us seek those things that are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God. But if a Christian desires to take possession
of this earth in his way as his inheritance or portion, he has reason to fear
it will be his All. We have but one inheritance, one country, and here we are
strangers and Pilgrims. Abraham told Dives that he had enjoyed his good things
here; he had the inheritance of the earth, in the crass material sense; and
therefore he had no other portion but what the Devils have. And when we
remember that Persecution is the lot of the Church, and that Poverty is her
portion, and her quantum is but food and raiment at the best, and that Patience
is her support, and Hope her refreshment, and Self-denial her security, and
Meekness is all her possession and title to a subsistence; it will appear
certain, that as Christ's Kingdom was not of this world, so neither shall his
Saints have their portion in that which is not his Kingdom. They are miserable
if they do not reign with him, and he never reigned here; but if we suffer with
him, we shall also reign with him hereafter. True it is, Christ promised to him
that should lose any interest for his sake the restitution of a hundred fold in
this world. But as the sense of that cannot be literal, for he cannot receive a
hundred Mothers or a hundred Wives; so whatsoever that be, it is to be enjoyed
with persecution. And then such a portion of the Earth as Christ has expressed
in figure, and shall by way of recompense restore us, and such a recompense as
we can enjoy with Persecution, and such an enjoyment as is consistent with our
having lost all our temporals, and such an acquist and purchase of it as is not
destructive of the grace of Meekness; all that we may enter into our accounts
as part of our lot, and the emanation from the holy Promise. But in the foot of
this account we shall not find any great affluence of temporal accruements.
However it be although, when a meek man has earthly possessions, by this Grace
he is taught how to use them and how to part with them; yet if he has them
not, by the virtue here commanded, he is not suffered to use any thing violent
toward the acquiring them, not so much as a violent passion or a stormy
imagination; for then he loses his Meekness, and what ever he gets can be none
of the reward of this Grace. He that sights for temporals (unless by some other
appendent duty he be obliged) loses his title by striving incompetently for the
reward, he cuts off that hand by which alone he can receive it. For unless he
be indeed meek, he has no right to what he calls the inheritance of the earth;
and he that is not content to want the inheritance of the earth when God
requires him, is not meek. So that if this Beatitude be understood in a
temporal sense, it is an offer of a reward upon a condition we shall be without
it, and be content too: For, in every sense of the word, Meekness implies a
just satisfaction of the spirit, and acquiescence in every estate or
contingency whatsoever, though we have no possessions but of a good Conscience,
no bread but that of carefulness, no support but from the Holy Spirit, and a
providence ministering to our natural necessities by an extemporary provision.
And certain it is, the meekest of Christ's servants, the Apostles and the
Primitive Christians, had no other verification of this Promise but this, that
rejoicing in tribulation, and knowing how to want as well as how to abound,
through many tribulations they entered into the Kingdom of Heaven: For that is
the Country in which they are coheirs with Jesus. But if we will certainly
understand what this reward is, we may best know it by understanding the duty;
and this we may best learn from him that gave it in commandment. Learn of me,
for I am meek, (said the Holy Jesus:) and to him was promised that the
uttermost ends of the earth should be his inheritance; and yet he died first,
and went to Heaven before it was verified to him in any sense, but only of
content, and desire, and joy in suffering, and in all variety of accident. And
thus also if we be meek, we may receive the inheritance of the Earth.

10. The acts of this Grace are, 1. To submit to all the instances of Divine
Providence, not repining at any accident which God has chosen for us, and --
Non si (...), and olim Sic (...) -- (...). Hot. lib. 2. (...). 10.
given us as part of our lot, or a punishment of our deserving, or an
instrument of virtue; not envying the gifts, graces, or prosperities of our
neighbors. 2. To pursue the interest and employment of our calling in which we
are placed, not despising the meanness of any work, though never so
disproportionable to our abilities. 3. To correct all malice, wrath,
evil-speaking, and inordinations of anger, whether in respect of the object or
the degree. 4. At no hand to entertain any thoughts of revenge or retaliation
of evil. 5. To be affable and courteous in our deportment toward all persons
of our society and intercourse. 6. Not to censure or reproach the weakness of
our neighbor, but support his burden, cover and cure his infirmities. 7. To
excuse what may be excused, lessening severity, and being gentle in
reprehension. (...) (...). (...). 19. (...).
8. To be patient in afflictions, and thankful under the Cross. 9. To endure
reproof with shame at our selves for deserving (...) quam qui maxim (...). l.
7. c. 10.
it, and thankfulness to the charitable Physician that offers the (...)
remedy. 10. To be modest and fairly-mannered toward our Superiors, obeying,
reverencing, speaking honorably of and Salva (...) quam (...). Comoed.
doing honor to aged persons, and all whom God has set over us, according to
their several capacities. 11. To be ashamed (...) (...).
and very apprehensive of the unworthiness of a crime; at no hand losing our
fear of the invisible God, and our reverence to visible societies, or single
persons. 12. To be humble in our exterior addresses and behavior in Churches
and all Holy places. 13. To be temperate in government, not imperious,
unreasonable, insolent or oppressive; lest we provoke to wrath those whose
interest of person and of Religion we are to defend or promote. 14. To do our
endeavor to expiate any injury we did, by confessing the fact, and offering
satisfaction, and asking forgiveness.

11. Fourthly, Blessed are they that Hunger and thirst after Righteousness; for
they shall be filled. This Grace is the greatest indication of spiritual
health, when our appetite is right, strong, and regular; when we are desirous
of spiritual nourishment, when we long for Manna, and follow Christ for loaves,
not of a low and terrestrial gust, but of that bread which came down from
heaven. Now there are two sorts of holy repast which are the proper objects of
our desires. The bread of Heaven, which is proportioned to our hunger; that is,
all those immediate emanations from Christ's pardon of our sins, and redemption
from our former conversation, holy Laws and Commandments. To this Food there is
also a spiritual Beverage to quench our thirst: and this is the effects of the
Holy Spirit, who first moved upon the waters of Baptism, and afterward became
to us the breath of life, giving us holy inspirations and assistences,
refreshing our wearinesses, cooling our fevers, and allaying all our
intemperate passions, making us holy, humble, resigned and pure, according to
the pattern in the mount, even as our Father is pure. So that the first
Redemption and Pardon of us by Christ's Merits is the Bread of Life, for which
we must hunger; and the refreshments and daily emanations of the Spirit, who is
the spring of comforts and purity, is that drink which we must thirst after: A
being first reconciled to God by Jesus, and a being sanctisied and preserved in
purity by the Holy Spirit, is the adequate object of our desires. Some to
hunger and thirst best fancy the analogy and proportion of the two Sacraments,
the Waters of Baptism, and the Food of the Eucharist; some, the Bread of the
Patin, and the Wine of the Chalice. But it is certain they signify one desire
expressed by the most impatient and necessary of our appetites, hungring and
thirsting. And the object is whatsoever is the principle or the effect, the
beginning, or the way, or the end of righteousness; that is, the Mercies of
God, the Pardon of Jesus, the Graces of the Spirit, a holy life, and a holy
death, and a blessed Eternity.

12. The blessing and reward of this Grace is fullness or satisfaction; which
relates immediately to Heaven, because nothing here below can satisfy us. The
Grace of God is our Viaticum, and entertains us by the way; its nature is to
increase, not to satisfy the appetites: not because the Grace is empty and
unprofitable, as are the things of the world; but because it is excellent, but
yet in order to a greater perfection; it invites the appetite by its present
goodness, but it leaves it unsatisfied, because it is not yet arrived at glory:
and yet the present imperfection, in respect of all the good of this World's
possession, is rest and satisfaction, and is imperfect only in respect of its
own future complement and perfection, and our hunger continues, and our needs
return, because all we have is but an antepast. But the glories of Eternity are
also the proper object of our desires; that is the reward of God's Grace, this
is the crown of righteousness. As Psalm. 17. 15.
for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness; and when I awake up after thy
likeness, I shall be satisfied with it. The acts of this Virtue are multiplied
according to its object; for they are only, 1. to desire, and 2. pray for, and
3. labor for all that which is Righteousness in any sense: 1. For the Pardon
of our sins; 2. for the Graces and Sanctification of the Spirit; 3. for the
advancement of Christ's Kingdom; 4. for the reception of the holy Sacrament,
and all the instruments, ordinances and ministeries of Grace; 5. for the grace
of Perseverance; 6. and finally for the crown of Righteousness.

13. Fisthly, Blessed are the Merciful; for they shall obtain mercy. Mercy is
the greatest mark and token of the (...), elect and predestinate persons in the
world. Put ye on Col. 3. 12.
(my beloved) as the elect of God the bowels of mercy, holy and (...) enim sunt
(...) qui (...) duram and quasi (...) volum; quae quidem (...) cum in (...) in
(...) and bonis amici quasi (...), and (...) apud M. T. (...),
precious. For Mercy is an attribute, in the manifestation of which as all our
happiness consists, so God takes greatest complacency, and delights in it above
all his other Works. He punishes to the third and fourth Generation, but shows
mercy unto thousands. Therefore the Jews say, that Michael (...) with one wing,
and Gabriel with two; meaning, that the pacifying Angel, the Minister of mercy,
(...), but the exterminating Angel, the Messenger of wrath, is slow. And we are
called to our approximation to God by the practice of this Grace: we are made
partakers of the Divine nature by being merciful as our heavenly Father is
merciful. This mercy consists in the affections, and in the effects and
actions. In both which the excellency of this Christian Precept is eminent
above the goodness of the moral precept of the old Philosophers, and the piety
and charity of the Jews by virtue of the Mosaic Law. The Stoic Philosophers
affirm it to be the duty of a wise man to succor and help the necessities of
indigent and miserable persons; but at no hand to pity them, or suffer any
trouble or compassion in our affections: for they intended that a wise person
should be dispassionate, unmoved, and without disturbance in every accident and
object and concernment. But the Blessed Jesus, who came to reconcile us to his
Father, and purchase us an entire possession, did intend to redeem us from sin,
and make our passions obedient and apt to be commanded, even and moderate in
temporal affairs, but high and active in some instances of spiritual
concernment; and in all instances, that the affection go along with the Grace;
that we must be as merciful in our compassion, as compassionate in our
exterior expressions and actions. The Jews by the prescript of their Law were
to be merciful to all their Nation and confederates in Religion; and this their
Mercy was called Justice: He has dispersed abroad and given to the poor, his
righteousness [or Justice] (...) for ever. But the mercies of a Christian are
to extend Gal. 6. 10.
to all: Do good to all men, especially to the household of Faith. And this
diffusion of a Mercy, not only to Brethren, but to Aliens and Enemies, is that
which S. Paul calls goodness, Romans 5 7.
still retaining the old appellative for Judaical mercy, [ (...):] For scarcely
Syrus (...) non (...) (...). s. d (...),
for a (...) man will one die, yet peradventure for a good man some will even
dare to die. So that the Christian Mercy must be a mercy of the whole man, the
heart must be merciful, and the hand operating in the labor of love; and it
must be extended to all persons of all capacities, according as their necessity
requires, and our ability permits, and our endearments and other obligations
dispose of and determine the order.

14. The acts of this Grace are, 1. To pity the miseries of all persons, and
all calamities spiritual or temporal, having a fellow-feeling in their
afflictions. 2. To be afflicted and sad in the public Judgments imminent or
incumbent upon a Church, or State, or Family. 3. To pray to God for remedy for
all afflicted persons. 4. To do all acts of bodily assistence to all miserable
and distressed people, to relieve the Poor, to redeem Captives, to forgive
Debts to disabled persons, to pay Debts for them, to lend them money, to feed
the hungry and clothe the naked, to rescue persons from dangers, to defend and
relieve the oppressed, to comfort widows and fatherless children, to help them
to right that suffer wrong; and, in brief, to do any thing of relief, support,
succor, and comfort. 5. To do all acts of spiritual (...), to counsel the
doubtful, to admonish the erring, to strengthen the weak, to resolve the
scrupulous, to teach the ignorant, and any thing else which may be instrumental
to his Conversion, Perseverance, Restitution and Salvation, or may rescue him
from spiritual dangers, or supply him in any ghostly necessity. The reward of
this Virtue is symbolical to the Virtue it self, the grace and glory differing
in nothing but degrees, and every virtue being a reward to it self. The
merciful shall receive mercy; mercy to help them in time of need; mercy from
God. who will not only give them the great mercies of Pardon and Eternity, but
also dispose the hearts of others to pity and supply their needs as they have
done to others. For the present, there is nothing more noble than to Bona
comparas (...); and (...) in (...) qui in (...).
be beneficial to others, and to lift up the poor (...) of the mire, and rescue
them from misery; it is to do the work of God: and for the future, nothing is a
greater title to a mercy at the Day of Judgment than to have showed mercy to
our necessitous Brother; it being expressed to be the only rule and instance in
which Christ means to judge the world, in their Mercy and Charity, or their
Unmercifulness respectively; I was hungry, and ye Deus est mortali juvare
mortalem, atque haec est ad aeternitatem via. Sen.
fed me, or ye fed me not: and so we stand or fall in the great and eternal
scrutiny. And it was the prayer of Saint Paul, (Onesiphorus showed kindness to
the great Apostle) The Lord show him a mercy in that day. For a cup of charity,
though but full of cold water, shall not lose its reward.

15. Sixthly, Blessed are the Pure (...) heart; for they shall see God. This
purity of heart includes purity of hands. Lord, who shall dwell in thy
Tabernacle? even he that is Psalm. 24, 3, 4.
of clean hands and a pure heart; that is, he that has not given his mind unto
vanity, nor sworn to deceive his Neighbor. It signifies justice of action and
candor of spirit, innocence of manners and sincerity of purpose; it is one of
those great circumstances that consummates Charity: For the end of the
Commandment is Charity out of a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
and of a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned; that is, a heart free from all
carnal affections, not only in the matter of natural impurity, but also
spiritual and immaterial, such as are Heresies, (which are theresore
impurities, because they mingle secular interest or prejudice with persuasions
in Religion) Seditions, hurtful and impious Stratagems, and all those which S.
Paul enumerates to be works or fruits of the flesh. A good Conscience; that is a
Conscience either innocent or penitent, a state of Grace, (...) a not having
prevaricated, or a being restored to our Baptismal purity. Faith unfeigned;
that also is the purity of Sincerity, and excludes Hypocrisy, timorous and
half persuasions, neutrality and indifferency in matters of Salvation. And all
these do integrate the whole duty of Charity. But Purity, as it is a special
Grace, signifies only honesty and uprightness of Soul, without hypocrisy to
God and dissimulation toward men; and then a freedom from all carnal desires,
so as not to be governed or led by them. Chastity is the purity of the body,
Simplicity is the purity of the spirit; both are the Sanctification of the
whole Man, for the entertainment of the Spirit of Purity and the Spirit of
Truth.

16. The acts of this Virtue are, 1. To quit all Lustful thoughts, not to take
delight in them, not to retain them or invite them, but as objects of
displeasure to avert them from us. 2. To resist all lustful desires, and
extinguish them by their proper correctories and remedies. 3. To resuse all
occasions, opportunities and temptations to Impurity; denying to please a
wanton (...), or to use a (...) gesture, or to go into a danger, or to converse
with an improper, unsafe object; hating the garment spotted with the flesh, so
S. Jude calls it; and not to look upon a maid, so Job; not to sit with a woman
that is a singer, so the son of Sirach. 4. To be of a liberal soul, not
mingling with affections of money and inclinations of covetousness, not doing
any act of violence, rapine or injustice. 5. To be ingenuous in our thoughts,
purposes and professions, speaking nothing contrary to our intentions, but
being really what we (...). 6. To give all Plato (...) (...).
our faculties and affections to God, without dividing interests between God
and his enemies, without entertaining of any one crime in society with our
pretenses for God. 7. Not to lie in sin, but instantly to repent of it and
return, purifying our Conscience from dead works, 8. Not to dissemble our faith
or belief when we are required to its confession, pretending a persuasion
complying with those from whom (...) we differ. Lust, Covetousness and
Hypocrisy are the three great enemies of this Grace, they are the motes of our
eyes, and the spots of our Souls. The reward of Purity is the vision
beatifical. If we are pure as God is pure, we shall also see him as he is: When
we awake up after his likeness, we shall (...) hold his presence. To which in
this world we are consigned by freedom from the cares of Covetousness, the
shame of Lust, the fear of discovery, and the stings of an evil Conscience,
which are the portion of the several Impurities here forbidden.

17. Seventhly, Blessed are the Peacemakers; for they shall be called the
children of Jam. 3. 17.
God. The wisdom of God is first pure, and then peaceable; that is the order of
the Beatitudes. As soon as Jesus was born, the Angels sang a Hymn, Glory be to
God on high, and on earth peace, good will toward men; signifying the two
great (...) upon which Christ was dispatched in his Legation from Heaven to
earth. He is the Prince of Peace. Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man ever shall see God. The acts of this Grace are, 1. To
mortisie our Anger, (...), and fiery dispositions, apt to enkindle upon every
slight accident, inadvertency, or misfortune of a friend or servant. 2. Not to
be hasty, rash, provocative, or upbraiding in our language. 3. To live quietly
and serenely in our families and neighbourhoods. 4. Not to backbite, slander,
misreport or undervalue any man, carrying tales, or sowing dissension between
brethren. 5. Not to interest our selves in the quarrels of others by abetting
either part, except where Charity calls us to rescue the oppressed; and then
also to do a work of charity without mixtures of uncharitableness. 6. To avoid
all suits of Law as much as is possible, without intrenching upon any other
collateral obligation toward a third interest, or a necessary support for our
selves, or great convenience for our families; or, if we be engaged in Law, to
pursue our just interests with just means and charitable maintenance. 7. To
endeavor by all means to reconcile disagreeing persons. 8. To endeavor by
affability and fair deportment to win the love of our neighbors. 9. To offer
satisfaction to all whom we have wronged or slandered, and to remit the
offenses of others, and in trials of right to find out the most charitable
expedient to determine it, as by indifferent arbitration, or something like it.
10. To be open, free and ingenuous in reprehensions and fair expostulations
with persons whom we conceive to have wronged us, that no seed of malice or
rancor may be latent in us, and upon the breath of a new displeasure break out
into a flame. 11. To be modest in our arguings, disputings, and demands, not
laying great interest upon trifles. 12. To moderate, balance and temper our
zeal by the rules of Prudence and the allay of Charity, that we quarrel not for
opinions, nor entitle God in our impotent and mistaken fancies, nor lose
Charity for a pretense of an article of Faith. 13. To pray heartily for our
enemies, real or imaginary, always loving and being apt to benefit their
persons, and to cure their faults by charitable remedies. 14. To abstain from
doing all affronts, disgraces, slightings and (...) jearings and mockings of
our neighbor, not giving him appellatives of scorn or irrision. 15. To submit
to all our Superiors in all things, either doing what they command, or
suffering what they impose; at no hand lifting our (...) against those upon
whom the characters of God and the marks of Jesus are imprinted in signal and
eminent authority; such as are principally the King, and then the Bishops, whom
God has set to watch over our Souls. 16. Not to invade the possessions of our
Neighbors, or commence War, but when we are bound by justice and legal trust
to defend the rights of others, or our own in order to our duty. 17. Not to
speak evil of dignities, or undervalue their persons, or publish their faults,
or upbraid the levities of our Governors; knowing that they also are designed
by God, to be converted to us for castigation and amendment of us. 18. Not to
be busy in other men's affairs. And then the peace of God will rest upon us.
Phil. 4. 9.
1 Th (...). 5. 23.
The reward is no less than the adoption and inheritance of sons; for he has
given unto 2 (...) 3. 16.
us power to be called the sons of God; for he is the Father of Peace, and the
Sons of Peace Heb. 13. 20.
are the Sons of God, and theresore have a title to the inheritance of Sons, to
be heirs with God, and coheirs with Christ in the kingdom of Peace, and
essential and neverfailing (...). 8. 17.
charity.

18. Eighthly, Blessed are they which are Persecuted sor righteousness sake; for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. This being the hardest command in the whole
Discipline of Jesus is fortified with a double Blessedness; for it follows
immediately, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you:
meaning, that all Persecution for a cause of Righteousness, though the
affliction be instanced only in reproachful language, shall be a title to the
Blessedness. Any suffering for any good or harmless action is a degree of
Martyrdom. It being the greatest testimony in the world -- (...) est, O (...),
sequi (...) pam. Hor. lib. 3. Od. 25.
of the greatest love, to quit that for God which has possessed our most
natural, regular and orderly affections. It is a preferring God's cause before
our own interest; it is a loving of Virtue without secular ends; it is the
noblest, the most resigned, ingenuous, valiant act in the world, to die for
(...), whom we never have seen; it is the crown of Faith, the confidence of
Hope, and our greatest Charity. The Primitive Churches living under Persecution
commenced many pretty opinions concerning the state and special dignity of
Martyrs, apportioning to them one of the three Coronets which themselves did
knit, and supposed as pendants to the great Crown of righteousness. They made
it suppletory of Baptism, expiatory of sin, satisfactory of public (...); they
placed them in bliss immediately, declared C. (...) de (...), Animas praelio
(...) suppliciis (...) aeternas putant. (...).
them to need no after-Prayer, such as the Devotion of those times used to pour
upon the graves of the faithful: with great prudence they did endeavor to
alleviate this burden, and sweeten the bitter chalice; and they did it by such
doctrines which did only remonstrate this great truth, That since no love was
greater than to lay down our lives, nothing could be so great but God would
indulge to them. And indeed whatsoever they said in this had no inconvenience,
nor would it now, unless men should think mere suffering to be sufficient to
excuse a wicked life, or that they be invited to dishonor an excellent
patience with the mixture of an impure action. There are many who would die for
Christ if they were put to it, and yet will not quit a Lust for him: Non (...)
autem (...), qui (...) non frangatur, eum (...) qui (...) se a (...), vinci a
(...). Cic. de Offic. l. 1.
those are hardly to be esteemed Christ's Martyrs: unless they be dead unto
sin, their dying for an Article or a good action will not pass the great
scrutiny. And it may be boldness of spirit, or sullenness, or an honorable
gallantry of mind, or something that is excellent in civil and political
estimate, moves the person, and endears the suffering; but that love only which
keeps the Commandments will teach us to (...) for love, and from love to pass
to blessedness through the red Sea of blood. And Tertul. de (...).
indeed it is more easy to die for Chastity than to live with it: and many
women have been found, who suffered death under the violence of Tyrants for
defense of their holy vows and purity, who, had they long continued amongst
pleasures, courtships, curiosities, and importunities of men, might perchance
have yielded that to a Lover which they denied to an Executioner. S. Cyprian
observes that our Blessed Lord, in admitting the innocent Babes of Bethlehem
first to die for him, did to all generations of Christendom consign this
Lesson, That only persons holy and innocent were fit to be Christ's Martyrs.
And I remember that the Prince of the Latin Poets, Hos (...), a falso damnati
(...) mortis. (...) sine (...) datae, sine judice, (...) Quaesitor (...); ille
(...) and (...). Virg. (...). 6.
over against the region and seats of Infants, places in the Shades below
persons that suffered death wrongfully; but adds, that this their death was not
enough to place them in such blessed mansions, but the Judge first made inquiry
into their lives, and accordingly designed their station. It is certain that
such dyings or great sufferings are Heroical actions, and of power to make
great compensations, and redemptions of time, and of omissions and
imperfections; but if the Man be unholy, so also are his Athleta non (...) quia
(...) quia (...). cp. 2.
Sufferings: for Heretics have died, and vicious persons have suffered in a
good cause, and a dog's neck may be cut off in sacrifice, and Swine's blood may
(...) the trench about the Altar: but God only accepts the Sacrifice which is
pure and spotless, first seasoned with salt, then seasoned with fire. The true
Martyr must have all the preceding Graces, and then he shall receive all the
Beatitudes.

19. The acts of this Duty are, 1. Boldly to confess the Faith, nobly to
exercise public virtues, not to be ashamed of any thing that is honest, and
rather to quit our goods, our liberty, our health, and life it self, than to
deny what we are bound to affirm, or to omit what we are bound to do, or to
pretend contrary to our present persuasion. 2. To rejoice in Afflictions;
counting it honorable to be conformable to Christ, and to wear the cognizance
of Christianity, whose certain lot it is to suffer the hostility and violence
of enemies visible and invisible. 3. Not to revile our Persecutors, but to bear
the Cross with evenness, tranquillity, patience and charity. 4. To offer our
sufferings to the glory of God, and to join them with the Passions of Christ,
by doing it in love to God, and obedience to his Sanctions, and testimony of
some part of his Religion, and designing it as a part of duty. The reward is
the Kingdom of Heaven; (...)
which can be no other but eternal Salvation, in case the Martyrdom be
consummate: and they also shall be made perfect; so the words of the reward
were read in Clement's time. If it be less, it keeps its proportion: all
suffering persons are the combination of Saints, they make the Church, they are
the people of the Kingdom, and heirs of (...) olim (...) haec (...); (...)
the Covenant. For if they be but Confessors, and confess Christ in prison,
though they never preach upon the rack or under the axe, yet Christ will
confess them before his heavenly Father; and they shall have a portion where
they shall never be persecuted any more.

The PRAYER.
O Blessed Jesus, who art become to us the Fountain of Peace and Sanctity, of
Righteousness and Charity, of Life and perpetual Benediction, imprint in our
spirits these glorious characterisms of Christianity, that we by such excellent
dispositions may be consigned to the infinity of Blessedness which thou came
to reveal, and minister, and exhibit to mankind. Give us great Humility of
spirit; and deny us not, when we beg Sorrow of thee, the mourning and sadness
of true Penitents, that we may imitate thy excellencies, and conform to thy
sufferings. Make us Meek, patient, indifferent, and resigned in all accidents,
changes and issues of Divine Providence. Mortify all inordinate Anger in us,
all Wrath, Strife, Contention, Murmurings, Malice and Envy; and interrupt, and
then blot out all peevish dispositions and morosities, all disturbances and
unevenness of spirit (...) of habit, that may hinder us in our duty. Oh teach
me so to hunger and thirst after the ways of Righteousness, that it may be meat
and drink to me to do thy Father's will. Raise my affections to Heaven and
heavenly things, fix my heart there, and prepare a treasure for me, which I may
receive in the great diffusions and communications of thy glory. And in this
sad interval of infirmity and temptations strengthen my hopes, and (...) my
Faith, by such emissions of light and grace from thy Spirit, that I may relish
those Blessings which thou preparest for thy Saints with so great appetite,
that I may despise the world and all its gilded vanities, and may desire
nothing but the crown of righteousness and the paths that lead thither, (...)
graces of thy Kingdom and the glories of it; that when I have served thee in
holiness and strict obedience, I may reign with thee in the glories of
Eternity: for thou, O Holy Jesus, art our hope, and our life, and glory, our
(...) great reward. Amen.

II.
(...) Jesu, who art infinitely pleased in demonstrations of thy Mercy, and
did descend into a state of misery, suffering persecution and (...), that
thou might give us thy mercy, and reconcile us to thy Father, and make us
partakers of thy Purities; give unto us tender bowels, that we may suffer
together with our calamitous and necessitous Brethren, that we having a
fellow-feeling of their miseries may use all our powers to help them, and ease
our selves of our common sufferings. But do thou, O Holy Jesu, take from us
also all our great calamities, the Carnality of our affections, our
Sensualities and Impurities, that we may first be pure, then peaceable, living
in peace with all men, and preserving the peace which thou have made for us
with our God, that we may never commit a sin which may interrupt so blessed an
atonement. Let neither hope nor fear, tribulation nor anguish, pleasure nor
pain make us to relinquish our interest in thee, and our portion of the
everlasting Covenant. But give us hearts constant, bold and valiant, to confess
thee before all the world in the midst of all disadvantages and contradictory
circumstances, choosing rather to beg, or to be disgraced, or (...), or to die,
than quit a holy Conscience, or renounce an Article of Christianity: that we
either in act, when thou shall call us, or always in preparation of mind,
suffering with thee, may also reign with thee in the Church Triumphant, O Holy
and most merciful Savior Jesu.

Amen.
DISCOURSE X. A Discourse upon that part of the Decalogue which the Holy JESUS
adopted into the Institution and obligation of Christianity.
1. WHen the Holy Jesus had described the Characterisms of Christianity in
these Eight Graces and Beatitudes, he adds his Injunctions, that in these
Virtues they should be eminent and exemplar, that they might adorn the Doctrine
of God; for he intended that the Gospel should be as Leven in a lump of dough,
to season the whole mass, and that Christians should be the instruments of
communicating the excellency and reputation of this holy Institution to all the
world. Therefore Christ calls them Salt, and Light, and the societies of
Christians a City set upon a hill, and a (...) set in a candlestick, whose
office and energy is to illuminate all the vicinage; which is also expressed in
these preceptive words, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven: which I consider
not only (...) (...). Mar. (...) S. Paulus, (...), Phil. 2. 15.
as a Circumstance of other parts, but as a precise Duty it self, and one of
the Sanctions of Christianity, which has so confederated the Souls of the
Disciples of the Institution, that it has in some proportion obliged every man
to take care of his Brother's Soul. And since Reverence to God and Charity to
our Brother are the two (...) Ends which the best Laws can have, this precept
of exemplary living is enjoined in order to them both: We must shine as lights
in the world, that God may be glorified, and our Brother edified; that the
excellency of the act may (...) the reputation of the Religion, and invite men
to confess God according to the sanctions of so holy an Institution. And if we
be curious that vanity do not mingle in the intention, and that the intention
do not spoil the action, and that we suffer not our lights to shine that men
may magnify us, and not glorify God, this duty is soon performed by way of
adherence to our other actions, and has no other difficulty in it, but that it
will require our prudence and care to preserve the simplicity of our purposes
and humility of our spirit in the midst of that excellent reputation which will
certainly be consequent to a holy and exemplary life.

2. But since the Holy Jesus had set us up to be lights in the world, he took
care we should not be stars of the least magnitude, but eminent, and such as
might by their great emissions of light give evidence of their being
immediately derivative from the Sun of Righteousness. He was now giving his
Law, and meant to retain so much of Moses, as Moses had of natural and
essential Justice and Charity, and superadd many degrees of his own; that as
far as Moses was exceeded by Christ in the capacity of a Lawgiver, so far
Christianity might be more excellent and holy than the Mosaical Sanctions. And
therefore, as a Preface to the Christian Law, the Holy Jesus declares, that
unless our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
that is, of the stricter sects of the Mosaical Institution, we shall not enter
into the Kingdom of heaven. Which not only relates to the prevaricating
Practices of the Pharisees, but even to their Doctrines and Commentaries upon
the Law of Moses, as appears evidently in the following instances. For if all
the excellency of Christianity had consisted in the mere command of Sincerity
and prohibition of Hypocrisy, it had nothing in it proportionable to those
excellent promises and clearest revelations of Eternity there expressed, nor of
a fit employment for the designation of a special and a new Lawgiver, whose
Laws were to last forever, and were established upon foundations stronger than
the pillars of Heaven and Earth.

3. But S. Paul, calling the Law of Moses a Law of Works, did well insinuate
what the Romans 3. 27.
Doctrine of the Jews was concerning the degrees and obligations of Justice:
for besides that it was a Law of Works in opposition to the Law of Faith, (and
so the sense of it is Vide Considerat. of Christ's first Preaching, ^. 3
formerly explicated) it is also a Law of Works in opposition to the Law of the
Spirit; and it is understood to be such a Law which required the exterior
Obedience; such a Law according to which S. Paul so lived that no man could
reprove him, that is, the Judges could not tax him with prevarication; such a
Law which, being in very many degrees carnal and material, did not with much
severity exact the intention and purposes spiritual. But the Gospel is the Law
of the spirit. If they failed in the exterior work, it was accounted to them
for sin; but to Christians nothing becomes a sin, but a failing and
prevaricating spirit. For the outward act is such an emanation of the
interior, that it enters into the account for the relation sake, and for its
parent. When God has put a duty into our hands, if our spirits be right, the
work will certainly follow; but the following work receives its acceptance,
not from the value the Christian Law has precisely put upon it, but because
the spirit from whence it came has observed its rule: the Law of Charity is
acted and expressed in works, but has its estimate from the spirit. Which
discourse is to be understood in a limited and qualified signification. For
then also God required the Heart, and interdicted the very concupiscences of
our irregular passions, at least in some instances; but because much of their
Law consisted in the exterior, and the Law appointed not nor yet intimated any
penalty to evil thoughts, and because the expiation of such interior
irregularities was easy, implicit, and involved in their daily Sacrifices
without special trouble, therefore the old Law was a Law of Works, that is,
especially and in its first intention. But this being less perfect, the Holy
Jesus inverted the order. 1. For very little of Christianity stands upon the
outward action; ( Christ having appointed but two Sacraments immediately:) and
2. a greater restraint is laid upon the passions, desires, and first motions of
the spirit, than under the severity of Moses: and 3. they are threatened with
the same curses of a sad eternity with the acts proceeding from them: and 4.
because the obedience of the spirit does in many things excuse the want of the
outward act, God always requiring at our hands what he has put in our power,
(...) Amphiar. Apud. AEschyl.
and no more: and 5. lastly, because the spirit is the principle of all actions
moral and spiritual, and certainly productive of them when they are not impeded
from without; therefore the Holy Jesus has secured the fountain, as knowing
that the current must needs be healthful and pure, if it proceeds through pure
channels from a limpid and unpolluted principle.

4. And certainly it is much for the glory of God, to worship him with a
Religion whose very design looks upon God as the searcher of our hearts and
Lord of our spirits, who judges the purposes as a God, and does not only take
his estimate from the outward action as a man. And it is also a great
reputation to the Institution it self, that it purifies the Soul, and secures
the secret cogitations of the mind: It punishes Covetouiness as it judges
Rapine; it condemns a Sacrilegious heart as soon as an Irreligious hand; it
detests hating of our Brother by the same aversation which it expresses against
doing him (...). He that curses in his heart shall die the death of an
explicit and bold Blasphemer; murmur and repining Jose hus (...) Polybium,
(...) dixit ob cogitatum (...) non (...) nisi ob (...): (...)
is against the Laws of Christianity: but either by the remissness of Moses's
Law, or the gentler execution of it, or the innovating or lessening glosses of
the Pharisees, he was esteemed innocent whose actions were according to the
letter, not whose spirit was conformed to the intention and more secret
Sanctity of the Law. So that our Righteousness must therefore exceed the
Pharisaical standard, because our spirits must be pure as our hands, and the
heart as regular as the action, our purposes must be sanctified, and our
thoughts holy; we must love our Neighbor as well as relieve him, and choose
Justice with adhesion of the mind, as well as carry her upon the palms of our
hands. And therefore the Prophets, foretelling the Kingdom of the Gospel and
the state of this Religion, call it a writing the Laws of God in our hearts.
And S. Paul distinguishes the Gospel from the Law by this only measure, We are
all Israelites, of the seed of Abraham, heirs of the same inheritance; only now
we are not to be accounted Jews for the outward consormity to the Law, but for
the inward consent and obedience to those purities which were secretly
signified by the types of Moses. They of the Law were Jews outwardly, their
Circumcision was outward in the flesh, their praise Romans 2. 28, 29
was of men: We are Jews inwardly, our Circumcision is that of the heart, in
the spirit, and not in the letter, and our praise is of God; that is, we are
not judged by the outward act, but by the mind and the intention; and though
the acts must sollow in all instances where we can and where they are required,
yet it is the less principal, and rather significative, than by its own
strength and energy operative, and accepted.

5. S. Clemens of Alexandria says, the Pharisees righteousness (...) --
Optimus est qui (...).
consisted in the not doing evil, and that Christ superadded this also, that we
must do the contrary good, and so exceed the Pharisaical measure. They would
not wrong a Jew, nor many times relieve him; they reckoned their innocence by
not giving offense, by walking blameless, by not being accused before the
Judges sitting in the gates of their Cities. But the balance in which the Judge
of quick and dead weighs Christians is, not only the avoiding evil, but doing
good; the following peace with all men and holiness; the proceeding from faith
to faith; the adding virtue to virtue; the persevering in all holy conversation
and godliness. And therefore S. Paul, commending the grace of universal
Charity, says, that Romans 13. 10.
Love works no ill to his neighbor, therefore Love is the fulfilling of the
Law; implying, that the prime intention of the Law was, that every man's right
be secured, that no man receive wrong. And indeed all the Decalogue consisting
of Prohibitions rather than Precepts, saving that each Table has one positive
Commandment, does not obscurely verify the doctrine of S. Clement's
interpretation. Now because the Christian Charity abstains from doing all
injury, therefore it is the fulfilling of the Law: but because it is also
patient and liberal, that it suffers long and is kind; therefore the Charity
commanded in Christ's Law exceeds that Charity which the Scribes and Pharisees
reckoned as part of their Righteousness. But Jesus himself does with great care
in the particulars instance in what he would have the Disciples to be eminent
above the most strict Sect of the Jewish Religion: 1. in practicing the moral
Precepts of the Decalogue with a stricter interpretation; 2. and in quitting
the Permissions and licenses which for the hardness of their heart Moses gave
them as indulgences to their persons, and securities against the contempt of
too severe Laws.

6. The severity of exposition was added but to three Commandments, and in
three indulgences the permission was taken away. But because our great
Lawgiver repeated also other parts of the Decalogue in his Luke 18. 20.
after-Sermons, I will represent in this (...) 10. 19.
(...). 19. 18.
Romans 13. 9.
one view all that he made to be Christian by adoption.

7. The first Commandment Christ often repeated and enforced, as being the
basis of I. COMMAND.
all Religion, and the first endearment of all that relation whereby we are
capable of being the sons of God, as being the great Commandment of the Law,
and comprehensive of all that duty we owe to God in the relations of the virtue
of Religion: (...) 22 37.
Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord; and, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with Mark 12. 30.
Luke 10. 27.
all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all
thy strength. This is the first Commandment, that is, this comprehends all that
which is moral and eternal in the first Table of the (...).

8. The Duties of this Commandment are, 1. To worship God alone with actions
proper to him, and 2. to love, and 3. obey him with all our faculties. 1.
Concerning Worship. The actions proper to the Honor of God are, to offer
Sacrifice, Incense and Oblations, making Vows to him, Swearing by his Name as
the instrument of secret testimony, confessing his incommunicable Attributes,
and Praying to him for those Graces which are essentially annexed to his
dispensation, as Remission of sins, Gifts of the Spirit, and the grace of
(...), and Life eternal. Other acts of Religion, such as are uncovering the
head, (...) the knee, falling upon our face, stooping to the ground, reciting
praises, are by the consent of Nations used as testimonies of civil or
religious veneration, and do not always pass for confessions of a Divinity, and
therefore may be without sin used to Angels, or Kings, or Governors, or to
persons in any sense more excellent than our selves, provided they be intended
to express an excellency no greater than is proper to their dignities and
persons; not in any sense given to an Idol, or false Gods. But the first sort
are such which all the world has consented to be actions of Divine and
incommunicable Adoration, and such which God also in several Religions has
reserved as his own appropriate regalities, and are Idolatry if given to any
Angel or man.

9. The next Duties are, 2. Love, 3. and Obedience; but they are united in the
Gospel, This is Love, that we keep his Commandments: and since we are for God's
sake bound also to love others, this Love is appropriate to God by the
extension of parts, and the intension of degrees. The Extension signifies that
we must serve God with all our Faculties; for all division of parts is
hypocrisy, and a direct prevarication: our Heart must think what our Tongue
speaks, our Hands act what we promise or purpose; and God's enemies must have
no share so much as in appearance or dissimulation. Now no Creature can
challenge this; and if we do Justice to our neighbors, though unwillingly, we
have done him no injury; for in that case he only who sees the irregularity of
our thoughts is the person injured. And when we swear to him, our heart must
swear as well as our tongue, and our hands must pay what our lips have
promised; or else we provoke him with an imperfect sacrifice: we love him not
with all our mind, with all our strength, and all our faculties.

10. But the difficulty and question of this Commandment lies in the Intension.
For it is not enough to serve God with every Capacity, Passion, and Faculty;
but it must be every degree of every Faculty, all the latitude of our Will, all
the whole intension of our Passions, all the possibility and energy of our
Senses and our Understanding: which because it is to be understood according to
that moderate sentence and account which God requires of us set in the midst of
such a condition, so attended, and depressed and prejudiced, the full sense of
it I shall express in several Propositions.

11. First, The Intension of the Love to which we are obliged requires not the
Degree which is absolutely the greatest and simply the most perfect. For there
are degrees of Grace, every one of which is pleasing to God, and is a state of
Reconciliation and atonement: and he that breaks not the bruised reed, nor
quenches the smoking slax, loves to cherish those endeavors which, beginning
from small principles, pass through the variety of degrees, and give
demonstration that though it be our duty to contend for the best, yet this
contention is with an enemy, and that enemy makes an abatement, and that
abatement being an imperfection rather than a sin is actually consistent with
the state of Grace, the endeavor being in our power, and not the success; the
perfection is that which shall be our reward, and therefore is not our present
duty. And indeed if to do the best action, and to love God as we shall do in
Heaven, were a present obligation, it would have been clearly taught us what is
simply the best action; whereas now that which is of it self better, in certain
circumstances is less perfect, and sometimes not lawful; and concerning those
circumstances we have no rules, nor any guide but prudence and probable
inducements: so that it is certain, in our best endeavors we should only
increase our scruples in stead of doing actions of the highest perfections, we
should crect a tyranny over our Consciences, and no augmentation of any thing
but the trouble. And therefore in the Law of Moses, when this Commandment was
given in the same words, yet that the sense of it might be clear, the analogy
of the Law declared that their duty had a latitude, and that God was not so
strict a task-master, but that he left many instances of Piety to the voluntary
Devotion of his servants, that they might receive the reward of
Free-will-offerings. But if these words had obliged them to the greatest
degree, that is, to all the degrees of our capacities in every instance, every
act of Religion had been duty and necessity.

12. And thus also it was in the Gospel. Ananias and Sapphira were killed by
sentence from Heaven for not performing what was in their power at first not to
have promised; but because they brought an obligation upon themselves which God
brought not, and then prevaricated, they paid the forfeiture of their lives. S.
Paul took no 2 Cor. 11. 7, 8.
wages of the Corinthian Churches, but wrought night and day with his own hand;
but himself says he had power to do otherwise. There was laid upon him a
necessity to preach, but no necessity to preach without wages and support.
There is a good and a better in Virginity and Marriage; and yet there is no
command in either, but that we abstain from sin: we are left to our own
election for the particular, having no necessity, but power in our will. David
prayed seven times a day, and Daniel prayed three times; 1 Cor. 7. 37.
and both were beloved of God. The Christian masters were not bound to manumit
their slaves, and yet were commended if they did so. Sometimes the Christians
fled in Persecution; S. Paul did so, and S. Peter did so, and S. Cyprian did
so, and S. Athanasius, and many more: But time was, when some of these also
chose to suffer death rather than to fly. And if to fly be a permission, and no
duty, there is certainly a difference of degrees in the choice; to fly is not
so great a suffering as to die, and yet a man may innocently choose the easier.
And our Blessed Lord himself, who never failed of any degree of his
obligations, yet at some time prayed with more zeal and servour than at other
times, as a little before his Passion. Since then at all times he did not do
actions of that degree which is absolutely the greatest; it is evident that
God's goodness is so great, as to be content with such a Love which parts no
share between him and sin; and leaves all the rest under such a liberty, as is
only encouraged by those extraordinary rewards and crowns proportioned to
heroical endeavors. It was a pretty Histor. (...).
Question which was moved in the Solitudes of Nitria concerning two Religious
Brothers; the one gave all his goods to the poor at once, the other kept the
inheritance and gave all the revenue. None of all the Fathers knew which was
absolutely the better, at once to renounce all, or by repetition of charitable
acts to divide it into portions: one act of Charity in an heroical degree, or
an habitual Charity in the degree of Virtue. This instance is probation enough,
that the opinion of such a necessity of doing the best action simply and
indefinitely is impossible to be safely acted, because it is impossible to be
understood. Two talents shall be rewarded, and so shall five, both in their
proportions: He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, but he shall reap:
Every man as he purposes in his heart, so let him give. The best action shall
have the best reward; and though he is the happiest who rises highest, yet he
is not sasest that enters into the state of disproportion to his person. I find
in the Lives of the later reputed (...). Epict. (...). 75.
Saints, that S. Teresa a Jesu made a vow to do every thing which she should
judge to be the best. I will not judge the person, nor censure the action,
because possibly her intention and desires were of greatest Sanctity; but
whosoever considers the story of her Life, and the strange repugnancies in the
life of man to such undertakings, must needs fear to imitate an action of such
danger and singularity. The advice which in this case is safest to be followed
is, That we employ our greatest industry that we fall not into sin and actions
of forbidden nature; and then strive by parts and steps, and with much
wariness, in attempering our zeal, to superadd degrees of eminency, and
observation of the more perfect instances of Sanctity; that doing some
excellencies which God has not commanded, he may be the rather moved to pardon
our prevaricating so many parts of our necessary duty. If Love transport us and
carry us to actions sublime and heroical, let us follow so good a guide, and
pass on with diligence, and zeal, and prudence, as far as Love will carry us:
but let us not be carried to actions of great eminency (...)
and strictness and unequal severities by scruple and pretense of duty; lest we
charge our miscarriages upon God, and call the yoke of the Gospel
insupportable, and Sophoc, (...).
Christ a hard Task-master. But we shall pass from Virtue to Virtue with more
fafety, if a Spiritual guide take us by the hand; only remembering, that if the
Angels themselves and the beatisied Souls do now and shall hereafter differ in
degrees of love and glory, it is impossible the state of imperfection should be
confined to the highest Love, and the greatest degree, and such as admits no
variety, no increment or difference of parts and stations.

13. Secondly, Our Love to God consists not in any one determinate Degree, but
has such a latitude as best agrees with the condition of men, who are of
variable natures, different affectious and capacities, changeable abilities,
and which receive their heightnings and declensions according to a thousand
accidents of mortality. For when a Law is regularly prescribed to perions whose
varieties and different constitutions cannot be regular or uniform, it is
certain (...) gives a great latitude of perfermance, and binds not to just
atoms and points. The Laws of God are like universal objects received into the
Faculty partly by choice, partly by nature; but the variety of perfection is by
the variety of the instruments, and disposition of the Recipient, and are
excelled by each other in several senses, and by themselves at several times.
And so is the practice of our Obedience, and the entertainments of the Divine
Commandments: For some are of malleable natures, others are morese; some are of
healthful and temperate constitutions, others are lustful, full of fancy, full
of appetite; some have excellent leisure and opportunities of retirement,
others are busy in an active life, and cannot with advantages attend to the
choice of the better part; some are peaceable and timorous, and some are in all
instances serene, others are of tumultuous and unquiet spirits: and these
become opportunities of Temptation on one side, and on the other occasions of a
Virtue: But every change of faculty and variety of circumstance has influence
upon Morality; and therefore their duties are personally altered, and increase
in obligation, or are slackned by necessities, according to the infinite
alteration of exterior accidents and interior possibilities.

14. Thirdly, Our Love to God must be totally exclusive of any affection to
sin, and engage us upon a great, assiduous and laborious care to resist all
Temptations, to subdue sin, to acquire the habits of Virtues, and live holily;
as it is already expressed in the Discourse of Repentance. We must prefer God
as the object of our hopes, we must choose to obey him rather than man, to
please him rather than satisfy our selves, and we must do violence to our
strongest Passions when they once contest against a Divine Commandment. If our
Passions are thus regulated, let them be fixed upon any lawful object
whatsoever, if at the same time we prefer Heaven and heavenly things, that is,
would rather choose to lose our temporal love than our eternal hopes, (which we
can best discern by our refusing to sin upon the solicitation or engagement of
the temporal object;) then, although we feel the transportation of a sensual
love toward a Wife, or Child, or Friend, actually more pungent and sensible
than Passions of Religion are, they are less perfect, but they are not
criminal. Our love to God requires that we do his Commandments, and that we do
not sin; but in other things we are permitted in the condition of our nature to
be more sensitively moved by visible than by invisible and spiritual objects.
Only this, we must ever have a disposition and a mind prepared to quit our
sensitive and pleasant objects, rather than quit a Grace, or commit a sin.
Every act of sin is against the Love of God, and every man does many single
actions of hostility and provocation against him; but the state of the Love of
God is that which we actually call the state of Grace. When Christ reigns in
us, and sin does not reign, but the Spirit is quickened, and the Lusts are
mortified; when we are habitually virtuous, and do acts of Piety, Temperance
and Justice frequently, easily, cheerfully, and with a successive, constant,
moral and humane industry, according to the talent which God has entrusted to
us in the banks of Nature and Grace; then we are in the love of God, then we
love him with all our heart. But if Sin grows upon us, and is committed more
frequently, or gets a victory with less difficulty, or is obeyed more readily,
or entertained with a freer complacency; then we love not God as he requires,
we divide between him and sin, and God is not the Lord of all our faculties.
But the instances 1 King. 14. 8.
of Scripture are the best exposition of this Commandment: For David followed 2
King. 23. 25.
God with all his heart, to do that which was right in his eyes; and Josiah
turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his
might. Both these Kings did it; and yet there was some imperfection in David,
and more violent recessions: for so says the Scripture of Josiah, Like unto
him was there no King before him; David was not so exact as he, and yet he
followed God with all his heart. From which these two Corollaries are certainly
deducible: That to love God with all our heart admits variety of degrees, and
the lower degree is yet a Love with all our heart; and yet to love God requires
a holy life, a diligent walking in the Commandments, either according to the
sense of innocence or of penitence, either by first or second counsels, by the
spirit of Regeneration or the spirit of Renovation and restitution. The sum is
this, The sense of this Precept is such as may be reconciled with the
Infirmities of our Nature, but not with a Vice in our Manners; with the
recession of single acts seldom (...), and always disputed against, and long
fought with, but not with an habitual aversation, or a ready obedience to sin,
or an easy victory.

15. This Commandment, being the sum of the First Table, had in Moses's Law
particular instances which Christ did not insert into his Institution; and he
added no other particular, but that which we call the Third Commandment,
concerning Veneration and reverence to the Name of God. The other two, viz.
concerning Images and the Sabbath, have some special considerations.

16. The Jews receive daily offense against the (...) of some Churches, who,
(...). COM. in the recitation of the Decalogue, omit the Second Commandment, as
supposing it to be a part of the first, according (...) (...) de Gigant. Vido
Exodus 34. 13. Deuteronomy. 4. 16. and 7. 5, Numb. 33. 52.
as we account them; and their offense rises higher, because they observe that
in the New Testament, where the Decalogue is six times repeated in special
recitation and in summaries, there is no word prohibiting the making,
retaining, or respect of Images. Concerning which things Christians consider,
that God for bad to the Jews (...) very having and making Images and
Representments, not only of the true God, or of false and imaginary Deities,
but of visible creatures; which because it was but of temporary reason, and
relative consideration of their aptness to Superstition (...) and Eeclesia and.
November. celebrat (...) and (...), qui, (...), quam Gentilibus (...) (...) (...)
(...). Sic. (...).
and their conversing with idolatrous Nations, was a command proper to the
Nation, part of their Govenant, not of essential, indispensable and eternal
reason, not of that which we usually call the Law of Nature. Of which also God
gave testimony, because himself commanded the signs and representment of
Seraphim to be set upon the Mercy-(...), toward which the Priest and the people
made their addresses in their religious Adorations; and of the Brazen Serpent,
to which they looked when they called to God for help against the sting of the
venomous Snakes. These instances tell us, that to make Pictures or Statues of
creatures is not against a natural reason, and that they may have uses which
are profitable, as well as be abused to danger and Superstition. Now although
the nature of that people was apt to the abuse, and their intercourse with the
Nations in their confines was too great an invitation to entertain the danger;
yet Christianity has so far removed that danger by the analogy and design of
the Religion, by clear Doctrines, Revelations, and infinite treasures of
wisdom, and demonstrations of the Spirit, that our Blessed Lawgiver thought it
not necessary to remove us from Superstition by a prohibition of the use of
Images and Pictures; and therefore left us to the sense of the great
Commandment, and the dictates of right Reason, to take care that we do not
dishonor the invisible God with visible representations of what we never saw
nor cannot understand, (...) yet convey any of God's incommunicable Worship in
the forenamed instances to any thing but himself. And for the matter of Images
we have no other Rule left us in the New Testament; the rules of Reason and
Nature, and the other parts of the Institution, are abundantly sufficient for
our security. And possibly S. Paul might relate to this, when he affirmed
concerning the Fifth, that it was the first Commandment with promise. For in
the Second Commandment to the Jews, as there was a great threatening, so also a
greater promise of showing mercy to a thousand generations. But because the
body of this Commandment was not transcribed into the Christian Law, the first
of the Decalogue which we retain, and in which a promise is inserted, is the
Fifth Commandment. And therefore the wisdom of the Church was remarkable in the
variety of sentences concerning the permission of Images. At first, when they
were blended in the danger and impure mixtures of Gentilism, and men were newly
recovered from the snare, and had the relics of a long custom to
superstitious and false worshippings, they endured no Images, but merely civil:
but as the danger ceased, and Christianity prevailed, they found that Pictures
had a natural use of good concernment, to move less-knowing people by the
representment and declaration of a Story; and then they, knowing themselves
permitted to the liberties of Christianity and the restraints of nature and
reason, and not being still weak under prejudice and childish dangers, but
fortified by the excellency of a wise Religion, took them into lawful uses,
doing honor to Saints as unto the absent Emperors, according to the custom of
the Empire; they erected Statues to their honor, and transcribed a history,
and sometimes a precept, into a table, by figures making more lasting
impressions than by words and sentences. While the Church stood within these
limits, she had natural reason for her warrant, and the custom of the several
Countries, and no precept of Christ to countermand it: They who went farther
were unreasonable, and according to the degree of that excess were
Superstitious.

17. The Duties of this Commandment are learned by the (...). Philo de (...).
intents of it: For it was directed against the false Religion of the Nations,
who believed the Images of their Gods to be Prioribus 170. (...) Templa quidem
alificabant [Romani,] Simulacrum (...) per deteriorum (...).
filled with the Deity; and it was also a caution to prevent our low
imaginations of God, lest we should come to think God to be like Man. And thus
far there was indispensable and eternal reason in the Precept: and this was
never lessened in any (...) Strab. l. 16.
thing by the Holy Jesus, and obliges us Christians to make our addresses and
worshippings to no God but the God of the Christians, that is, of all the
world; and not to do this in or before an Image of him, because he cannot be
represented. For the Images of Christ and his Saints, they come not into (...).
(...).
either of the two considerations, and we are to understand our duty by the
proportions of our reverence to God, expressed in the great Commandment. Our
Fathers in Christianity, as I observed now, made no scruple of using the Images
and Pictures of their Princes and Learned men; which the Jews understood to be
forbidden to them in the Commandment. Then they admitted even in the Utensils
of the Church some coelatures and engravings: Such was that Tertullian speaks
of, The good Shepherd in the (...). Afterward they admitted Pictures, but not
before the time of Constantine; for in the Council of Eliberis they were
forbidden. And in succession of time the scruples lessened with the danger, and
all the way they signified their belief to be, that this Commandment was only
so far retained by Christ as it relied upon natural reason, or was a particular
instance of the great Commandment: that is, Images were forbidden where they
did dishonor God, or lessen his reputation, or estrange our duties, or became
Idols, or the direct matter of superstitious observances, charms, or senseless
confidences; but they were permitted to represent the Humanity of Christ, to
remember Saints and Martyrs, to recount a story, to imprint a memory, to do
honor and reputation to absent persons, and to be the instruments of a
relative civility and esteem. But in this particular infinite care is to be
taken of Scandal and danger, of a forward and zealous ignorance, or of a
mistaking and peevish confidence; and where a Society has such persons in it,
the little good of Images must not be violently retained with the greater
danger and certain offense of such persons of whom consideration is to be had
in the cure of Souls. I only add this, that the first Christians made no
scruple of saluting the Statues of their Princes, and were confident it made no
intrenchment upon the natural prohibition contained in this Commandment;
because they had observed, that exterior inclinations and addresses of the
body, though in the lowest manner, were not proper to God, but in Scripture
found also to be communicated to Creatures, Genesis 48. 12.
to Kings, to Prophets, to Genesis 23. 12. and 27, 29, and 42. 6.
Parents, to Religious persons: and because they found it to be death to do
affront to the Pictures and Statues of their Emperors, they concluded in
reason, (which they also 1 Samuel 20. 41.
1 King. 1, 16.
saw verified by the practice and opinion of all the world) that the respect
they did at the Emperor's Statue was accepted as a veneration to his person.
But these things are but sparingly to be drawn into Religion, because the
customs of this world are altered, and their opinions new; and many, who have
not weak understandings, have weak Consciences; and the necessity for the
entertainment of them is not so great as the offense is or may be.

18. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. This our Blessed
Savior III. COM.
repeating expresses it thus, It has been said to them of old Apud Romanos
sancitum est, ut si per Deum (...) quis (...), ad Deum ipsum (...), quem (...)
esse (...) Majestatis vindicem (...). L. (...), C. de rebus (...). and (...).
Sinper (...) quis (...) cum (...) elogio, (...). Si duo (...), Sect. fin. de
(...).
time, [ Thou shall not for swear thy self;] to which Christ adds out of Number.
30. 2. But thou shall perform thy Oaths unto the Lord. The meaning of the one
we are taught by the other. We must not invocate the Name of God in any promise
in vain, that is, with a Lie: which happens either out of levity, that we
change our purpose, which at first we really intended; Lysandir dixit (...) uti
posse pro suo (...). Plutarch. in Lysand. (...) in (...) ait, (...) usos esse
juramento (...).
or when our intention at that instant was fallacious, and contradictory to the
undertaking. This is to take the Name of God, that is, to use it, to take it
into our mouths, for vanity; that is, according to the perpetual style of
Scripture, for a Lie. Every one has spoken vanity to his neighbor, that is,
he has lied unto him; for Psalm. 12. 2.
so it follows, with flattering lips, and with a double heart: and swearing
deceitfully is by Psalm. 24. 4.
the Psalmist called lifting up his soul unto vanity. And Philo the Jew, who
well understood (...) Philo.
the Law and the language of his Nation, renders the sense of this Commandment
to be, to call God to witness to a Lie. And this is to be understood only in
Promises, for so Christ explains it by the appendix out of the Law, Thou shall
perform thy Oaths: For lying in Judgment, which is also with an Oath, or taking
God's Name for witness, is forbidden in the Ninth Commandment. To this Christ
added a farther restraint. For whereas by the Natural Law it was not unlawful
to swear by any Oath that implied not Idolatry, (...) the belief of a false
God, (I say) any grave and prudent Oath, when they spoke a grave truth; and
whereas it was lawful for the (...) in ordinary intercourse to swear by God, so
they did not swear to a Lie, (to which also swearing to an impertinency might
be reduced by a proportion of reason, and was so accounted of in the practice
of the Jews) but else and in other cases they used to swear by God, or by a
Creature respectively; (for, they that swear by him shall be commended, Psalm.
63. 11.
says the Psalmist; and swearing to the Lord of Hosts is called speaking the
language of Canaan:) 1 Samuel 20. 17. (...). 19. 18.
Most of this was rescinded; Christ forbad all swearing, not only swearing to a
Lie, but also swearing to a truth in common affairs; not only swearing commonly
by the Name of God, but swearing commonly by Heaven, and by the Earth, by our
Head, (...).
or by any other Oath: only let our speech be yea, or nay, that is, plainly
affirming or denying. In these, I say, Christ corrected the license and
vanities of the Jews and Gentiles. For as the Jews accounted it Religion to
name God, and therefore would not swear by him but in the more solemn occasions
of their life; but in trifles they would swear by their Fathers, or the Light
of Heaven, or the Ground they trod on: so the Greeks were also careful not to
swear by the Gods lightly, much less fallaciously; but they would swear by any
thing about them or near them, upon an occasion as vain Mart. l. 11. ep. 95.
as their Oath. But because these Oaths are either indirectly to be referred to
God, Ecco negat, (...) Tonantis. Non (...), jura, (...), per (...), (...) est,
per (...). Vide Harmenopulum in (...). l. 5. c. 27. and Scalig. de Emend. temp.
in append. libror. (...) Interp. in Hom. (...). lib. 6. hist. cap. 4.
(and Christ instances in diverse) or else they are but a vain testimony, or
else they give a Divine honor to a Creature by making it a Judge of truth and
discerner of spirits; therefore Christ seems to forbid all forms of Swearing
whatsoever. In pursuance of which law, Basilides, being converted at the
prayers of Potamiaena a Virgin-Martyr, and required by his fellow soldiers to
swear upon some occasion then happening, answered, it was not lawful for him to
swear, for he was a Christian; and many of the Fathers have followed the words
of Christ in so severe a sense, that their words seem to admit no exception.

19. But here a grain of salt must be taken, lest the letter destroy the
spirit. First, it is certain the Holy Jesus forbad a Vide Ecclus. 23. 9, 11,
13. Dominus and Jacobus ideo prohibuer (...) andum, non ut illud prorsus e
rebus humanis (...), sed quia (...) a (...) non facile jurando. S. August. ser.
28. de verbis Apost.
custom of Swearing; it being great irreligion to despise and lessen the Name
of God, which is the instrument and conveyance of our Adorations to him, by
making it common and applicable to trifles and ordinary accidents of our life.
He that swears often, many times swears false, and however lays by that
reverence which, being due to God, the Scripture determines it to be due at his
Name: His Name is to be loved and feared. And therefore Christ commands that
our communication be yea, yea, or nay, nay; that is, our ordinary discourses
should be simply affirmative or negative. In order to this, (...).
Plutarch affirms out of Phavorinus, that the reason why the Greeks forbad
children who were about to swear by Hercules, to swear within doors, was, that
by this delay and preparation they might be taught not to be hasty or quick in
swearing, but all such invocations should be restrained and retarded by
ceremony: and Hercules himself was observed never to have sworn in all his
lifetime but once. 2. Not only customary Swearing is forbidden, but all
Swearing upon a slight cause. S. Basil upbraids some Christians his
contemporaries with the example of Clinias the Pythagorean, who, rather than he
would swear, suffered a mulct of three talents. And all the followers of
Pythagoras admitted no Oath, unless the matter were grave, necessary, and
charitable: and the wisest and gravest persons among the Heathens were very
severe in their Counsels concerning Oaths. 3. But there are some cases in which
the interests of Kingdoms and (...) politic, Peace and Confederacies, require
the sanction of promissory Oaths; and they whom we are bound to obey, and who
may kill us if we do not, require that their interests be secured by an Oath:
and that in this case, and all that are equal, our Blessed Savior did not
forbid Oaths, is certain, not only by the example of Christians, but of all the
world before and since this prohibition, understanding it to be of the nature
of such natural bands and securities, without which Commonwealths in some cases
are not easily combined, and therefore to be a thing necessary, and therefore
not to be forbidden. Now what is by Christians to be esteemed a slight cause,
we may determine by the account we take of other things. The Glory of God is
certainly no light matter; and therefore when that is evidently and certainly
concerned, not phantastically and by vain and imaginary consequences, but by
prudent and true estimation, then we may lawfully swear. We have S. Paul's
example, who well understood the precept of his Master, and is not to be
supposed easily to have done any violence to it; but yet we find religious
affirmations, and God invoked Rom 1. 9.
for witness as a record upon his soul, in his Epistles to the Romans,
Galatians, and 2 Cor. 11. 31. Gal. 1. 20.
Corinthians. But these Oaths were only assertory. Tertullian affirms, that
Christians refused to swear by the Genius of their Prince, because it was a
Demon; but they swear by his Health, and their solemn Oath was by God, and
Christ, and the Holy Spirit, and the Majesty of the Emperor. The Fathers of the
Ephesine Council made Nestorius and Victor swear; and the Bishops at Chalcedon
swear by the health of their Princes. But as S. Paul did it extrajudicially,
when the glory of God was concerned in it and the interest of Souls; so the
Christians used to swear in a cause of Piety and Religion, in obedience and
upon public command, or for the ends of Charity and Justice, both with Oaths
promissory and assertory, as the matter required: with this only difference,
that they never did swear in the causes of Justice or Charity but when they
were before a Magistrate; but if it were in a cause of Religion, and in matters
of promise, they did indeed swear among themselves, but always to or in
communities and societies, obliging themselves by Oath not to commit
wickedness, Robberies, Sacrilege, not to deceive their trust, not to detain
the pledge; which rather was an act of direct intercourse with God, than a
solemn or religious obligation to man. Which very thing Pliny also reports of
the Christians.

20. The sum is this: Since the whole subject matter of this Precept is Oaths
promissory, (...)
or Vows; all Promises with Oaths are regularly forbidden to Christians, unless
they be made to God or God's (...), in a matter not trisling. For in the first
case, a Promise made to God, and a swearing by God to perform the Promise, to
him is all one: For the Name of God being the instrument and determination of
all (...) addresses, we cannot be supposed to speak to God without using of his
Name (...) or by implication: and therefore he that promises to God makes a
Promise, and uses God's Name in the Promise; the Promise it self being in the
nature of a Prayer or solemn Invocation of God. In the second case, when the
public necessity requires it, of S. Basil. l. (...) S (...). S.
which we are not judges, but are under authority, we find the lawfulness by
being bound to believe, or not to contradict, the pretense of its necessity;
only care is to be (...) magnum humanae (...) um; (...).
taken that the matter be grave or religious, that is, it is to be esteemed and
presumed so by us, if the Oath be imposed by our lawful Superiors, and to be
cared for by them: or else it is so to be provided for by our selves, when our
intercourse is with God, as in Vows and Promises passed to God; being careful
that we do not offer to God Goatshair, or the (...) of Mushromes, or the blood
of Swine, that is, things either impious or vain. But in our communication,
that is, in our ordinary intercourse with men, we must promise by simple
testimony, not by religious adjurations, though a creature be the instrument of
the Oath.

21. But this forbids not assertory Oaths at all, or deposing in Judgment; for
of this Christ speaks not here, it being the proper matter of another
Commandment: and since (as S. Paul affirms) an Oath is the end of all
controversy, and that the necessity of Commonwealths Heb. 6. 16.
requires that a period should be fixed to questions, and a rule for the
nearest certainty for Judgment; whatsoever is necessary is not unlawful, and
Christ, who came to knit the bonds of Government faster by the stricture of
more religious ties, cannot be understood to have given precepts to dissolve
the instruments of Judicature and prudent Government. But concerning assertory
Oaths, although they are not forbidden, but supposed in the Ninth Commandment
to be done before our Judges in the cause of our Neighbor; yet because they
are only so supposed, and no way else mentioned by permission or intimation,
therefore they are to be estimated by the proportions of this Precept
concerning promissory Oaths: they may be taken in Judgment and righteousness,
but never lightly, never extrajudicially; only a less cause, so it be judicial,
may authorize an assertory than a promissory Oath; because many cases occur in
which Peace and Justice may be concerned, which without an Oath are
indeterminable, but there are but few necessities to confirm a Promise by an
Oath. And therefore the reverence of the Name of God ought not to be entrenched
upon in accidents of little or no necessity; God not having made many
necessities in this case, would not in the matter of Promise give leave to use
his Name but when an extraordinary case happens. An Oath in Promises is of no
use for ending questions and giving judicial sentences; and the faith of a
Christian and the word of a just person will do most of the work of Promises;
and it is very much to the disreputation of our Religion or ourselves, if we
fall into hypocrisy or deceit, or if a Christian Asseveration were not of
value equal with an Oath. And therefore Christ forbidding promissory Oaths, and
commanding so great simplicity of spirit and honesty, did consonantly to the
design and perfection of his Institution, intending to make us so just and
sincere, that our Religion being infinite obligation to us, our own Promises
(...) (...). (...) (...). in (...), l. (...). (...) (...) sit. (...). (...).
should pass for bond enough to others, and the Religion receive great honor
by being esteemed a sufficient security and instrument of public intercourse.
And this was intimated by our Lord himself in that reason he is pleased to give
of the prohibition of swearing: ( (...). 5. 37.
Let your communication be Yea, yea, Nay, (...) sensum apud (...) Praetoris ex
edicto (...). [(...) and (...) in omni (...) non cogam.] A. Gell. (...). 10. c.
15.
nay; for whatsoever is more comes of evil: that is, As good Laws come from
ill manners, the modesty of clothing from the shame of sin, Antidotes and
Physic by occasion of poisons and diseases; so is Swearing an effect of
distrust, and want of faith or honesty, on one or both sides. Men dare not
trust the word of a Christian, or a Christian is not just and punctual to his
Promises, and this calls for confirmation by an Oath. So that Oaths suppose a
fault, though they are not faults always themselves; whatsoever is more than
Yea or Nay, is not always evil, but it always comes of evil. And therefore the
Essenes esteemed every man that was put to his Oath no better than an infamous
person, a perjurer, or at least suspected, not esteemed a just man: Curtius
lib. 7.
and the Heathens would not suffer the Priest of Jupiter to swear, because all
men had great opinion of his sanctity and authority: and the Scythians derided
Alexander's caution and timorous provision, when he required an Oath of them;
Nos religionem in ipsa side novimus, Our faith is our bond: and Qui non (...)
pro Roscio.
they who are willing to deceive men will not stick to deceive God, when they
have called God to witness. But I have a caution to insert for each, which I
propound as an humble advice to persons eminent and publicly interested.

22. First, That Princes, and such as have power of decreeing the injunction of
promissory (...) Philo in (...).
Oaths, be very curious and reserved, not lightly enjoining such Promises,
neither in respect of the matter trivial, nor yet frequently, nor without great
reason enforcing. The matter of such Promises must be only what is already
matter of Duty or Religion; for else the matter is not grave enough sor the
calling of God to testimony: but when it is a matter of Duty, then the Oath is
no other than a Vow or Promise made to God in the presence of men. And because
Christians are otherwise very much obliged to do all which is their duty in
matters both civil and religious, of Obedience and Piety; therefore it must be
an instant necessity and a great cause to superinduce such a confirmation as
derives from the so sacredly invocating the Name of God; it must be when there
is great necessity that the duty be actually performed, and when the Supreme
power either has not power sufficient to punish the delinquent, or may miss to
have notice of the delict. For in these cases it is reasonable to bind the
faith of the obliged persons by the fear of God after a more special manner;
but else there is no reason sufficient to demand of the subject any farther
security than their own faith and contract. The reason of this advice relies
upon the strictness of the words of this Precept against promissory Oaths, and
the reverence we owe to the name of God. Oaths of Allegiance are fit to be
imposed in a troubled State or to a mutinous People: But it is not so fit to
tie the People by Oath to abstain from transportations of Metal, or Grain, or
Leather, from which by Penalties they are with as much security, and less
suspicion of iniquity, restrained.

23. Secondly, Concerning assertory Oaths and Depositions in Judgment, although
a greater liberty may be taken in the subject matter of the Oath, and we may,
being required to it, swear in Judgment, though the cause be a question of
money, or our interest, or the rights of a Society; and S. Athanasius purged
himself by Oath before the Emperor Constantius: yet it were a great pursuance
and security of this part of Christian Religion, if in no case contrary Oaths
might be admitted, in which it is certain one part is perjured to the (...)
Hom. Iliad. l. 4.
ruin of their Souls, to the intricating of the Judgment, to the dishonor of
Religion; but that such rules of prudence and reasonable presumption be
established, that upon the Oath of that party which the Law shall choose, and
upon probable grounds shall presume for, the sentence may be established. For
by a small probability there may a surer Judgment be given than upon the
confidence of contradictory Oaths, and after the sin the Judge is left to the
uncertainty of conjectures as much as if but one part had sworn; and to much
more, because such an Oath is by the consent of all men accepted as a rule to
determine in Judgment. By these discourses we understand the intention of our
Blessed Master in this Precept: and I wish by this or any thing else men would
be restrained (...) that low, cheap, unreasonable and unexcusable vice of
customary Swearing, to which we have nothing to invite us that may lessen the
iniquity, for which we cannot pretend temptation nor allege infirmity, but it
begins by wretchlesness and a malicious carelessness, and is continued by the
strength of habit and the greatest immensity of folly. And I consider that
Christian Religion, being so holy an Institution, to which we are invited by so
great promises, in which we are instructed by so clear revelations, and to the
performance of our duties compelled by the threatenings of a sad and
insupportable eternity, should more than sufficiently endear the performance of
this Duty to us. The name of a Christian is a high and potent antidote against
all sin, if we consider aright the honor of the name, the undertaking of our
Covenant, and the reward of our duty. The Jews eat no Swines flesh, because
they are of Moses, and the Turks drink no Wine, because they are Mahumetans;
and yet we swear for all we are Christians, than which there is not in the
world a greater conviction of our baseness and irreligion. Is the authority of
the Holy Jesus so despicable? are his Laws so unreasonable, his rewards so
little, his threatenings so small, that we must needs in contempt of all this
profane the great Name of God, and trample under foot the Laws of Jesus, and
cast away the hopes of Heaven, and enter into security to be possessed by
Hell Torments for Swearing, that is, for speaking like a fool, without reason,
without pleasure, without reputation, much to our disesteem, much to the
trouble of civil and wise persons with whom we join in society and intercourse?
Certainly Hell will be heat seven times hotter for a customary Swearer, and
every degree of his unreasonableness will give him a new degree of torment,
when he shall find himself in flames for being a stupid, an Atheistical, an
irreligious fool. This only I desire should be observed, that our Blessed
Master forbids not only swearing by God, but by any Creature; for every Oath by
a creature does involve and tacitly relate to God. And therefore says Christ,
Swear not by Heaven, (...) (...).
for it is the throne of God; and he that swears by the Qui per (...) suam
jurat, (...) jurat. (...). J. C. Council. Chalc. c. 25.
throne of God, swears by it, and by him that sits thereon. So that it is
not a less matter to swear by a Creature than to swear by God; for a Creature
cannot be the instrument of testimony, but as it is a relative to God; and it
by implication calls the God of that Creature to witness. So that although in
such cases in which it is permitted to swear by God, we may in those cases
express our Oath in the form of advocating and calling the Creature, (as did
the primitive Christians swearing by the health of their Emperor, and as
Joseph swearing by the life of Pharaoh, and as Elisha swearing by the life of
Elias, 2 King. 2. 2.
1 Cor. 15. 31.
and as did S. Paul protesting by the rejoicing he had in Jesus Christ, and as
we in (...). 19.
our forms of swearing in Courts of Judicature touch the Gospels, saying, So
help me God, and the Contents of this Book; and in a few Ages lately past
Bishops and Priests sometimes swore upon the Cross, sometimes upon the Altar,
sometimes by their holy Order:) yet we must remember that this in other words
and ceremonies is but a calling God for witness; and he that swears by the
Cross, swears by the holy Crucifix, that is, Jesus crucified thereon. And
therefore these and the like forms are therefore not to be used in ordinary
communication, because they relate to God; they are as obligatory as the
immediate invocation of his Holiness and Majesty; and it was a Per (...) sacra,
(...) caput. Matt. Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Isa. 1. 2. (...) 1. 2. S. (...). (...). ad
Publicolam; and l. 51. Duo patroni, (...). Si quis (...); and l. Non (...), D.
de (...). (...). ad Seap. (...) -- (...) Dulce (...) in (...) accingier (...).
Virgil. l. 4. (...).
Judaical vanity to think swearing by Creatures was less obliging: they are
just with the same restraints made to be religious as the most solemn
invocation of the holy and reverend Name of God, lawful or unlawful as the
other: unless the swearing by a Creature come to be spoiled by some other
intervening circumstance, that is, with a denying it to relate to (...) suos
illam quondam (...); and (...).
God; for then it becomes Superstition as well as Profanation, and it gives to
a Creature what is proper to God; or when the Creature is contemptible, or less
than the gravity of the matter, as if a man should swear by a Fly, or the
shadow of a Tree; or when there is an indecorum in the thing, or something that
does at too great distance relate to God: for that which with greatest vicinity
refers to God in several Religions is the best instrument of an Oath, and
nearest to God's honor; as in Christianity are the Holy Sacrament, the Cross,
the Altar, and the Gospels; and therefore too great a distance may be an
indecency next to a disparagement. This only may be added to this
consideration; That although an Oath, which is properly calling God or God's
relative into testimony, is to be understood according to the former Discourse;
yet there may be great affirmations or negations respectively, and confirmed by
forms of vehement asseveration, such as the customs of a Nation or consent
shall agree upon: and those do in some cases promote our belief or confirm our
pretensions better than a plain Yea or No; because by such consent the person
renders himself infamous if he breaks his word or trust. And although this will
not come under the restraint of Christ's words, because they are not properly
Oaths, but circumstances of earnest affirmation or negation; yet these are
humane Attestations, introduced by custom or consent, and as they come not
under the notion of Swearing, so they are forms of testimony and collateral
engagement of a more strict truth.

24. The Holy Jesus having specified the great Commandment of loving God with
all IV. COM.
our heart, in this one instance of hallowing and keeping his Name sacred, that
is, from profane and common talk, and less prudent and unnecessary
entercourses, instanced in no other commandment of Moses: but having frequent
occasion to speak of the Sabbath, for ever expresses his own dominion over the
Day, and that he (...). (...). ad (...). (...) (...). l. 7. c. 24. and lib 8.
(...). (...). Canon (...). 65. and (...). in (...). Vide (...) Synod. (...).
had dissolved the bands of Moses in this instance; that now we were no more
obliged to that Rest which the (...) religiously observed by prescript of the
Law; and by diverse acts against securities of the then-received practices did
desecrate the day, making it a broken yoke, and the first great instance of
Christian Liberty. And when the Apostle gave instructions that no man should
judge his (...) in a Holy Day, or New Mons, or the Sabbath Days, he declared
all the Judaical Feasts Col. 2. 16.
to be obliterated by the sponge which Jesus tasted on the Cross; it was within
the Manuscript of Ordinances, and there it was cancelled. And there was nothing
moral in it, but that we do honor to God for the Creation, and to that and all
other purposes of Religion separate and hallow some portion of our time. The
Primitive Church kept both the Sabbath and the Lord's day till the time of the
(...) Council, about 300 years after Christ's nativity, and almost in every
thing made them equal; and therefore did not esteem the Lord's day to be
substituted in the place of the obliterated Sabbath, but a Feast celebrated by
great reason and perpetual consent, without precept or necessary Divine
injunction. But the liberty of the Church was great: they found themselves
disobliged from that strict and necessary Rest which was one great part of the
Sabbatick rites, only they were glad of the occasion to meet often for offices
of Religion, and the day served well for the gaining and facilitating the
Conversion of the Jews, and for the honorable sepulture of the Synagogue, it
being kept so long, (...) the forty days mourning of Israel for the death of
their Father Jacob; but their liberty they improved not to license, but as an
occasion of more frequent assemblies. And there is something in it for us to
imitate, even to sanctify the Name of God in the great work of the Creation,
reading his praises in the book of his Creatures, and taking all occasions of
religious acts and offices, though in none of the Jewish circumstances.

25. Concerning the observation of the Lord's Day, which now the Church
observes and ever did in remembrance of the Resurrection, because it is a day
of positive and Ecclesiastical institution, it is fit that the Church, who
instituted the day, should determine the manner of its observation. It was set
apart in honor of the Resurrection, and it were not ill if all Churches would
into the weekly Offices put some memorial of that mystery, that the reason of
(...) Tacit. l. 3. Annal. his verbis: Quemne diem vacuum (...)? ubi inter sacra
and (...), quo (...) verbis etiam profanis (...) mos (...) and (...) inducantur.
the Festival might be remembered with the day, and God thanked with the
renewing of the Offices. But because Religion was the design of the Feast, and
(...) was necessary for Religion, therefore to abstain from (...) in famulis
(...). Cicer. de (...). l. 2.
Suits of Law and servile works, but such works as are of Quippe (...) and jura
(...) nulla Relligio (...) sepem, (...) flu vio (...) salubri. Virgil. apud
Macrob.
necessity and charity, (which to observe (...) (...). l. 1.
are of themselves a very good Religion) is a necessary duty (...)
of the day; and to do acts of public Religion is the other part of it. So
much is made matter of duty by the intervention S. (...). 4. in Joan. (...)
observant (...), ad (...), ad (...), quam illo die in (...) saltarent? (...) in
Psalm. 92. (...).
of Authority: and though the Church has made no more prescriptions in this,
and God has made none at all; yet he who keeps the Day most strictly, most
religiously, he keeps it best, and most consonant to the design of the Church,
and the ends of Religion, and the opportunity of the present leisure, and the
interests of his Soul. The acts of Religion proper for the Day are Prayers and
public Liturgies, Preaching, Catechizing, acts of Charity, Visiting sick
persons, acts of Eucharist to God, of Hospitality to our poor neighbors, of
friendliness and civility to all, reconciling differences; and after the
public Assemblies are dissolved, any act of direct Religion to God, or of ease
and remission to Servants, or whatsoever else is good in Manners, or in Piety,
or in Mercy. What is said of this great Feast of the Christians is to be
understood to have a greater (...) and obligation in the Anniversary of the
Resurrection, of the Ascension; of the Nativity of our Blessed Savior, and of
the descent of the Holy Spirit in Pentecost. And all days festival to the
honor of God in remembrance of the holy Apostles, and Martyrs, and departed
Saints, as they are with prudence to be chosen and retained by the Church, so
as not to be unnecessary, or burdensome, or useless; so they are to be
observed by us as instances of our love of the communion of Saints, and our
thankfulness for the blessing, and the example.

26. Honor thy Father and thy Mother. This Commandment Christ made also to V.
COM.
be Christian by his frequent repetition and mention of it in his Sermons and
Laws, and so ordered it, that it should be the band of civil Government and
Society. In the Decalogue God sets this Precept immediately after the duties
that concern himself, our duty to Parents being in the consines with our duty
to God, the Parents being in order of nature next to God, the cause of our
being and production, and the great Almoners of Eternity, conveying to us the
essences of reasonable Creatures, and the charities of Heaven. And when our
Blessed Savior in a Sermon to the (...) spoke of duty to Parents, he rescued
it from the impediments of a vain tradition, and secured this Duty, though
against a pretense of Religion toward God, telling us that God would not
himself accept a gift which we took from our Parents needs. This duty to
Parents is the very (...) and band of Commonwealths. He that honors (...).
(...).
his Parents will also love his Brethren derived from the same loins, he will
dearly account of all his relatives and persons of (...) de (...) Philo (...)
D. (...).
the same cognation; and so Families are united, and (...) them Cities and
Societies are framed. And because Parents and Patriarchs (...) avo, (...) in
(...). Hor. (...). 2. od. 2.
of (...) and of Nations had regal power, they who by any change (...) in the
care and government of Cities and Kingdoms succeeded in the power and
authority of Fathers, (...) H (...).
and became so in estimate of Law and true Divinity to (...). Cicer. (...). 3.
all their people. So that the Duty here commanded is due to all our Fathers in
the sense of Scripture and Laws, not only to our natural, but to our civil
Fathers, that is, to Kings and Governors. And the Scripture adds Mothers, for
they also, being instruments of the blessing, are the objects of the Duty. The
duty is, Honor, that is, Reverence and Support, if they shall need it. And
that which our Blessed Savior calls (...). 15. 6.
not (...) our Parents in S. Matthew, is called in S. Mark doing nothing for
them; Mar. 7. 12.
and Honor is expounded by 1 Timothy 5. 18.
S. Paul to be maintenance as (...). (...).
well as reverence. Then we honor our Parents, if with great readiness we
minister to their necessities, and communicate our (...) (...). (baeum.
estate, and attend them in sicknesses, and supply their wants, and, as much as
lies in us, give them support, who gave us being.

27. Thou shall do no Murder: so it was said to them of old time. He that
kills shall VI. COM.
Lev. 24. 21.
be guilty of Judgment, that is, he is to die by the sentence of the Judge. To
this Christ Number. 35. 16, 17.
makes an appendix, But I say unto you, he that is angry with his Brother
without a cause shall be in danger of the Judgment. This addition of our
Blessed Savior, as all the other, which are severer explications of the Law
than the Jews admitted, was directed against the vain and imperfect opinion of
the Lawyers, who thought to be justified by their external works, supposing, if
they were innocent in matter of fact, God would require no more of them than
Man did, and what by custom or silence of the Laws was not punishable by the
Judge, was harmless before God; and this made them to trust in the letter, to
neglect the duties of Repentance, to omit asking pardon for their secret
irregularities, and the obliquities and aversations of their spirits; and this
S. Paul also complains of, that neglecting the righteousness of God, they
sought to establish their own, Romans 10. 3.
that is, according to Man's judgment. But our Blessed Savior tells them that
such an innocence is not enough; God requires more than conformity, and
observation of the fact, and exterior (...), placing Justice not in legal
innocence, or not being condemned in judgment of the Law and humane judicature,
but in the righteousness of the spirit also: for the first acquits us before
man, but by this we shall be held upright in judgment before the Judge of all
the world. And therefore besides abstinence from murder or actual wounds,
Christ forbids all anger without cause against our Brother, that is, against
any man.

28. By which not the first motions are forbidden, the twinklings of the eye,
as the Philosophers call them, the pro-passions and sudden and irresistible
alterations; for it is impossible to prevent them, unless we could give our
selves a new nature, any 8. Hieron. epist. ad (...).
more than we can refuse to wink with our eye when a sudden blow is offered at
it, or refuse to yawn when we see a yawning sleepy person: but by frequent and
habitual mortification, and by continual watchfulness, and standing in
readiness against all inadvertencies, we shall lessen the inclination, and
account fewer sudden irreptions. A wise and meek person should not kindle at
all, but after violent and great collision; and then, if like a flint he sends
a spark out, it must as soon be extinguished as it shows, and cool as soon as
sparkle. But however, the sin is not in the natural disposition. But when we
entertain it, though it be, as (...) expresses it, cum voluntate non (...),
without (...) lib. 2. de Ira, c. 4.
a determination of revenge, then it begins to be a sin. Every indignation
against the person of the man, in us is pride and self-love, and toward others
ungentleness, and an immorigerous spirit. Which is to be understood, when the
cause is not sufficient, or when the anger continues longer, or is excessive in
the degrees of its proportion.

29. The causes of allowable Anger are, when we see God dishonored, or a sin
committed, or any irregularity, or fault in matter of Government; a fault
against the laws of a family or good manners, disobedience or stubbornness;
which in all instances where they may be prudently judged such by the
Governor, yet possibly they are not all direct sins against God and Religion.
In such cases we may be angry. But then we may also sin, if we exceed in time,
or measure of degree.

30. The proportion of time S. Paul expresses, by not letting the Sun set upon
(...) Leontius (...). in (...), c. 14.
anger. Leontius Patricius was one day extremely and unreasonably angry with
John the Patriarch of Alexandria; at Evening the Patriarch sent a servant to
him with this message, Sir, the Sun is set: upon which Patricius reflecting,
and the grace of God making the impression deep, visible and permanent, he
threw away his anger, and became wholly subject to the counsel and ghostly aids
of the Patriarch. This limit S. Paul borrowed from the Psalmist: for that which
in the fourth Psalm verse 5. we read, Stand in awe, and sin not, the Septuagint
reads, Be angry, but sin not. And this measure is taken from the analogy of the
Law of the Jews, that a malefactor should not hang upon the accursed tree after
the Sun was set: and if the Laws laid down their just anger against Malefactors
as soon as the Sun descended, and took off his beams from beholding the
example; much more is it reasonable that a private anger, which is not
warranted by authority, not measured by laws, not examined by solemnities of
Justice, not made reasonable by considering the degree of the causes, not made
charitable by intending the public good, not secured from injuriousness by
being disinterest, and such an anger in which the party is judge and witness
and executioner; it is (I say) but reason such an anger should unyoke and go to
bed with the Sun, since Justice and Authority laid by the Rods and Axes as soon
as the Sun unteamed his chariot. Plutarch reports (...). (...).
that the Pythagoreans were strict observers of the very letter of this
caution: For if Anger had boiled up to the height of injury or reproach, before
Sun set they would shake hands, salute each other, and depart friends: for they
were ashamed that the same anger which had disturbed the counsels of the day
should also trouble the quiet and dreams of the night, lest anger by mingling
with their rest and nightly fancies should grow natural and habitual. Well,
anger must last no longer; but neither may a Christian's anger last so long;
for if his anger last a whole day, it will certainly before night sour into a
crime. A man's anger is like the Spleen, at the first it is natural, but in its
excess and distemper it swells into a disease: and therefore although to be
angry at the presence of certain objects is natural, and therefore is
indifferent, because he that is an essential enemy to sin never made sin
essential to a man; yet unless it be also transient and pass off at the command
of Reason and Religion, it quickly becomes criminal. The meaning is, that it be
no more but a transient Passion, not permanent at all; but that the anger
against the man pass into indignation against the crime, and pity of the
person, till the pity grows up into endeavors to help him. For an angry,
violent and disturbed man is like that white Bramble of Judaea, of which
Josephus reports, that it is set on (...) by impetuous winds, and consumes it
self, and burns the neighbour-plants: and the (...), and (...) cur (...).
Horat. (...). 1. od. 16.
evil effects of a violent and passionate Anger are so great, so dangerous, so
known to all the world, that the very consideration of them is the best
argument in the world to dispute against it; Families and Kingdoms have
suffered horrid calamities; and whatsoever is violent in art or nature has
been made the instrument of sadness in the hands of Anger.

31. The measure of the degree is to be estimated by humane prudence, that it
exceed not the value of the cause, nor the proportion of other circumstances,
and that it cause no eruption into indiscretions or undecencies. For therefore
Moses's anger, though for God and Religion, was reproved, because it went forth
into a violent and troubled expression, and showed the degree to be inordinate.
For it is in this passion as in Lightning, which, if it only breaks the cloud
and makes a noise, shows a tempest and disturbance in nature, but the hurt is
none; but if it seises upon a man, or dwells upon a house, or breaks a tree, it
becomes a judgment and a curse. And as the one is a mischief in chance and
accident, so the other is in morality and choice: if it passes from passion
into action, from a transient violence to a permanent injury, if it abides, it
scorches the garment or burns the body; and there is no way to make it
innocent, but to remove and extinguish it, and, while it remains, to tie the
hands, and pare the nails, and muzzle it, that it may neither scratch, nor
bite, nor talk. An anger in God's cause may become unhallowed, if it sees the
Sun rise and set: and an anger in the cause of a man is innocent according to
the degrees of its suddenness and discontinuance; for by its quickness and
volatile motion it shows that it was 1. unavoidable in its production, or 2.
that it was (...) in the event, or 3. quickly suppressed: according to which
several cases Anger is either 1. natural, or 2. excusable, or 3. the matter of
a virtue.

32. The Vulgar (...) Bible in this Precept of our Blessed Savior reads not
the appendix, without a cause, but indefinitely, he that is angry with his
Brother; and S. (...) affirms that the clause without a cause is not to be
found in the true Greek copies: upon supposition of which, because it is not to
be imagined that all Anger in (...) causes and in all degrees is simply
unlawful, and S. Paul distinguishes being angry from committing a sin, Be
angry, but sin not, these words are left to signify such an anger as is the
crime of Homicide in the heart, like the secret Lusting called by Christ
Adultery in the heart; and so here is forbidden not only the outward act, but
the inward inclinations to (...), that is, (...). (...). 2. (...).
an Anger with deliberation and purpose of revenge, this being explicative and
additional to the Precept forbidding Murder: which also our Blessed Savior
seems to have intended, by threatening the same penalty to this anger or
spiritual Homicide which the Law inflicted upon the actual and external, that
is, judgment or condemnation. And because this prohibition of Anger is an
explication and more severe commentary upon the Sixth Commandment, it is more
than probable that this Anger, to which condemnation is threatened, is such an
Anger as has entertained something of mischief in the spirit. And this agrees
well enough with the former interpretation, save that it affirms no degree of
anger to be criminal as to the height of condemnation, unless it be with a
thought of violence or desires of revenge; the other degrees receiving their
heightnings and declensions as they keep their distance or approach to this.
And besides, by not limiting or giving caution concerning the cause, it
restrains the malice only or the degree, but it permits other causes of anger
to be innocent besides those spiritual and moral, of the interests of God's
glory and Religion. But this is also true, which soever of the readings be
retained. For the irascible faculty having in nature an object proper to its
constitution and natural design, if our anger be commenced upon an object
naturally troublesome, the anger is very natural, and nowhere said to be
irregular. And he who is angry with a servant's unwariness or inadvertency, or
(...). (...). Si (...), Divinae (...) per gladium (...) non (...). S. Greg.
(...). 5. Moral.
the remisness of a child's spirit and application to his studies, or on any
sudden displeasure, is not in any sense guilty of prevaricating the Sixth
Commandment, unless besides the object he adds an inequality of degree, or
unhandsome circumstance, or adjunct. And possibly it is not in the nature of
man to be strict in discipline, if the prohibitions of Anger be confined only
to causes of Religion; and it were hard that such an Anger which is innocent in
all effects, and a good instrument of Government, should become criminal and
damnable; because some instances of displeasure are in actions not certainly
and apparently sinful. So that our Blessed Savior forbidding us to be angry
without a cause, means such causes which are not only irregularities in
Religion, but (...) in manners; and an Anger may be religious, and political,
and oeconomical, according as it meets with objects proper to it in several
kinds. It is sometimes necessary that a man carry a tempest in his face and a
rod in his hand; but for ever let him have (...) c.. (...).
a smooth mind, or at least under command, and within the limits of Reason and
Religion, that he may steer securely, and avoid the rocks of sin: for then he
may reprove a friend that did amiss, or chastise an offending son, or correct a
vicious servant. The sum is this: There are no other bounds to hallow or to
allow and legitimate Anger but that, 1. The cause be Religion, or matter of
Government: 2. That the degree of the Anger in prudent accounts be no bigger
than the cause: 3. That if it goes forth, it be not expressed in any action of
uncharitableness, or unseasonable violence: 4. Whether it goes forth or abides
at home, it must not dwell long any-where; nor abide in the form of a burning
coal, but at the most of a thin flame, thence passing into air salutary and
gentle, fit to breath, but not to blast. There is this only nicety to be
observed: That although an Anger arising for Religion, or in the matter of
(...), cannot innocently abide long; yet it may abide till it has passed forth
into its proper and temperate expression, whether of reprehension or
chastisement, and then it must sit down. But if the Anger arises from another
cause, (provided it be of it self innocent, not sinful in the object or cause)
the passion in its first spring is also innocent, because it is (...), and on
the sudden unavoidable: but this must be suppressed within, and is not
permitted to express it self at all: for in that degree in which it goes out of
the mouth, or through the eyes, or from the hand, in that degree it is violent,
ought to be corrected and restrained; for so that passion was intended to be
turned into virtue. For this passion is like its natural parent or instrument:
And if Choler keeps in its proper seat, it is an instrument of digestion; but
if it goes forth into the stranger regions of the body, it makes a Fever: and
this Anger which commences upon natural causes, though so far as it is natural
it must needs be innocent, yet when any consent of the will comes to it, or
that it goes forth in any action or voluntary signification, it also becomes
criminal. Such an Anger is only permitted to be born and die; but it must never
take nourishment, or exercise any act of life.

33. But if that prohibition be (...), then it is certain the analogy of the
Commandment, of which this is an explication, refers it to Revenge or Malice:
it is an Anger that is Wrath, an Anger of Revenge or Injury, which is here
prohibited. And I add this consideration, That since it is certain that Christ
intended this for an explication of the prohibition of Homicide, the clause of
[ (...) in (...); i. e. non (...) extra (...) and extra modum.
without cause] seems less natural and proper. For it would intimate, that
though anger of Revenge is forbidden when it is rash and unreasonable; yet that
there might be a cause of being angry with a purpose of revenge and recompense,
and that in such a case it is permitted to them to whom in all other it is
denied, that is, to private persons; which is against the meekness and charity
of the Gospel. More reasonable it is, that as no man might kill his Brother in
Moses's Law by his own private authority; so an Anger is here forbidden, such
an Anger which no qualification can permit to private persons, that is, an
Anger with purposes of Revenge.

34. But Christ adds, that a farther degree of this sin is, when our Anger
breaks out in contumelies and ill language, and receives its increment
according to the degree and injury of the reproach. There is a Homicide in the
tongue as well as in the heart; and he that kills a man's (...). (...). 2.
reputation by calumnies, or slander, or open reviling, has broken this
Commandment. But this is not to be understood so, but that -- (...) me, (...)
me (...)? -- A turpi (...) dissimilis sis. (...) -- Deprensi non (...) fama
(...). -- Horat. Sat. 4. (...). 1.
persons in authority or friends may reprehend a vicious person in language
proper to his crime, or expressive of his malice or iniquity. Christ called
Herod Fox: and although S. Michael brought not a railing accusation against
Satan, yet the Scripture calls him an Accuser, and Christ calls him the Father
of lies, and S. Peter, a devourer and a roaring Lion; and S. John calls
Diotrephes a lover of pre-eminence, or ambitious. But that which is here
forbidden, is not a representing the crimes of the man for his emendation, or
any other charitable or religious end, but a reviling him to do him mischief,
to murder his reputation: which also shows, that whatever is here forbidden is
in some sense or other accounted Homicide; the Anger in order to reproach, and
both in order to murder, subject to the same punishment, because forbidden in
the same period of the Law; save only that, according to the degrees of the
sin, Christ proportions several degrees of punishment in the other world, which
he apportions to the degrees of death which had ever been among the Jews, viz.
the Sword, and Stoning to death, which were punishments legal and judicial, and
the Burning infants in the Valley of Hinnom, which was a barbarous and
superstitious custom used formerly by their Fathers in imitation of the
Phoenician accursed rites.

35. The remedies against Anger, which are prescribed by Masters of spiritual
life, are partly taken from rules of Prudence, partly from Piety and more
precise rules of Religion. In Prudence, 1. Do not easily entertain, or at all
encourage, or willingly hear, or promptly believe Tale-bearers and reporters of
other men's faults: for oftentimes we are set on fire by an ignis (...), a false
flame, and an empty story. 2. Live with peaceable people, if thou can. 3. Be
not inquisitive into the misdemeanors of others, or the reports which are made
of you. 4. Find out reasons of excuse to alleviate and lessen the ignorances of
a friend, or carelessnesses of a servant. 5. Observe what object is aptest to
inflame thee, and by special arts of fortification stop up the avenues to that
part: If Losses, if Contempt, if Incivilities, if Slander, still make it the
greatest part of your employment to subdue the impotency of that Passion that
is more apt to raise tempests. 6. Extirpate petty curiosities of Apparel,
Lodging, Diet, and learn to be indifferent in circumstances; and if you be apt
to be transported with such little things, do some great thing that shall cut
off their frequent intervening. 7. Do not multiply secular cares, and
troublesome negotiations which have variety of conversation with several
humors of men and accidents of things; but frame to thy self a life simple as
thou can, and free from all affectations. 8. Sweeten thy temper and allay the
violence of thy spirit with some convenient, natural, temperate and medicinal
solaces; for some dispositions we have seen inflamed into Anger, and often
assaulted by Peevishness, through immoderate fasting and inconvenient
austerities. 9. A gentle answer is an excellent Remora to the progresses of
Anger, whether in thy self or others. For Anger is like the waves of a troubled
sea; when it is corrected (...) Fabricator descripsit; (...) inter (...) est:
si (...) iram (...) quia (...) and (...).
with a soft reply, as with a little strand, it retires, and leaves nothing
behind it but froth and shells, no permanent mischief. 10. ( Ex quo factus sum
(...) me, (...) meum non (...), dixit S. (...).
) Silence is an excellent art: and that was the advice which S. Isaac, an old
religious person in the Primitive Church, is reported to have followed, to
suppress his Anger within his breast, and use what means he could there to
strangle it; but never permitting it to go forth in language: Anger and Lust
being like fire, which if you enclose, suffering it to have no emission, it
perishes and dies; but give it the smallest vent, and it rages to a consumption
of all it reaches. And this advice is coincident with the general rule which is
prescribed in all temptations, that Anger be suppressed in its cradle and first
( Melius (...) est (...) probabils (...) and (...). S. Aug. ad (...).
assaults. 11. Lastly, let every man be careful that in his Repentance, or in
his Zeal, or his Religion, he be as dispassionate and free from Anger as is
possible; lest Anger pass upon him in a reflex act, which was rejected in the
direct. Some mortifiers in their contestation against Anger, or any evil or
troublesome principle, are like Criers of Assizes, who calling for silence make
the greatest noise; they are extremely angry when they are fighting against the
habit or violent inclinations to Anger.

36. But in the way of more strict Religion it is advised, that he who would
cure his Anger should pray often. It is S. Austin's counsel to the Bishop
Auxilius, that, like the Apostles in a storm, we should awaken Christ, and call
to him for aid, lest we shipwreck in so violent (...) and impetuous
disturbances. 2. Propound to thy self the example of Meek and Patient persons;
remembering always that there is a family of Meek Saints, of which Moses is the
Precedent; a family of Patient Saints, under the conduct of Job: every one in
the mountain of the Lord shall be gathered to his own Tribe, to his own Family,
in the great day of Jubilee: and the Angry shall perish with the effects of
Anger; and peevish persons shall be vexed with the disquietness of an eternal
worm and sting of a vexatious Conscience, if they suffer here the
transportations and saddest effects of an unmortified, habitual and prevailing
anger. 3. Above all things endeavor to be humble, to think of thy self as thou
deservest, that is, meanly and unworthily; and in reason it is to be presumed
thou will be more patient of wrong, quiet under affronts and injuries,
susceptive of inconveniences, and apt to entertain all adversities, as
instruments of Humiliation. deleteries of Vice, corrections of undecent
Passions, and instruments of Virtue. 4. All the Reason, and all the Relations,
and all the Necessities of mankind are daily arguments against the violences
and inordinations of Anger. For he that would not have his Reason confounded,
or his discourse useless, or his family be a den of Lions; he that would not
have his Marriage a daily duel, or his Society troublesome, or his Friendship
formidable, or his Feasts bitter; he that delights not to have his Discipline
cruel, or his Government tyrannical, or his Disputations violent, or his
Civilities unmannerly, or his Charity be a rudeness, or himself brutish as a
Bear, or peevish as a Fly, or miserable upon every accident and in all the
changes of his life, must mortify his Anger. For it concerns us as much as
Peace, and Wisdom, and Nobleness, and Charity, and Felicity are worth, to be
at peace in our breasts, and to be pleased with all God's Providence, and to be
in charity with every thing, and with every man.

37. Thou shall not commit Adultery. These two Commandments are immediate to
VII. COM.
each other, and of the greatest cognation: for Anger and Lust work upon one
subject; and the same fervours of blood which make men revengeful, Vbi (...)
est (...). Cassian. -- Numquid ego a (...) Magno (...) -- (...), mea (...)?
Horat: (...). l. 1. (...). 2.
will also make men unchaste. But the prohibition is repeated in the words of
the old Commandment; so it was said to them of old: which was not only a
prohibition of the violation of the rights of Marriage, but was even among the
Jews extended to signify all mixture of sexes not matrimonial. For Adultery in
Scripture is sometimes used to signify Fornication, and Fornication for
Adultery; as it is expressed in the permissions of Divorce in the case of
Fornication: and by Moses's Law Fornication also was forbidden, and it was
hated also and reproved in the natural. But it is very probable that this
Precept was restrained only to the instance of Adultery in the proper sense,
that is, violation of Marriage; for Moses did in other annexes of the Law
forbid Fornication. And as a blow or wound was not esteemed in Moses's Law a
breach of the sixth Commandment; so neither was any thing but Adultery esteemed
a violation of the seventh by very many of their own Doctors: of which I reckon
this a sufficient probation, because they permitted stranger Virgins and
Captives to fornicate; only they believed it sinful in the Hebrew Maidens. And
when two Harlots pleaded before Solomon for the Bastard-child, he gave sentence
of their question, but nothing of their crime. (...). (...) and (...), ad (...)
and ad (...); and (...) Terentius (...).
Strangers with the Hebrews signified many times Harlots, because they were
permitted to be such, and were entertained to such purposes. But these were the
licenses of a looser interpretation; God having to all Nations given sufficient
testimony of his detestation of all Concubinate not hallowed by Marriage: of
which among the Nations there was abundant testimony, in that the Harlots were
not permitted to abide in the Cities, and wore veils in testimony of their
shame and habitual undecencies; which we observe Genesis 38. 14.
in the story of Thamar, and also in Chrysippus. And although it passed without
punishment, yet never without shame, and a note of turpitude. And the
abstinence from Fornication was one of the Precepts of Noah, to which the Jews
obliged the stranger-Proselytes, who were only Proselytes of the House: and the
Apostles enforce it upon the Gentiles in their first Decree at Jerusalem, as
renewing an old stock of Precepts and obligations in which all the converted
and religious Gentiles did communicate with the Jews.

38. To this Christ added, that the Eyes must not be adulterous; his Disciples
must not only abstain from the act of unlawful Concubinate, but from the
impurer intuition of a wife of another man: so according to the design of his
whole Sermon opposing the Righteousness of the Spirit to Nihil (...) philos,
apud Plutarch. (...). Plato.
that of the Law, or of Works, in which the Jews confided. Christians must have
chaste desires, not indulging to themselves Vt jam servaris (...) corpus,
adultera men's est: Omnibus (...). Ovid. (...) est etiam sine (...). (...).
a liberty of looser thoughts; keeping the threshold of their Temples pure,
that the Holy Ghost may observe nothing unclean in the entry of his habitation.
For he that lusts after a (...) (...).
woman, wants nothingto the consummation of the act but some convenient
circumstances; which because they are not in our power the act is impeded, but
nothing of the malice abated. But so severe in this was our Blessed Master,
that he commanded us rather to put our eyes out than to suffer them to become
an offense to us, that is, an inlet of sin, or an invitation or transmission of
impurity: by putting our eye out meaning the extinction of all incentives of
Lust, the rejection of all opportunities and occasions, the quitting all
conditions of advantage which ministers fuel to this Hellfire. And by this
severity we must understand all beginnings, temptations, likenesses, and
insinuations and minutes (...) Lust and impurity to be forbidden to Christians;
such as are all morose delectations in vanity, wanton words, gestures, Balls,
revellings, wanton diet, garish and lascivious dressings and trimmings of the
body, looser Banquetings: all making provisions for the flesh to fulfill the
lusts of it, all lust of Concupiscence, and all lust of the eye, and all lust
of the hand, unclean contracts, are to be rescinded, all lust of the tongue and
palate, all surfeiting and drunkenness: for it is impossible to keep the spirit
pure, if it be exposed to all the entertainment of enemies. And if Christ
forbad the wanton eye, and placed it under the prohibition of Adultery; it is
certain, whatsoever ministers to that Vice, and invites to it, is within the
same restraint; it is the eye, or the hand, or the foot, that is to be cut off.
To this Commandment Fastings and severe Abstinences are apt to be reduced, as
being the proper abscission of the instruments and temptations of Lust, to
which Christ invites by the mixed proposition of threatening and reward; for
better it is to go to Heaven with but one eye or one foot, that is, with a body
half nourished, than with full meals and an active Lust to enter into Hell. And
in this our Blessed Lord is a Physician rather than a Lawgiver: for abstinence
from all impure Concubinate, and morose delectations so much as in thought,
being the Commandment of God; that Christ bids us retrench the occasions and
insinuations of Lust, it is a facilitating the duty, not a new severity, but a
security and caution of prudence.

39. Thou shall not steal. To this Precept Christ added nothing; because God
had already VIII. COM.
in the Decalogue (...) this Precept with a restraint upon the (...) sibi dirus
(...), niss causa (...), and (...). Horat. l. 2. Od. 2.
desires. ( (...) Philo in (...).
) For the Tenth Commandment sorbids all coveting of our Neighbor's goods: for
the Wife there reckoned, and forbidden to be desired from another man, is not a
restraint of Libidinous appetite, but of the Covetous; it being accounted part
of wealth to have a numerous family, many wives and many servants: and this
also God by the Prophet (...) (...). 10. de (...).
Nathan upbraided to David, as an instance of David's wealth (...) (...) 1.
and God's liberality. But yet this Commandment Christ adopted into his Law, it
being prohibited by the natural Law, or the Law of right Reason, Commonwealths
not being able to subsist without distinction of Dominion, nor industry to be
encouraged but by propriety, nor Families to be maintained (...) J. C. l.
(...). D. (...), D. de Verborum (...).
but by defense of just rights and truly-purchased Possessions. And this
Prohibition extends to all injustice, whether done by force or fraud; whether
it be by ablation, or prevention, or detaining of rights; any thing in which
injury is done directly or obliquely to our Neighbor's fortune.

40. Thou shall not bear false witness. That is, Thou shall not answer in
judgment IX. COM.
against thy Neighbor falsely: which testimony in the Law was given solemnly
and by Oath, invoking the Name of God. (...) adjure thee by God that thou tell
us whether thou be the CHRIST, said the High Priest (...) (...). 4. (...).
to the Blessed Jesus, that is, speak upon thy Oath; and then he (...) Hesiod.
l. (...).
told them fully, though they made it the pretense of murdering him, and he
knew they would do so. Confessing and witnessing truth is giving glory to God:
but false witness is high injustice, it is inhumanity and treason against the
quietness, or life, or possession of a just person; it is in it self irregular
and unreasonable, and therefore is so forbidden to Christians, not only as it
is unjust, but as it is false. For a Lie in communication and private converse
is also forbidden as well as unjust testimony; ( Ephesians. 4. 25.
(...) (...). (...) (...).
Let every man speak truth with his Neighbor, that is, in private society: and
whether a Lie be in (...) sidi (...). Idem (...).
jest or earnest, when the purpose is to deceive and abuse, though in the
smallest instance, it is in that degree criminal as it is injurious. I find not
the same affirmed in every deception of our Neighbors, wherein no man is
injured, and some are benefited; the error of the affirmation being nothing
but a natural irregularity, nothing malicious, but very charitable. I find no
severity superadded by Christ to this Commandment prohibiting such discourse
which, without injury to any man, deceives a man into Piety or safety. But this
is to be extended no farther: In all things else we must be severe in our
discourses, and neither lie in a great matter nor a small, for the custom
thereof is not good, says the son of Sirach. I could add concerning this
Precept, That Christ having left it in that condition he found it in the
Decalogue, without any change or alteration of circumstance, we are commanded
to give true testimony in Judgment; which because it was under an Oath, there
lies upon us no prohibition, but a severity of injunction to swear truth in
Judgment when we are required. The securing of Testimonies was by the sanctity
of an Oath, and this remains unaltered in Christianity.

41. Thou shall not covet. This Commandment we find nowhere repeated in the X.
COM.
Gospel by our Blessed Savior; but it is inserted in the repetition Furtum
(...) sine (...) sola (...), atque (...) surtum (...). A. Gell. l. 11. c. 18.
of the Second Table, which S. Paul mentioned to the Romans: for it was so
abundantly expressed in the enclosures of other Has (...) intra (...) qui (...)
ullum, Facts (...) -- (...). Dixit Xenocrates, Non (...) in (...).
Precepts, and the whole design of Christ's Doctrine, that it was less needful
specially to express that which is everywhere affixed to many Precepts
Evangelical. Particularly it is inherent in the first Beatitude, Blessed are
the poor in spirit; and it means, that we should not wish our Neighbor's goods
with a deliberate entertained desire, but that upon the commencement of the
motion it be disbanded instantly: for he that does not at the first address and
(...) of the passion suppress it, he has given it that entertainment which in
every period of staying is a degree of morose delectation in the appetite. And
to this I find not Christ added any thing, for the Law it self, forbidding to
entertain the desire, has commanded the instant and present suppression; they
are the same thing, and cannot reasonably be distinguished. Now that Christ in
the instance of Adultery has commanded to abstain also from occasions and
accesses toward the Lust, in this has not the same severity; because the vice
of Covetousness is not such a wildfire as Lust is, not inflamed by contact,
and neighborhood of all things in the world: every thing may be instrumental
to libidinous desires, but to covetous appetites there are not temptations of
so different natures.

42. Concerning the order of these Commandments it is not unusefully observed,
that, if we account from the first to the last, they are of greatest perfection
which are last described; and he who is arrived to that severity and dominion
of himself as not to desire his Neighbor's goods, is very far from actual
injury, and so in proportion; it being the least degree of Religion to confess
but One God. But therefore Vices are to take their estimate in the contrary
order: he that prevaricates the First Commandment is the greatest sinner in the
world; and the least is he that only covets without any actual injustice. And
there is no variety or objection in this, unless it be altered by the
accidental difference of degrees; but in the kinds of sin the Rule is true:
this only, The Sixth and Seventh are otherwise in the Hebrew Bibles than ours,
and in the Greek otherwise in Exodus than in Deuteronomy; and by this rule it
is a greater sin to commit Adultery than to Kill; concerning which we have no
certainty, save that S. Paul in one respect makes the sin of Uncleanness the
greatest of any sin, whose scene lies in the body; Every sin is without the
body, but he that commits Fornication sins against his own body.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal Jesus, Wisdom of the Father, thou light of Jews and Gentiles, and
the great Master of the world, who by thy holy Sermons and clearest revelations
of the mysteries of thy Father's Kingdom did invite all the world to great
degrees of Justice, Purity and Sanctity, and instruct us all in a holy
Institution, give us understanding of thy Laws; that the light of thy celestial
Doctrine illuminating our darknesses, and making bright all the recesses of our
spirits and understandings, we may direct our feet, all the lower man, the
affections of the inferior appetite, to walk in the paths of thy Commandments.
Dearest God, make us to live a life of Religion and Justice, of Love and Duty;
that we may adore thy Majesty, and reverence thy Name, and love thy Mercy, and
admire thy infinite glories and perfections, and obey thy Precepts. Make us to
love thee for thy self, and our neighbors for thee; make us to be all Love and
all Duty: that we may adorn the Gospel of thee our Lord, walking worthy of our
Vocation; that as thou have called us to be thy Disciples, so we may walk
therein, doing the work of faithful servants, and may receive the adoption of
sons, and the gift of eternal glory, which thou have reserved for all the
Disciples of thy holy Institution. Make all the world obey thee as a Prophet;
that, being redeemed and purified by thee our High Priest, all may reign with
thee our King in thy eternal Kingdom, O Eternal Jesus, Wisdom of thy Father.

Amen.
Of the Three additional Precepts which Christ superinduced, and made parts of
the Christian Law.
DISCOURSE XI. Of CHARITY, with its parts, Forgiving, Giving, not Judging.
Of Forgiveness. PART I.
1. THE Holy Jesus coming to reconcile all the world to God, would reconcile
all the parts of the world one with another, that they may rejoice in their
common band and their common Salvation. The first instance of Charity forbad to
Christians all Revenge of Injuries; which was a perfection and endearment of
duty beyond what either most Plutarchus (...) multa (...) inimicos. "(...) and
(...) est quam in (...) -- Oblata (...) inimicum, (...) missum (...) est. Qui
(...) miseratur (...), and (...) indigenti, and filiis (...) at familiae (...)
ipsorum (...) operam suam (...) qui (...) amat, (...) est (...), etc. (...)
cap. ex inim; (...).
of the old Philosophers, or the Laws of the Nations (...) of Moses, ever
practiced or enjoined. For Revenge was esteemed to unhallowed, unchristian
natures as sweet as life, a satisfaction of injuries, and the only cure of
maladies and affronts. Only, Laws of the wisest Commonwealths commanded that
Revenge should be taken by the Judge; a few cases being excepted, in which, by
sentence of the Law, the injured person or his nearest Relative might be the
Executioner of the Vengeance: as among Et Cicero dixit (...).
the Jews in the case of Murder; among the Romans, (...) primum munus est, ut
(...) injuria. (...).
in the case of an Adulteress or a ravished daughter, Exodus 21. 23. Levit. 24.
20. Deuteronomy. 19. 21.
the Father might kill the Adulteress or the Ravisher. In (...) vigor, (...)
publici (...) in (...) constituta, (...) quisquam (...) ipsi (...) ultionem.
Honor. and Theod. in Cod. (...).
other things the Judge only was to be the Avenger. But Christ commanded his
Disciples, rather than to take revenge, to expose themselves to a second
injury, rather offer the other cheek than be avenged for a blow on this; For
vengeance belongs to God, and he will retaliate: and to that wrath we must give
place, says S. Paul; that is, in welldoing and evil suffering commit our
selves to his righteous judgment, leaving room for his execution, Romans 12. 19.
who will certainly do it, if we snatch not the sword from his arm.

2. But some observe, that our Blessed Savior instanced but in smaller
injuries: He that bad us suffer a blow on the cheek, did not oblige us tamely
to be sacrificed; he that enjoined us to put up the loss of our Coat and Cloak,
did not signify his pleasure to be that we should (...) our Family to be
turned out of doors, and our whole Estate aliened and cancelled, especially we
being otherwise obliged to provide for them under the pain of the curse of
Infidelity. And indeed there is much reason our defenses may be extended, when
the injuries are too great for our sufferance, or that our defense bring no
greater damage to the other than we divert from our selves. But our Blessed
Savior's prohibition is instanced in such small particulars, which are no
limitations of the general Precept, but particulars of common consideration.
But I say unto you, resist not evil: (...) sumitur (...) generali pro omni
(...).
so our English Testament reads it; but the word signifies avenge not evil, and
it binds us to this only, that we be not avengers of the wrong, but rather
suffer twice, than once to be avenged. He that is struck on the face may run
away, or may divert the blow, or bind the hand of his enemy; and he whose Coat
is snatched away may take it again, if without injury to the other he may do
it. We are sometimes bound to resist evil: every clearing of our innocence,
refuting of calumnies, quitting our selves of reproach, is a resisting evil;
but such which is hallowed to us by the example of our Lord himself and his
Apostles. But this Precept is clearly expounded by S. Paul, Render Romans 12. 17.
not evil for evil, that is, be not revenged: You may either secure or restore
your selves to the condition of your own possessions or fame, or preserve your
life, provided that no evil be returned to him that offers the injury. For so
sacred are the Laws of Christ, so holy and great is his Example, so much has
he endeared us who were his enemies, and so frequently and severely has he
preached and enjoined Forgiveness; that he who knows not to forgive, knows not
to be like a Christian, and a Disciple of so gentle a Master.

3. So that the smallness or greatness of the instance alters not the case in
this duty: In the greatest matters we are permitted only to an innocent
defense, in the smallest we may do so too: I may as well hold my coat fast as
my gold, and I may as well hide my goods as run away, and that is a defense; and
if my life be in danger, I must do no more but defend my (...). Save only that
defense in case of life is of a larger signification than in case of goods. I
may wound my enemy, if I cannot else be safe; I may disarm him, or in any sense
disable him, and this is extended even to a liberty to kill (...), sed ut (...)
non (...); nisi si (...) magni hominis (...). Sen.
him, if my defense necessarily stands upon so hard conditions: for although I
must not give him a wound for a wound, because that cannot cure me, but is
certainly Revenge; yet when my life cannot be otherwise safe than by killing
him, I have used that liberty which Nature has permitted me, and Christ has
not forbidden, who only interdicted Revenge, and for bad no desence which is
charitable and necessary, and not blended with malice and anger. And it is as
much Charity to preserve my self as him, when I fear to die.

4. But although we find this nowhere forbidden, yet it is very consonant to
the excellent mercy of the Gospel, and greatly laudable, if we choose rather to
lose our life; in imitation of Christ, than save it by the loss of another's in
pursuance of the permissions of Nature. When Nature only gives leave, and no
Lawgiver gives command to defend our lives, and the excellence of Christianity
highly commends dying for our enemies, and propounds to our imitation the
greatest Example that ever could be in the world; it is a very great
imperfection, if we choose not rather to obey an insinuation of the Holy Jesus,
than with greediness and appetite pursue the bare permissions of Nature. But in
this we have no necessity. Only this is to be read with two cautions. 1. So
long as the assaulted person is in actual danger, he must use all arts and
subterfuges which his wit or danger can supply him with, as passive defense,
flight, arts of diversion, entreaties, soft and gentle answers, or whatsoever
is in its kind innocent, to prevent his sin and my danger; that when he is
forced to his last defense, it may be certain he has nothing of Revenge
mingled in so sad a remedy. 2. That this be not (...), non principis, ulciscar,
dixit (...). Tacit. l. 3. Annal.
understood to be a permission to defend our lives against an angry and unjust
Prince: for if my lawful Prince should attempt my life with rage, or with the
abused solemnities of Law; in the first case the Sacredness of his Person, in
the second, the reverence and religion of Authority, are his defensatives, and
immure him, and bind my hands, that I must not (...) them up, but to Heaven,
for my own defense and his pardon.

5. But the vain pretenses of vainer persons have here made a Question where
there is no seruple; And if I may defend my Life with the sword, or with any
thing which Nature and the Laws forbid not, why not also mine Honor, which is
as dear as life, which makes my (...) without contempt, useful to my friend,
and comfortable to my self? For to be reputed a Coward, a baffled person, and
one that will take affronts, is to be miserable and scorned, and to invite all
insolent persons to do me injuries. May I not be permitted to fight for mine
Honor, and to wipe off the stains of my reputation? Honor is as dear as life,
and sometimes dearer. To this I have many things to say, For that which men in
this question call Honor is nothing but a reputation amongst persons vain,
unchristian in their deportment, empty and ignorant souls, who count that the
standard of Honor which is the instrument of reprobation; as if to be a
Gentleman were to be no Christian. They that have built their Reputation upon
such societies must take new estimates of it, according as the wine, or fancy,
or custom, or some great fighting person shall determine it; and whatsoever
invites a quarrel is a rule of Honor. But then it is a sad consideration to
remember, that it is accounted honor not to recede from any thing we have said
or done: It is honor not to take the Lie, in the mean time it is not
dishonorable to lie indeed, but to be told so; and not to kill him that says
it, and venture my life and his too, that is a forfeiture of reputation. A
Mistresses's favor, an idle discourse, a jest, a jealousy, a health, a
gayety, any thing must engage two lives in hazard, and two Souls in ruin; or
else they are dishonored. As if a Life, which is so dear to a man's self,
which ought to be dear to others, which all Laws and wisePrinces and States
have secured by the circumvallation of Laws and penalties, which nothing but
Heaven can recompense for the loss of, which is the breath of God, which to
preserve Christ died, the Son of God died, as if this were so contemptible a
thing, that it must be ventured for satisfaction of a vicious person, or a vain
custom, or such a folly which a wise and a severe person had rather die than be
guilty of. Honor is from him that honors: now certainly God and the King are
the fountains of Honor; right Reason and Religion, the Scripture and the Laws,
are the best rules of estimating Honor: and if we offer to account our Honors
by the senseless and illiterate discourses of vain and vicious persons, our
Honor can be no greater than the fountain from whence it is derivative; and at
this rate Harpaste, Seneca's Wive's fool, might have declared Thersites an
honorable person, and every bold Gladiator in a Roman Theater, or a fighting
Rebel among the slaves of Sparta, or a Trouper of Spartacus his Guard, might
have stood upon their Honor upon equal and as fair a challenge. Certainly
there is no greater honor than to be like the Holy Jesus, and he is delectable
in the eyes of God, and so are all his relatives and sollowers, by
participation of his honor; and nothing can be more honorable than to do wise
and excellent actions, according to the account of Divine and (...) Laws: and
if either God or the King can derive Honor upon their subjects, then
whatsoever is contrary to that which they honor must needs be base,
dishonorable and inglorious.

6. But if we be troubled for fear of new and succeeding injuries, and will
needs fight, and as much as lies in us kill our Brother to (...). (...). Quis
(...) statuit unquam, aut cui concedi (...) summo omnium periculo (...), ut
(...) jure (...), a quo (...); sdicat (...)? Cicero.
prevent an injury, nothing can be more unworthy of a Christian, nothing can be
more inhumane. (...), pleading in the Roman Senate in the behalf of the Rhodian
Ambassadors, who came to beg peace of the Commonwealth, which had entertained
an anger and some thoughts of war against them, upon pretense that the Rhodians
would war with them when they durst, discoursed severely and prudently against
such unreasonable purposes. And the life of men and the interest of states is
not like the trade of Fencers, whose lot is to conquer if they strike sirst, to
die if they be prevented: Man's life is not established upon so unequal and
unreasonable necessities, that either we must sirst do an injury, or else it is
certain we must receive a mischief. God's providence and care in his government
of the world is more vigilant and merciful, and he protects persons innocent
and just in all cases, except when he means to make an injury the instrument of
a grace, or a violent death to be the gate of glory. It was not ill answered of
(...) to King Polyphontes, who therefore killed his Brother, because he had
entertained a purpose to have killed him; You should only have done the same
injury to him which he did to you; you should still have had a purpose to kill
him: for his injustice went no farther; and it is hard to requite ill and
uncertain purposes with actual Murder, especially when we are as much secured
by the power of Laws, as the whole Commonwealth is in all its greatest
interests. And therefore for Christians to kill a man to prevent being bastled
or despised, is to use an extreme desperate remedy, infinitely painful and
deadly, to prevent a little griping in the belly foreseen as possible to happen
it may be three years after. But besides, this objection supposes a Disease
almost as earnestly to be cured as this of the main Question; for it represents
a man keeping company with lewd and debauched persons, spending his time in
vanity, drunken societies, or engaged in lust, or placing his (...) amongst
persons apt to do affronts and unworthy misdemeanors; and indeed an affront,
an injury, a blow, or a loud disgrace, is not the consequent of not sighting,
but a punishment for engaging in loose, baser and vicious company. If the
Gallants of the age would find an honest and a noble employment, or would be
delicate in the choice of their friends and company, or would be severe in
taking accounts of themselves and of their time, would live as becomes persons
wise and innocent, that is, like Christians, they would soon perceive
themselves removed far from injuries, and yet farther from trouble, when such
levities of mischance or folly should intervene. But suppose a man affronted or
disgraced, it is considerable whether the man deserved it or no. If he did, let
him entertain it for his punishment, and use it for an instrument of correction
and humility: If he did not, as an instance of fortitude and despite of lower
things. But to venture lives to abolish a past-act is madness, unless in both
those lives there was not good enough to be esteemed greater and of better
value than the light affront had in it of misery and trouble. Certainly those
persons are very unfortunate, in whose lives much more pleasure is not than
there is mischief in a light blow, or a lighter affront, from a vain or an
angry person. But suppose there were not, yet how can sighting or killing my
adversary wipe off my aspersion, or take off my blow, or prove that I did not
lie? For it is but an ill argument to say, If I dare kill him, then I did not
lie; or if I dare fight, then he struck me not; or if I dare venture damnation,
then I am an honorable person. And yet farther, who gave me power over my own
life, or over the life of another, that I shall venture my own, and offer to
take his? God and God's Vicegerent only are the Lords of lives; who made us
Judges, and Princes, or Gods? and if we be not such, we are Murderers and
Villains. When Moses would have parted the Duellists that fought in Egypt, the
injurious person asked him, Who made thee a judge or ruler over us? Will thou
kill me, as thou did the Egyptian yesterday? meaning, he had no power to
kill, none to judge of life and death, unless he had been made a Ruler. Yea but
flesh and blood cannot endure a blow or a disgrace. Grant that too, but take
this into the account, Flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
And yet besides this, those persons have but a tender stock of reason and
wisdom and patience who have not discourse enough to make them bear an injury,
which the Philosophy of the Gentiles, without the light of Christianity, (...).
Menand.
taught them to tolerate with so much equanimity and dispassionate
entertainment. That person is not a man who knows not how to suffer the
inconvenience of an accident, and indiscretion of light persons; or if he could
not, yet certainly that is a mad impatience when a man, to remedy the pain of a
drop of scalding water, shall drench himself in the liquid flames of pitch and
a bituminous bath.

7. Truth is, to fight a Duel is a thing that all Kingdoms are bound to
restrain with highest severity; it is a consociation of many the worst acts
that a person ordinarily can be guilty of; it is want of Charity, of Justice,
of Humility, of trust in God's providence; it is therefore Pride, and Murder,
and Injustice, and infinite Unreasonableness, and nothing of a Christian,
nothing of excuse, nothing of honor in it, if God and wise men be admitted
Judges of the Lists. And it would be considered, that every one that fights a
Duel must reckon himself as dead or dying, (for however any man flatters
himself by saying he will not kill, if he could avoid it; yet rather than be
killed he will, and to the danger of being killed his own act exposes him:) now
is it a good posture for a man to die with a sword in his hand thrust at his
Brother's breast with a purpose either explicit or implicit to have killed him?
Can a man die twice, that in case he miscarries and is damned for the first ill
dying, he may mend his fault and die better the next time? Can his vain,
imaginary and fantastic shadow of Reputation make him recompense for the
disgrace and confusion of face, and pains and horrors of Eternity? Is there no
such thing as forgiving injuries, nothing of the discipline of Jesus in our
spirits? are we called by the name of Christ, and have nothing in us but the
spirit of Cain, and Nimrod, and Joab? If neither Reason nor Religion can rule
us, neither interest nor safety can determine us, neither life nor Eternity can
move us, neither God nor wise men be sufficient Judges of Honor to us; then
our damnation is just, but it is heavy; our fall is certain, but it is cheap,
base, and inglorious. And let not the vanities or the Gallants of the world
slight this friendly monition, rejecting it with a scorn, because it is talking
like a Divine: it were no disparagement if they would do so too, and believe
accordingly; and they would find a better return of honor in the crowns of
Eternity by talking like a Divine, than by dying like a fool; by living in
imitation and obedience to the laws of the Holy Jesus, than by perishing, or
committing Murder, or by attempting it, or by venturing it, like a weak,
impotent, passionate and brutish person. Upon this Chapter it is sometime
asked, whether a Virgin may not kill a Ravisher to defend her Chastity.
Concerning which as we have no special and distinct warrant, so there is in
reason and analogy of the Gospel much for the negative. For since his act alone
cannot make her criminal, and is no more than a wound in my body, or a civil or
a natural inconvenience, it is unequal to take a life in exchange for a lesser
injury, and it is worse that I take it my self. Some great examples we find in
story, and their names are remembered in honor; but we can make no judgment of
them, but that their zeal was reproveable for its intemperance, though it had
excellency in the matter of the Passion.

8. But if we may not secure our Honor, or be revenged for injuries by the
sword, may we not crave the justice of the Law, and implore the vengeance of
the Judge, who is appointed for vengeance against evil doers? and the Judge
being the King's Officer, and the King God's Vicegerent, it is no more than
imploring God's hand; and that is giving place to wrath, which S. Paul speaks
of, that is, permitting all to the Divine Justice. To this I answer, That it is
not lawful to go to Law for every occasion or slighter injury, because it is
very distant from the mercies, forgiveness and gentleness of a Christian, to
contest for Trifles; (...); Timon. Phlias.
and it is certain that the injuries, or evil, or charges of trouble and
expense, will be more vexatious and afflictive to the person contested, than a
small instance of wrong is to the person injured. And it is a great
intemperance of anger and impotence of spirit, (...); and (...). Qui (...). 2.
de (...). 32.
a covetousness and impatience, to appeal to the Judge for determination
concerning a lock of Camel's hair or a Goat's beard, I mean any thing that is
less than the gravity of Laws or the solemnity of a Court, and that does not
outweigh the inconveniences of a Suit. But this we are to consider in the
expression of our Blessed Savior, If a man will sue thee (...). 5. 40.
at the Law, and take thy Cloak, let him have thy Coat also. Which words are a
particular instance in pursuit of the general Precept, Resist not, or avenge
not, evil. The primitive Christians (as it happens in the first fervours of a
Discipline) were sometimes severe in observation of the letter, not subtlely
distinguishing Counsels from Precepts, but swallowing all the words of Christ
without chewing or discrimination. They abstained from Tribunals, unless they
were forced thither by persecutors; but went not thither to repeat their goods.
And if we consider Suits of Law as they are wrapped in (...). (...).
circumstances of action and practice, with how many subtleties and arts they
are managed, how pleadings are made mercenary, and that it will be hard to find
right counsel that shall advise you to desist if your cause be wrong, (and
therefore there is great reason to distrust every Question, since, if it be
never so wrong, we shall meet Advocates to encourage us and plead (...).
for it) what danger of miscarriages, of uncharitableness, anger and
animosities, what desires to prevail, what care and (...).
fearfulness of the event, what (...) temptations do intervene, how many sins
are secretly (...) in our (...) and actions; if a Suit were of it self never so
lawful, it would concern the duty of a Christian to avoid it, as he prays
against temptations, and cuts off the opportunities of a sin. It is not lawful
for a Christian to sue his brother at the Law, unless he can be patient if he
loses, and charitable if he be wronged, and can (...) his end without any
mixture of Covetousness, or desires to prevail without Envy, or can believe
himself wrong when his Judge says he is, or can submit to peace when his just
cause is oppressed, and rejected and condemned, and without pain or regret can
sit down by the loss of his right, and of his pains and his money. And if he
can do all this, what need he go to Law? He may with less trouble and less
danger take the loss singly, and expect God's providence for reparation, than
disentitle himself to that by his own srowardness, and take the loss when it
comes laden with many circumstances of trouble.

9. But however by accident it may become unlawful to go to Law in a just
cause, or in any, yet by this Precept we are not (...). To go to Law for
revenge we are simply (...), that is, to return evil for evil; and therefore
all those Suits which are for (...).
vindictive sentences, not for reparative, are directly criminal. To follow a
Thief to death for spoiling my goods is extremely unreasonable and
uncharitable; for as there is no proportion between my goods and his life, (and
therefore I demand it to his evil and injury) so the putting him to death
repairs not my estate: the first makes it in me to be unjust, the latter
declares me malicious and revengeful. If I demand an eye for an eye, his eye
extinguished will not enlighten mine; and therefore to prosecute him to such
purposes is to resist or render evil with evil, directly against Christ's
Sermon. But if the postulation of sentence be in order only to restore my self,
we find it permitted by S. Paul, who, when for the (...) sake he forbad going
to Law before unbelievers, and for the danger and temptation's sake, and the
latent irregularity which is certainly appendent to ordinary Litigations, he is
angry indefinitely with them that go to Law; yet he advises that Christian
Arbitrators be appointed for decision of emergent Questions. And therefore when
the Supreme Authority has appointed and regularly established an Arbitrator,
the permission is the same. S. Paul is angry that among (...) Cor. 6. (...),
etc.
Christians there should be Suits, but it is therefore he is chiefly angry
because Christians do wrong; they who should rather suffer wrong, yet that they
should do it, and defraud their brother, which in some sense enforces Suits,
that is it he highly blames. But when injustice is done, and a man is in a
considerable degree defrauded, then it is permitted to him to repeat his own
before Christian Arbitrators, whether chosen by private consent or public
authority; for that circumstance makes no essential alteration in the Question:
but then this must be done with as much simplicity and unmingled design as is
possible, without any desire of rendering evil to the person of the offender,
without arts of heightning the charge, without prolongation, devices, and arts
of vexation, without anger and animosities; and then although accidentally
there is some appendent charge to the offending person, that is not accounted
upon the stock of Revenge, because it was not designed, and is not desired, and
is cared for to prevent it as much as may be, and therefore offer was made of
private and unchargeable Arbitrators; and this being refused, the charge and
accidental evil, if it be less than the loss of my sufferance and injury, must
be reckoned to the necessities of affairs, and put upon the stock of his
injustice, and will not affix a guilt upon the actor. I say, this is true, when
the actor has used all means to accord it without charge, and when he is
refused manages it with as little as he can, and when it is nothing of his
desire, but something of his trouble, that he cannot have his own without the
lesser accidental evil to the offender, and that the question is great and
weighty in his proportion; (...) -- (...) (...)
then a Suit of Law is of it self lawful. But then let it be remembered how many
ways afterward it may become unlawful, and I have no more to add in this
Article but the saying of the son of Sirach, He that loves danger shall perish
in it. And certainly he had need be an Angel that manages a Suit innocently;
and he that has so excellent a spirit as with innocence to run through the
(...) temptations of a Lawsuit, in all probability has so much holiness as to
suffer the injury, and so much prudence as to avoid the danger: and therefore
nothing but a very great defalcation or ruin of a man's estate will from the
beginning to the end justify such a controversy. When the man is put to it
so, that he cannot do some other duty without venturing in this, then the grace
of God is sufficient for him; but he that enters lightly shall walk
dangerously, and a thousand to one but he will fall foully. (...) Cor. 6. 7.
It is utterly a fault among you, said S. Paul, because ye go to Law one with
another. It is (...).
not always a crime, but ever a fault and an irregularity, a recession from
Christian perfection, and an entertaining of a danger, which though we escape
through, yet it was a fault to have entered into it, when we might have avoided
it. And even then Verse. 12.
when it is lawful for us, it is not expedient: For so the Apostle sums up his
reprehension concerning Christians going to Law, We must rather take wrong,
rather suffer our Verse. 7.
selves to be defrauded; and when we cannot bear the burden of the loss, then
indeed we are permitted to appeal to Christian Judges; but then there are so
many cautions to be observed, that it may be the remedy is worse than the
disease. I only observe this one thing, that S. Paul permits it only in the
instance of defraudation or matter of interest; such as are defending of Widows
and Orphans and Churches, which in estimation of Law are by way of fiction
reckoned to be in pupillage and minority; add also repeating our own interests,
when our necessities, or the support of our family and relatives, requires it:
for all these are cases of Charity or duty respectively. But besides the matter
of defraudation, we find no instance expressed, nor any equality and parallel
of reason to permit Christians in any case to go to Law; because in other
things the sentence is but vindictive, and cannot repair us; and therefore
demanding Justice is a rendering evil in the proper matter of Revenge.
Concerning which I know no (...) but in an action of Scandal and ill report.
But because an innocent and an holy life will force light out of darkness, and
Humility, and Patience, and waiting upon God will bring glory out of shame; I
suppose he who goes to Law to regain his credit attempts the cure by
incompetent remedies: if the accusation be public, the Law will call him to an
account, and then he is upon his defense, and must acquit himself with meekness
and sincerity; but this allows not him to be the actor, for then it is rather a
design of Revenge than a proper deletery of his disgrace, and purgative of the
(...). For if the accusation can be proved, it was no calumny; if it be not
proved, the person is not always innocent, and to have been accused leaves
something foul in his reputation: and therefore he that by Law makes it more
public propagates his own disgrace, and sends his shame farther than his
innocence, and the crime will go whither his absolution shall not arrive.

10. If it be yet farther questioned, whether it be lawful to pray for a
Revenge, or a Punishment upon the offender, (I reckon them all one; he that
prays for punishment of him that did him personal injury cannot easily be
supposed to separate the Punishment from his own Revenge) I answer, that
although God be the avenger of all our wrongs, yet it were fit for us to have
the affections of brethren, not the designs and purposes of a Judge, but leave
them to him to whom they are proper. When in the bitterness of soul an
oppressed person curses sadly, and prays for vengeance, the calamity of the man
and the violence of his enemy hasten a curse, and ascertain it. But whatever
excuses the greatness of the Oppression may make I know not; but the bitterness
of the spirit, besides that it is pitiable as it is a passion, yet it is
violent and less Christian as it is active and sends forth prayers. Woe is
pronounced to them by whom the (...) comes; yet we must beware of offenses,
because by them we are engaged in a sin: and he that prays for a Revenge has a
revengeful spirit, however it be restrained by Laws and exterior tendernesses
from acting such dire purposes. And he that prays for Revenge may indeed
procure a Justice to be done upon the injurious person; but oftentimes it
happens then to fall on him when we least wish it, when we also have a conjunct
interest in the others preservation and escape: God so punishing the first
wrong, that we also may smart for our uncharitable wishes. For the ground of
all this discourse is, that it is part of Christian Charity to forgive (...)
qui (...); qui (...). Tacit.
injuries: which forgiveness of the injury, although it may reasonably enough
stand with my fair and innocent requiring of my own, which goes no farther than
a fair repetition; yet in no case can it stand with the acting and desiring
Revenge, which also in the formality of Revenge can have no pretense of
Charity, because it is ineffective to my restitution. This Discourse concerns
private persons; whether it concern the Question of War, and how far, is not
proper for this Consideration.

Of Alms. PART II.
1. BUT Christian Charity has its effect also in Benefits as well as
Gentleness and innocence: Give to him that asks, and from him that would
borrow of thee turn Matthew. 5 42. 6. 3.
not thou away. But when thou do thine Alms, (...) not thy left hand know
what thy right hand does. These are the Precepts of the Lord, for the substance
and the manner of Alms, for the quantity and freeness of the donative, and the
simplicity of him that gives; to which add those other words of his, Sell your
possessions, and give Alms. This Luke 12. 33.
Precept with its circumstances was intended as a defensative against
Covetousness and Prodigality, and a suppletory to make up the wants, and to
make even the breaches of mankind: In which we shall best understand our
obligation, if we consider in what proportion we must give Alms, and to what
persons, and in what manner.

2. First, For the Quantity, we shall best take an estimate of it, if we
remember 1 Timothy 6. 8.
the portion which God allows to Christians, Having food and raiment, let us be
content with it: and our Blessed Savior at the latter end of this Sermon stirs
us up to confidence in God, and not to doubt our provisions, by telling that
God feeds the Ravens, and clothes the Lilies, and he will much rather do it to
us, he will clothe us and feed us; no more is in the promise, no more is in our
need: and therefore whatsoever is beside our needs natural and personal, that
is, proportioning our needs to the condition of our life, and exigence of our
calling, and quality of our person, all that can be spared from what we
modestly and temperately spend in our support, and the supply of our families,
(...) convincitur, qui (...) sibi (...), did. 42.
and other necessary incidents, all that is to be spent in Charity or Religion.
He defrauds the poor of their right who detains from them beyond his own
necessary, prudent, and convenient supplies, says S. Hierom: and this is
intended to be a retrenchment of all vain expenses, costly feasts, rich
clothes, pompous retinue, and such (...) of expense which of themselves serve
no end of piety or just policy, but by wife and temperate persons are esteemed
unnecessary, and without which the dignity (...)
and just value of the person may still be retained. Whatsoever is vainly spent
was the portion of the poor; whatsoever we lose in idle gaming, revelling, and
wantonness Hor. l. 2. (...). 2.
of prodigality, was designed by Christ to refresh his own bowels, to fill the
bellies of James 5. 2. 3.
the poor; whatsoever lies in our repository useless and superfluous, all that
is the poor (...) fur auferat (...) dederis, solas semper babebis (...).
Martial.
man's inheritance: and certainly there is not any greater baseness than to
suffer a man to perish or be in extreme want of that which God gave me for him,
and beyond my own needs. It is unthankfulness to God, it is unmercifulness to
the poor, it is improvidence to our selves, it is unfaithfulness in the
dispensation of the money of which (...) maximum incentivum (...) compatiamur
(...) quantum possumus, (...) interdum (...). S. Ambr. l. 2. (...).
God made him but the Steward, and his chest the Bank for the exchange and
issuing it to the indigent. And he that is unmerciful and unjust is extremely
unlike God. But in taking this estimate concerning our (...) we are to (...)
according to the rules of prudence, not making determinations in grains and
scruples, but in the greater actions and accountable proportions of our
estates. And if any man seeing great necessities of indigent and calamitous
persons shall give beyond his ability, he had the Philippians for his
precedent, and he has God engaged for his payment, and a greater (...) in
Heaven for his reward. Only this; as we are to provide for our selves, so also
for our Family and the relatives of our charge and nearer endearments, not only
with a provision of the present day's entertainment, but also for all nearer,
probable, foreseen and expected events, such as are Portions for our Children,
Dowries for Daughters: but this must not be extended to care and reservations
for all possible and far-distant events; but so much is to be permitted to the
Divine Providence as our present duty gives leave. In which although a prudent
guide and a sober reason are to make application to practice, yet the Rule in
general is, That by so much we are to relieve the poor, as we can deduct from
such a portion of good things as God permits us to use for our own support, and
reasonable and temporal conveniences of our person and condition; ever
remembering, that if we increase in our Estate we also should increase in
Charity, that in this also may be verified what is written, He that had much
had nothing over, and he that had little had no lack. There is in the quantity
of these donatives some latitude; but if we sow sparingly, or if we scatter
plentifully, so we shall reap: Only we must be careful that no extreme
necessity or biting want lies upon any poor man, whom we can relieve without
bringing such a want upon our selves which is less than the permissions of
fortune which the mercies of God have permitted to us, that is, food and
raiment proper for us. Under food and raiment all the necessaries of our life
are to be understood: Whatsoever is more than this is counsel and perfection;
for which a proportionable reward is deposited in the treasures of Eternity.

3. Secondly, If question be made concerning the Persons who are to be the
object of our Alms, our rule is plain and easy; for nothing is required in the
person suscipient and capable of Alms, but that he be in misery and want, and
unable to relieve himself. This last clause I insert in pursuance of that
caution given to the Church of Thessalonica by S. Paul, If any one will not
work, neither let him eat; for we must be careful that our 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
Charity, which is intended to minister to poor men's needs, do not minister to
idleness and the love of beggary, and a wandering, useless, unprofitable life.
But, abating this, there is no other consideration that can exempt any needy
person from participation of your Charity; not, though (...)
he be your Enemy; (for that is it which our Blessed Savior -- (...)(...) 39.
means in the appendix of this Precept, Love your Enemies, that is, according
to the exposition of the Apostle, If thine enemy hunger, (...) him, if he
thirst, give him drink) not, though he be an Unbeliever; not, though he be a
vicious (...), vir Consularis, quum pal (...) quidam (...) est, (...) homini.
A. Gell. l. 9. c. 2.
person: provided only that the vice be such to which your relief ministers no
fuel and adds no flame; and if the mere necessities of his nature be supplied,
it will be a fair security against the danger; but if the vice be in the scene
of the body, all freer comforts are to be denied him, because they are but
incentives of sin and Angels of darkness. This I the rather insert, that the
pride and supercilious austerities of some persons become not to them an
instrument of excuse from ministering to needy persons, upon pretense their own
sins brought them into that condition. For though the causes of our calamities
are many times great secrets of Providence, yet suppose the poverty of the man
was the effect of his Prodigality or other baseness, it matters not as to our
duty how he came into it, but where he is; lest we also be denied a visit in
our sicknesses, and a comfort in our sorrow, or a counsel in our doubts, or aid
in any distress, upon pretense that such sadness was procured by our sins: and
ten to one but it was so. Do good to all, faith the Apostle, but especially to
the family of faith; for to them our Charity is most proper and proportioned:
to all, viz. who are in need, and cannot relieve themselves; in which number
persons that can work are not to be accounted. So that if it be necessary to
observe an order in our Charity, that is, when we cannot supply and suffice for
all our opportunities of mercy, then let not the Brethren of our Lord go away
ashamed; and in other things observe the order and propriety of your own
relations, -- (...) Limine (...), and (...), and falso (...). Juren. Satyr. 1.
and where there is otherwise no difference, the degree of the necessity is
first to be considered. This also, if the necessity be (...) and extreme,
whatever the man be, he is first (...). Menand.
to be relieved before the lesser necessities of the best persons or most holy
poor. But the proper objects of our Charity are old persons, sick or impotent,
laborious and poor Housekeepers, Widows and Orphans, people oppressed or
persecuted for the cause of Righteousness, distressed Strangers, Captives and
abused Slaves, prisoners of Debt. To these we must be liberal, whether they be
holy or unholy, remembering that we are sons of that Father who makes the dew of
Heaven to drop upon the dwellings of the righteous and the fields of sinners.

4. Thirdly, The Manner of giving Alms is an office of Christian prudence; for
in what instances we are to exemplify our Charity we must be determined by our
own powers, and others needs. The Scripture reckons entertaining strangers,
visiting the sick, going to prisons, feeding and clothing the hungry and
naked: to which, by the exigence of the poor and the analogy of Charity, many
other are to be added. The Amititiam (...) ad (...) nostrum referemus, (...) ad
illius commoda quem diligimus, nonerit ista (...) quadam utilltatum (...):
Prata, and (...), and (...) diliguntur (...) modo, (...) strctus ex (...);
Hominum charitas and (...) est. Cicer, de (...). Deor. l. 1.
Holy Jesus in the very Precept instanced in lending money to them that need to
borrow; and he adds, looking for nothing again, that is, if they be unable to
pay it. Forgiving Debts is a great instance of mercy, and a particular of
excellent relief: but to imprison men for Debt, when it is certain they are not
able to pay it, and by that prison will be far more disabled, is an
uncharitableness next to the cruelties of salvages, and at infinite distance
from the mercies of the Holy Jesus.

Of not Judging. PART III.
ANother instance of Charity our great Master inserted in this Sermon, [ not to
judge our Brother:] and this is a Charity so cheap and so reasonable, that it
requires nothing of us but silence in our spirits. We may perform this duty at
the charge of a negative; if we meddle not with other men's affairs we shall do
them no wrong, and purchase to our selves a peace, and be secured the rather
from the (...) sentence of a severer Judge. But this interdict forbids only
such judging as is ungentle and uncharitable: in criminal causes let us find
all the ways to alleviate the burden of the man by just excuses, by
extenuating or lessening accidents, by abatement of incident circumstances, by
gentle sentences, and whatsoever can do relief to the person, that his spirit
be not exasperated, that the crime be not the parent of impudence, that he be
not insulted on, that he be invited to repentance, and by such sweetnesses he
be led to his restitution. This also in questions of doubts obliges us to
determine Qui (...) propriis offendat amicum (...), ignoscat (...) illius:
aquum is it (...). Horat. l. 1. sat. 3.
to the more favorable sense; and we also do need the same mercies, and
therefore should do well by our own rigor not to disintitle our selves to such
possibilities and reserves (...) proximum, (...) ad (...) locum (...). Prove.
(...). -- (...)
of Charity. But it is foul and base, by detraction and iniquity to blast the
reputation of an honorable action, and (...) in (...) sancimus iniquam? Nam
vitiis nemo sins (...); optimus ille est Qui minimis urgetur. -- Horat. ibid.
the fair name of virtue with a calumny. But this duty is also a part of the
grace of Justice and of Humility, and by its relation and kindred to so many
virtues is furnished with so many arguments of amability and endearment.

The PRAYER.
HOly and merciful Jesus, who art the great principle and the instrument of
conveying to us the charity and mercies of Eternity, who did love us when we
were enemies, forgive us when we were debtors, recover us when we were dead,
ransom us when we were slaves, relieve us when we were poor, and naked, and
wandering, and full of sadness and necessities; give us the grace of Charity,
that we may be pitiful and compassionate of the needs of our necessitous
Brethren, that we may be apt to relieve them, and that according to our duty
and possibilities we may rescue them from their calamities. Give us courteous,
affable, and liberal souls; let us by thy example forgive our debtors, and love
our enemies, and do to them offices of civility and tenderness and relief;
always propounding thee for our pattern, and thy mercies for our precedent, and
thy Precepts for our rule, and thy Spirit for our guide: that we, showing mercy
here, may receive the mercies of Eternity by thy merits, and by thy charities,
and dispensation, O Holy and merciful Jesus.

Amen.
DISCOURSE XII. Of the Second additional Precept of Christ, ( viz.) Of PRAYER.
Non magna loquimur sed vivimus.
Cum clamore valido et lachrymas pr^ces offerens exauditus ^^^ pro sua
rererent^^




1. THE Soul of a Christian is the house of God, Ye are God's building, (says
S. Paul;) but the house of God is the house of Prayer: and therefore Prayer is
1 Cor. 3. 9.
the work of the Soul, whose organs are intended for instruments of the Divine
praises; and when every stop and pause of those instruments is but the
conclusion of a Collect, and every breathing is a Prayer, then the Body becomes
a Temple, and the Soul is the Sanctuary, and more private recess, and place of
intercourse. Prayer is the great duty, and the greatest privilege of a
Christian; it is his intercourse with God, his Sanctuary in troubles, his
remedy for sins, his cure of griefs, and, as S. Gregory calls it, it is the
principal instrument whereby we minister to God in execution of the decrees of
eternal Predestination; and those things which God intends for us, we bring to
our selves by the mediation of holy Prayers. Prayer is the (...) Damasc. l. 3.
Orthodox. sid.
ascent of the mind to God, and a petitioning for such things as we need for
our support and duty. It is an abstract and summary of Christian Religion.
Prayer is an act of Religion and Dinine Qui singit sacros auro vel marmore
vultus, Non facit ille D^^s: qui regat, ille facit.
Worship, confessing his power and his mercy; it celebrates his Attributes, and
confesses his glories, and reveres his person, and implores his aid, and gives
thanks for his blessings: it is an act of Humility, condescension, and
dependence, expressed in the prostration of our bodies and humiliation of our
spirits: it is an act of Charity when we pray for others; it is an act of
Repentance when it confesses and begs pardon for our sins, and exercises every
Grace according to the design of the man, and the matter of the Prayer. So that
there will be less need to amass arguments to invite us to this Duty; every
part is an excellence, and every end of it is a blessing, and every design is a
motive, and every need is an impulsive to this holy office. Let us but remember
how many needs we have, at how cheap a rate we may obtain their remedies, and
yet how honorable the employment is to go to God with confidence, and to fetch
our supplies with easiness and joy; and then, without farther preface, we may
address our selves to the understanding of that Duty by which we imitate the
employment of Angels and beatified spirits, by which we ascend to God in spirit
while we remain on earth, and God descends on earth while he yet resides in
Heaven, sitting there on the Throne of his Kingdom.

2. Our first enquiry must be concerning the Matter of our Prayers; for our
Desires are not to be the rule of our Prayers, unless Reason and Religion be
the rule of our Desires. The old Heathens (...) ridet (...) in (...). (...)
prayed to their Gods for such things which they were ashamed to name publicly
before men; and these were their private prayers, which they durst not for
their undecency or iniquity make public. And indeed sometimes the best men ask
of God Things not unlawful in themselves, yet very hurtful to them: and
therefore, as by the Spirit of God and right Reason we are taught in general
what is lawful to be asked; so it is still to be submitted to God, when we have
asked lawful things, to grant to us in -- Si tuito mala (...) susurro (...) --
Pu'chra Laverna, D. (...), da justum (...), and fraudibus (...) nubem. Horat.
kindness, or to deny us in mercy: after all the rules that can be given us, we
not being able in many instances to judge for our selves, unless also we could
certainly pronounce concerning future contingencies. But the Holy Ghost being
now sent upon the Church, and the rule of Christ being left to his Church,
together with his form of Prayer taught and prescribed to his Disciples, we
have sufficient instruction for the matter of our Prayers so far as concerns
the lawfulness or unlawfulness. And the rule is easy and of no variety. 1. For
we are bound to pray for all things that concern our duty, all that we are
bound to labor for; such as are Glory and Grace, necessary assistances of the
Spirit, and rewards spiritual, Heaven and Heavenly things. 2. Concerning those
things which we may with safety hope for, but are not matter of duty to us, we
may lawfully testify our hope and express our desires by petition: but if in
their particulars they are under no express promise, but only conveniences of
our life and person, it is only lawful to pray for them under condition, that
they may conform to God's will and our duty, as they are good and placed in the
best order of eternity. Therefore 1 for spiritual blessings let our Prayers be
particularly importunate, perpetual and persevering: 2 For temporal blessings
let them be generally -- Si (...) vit, (...) ipsis expendere Numinibus, quid
(...) sit (...) is; Nam pro (...) quaque dabunt (...), Juvenal.
short, conditional and modest: 3 And whatsoever things are of mixed nature,
more spiritual than Riches, and less necessary than Graces, such as are gifts
and exterior aids, we may for them as we may desire them, and as we may expect
(...) in (...) regantium (...) -- Multa (...) (est.
them, that is, with more confidence and less restraint than D sunt (...) est,
cui (...), qued (...) est, manu. Hor. l. 3. od. 16.
in the matter of temporal requests, but with more reservedness and less
boldness of petition than when we pray for the graces of Sanctification. In the
first case we are bound to pray: in the second, it is only lawful under certain
conditions: in the third, it becomes to us an act of zeal, nobleness, and
Christian prudence. But the matter of our Prayers is best taught us in the form
our Lord taught his Disciples; which because it is short, mysterious, and, like
the treasures of the Spirit, full of wisdom and latent senses, it is not
improper to draw Oration (...) quantum substringitur verbis. tantum dissunditur
sensibus. Tertull. Evangelii (...). Idem l. (...) Orat. c. 1. Si (...) and
(...) pessumus quam quod in (...). S. Aug. (...). in Erem.
forth those excellencies which are intended and signified by every Petition,
that by so excellent an authority we may know what it is lawful to beg of God.

3. Our Father which art in Heaven. The address reminds us of many parts of our
Vir bonus (...) D. i progenies. Senec. de Provident (...) Menan. Hot donum
(...) donum, ut (...) bominem vocet (...), Leo Ser. de Nativ.
duty. If God be our Father, where is his fear, and reverence, and obedience?
If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham; and, Ye are of
your father the Devil, for his works ye do. Let us not dare to call him Father,
if we be rebels and enemies; but if we be obedient, then we know he is our
Father, and will give us a Child's portion, and the inheritance of Sons. But it
is observable, that Christ here speaking concerning private Prayer, does
describe it in a form of plural signification; to tell us, that we are to draw
into the communication of our prayers all those who are Matthew. 23. 8.
confederated in the common relation of Sons to the same Father. Which art in
Heaven Ephesians. 4. 6.
tells us Nibil (...) in insimis, qui Patrem (...) incoeslis. Leo Ser. de Asens.
where our hopes and our hearts must be fixed, whither our desires and our
prayers must tend. Sursum corda; Where our treasure is, there must our hearts
be also.

4. Hallowed be thy Name. That is, Let thy Name, thy Essence and glorious
Attributes be honored and adored in all the world, believed by Faith, loved by
Charity, celebrated with praises, thanked with Eucharist; and let thy Name be
hallowed in us; as it is in it self. Thy Name being called upon us, let us walk
worthy of that calling; that our light may shine before men, that they seeing
our good works may glorify thee our Father which art in heaven. In order also
to the sanctification of thy Name grant that all our praises, hymns,
Eucharistical remembrances and representments of thy glories may be useful,
blessed and esfectual for the dispersing thy fame, and advancing thy honor
over all the world. This is a direct and formal act of worshipping and
adoration. The Name of God is representative of God himself, and it signifies,
Be thou worshipped and adored, be thou thanked and celebrated with honor and
Eucharist.

5. Thy Kingdom come. That is, As thou have caused to be preached and published
the coming of thy Kingdom, the peace and truth, the revelation and glories of
the Gospel; so let it come verily and esfectually to us and all the world; that
thou may truly reign in our spirits, exercising absolute dominion, subduing
all thine Enemies, ruling in our Faculties, in the Understanding by Faith, in
the Will by Charity, in the Passions by Mortification, in the Members by a
chaste and right use of the parts. And as it was more particularly and in the
letter proper at the beginning of Christ's Preaching, when he also taught the
Prayer, that God would hasten the coming of the Gospel to all the world: so
(...) also and ever it will be in its proportion necessary and pious to pray
that it may come still, making greater progress in the world, extending it self
where yet it is not, and intending it where it is already; that the Kingdom of
Christ may not only be in us in name and form and honorable appellatives, but
in effect and power. This Petition in the first Ages of Christianity was not
expounded to signify a prayer for Christ's second coming; because the Gospel
not being preached to all the world, they prayed for the delay of the day of
Judgment, that Christ's Kingdom upon earth might have its proper increment: but
since then every Age, as it is more forward in time, so it is more earnest in
desire to accomplish the intermedial Prophecies, that the Kingdom of God the
Father might come in glories infinite. And, indeed, the Kingdom of Grace being
in order to the Kingdom of Glory, this, as it is principally to be desired, so
may possibly be intended chiefly: which also is the more probable, because the
address of this Prayer being to God the Father, it is proper to observe, that
the Kingdom of Grace, or of the Gospel, is called the Kingdom of the Colos. 1.
13. Revel. 1. 9.
Son, and that of Glory in the style of the Scripture is the Kingdom of the
Father. S. German, Patriarch of Constantinople, Matthew. 13. 41.
Luke 6. 20.
expounds it with some little difference, but not ill; Thy Kingdom come, that
is, Matthew. 16. 28.
Let thy Holy Spirit come into us; for the Kingdom of Heaven is within us,
says the Holy Scripture: and so it intimates our desires that the promise of
the Father, and the Prophecies of old, and the Holy Ghost the Comforter, may
come upon us: Let that anointing from above descend upon us, whereby we may be
anointed Kings and Priests in a spiritual Kingdom and Priesthood by a holy
Chrism.

6. Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. That is, The whole Economy
and dispensation of thy Providence be the guide of the world, and the measure
of our desire; that we be patient in all accidents, conformable to God's will
both in doing and in suffering, submitting to changes, and even to
persecutions, and doing all God's will: which because without God's aid we
cannot do, therefore we beg it of him by prayer; but by his aid we are (...) we
may do it in the manner of Angelical obedience, that is, promptly, readily,
cheerfully, and with all our faculties. Or thus: As the Angels in Heaven serve
thee with harmony, concord and peace; so let us all join in the service of thy
Majesty with peace and purity, and love unfeigned: that as all the Angels are
in peace, and amongst them there is no persecutor and none persecuted, there is
none afflicting or afflicted, none assaulting or assaulted, but all in
sweetness and peaceable serenity glorifying thee; so let thy will be done on
earth by all the world in peace and unity, in charity and tranquillity, that
with one heart and one voice we may glorify thee our universal Father, having
in us nothing that may displease thee, having quitted all our own desires and
pretensions, living in Angelick conformity, our Souls subject to thee, and our
Passions to our Souls; that in earth also thy will may be done as in the spirit
and Soul, which is a portion of the heavenly substance. These three Petitions
are addressed to God by way of adoration. In the first the Soul puts on the
affections of a Child, and devests it self of its own interest, offering it
self up wholly to the designs and glorifications of God. In the second it puts
on the relation and duty of a Subject to her legitimate Prince, seeking the
promotion of his Regal Interest. In the third she puts on the affection of a
Spouse, loving the same love, and choosing the same object, and delighting in
unions and conformities. The next part descends lower, and makes addresses to
God in relation to our own necessities.

7. Give us this day our (...), quod (...) (...) ((...) S. (...)) (...) [
(...):] S. Lucas [ (...),] (...), (...)
daily bread. That is, Give unto us all that is necessary for the support of
our lives, the bread of our necessity, so the Syriack Interpreter reads it;
This day give us the portion of bread which is day by day necessary. Give us
the bread or support which we shall need all our lives; only this day minister
our present part. For we pray for the necessary bread or maintenance, which God
knows we shall need all (...) Sordidus (...), Horat. l. 2. Od. 16.
our days; but that we be not careful for to morrow, we are taught to pray not
that it be all at once represented or deposited, (...) Ab Jove donari (...).
Horat, ad (...), l. 2. F. p. 12.
but that God would minister it as we need it, how he pleases: but our needs
are to be the measure of our desires, our desires must not make our needs; that
we may be consident of the Divine Providence, and not at all covetous: for
therefore God feeds his people with extemporary provisions, that by needing
always they may learn to pray to him, and by (...) Plutarch.
being still supplied may learn to trust him for the future, and thank him for
that is past, and rejoice in the present. So God rained down Manna, giving them
their daily portion; and so all Fathers and Masters minister to their children
and servants, giving them their proportion as they eat it, not the meat of a
year at once; and yet no child or servant fears want, if his Parent or Lord
were good, and wise, and rich. And it is necessary for all to pray this Prayer:
the Poor, because they want the bread, and have it not deposited but in the
hands of God; mercy ploughing the (...) of Heaven (as Job's expression is)
brings them corn; and the caltel upon a thousand hills are God's, and they find
the poor man meat: the Rich also need this Prayer, because although they have
the bread, yet they need the blessing; and what they have now may perish or be
taken from them; and as preservation is a perpetual creation, so the continuing
to rich men what God has already bestowed is a continual giving it. Young men
must pray, because their needs are like to be the longer; and Old men, because
they are present: but all these are to pray but for the (...) in (...) quod
(...); and (...). -- Horat. l 2 Od. 16. -- (...)? Horat. l. 2. Od. (...). (...)
longam: Jam (...), Et (...) exilis (...). -- Horat. l. 1. Od. 4. (...). Conc.
(...).
present; that which in estimation of Law is to be reckoned as imminent upon
the present, and part of this state and condition. But it is great
improvidence, and an unchristian spirit, for old men to heap up provisions, and
load their sumpters still the more by how much their way is shorter. But there
is also a bread which came down from heaven, a diviner nutriment of our Souls,
the food and wine of Angels, Christ himself, as he communicates himself in the
expresses of his Word and Sacraments: and if we be destitute of this bread, we
are miserable and perishing people. We must pray that our Souls also may feed
upon those celestial viands prepared for us in the antepasts of the Gospel,
till the great and fuller meal of the Supper of the Lamb shall answer all our
prayers, and (...) every desire.

8. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. Not
only those sins of infirmity, invasion, and sudden surprise, which, like
excrescencies of luxuriant trees, adhere to many actions by inadvertency, and
either natural weakness or accidental prejudice; but also all those great sins
which were washed off from our Souls, and the stain taken away in Baptism; or
when by choice and after the use of Reason we gave up our names to Christ, when
we first received the adoption of sons: for even those things were so pardoned,
that we must for ever confess and glory in the Divine mercy, and still
ascertain it by performing what we then promised, and which were the conditions
of our covenant. For although Christ has taken off the guilt, yet still there
remains the disreputation; and S. Paul calls himself the chiefest of sinners,
not referring to his present condition, but to his former persecuting the
Church of God, which is one of the greatest crimes in the world, and for ever
he asked pardon for it: and so must we, knowing that they may return; if we
shake off the yoke of Christ, and break his cords from us, the bands of the
covenant Evangelical, the sins will return so as to undo us. And this we pray
with a tacit obligation to forgive: for so only and upon that condition we beg
pardon to be given or continued respectively; that is, as we from our hearts
forgive them that did us injury in any kind, never entertaining so much as a
thought of revenge, but contrariwise loving them that did us wrong; for so we
beg that God should do to us: and therefore it is but a lesser revenge to say,
I will forgive, but I will never have to do with him. For if he become an
object of Charity, we must have to do with him to relieve him; because he needs
prayers, we must have to do with him and pray for him: and to refuse his
society when it is reasonably and innocently offered, is to deny that to him
which Christians have only been (...) and diligi. Hugo de S. Victor. l. 2.
(...), in (...).
taught to deny to persons excommunicate, to persons under punishment, i. e. to
persons not yet forgiven: and we shall have but an evil portion, if God should
forgive our sins, and should not also love us, and do us grace, and bestow
benefits upon us. So we must forgive others; so God forgives us.

9. And lead us not into temptation. S. Cyprian, out of an old Latin copy,
reads it, (...) S. German. (...). C P. (...)
Suffer us not to be led into temptation, that is, Suffer us not to be overcome
by temptation. And therefore we are bound to prevent our access to such
temptation whose very approximation is dangerous, and the contact is irregular
and evil; such as are temptations of the flesh: yet in other temptations the
assault sometimes makes confident, and hardens a resolution. For some spirits,
who are softened by fair usages, are steeled and emboldned by a persecution. But
of what nature soever the temptations be, whether they be such whose approach a
Christian is bound to fear, or such which are the certain lot of Christians,
(such are troubles and persecutions, into which when we enter we must count it
joy) yet we are to pray that we enter not into the possession of the
temptation, that we be not overcome by it.

10. But deliver us from evil. From the assaults or violence of evil, from the
Wicked one, who not only presents us with objects, but heightens our
concupiscence, and makes us imaginative, fantastical and passionate, setting
on the temptation, making the lust active, and the man full of appetite, and
the appetite full of energy and power: therefore deliver us from the Evil one,
who is interested as an enemy in every hostility and in every danger. Let not
Satan have any power or advantage over us; and let not evil men prevail upon us
in our danger, much less to our ruin. Make us safe under the covering of thy
wings against all fraud and every violence, that no temptation destroy our
hopes, or break our strength, or alter our state, or overthrow our glories. In
these last Petitions, which concern our selves, the Soul has affections proper
to her own needs; as in the former proportion to God's glory. In the first of
these, the affection of a poor, indigent, and necessitous Beggar; in the
second, of a delinquent and penitent servant; in the last, of a person in
affliction or danger. And after all this the reason of our confidence is
derived from God.

11. For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever. That is,
These which we beg are for the honor of thy kingdom, for the manifestation of
thy power, and the glory of thy Name and mercies: And it is an express Doxology
or Adoration, which is apt and (...) to conclude all our Prayers and addresses
to God.

12. These are the generals and great Treasures of matter to which all our
present or sudden needs are reducible; and when we make our Prayers more minute
and particular, if the instance be in matter of duty and merely spiritual,
there is no danger: but when our needs are temporal, or we are transported with
secular desires, all descending to particulars is -- Pro jucundis (...) est
(...) homo quam (...). Nes, animorum (...) and (...): at (...) qui (...). Juven.
a confining the Divine Providence, a judging for our selves, a begging a
temptation oftentimes, sometimes a mischief: and to beg beyond the necessities
of our life, is a mutiny against that Providence which assigns to Christians no
more but food and raiment for their own use; all other excrescencies of
possessions being entrusted to the rich man's (...), only as to a steward, and
he shall be accountable for the coat that lies by him, as the portion of moths,
and for the shoes which are the spoils of mouldiness, and the contumely of
plenty. Grant me, O Lord, not (...)
what I desire, but what is profitable for me. For sometimes we desire that
which in the succeeding event of things will undo us. This rule is in all
things that concern our selves. There is some little difference in the affairs
and necessities of other men: for, provided we submit to the Divine Providence,
and pray for good things for others only with a tacit condition, so far as
they are good and profitable in order to the best ends, yet if we be
particular, there is no covetousness in it; there may be indiscretion in the
particular, but in the general no fault, because it is a prayer and a design of
Charity. For Kings and all that are in authority we may yet enlarge, and pray
for a peaceable reign, true lieges, strong armies, victories and fair success
in their just -- (...). Virg.
wars, health, long life, and riches, because they have a capacity which
private persons have not; and whatsoever is good for single persons, and
whatsoever is apt for their uses as public persons, all that we may and we
must pray for, either particularly, for so we may, or in general
significations, for so we must at least: that we may lead a godly, peaceable
and quiet life, in all godliness and honesty; that is S. Paul's rule, and the
prescribed measure and purpose of such prayers. And in this instance of Kings,
we may pray for defeating all the King's enemies, such as are truly such; and
we have no other restraint upon us in this, but that we keep our desires
confined within the limits of the end we are commanded; that is, so far to
confound the King's enemies, that he may do his duty, and we do ours, and
receive the blessing: ever as much as we can to distinguish the malice from the
person. But if the enemies themselves will not also separate what our
intentions distinguish, that is, if they will not return to their duty, then
let the prayers operate as God pleases, we must be zealous for the end of the
King's authority and peaceable government. By enemies I mean Rebels or
Invaders, Tyrants and (...); for in other Wars there are many other
considerations not proper for this place.

13. The next consideration will be concerning the Manner; I mean both the
manner of our Persons, and the manner of our Prayers; that is, with what
conditions we ought to approach to God, and with what circumstances the Prayers
may or ought to be performed. The Conditions to make our Prayers holy and
certain to prevail are, 1. That we live good lives, endeavoring to conform by
holy obedience to all the Divine Commandments. This condition is expressly
recorded by S. John; Beloved, if our hearts condemn us not, then have we
confidence toward God, and whatsoever we ask of him 1 John 3. 21.
we shall obtain: and S. James affirms that the effectual servent prayer of a
righteous man James 5. 15.
avails much: and our Blessed Savior, limiting the confidence of our Prayers
for Forgiveness to our Charity and forgiving others, plainly tells us, that the
uncharitable and unrighteous person shall not be heard. And the blind man in
the Gospel understood well what he said, Now we know that God hears not
sinners; but if any man (...) 9 31.
be a worshipper, and does his will, him he hears. And it was so decreed and
resolved a point in the doctrine of their Religion, that it was a proverbial
saying. And although this discourse of the blind man was of a restrained
occasion, and signified, if Christ had been a false Prophet, God would not have
attested his Sermons with the power of Miracles; yet in general also he had
been taught by David, If I regard iniquity in my heart, Psalm. 66. 18.
the Lord will not hear my prayer. And therefore when men pray in every place,
(for so 1 (...). 2. 8.
they are commanded) let them lift up pure hands, without anger and contention.
And indeed although every sin entertained with a free choice and a full
understanding is an obstruction to our Prayers; yet the special sin of
Uncharitableness makes the biggest (...). Lam. 5.
cloud, and is in the proper matter of it an indisposition for us to receive
mercy: for he who is softened with apprehension of his own needs of mercy, will
be tenderhearted toward his brother; and therefore he that has no bowels
here, can have no aptness there to receive or heartily to hope for mercy. But
this rule is to be understood of persons who persevere in the habit and
remanent affections of sin; so long as they entertain sin with love,
complacency and joy, they are in a state of enmity with God, and therefore in
no fit disposition to receive pardon and the entertainment of friends: but
penitent sinners and returning souls, laden and grieved with their heavy
pressures, are next to holy innocents, the aptest persons in the world to be
heard in their Prayers for pardon; but they are in no farther disposition to
large favors, and more eminent charities. A sinner in the beginning of his
Penance will be heard for himself, and yet also he needs the prayers of holy
persons more signally than others; for he has but some very few degrees of
dispositions to reconciliation: but in prayers of intercession or mediation for
others, only holy and very pious persons are fit to be interested. All men as
matter of duty must pray for (...) n. (...) qui (...) ad (...) ad (...).
Gregor. Pastor.
all men: but in the great necessities of a Prince, of a Church, or Kingdom, or
of a family, or of a great danger and calamity (...), Non (...) Far pio and
(...). Hor. l. 3. Od. 23.
to a single person, only a Noah, a David, a Daniel, a (...), an Enoch or Job,
are fit and proportioned advocates. God so requires Holiness in us that our
Prayers may be accepted, that he entertains them in several degrees according
to the degrees of our Sanctity; to fewer or more purposes, according as we are
little or great in the kingdom of Heaven. As for those irregular donations of
good things which wicked persons ask for and have; they are either no mercies,
but instruments of cursing and crime; or else they are designs of grace,
intended to convince them of their unworthiness, and so, if they become not
instruments of their Conversion, they are aggravations of their Ruin.

14. Secondly, The second condition I have already explained in the description
of (...)
the Matter of our Prayers. For although we may lawfully ask for whatsoever we
need, and this leave is consigned to us in those words of our Blessed Savior,
Your heavenly Father knows what you have need of: yet because God's
Providence walks in the great deep, that is, his footsteps are in the water,
and leave no impression; no former act of grace becomes a precedent that he
will give us that in kind which then he saw convenient, and therefore gave us,
and now he sees to be inconvenient, and therefore does deny. Therefore in all
things, but what are matter of necessary and unmingled duty, we must send up
our Prayers; but humility, mortification and conformity to the Divine will must
attend for an answer, and bring back not what the public Embassy pretends, but
what they have in private instructions to desire; accounting that for the best
satisfaction which God pleases, not what I have either unnecessarily, or
vainly, or sinfully desired.

15. Thirdly, When our persons are disposed by Sanctity, and the matter of our
Prayers is hallowed by prudence and religious intendments, then we are bound to
entertain a full Persuasion and (...) Hope that God will hear us. What things
soever ye desire Mar. 11. 24.
when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall obtain them, said our
Blessed Savior: and S. James taught from that Oracle, If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask it James 1. 5, 6.
of God: But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering; for he that wavereth is
like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind and tossed to and fro: Meaning,
that when there is no fault in the matter of our Prayers, but that we ask
things pleasing to God, and there is no indisposition and hostility in our
persons and manners between God and us, then to doubt were to distrust God; for
all being right on our parts, if we doubt the Chrysantio (...) in (...). (...)
(...) in vita Maximi. Signum futurae (...) quando (...) ad (...) cum (...), and
(...). Cassian. Collat. 9. c. 32. Ecclus. 35. 17. Psalm, 102. 17.
issue, the defailance must be on that part, which to suspect were infinite
impiety. But after we have done all we can, if, out of humility, and fear that
we are not truly disposed, we doubt of the issue, it is a modesty which will
not at all discommend our persons, nor impede the event; provided we at no hand
suspect either God's power or veracity. Putting trust in God is an excellent
advantage to our Prayers; I will deliver him, (says God) because he has put
his trust in me. And yet distrusting our selves, and suspecting our own
dispositions, as it pulls us back in our actual confidence of the event, so
because it abates nothing of our confidence in God, it prepares us to receive
the reward of humility, and not to lose the praise of a holy trusting in the
Almighty.

16. These conditions are essential: some other there are which are incidents
and accessories, but at no hand to be neglected. And the first is, actual or
habitual attention to our Prayers, which we are to procure with moral and
severe Non in pluribus sint actus (...). Ecclus. 11. 10. Impar (...) ad
singula, dum (...) dividitur ad (...). S. Greg. Past. 1. p. c. 4. (...) puta,
(...) unum (...) nemo unum agit; (...) multiformes (...). Seneca. (...) omnibus
(...). (...). Inveni (...) in (...), i. e. in (...); quia quae (...), quies
explicat. S. Bernard. Sermon. 1. in Cant.
endeavors, that we desire not God to hear us when we do not hear our selves.
To which purpose we must avoid, as much as our duty will permit us,
multiplicity of cares and exterior employments; for a River cut into many
rivulets divides also its strength, and grows contemptible, and apt to be
forded by a lamb, and drunk up by a Summer-Sun: so is the spirit of man busied
in variety and divided in it self; it abates its fervor, cools into
indifferency, and becomes trifling by its dispersion (...) locus ingenio, (...)
carmine solo Vexant -- Pectora nostra (...) non (...) opus, (...) de (...) --
(...).
and inadvertency. Aquinas was once asked, with what compendium a man might
best become learned; he answered, By reading of one Book: meaning that an
understanding entertained with several objects is intent upon neither, and
profits not. And so it is when we pray to God; if the cares of the world
intervene, they choke our desire into an indifferency, and suppress the flame
into a smoke, and strangle the spirit. But this being an habitual carelessness
and intemperance of spirit, is an enemy to an habitual attention, and therefore
is highly criminal, and makes our Prayers to be but the labor of the lips,
because our desires are lessened by the remanent affections of the world. But
besides an habitual attention in our Prayers, that is, a desire in general of
all that our Prayers pretend to in particular, there is also for the
accommodation, and to facilitate the access of our Prayers, required, that we
attend actually to the words or sense of every Collect or Petition. To this we
must contend with Prayer, with actual dereliction and seposition of all our
other affairs, though innocent and good in other kinds, by a present spirit.
And the use of it is, that such attention is an actual conversing with God; it
occasions the exercise of many acts of virtue, it increases zeal and fervency,
and by reflection enkindles love and holy desires. And although there is no rule
to determine the degree of our actual attention, and it is ordinarily
impossible never to wander with a thought, or to be interrupted with a sudden
immission into our spirit in the midst of prayers; yet our duty is, by
mortification of our secular desires, by suppression of all our irregular
passions, by reducing them to indifferency, by severity of spirit, by
enkindling our holy appetites and desires of holy things, by silence and
meditation and repose, to get as forward in this excellency as we can: to which
also we may be very much helped by ejaculatory prayers and short breathings; in
which as, by reason of their short abode upon the spirit, there is less fear of
diversion; so also they may so often be renewed, that nothing of the Devotion
may be unspent or expire for want of oil to feed and entertain the flame. But
the determination of the case of Conscience is this: Habitual attention is
absolutely necessary in our Prayers, that is, it is altogether our duty to
desire of God all that we pray for, though our mind be not actually attending
to the form of words; and therefore all worldly desires, that are inordinate,
must be rescinded, that we more earnestly attend on God than on the world. He
that prays to God to give him the gift of Chastity, and yet secretly wishes
rather for an opportunity of Lust, and desires God would not hear him, (as S.
Austin confesses of himself in his youth) that man sins for want of holy and
habitual desires; he prays only with his lips, what he in no sense attests in
his heart. 2. Actual attention to our Prayers is also necessary, not ever to
avoid a sin, but that the present Prayer become effectual. He that means to
feast, and to get thanks of God, must invite the poor; and yet he that invites
the rich, in that he sins not, though he has no reward of God for that. So
that Prayer perishes to which the man gives no degree of actual attention, for
the Prayer is as if it were not, it is no more than a dream or an act of custom
and order, nothing of Devotion, and so accidentally becomes a sin (I mean there
where and in what degrees it is avoidable) by taking God's Name in vain. 3. It
is not necessary to the prevalency of the Prayer that the spirit actually
accompany every clause or word; if it says a hearty Amen, or in any part of it
attests the whole, it is such an attention which the present condition of most
men will sometimes permit. 4. A wandering of the spirit through carelessness, or
any vice, or inordinate passion, is in that degree criminal as is the cause,
and it is heightened by the greatness of the interruption. 5. It is only
excused by our endeavors to cure it, and by our after-acts either of sorrow,
or repetition of the Prayer, and reinforcing the intention. And certainly if we
repeat our Prayer, in which we have observed our spirits too much to wander,
and resolve still to repeat it, (as our opportunities permit) it may in a good
degree defeat the purpose of the Enemy, when his own arts shall return upon his
head, and the wandering of our spirits be made the occasion of a Prayer, and the
parent of a new Devotion. 6. Lastly, according to the degrees of our actual
attention, so our Prayers are more or less perfect: a present spirit being a
great instrument and testimony of wisdom, and apt to many great purposes; and
our continual abode with God being a great indearment of our persons by
increasing the affections.

17. Secondly, The second accessory is intension of spirit or fervency; such as
was that of our Blessed Savior, who prayed to his Father with strong cries and
loud petitions, not clamorous in language, but strong in Spirit. S. Paul also,
when he was pressed with a strong temptation, prayed thrice, that is,
earnestly; and S. James affirms this to be of (...), Sophocl, (...).
great value and efficacy to the obtaining blessings, The effectual servent
prayer of a just person avails much; and (...), though a man of like (...), yet
by earnest prayer he obtained rain, or drought, according as he desired. Now
this is properly produced by the greatness of our desire of heavenly things,
our true value and estimate of Religion, our sense of present pressures, our
lears; and it has some accidental increases by the disposition of our body,
the strength of fancy, and the tenderness of spirit, and assiduity of the
dropping of religious discourses; and in all men is necessary to be so great,
as that we prefer Heaven and Religion before the world, and desire them rather,
with the choice of our wills and understanding: though there cannot always be
that degree of sensual, pungent or delectable affections toward Religion, as
toward the desires of nature and sense; yet ever we must prefer celestial
objects, restraining the appetites of the world, lest they be immoderate, and
heightning the desires of grace and glory, lest they become indifferent, and
the fire upon the altar of incense be extinct. But the greater zeal and servour
of desire we have in our Prayers, the sooner and the greater will the return of
the Prayer be, if the Prayer be for spiritual objects. For other things our
desires must be according to our needs, not by a value derived from the nature
of the thing, but the usefulness it is of to us in order to our greater and
better purposes.

18. Thirdly, Of the same consideration it is, that we persevere and be
importunate in (...)
our Prayers, by repetition of our desires, and not remitting either our
affections or our offices, till God, overcome by our importunity, give a
gracious answer. Jacob wrastled Romans 12. 12.
with the Angel all night, and would not dismiss him till he had given him a
blessing; Quod (...) and (...).
Let me alone, says God, as if he felt a pressure and burden lying upon him
by our prayers, or could not quit himself, nor depart, unless we give him
leave. And since God is detained by our Prayers, and we may keep him as long as
we please, and that he will not go away till we leave speaking to him; he that
will dismiss him till he has his blessing, knows not the value of his
benediction, or understands not the energy and power of a persevering Prayer.
And to this purpose Christ spoke a Parable, that Luke 18. 1.
men ought always to pray, and not to faint: Praying without ceasing S. Paul
calls it, that (...) (...).
is, with continual addresses, frequent interpellations, never ceasing renewing
the request till I obtain my desire. For it is not enough to recommend our
desires to God with one hearty Prayer, and then forget to ask him any more; but
so long as our needs continue, so long, in all times, and upon all occasions,
to renew and repeat our desires: and this is praying continually. Just as the
Widow did to the unjust Judge, she never left going to him, she troubled him
every day with her clamorous suit; so must we pray always, that is, every day,
and many times every day, according to our occasions and necessities, or our
devotion and zeal, or as we are determined by the customs and laws of a Church;
never giving over through weariness or distrust, often renewing our desires by
a continual succession of Devotions, returning at certain and determinate
periods. For God's blessings, though they come infallibly, yet not always
speedily; saving only that it is a blessing to be delayed, that we may increase
our desire, and renew our prayers, and do acts of confidence and patience, and
ascertain and encrcase the blessing when it comes. For we do not more desire to
be blessed than God does to hear us importunate for blessing; and he weighs
every sigh, and bottles up every tear, and records every Prayer, and looks
through the cloud with delight to see us upon our knees, and when he sees his
time, his light breaks through it, and shines upon us. Only we must not make
our accounts for God according to the course of the Sun, but the measures of
Eternity. He measures us by our needs, and we must not measure him by our
impatience. God is not slack, as some men count slackness, says the Apostle;
and we find it so, when we have waited long. All the elapsed time is no part of
the tediousness; the trouble of it is passed with it self: and for the future,
we know not how little it may be: for ought we know we are already entered into
the cloud that brings the blessing. However, pray till it comes: for we shall
never miss to receive our desire, if it be holy, or innocent, and safe; or else
we are sure of a great reward of our Prayers.

19. And in this so determined there is no danger of blasphemy or vain
repetitions: For those repetitions are vain which repeat the words, not the
Devotion, which renew the expression, and not the desire; and he that may pray
the same Prayer to morrow which he said to day, may pray the same at night
which he said in the morning, and the same at noon which he said at night, and
so in all the hours of Prayer, and in all the opportunities of Devotion. Christ
in his agony went thrice, and said the same words, but he had intervals for
repetition; and his need and his Devotion pressed him forward: and whenever our
needs do so, it is all one if we say the same words or others, so we express
our desire, and tell our needs, and beg the remedy. In the same office and the
same hour of Prayer to repeat the same things often has but few excuses to
make it reasonable, and fewer to make it pious: But to think that the Prayer is
better for such repetition is the fault which the Holy Jesus condemned in the
Gentiles, who in their Hymns would say a name over a Ohe jam desine (...),
uxor, gratulando (...) Tuam (...) inventam gnatam: nisi illos (...) ex ingenio
(...),
hundred times. But in this we have no rule to determine us in numbers and
proportion, but right Reason. God Vt nil (...) intelligere nisi idem dictum est
(...). Ter. Heaut.
loves not any words the more for being said often; and (...). Philem. (...)
Sophocl. (...). 2.
those repetitions which are unreasonable in prudent estimation cannot in any
account be esteemed pious. But where a reasonable cause allows the repetition,
the same cause that makes it reasonable makes it also proper for Devotion. He
that speaks his needs, and expresses nothing but his fervor and greatness of
desire, cannot be vain or long in his Prayers; he that speaks impertinently,
that is, unreasonably and without desires, is long, though he speak but two
syllables; he that thinks for speaking much to be heard the sooner, thinks God
is delighted in the labor of the lips: but when Reason is the guide, and Piety
is the rule, and Necessity is the measure, and Desire gives the proportion, let
the Prayer be very long; he that shall blame it for its length must proclaim
his disrelish both of Reason and Religion, his despite of Necessity and
contempt of Zeal.

20. As a part and instance of our importunity in Prayer it is usually reckoned
and advised, that in cases of great, sudden (...)
and violent need we corroborate our Prayers with a Vow of (...).
doing something holy and religious in an uncommanded instance, something to
which God had not formerly bound our Solebant autem and (...).
duty, though fairly invited our will; or else, if we choose a (...) and (...)
Arboris ictu. Horat. l. 3. (...). 8.
Duty in which we were obliged, then to vow the doing of it in a more excellent
manner, with a greater inclination of the Non (...) -- ad miser as (...), and
(...), Ne Cypria (...) Addant (...). 1d. l. 3. od. 29.
Will, with a more fervent repetition of the act, with some more noble
circumstance, with a fuller assent of the Understanding, (...) l. 11. Anu.
or else adding a new Promise to our old Duty, to make it become more necessary
to us, and to secure our duty. In this case, as it requires great prudence and
caution in the susception, lest what we piously intend obtain a present
blessing, and lay a lasting snare; so if it be prudent in the manner, holy in
the matter, useful in the consequence, and safe in all the circumstances of the
person, it is an endearing us and our Prayer to God by the increase of duty and
charity, and therefore a more probable way of making our Prayers gracious and
acceptable. And the religion of Vows was not only hallowed by the example of
Jacob at Bethel, of Hannah praying for a child and God hearing her, of David
vowing a Temple to God, and made regular and safe by the rules and cautions in
Moses's Law; but left by our Blessed Savior in the same constitution he found
it, he having innovated nothing in the matter of Vows: and it was practiced
accordingly in the instance of S. Paul at Cenchrea; of (...) and (...). S.
Hieron. (...). 8. ad (...).
Ananias and Sapphira, who vowed their possessions to the use of the Church;
and of the Widows in the Apostolical age, who therefore vowed to remain in the
state of widowhood, (...).
because concerning them who married after the entry into (...). Idem, (...) S.
Virgin. c. 14.
Religion S. Paul says, they have broken their first faith: and such were they
of whom our Blessed Savior affirms, that some make themselves (...) for the
kingdom of Heaven, that is, such who promise to God a life of Chastity. And
concerning the success of Prayer so seconded with a prudent and religious Vow,
besides Eccles. 5. v. 4. 5. Psalm. 132. 1, 2. Deuteronomy. 23. 21. Acts 18. 18.
the instances of Scripture, we have the perpetual experience and witness of
all Christendom; and in particular our Saxon Kings have been remarked for this
part of importunity in their own Chronicles. (...).
Oswy got a -- (...). Hor. l. 2. od. 17.
great victory with unlikely forces against Penda the (...) after his earnest
Prayer, and an appendent Vow: and Ceadwalla obtained of God power to recover
the Isle of Wight from the hands of Infidels after he had prayed, and promised
to return the fourth part of it to be employed in the proper services of God
and of Religion. This can have no objection or suspicion in it among wise and
disabused persons; for it can be nothing but an increasing and a renewed act of
Duty, or Devotion, or Zeal, or Charity, and the importunity of Prayer acted in
a more vital and real expression.

21. First, All else that is to be considered concerning Prayer is extrinsecal
and accidental to it. Prayer is public, or private; in the communion or
society of Saints, or in our Closets: these Prayers have less temptation to
vanity; the other have more advantages of Charity, example, fervor, and
energy. In public offices we avoid singularity, in the private we avoid
hypocrisy: those are of more (...), these of greater retiredness and silence
of spirit: those serve the needs of all the world in the first intention, and
our own by consequence; these serve our own needs first, and the public only
by a secondary intention: these have more pleasure, they more duty: these are
the best instruments of Repentance, where our Confessions may be more
particular, and our shame less scandalous; the other are better for Eucharist
and instruction, for edification of the Church and glorification of God.

22. Secondly, The posture of our bodies in Prayer had as great variety as the
Ceremonies and civilities of several Nations came to. The Jews most commonly
prayed standing: so did the Pharisee and the Publican in the Nehem. 9. 5. Mark
11. 25. Luke 18 11.
Temple. So did the Primitive Christians in all their greater (...) Plautarch
(...) (...) (...) Vide S. Aug. l. 3. c. 5. de (...).
Festivals, and intervals of Jubilee; in their Penances they kneeled. The Monks
in (...) sat when they sang the Psalter. And in every Country, whatsoever by
the custom of the Nation was a symbol of reverence and humility, of silence
(...) suis ornamentis pretiosis, Simplicis and (...) vestis, (...); Et (...)
sacram (...) ad (...). S. Rosweld de Hon. (...). and de Otbon.
and attention, of gravity and modesty, that posture they translated to their
Prayers. But in all Nations bowing the head, that is, a laying down our glory
at the feet of God, was the manner of Worshippers: and this was always the more
humble and the lower, as their Devotion was higher; and was very often
expressed by prostration, or lying flat upon the ground; and this all Nations
did and all Religions. Our deportment ought to be grave, decent, humble, apt
for adoration, apt to edisie; and when we address our selves to Prayer, not
instantly to leap into the office, as the Judges of the Areopage into their
sentence, without preface or preparatory affections; but, considering in what
presence we speak, and to what purposes, let us balance our servour with
reverential fear: and when we have done, not rise from the ground as if we
vaulted, or were glad we had done; but, as we begin with desires of assistance,
so end with desires of pardon and acceptance, concluding our longer offices
with a shorter mental Prayer of more private reflection and reverence, designing
to mend what we have done amiss, or to give thanks and proceed if we did well,
and according to our powers.

23. Thirdly, In private Prayers it is permitted to every man to speak his
Prayers, or only to think them, which is a speaking to God. Vocal or mental
Prayer is all one to God, but in order to us they have their several
advantages. The sacrifice of the heart and the calves of the lips make up a
holocaust to God: but words are the arrest of the desires, and keep the spirit
fixed, and in less permissions to wander from fancy to fancy; and mental Prayer
is apt to make the greater fervor, if it wander not: our office is more
determined by words; but we then actually think of God when our spirits only
speak. Mental Prayer, when our spirits wander, is like a Watch standing still,
because the spring is down; wind it up again, and it goes on regularly: but in
Vocal Prayer, if the words run on, and the spirit wanders, the Clock strikes
false, the Hand points not to the right hour, because something is in disorder,
and the striking is nothing but noise. In mental Prayer we confess God's
omniscience; in vocal Prayer we call the Angels to witness. In the first our
spirits rejoice in God; in the second the Angels rejoice in us. Mental Prayer
is the best remedy against lightness, and indifferency of affections; but vocal
Prayer is the aptest instrument of communion. That is more Angelical, but yet
fittest for the state of separation and glory; this is but humane, but it is
apter for our present constitution. They have their distinct proprieties, and
may be used according to several accidents, occasions, or dispositions.

The PRAYER.
O Holy and eternal God, who have commanded us to pray unto thee in all our
necessities, and to give thanks unto thee for all our instances of joy and
blessing, and to adore thee in all thy Attributes and communications, thy own
glories and thy eternal mercies; give unto me thy servant the spirit of Prayer
and Supplication, that I may understand what is good for me, that I may desire
regularly, and choose the best things, that I may conform to thy will, and
submit to thy disposing, relinquishing my own affections and imperfect choice.
Sanctify my heart and spirit, that I may sanctify thy Name, and that I may be
gracious and accepted in thine eyes. Give me the humility and obedience of a
Servant, that I may also have the hope and confidence of a Son, making humble
and confident addresses to the Throne of grace; that in all my necessities I
may come to thee for aids, and may trust in thee for a gracious answer, and may
receive satisfaction and supply.

II.
GIve me a sober, diligent and recollected spirit in my Prayers, neither
choked with cares, nor scattered by levity, nor discomposed by passion, nor
estranged from thee by inadvertency, but fixed fast to thee by the
indissolvible bands of a great love and a pregnant Devotion: And let the beams
of thy holy Spirit descending from above enlighten and enkindle it with great
servours, and holy importunity, and unwearied industry; that I may serve thee,
and obtain thy blessing by the assiduity and Zeal of perpetual religious
offices. Let my Prayers come before thy presence, and the lifting up of my
hands be a daily sacrifice, and let the fires of zeal not go out by night or
day; but unite my Prayers to the intercession of thy Holy Jesus, and to a
communion of those offices which Angels and beatified Souls do pay before the
throne of the Lamb, and at the celestial Altar; that my Prayers being hallowed
by the Merits of Christ, and being presented in the phial of the Saints, may
ascend thither where thy glory dwells, and from whence mercy and eternal
benediction descends upon the Church.

III.
LOrd, change my sins into penitential sorrow, my sorrow to petition, my
petition to (...); that my Prayers may be consummate in the adorations of
eternity, and the glorious participation of the end of our hopes and prayers,
the fullness of never-failing Charity, and fruition of thee, O Holy and Eternal
God, Blessed Trinity and mysterious Unity, to whom all honor, and worship, and
thanks, and confession, and glory, be ascribed for ever and ever.

Amen.
DISCOURSE XIII. Of the Third additional Precept of Christ, ( viz.) Of the
manner of FASTING.
1. FAsting, being directed in order to other ends, as for mortifying the body,
taking Per universum (...) observatur, (...), in (...) Sacramenti, in (...)
Dominicum corpus (...) quam (...) cibi. S. Aug. (...). 18.
away that fuel which ministers to the flame of Lust, or else relating to what
is past, when it becomes an instrument of Repentance, and a part of that
revenge which S. Paul affirms to be the effect of godly sorrow, is to take its
estimate for value, and its rules for practice, by analogy and proportion to
those ends to which it does cooperate. Fasting before the holy Sacrament is a
custom of the Christian Church, and derived to us from great antiquity; and the
use of it is, that we might express honor to the mystery, by suffering nothing
to enter into our mouths before the symbols. Fasting to this purpose is not an
act of Mortification, but of Reverence and venerable esteem of the instruments
of Religion, and so is to be understood. And thus also, not to eat or drink
before we have said our morning Devotions, is esteemed to be a religious
decency, and preference of Prayer and God's honor before our temporal
satisfaction, a symbolical attestation that we esteem the words of God's mouth
more than our necessary food. It is like the zeal of Abraham's servant, who
would not eat nor drink till he had done his errand. And in pursuance of this
act of Religion, by the tradition of their Fathers it grew (...) non (...); and
(...), nisi (...) no (...) prandium vocare solet (...). Joseph, in vita (...).
to be a custom of the Jewish Nation, that they should not eat bread upon their
solemn Festivals before the sixth hour; that they might first celebrate the
rites of their Religious solemnities, before they gave satisfaction to the
lesser desires of nature. And therefore it was a reasonable satisfaction of the
objection made by the assembly against the inspired Apostles in Pentecost,
These are not drunk, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day:
meaning, that the day being festival, they knew it was not lawful for any of
the Nation to break their fast before the sixth hour; for else they might
easily have been drunk by the third hour, if they had taken their morning's
drink in a freer proportion. And true it is that Religion snatches even at
little things; and as it teaches us to observe all the great Commandments and
significations of duty, so it is not willing to pretermit any thing, which,
although by its greatness it cannot of it self be considerable, yet by its
smallness it may become a testimony of the greatness of the affection, which
would not omit the least minutes of love and duty. And therefore when the Jews
were scandalized at the Disciples of our Lord for rubbing the ears of corn on
the Sabbath Day, as they walked through the fields early in the morning, they
intended their reproof not for breaking the Rest of the day, but the Solemnity;
for eating before the public Devotions were finished. Christ excused it by the
necessity and charity of the act; they were hungry, and therefore having so
great need, they might lawfully do it: meaning, that such particles and
circumstances of Religion are not to be neglected, unless where greater cause
of charity or necessity does supervene.

2. But when Fasting is in order to greater and more concerning purposes, it
puts on more Religion, and becomes a duty, according as it is necessary or
highly conducing to such ends, to the promoting of which we are bound to
contribute all our skill and faculties. Fasting is principally operative to
mortification of carnal appetites, to which Feasting and full tables do
minister aptness and power and inclinations. (...). 5. 7.
When I fed them to the full, then they committed adultery, and assembled by
troops in the Harlots houses. And if we observe all our own vanities, we shall
find that upon every sudden joy, or a prosperous accident, or an (...) (...)
apud (...). (...) in cippo (...). S. Cyp.
opulent fortune, or a pampered body, and highly spirited and inflamed, we are
apt to rashness, levities, inconsiderate expressions, scorn and pride,
idleness, wantonness, curiosity, (...) junia (...) contra peccata saciunt
(...), superbiam (...), and (...) voluntatis (...) ad (...). S. Leo, (...). 4.
de Jejun.
niceness, and impatience. But Fasting is one of those afflictions which
reduces our body to want, our spirits to soberness, our condition to
sufferance, our desires to abstinence and customs of denial; and so, by taking
off the inundations Saginantur (...) qui (...), de Jejun.
of sensuality, leaves the enemies within in a condition of being easier
subdued. Fasting directly advances toward Chastity; and by consequence and
indirect powers to Patience, and Humility, and Indifferency. But then it is not
the Fast of a day that can do this; it is not an act, but a state of Fasting,
that operates to Mortification. A perpetual Temperance and frequent abstinence
may abate such proportions of strength and nutriment, as to procure a body
mortified and (...) in desires. And thus S. Paul kept his body under, using
severities to it for the taming its rebellions and distemperatures. And S.
Jerome reports of S. Hilarion, that when he had fasted S. Hieron. in Vita S.
Hilarion.
much and used course diet, and found his Lust too strong for such austerities,
he resolved to increase it to the degree of Mastery, lessening his diet, and
increasing his hardship, till he should rather think of food than wantonness.
And many times the Fastings of some men are ineffectual, because they promise
themselves cure too soon, or make too gentle applications, or put less
proportions into their antidotes. I have read of a Maiden, that, seeing a young
man much transported with her love, and that he ceased not to importune her
with all the violent pursuits that passion could suggest, told him, she had
made a Vow to fast forty days with bread and water, of which she must discharge
her self before she could think of corresponding to any other desire; and
desired of him as a testimony of his love, that he also would be a party in the
same Vow. The young man undertook it, that he might give probation of his love:
but because he had been used to a delicate and nice kind of life, in twenty
days he was so weakened, that he thought more of death than love; and so got a
cure for his intemperance, and was wittily cousened into remedy. But S.
Hierom's counsel in this Question is most reasonable, not allowing violent and
long fasts, and then returns to an ordinary course; for these are too great
changes of diet to consist with health, and too sudden and transient to obtain
a permanent and natural effect: but a belly always hungry, a table (...) cibus
and (...) semper (...) triduana (...) superant. S. Hieron. (...). 8. ad (...).
never full, a meal little and necessary, no extravagancies, no freer repast,
this is a state of Fasting, which will be found to be of best avail to suppress
pungent Lusts and rebellious desires. And it were well to help this exercise
with the assistences of such austerities which teach Patience, and ingenerate a
passive fortitude, and accustom us to a despite of pleasures, and which are
consistent with our health. For if Fasting be left to do the work alone, it may
chance either to spoil the body, or not to spoil the Lust. Hard lodging, (...)
garments, laborious postures of prayer, journies on foot, sufferance of cold,
paring away the use of ordinary solaces, denying every pleasant appetite,
rejecting the most pleasant morsels; these are in the rank of bodily exercises,
which though (as S. Paul says) of themselves they profit little, yet they
accustom us to acts of self-denial in exterior instances, and are not useless
to the designs of mortifying carnal and sensual lusts. They have (...). 2. 23.
(...)
a proportion of wisdom with these cautions, viz. in will worship, that is, in
voluntary susception, when they are not imposed as (...) Can. Apost, 50.
necessary Religion; in humility, that is, without contempt of others that use
them not; in neglecting of the body, that is, when they are done for discipline
and mortification, that the flesh by such handlings and rough usages become
less satisfied and more despised.

3. As Fasting has respect to the future, so also to the present; and so it
operates in giving assistence to Prayer. There is a kind of Devil that is not
to be ejected but by prayer and fasting, that is, Prayer elevated and made
intense by a defecate and pure spirit, not laden with the burden of meat and
vapors. S. (...). 5. de Jejun.
Basil affirms, that there are certain Angels deputed by God to minister, and
to describe all such in every Church who mortify themselves by Fasting; as if
paleness and a meagre visage were that mark in the forehead which the Angel
observed Jejunium (...), leves (...). S. (...). in vigil. S. (...).
when he signed the Saints in Jerusalem to escape the Judgment. Prayer is the
(...), dixil S. Chrysostom.
wings of the Soul, and Fasting is the wings of Prayer. Tertullian calls it
(...) al re, (...), and (...) ad Dominum. (...).
the nourishment of Prayer. But this is a Discourse of Christian Philosophy;
and he that chooses to do any act of spirit, or understanding, or attention,
after a full meal, will then perceive that Abstinence had been the better
disposition to any intellectual and spiritual action. And therefore the Church
of God ever joined Fasting to their more solemn offices of Prayer. The Apostles
fasted and prayed when they laid hands and invocated Acts 13. 1, 2.
the Holy Ghost upon Saul and Barnabas. And these also, when they had prayed
Acts 14. 23.
with fasting, ordained Elders in the Churches of Lystra and Iconium. And the
Vigils of every Holy Day tell us, that the Devotion of the Festival is promoted
by the Fast of the Vigils.

4. But when Fasting relates to what is past, it becomes an instrument of
Repentance, (...) S. Basil.
it is a punitive and an (...) action, an effect of godly sorrow, a testimony
of contrition, a judging of our selves, and chastening our bodies, that we be
not judged of the Lord. The Fast of the Ninevites, and the Fast the Prophet
Joel calls for, and Joel 2. 15.
the Discipline of the Jews in the rites of Expiation, proclaim this usefulness
of Fasting Levit. 23. 27, etc.
in order to Repentance. And indeed it were a strange Repentance that had
(...). 22. 12.
no sorrow in it, and a stranger sorrow that had no affliction; but it were the
strangest scene of affliction in the world, when the sad and afflicted person
shall (...) Ph lo, (...) de ipso (...) at (...) and (...), animum (...) illa
quae (...) tristi (...). (...). de (...). c. 9.
eat freely, and delight himself, and to the banquets of a full table serve up
the chalice of tears and sorrow, and no bread of affliction. Certainly he that
makes much of himself has no great indignation against the sinner, when
himself is the man. And it is but a gentle revenge and an easy judgment, when
the sad sinner shall do penance in good meals, and expiate his sin with sensual
satisfaction. So that Fasting relates to Religion in all variety and difference
of time: it is an antidote against the poison of sensual temptations, an
advantage to Prayer, and an instrument of extinguishing the guilt and the
affections of sin by judging our selves, and representing in a Judicatory of
our own, even our selves being Judges, that sin deserves condemnation, and the
sinner merits a high Baruch 2. 18. (...) and (...) apud (...). Vnde (...)
(...): and in (...), (...).
calamity. Which excellencies I repeat in the words of Baruch the Scribe, he
that was Amanuensis to the Prophet Jeremy, The soul that is greatly vexed,
which goes stooping and feeble, and the eyes that fail, and the hungry soul,
will give thee praise and righteousness, O Lord.

5. But now as Fasting has diverse ends, so also it has diverse Laws. If
Fasting be intended as an instrument of Prayer, it is sufficient that it be of
that quality and degree that the spirit be clear, and the head undisturbed; an
ordinary act of Fast, an abstinence (...)
from a meal, or a deferring it, or a lessening it when it comes, and the same
abstinence repeated according to the solemnity, and intendment of the offices.
And this is evident in reason, and the former instances, and the practice of
the Church, dissolving some of her Fasts which were in order only to Prayer by
noon, and as soon as the great and first solemnity of the day is over. But if
Fasting be intended as a punitive act, and an instrument of Repentance, it must
be greater. S. Paul at his Conversion continued three days without eating or
drinking. It must have in it so much affliction as to express the indignation,
and to condemn the sin, and to judge the person. And although the measure of
this cannot be exactly determined, yet the general proportion is certain; for a
greater sin there must be a greater sorrow, and a greater sorrow must be
attested with Ezra 8. 21.
Vid. Dan. 10.
a greater penalty. And Ezra declares his purpose thus, I proclaimed a Fast,
that we 12. Psa. 35.
might afflict our selves besore God. Now this is no farther required, nor is
it in this 13. Levit. 16.
sense (...) useful, but that it be a trouble to the body, an act of judging
and 29, 30, 31.
Isa. 58. 3.
severity; and this is to be judged by proportion to the sorrow and
indignation, as the sorrow is to the crime. But this affliction needs not to
leave any remanent effect upon the body; but such transient sorrow which is
consequent to the abstinence of certain times designed for the solemnity is
sufficient as to this purpose. Only it is to be renewed often, as our
Repentance must be habitual and lasting; but it may be commuted with other
actions of severity and discipline, according to the Customs of a Church, or
the capacity of the persons, or the opportunity of circumstances. But if the
Fasting be intended for Mortification, then it is fit to be more severe, and
medicinal by continuance, and quantity, and quality. To Repentance, total
abstinences without interruption, that is, during the solemnity, short and
sharp, are most apt: but toward the mortifying a Lust those sharp and short
Fasts are not reasonable; but a diet of Fasting, an habitual subtraction of
nutriment from the body, a long and lasting austerity, increasing in degrees,
but not violent in any. And in this sort of Fasting we must be highly careful
we do not violate a duty by sondness of an instrument; and because we intend
Fasting as a help to mortify the Lust, let it not destroy the body, or retard
the spirit, or violate our health, or impede us in any part of our necessary
duty. As we must be careful that our Fast be reasonable, serious, and apt to
the end of our designs; so we must be curious, that by helping one duty
uncertainly, it do not certainly destroy another. Let us do it like honest
persons and just, without artifices and hypocrisy; but let us also do it like
wise persons, that it be neither in it self unreasonable, nor by accident
become criminal.

6. In the pursuance of this Discipline of Fasting, the Doctors of the Church
and Guides of Souls have not unusefully prescribed other annexes and
circumstances; as that all the other acts of deportment be symbolical to our
Fasting. If we fast for Mortification, let us entertain nothing of temptation
or semblance to invite a Lust; no sensual delight, no freer entertainments of
our body to countenance or corroborate a passion. If we fast that we may pray
the better, let us remove all secular thoughts for that time; for it is vain to
alleviate our spirits of the burden of meat and drink, and to depress them
with the loads of care. If for Repentance we fast, let us be most curious that
we do nothing contrary to the design of Repentance, knowing that a sin is more
contrary to Repentance than Fasting is to sin; and it is the greatest stupidity
in the world to do that thing which I am now mourning for, and for which I do
judgment upon my self. And let all our actions also pursue the same design,
helping one instrument with another, and being so zealous for the Grace, that
we take in all the aids we can to secure the Duty. For to fast from flesh, and
to eat delicate fish; not to eat meat, but to drink rich wines freely; to be
sensual in the objects of our other appetites, and restrained only in one; to
have no dinner, and that day to run on hunting, or to play at cards; are not
handsome instances of sorrow, or devotion, or self-denial. It is best to
accompany our Fasting with the retirements of Religion, and the enlargements of
Charity, giving to others what we deny to our selves. These are proper actions:
and although not in every instance necessary to be done at the same time, (for
a man may give his Alms in other circumstances, and not amiss;) yet as they are
very convenient and proper to be joined in that society, so to do any thing
contrary to Religion or to Charity, to Justice or to Piety, to the design of
the person or the design of the solemnity, is to make that become a sin which
of it self was no virtue, but was capable of being hallowed by the end and the
manner of its execution.

7. This Discourse has hitherto related to private Fasts, or else to Fasts
indefinitely. For what rules soever every man is bound to observe in private
for Fasting piously, the same rules the Governors of a Church are to intend in
their public prescription. And when once Authority has intervened, and
proclaimed a Fast, there is no new duty incumbent upon the private, but that we
obey the circumstances, letting them to choose the time and the end for us: and
though we must prevaricate neither, yet we may improve both; we must not go
less, but we may enlarge; and when Fasting is commanded only for (...), we may
also use it to Prayers, and to Mortification. And we must be curious that we do
not obey the letter of the prescription, and violate the intention, but observe
all that care in public Fasts which we do in private; knowing that our private
ends are included in the public, as our persons are in the communion of
Saints, and our hopes in the common inheritance of sons: and see that we do not
fast in order to a purpose, and yet use it so as that it shall be to no
purpose. Whosoever so fasts as that it be not effectual in some degree toward
the end, or so fasts that it be accounted of it self a duty and an act of
Religion, without order to its proper end, makes his act vain, because it is
unreasonable; or vain, because it is superstitious.

The PRAYER.
O Holy and Eternal Jesu, who did for our sake fast forty days and forty
nights, and have left to us thy example, and thy prediction, that in the days
of thy absence from us we thy servants and children of thy Bride-chamber should
fast; teach us to do this act of discipline so, that it may become an act of
Religion. Let us never be like Esau, valuing a dish of meat above a blessing;
but let us deny our appetites of meat and drink, and accustom our selves to the
yoke, and subtract the fuel of our Lusts, and the incentives of all our
unworthy desires: that our bodies being free from the intemperances of
nutriment, and our spirits from the load and pressure of appetite, we may have
no desires but of thee; that our outward man daily decaying by the violence of
time, and mortified by the abatements of its too free and unnecessary support;
it may by degrees resign to the entire dominion of the Soul, and may pass from
vanity to Piety, from weakness to ghostly strength, from darkness and mixtures
of impurity to great transparences and clarity in the society of a beatified
Soul, reigning with thee in the glories of Eternity, O Holy and Eternal Jesu.

Amen.
DISCOURSE XIV. Of the Miracles which JESUS wrought for confirmation of his
Doctrine during the whole time of his Preaching.
Mary and Martha.
A woman, named Martha, received him into her house And her sister Mary sat at
Jesus feet, and heard his word. But Martha was cumbred about much serving --
And Jesus said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about
many things: but one thing is needful: and Mary has chosen that good part:
Luke 10. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42.

The dried hand healed, and devil cast out Mat 12.
10 And behold There was a man which had his hand dried up etc. 13. Then said
he unto the man stretch sorth thine hand etc. 22. Then was brought to him one
possessed with a Devil etc. and he healed him.




1. WHen Jesus had ended his Sermon on the Mount, he descended into the
valleys, to consign his Doctrine by the power of Miracles and the excellency of
a rare Example; that he might not lay a yoke upon us which himself also would
not bear. But as he became the author, so also the finisher of our Faith; what
he designed in proposition, he represented in his (...). Lactant.
own practice; and by these acts made a new Sermon, teaching all Prelates and
spiritual persons to descend from their (...) of contemplation, (...) (...).
and the authority and business of their discourses, to apply themselves to do
more material and corporal mercies to afflicted persons, and to preach by
Example as well as by Ennodius in vita (...) suis paginam quam (...), and quod
liber (...) signabat.
their Homilies. For he that teaches others well, and practices contrary, is
like a fair candlestick bearing a goodly and bright taper, which sends forth
light to all the house, but round about it self there is a shadow and
circumstant darkness. The Prelate should be the light consuming and spending it
self to enlighten others, scattering his rays round about from the (...) of
Contemplation and from the (...) of Practice, but himself always tending
upwards, till at last he expires into the element of Love and celestial
fruition.

2. But the Miracles which Jesus did were next to infinite; and every
circumstance of action that passed from him, as it was intended for Mercy, so
also for Doctrine, and the impotent or diseased persons were not more cured
than we instructed. But because there was nothing in the actions but what was a
pursuance of the Doctrines delivered in his Sermons, in the Sermon we must look
after our Duty, and look upon his practice as a verification of his Doctrine,
and instrumental also to other purposes. Therefore in general if we consider
his Miracles, we shall see that he did design them to be a compendium of Faith
and Charity. For he chose to instance his Miracles Acts 10. 38.
in actions of Mercy, that all his powers might especially determine upon
bounty and Charity; and yet his acts of Charity were so miraculous, that they
became an argument of the Divinity of his Person and Doctrine. Once he turned
water into wine, which was a mutation by a supernatural power in a natural
suscipient, where a person was not the subject, but an Element; and yet this
was done to rescue the poor Bridegroom from affront and trouble, and to do
honor to the holy rite of Marriage. All the rest, (unless we except his
Walking upon the waters) during his natural life, were actions of relief and
mercy, according to the design of God, manifesting his power most chiefly in
showing mercy.

3. The great design of Miracles was to prove his Mission from God, to convince
the world of sin, to demonstrate his power of forgiving sins, to indear his
Precepts, and that his Disciples might believe in him, and that believing they
might have life through Joh. 20. 31.
10. 38.
his name. For he, to whom God by doing Miracles gave testimony from Heaven,
must 5. 30.
needs be sent from God; and he who had received power to restore nature, and
to create new organs, and to extract from incapacities, and from privations to
reduce habits, was Lord of Nature, and therefore of all the world. And this
could not but create great confidences in his Disciples, that himself would
verify those great Promises upon which he established his Law. But that the
argument of Miracles might be infallible, and not apt to be reproved, we may
observe its eminency by diverse circumstances of probability heightened up to the
degree of moral demonstration.

4. First, The Holy Jesus did Miracles which no man (before him, or at that
time) John 15. 24.
ever did. Moses smote the Rock, and water gushed out; but he could not turn
that water into wine: Moses cured no diseases by the empire of his will, or the
word of his mouth; but Jesus healed all infirmities. Elisha raised a dead Child
to life; but Jesus raised one who had been dead four days, and buried, and
corrupted. Elias. and Samuel, and all the Prophets, and the succession of the
High Priests in both the Temples, put all together, never did so many or so
great Miracles as Jesus did. He cured Leprous persons by his touch: he restored
Sight to the blind, who were such not by any intervening accident hindering the
act of the organ, but by nature, who were born blind, and whose eyes had not
any natural possibility to receive sight, who could never see without creating
of new eyes for them, or some integral part cooperating to vision; and
therefore the Miracle was wholly an effect of a Divine power, for nature did
not at all cooperate; or, that I may use the elegant expression of Dante, it
was such -- a cui natura
Non scaldo ferro may, ne batte ancude,
for which Nature never did heat the iron, nor beat the anvil. He made crooked
lims become straight, and the lame to walk; and habitual diseases and
inveterate of 18 years continuance (and once of 38) did disappear at his
speaking, like darkness at the presence of the Sun. He cast out Devils, who by
the majesty of his person were forced to confess and worship him, and yet by
his humility and restraints were commanded silence, or to go whither he
pleased; and without his leave all the powers of Hell were as infirm and
impotent as a withered member, and were not able to stir. He raised three dead
persons to life; he fed thousands of People with two small fishes and five
little barly-cakes: and, as a consummation of all power and all Miracles, he
foretold, and verified it, that himself would rise from the dead after three
days sepulture. But when himself had told them, he did Miracles which no man
else ever did, they were not able to reprove his saying with one single
instance; but the poor blind man found him out one instance to verify his
assertion, It was yet never heard, that any man opened the eyes of one that was
born blind.

5. Secondly, The scene of his Preaching and Miracles was Judaea, which was the
Pale of the Church, and God's enclosed portion, of whom were the Oracles and
the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the Flesh, Christ was to come, and to
whom he was promised. Now since these Miracles were for verification of his
being the Christ, the promised MESSIAH, they were then to be esteemed a
convincing argument, when all things else concurring, as the Predictions of the
Prophets, the Synchronisms, and the capacity of his person, he brought Miracles
to attest himself to be the person so declared and signified. God would not
suffer his People to be abused by Miracles, nor from Heaven would speak so loud
in testimony of any thing contrary to his own will and purposes. They to whom
he gave the Oracles, and the Law, and the Predictions of the Messiah, and
declared beforehand, that at the coming of the Messiah the blind Isai. 35. 4.
5.
should see, the lame should walk, and the deaf should hear, the lepers should
be cleansed, and to Matthew. 11. 5.
the poor the Gospel should be preached, could not expect a greater conviction
for acceptance of a person, than when that happened which God himself by his
Prophets had consigned as his future testimony; and if there could have been
deception in this, it must needs have been inculpable in the deceived person,
to whose error a Divine Prophecy had been both nurse and parent. So that
taking the Miracles Jesus did in that conjunction of circumstances, done to
that People to whom all their Oracles were transmitted by miraculous
verifications, Miracles so many, so great, so accidentally, and yet so
regularly, to all comers and necessitous persons that prayed it, after such
Predictions and clearest Prophecies, and these Prophecies owned by himself, and
sent by way of symbol and mysterious answer to John the Baptist, to whom he
described his Office by recounting his Miracles in the words of the Prediction;
there cannot be any fallibility or weakness pretended to this instrument of
probation, applied in such circumstances to such a people, who, being dear to
God, would be preserved from invincible deceptions, and being commanded by him
to expect the Messiah in such an equipage of power and demonstration of
Miracles, were therefore not deceived, nor could they, because they were bound
to accept it.

6. Thirdly, So that now we must not look upon these Miracles as an argument
primarily intended to convince the Gentiles, but the Jews. It was a high
probability to them also, and so it was designed also in a secondary intention:
But it could not be an argument to them so certain, because it was destitute of
two great supporters. For they neither believed the Prophets foretelling the
Messiah to be such, nor yet saw the Miracles done: So that they had no
testimony of God beforehand, and were to rely upon humane testimony for the
matter of fact; which, because it was fallible, could not infer a necessary
conclusion alone and of it self, but it put on degrees of persuasion, as the
(...) had degrees of certainty or universality; that they also which see not,
and yet have believed, might be blessed. And therefore Christ sent his Apostles
to convert the Gentiles, and supplied in their case what in his own could not
be applicable, or so concerning them. For he sent them to do Miracles in the
sight of the Nations, that they might not doubt the matter of fact; and
prepared them also with a Prophecy, foretelling that they should do the same
and greater Miracles than he did: they had greater prejudices to contest
against, and a more unequal distance from belief and aptnesses to credit such
things; therefore it was necessary that the Apostles should do greater Miracles
to remove the greater mountains of objection. And they did so; and by doing it
in pursuance and testimony of the ends of Christ and Christianity, verified the
fame and celebrity of their Master's Miracles, and represented to all the world
his power, and his veracity, and his Divinity.

7. Fourthly, For when the Holy Jesus appeared upon the stage of Palestine, all
things were quiet and at rest from prodigy and wonder; nay, John the Baptist,
who by his excellent Sanctity and Austerities had got great reputation to his
person and Doctrines, yet did no Miracle; and no man else did any, save some
few Exorcists among the Jews cured some Demoniacks and distracted People. So
that in this silence a Prophet appearing with signs and wonders had nothing to
lessen the arguments, no opposite of like power, or appearances of a
contradictory design. And therefore it persuaded infinitely, and was certainly
operative upon all persons, whose interest and love of the world did not
destroy the piety of their wills, and put their understanding into fetters. And
Nicodemus, a Doctor of the Law, being convinced, said, We know that thou art a
John 3. 2.
Doctor sent from God; for no man can do those (...) which thou do, unless
God be with him. But when the Devil saw what great affections and confidences
these Miracles of Christ had produced in all persons, he too late strives to
lessen the argument by playing an after-game; and weakly endeavors to abuse
vicious persons (whose love to their sensual pleasures was of power to make
them take any thing for argument to retain them) by such low, few,
inconsiderable, uncertain and suspicious instances, that it grew to be the
greatest confirmation and (...) in behalf of Religion, that either friend or
foe upon his own industry could have represented. Such as were the making an
Image speak, or fetching fire from the clouds; and that the images of Diana
Cyndias and Vesta among the Jasiaeans would admit no rain to wet them, or cloud
to darken them; and that the bodies of them who entered into the Temple of
Jupiter Lib. 16. Hst.
in Arcadia would cast no shadow: which things Polybius himself, one of their
own Superstition, laughs at as impostures, and says they were no way to be
excused, unless the pious purpose of the inventors did take off from the malice
of the lie. But the Miracles of Jesus were confessed, and wondered at by
Josephus, were published to all the world by his own Disciples, who never were
accused, much less convicted, of forgery, and they were acknowledged by (...)
dixit (...) apud Origin.
Celsus and (...) etc. verba Juliani apud Cyril. (...). 6.
Julian, the greatest enemies of Christ.

8. But farther yet, themselves gave it out that one Caius was cured of his
blindness by AEsculapius, and so was (...) Aper; and at Alexandria Vespasian
cured a man of the Gout by treading upon his Toes, and a blind man with
spittle. And when Adrian the Emperor was sick of a Fever, and would have
killed himself, it is said, two blind Spartianus in Adriano; qui (...), Marium
(...) dixiss hac (...): per (...).
persons were cured by touching him, whereof one of them told him that he also
should recover. But although Vespasian by the help of Apollonius Tyaneus, who
was his familiar, who also had the Devil to be his, might do any thing within
the power of nature, or by permission might do much more; yet besides that this
was of an uncertain and less credible report, if it had been true, it was also
infinitely short of what Christ did, and was a weak, silly imitation, and
usurping of the argument which had already prevailed upon the persuasions of
men beyond all possibility of confutation. And for that of Adrian, to have
reported it is enough to make it ridiculous; and it had been a strange power to
have cured two blind persons, and yet be so unable to help himself, as to
attempt to kill himself by reason of anguish, impatience and despair.

9. Fifthly, When the Jews and Pharisees believed not Christ for his Miracles,
and yet perpetually called for a Sign, he refused to give them a Sign which
might be less than their prejudice, or the persuasions of their interest; but
gave them one which alone is greater than all the Miracles which ever were
done, or said to be done, by any Antichrist or the enemies of the Religion, put
all together; a Miracle which could have no suspicion of imposture, a Miracle
without instance or precedent or imitation: and that is, Jesus's lying in the
grave three days and three nights, and then rising again, and appearing to
many, and conversing for forty days together, giving probation of his Rising,
of the verity of his Body, making a glorious promise, which at Pentecost was
verified, and speaking such things which became Precepts and parts of the Law
for ever after.

10. Sixthly, I add two things more to this consideration. First, that the
Apostles did such Miracles, which were infinitely greater than the pretensions
of any adversary, and inimitable by all the powers of man or darkness. They
raised the dead, they cured all diseases by their very shadow passing by, and
by the touch of garments; they converted Nations, they foretold future events,
they themselves spoke with Tongues, and they gave the Holy Ghost by imposition
of hands, which enabled others to speak Languages which immediately before they
understood not, and to cure diseases, and to eject Devils. Now supposing
Miracles to be done by Gentile Philosophers and Magicians after; yet when they
fall short of these in power, and yet teach a contrary Doctrine, it (...) a
demonstration that it is a lesser power, and therefore the Doctrine not of
Divine authority and sanction. And it is remarkable, that among all the
Gentiles none ever reasonably pretended to a power of casting out Devils. For
the Devils could not get so much by it, as things then stood: And besides, in
whose name should they do it who worshipped none but Devils and false gods?
which is too violent presumption, that the Devil was the Architect in all such
buildings. And when the seven sons of Sceva, who was (...) 19.
a Jew, (amongst whom it was sometimes granted to cure Demoniacks) offered to
exorcize a possessed person, the Devil would by no means endure it, but beat
them for their pains. And yet, because it might have been for his purpose to
have enervated the reputation of S. Paul, and by a voluntary cession equalled
S. Paul's enemies to him, either the Devil could not go out but at the command
of a Christian; or else to have gone out would have been a disservice and ruin
to his kingdom: either of which declares, that the power of casting out Devils
is a testimony of God, and a probation of the Divinity of a Doctrine, and a
proper argument of Christianity.

11. Seventhly, But, besides this, I consider, that the Holy Jesus, having
first possessed upon just title all the reasonableness of humane understanding
by his demonstration of a miraculous power, in his infinite wisdom knew that
the Devil would attempt to gain a party by the same instrument, and therefore
so ordered it, that the Miracles which should be done, or pretended to, by the
Devil, or any of the enemies of the Cross of Chris^t, should be a confirmation
of Christianity, not do it disservice; for he foretold that Antichrist and
other enemies should come in prodigies, and lying wonders and signs. Concerning
which, although it may be disputed whether they were truly Miracles, or mere
deceptions and magical pretenses; yet because they were such which the People
could not discern from Miracles really such, therefore it is all one, and in
this consideration are to be supposed such: but certainly he that could
foretell such a future contingency, or such a secret of Predestination, was
able also to know from what principle it came; and we have the same reason to
believe that Antichrist shall do Miracles to evil purposes, as that he shall do
any at all; he that foretold us of the man, foretold us also of the imposture,
and commanded us not to trust him. And it had been more likely for Antichrist
to prevail upon Christians by doing no Miracles, than by doing any: For if he
had done none, he might have escaped without discovery; but by doing Miracles,
as he verified the wisdom and prescience of Jesus, so he declared to all the
Church that he was the enemy of their Lord, and therefore less likely to
deceive: for which reason it is said, that he shall deceive, if it were
possible, the very elect; that is therefore not possible, because that by which
he insinuates himself to others, is by the elect, the Church and chosen of God,
understood to be his sign and mark of discovery, and a warning. And therefore
as the Prophecies of Jesus were an infinite verification of his Miracles, so
also this Prophecy of Christ concerning Antichrist disgraces the reputation and
faith of the Miracles he shall act. The old Prophets foretold of the Messiah,
and of his Miracles of power and mercy, to prepare for his reception and
entertainment: Christ alone, and his Apostles from him, foretold of Antichrist,
and that he should come in all Miracles of deception and lying, that is, with
true or false Miracles to persuade a lie: and this was to prejudice his being
accepted, according to the Law of Moses. So that as all that spoke of Christ
bade us believe him for the Miracles; Deuteronomy. 13. 1, (...)
so all that foretold of Antichrist bade us disbelieve him the rather for his:
and the reason of both is the same, because the mighty and surer word of
Prophecy (as S. Peter calls it) being the greatest testimony in the world of a
Divine principle, gives authority, or reprobates, with the same power. They who
are the predestinate of God, and they that are the praesciti, the foreknown and
marked people, must needs stand or fall to the Divine sentence; and such must
this be acknowledged: for no enemy of the Cross, not the Devil himself, ever
foretold such a contingency, or so rare, so personal, so voluntary, so
unnatural an event, as this of the great Antichrist.

12. And thus the Holy Jesus, having showed forth the treasures of his Father's
Wisdom in Revelations and holy Precepts, and upon the stock of his Father's
greatness having dispended and demonstrated great power in Miracles, and these
being instanced in acts of Mercy, he mingled the glories of Heaven to transmit
them to earth, to raise us up to the participations of Heaven: he was pleased,
by healing the bodies of infirm persons, to invite their spirits to his
Discipline, and by his power to convey healing, and by that mercy to lead us
into the treasures of revelation; that both Bodies and Souls, our Wills and
Understandings, by Divine instruments might be brought to Divine perfections in
the participations of a Divine nature. It was a miraculous mercy that God
should look upon us in our blood, and a miraculous condescension that his Son
should take our nature; and even this favor we could not believe without many
Miracles: and so contrary was our condition to all possibilities of happiness,
that if Salvation had not marched to us all the way in Miracle, we had perished
in the ruins of a sad eternity. And now it would be but reasonable, that,
since God for our sakes has rescinded so many laws of natural establishment,
we also for his, and for our own, would be content to do violence to those
natural inclinations, which are also criminal when they derive into action.
Every man living in the state of Grace is a perpetual Miracle, and his Passions
are made reasonable, as his Reason is turned to Faith, and his Soul to Spirit,
and his Body to a Temple, and Earth to Heaven; and less than this will not
dispose us to such glories, which being the portion of Saints and Angels, and
the nearest communications with God, are infinitely above what we see, or hear,
or understand.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal Jesu, who did receive great power, that by it thou might convey
thy Father's mercies to us impotent and wretched people; give me grace to
believe that heavenly Doctrine which thou did ratify with arguments from
above, that I may fully assent to all those mysterious Truths which integrate
that Doctrine and Discipline in which the obligations of my duty and the hopes
of my felicity are deposited. And to all those glorious verifications of thy
Goodness and thy Power add also this Miracle, that I, who am stained with
Leprosy of sin, may be cleansed, and my eyes may be opened, that I may see the
wondrous things of thy Law; and raise thou me up from the death of sin to the
life of righteousness, that I may for ever walk in the land of the living,
abhorring the works of death and darkness: that as I am by thy miraculous mercy
partaker of the first, so also I may be accounted worthy of the second
Resurrection; and as by Faith, Hope, Charity and Obedience I receive the fruit
of thy Miracles in this life, so in the other I may partake of thy Glories,
which is a mercy above all Miracles. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me
clean. Lord, I believe; help mine unbelief: and grant that no (...) or
incapacity of mine may hinder the wonderful operations of thy Grace; but let it
be thy first Miracle to turn my water into wine, my barrenness into
fruitfulness, my aversations from thee into unions and intimate adhesions to
thy infinity, which is the fountain of mercy and power. Grant this for thy
mercie's sake, and for the honor of those glorious Attributes in which thou
have revealed thy self and thy Father's excellencies to the world, O Holy and
Eternal Jesu.

Amen.
The End of the Second Part. (...)
THE HISTORY OF THE Life and Death OF THE HOLY JESUS:

BEGINNING At the Second Year of his PREACHING, until his ASCENSION: WITH
CONSIDERATIONS and DISCOURSES upon the several parts of the Story; And PRAYERS
fitted to the several MYSTERIES.

THE THIRD PART.

Seneca apud Lactant. lib. 6. c. 17. Hic est ille homo qui, sive toto corpore
tormenta patienda sunt, sive flamma ore recipienda est, sive extendenda per
patibulum manus; non quaerit quid patiatur, sed quam been.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for R. Royston, 1675

TO The Right Honorable and Virtuous Lady, The LADY FRANCES Countess of
CARBERY.
MADAM,
SInce the Divine Providence has been pleased to bind up the great breaches of
my little fortune by your Charity and Nobleness of a religious tenderness, I
account it an excellent circumstance and handsomeness of condition, that I have
the fortune of S. Athanasius, to have my Persecution relieved and comforted by
an Honorable and Excellent Lady; and I have nothing to return for this honor
done to me, but to do as the poor Paralyticks and infirm people in the Gospel
did when our Blessed Savior cured them, they went and told it to all the
Country, and made the Vicinage full of the report, as themselves were of
health and joy. And although I know the modesty of your person and Religion had
rather do favors than own them, yet give me leave to draw aside the curtain
and retirement of your Charity; for I had rather your virtue should blush, than
my unthankfulness make me ashamed. Madam, I intended by this Address not only
to return you spirituals for your temporal's, but to make your noble usages of
me and mine to become, like your other Charities, productive of advantages to
the standers by. For although the beams of the Sun reflected from a marble
return not home to the body and fountain of light; yet they that walk below
feel the benefit of a doubled heat: so whatever reflections or returns of your
Favors I can make, although they fall short of what your Worth does most
reasonably challenge, and can proceed but toward you with forward desires and
distant approaches; yet I am desirous to believe that those who walk between us
may receive assistences from this intercourse, and the following Papers may be
auxiliary to the enkindling of their Piety, as to the confirming and
establishing yours. For although the great Prudence of your most Noble Lord,
and the modesties of your own temperate and sweeter dispositions, become the
great endearments of Virtue to you; yet because it is necessary that you make
Religion the business of your life, I thought it not an impertinent
application, to express my thankfulness to your Honor by that which may best
become my duty and my gratitude, because it may do you the greatest service.
Madam, I must beg your pardon, that I have opened the sanctuary of your retired
Virtues; but I was obliged to publish the endearments and favors of your Noble
Lord and your self toward me and my relatives: For as your hands are so
clasped, that one Ring is the ligature of them both; so I have found emanations
from that conjuncture of hands with a consent so forward and apt, that nothing
can satisfy for my obligations, but by being, in the greatest eminency of
thankfulness and humility of person,

MADAM, Your Honor's most obliged and most humble Servant, JER. TAILOR.

TO The Right Honorable and Virtuous Lady, The LADY ALICE Countess of CARBERY.
MADAM,
BY the Divine Providence, which disposes all things wisely and charitably, you
are in the affections of your Noblest Lord Successor to a very dear and most
Excellent person, and designed to fill up those offices of Piety to her dear
pledges, which the have which God made to glorify and secure her would not
permit her to finish. I have much ado to refrain from telling great stories of
her Wisdom, Piety, Judgment, Sweetness, and Religion; but that it would renew
the wound, and make our sins bleed afresh at the memory of that dear Saint: and
we hope that much of the storm of the Divine anger is over, because he has
repaired the breach by sending you to go on upon her account, and to give
countenance and establishment to all those Graces which were warranted and
derived from her example. Madam, the Nobleness of your Family, your Education
and your excellent Principles, your fair dispositions and affable Comportment,
have not only made all your servants confident of your Worthiness and great
Virtues, but have disposed you so highly and necessarily toward an active and
a zealous Religion, that we expect it should grow to the height of a great
Example; that you may draw others after you, as the eye follows the light in
all the angles of its retirement, or open stages of its publication. In order
to this I have chosen your Honor into a new relation, and have endeared you to
this instrument of Piety; that if you will please to do it countenance, and
employ it in your counsels and pious offices, it may minister to your appetites
of Religion; which as they are already fair and prosperous, so they may swell
up to a vastness large enough to entertain all the secrets and pleasures of
Religion: that so you may add, to the Blessings and Prosperities which already
dwell in that Family where you are now fixed, new title to more, upon the stock
of all those Promises which have secured and entailed Felicities upon such
persons who have no vanities, but very many Virtues. Madam, I could not do you
any service but by doing my self this honor, to adorn my Book with this
fairest title and inscription of your Name. You may observe, but cannot blame,
my ambition; so long as it is instanced in a religious service, and means
nothing but this, that I may signify how much I honor that Person who is
designed to bring new Blessings to that Family which is so Honorable in it
self, and for so many reasons dear to me. Madam, upon that account, besides the
stock of your own Worthiness, I am

Your Honor's most humble and obedient Servant, JER. TAILOR.

SECT. XIII. Of the Second Year of the Preaching of JESUS.
The poole of Bethesda.
IOH. 5. 8. 9. Jesus says unto him Rise take up thy bed and walk and
immediately the man was made whole and walked and on the same day was the
Sabboath. place this to the third Sunday in Advent.

Marie washing CHRIST'S feet.
IOH. 12. 7 Then said Jesus. let her alone: Against the day of my burying has
she kept this. 8 For the poor always ye have with you, but me ye have not
always. Monday before Easter.




1. WHEN the First Year of Jesus, the year of Peace and undisturbed Preaching,
was expired, there was a Feast of the Jews, and Jesus John 5. 1, etc.
went up to Jerusalem. This Feast was the second Passover he kept Iren. l. 2.
c. 10.
after he began to preach; not the Feast of Pentecost or Tabernacles, both
which were passed before Jesus came last from Judaea: whither when he was now
come, he finds an impotent person lying at the pool of Bethesda, waiting till
the Angel should move the waters, after which whosoever first stepped in was
cured of his infirmity. The poor man had waited thirty eight years, and still
was prevented by some other of the Hospital that needed a Physician. But Jesus
seeing him, had pity on him, cured him, and bade him take up his bed and walk.
This cure happened to be wrought upon the Sabbath, for which the Jews were so
moved with indignation, that they thought to (...) him: And their anger was
enraged by his calling himself the Son of God, and making himself equal with
God.

2. Upon occasion of this offense, which they snatched at before it was
ministered, John 5. 19. etc.
Jesus discourses upon his Mission, and derivation of his authority from the
Father; of the union between them, and the excellent communications of power,
participation of dignity, delegation of judicature, reciprocations and
reflections of honor from the Father to the Son, and back again to the Father.
He preaches of life and Salvation to them that believe in him; prophesies of
the resurrection of the dead by the efficacy of the voice of the Son of God;
speaks of the day of Judgment, the differing conditions after, of Salvation and
Damnation respectively; confirms his words and mission by the testimony of John
the Baptist, of Moses and the other Scriptures, Suidas Voc. (...)
and of God himself. And still the scandal rises higher: for in the second
Sabbath after the first, that is, in the first day of unleavened bread, which
happened the next day after the weekly Sabbath, the Disciples of Jesus pull
ripe (...) of corn, rub them in their hands, and eat them to satisfy their
hunger: For which he offered satisfaction to their scruples, convincing them,
that works of necessity are to be permitted even to the breach of a positive
temporary constitution, and that works of Mercy are the best serving of God
upon any day whatsoever, or any part of the day that is vacant to other
offices, and proper for a religious Festival.

3. But when neither Reason nor Religion would give them satisfaction, but that
they went about to kill him, he withdrew himself from Jerusalem, and returned
to Galilee; whither the Scribes and Pharisees followed him, observing his
actions, and whether or no he would prosecute that which they called
profanation of their Sabbath, by doing acts of Mercy upon that day. He still
did so. For entering into one of the Synagogues of Galilee upon the Sabbath,
Jesus saw a man Evangel. Naz. quod S. Hieron. (...). in Gracum (...).
(whom S. Hierom reports to have been a Mason) coming to Tire, and complaining
that his hand was withered, and desiring (...)
help of him, that he might again be restored to the use of his hands, lest he
should be compelled with misery and shame to beg his bread. Jesus restored his
hand as whole as the other in the midst of all those spies and enemies. Upon
which act, being confirmed in their malice, the Pharisees went forth, and
joined with the Herodians, (a Sect of people who said Herod was the Messiah,
because by the decree of the Roman Senate, when the Scepter departed from
Judah, (...) and (...), and (...). advers. (...).
he was declared King) and both together took counsel how they might kill him.

4. Jesus therefore departed again to the seacoast, and his companies
increased as his fame, for he was now followed by new multitudes from Galilee,
from Judaea, from Jerusalem, from Idumaea, (...) beyond Jordan, from about Tire
and Sidon; who, hearing the report of his miraculous power to cure all diseases
by the word of his mouth, or the touch of his hand, or the handling his
garment, came with their ambulatory hospital of sick and their possessed; and
they pressed on him, but to touch him, and were all immediately cured. The
Devils confessing publicly, that he was the Son of God, till they were upon
all such occasions restrained, and compelled to silence.

5. But now Jesus having commanded a ship to be in readiness against any
inconvenience or troublesome pressures of the multitude, went up into a
mountain to pray, and continued in prayer all night, intending to make the
first ordination of Apostles: which the next day he did, choosing out of the
number of his Disciples these (...) and (...) du (...) and (...), Omnibus (...)
Sedul.
twelve to be Apostles; Simon Peter and Andrew, James and John, the sons of
thunder, Philip and Bartholomew, Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus
and Simon the Zelot, Judas the brother of James and Judas (...). With these
descending from the mountain to the plain, he repeated the same Sermon, or much
of it, which he had before preached in the first beginning of his Prophesyings;
that he might publish his Gospel to these new Auditors, and also more
particularly inform his Apostles in the Doctrine of the Kingdom: for now,
because he saw Israel scattered like sheep having no Shepherd, he did purpose
to send these twelve abroad to preach Repentance and the approximation of the
Kingdom; and therefore first instructed them in the mysterious parts of his
holy Doctrine, and gave them also particular instructions together with their
temporary commission for that journey.

6. For Jesus sent them out by two and two, giving them power over unclean
spirits, and to heal all manner of sickness and diseases; telling them they
were the light, and the eyes, and the salt of the world, so intimating their
duties of diligence, holiness, and incorruption; giving them in charge to
preach the Gospel, to dispense their power and Miracles freely, as they had
received it, to anoint sick persons with oil, not to enter into any Samaritan
Town, but to go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, to provide no
viaticum for their journeys, but to put themselves upon the Religion and Piety
of their Proselytes: he arms them against persecutions, gives them leave to
slye the storm from City to City, promises them the assistances of his Spirit,
encourages them by his own example of long-sufferance, and by instances of
Divine providence expressed even to creatures of smallest value, and by promise
of great rewards, to the confident confession of his Name; and furnishes them
with some propositions, which are like so many bills of exchange, upon the
trust of which they might take up necessaries; promising great retributions not
only to them who quit any thing of value for the sake of Jesus, but to them
that offer a cup of water to a thirsty Disciple.] And with these instructions
they departed to preach in the Cities.

7. And Jesus returning to Capernaum received the address of a faithful
Centurion of the Legion called the Iron Legion (which usually quartered in
Judaea) in behalf of his servant, Dio hist. Romans lib. 55.
whom he loved, and who was grievously afflicted with the Palsy; and healed
him, as a reward and honor to his Faith. And from thence going to the City
Naim, he raised to life the only son of a widow, whom the mourners followed in
the street, bearing the corpse sadly to his funeral. Upon the fame of these and
diverse other Miracles John the Baptist, who was still in prison, (for he was
not put to death till the latter end of this year) sent two of his Disciples to
him by divine providence, or else by John's designation, to minister occasion
of his greater publication, enquiring if he was the Messiah. To whom Jesus
returned no answer, but a Demonstration taken from the nature of the thing, and
the glory of the Miracles, saying, Return to John and tell him what ye see; for
the deaf hear, the blind see, the lame walk, the dead are raised, and the
lepers are cleansed, and to the poor the Gospel is preached: which were the
Characteristick notes of the Messiah, according to the predictions of the holy
Isa. 35. 4. 5.
Prophets.

6. When John's Disciples were gone with this answer, Jesus began to speak
concerning John, of the austerity and holiness of his person, the greatness of
his function, the Divinity of his commission, saying, that he was greater than
a Prophet, a burning and shining light, the Elias that was to come, and the
consummation or ending of the old Prophets: Adding withal, that the
perverseness of that Age was most notorious in the entertainment of himself and
the Baptist: for neither could the Baptist, who came neither eating nor
drinking, (that by his austerity and mortified deportment he might invade the
judgment and affections of the people) nor Jesus, who came both eating and
drinking, (that by a moderate and an affable life framed to the compliance and
common use of men he might sweetly insinuate into the affections of the
multitude) obtain belief amongst them. They could object against every thing,
but nothing could please them. But wisdom and righteousness had a theater in
its own family, and is justified of all her children. Then he proceeds to a
more applied reprehension of Capernaum and Chorazin and Bethsaida, for being
pertinacious in their sins and infidelity, in defiance and reproof of all the
mighty works which had been wrought in them. But these things were not revealed
to all dispositions; the wife and the mighty of the world were not subjects
prepared for the simplicity and softer impresses of the Gospel, and the
downright severity of its Sanctions. And therefore Jesus glorified God for the
magnifying of his mercy, in that these things which were hid from the great
ones were revealed to babes; and concludes this Sermon with an invitation of
all wearied and disconsolate persons, loaded with sin and misery, to come to
him, promising ease to their burdens, and refreshment to their weariness, and
to exchange their heavy pressures into an easy yoke, and a light burden.

9. When Jesus had ended this Sermon, one of the Pharisees, named Simon,
invited Luke 7.
him to eat with him; into whose house when he was entered, a certain woman that
was a sinner, abiding there in the City, heard of it; her name was Mary: she
had been married to a noble personage, a native of the Town and Castle of
Magdal, from whence she had her name of Magdalen, though she her self was born
in Bethany; a widow she was, and prompted by her wealth, liberty and youth to
an intemperate life, and too free entertainments. She came to Jesus into the
Pharisee's house: not (as did the staring multitude) to glut her eyes with the
sight of a miraculous and glorious person; nor (as did the Centurion, or the
(...), or the Ruler of the Synagogue) for cure of her sickness, or in behalf of
her friend, or child, or servant; but (the only example of so coming) she came
in remorse and regret for her sins, (...) came to Jesus to lay her burden at
his feet, and to present him with a broken heart, and a weeping eye, and great
affection, and a box of Nard Pistick, salutary and precious. For she came
trembling, and fell down before him, weeping bitterly for her sins, pouring out
a (...) great enough to wash the -- (...) in (...), Munda suis lacrymis redis,
and (...). Sedul. l. 3.
feet of the Blessed Jesus, and wiping them with the hairs of her head; after
which she brake the box, and anointed his feet with ointment. Which expression
was so great an ecstasie of love, sorrow and adoration, that to anoint the feet
even of the greatest Monarch was long (...). (...). lib. 13. c. 3. Vide (...).
(...). l. 12. (...) 30. (...) in Thalia.
unknown, and in all the pomps and greatnesses of the Roman Prodigality it was
not used till Otho taught it to Nero; in whose instance it was by Pliny
reckoned for a prodigy of unnecessary profusion, and in it self, without the
circumstance of (...) free a dispensation, it was a present for a Prince, and
an Alabaster-box of Nard Pistick was sent as a present from (...) to the King
of Ethiopia.

10. When Simon observed this sinner so busy in the expresses of her Religion
and (...) to Jesus, he thought with himself that this was no Prophet, that did
not know her to be a sinner, or no just person, that would suffer her to touch
him. For although the Jews Religion did permit Harlots of their own Nation to
live, and enjoy the privileges of their Nation, save that their Oblations were
refused: yet the Pharisees, who pretended to a greater degree of Sanctity than
others, would not admit them to civil (...), or the benefits of ordinary
society; and thought Religion it self and the honor of a Prophet was concerned
in the interests of the same superciliousness: and therefore Simon made an
objection within himself. Which Jesus knowing, (for he understood his thoughts
as well as his words) made her Apology and his own in a civil question
expressed in a Parable of two Debtors, to whom a greater and a less debt
respectively was forgiven; both of them concluding, that they would love their
merciful Creditor in proportion to his mercy and donative: and this was the
case of Mary Magdalen, to whom because much was forgiven, she loved much, and
expressed it in characters so large, that the Pharisee might read his own
incivilities and inhospitable entertainment of the Master, when it stood
confronted with the magnificency of Mary Magdalen's penance and charity.

11. When Jesus had dined, he was presented with the sad sight of a poor
Demoniack possessed with a blind and a dumb Devil, in whose behalf his friends
entreated Jesus, that he would cast the Devil out; which he did immediately,
and the blind man saw, and the dumb spoke, so much to the amazement of the
people, that they ran in so prodigious companies after him, and so scandalized
the Pharisees, who thought that by means of this Prophet their reputation would
be lessened and their Schools empty, that first a rumor was scattered up and
down from an uncertain principle, but communicated with tumult and apparent
noises, that Jesus was beside himself. Upon which rumor his friends and
kindred came together to see, and to make provisions accordingly; and the holy
Virgin Mother came her self, but without any apprehensions of any such horrid
accident. The words and things she had from the beginning laid up in her heart
would furnish her with principles exclusive of all apparitions of such fancies;
but she came to see what that persecution was which, under that color, it was
likely the Pharisees might commence.

12. When the Mother of Jesus and his kindred came, they found him in a house,
encircled with people, full of wonder and admiration: And there the holy
Virgin Mother might hear part of her own Prophecy verified, that the
generations of the earth should call her blessed; for a woman worshipping Jesus
cried out, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee
suck. To this Jesus replied, not denying her to be highly blessed who had
received the honor of being the Mother of the Messiah, but advancing the
dignities of spiritual excellencies far above this greatest temporal honor in
the world; Yea rather blessed are they that hear the word of God, and do it.
For in respect of the issues of spiritual perfections and their proportionable
benedictions, all immunities and temporal honors are empty and hollow
blessings; and all relations of kindred disband and empty themselves into the
greater channels and floods of Divinity.

13. For when Jesus being in the house, they told him his Mother and his
Brethren staid for him without; he told them, those relations were less than
the ties of Duty and Religion: For those dear names of Mother and Brethren,
which are hallowed by the laws of God and the endearments of Nature, are made
far more sacred when a spiritual cognation does supervene, when the relations
are subjected in persons religious and holy: but if they be abstract and
separate, the conjunction of persons in spiritual bands, in the same Faith, and
the same Hope, and the union of them in the same mystical Head, is an adunation
nearer to identity than those distances between Parents and Children, which are
only cemented by the actions of Nature as it is of distinct consideration from
the spirit. For Jesus pointing to his Disciples said, Behold my Mother and my
Brethren; for whosoever does the will of my Father which is in heaven, he is my
Brother, and Sister, and Mother.

14. But the Pharisees upon the occasion of the Miracles renewed the old
quarrel; He casts out Devils by Beelzebub. Which senseless and illiterate
objection Christ having confuted, charged them highly upon the guilt of an
unpardonable crime, telling them, that the so charging those actions of his
done in the virtue of the Divine Spirit, is a sin against the Holy Ghost: and
however they might be bold with the Son of Man, and prevarications against his
words or injuries to his person might upon Repentance and Baptism find a
pardon; yet it was a matter of greater consideration to sin against the Holy
Ghost; that would find no pardon here, nor hereafter. But taking occasion upon
this discourse, he by an ingenious and mysterious Parable gives the world great
caution of recidivation and backsliding after Repentance. For if the Devil
returns into a house once swept and garnished, he brings seven spirits more
impure than himself; and the last estate of that man is worse than the first.

15. After this, Jesus went from the house of the Pharisee, and, coming to the
Sea of Tiberias or Genezareth, (for it was called the Sea of Tiberias from a
Town on the banks of the Lake) taught the people upon the shore, himself
sitting in the ship; but he taught them by Parables, under which were hid
mysterious senses, which shined through their veil like a bright Sun through an
eye closed with a thin eyelid; it being light enough to show their infidelity,
but not to dispell those thick Egyptian darknesses which they had contracted by
their habitual indispositions and pertinacious aversations. By the Parable of
the Sower scattering his seed by the way side, and some on stony, some on
thorny, some on good ground, he intimated the several capacities or
indispositions of men's hearts, the carelessness of some, the frowardness and
levity of others, the easiness and softness of a third, and how they are
spoiled with worldliness and cares, and how many ways there are to miscarry,
and that but one sort of men receive the word, and bring forth the fruits of a
holy life. By the Parable of Tares permitted to grow amongst the Wheat, he
intimated the toleration of dissenting Opinions not destructive of Piety or
civil societies. By the three Parables of the Seed growing insensibly, of the
grain of Mustard Seed swelling up to a tree, of a little Leven qualifying the
whole lump, he signified the increment of the Gospel, and the blessings upon
the Apostolical Sermons.

16. Which Parables when he had privately to his Apostles rendered into their
proper senses, he added to them two Parables concerning the dignity of the
Gospel, comparing it to Treasure hid in a field, and a Jewel of great price,
for the purchase of which every good Merchant must quit all that he has rather
than miss it: telling them withal, that however purity and spiritual
perfections were intended by the Gospel, yet it would not be acquired by every
person; but the public Professors of Christianity should be a mixed multitude,
like a net enclosing fishes good and bad. After which discourses he retired
from the Sea side, and went to his own City of Nazareth; where he preached so
excellently upon certain words of the Prophet Chap. 61. (...).
(...), that all the people wondered at the wisdom which he expressed in his
Divine discourses. But the men of Nazareth did not do honor to the Prophet,
that was their Countryman, because they knew him in all the disadvantages of
youth, and kindred, and trade, and poverty, still retaining in their minds the
infirmities and humilities of his first years, and keeping the same
apprehensions of him a man and a glorious Prophet, which they had to him a
child in the shop of a Carpenter. But when Jesus in his Sermon had reproved
their infidelity, at which he wondered, and therefore did but few Miracles there
in respect of what he had done at Capernaum, and intimated the prelation of
that City before (...), they thrust him out of the City, and led him to the
brow of the hill on which the City was built, intending to throw him down
headlong. But his work was not yet finished, therefore he passing through the
midst of them went his way.

17. Jesus therefore departing from Nazareth went up and down to all the Towns
and Castles of Galilce, attended by his Disciples, and certain women out of
whom he had cast unclean spirits; such as were Mary Magdalen, Johanna wife to
Chuza Herod's Steward, Susanna, and some others, who did for him offices of
provision, and ministered to him out of their own substance, and became parts of
that holy College which about this time began to be (...); because now the
Apostles were returned from their Preaching, full of joy that the Devils were
made subject to the word of their mouth, and the Empire of their Prayers, and
invocation of the holy Name of Jesus. But their Master gave them a lenitive to
assuage the tumor and excrescency, intimating that such privileges are not
solid foundations of a holy joy; but so far as they cooperate toward the great
end of God's glory and their own Salvation, to which when they are (...)
Discourse of Certainty of Salvation, Number. 3.
consigned, and their names written in Heaven, in the book of Election and
Registers of Predestination, then their joy is reasonable, holy, true, and
perpetual.

18. But when Herod had heard these things of Jesus, presently his
apprehensions were such as derived from his guilt, he thought it was John the
Baptist who was risen from the dead, and that these mighty works were
demonstrations of his power, increased (...) incolumem (...), Sublatam ex
oculis qu erimus invidi.
by the superadditions of immortality and diviner influences made
proportionable to the honor of a Martyr, and the state of separation. For a
little before this time Herod had sent to the Castle of Macheruns, where John
was prisoner, and caused him to Horat. (...). 3. (...). 24.
be beheaded. His head Herodias buried in her own Palace, thinking to secure it
against a reunion, lest it should again disturb her unlawful Lusts, and
disquiet Herod's conscience. But the body the Disciples of John gathered up,
and carried it with honor and sorrow, and buried it in Sebaste, in the
confines of Samaria, making his grave between the bodies of (...) and Abdias
the Prophets. And about this time was the Passover of the Jews.

DISCOURSE XV. Of the Excellency, Ease, Reasonableness and Advantages of
bearing Christ' s Yoke, and living according to his Institution.
Ecce agnus Dei gui to^lit peccata Mundi John. 1. 29. Behold the lamb of God,
which takes away the sin of the World.

The Christian's Work and Reward.
Matthew. 11. 29, 30. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me. For my yoke is
easy and my burden is light. Revel. 2, 10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I
will give thee a crown of life.

1 Cor. 9. 24, 25. So run that ye may obtain. Every man that strives for ye
mastery is temperate in all things: now they do it to obtain a corrupible
crown, but we an incorruptible.




THE Holy Jesus came to break from off our necks two great yokes; the one of
Sin, by which we were fettered and imprisoned in the condition of slaves and
miserable persons; the other of Moses's Law, by which we were kept in pupillage
and minority, and a state of Imperfection: and asserted us into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God. The first was a Despotick Empire, and the
Government of a Tyrant: the second was of a Schoolmaster, severe, absolute and
imperious, but it was in order to a farther good, yet nothing pleasant in the
sufferance and load. And now Christ having taken off these two, has put on a
third. He quits us of our Burden, but not of our Duty; and has changed the
former Tyranny and the less-perfect Discipline into the sweetness of paternal
regiment, and the excellency of such an Institution whose every Precept carries
part of its reward in hand, and assurances of after-glories. Moses's Law was
like sharp and unpleasant Physic, certainly painful, but uncertainly
healthful. For it was not then communicated to them by promise and universal
revelations, that the end of their Obedience should be Life eternal: but they
were full of hopes it might be so, as we are of health when we have a learned
and wise Physician. But as yet the Reward was in a cloud, and the hopes in
fetters and confinement. But the Law of Christ is like Christ's healing of
diseases; he does it easily, and he does it infallibly. The event is certainly
consequent, and the manner of cure is by a touch of his hand, or a word of his
mouth, or an approximation to the hem of his garment, without pain and
vexatious instruments. My meaning is, that Christianity is by the assistance of
Christ's spirit, which he promised us and gave us in the Gospel, made very
easy to us: And yet a reward so great is promised, as were enough to make a
lame man to walk, and a broken arm endure the burden; a reward great enough to
make us willing to do violence to all our inclinations, passions, and desires.
A hundred weight to a giant is a light burden, because his strength is
disproportionably great, and makes it as easy to him as an ounce is to a
child. And yet if we had not the strength of giants, if the hundred weight were
of Gold or Jewels, a weaker person would think it no trouble to bear that
burden, if it were the reward of his portage and the hire of his labors. The
Spirit is given to us to enable us, and Heaven is promised to encourage us; the
first makes us able, and the second makes us willing: and when we have power
and affections, we cannot complain of pressure. And this is the meaning of our
Blessed Savior's invitation; Come to me, for my burden is light, my (...) is
easy: which S. John (...). 11. 30.
1 John 5. 3, 4.
also observed, For this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments; and
his Commandments are not grievous. For whatsoever is born of God overcomes the
world; and this is the victory that overcomes, even our Faith: that is, our
belief of God's promises, the promise of the Spirit for present aid, and of
Heaven for the future reward, is strength enough to overcome all the world.

2. But besides that God has made his yoke easy by exterior supports more
than ever was in any other Religion; Christianity is of it self, according to
humane estimate, a Religion more easy and desirable by our natural and
reasonable appetites, than Sin in the midst of all its pleasures and imaginary
felicities. Virtue has more pleasure in it than Sin, and has all
satisfactions to every desire of man in order to humane and prudent ends; which
I shall represent in the consideration of these particulars. (...) To live
according to the Laws of Jesus is in some things most natural and
proportionable to the desires and first intentions of Nature. 2. There is in it
less trouble than in Sin. 3. It conduces infinitely to the content of our
lives, and natural and political satisfactions. 4. It is a means to preserve
our temporal lives long and healthy. 5. It is most reasonable; and he only is
prudent that does so, and he a fool that does not. And all this besides the
considerations of a glorious and happy Eternity.

3. Concerning the First I consider, that we do very ill when, in stead of
making our Natural infirmity an instrument of Humility, and of recourse to the
grace of God, we pretend the sin of Adam to countenance our actual sins,
natural infirmity to excuse our malice; either laying Adam in fault for
deriving the disability upon us, or God, for putting us into the necessity. But
the (...) that we feel in this are from the rebellion of the inferior Appetite
against Reason, or against any Religion that puts restraint upon our first
desires, And therefore in carnal and sensual instances accidentally we (...)
the more natural averseness, because God's Laws have put our irascible and
concupiscible faculties in fetters and restraints; yet in matters of duty,
which are of immaterial and spiritual concernment, all our natural reason is a
perfect enemy and contradiction to, and a Law against, Vice. It is natural for
us to love our Parents, and they who do not are unnatural; they do violence to
those dispositions which God gave us to the constitution of our Nature, and for
the designs of Virtue: and all those tendernesses of affection, those bowels
and relenting dispositions, which are the endearments of Parents and Children,
are also the bands of duty. Every degree of love makes duty delectable: and
therefore either by nature we are inclined to hate our Parents, which is
against all reason and experience; or else we are by nature inclined to do to
them all that which is the effect of love to such Superiors and principles of
being and dependency: and every prevarication from the rule, effects and
expresses of love, is a contradiction to Nature, and a mortification; to which
we cannot be invited by any thing from within, but by something from without,
that is violent and preternatural. There are also many other virtues even in
the matter of sensual appetite which none can lose, but by altering in some
degree the natural disposition. And I instance in the matter of Carnality and
Uncleanness, to which possibly some natures may think themselves apt and
disposed: but yet God has put into our mouths a bridle to curb the
licentiousness of our speedy appetite, putting into our very natures a
principle as strong to restrain it as there is in us a disposition apt to
invite us; and this is also in persons who are most apt to the vice, women and
young persons, to whom God has given a modesty and shame of nature, that the
entertainments of Lusts may become contradictions to our retreating and
backward modesty, more than they are satisfactions to our tooforward appetites.
It is as great a mortification and violence to nature to blush, as to lose a
desire; and we find it true, when persons are invited to confess their sins, or
to ask forgiveness publicly, a secret smart is not so violent as a public
shame: and therefore to do an action which brings shame all along, and opens
the Sanctuaries of nature, and makes all her retirements public, and
dismantles her enclosure, as Lust does, and the shame of carnality, has in it
more asperity and abuse to nature, than the short pleasure to which we are
invited can repay. There are unnatural Lusts, Lusts which are such in their
very condition and constitution, that a man must turn a woman, and a woman
become a beast in acting them; and all Lusts that are not unnatural in their
own complexion, are unnatural by a consequent and accidental violence. And if
Lust has in it dissonancies to Nature, there are but few apologies (...) to
excuse our sins upon Nature's stock: and all that systeme of principles and
reasonable inducements to Virtue, which we call the Law of Nature, is nothing
else but that firm ligature and incorporation of Virtue to our natural
principles and dispositions, which whosoever prevaricates does more against Nature
than he that restrains his appetite. And besides these particulars, there is
not in our natural discourse any inclination directly and by intention of it
self contrary to the love of God, because by God we understand that Fountain of
Being which is infinitely perfect in it self, and of great good to us; and
whatsoever is so apprehended, it is as (...). Procop. Gothic. 1.
natural for us to love, as to love any thing in the world; for we can love
nothing but what we believe to be good in it self, or good to us. And beyond
this, there are in Nature many (...)(...).
principles and reasons to make an aptness to acknowledge and confess God; and
by the consent of Nations, which they also have learned from the dictates of
their Nature, all men in some manner or other worship God. And therefore when
this our Nature is determined in its own indefinite principle to the manner of
worship, all acts against the Love, the Obedience and the Worship of God, are
also against Nature, and offer it some rudeness and violence. And I shall
observe this, and refer it to every man's reason and experience, that the great
difficulties of Virtue commonly apprehended commence not so much upon the stook
of Nature, as of Siquidem Leomdes (...) eum (...) imbuit, (...) quoque and jam
maximum Regem ab illa institutions puerili sunt (...).
Education and evil Habits. Our Virtues are difficult, because we at first get
ill Habits; and these Habits must be unrooted before we do well: and that is our
trouble. But if by the strictness of Discipline and wholesome Education we begin
at first in our duty and the practice of virtuous principles, we shall find
Virtue made as natural to us, while it is customary and habitual, as we pretend
infirmity to be and propensity to vicious practices. And this we are taught by
that excellent Hebrew who said, Wisdom is easily seen of them that love her,
and found of such as seek her: She preventeth them that desire her, in making
her self first known unto them. Whosoever seeks her early shall have no great
travel; for he shall find her sitting (...). l. 1. c. 1 Wisd. 6. 12, 13, 14.
at his doors.

4. Secondly, In the strict observances of the Law of Christianity there is
less Trouble than in the habitual courses of sin. (...) est facere is it a (...)
n. quiet (...) est animi? quid (...) a laboriosius? (...) elementia remissius?
quid (...) negotiosius? Vacat (...), libido (...) est. Omnium denique virtutum
tutela facilior est; vitia magno (...). Seneca.
For if we consider the general design of Christianity, it propounds to us in
this world nothing that is of difficult purchase, nothing beyond what God
allots us by the ordinary and common Providence, such things which we are to
receive In (...) turpitudo; cum in recte factis (...) labor, (...) honest (...).
without care and solicitous vexation: So that the Ends are Muson.
not big, and the Way is easy; and this walked over with much simplicity and
sweetness, and those obtained without difficulty. He that propounds to himself
to live low, pious, humble, and retired, his main employment is nothing but
sitting quiet, and undisturbed with variety of impertinent affairs: But he that
loves the World and its acquisitions entertains a thousand businesses, and
every business has a world of employment, and every employment is multiplied
and made intricate by circumstances, and every circumstance is to be disputed,
and he that disputes ever has two sides in enmity and opposition; and by this
time there is a genealogy, a long descent and cognation of troubles, branched
into so many particulars, that it is troublesome to understand them, and much
more to run through them. The ways of Virtue are very much upon the defensive,
and the work one, uniform and little; they are like war within a strong Castle,
if they stand upon their guard, they seldom need to strike a stroke. But a Vice
is like storming of a Fort, full of noise, trouble, labor, danger, and
disease. How easy a thing is it to restore the pledge? but if a man means to
defeat him that trusted him, what a world of arts must he use to make
pretenses? to delay first, then to excuse, then to object, then to intricate
the business, next to quarrel, then to forswear it, and all the way to palliate
his crime, and represent himself honest? And if an oppressing and greedy person
have a design to cozen a young Heir, or to get his neighbor's land, the cares
of every day and the interruptions of every night's sleep are more than the
purchase is worth; since he might buy Virtue at half that watching, and the
less painful care of a fewer number of days. A (...) ad (...) innocentia (...),
quam (...)a. (...). de orat.
plain story is soonest told, and best confutes an intricate Lie. And when a
person is examined in judgment, one false answer asks more wit for its support
and maintenance than a History of truth. And such persons are put to so many
shameful retreats, false colors, Fucus's and dawbings with untempered mortar,
to avoid contradiction or discovery, that the labor of a false story seems in
the order of things to be designed the beginning of its punishment. And if we
consider how great a part of our Religion consists in Prayer, and how easy a
thing God requires of us when he commands us to pray for blessings, the duty of
a Christian cannot seem very troublesome.

5. And indeed I can cardly instance in any Vice but there (...) namque a nobis
(...) ((...)) quid (...) a (...), humilitatem, (...), sanctitatem, (...) nos,
(...)? Salvian.
is visibly more pain in the order of acting and observing it, than in the
acquist or promotion of Virtue. I have seen drunken persons in their seas of
drink and talk dread every cup as a blow, and they have used devices and
private arts to (...). S. (...) (...)
escape the punishment of a full draught; and the poor wretch being condemned
by the laws of Drinking to his measure, was forced and haled to execution, and
he suffered it, and thought himself engaged to that person who with much
kindness and importunity invited him to a Fever: but certainly there was more
pain in it than in the strictness of holy and severe Temperance. And he that
shall compare the troubles and dangers of an ambitious War with the gentleness
and easiness of Peace, will soon perceive that every Tyrant and usurping
Prince, that snatches at his neighbor's rights, has two armies, one of men,
and the other of cares. Peace sheds no blood, but of the pruned vine; and has
no business, but modest and quiet entertainments of the time, opportune for
Piety, and circled with reward. But God often punishes Ambition and Pride with
Lust; and he sent a thorn in the flesh as a corrective to the elevations and
grandezza of S. Paul, growing up from the multitude of his Revelations: and it
is not likely the punishment should have less trouble than the crime, whose
pleasures and obliquity this was designed to punish. And indeed every
experience can verify, that an Adulterer has in him the impatience of
desires, the burnings of lust, the fear of shame, the apprehensions -- (...)
domus (...), quod male (...) Regumest (...). Horat. l. 4. od. 12.
of a jealous, abused, and an enraged Husband. He endures affronts, mistimings,
tedious waitings, the dullness of delay, the regret of interruption, the
confusion and amazements of discovery, the scorn of a reproached vice, the
debasings of contempt upon it; unless the man grows impudent, and then he is
more miserable upon another stock. But David was so put to it to attempt, to
obtain, to enjoy Bathsheba, and to prevent the shame of it, that the difficulty
was greater than all his wit and power, and it drove him into base and unworthy
arts, which discovered him the more, and multiplied his crime. But while he
enjoyed the innocent pleasures of his lawful bed, he had no more trouble in it
than there was in inclining his head upon his pillow. The ways of sin are
crooked, desert, rocky and uneven: they are broad indeed, and there is variety
(...) (...), 5. 7.
of ruins, and allurements to entice fools, and a large theater to act the
bloody tragedies of Souls upon; but they are nothing smooth, or safe, or
delicate. The ways of Virtue are straight, but not crooked; narrow, but not
unpleasant. There are two Vices for one Virtue; and therefore the way to Hell
must needs be of greater extent, latitude and dissemination: But because Virtue
is but one way, therefore it is easy, regular, and apt to walk in without
error or diversions. Narrow is the gate, and straight is the way. It is true,
considering our evil customs and depraved natures, by which we have made it so
to us. But God has made it more passable by his grace and present aids; and S.
John Baptist receiving his Commission to preach Repentance, it was expressed in
these words, Make plain the paths of the Lord. Indeed Repentance is a rough and
a sharp virtue, and like a mattock and spade breaks away all the roughnesses of
the passage, and hindrances of sin: but when we enter into the dispositions
which Christ has designed to us, the way is more plain and easy than the ways
of Death and Hell. Labor it has in it, just as all things that are excellent;
but no confusions, no distractions of thought, no amazements, no labyrinths,
and intricacy of counsels: But it is like the labors of Agriculture, full of
health and simplicity, plain and profitable, requiring diligence, but such in
which crafts and painful stratagems are useless and impertinent. But Vice has
oftentimes so troublesome a retinue, and so many objections in the event of
things, is so entangled in difficult and contradictory circumstances, has in
it parts so opposite to each other, and (...) inconsistent with the present
condition of the man, or some secret design of his, that those little pleasures
which are its Fucus and pretense are less perceived and least enjoyed, while
they begin in fantastic semblances, and rise up in smoke, vain and hurtful,
and end in dissatisfaction.

6. But it is considerable, that God, and the Sinner, and the Devil, all join
in increasing the difficulty and trouble of sin, upon contrary designs indeed,
but all cooperate to the verification of this discourse. For God by his
restraining grace, and the checks of a tender Conscience, and the bands of
public honesty, and the sense of honor and reputation, and the customs of
Nations, and the severities of Laws, makes that in most men the choice of Vice
is imperfect, dubious and troublesome, and the pleasures abated, and the
apprehensions various and in differing degrees; and men act their crimes while
they are disputing against them, and the balance is cast by a few grains, and
scruples vex and disquiet the possession; and the difference is perceived to be
so little, that inconsideration and inadvertency is the greatest means to
determine many men to the entertainment of a sin. And this God does with a
design to lessen our choice, and to disabuse our persuasions from arguments and
weak pretenses of Vice, and to invite us to the trials of Virtue, when we see
its enemy giving us so ill conditions. And yet the Sinner himself makes the
business of sin greater; for its nature is so loathsome, and its pleasure so
little, and its promises so unperformed, that when it lies open, easy and apt
to be discerned, there is no argument in it ready to invite us; and men hate a
vice which is every day offered and prostitute, and when they seek for
pleasure, unless difficulty presents it, as there is nothing in it really to
persuade a choice, so there is nothing strong or witty enough to abuse a man.
And to this purpose (amongst some others, which are malicious and crafty) the
Devil gives assistance, knowing that men despise what is cheap and common, and
suspect a latent excellency to be in difficult and forbidden objects: and
therefore the Devil sometimes crosses an opportunity of sin, knowing that the
desire is the iniquity, and does his work sufficiently; and yet the crossing
the desire by impeding the act heightens the appetite, and makes it more
violent and impatient. But by all these means sin is made more troublesome than
the pleasures of the temptation can account for: and it will be a strange
imprudence to leave Virtue upon pretense of its difficulty, when for that very
reason we the rather entertain the instances of sin, despising a cheap sin and
a costly Virtue; choosing to walk through the brambles of a Desert, rather than
to climb the fruit trees of Paradise.

7. Thirdly, Virtue conduces infinitely to the Content of our lives, to secular
felicities, (...). (...).
and political satisfactions; and Vice does the quite contrary. For the
blessings of this life are these that make it happy, Peace and quietness,
Content and satisfaction of desires, Riches, Love of friends and neighbors,
Honor and reputation abroad, a Healthful body, and a long Life. This last is a
distinct consideration, but the other are proper to this title. For the first
it is certain, Peace was so designed by the Holy Jesus, that he framed all his
Laws in compliance to that design. He that returns good Malignum hunc (...)
hominem (...). Ego esse (...) credo, cui placet (...). Matt. Ep.
for evil, a soft answer to the asperity of his enemy, kindness to injuries,
lessons the contention always, and sometimes gets a friend, and when he does
not, he shames his enemy. Every little accident in a family to peevish and
angry persons is the matter of a quarrel, and every quarrel discomposes the
peace of the house, and sets it on fire, and no man can tell how far that may
burn, it may be to a dissolution of the whole fabric. But whosoever obeys the
Laws of Jesus, bears with the infirmities of his relatives and society, seeks
with sweetness to remedy what is ill, and to prevent what it may produce, and
throws water upon a spark, and lives sweetly with his wife, affectionately with
his children, providently and discreetly with his servants; and they all love
the Major-domo, and look upon him as their Parent, their Guardian, their
Friend, their Patron, their Proveditore. But look upon a person angry,
peaceless and disturbed, when he enters upon his threshold, it gives an alarm
to his house, and puts them to flight, or upon their defense; and the Wife
reckons the joy of her day is done, when he returns; and the Children enquire
into their Father's age, and think his life tedious; and the Servants curse
privately, and do their service as slaves do, only when they dare not do
otherwise; and they serve him as they serve a Lion, they obey his strength, and
fear his cruelty, and despise his manners, and hate his person. No man enjoys
content in his family but he that is peaceful and charitable, just and loving,
forbearing and forgiving, careful and provident. He that is not so, his house
may be his Castle, but it is manned by enemies; his house is built, not upon
the sand, but upon the waves, and upon a tempest: the foundation is uncertain,
but his ruin is not so.

8. And if we extend the relations of the man beyond his own walls, he that
does his duty to his Neighbor, that is, all offices of kindness, gentleness
and humanity, nothing of injury and affront, is certain never to meet with a
wrong so great as is the inconvenience of a Lawsuit, or the contention of
neighbors, and all the consequent dangers and inconvenience. Kindness will
create and invite kindness; an injury provokes an injury. And since the love of
Neighbors is one of those beauties which Solomon did admire, and that this
beauty is within the combination of precious things which adorn and reward a
peaceable, charitable disposition; he that is in love with spiritual
excellencies, with intellectual rectitudes, with peace and with blessings of
society, knows they grow amongst rose bushes of Virtue and holy obedience to
the Laws of Jesus. And for a good man some will even dare to die, and a sweet
and charitable disposition is received with fondness, and all the endearments
of the Neighborhood. He that observes how many families are ruined by
contention, and how many spirits (...). Jac. 3. 10.
are broken by the care, and contumely, and fear, and spite, which are
entertained as advocates to promote a Suit of Law, will soon confess that a
great loss, and peaceable quitting of a considerable interest, is a purchase
and a gain, in respect of a long Suit and a vexatious quarrel. And still if the
proportion rises higher, the reason swells, and grows more necessary and
determinate. For if we would live according to the Discipline of Christian
Religion, one of the great plagues which vex the world would be no more. That
there should be no wars, was one of the designs of Christianity; and the living
according to that Institution which is able to prevent all wars, and to
establish an universal and eternal peace, when it is obeyed, is the using an
infallible instrument toward that part of our political happiness which
consists in Peace. This world would be an image of Heaven, if all men were
charitable, peaceable, just, and loving. To this excellency all those precepts
of Christ which consist in forbearance and forgiveness do cooperate.

9. But the next instance of the reward of holy Obedience and conformity to
Christ's Laws is it selfa Duty, and needs no more but a mere repetition of it.
We must be content in every state; and because (...). Poli. (...) M. Cato (...)
Aul. Gell. l. 13. c. 22. (...) egeo; at ego (...), quia (...).
Christianity teaches us this lesson, it teaches us to be happy: for nothing
from without can make us (...), unless we Nique mala (...) vulgus putat: (...)
qui (...), ac (...); si illi gravem (...) tolerent, hi (...). Tacit. (...). l.
6.
join our own consents to it, and apprehend it such, and entertain it in our
sad and melancholic retirements. A Prison is but a retirement, and opportunity
of serious thoughts, to a person whose spirit is confined, and apt to sit
still, and desires -- (...) (fortuna) (...), resigno (...), and (...) me
involvo: (...) sine dote (...). Hor. l. 3. (...). 29.
no enlargement beyond the cancels of the body, till the state of Separation
calls it forth into a fair liberty. But every retirement is a prison to a loose
and wandering fancy, for whose (...). (...).
wildness no (...) are restraint, no band of duty is consinement, who, when he
has broken the first hedge of duty, can never after endure any enclosure so
much as in a Symbol. But this Precept is so necessary, that it is not more a
duty than a rule of prudence, and in many accidents of our lives it is the only
cure of sadness: for it is certain that no providence less than divine can
prevent evil and cross accidents; but that is an excellent remedy to the evil
that receives the accident within its power, and takes out the sting, paring
the nails, and drawing the teeth of the wild beast, that it may be tame, or
harmless and medicinal. For all Content consists in the proportion of the
object to the appetite: and because external accidents are not in our power,
and it were nothing excellent that things happened to us according to our first
desires; God has by his grace put it into our own power to make the happiness,
by making our desires descend to the event, and comply with the chance, and
combine with all the issues of Divine Providence. And then we are noble
persons, when we borrow not our content from things below us, but make our
satisfactions from Non (...) Mentis, and cur at (...). Hor. l. 2. (...). 16.
within. And it may be considered, that every little care may disquiet us, and
may increase it self by reflection upon its own acts, and every discontent may
discompose our spirits, (...) fortem videris, (...). Senec. trag.
and put an edge, and make afflictions poynant, but cannot take off one from
us, but makes every one to be (...). (...).
two. But Content removes not the accident, but complies (...). Zoroast.
with it, it takes away the sharpness and displeasure of it, and by stooping
down makes the lowest equal, proportionable, and commensurate. Impatience makes
an Ague to be a Fever, and every Fever to be a Calenture, and that Calenture
may expire in Madness: But a quiet spirit is a great disposition to health, and
for the present does alleviate the sickness. And this also is notorious in the
instance of Covetousness. The love of money is the root of all evil, which
while some have 1 Timothy 6. 10.
coveted after, they have pierced themselves with many sorrows. Vice makes
poor, and does ill endure it.

10. For he that in the School of Christ has learned to determine his desires
when his needs are served, and to judge of his needs by the proportions (...)
perjura patris sides Consortem (...) fallat and hespitem, (...) improbae
Crescunt divitiae, (...) quid semper (...). l. 3. od. 24.
of nature, has nothing wanting toward Riches. Virtue makes Poverty become
rich, and no Riches can satisfy a covetous mind, or rescue him from the
affliction of the worst kind of Poverty. He only wants that is not satisfied.
And there is great infelicity in a Family where Poverty dwells with discontent:
-- Vel dic, quid refer at intra Naturae fines viventi, jugera (...) Mill (...)
-- Vt, tibi (...) sit (...) liquidi non (...), Vel cyatho; and (...), Magno de
flumine mallem, Quam (...) fonticulo tantundem (...), Plenior ut si quos
delectet copia (...), Cum ripa (...) at (...). At qui (...) est (...) is (...);
limo Turbatam (...) it aquam, (...) in undis. Horat. Sermon. l. (...). Sat. 1.
There the Husband and Wife quarrel for want of a full table and a rich
wardrobe; and their love, that was built upon false arches, sinks when such
temporary supporters are removed; they are like two Milstones, which set the
Mill on fire when they want corn: and then their combinations and society were
unions of Lust, or not supported with religious love. But we may easily suppose
S. Joseph and the Holy Virgin Mother in Egypt poor as hunger, forsaken as
banishment, disconsolate -- (...). Soph. (...).
as strangers; and yet their present lot gave them no afflicton, because the
Angel fed them with a necessary hospitality, and their desires were no larger
than their tables, and their eyes looked only upwards, and they were careless
of the future, and careful of their duty, and so made their life pleasant by
the measures and discourses of Divine Philosophy. When Elisha stretched himself
upon the body of the child, and laid hands to hands, and applied mouth to
mouth, and so shrunk himself into the posture of commensuration with the child,
he brought life into the dead trunk: and so may we, by applying our spirits to
the proportions of a narrow fortune, bring life and vivacity into our dead and
lost condition, and make it live till it grows bigger, or else returns to
health and salutary uses.

11. And besides this Philosophical extraction of gold from stones, and Riches
from the dungeon of Poverty, a holy life does most probably procure such a
proportion of Riches which can be useful to us, or consistent with our
felicity. For besides that the Holy Jesus has promised all things which our
heavenly Father knows we need, (provided we do our duty) and that we find great
securities and rest from care when we have once cast our cares upon God, and
placed our hopes in his bosom; besides all this, the temperance, sobriety, and
prudence of a Christian is a great income, and by not despising it, a small
revenue combines its parts till it grows to a heap big enough for the emissions
of Charity, and all the offices of Justice, and the supplies of all
necessities: whilst Vice is unwary, prodigal and indiscreet, throwing away
great revenues as tributes to intem perance and vanity, and suffering
dissolution and forfeiture of estates as a punishment and curse. Some sins are
direct improvidence and ill husbandry. I reckon in this number Intemperance,
Lust, Litigiousness, Ambition, Bribery, Prodigality, Aleam (...), ut cum (...)
jactu de liberate and de (...). Tacit. de mor. Germ.
Caming, Pride, Sacrilege, which is the greatest spender of them all, and makes
a fair estate evaporate like Camphire, turning it into nothing, no man knows
which way. But what the (...) gave as an estimate of a rich man, saying, He
that can maintain an Army is rich, was but a short account; for he that can
maintain an Army may be beggered by one Vice, and it is a vast revenue that
will pay the debt-books of Intemperance or Lust.

12. To these if we add that Virtue is Virtus repulsae (...) honoribus; (...)
sumit aut ponit (...) Arbitrio popularis aurae. Horat. l. 3. od. 2.
honorable, and a great advantage to a fair reputation, that it is Virtus
laudatur, and alget. Juven.
praised by them that love it not, that it is honored by the followers and
family of Vice, that it forces glory out of shame, honor from contempt, that it
reconciles men to the fountain of Honor, the Almighty God, who will honor
them that honor him; there are but a few more excellencies in the world to
make up the Rosary of temporal Felicity. And it is so certain that Religion
serves even Praecipuam (...) Majestatis curam (...) prospicimus, religiouis
indaginem; (...) si (...) retinere (...) inceptis. Theod. and Valent. in Cod.
(...).
our temporal ends, that no great end of State can well be served without it;
not Ambition, not desires of Wealth, not any great design, but Religion must be
made its usher or support. If a new Opinion be commenced, and the Author would
make a Sect, and draw Disciples after him, at least he must be thought to be
Religious; which is a demonstration how great an instrument of reputation Piety
and Religion is: and if the pretense will do us good offices amongst men, the
reality will do the same, besides the advantages which we shall receive from
the Divine Benediction. The power of godliness will certainly do more than the
form alone. And it is most notorious in the affairs of the Clergy, whose lot it
has been to fall from great riches to poverty, when their wealth made them
less curious of their duty; but when Humility and Chastity and exemplary
Sanctity have been the enamel of their holy Order, the people, like the
Galatians, would pull out their own eyes to do them benefit. And indeed God
has singularly (...) providentia (...) munus, ut (...) magis juvarent. (...),
l. 1. c. 12.
blessed such instruments to the being the only remedies to repair the breaches
made by Sacrilege and Irreligion. But certain it is, no man was ever honored
for that which was esteemed vicious. Vice has got money, and a curse many
times, and Vice has adhered to the instruments and purchaces of Honor: But
among all Nations whatsoever those called Honorable put on the face and
pretense of Virtue. But I choose to instance in the proper cognizance of a
Christian, Humility, which seems contradictory to the purposes and reception of
Honor; and yet in the world nothing is a more certain means to purchase it. Do
not all the world hate a proud man? And therefore what is contrary to Humility
is also contradictory to Honor and Reputation. And when the Apostle had given
command, that in giving honor we should one go before another, he laid the
foundation of praises, and Panegyricks, and Triumphs. And as Humility is secure
against affronts and tempests of despite, because it is below them: so when by
employment or any other issue of Divine Providence it is drawn from its (...)
and secrecy, it shines clear and bright as the purest and most polished metals.
Humility is like a Tree, whose Root, when it sets deepest in the earth, rises
higher, and spreads fairer, and stands surer, and lasts longer; every step of
its descent is like a rib of iron combining its parts in unions indissoluble,
and placing it in the chambers of security. No wise man ever lost any thing by
cession; but he receives the hostility of violent (...) into his embraces, like
a stone into a lap of wool, it rests and sits down soft and innocently; but a
stone falling upon a stone makes a collision, and extracts fire, and finds no
rest: and just so are two proud persons, despised by each other, contemned by
all, living in perpetual dissonancies, always fighting against asfronts, (...)
of every person, disturbed by every accident, a perpetual storm within, and
daily hissings from without.

13. Fourthly, Holiness and Obedience is an excellent preservative of Life, and
makes it long and healthful. In order to which discourse, because it is new,
material, and argumentative, apt to persuade men who prefer life before all
their other interests, I consider many things. First, In the Old Testament a
long and a prosperous life were the great promises of the Covenant, their hopes
were built upon it, and that was made the support of all their duty. If thou will diligently hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, I will put none of
the diseases upon thee which I brought upon the Egyptians; Exodus 15. 26.
for I am the LORD that heals thee. And more particularly yet, that we may
not think Piety to be security only against the plagues of Egypt, God makes his
promise more indefinite and unconfined; Ye shall serve the LORD your God, and I
will take sickness Exodus 23. 25, 26.
away from the midst of thee, and will fulfill the number of thy days; that is,
the period of nature shall be the period of thy person thou shall live long,
and die in a seasonable and ripe age. And this promise was so verified by a
long experience, that by David's time it grew up to a rule, What man is he that
desires life, and loves many days, that he may see Psalm. 34. 12, 13.
good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. And
the same argument was pressed by Solomon, who was an excellent Philosopher, and
well skilled in the natural and accidental means of preservation of our lives.
Fear the LORD, Prove. 3. 7, 8.
and depart from evil; and it shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy
bones. Length of days is in the right hand of wisdom: For she is a tree of
life to them that lay hold upon her. Verse 16, 18.
Meaning, that the Tree of Life and immortality which God had planted in
Paradise, and which if Man had stood he should have tasted, and have lived for
ever, the fruit of that Tree is offered upon the same conditions; if we will
keep the Commandments of God, our Obedience, like the Tree of life, shall
consign us to Immortality hereafter by a long and a healthful life here. And
therefore although in Moses's time the days of Man had been shortened, till they
came to threescore years and ten, or fourscore Psalm. 90. 10.
years, and then their strength is but labor and sorrow; (for Moses was Author
of that Psalm;) yet to show the great privilege of those persons whose Piety
was great, Moses himself attained to one hundred and twenty years, which was
almost double to the ordinary and determined period. But Enoch and Elias never
died, and became great examples to us, that a spotless and holy life might
possibly have been immortal.

14. I shall add no more examples, but one great conjugation of precedent
observed by the Jewish Writers, who tell us that in the second Temple there
were 300 high Priests, (I suppose they set down a certain number for an
uncertain, and by 300 they mean very many) and yet that Temple lasted but 420
years; the reason of this so rapid and violent abscission of their Priests
being their great and scandalous impieties: and yet in the first Temple, whose
abode was within ten years as long as the second, there was a succession but of
18 high Priests; for they being generally very pious, and the preservers of
their Rites and Religion against the Schism of (...), and the Defection of
(...), and the Idolatry and Irreligion of many of the Kings of Judah, God took
delight to reward it with a long and honorable old age. And (...) knew well
enough what he said, when in his (...) and prophetic rapture he made his
prayer to God, Let Number. 23. 10.
my Soul die the death of the righteous. It was not a Prayer that his Soul
might be saved, or that he might repent at last; for Repentance and Immortality
were revelations of a later date: but he in his prophetic (...) seeing what
God had purposed to the Moabites, and what blessings he had reserved for
Israel, prays that he might not die, as the Moabites were like to die, with an
untimely death, by the sword of their enemies, dispossessed of their Country,
spoiled of their goods, in the period and last hour of their Nation: but let my
soul die the death of the just, the death designed for (...). (...).
the faithful Israelites; such a death which God promised to Abraham, that he
should return to his Fathers in peace, and in a Cicero in (...). 1. sic reddit;
Mors mea non (...), ut (...) cum (...).
good old age. For the death of the righteous is like the descending of ripe
and wholesome fruits from a pleasant and florid Tree; our senses entire, our
lims unbroken, without horrid tortures, after provision made for our children,
with a blessing entailed upon posterity, in the presence of our Friends, our
dearest relative closing up our eyes and binding our feet, leaving a good name
behind us. O let my soul die such a death; for this, in whole or in part,
according as God sees it good, is the manner that the righteous die. And this
was Balaam's prayer. And this was the state and condition in the Old Testament.

15. In the Gospel the case is nothing altered. For besides that those
austerities, rigours and mortifications which are in the Gospel advised or
commanded respectively, are more salutary or of less corporal inconvenience
than a vicious life of Intemperance, or Lust, or Carefulness, or tyrant
Covetousness; there is no accident or change to the sufferance of which the
Gospel has engaged us, but in the very thing our life is carefully provided
for, either in kind, or by a gainful exchange: He that loses his life for my
Matt. 10. 39.
sake shall find it, and he that will save his life shall lose it. And although
God, who promised long life to them that obey, did not promise that himself
would never call for our life, borrowing it of us, and repaying it in a
glorious and advantageous exchange; yet this very promise of giving us a better
life in exchange for this, when we exposed it in Martyrdom, does confirm our
title to this, this being the instrument of permutation with the other: for God
obliging himself to give us another in exchange for this, when in cases
extraordinary he calls for this, says plainly, that this is our present right
by grace, and the title of the Divine Promises. But the Promises are clear. For
S. Paul calls children to the observation of the fifth Commandment by the same
argument which God used in the first promulgation of it. Honor thy Father and
thy Mother, (...). 6. 2, 3.
(which is the first Commandment with Promise) That it may be well with thee,
and that thou may live long upon the earth. For although the Gospel -- (...)
(...). Philoct.
be built upon better Promises than the Law, yet it has the same too, not as
its foundation, but as appendences and adjuncts of grace, and supplies of need.
Godliness has the promise of this life, as well as 1 Timothy s 4. 8.
of the life that is to come. That is plain. And although Christ revealed his
Father's mercies to us in new expresses and great abundance; yet he took
nothing from the world which ever did in any sense invite Piety, or indear
Obedience, or cooperate toward Felicity. And (...) the Promises which were
made of old are also presupposed in the new, and mentioned by intimation and
implication within the greater. When our Blessed Savior in seven of the Eight
Beatitudes had instanced in new Promises and Rewards, as Heaven, Seeing of God,
Life eternal; in one of them, to which Matt. 5. 3. etc.
Verse 5.
Heaven is as certainly consequent as to any of the rest, he did choose to
instance in a temporal blessing, and in the very words of the Old Testament; to
show, that that part of Psalm. 37. 11.
the old Covenant which concerns Morality, and the rewards of Obedience,
remains firm and included within the conditions of the Gospel.

16. To this purpose is that saying of our Blessed Savior; Man lives not by
Matt. 4. 4.
bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God:
meaning, that Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
besides natural means ordained for the preservation of our lives, there are
means supernatural and divine. God's Blessing does as much as bread: nay, it is
Every word proceeding out of the (...) of God; that is, every Precept and
Commandment of God is so for our good, that it is intended as food and Physic
to us, a means to make us live long. And therefore God has done in this as in
other graces and issues Evangelical, which he purposed to continue in his
Church for ever: He first gave it in miraculous and extraordinary manner, and
then gave it by way of perpetual ministry. The Holy Ghost appeared at first
like a prodigy, and with Miracle; he descended in visible representments,
expressing himself in revelations and powers extraordinary: but it being a
Promise intended to descend upon all Ages of the Church, there was appointed a
perpetual ministry for its conveyance; and still, though without a sign or
miraculous representment, it is ministered in Confirmation by imposition of the
Bishop's hands. And thus also health and long life, which by way of ordinary
benediction is consequent to Piety, Faith and Obedience Evangelical, was at
first given in a miraculous manner; that so the ordinary effects, being at
first confirmed by miraculous and extraordinary instances and manners of
operation, might for ever after be confidently expected without any dubitation,
since it was in the same manner consigned by which all the whole Religion was,
by a voice from Heaven, and a verification of Miracles, and extraordinary
supernatural effects. That the gift of healing, and preservation and
restitution of life, was at first miraculous, needs no particular probation.
All the story of the Gospel is one entire argument to prove it: and amongst the
fruits of the Spirit S. Paul reckons gifts of healing, and government, and
helps, or exterior assistences and advantages; to represent that it was
intended the life of Christian people should be happy and healthful for ever.
Now that this grace also descended afterward in an ordinary ministry is
recorded by S. James: Is any man sick amongst you? let him call Jam. 5. 14, 15.
for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with
oil in the name of the Lord; that was then the ceremony, and the blessing and
effect is still; for the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord
shall raise him up. For it is observable, that the blessing of healing and
recovery is not appendent to the Anealing, but to the Prayer, of the Church; to
manifest, that the ceremony went with the first miraculous and extraordinary
manner; yet that there was an ordinary ministry appointed for the daily
conveyance of the blessing: the faithful prayers and offices of holy Priests
shall obtain life and health to such persons who are receptive of it, and in
spiritual and apt dispositions. And when we see, by a continual flux of
extraordinary benediction, that even some Christian Princes are instruments of
the Spirit not only in the government, but in the gifts of healing too, as a
reward for their promoting the just interests of Christianity; we may
acknowledge our selves convinced, that a holy life in the faith (...) is (...)
in (...) Dominus (...) sciamus esse, (...) praemoriuntur in (...), quod in
(...) in aliena aetate (...); dixit S. Hieron. Paulo (...) vigeto and pio
(...), l. (...) (...), 8.
and obedience of Jesus Christ may be of great advantage for our health and
life, by that instance to entertain our present desires, and to establish our
hopes of life eternal.

17. For I consider that the fear of God is therefore the best antidote in the
World against sickness and death, because it is the direct enemy to sin, which
brought in sickness and death; and besides this, that God by spiritual means
should produce alterations natural, is not hard to be understood by a Christian
Philosopher, take him in either of the two capacities. 2. For there is a rule
of proportion, and analogy of effects, that if sin destroys not only the Soul
but the Body also, then may Piety preserve both, and that much rather: for if
sin, that is, the effects and consequents of sin, has abounded, then shall
Romans 5. 20.
grace superabound; that is, Christ has done us more benefit than the Fall of
Adam has done us injury; and therefore the effects of sin are not greater upon
the body, than either are to be restored or prevented by a pious life. 3. There
is so near a conjunction between Soul and Body, that it is no wonder if God,
meaning to glorify both by the means of a spiritual life, suffers spirit and
matter to communicate in effects and mutual impresses. Thus the waters of
Baptism purify the Soul; and the Holy Eucharist, not the symbolical, but the
mysterious and spiritual part of it, makes the Body also partaker of the death
(...) Christ and a holy union. The flames of Hell, whatsoever they are, torment
accursed Souls; and the stings of Conscience vex and disquiet the Body. 4. And
if we consider that in the glories of Heaven, when we shall live a life purely
spiritual, our Bodies also are so clarified and made spiritual that they also
become immortal; that state of Glory being nothing else but a perfection of the
state of Grace, it is not unimaginable but that the Soul may have some
proportion of the same operation upon the Body as to conduce to its
prolongation, as to an antepast of immortality. 5. For since the Body has all
its life from its conjunction with the Soul, why not also the perfection of
life according to its present capacity, that is, health and duration, from the
perfection of the Soul, I mean, from the ornaments of Grace? And as the
blessedness of the Soul (says the Philosopher) consists in the speculation of
honest and just things; so the perfection of the Body and of the whole Man
consists in the practick, the exercise and operations of Virtue.

18. But this Problem in Christian Philosophy is yet more intelligible, and
will be reduced to certain experience, if we consider good life in union and
concretion with particular, material, and circumstantiate actions of Piety: For
these have great powers and influences even in Nature to restore health and
preserve our lives. Witness the sweet (...). De (...) apud Thu. cyd.
sleeps of temperate persons, and their constant appetite; which Timotheus the
son of Conon observed, when he dieted in Plato's Academy with severe and
moderated diet; They that sup with Plato are well the next day. Witness the
symmetry of passions in meek men, their freedom from the violence of enraged
and passionate indispositions, the admirable harmony and sweetness of content
which dwells in the retirements of a holy Conscience: to which if we add those
joys which they only understand truly who feel them inwardly, the joys of the
Holy Ghost, the content and joys which are attending upon the lives of holy
persons are most likely to make them long and healthful. For now we live,
(says S. Paul) if ye stand fast in the Lord. It would prolong S. Paul's 1 Thessalonians. 3. 8.
life to see his ghostly children persevere in holiness; and if we understood
the joys of it, it would do much greater advantage to our selves. But if we
consider a spiritual life abstractedly and in it self, Piety produces our life,
not by a natural efficiency, but by Divine benediction. God gives a healthy and
a long life as a reward and blessing to crown our Piety even before the sons of
men: For such as be blessed of him shall inherit the Psalm. 37. 22.
Earth; but they that be cursed of him shall be cut off. So that this whole
matter is principally to be referred to the act of God, either by ways of
nature, or by instruments of special providence, rewarding Piety with a long
life. And we shall more fully apprehend this if, upon the grounds of Scripture,
Reason, and Experience, we weigh the Prove. 10. 27.
contrary. Wickedness is the way to shorten our days.

19. Sin brought Death in first; and yet Man lived almost a thousand years. But
he sinned more, and then Death came nearer to him: for when all the World was
first drowned in wickedness, and then in water, God cut him shorter by one
half, and five hundred years was his ordinary period. And Man sinned still, and
had strange imaginations, and built towers in the air; and then about Peleg's
time God cut him shorter by one half yet, two hundred and odd years was his
determination. And yet the generations of the World returned not unanimously to
God; and God cut him off another half yet, and reduced him to one hundred and
twenty years. And by Moses's time one half of the final remanent portion was
pared away, reducing him to threescore years and ten; so that, unless it be by
special dispensation, men live not beyond that term, or thereabout. But if God
had gone on still in the same method, and shortened our days as we multiplied
our sins, we should have been but as an Ephemeron, Man should have lived the
life of a Fly or a Gourd; the morning should have seen his birth, his life have
been the term of a day, and the evening must have provided him of a shroud. But
God seeing Man's thoughts were only evil continually, he was resolved no
longer so to strive with him; nor destroy the kind, but punish individuals
only and single persons; and if they sinned, or if they did obey, regularly
their life should be proportionable. This God Psalm. 34. 21.
set down for his rule, Evil shall (...) the wicked person: and, He that
keeps the Commandments Prove. 19. 16.
keeps his own Soul; but he that despises his own ways shall die.

20. But that we may speak more exactly in this Problem, we must observe that
in Scripture three general causes of natural death are assigned, Nature,
Providence, and Chance. By these three I only mean the several manners of
Divine influence and operation. For God only predetermines; and what is changed
in the following events by Divine permission, to this God and Man in their
several manners do cooperate. The saying of David concerning Saul with
admirable Philosophy describes the three ways of ending Man's life. David said
furthermore, As the LORD lives, the LORD shall smite him, or his day shall
come to die, or he shall descend into 1 Samuel 26. 10.
battle and perish. The first is special Providence. The second means the term
of Nature. The third is that which in our want of words we call Chance or
Accident, but is in effect nothing else but another manner of the Divine
Providence. That in all these Sin does interrupt and retrench our lives, is the
undertaking of the following periods.

21. First, In Nature Sin is a cause of dyscrasies and distempers, (...) omnia
(...) and (...) incubuit (...) gradum. Horat. l. 1. (...). 3.
making our bodies healthless and our days few. For although God has prefixed
a period to Nature by an universal and antecedent determination, and that
naturally every man that lives temperately, and by no supervening accident is
interrupted, shall arrive thither; yet because the greatest part of our lives
is governed by will and understanding, and there are temptations to
Intemperance and to violations of our health, the period of Nature is so
distinct a thing from the period of our person, that few men attain to that
which God had fixed by his first law and (...) purpose, but end their days with
folly, and in a period which God appointed (...) with anger, and a
determination secondary, consequent, and accidental. And therefore says David,
Health is far from the (...), for they regard not thy statutes. And to this
purpose is that saying of In (...). 23. (...) unitur Deo, (...) and (...) per
vim (...), and (...) ultra limitatum (...).
Abenezra: He that is united to God, the Fountain of Life, his Soul, being
improved by Grace, communicates to the Body an establishment of its radical
moisture and natural heat, to make it more healthful, that so it may be more
instrumental to the spiritual operations and productions of the Soul, and it
self be preserved in perfect constitution. Now how this blessing is
contradicted by the impious life of a wicked person is easy to be understood,
if we consider that from Eubulus apud (...), l. 7. c. 1. (...): Vnu n (...),
and (...); and (...), qui (...), etc. (...).
drunken Surfeits come Dissolution of members, Headachs, Apoplexies, dangerous
Falls, Fracture of bones, Drenchings and dilution of the brain, Inslammation of
the liver, Crudities of the stomach, and thousands more, which Solomen sums up
in general terms; Prove. 23. 29, 30.
Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has redness of eyes? they that tarry long
at the (...). I shall not need to instance in the sad and uncleanly consequents
of Lusts, the wounds and accidental deaths which are occasioned by Jealousies,
by Vanity, by Peevishness, vain Reputation and Animosities, by Melancholy, and
the despair of evil Consciences; and yet these are abundant argument, that when
God so permits a man to run his course of Nature, that himself does not
intervene by an extraordinary (...), or any special acts of providence, but
only gives his ordinary assistence to natural causes, a very great part of men
make their natural period shorter, and by sin make their days miserable and few.

22. Secondly, Oftentimes Providence intervenes, and makes the way shorter; God
for the iniquity of man not suffering Nature to take her course, but stopping
her in the midst of her journey. Against this David prayed, O my God, cut me
(...) off in the midst (...) 102. 24.
of my days. But in this there is some variety. For God does it sometimes in
mercy, sometimes in judgment. The righteous die, and no man regards; not
considering that Isa. 57. 1.
they are taken away from the evil to come. God takes the righteous man hastily
to his Crown, lest temptation snatch it from him by interrupting his hopes and
sanctity. And this was the case of the old World. For from Adam to the Flood by
the Patriarchs were eleven generations, but by Cain's line there were but
eight, so that Cain's posterity were longer lived: because God, intending to
bring the Flood upon the World, took delight to rescue his elect from the
dangers of the present impurity, and the future Deluge. Abraham lived five
years less than his son Isaac, it being (say the Doctors of the Jews) intended
for mercy to him, that he might not see the iniquity of his Grandchild (...).
And this the Church for many Ages has believed in the case of baptized Infants
dying before the use of Reason. For besides other causes in the order of Divine
Providence, one kind of mercy is done to them too; for although their condition
be of a lower form, yet it is secured by that timely (shall I call it?) or
untimely death. But these are cases extraregular: ordinarily and by rule God
has revealed his purposes of interruption of the lives of sinners to be in
anger and judgment; for when men commit any signal and grand impiety, God
suffers not Nature to take her course, but strikes a stroke with his own hand.
To which purpose I think it a remarkable instance which is reported by (...),
Lib. (...). 1.
that for 3332 years even to the twentieth Age, there was not one example of
Panar. (...). 6.
a Son that died before his Father, but the course of Nature was kept, that he
who was first born in the descending line did die first; (I speak of natural
death, and therefore Abel cannot be opposed to this observation) till that
Terah the father of Abraham taught the People to make Images of clay and
worship them; and concerning him it was first remarked, that Haran died before
his father Terah in the land of his nativity: God by an Genesis 11. 28.
unheard of Judgment and a rare accident punishing his newly-invented crime.
And whenever such (...) of a life happens to a vicious person, let all the
world acknowledge it for a Judgment; and when any man is guilty of evil habits
or unrepented sins, he may therefore expect it, because it is threatened and
designed for the lot and curse of such persons. This is threatened to
Covetousness, Injustice, and Oppression. As a Partridge sits on eggs, and
hatcheth them not: so he that gets riches, and not by right, Jer. 17. 11.
shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a Fool. The
same is threatened to Voluptuous persons in the highest caresses of delight; and
Christ told a parable with the same design. The rich man said, Soul, take thy
ease; but God answered, O fool, this night shall thy Soul be required of thee.
Zimri and Cozbi were slain in the trophies of their Lust; and it was a sad
story which was told by Thomas Cantipratanus: Two Religious persons tempted by
each other in the vigor of their youth, in their very first pleasures and
opportunities of sin were both struck dead in their embraces and posture of
entertainment. God 2 (...). 13. 20.
smote Jeroboam for his Usurpation and Tyranny, and he died. 1 (...). 10. 13.
Saul died for Disobedience against God, and asking counsel of a Pythonisse.
God smote 2 (...). 26. 19.
(...) with a Leprosy for his profaneness; and distressed 2 Kings 16.
(...) sorely for his Sacrilege; and 2 Chronicles. 21. 18.
sent a horrid disease upon Jehoram for his Idolatry. These instances represent
Voluptuousness and Covetousness, Rapine and Injustice, Idolatry and Lust,
Profaneness and Sacrilege, as remarked by the signature of exemplary Judgments
to be the means of shortening the days of man; God himself proving the
Executioner of his own fierce wrath. I instance no more, but in the singular
case of Hananiah the false Prophet: Thus says the LORD, Behold, I will cut
thee from off the face of the earth; Jer. 28. 16.
this year thou shall die, because thou have taught Rebellion against the LORD.
That is the curse and portion of a false Prophet, a short life, and a sudden
death of God's own particular and more immediate (...).

23. And thus also the sentence of the Divine anger went forth upon criminal
persons in the New Testament; Witness the Disease of Herod, Judas's Hanging
himself, the Blindness of (...), the Sudden death of Ananias and Sapphira, the
Buffetings with which Satan (...) the bodies of persons excommunicate. Yea, the
blessed Sacrament of CHRIST's Body and Blood, which is intended for our
spiritual life, if it be unworthily received, proves the cause of a natural
death: For this 1 Cor. 11. 30.
cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many are fallen asleep, says S.
Paul to the (...) Church.

24. Thirdly, But there is yet another manner of ending man's life, by way of
Chance or Contingency; meaning thereby the manner of God's Providence and event
of things which is not produced by the disposition of natural causes, nor yet
by any particular and special act of God; but the event which depends upon
accidental causes, not so certain and regular as Nature, not so conclusive and
determined as the acts of decretory Providence, but comes by disposition of
causes irregular to events rare and accidental. This David expresses by entering
into battle: and in this, as in the other, we must separate cases extraordinary
and rare from the ordinary and common. Extraregularly, and upon extraordinary
reasons and permissions, we find that holy persons have miscarried in battle.
So the (...) fell before Benjamin; and Jonathan, and (...), and many of the
Lord's champions, fighting against the Philistines: but in these deaths as God
served other ends of Providence, so he kept to the good men that fell all the
mercies of the Promise by giving them a greater blessing of event and
compensation. In the more ordinary course of Divine dispensation, they that
prevaricate the Laws of God are put out of protection; God withdraws his
special Providence, or their tutelar Angel, and leaves them exposed to the
influences of Heaven, to the power of a Constellation, to the accidents of
humanity, to the chances of a Battle, which are so many and various, that it is
ten thousand to one, a man in that case never escapes; and in such variety of
contingencies there is no probable way to assure our safety, but by a holy life
to endear the Providence of God to be our Guardian. It was a remarkable saying
of Deborah, The Stars sought in their courses, (...) in their orbs, against
Sisera. Sisera fought when there Jndg. 5. 20.
was an evil Aspect or malignant influence of Heaven upon him. For even the
smallest thing that is in opposition to us is enough to turn the chance of a
Battle; that although it be necessary for defense of the godly that a special
Providence should intervene, yet to confound the impious no special act is
requisite. If God exposes them to the ill aspect of a Planet, or any other
casualty, their days are interrupted, and they die. And this is the meaning of
the Prophet Jer. 10. 2. Gentes (...) and (...) dies (...) cum (...) luna (...)
reputabatur, unde (...) (...) (...) quintas (...) suspectas habet. (...).
Jeremy; Be not ye (...) at the signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed
at them: meaning, that God will overruled all inferior causes for the safety
of his servants; but the wicked shall be exposed to chance and humane
accidents; and the signs of Heaven, which of themselves do but signify, or at
most but dispose and incline toward events, shall be enough to actuate and
consummate their ruin. And this is the meaning of that Proverb of the Jews,
(...) est (...). (...) (...).
Israel has no Planet: which they expounded to mean, If they observe the Law,
the Planets shall not hurt them, God will overruled all their influences; but
if they prevaricate and rebel, the least Star (...) -- (...).
in the firmament of Heaven shall bid them battle, and overthrow them. A (...)
shall lie in a wicked Man's way, and God shall so expose him to it, leaving him
so unguarded and defenseless, that he shall stumble at it and fall, and break a
bone, and that shall (...) a Fever, and the Fever shall end his days. For not
only every creature, when it is set on by God, can prove a ruin; but if we be
not by the Providence of God defended against it, we cannot behold the least
atome in the Sun without danger of losing an eye, nor eat a grape without fear
of choking, nor sneeze without breaking of a vein. And Arius, going to the
ground, purged his entrails forth, and fell down unto the earth and died. Such
and so miserable is the great insecurity of a sinner. And of this Job had an
excellent meditation: How often is the candle of the wicked (...) 21. (...).
put out? and how often comes their destruction upon them? GOD distributeth
sorrows in his anger. For what pleasure has he in his house after him, when
the number of his (...) 21.
months is cut off in the midst? This is he that dies in his full strength,
being wholly (...) 23.
at ease and quiet.

25. I sum up this discourse with an observation that is made concerning the
Family of Eli, upon which, for the remisness of Discipline on the Father's
part, and for the Impiety and Profaneness of his (...), God sent this Curse,
All the increase of their house shall die in the flower of their age. According
to that sad malediction it happened 1 (...). 2. 33.
for many generations; the Heir of the Family died as soon as he begat a Son to
succeed him: till the Family being wearied by so long a Curse, by the counsel
of Rabbi Johanan Ben Zachary, betook themselves universally to a sedulous and
most devout meditation of the Law, that is, to an exemplar Devotion and strict
Religion: but then the Curse was turned into a Blessing, and the line masculine
lived to an honorable old age. For the Doctors of the Jews said, that God
often changes his purposes concerning the death of man, when the sick person is
liberal in Alms, or fervent in Prayer, or changes his Name, that is, gives up
his name to God by the serious purposes and religious vows of holy Obedience.
He that follows after righteousness (Alms it is in the vulgar (...)) Prove.
21. 21.
and mercy finds life; that verifies the first: and the fervent Prayer of
Hezekiah is a great instance of the second: and all the (...) discourse was
intended for probation of the third and proves that no disease is so deadly as
a deadly Sin; and the ways of Righteousness are therefore advantages of Health,
and preservatives of Life, (when health and life are good for us) because they
are certain title to all God's Promises and Blessings.

26. Upon supposition of these premises I consider, there is no cause to
wonder, that tender persons and the softest women endure the violences of art
and Physic, sharp pains of Causticks and Cupping-glasses, the abscission of
the most sensible part, for preservation of a mutilous and imperfect body: but
it is a wonder that, when God has appointed a remedy in Grace apt to preserve
Nature, and that a dying unto sin should prolong our natural life, yet few men
are willing to try the experiment; they will buy their life upon any conditions
in the world but those which are the best and easiest, any thing but Religion
and Sanctity; although for so doing they are promised that immortality shall be
added to the end of a long life, to make the life of a mortal partake of the
eternal duration of an Angel, or of God himself.

27. Fifthly, The last testimony of the Excellency and (...) Christ's yoke,
(...) sapientiam (...), and (...), Lactan, (...). (...).
the fair load of Christianity, is the Reasonableness of it, and the
Unreasonableness of its contrary. For whatsoever the wisest men in the world in
all Nations and Religions did agree upon as most excellent in it self, and of
greatest power to make political, or future and immaterial felicities, all that
and much more the Holy Jesus adopted into his Law: for they receiving sparks or
single irradiations from the regions of light, or else having fair tapers
shining indeed excellently in representations and expresses of Morality, were
all involved and swallowed up into the body of light, the Sun of Righteousness.
Christ's Discipline was the breviary of all the Wisdom of the best men, and a
fair copy and transcript of his Father's Wisdom; and there is nothing in the
laws of our Religion but what is perfective of our spirits, excellent rules of
Religion, and rare expedients of obeying God by the nearest ways of imitation,
and such duties which are the proper ways of doing benefits to all capacities
and orders of men. But I remember my design now is not to represent
Christianity to be a better Religion than any other; for I speak to Christians,
amongst whom we presuppose that: but I design to invite all Christians in name
to be such as they are called, upon the interest of such arguments which
represent the advantages of Obedience to our Religion as it is commanded us by
God. And this I shall do yet farther, by considering, that those Christian
names who apprehend Religion as the Fashion of their Country, and know no
other use of a Church but customary, or secular and profane, that, supposing
Christian Religion to have come from God, as we all profess to believe, there
are no greater fools in the world than such whose life conforms not to the
pretense of their Baptism and Institution. They have all the signs and
characters of fools, and undiscreet, unwary persons.

28. First, Wicked persons, like children and fools, choose the present,
whatsoever it is, and neglect the infinite treasures of the future. They that
have no faith nor foresight have an excuse for snatching at what is now
represented, because it is that all which can move them: but then such persons
are infinitely distant from wisdom, whose understanding neither Reason nor
Revelation has carried farther than the present adherencies; not only because
they are narrow souls who cannot look forward, and have nothing (...). (...).
to distinguish them from beasts, who enjoy the present, being careless of what
is to come; but also because whatsoever is present is not fit satisfaction to
the spirit, nothing but gluttings of the sense and sottish appetites. Moses was
a wise person, and so esteemed and reported by the Spirit of God, because he
despised the pleasures of Pharaoh's Court, having an eye to the recompense of
reward; that is, because he despised all (...) present arguments of delight,
and preferred those excellencies which he knew should (...) infinitely greater,
as well as he knew they should be at all. He that would have rather chosen to
stay in the Theater and see the sports out, then quit the present Spectacle
upon assurance to be adopted into Caesar's family, had an offer made him too
great for a fool; and yet his misfortune was not big enough for pity, because
he understood nothing of his felicity, and rejected what he understood not. But
he that prefers moments before eternity, and despises the infinite successions
of eternal Ages that he may enjoy the present, not daring to trust God for what
he sees not, and having no objects of his affections but those which are the
objects of his eyes, has the impatience of a child, and the indiscretion of a
fool, and the faithlesness of an unbeliever. The Faith and Hope of a Christian
are the graces and portions of spiritual wisdom, which Christ designed as an
antidote against this folly.

29. Secondly, Children and fools choose to please their Senses rather than
their Reason, because they still dwell within the regions of Sense, and have
but little residence amongst intellectual essences. And because the needs of
Nature first employ our sensual appetites, these being first in possession
would also fain retain it, and therefore for ever continue their title, and
perpetually fight for it: but because the inferior faculty fighting against
the superior is no better than a Rebel, and that it takes Reason for its
enemy, it shows such actions which please the Sense and do not please the
Reason to be unnatural, monstrous, and unreasonable. And it is a great
disreputation to the understanding of a man, to be so cozened and deceived, as
to choose Money before a moral Virtue; to please that which is common to him and
beasts, rather than that part which is a communication of the Divine nature; to
see him run after a bubble which himself has made, and the Sun has
parti-colored, and to despise a treasure, which is offered to him to call him
off from pursuing that emptiness and nothing. But so does every vicious person,
feeds upon husks, and loathes Manna; worships Cats and Onions, the beggarly and
basest of Egyptian Deities, and neglects to adore and honor the eternal God:
he prefers the society of Drunkards before the communion of Saints; or the
fellowship of Harlots before a quire of pure, chaste, and immaterial Angels; the
sickness and filth of Luxury before the health and purities of Chastity and
Temperance; a dish of red lentil pottage before a Benison; Drink before
Immortality, Money before Mercy, Wantonness before the severe Precepts of
Christian Philosophy, Earth before Heaven and Folly before the crowns and (...)
and glories of a Kingdom. Against this folly Christian Religion opposes (...)
of things below, and setting our affections on things above.

30. Thirdly, Children and fools propound to themselves Ends silly, low and
cheap, the getting of a nut-shel, or a bag of cherry-stones, a gaud to
entertain the fancy of a few minutes; and in order to such ends direct their
counsels and designs. And indeed in this they are innocent. But persons not
living according to the Discipline of Christianity are as foolish in the
designation of their Ends, choosing things as unprofitable and vain to
themselves, and yet with many mixtures of malice and injuriousness both to
themselves and others. His end is to cozen his Brother of a piece of Land, or
to disgrace him by telling of a lie, to supplant his fortune, to make him
miserable: Ends which wise men and good men look upon as miseries and
persecutions, instruments of affliction and regret; because every man is a
member of a society, and has some common terms of union and conjuncture, which
make all the body susceptive of all accidents to any part. And it is a great
folly, for pleasing of the eye to snatch a knife which cuts our fingers; to
bring affliction upon my brother or relative, which either must affect me, or
else I am an useless, a base or dead person. The ends of Vice are ignoble and
dishonorable: to discompose the quiet of a family, or to create jealousies, or
to raise wars, or to make a man less happy, or apparently miserable, or to fish
for the Devil, and gain Souls to our Enemy, or to please a passion that undoes
us, or to get something that cannot satisfy us; this is the chain of counsels,
and the great aims of unchristian livers, they are all of them extreme great
miseries. And it is a great undecency for a man to propound an end less and
more imperfect than our present condition; as if we went about to unravel our
present composure, and to unite every degree of essence and capacity, and to
retire back to our first matter and unshapen state, hoping to get to our
journey's end by going backwards. Against this folly the Holy Jesus opposed the
Fourth Beatitude, or Precept of hungring and thirsting after Righteousness.

31. Fourthly, But children and fools, whatever their ends be, they pursue
them with as much weakness and folly as they first chose them with
indiscretion; running to broken cisterns or to puddles to quench their thirst.
When they are hungry, they make fantastic banquets, or put Coloquintida into
their pottage, that they may be furnished with pot herbs: or are like the Ass
that desired to flatter his Master, and therefore fawned upon him like a
Spaniel, and bruised his shoulders. Such undecencies of means and prosecutions
of interests we find in unchristian courses. It may be-they propound to
themselves Riches for their end, and they use Covetousness for their means, and
that brings naught home; or else they steal to get it, and they are
apprehended, and made to restore fourfold. Like moths gnawing a garment (...).
Sophoc. (...) futura prospectant. (...) ad Constant filium.
they devour their own house, and by greediness of desire they destroy their
content, making impatience the parent and instrument of all their (...). Or
they are so greedy and imaginative, and have raised their expectation by an
over-valuing esteem of temporary felicities, that when they come they fall
short of their promises, and are indeed less than they (...) have been, by
being beforehand apprehended greater than they could be. If their design be to
represent themselves innocent and guiltless of a suspicion or a fault, they
deny the fact, and double it. When they would repair their losses they fall to
Gaming; and besides that they are infinitely full of fears, passions, wrath and
violent disturbances in the various chances of their game, that which they use
to restore their (...) ruins even the little remnant, and condemns them to
beggary, or what is worse. Thus evil men (...) for content out of things that
cannot satisfy, and take care to get that content; that is, they raise War to
enjoy present Peace, and renounce all Content to get it: They strive to depress
their Neighbors, that they may be their equals; to disgrace them, to get
reputation to themselves; (which arts being ignoble do them the most
disparagement) and resolve never to enter into the felicities of God by content
taken in the prosperities of man, which is a making our selves wretched by
being wicked. Malice and Envy is indeed a mighty curse; and the Devil can show
us nothing more foolish and unreasonable than Envy, which is in its very
formality a curse, an eating of coals and vipers because my neighbor's table
is full, and his cup is crowned with health and plenty. The Christian Religion,
as it chooses excellent ends, so it uses proportionate and apt means. The most
contradictory accident in the world, when it becomes hallowed by a pious and
Christian design, becomes a certain means of felicity and content. To quit our
lands for Christ's sake will certainly make us rich; to depart from our friends
will increase our relations and beneficiaries: but the striving to secure our
temporal interests by any other means than obedient actions or obedient
sufferings, is declared by the Holy Jesus to be the greatest improvidence and
ill husbandry in the world. Even in this world Christ will repay us an hundred
fold for all our losses which we suffer for the interests of Christianity. In
the same proportion we find, that all Graces do the work of humane felicities
with a more certain power and (...) effect than their contraries. Gratitude
endears Benefits, and procures more Friendships: Confession gets a Pardon;
Impudence and lying doubles the fault, and exasperates the offended person:
Innocence is bold, and rocks a man asleep; but an evil Conscience is a
continual alarm. Against this folly of using disproportionate means in order to
their ends the Holy Jesus has opposed the Eight Beatitudes, which by
contradictions of nature and improbable causes, according to humane and erring
estimate, bring our best and wisest ends to pass infallibly and divinely.

32. But this is too large a field to walk in: for it represents all the
flatteries of sin to be a mere cozenage and deception of the Understanding; and
we find by this scrutiny, that evil and unchristian persons are infinitely
unwise, because they neglect the counsel of their superiors and their guides.
They dote passionately upon trifles; they rely upon false foundations and
deceiving principles; they are most confident when they are most abused; they
are like shelled fish, singing loudest when their house is on fire about their
ears, and being merriest when they are most miserable and perishing; when they
have the option of two things, they ever choose the worst; they are not masters
of their own actions, but break all purposes at the first temptation; they take
more pains to do themselves a mischief than would (...) Heaven: that is, they
are rude, ignorant, foolish, unwary and undiscerning people in all senses and
to all purposes; and are incurable but by their Obedience and conformity to the
Holy Jesus, the eternal Wisdom of the Father.

33. Upon the strength of these premises the yoke of Christianity must needs
be apprehended light, though it had in it more pressure than it has; because
lightness or heaviness being relative terms are to be esteemed by comparison to
others. Christianity is far easier than the yoke of Moses's Law, not only
because it consists of fewer Rites, but also because those perfecting and
excellent Graces which integrate the body of our Religion are made easy by
God's assisting, and the gifts of the Holy Ghost: and we may yet make it easier
by Love and by Fear, which are the proper products of the Evangelical Promises
and Threatenings. For I have seen persons in affrightment have carried burdens,
and leaped ditches, and climbed walls, which their natural power could never
have done. And if we understood the sadnesses of a cursed Eternity, from which
we are commanded to fly, and yet knew how near we are to it, and how likely to
fall into it, it would create fears greater than a sudden fire, or a midnight
alarm. And those unhappy souls who come to feel this truth, when their
condition is without remedy, are made the more miserable by the apprehension of
their stupid folly. For certainly the accursed Spirits feel the smart of Hell
once doubled upon them, by considering by what vain unsatisfying trifles they
lost their happiness, with what pains they perished, and with how great ease
they might have been beatified. And certain it is, Christian Religion has so
furnished us with assistences, both exterior and interior, both of persuasion
and advantages, that whatsoever Christ has doubled upon us in perfection he
has alleviated in aids.

34. And then if we compare the state of Christianity with Sin, all the
preceding discourses were intended to represent how much easier it is to be a
Christian, than a vile and wicked person. And he that remembers, that whatever
fair allurements may be pretended as invitations to a sin, are such false and
unsatisfying pretenses, that they drive a man to repent him of his folly, and
like a great laughter end in a sigh, and expire in weariness and indignation;
must needs confess himself a fool for doing that which he knows will make him
repent that he ever did it. A sin makes a man afraid when it thunders, and in
all dangers the sin detracts the visour, and affrights him and visits him when
he comes to die, upbraiding him with guilt, and threatening misery. So that
Christianity is the easiest Law and the easiest state, it is more perfect and
less troublesome; it brings us to Felicity by ways proportionable, landing us
in rest by easy and unperplexed journeys. This Discourse I therefore thought
necessary, because it reconciles our Religion with those passions and desires
which are commonly made the instruments and arguments of sin. For we rarely
meet with such spirits which love Virtue so metaphysically, as to abstract her
from all sensible and delicious compositions, and love the purity of the Idea.
S. Lewis the King sent Ivo Bishop of Chartres on an Embassy: and he told, that
he met a grave Matron on the way with fire in one hand, and water in the other;
and, observing her to have a melancholic, religious and fantastic deportment
and look, asked her what those symbols meant, and what she meant to do with her
fire and water. She answered, My purpose is with the fire to burn Paradise, and
with my water to quench the flames of Hell, that men may serve God without the
incentives of hope and fear, and purely for the love of God. Whether the Woman
were only imaginative and sad, or also zealous, I know not. But God knows he
would have few Disciples, if the arguments of invitation were not of greater
promise than the labors of Virtue are of trouble. And therefore the Spirit of
God knowing to what we are inflexible, and by what we are made most ductile and
malleable, has propounded Virtue -- Quis (...) ipsam (...) si (...)?
clothed and dressed with such advantages as may entertain even our Sensitive
part and first desires, that those also may be (...) studiorum (...) Tacit.
invited to Virtue who understand not what is just and reasonable, Vide
Ciceron. (...). 2. Lact. l. 3. c. 27. (...).
but what is profitable, who are more moved with advantage Virtusper (...) non
(...) est, quoniam in (...), ut dixi, (...) ejus est. (...), c. 12. Aug. ep. 12.
than justice. And because emolument is more felt than innocence; and a man may
be poor for all his gift of (...); the Holy Jesus, to endear the practices of
Religion, has represented Godliness unto us under the notion of gain, and sin
as unfruitful: and yet besides all the natural and reasonable advantages, every
Virtue has a supernatural reward, a gracious promise attending; and every Vice
is not only naturally deformed, but is made more ugly by a threatening, and
horrid by an appendent curse. Henceforth therefore let no man complain that the
Commandments of God are impossible; for they are not only possible, but easy;
and they that say otherwise, and do accordingly, take more pains to carry the
instruments of their own death, than would serve to ascertain them of life. And
if we would do as much for Christ as we have done for Sin, we should find the
pains less, and the pleasure more. And therefore such complainers are without
excuse; for certain it is, they that can go in foul ways, must not say they
cannot walk in fair: they that march over rocks in despite of so many
impediments, can travel the even ways of Religion and Peace, when the Holy
Jesus is their Guide, and the Spirit is their Guardian, and infinite felicities
are at their journey's end, and all the reason of the world, political,
oeconomical and personal, do entertain and support them in the travel of the
passage.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal Jesus, who gave Laws unto the world, that mankind, being united
to thee by the bands of Obedience, might partake of all thy glories and
felicities; open our understanding, give us the spirit of discerning, and just
apprehension of all the beauties with which thou have enamelled Virtue, to
represent it beauteous and amiable in our eyes; that by the allurements of
exterior decencies and appendent blessings our present desires may be
entertained, our hopes promoted, our affections satisfied, and Love entering in
by these doors may dwell in the interior regions of the Will. O make us to
love thee for thy self, and Religion for thee, and all the instruments of
Religion in order to thy glory and our own felicities. Pull off the visors of
Sin, and discover its deformities by the lantern of thy Word and the light of
the Spirit; that I may never be bewitched with sottish appetites. Be pleased to
build up all the contents I expect in this world upon the interests of a
virtuous life, and the support of Religion; that I may be rich in Good works,
content in the issues of thy Providence, my Health may be the result of
Temperance and severity, my Mirth in spiritual emanations, my Rest in Hope, my
Peace in a good Conscience, my Satisfaction and acquiescence in thee: that from
Content I may pass to an eternal Fullness, from Health to Immortality, from
Grace to Glory, walking in the paths of Righteousness, by the waters of
Comfort, to the land of everlasting Rest, to feast in the glorious
communications of Eternity, eternally adoring, loving and enjoying the infinity
of the ever-Blessed and mysterious Trinity; to whom be glory, and (...), and
dominion now and for ever.

Amen.
DISCOURSE XVI. Of Certainty of Salvation.
Ad Number. 17.
1. WHen the Holy Jesus took an account of the first Legation and voyage of his
Apostles, he found them rejoicing in privileges Quod dixit Jesus 72 (...).
Lucae to. v. 20. (...) descripta (...) in (...), non tamen ad (...) ad munus
Evangelicum and (...) in (...). Alii autem (...) rem (...), sed (...) gaudii
(...) and (...); ex (...) scil. and quando hoc (...), aut (...) autem verba
significent, (...) est Doctores (...) non (...) 72 Discipulos (...).
and exterior powers, in their authority over unclean spirits: but weighing it
in his balance, he found the cause too light, and therefore diverted it upon
the right object; Rejoice that your names are written in Heaven. The revelation
was confirmed and more personally applied in answer to S. Peter's Question, We
have for saken all and followed thee: what shall we have therefore? Their LORD
answered, Ye shall sit upon twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Amongst these persons to whom Christ spoke Judas was; he was one of the Twelve,
and he had a throne allotted for him; his name was described in the book of
life, and a Scepter and a Crown was deposited for him too. For we must not
judge of Christ's meaning by the event, since he spoke these words to produce
in them Faith, comfort and joy in the best objects: it was a Sermon of duty as
well as a Homily of comfort, and therefore was equally intended to all the
College: and since the number of Thrones is proportioned to the number of men,
it is certain there was no exception of any man there included; and yet it is
as certain Judas never came to sit upon the throne, and his name was blotted
out of the book of life. Now if we put these ends together, that in Scripture
it was not revealed to any man concerning his final condition, but to the dying
penitent Thief, and to the twelve Apostles, that twelve thrones were designed
for them, and a promise made of their inthronization, and yet that no man's
final estate is so clearly declared miserable and lost as that of Judas, one of
the Twelve, to whom a throne was promised; the result will be, that the
election of holy persons is a condition allied to duty, absolute and infallible
in the general, and supposing all the dispositions and requisites concurring;
but fallible in the particular, if we fall off from the mercies of the
Covenant, and prevaricate the conditions. But the thing which is most
observable is, that if in persons so eminent and privileged, and to whom a
revelation of their Election was made as a particular grace, their condition
had one weak leg, upon which because it did rely for one half of the interest,
it could be no stronger than its supporters; the condition of lower persons, to
whom no revelation is made, no privileges are indulged; no greatness of
spiritual eminency is appendent, as they have no greater certainty in the
thing, so they have less in person, and are therefore to work out their
salvation with great fears and tremblings of spirit.

2. The purpose of this consideration is, that we do not judge of our final
condition by any discourses of our own, relying upon God's secret Counsels, and
Predestination of Eternity. This is a mountain upon which whosoever climbs,
like Moses, to behold the land of Canaan at great distances, may please his
eyes, or satisfy his curiosity, but is certain never to enter that way. It is
like enquiring Ad scelus ab (...) votis (...). Tacit.
into fortunes, concerning which Phavorinus the Philosopher spoke not
unhandsomely; They that foretell events of destiny -- (...) debile vulgus (...)
pallor and (...), Hine (...), and (...). Statins.
and secret providence, either foretell sad things, or prosperous. If they
promise prosperous, and deceive, you are made miserable by a vain speculation.
If they threaten ill fortune, and say false, thou art made wretched by a false
fear. But if they foretell adversity, and say true, thou art made miserable by
thy own apprehension before thou art so by destiny; and many times the fear is
worse than the evil feared. But if they promise felicities, and promise truly
what shall come to pass; then thou shall be wearied by an impatience and a
suspended hope, and thy hope shall ravish and Futurum (...) spes (...). A.
Gellius, l. 14
deflower the joys of thy possession. Much of it is hugely applicable to the
present Question; and our Blessed Lord, when he was petitioned that he would
grant to the two sons of Zebedee, that they might sit one on the right hand and
the other on the left in his Kingdom, rejected their desire, and only promised
them what concerned their duty and their suffering, referring them to that, and
leaving the final event of men to the disposition of his Father. This is the
great Secret of the Kingdom, which God has locked up and sealed with the
counsels of Eternity. The sure foundation of God stands, having this 2 Timothy
2. 19.
seal, The Lord knows who are his. This seal shall never be broken up till
the great day of Christ; in the mean time the Divine knowledge is the only
(...) of the final sentences, and this way of God is unsearchable and past
finding out. And therefore if we be solicitous and curious to know what God in
the counsels of Eternity has decreed concerning us, he has in two fair Tables
described all those sentences from whence we must take accounts, the
revelations of Scripture, and the book of Conscience: The first recites the Law
and the conditions; the other gives in evidence: the first is clear, evident
and conspicuous; the other, when it is written with large characters, may also
be discerned; but there are many little accents, periods, distinctions, and
little significations of actions, which either are there written in water, or
fullied over with carelessness, or blotted with forgetfulness, or not legible by
ignorance, or misconstrued by interest and partiality, that it will be
extremely difficult to read the hand upon the wall, or to copy out one line of
the eternal sentence. And therefore excellent was the counsel of the Son of
Sirach, (...) not out the things that are (...) hard for thee, (...) (...). 3.
21, 22.
search the things that are above thy strength: (...) what is (...) thee think
thereupon with reverence; for it is not (...) for thee (...) see with thine
eyes the things that are in secret. For whatsoever God has revealed in general
concerning Election, it concerns all persons within the pale of Christianity:
He has conveyed notice to all Christian people, that they are the sons of God,
that they are the (...) of Eternity, coheirs (...) Christ, partakers of the
Divine nature; meaning, that such they are by the design of God, and the
purposes of the manifestation of his Son. The Election (...) God is disputed in
Scripture to be an act of God separating whole Nations, and rejecting others;
in each of which many particular instances there were contrary to the general
and universal purpose; and of the elect nations many particulars perished, and
many of the rejected people sat down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the
kingdom of Heaven: and to those persons to whom God was more particular, and
was pleased to show the scrowls of his eternal counsels, and to reveal their
particular Elections, as he did to the twelve Apostles, he showed them wrapped
up and (...); and, to take off their confidences or presumptions, he gave
probation in one instance that those scrowls may be cancelled, that his purpose
concerning particulars may be altered by us; and (...) that he did not discover
the bottom of the Abyss, but some purposes of special grace and (...) design.
But his peremptory, final, (...) Decree he keeps in the cabinets of the eternal
ages, never to be unlocked till the Angel of the Covenant shall declare the
unalterable universal Sentence.

3. But as we take the measure of the course of the Sun by the dimensions of
the shadows made by our own bodies or our own instruments; so must we take the
measures of Eternity by the span of a man's hand, and guess at what God decrees
of us, by considering how our relations and endearments are to him. And it is
observable, that all the confidences which the Spirit of God has created in
the Elect are built upon Duty, and stand or fall according to the strength or
weakness of such supporters. We know we 1 John 3 14.
are translated from death to life by our love unto the Brethren: meaning, that
the performance of our duty is the best consignation to Eternity, and the only
testimony God gives us of our Election. And therefore we are to make our
judgments accordingly. And here I consider, that there is no state of a
Christian in which by virtue of the Covenant of the Gospel it is effectively
and fully declared that his sins are actually pardoned, but only in Baptism, at
our first coming to Christ, when he redeems us from our (...) conversation,
when he makes us become Sons of God, when he justifies us (...) by his grace,
when we are purified by Faith, when we make a Covenant with Christ to live
(...) ever according to his Laws. And this I shall suppose I have already
proved and explicated in the Discourse of Repentance. So that whoever is
certain he has not offended God since that time, and in nothing transgresses
the Laws of Christianity, he is certain that he actually remains in the state
of Baptismal purity: but it is too certain that this certainty remains not
long, but we commonly throw some dirt into our waters of Baptism, and stain our
white robe which we then put on.

4. But then because our restitution to this state is a thing that consists of
so many parts, is so divisible, various, and uncertain whether it be arrived to
the degree of Innocence, (and our Innocence consists in a Mathematical point,
and is not capable of degrees any more than Unity, because one stain destroys
our being innocent) it is therefore a very difficult matter to say that we have
done all our duty toward our restitution to Baptismal grace; and if we have
not done all that we can do, it is harder to say that God has accepted that
which is less than the conditions we entered into when we received the great
Justification and Pardon of sins. We all know we do less than our duty, and we
hope that God makes abatements for humane infirmities; but we have but a few
rules to judge by, and they not infallible in themselves, and we yet more
fallible in the application, whether we have not mingled some little minutes of
malice in the body of infirmities, and how much will bear excuse, and in what
time, and to what persons, and to what degrees, and upon what endeavors we
shall be pardoned. So that all the interval between our losing baptismal grace
and the day of our death we walk in a cloud, having lost the certain knowledge
of our present condition by our prevarications. And indeed it is a very hard
thing for a man to know his own heart: And he that shall observe how often
himself has been abused by confidences and secret imperfections, and how the
greatest part of Christians in name only do think themselves in a very good
condition, when God knows they are infinitely removed from it; (and yet if they
did not think themselves well and sure, it is unimaginable they should sleep so
quietly, and walk securely, and consider negligently, and yet proceed (...)) he
that considers this, and upon what weak and false principles of Divinity men
have raised their strengths and persuasions, will easily consent to this, that
it is very easy for men to be deceived in taking estimate of their present
condition, of their being in the state of Grace.

5. But there is great variety of men, and difference of degrees; and every
step of returning to God may reasonably add one degree of hope, till at last it
comes to the certainty and top of hope. Many men believe themselves to be in
the state of Grace, and are not: many are in the state of Grace, and are
infinitely fearful they are out of it: and many that are in God's favor do
think they are so, and they are not deceived. And all this is certain. For some
sin that sin of Presumption and Flattery of themselves, and some good persons
are vexed with violent fears and temptations to despair, and all are not: and
when their hopes are right, yet some are strong, and some are weak; for they
that are well persuaded of their present condition have persuasions as
different as are the degrees of their approach to innocence; and he that is at
the highest has also such abatements which are apt and proper for the 1 Cor.
4. 4. Cum (...) in (...), Nihil (...) sum, etc. q. d. (...) a (...) me non
(...) ait, (...) quis (...)? S. (...). c. 2. (...).
conservation of humility and godly (...). I am guilty of nothing, (says S.
Paul) but I am not hereby justified; meaning thus, Though I be innocent, for
ought I know, yet God, who judges otherwise than we judge, may find something
to reprove in me: It is God that judges, that is, concerning my degrees of
acceptance and hopes of glory. If the person be newly recovering from a state
of sin, because his state is imperfect, and his sin not dead, and his lust
active, and his habit not quite extinct, it is easy for a man to be too hasty
in pronouncing well. He is wrapped up in a cloak of clouds, hidden and encumbred;
(...). 9. 1, 2.
and his brightest day is but twilight, and his discernings dark, conjectural
and imperfect; and his heart is like a cold hand newly applied to the fire,
full of pain, and whether the heat or the cold be strongest is not easy to
determine; or like middle colors, which no man can tell to which of the
extremes they are to be accounted. But according as persons grow in Grace, so
they may grow in confidence of their present condition. It is not certain they
will do so; for sometimes the beauty of the tabernacle is covered with goats
hair and skins of beasts, and holy people do infinitely deplore the want of
such Graces which God observes in them with great complacency and acceptance.
Both these cases say, that to be certainly persuaded of our present condition
is not a Duty: Sometimes it is not possible, and sometimes it is better to be
otherwise. But if we consider of this Certainty as a Blessing and a Reward,
there is no question but in a great and an eminent Sanctity of life there may
also be a great confidence and fullness of persuasion that our present being is
well and gracious, and then it is certain that such persons are not deceived.
For the thing it self being sure, if the persuasion answers to it, it is
needless to dispute of the degree of certainty and the manner of it. Some
persons are heartily persuaded of their being reconciled; and of these some are
deceived, and some are not deceived; and there is no sign to distinguish them,
but by that which is the thing signified: a holy life according to the strict
rules of Christian Discipline tells what persons are confident, and who are
presumptuous. But the certainty is reasonable in none but in old Christians,
habitually holy persons, not in new Converts, or in lately lapsed people: for
concerning them we find the Spirit of God speaking with clauses of restraint
and ambiguity, a Beatus (...), de (...) dubitat. Rem (...) qui audacter (...).
S. Hieron.
perhaps, and, who knows, and, peradventure the thoughts of thy heart may be
forgiven thee; God may have mercy on (...) And that God has done so, they only
have reason to be confident whom God has blessed with a lasting continuing
Piety, and who have wrought out the habits of their precontracted vices.

6. But we find in Scripture many precepts given to holy persons being in the
state of Grace to secure their standing, and perpetuate their present
condition. For, Matthew. 24. 13.
He that endures unto the end, he [only] shall be saved, (said our Blessed
Savior:) and, Dan. 4. 27.
1 Cor. 10. 12.
He that stands, let him take heed lest he fall: and Romans 11. 20.
Thou stand by Faith; be Jocl 2. 14.
not high-minded, but fear: and, (...). 2. 12.
Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling. Acts 8. 22.
Rev. 3. 11.
Hold fast that (...) have, and let no man take the crown from thee. And it was
excellent advice; for one Church had Chap. 24.
lost their first love, and was likely also to lose their crown. And S. Paul
himself, who had once entered within the veil, and seen unutterable glories, yet
was forced to endure hardship, and to fight against his own disobedient
appetite, and to do violence to his inclinations, for fear that, whilst he
preached to others, himself should become a castaway. And since we observe in
holy story that Adam and Eve fell in Paradise, and the Angels fell in Heaven it
self, stumbling at the very jewels which pave the streets of the celestial
Jerusalem; and in Christ's family, one man for whom his Lord had prepared a
throne turned Devil; and that in the number of the Deacons it is said that one
turned Apostate, who yet had been a man full of the Holy Ghost: it will lessen
our train, and discompose the gayeties of our present confidence, to think that
our securities cannot be really distinguished from danger and uncertainties.
For every man walks upon two legs: one is firm, invariable, constant and
eternal; but the other is his own. God's Promises are the objects of our Faith;
but the events and final conditions of our Souls, which is consequent to our
duty, can at the best be but the objects of our Hope. And either there must in
this be a less certainty, or else Faith and Hope are not two distinct Graces.
God's (...) and vocation Romans 11. 29.
are without repentance; meaning, on God's part: but the very people concerning
whom S. Paul used the expression were reprobate and cut off, and in good time
shall be called again; in the mean time many single persons perish. There is no
condemnation Romans 8. 1.
to them that are in Christ Jesus. God will look to that, and it will never
fail; but then they must secure the following period, and not walk after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit. Behold the goodness of God toward thee, (says S.
Paul) if thou continue in Romans 11. 22.
his goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off. And if this be true
concerning the whole Church of the Gentiles, to whom the Apostle then made the
address, and concerning whose election the decree was public and manifest,
that they might be cut off, and their abode in God's favor was upon condition
of their perseverance in the Faith; much more is it true in single persons,
(...) election in particular is shut up in the abyss, and permitted to the
condition of our Faith and Obedience, and the revelations of Doomsday.

7. Certain it is that God has given to holy persons the Spirit of adoption,
enabling Romans 8. 15.
them to cry, Abba, Father, and to account themselves for sons; and by this
Spirit we 1 John 4. 13.
know we dwell in him, and therefore it is called in Scripture the earnest of
the Spirit: 2 Cor. 1. 22. and (...). 5. v. 5.
though at its first mission, and when the Apostle wrote and used this
appellative, the Holy Ghost was of greater signification, and a more visible
earnest and endearment of their hopes, than it is to most of us since. For the
visible sending of the Holy Ghost upon many Believers in gifts, signs and
prodigies, was infinite argument to make them expect events as great beyond
that as that was beyond the common gifts of men: just as Miracles and Prophecy,
which are gifts of the Holy Ghost, were arguments of probation for the whole
Doctrine of Christianity. And this being a mighty verification of the great
Promise, the promise of the Father, was an apt instrument to raise their hopes
and confidences concerning those other Promises which Jesus made, the promises
of Immortality and eternal life, of which the present miraculous Graces of the
Holy Spirit were an earnest, and in the nature of a contracting penny: and still
also the Holy Ghost, though in another manner, is an earnest of the great price
of the heavenly calling, the rewards of Heaven; though not so visible and
apparent as at first, yet as certain and demonstrative where it is discerned or
where it is believed, as it is and ought to be in every person who does any
part of his duty, because by the Spirit we do it, and without him we cannot.
And since we either feel or believe the presence and gifts of the Holy Ghost to
holy purposes, (for whom we receive voluntarily, we cannot casily receive
without a knowledge of his reception) we cannot but entertain him as an
argument of greater good hereafter, and an earnest-peny of the perfection of
the present Grace, that is, of the rewards of Glory; Glory and Grace differing
no otherwise, than as an earnest in part of payment does from the whole price,
the price of our high calling. So that the Spirit is an earnest, not because he
always signifies to us that we are actually in the state of Grace, but by way
of argument or reflection; we know we do belong to God when we receive his
Spirit; (and all Christian people have received him, if they were rightly
baptized and confirmed) I say, we know by that testimony that we belong to God,
that is, we are the people with whom God has made a Covenant, to whom he has
promised and intends greater blessings, to which the present gifts of the
Spirit are in order. But all this is conditional, and is not an immediate
testimony of the certainty and future event; but of the event as it is possibly
future, and may (without our fault) be reduced to act as certainly as it is
promised, or as the earnest is given in hand. And this the Spirit of God
oftentimes tells us in secret visitations and public testimonies: and this is
that which S. Paul calls, Heb. (...)
tasting of the heavenly gift, and partaking of the Holy Ghost, and tasting of
the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come. But yet some that
have done so have fallen away, and have quenched the Spirit, and have given
back the earnest of the Spirit, and contracted new relations, and God has been
their Father no longer, for they have done the works of the Devil. So that if
new Converts be uncertain of their present state, old Christians are not
absolutely certain they shall persevere. They are as sure of it as they can be
of future acts of theirs which God has permitted to their own power. But this
certainty cannot exclude all fear, till their Charity be perfect; only
according to the strength of their habits, so is the confidence of their abodes
in Grace.

8. Beyond this, some holy persons have degrees of persuasion superadded as
Largesses and acts of grace, God loving to bless one degree of Grace with
another, till it comes to a Confirmation in Grace, which is a state of
Salvation directly opposite to Obduration; and as this is irremediable and
irrecoverable, so is the other inamissible: as God never saves a person
obdurate and obstinately impenitent, so he never loses a -- (...); Is, (...) --
man whom he has confirmed in grace, whom he [so] loves, he loves unto the
end; and to others indeed he offers his persevering love, but they will not
entertain it with a persevering duty, they will not be beloved unto the end.
But I insert this caution, that every man that is in this condition of a
confirmed Grace does not always know it; but sometimes God draws aside the
curtains of peace, and shows him his throne, and visits him with irradiations
of glory, and sends him a little star to stand over his dwelling, and then
again covers it with a cloud. It is certain concerning some persons, that they
shall never fall, and that God will not permit them to the danger or
probability of it; to such it is morally impossible: but these are but few, and
themselves know it not as they know a demonstrative proposition, but as they
see the Sun, sometimes breaking from a cloud very brightly, but all day long
giving necessary and sufficient light.

9. Concerning the multitude of Believers this discourse is not pertinent, for
they only take their own accounts by the imperfections of their own duty
blended with the mercies of God: the cloud gives light on one side, and is dark
upon the other; and sometimes a bright ray peeps through the fringes of a
shower, and immediately hides it self, that we might be humble and diligent,
striving forwards and looking upwards, endeavoring our duty and longing after
Heaven, working out our Salvation with fear and trembling, and in good time our
calling and (...) may be assured, when we first according to the precept of the
Apostle, use all diligence. S. Paul, when he writ his first 1 Cor. 9. 27.
Epistle to the Corinthians, was more fearful of being reprobate, and therefore
he used exterior arts of mortification. But when he writ to the Romans, which
was a good while after, we find him more confident of his final condition,
persuaded that neither Romans 8. 38.
height, nor depth, Angel, nor principality, nor power could separate him from
the love of God in Jesus Christ: and when he grew to his latter end, when he
wrote to S. Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 6, (...)
he was more confident yet, and declared that now a crown of rightcousness was
certainly laid up for him, for now he had sought the fight, and finished his
course, the time of his departure was at hand. Henceforth he knew no more fear;
his love was perfect as this state would permit, and that cast out all fear.
According to this precedent if we reckon our securities, we are not likely to
be reproved by any words of Scripture, or by the condition of humane infirmity.
But when the confidence out-runs our growth in Grace, it is it self a sin;
though when the confidence is equal with the Grace, it is of it self no regular
and universal duty, but a blessing and a reward indulged by special
dispensation, and in order to personal necessities or accidental purposes. For
only so much hope is simply necessary as excludes despair, and encourages our
duty, and glorifies God, and entertains his mercy; but that the hope should be
without fear is not given but to the highest Faith, and the most excellent
Charity, and to habitual, ratified and confirmed Christians, and to them also
with some variety. The sum is this: All that are in the state of beginners and
imperfection have a conditional Certainty, changeable and fallible in respect
of us, (for we meddle not with what it is in God's secret purposes;)
changeable, I say, as their wills and resolutions. They that are grown toward
perfection have more reason to be confident, and many times are so: but still
although the strength of the habits of Grace adds degrees of moral certainty to
their expectation, yet it is but as their condition is, hopeful and promising,
and of a moral determination. But to those few to whom God has given
confirmation in Grace, he has also given a certainty of condition, and
therefore if that be revealed to them, their persuasions are certain and
infallible. If it be not revealed to them, their condition is in it self
certain, but their persuasion is not so; but in the highest kind of Hope, an
anchor of the Soul sure and steadfast.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal God, whose counsels are in the great deep, and thy ways past finding
out; thou have built our Faith upon thy Promises, our Hopes upon thy Goodness,
and have described our paths between the waters of comfort and the dry barren
land of our own duties and affections: we acknowledge that all our comforts
derive from thee, and to our selves we owe all our shame and confusions and
degrees of desperation. Give us the assistances of the Holy Ghost to help us in
performing our duty, and give us those comforts and visitations of the Holy
Ghost which thou in thy (...) and eternal wisdom know most apt and expedient
to encourage our duties, to entertain our hopes, to alleviate our sadnesses, to
refresh our spirits, and to endure our abode and constant endeavors in the
strictnesses of Religion and Sanctity. Lead us, dearest God, from Grace to
Grace, from imperfection to strength, from acts to habits, from habits to
confirmation in Grace, that we may also pass into the regions of comfort,
receiving the earnest of the Spirit, and the adoption of Sons; till by such a
signature we be consigned to glory, and enter into the possession of the
inheritance which we expect in the Kingdom of thy Son, and in the fruition of
the felicities of thee, O gracious Father, God Eternal.

Amen.
SECT. XIV. Of the Third Year of the Preaching of JESUS.
Five loaves satisfy so many Thousands.
Mat: 14. 19. And he took the five loaves and the two fishes and looking up to
Heaven he blessed and brake, and gave the loaves to his Disciples, and the
Disciples to the Multitude. 20. And they did all eat and were filled, and they
took up the fragments, that remained twelve baskets. 21. And they that had
eaten, were about five Thousand men, beside women and Children.

Lazarus at the rich glutton's gate.
Luk: 16. 19. There was a certain rich man which was Clothed in purple and fine
linen, and fared sumptuously everey day. 20. And there was a certain Beggar,
named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of sores. 25. And in Hell he
lift up his eyes being in Torments, and sees Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in
his Bosom.




1. BUT Jesus knowing of the death of the Baptist, Herod's jealousy, and the
envy of the Pharisees, retired into a desert place beyond the Lake together
with his Apostles: For the people pressed so upon them, they had not leisure to
eat. But neither there could he be hid, but great multitudes flocked thither
also, to whom he preached many things. And afterward, because there were no
villages in the neighborhood, lest they should faint in their return to their
houses, he caused them to sit down upon the grass, and with five loaves of
barley and two small fishes he satisfied five thousand men, besides women and
children, and caused the Disciples to gather up the fragments, which being
amassed together filled twelve baskets. Which Miracles had so much proportion
to the understanding, and met so happily with the affections of the people,
that they were convinced that this was the (...) who was to come into the
world, and had a purpose to have taken him by force, and made him a King.

2. But he, that left his Father's Kingdom to take upon him the miseries and
infelicities of the world, fled from the offers of a Kingdom, and their
tumultuary election, as from an enemy; and therefore sending his Disciples to
the ship before toward Bethsaida, he ran into the mountains to hide himself
till the multitude should scatter to their several habitations; he in the mean
time taking the opportunity of that retirement for the advantage of his
Prayers. But when the Apostles were far engaged in the Deep, a great tempest
arose, with which they were pressed to the extremity of danger and the last
refuges, laboring in sadness and hopelesness, till the fourth watch of the
night, when in the midst of their fears and labors Jesus comes walking on the
sea, and appeared to them, which turned their fears into affrightments; for
they supposed it had been a spirit: but he appeased their fears with his
presence, and manifestation who he was; which yet they desired to have proved
to them by a sign. For Simon Peter said unto him, Master, if it be thou,
command me to come to thee on the waters. The Lord did so; and Peter, throwing
himself upon the confidence of his Master's power and providence, came out of
the ship, and his fear began to weigh him down, and he cried, saying, Lord,
save me. Jesus took him by the hand, reproved the timorousness of his Faith,
and went with him into the ship: where when they had worshipped him, and
admired the Divinity of his Power and Person, they presently came into the land
of Genesareth, the ship arriving at the Port immediately; and all that were
sick or possessed with unclean spirits were brought to him, and as many as
touched the border of his garment were made whole.

3. By this time they whom Jesus had left on the other side of the Lake had
come as far as Capernaum to seek him, wondering that he was there before them:
but upon the occasion of their so diligent inquisition Jesus observes to them,
That it was not the Divinity of the Miracle that provoked their zeal, but the
satisfaction they had in the loaves, a carnal complacency in their meal; and
upon that intimation speaks of celestial bread, the divine nutriment of souls;
and then discourses of the mysterious and symbolical manducation of Christ
himself, affirming that he himself was the bread of life that came down from
Heaven, that he would give his Disciples his flesh to eat and his blood to
drink, and all this should be for the life of the World, to nourish unto life
eternal; so that without it a happy eternity could not be obtained. Upon this
discourse Epiphan. Haeres. 51.
diverse of his Disciples (amongst whom S. Mark the Evangelist is said to be
one, though he was afterward recalled by Simon Peter) for sook him, being
scandalized by their literal and carnal understanding of those words of Jesus,
which he intended in a spiritual sense. For the words that he spoke were not
profitable in the sense of flesh and blood, but they are spirit, and they are
life, himself being the Expounder, who best knew his own meaning.

4. When Jesus saw this great defection of his Disciples from him, he turned
him to the twelve Apostles, and asked if they also would go away. Simon Peter
answered, Lord, whither shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life: And
we believe and are sure thou art that CHRIST, the Son of the living God.
Although this public confession was made by Peter in the name and confidence
of the other Apostles, yet Jesus told them, that even amongst the twelve there
was one Devil; meaning Judas Iscariot, who afterward betrayed him. This he
told them Prophetically, that they might perceive the sad accidents which
afterward happened did not invade and surprise him in the disadvantages of
ignorance or improvision, but came by his own knowledge and providence.

5. Then came to him the Pharisees, and some Scribes which came from Jerusalem
and Galilee, (for Jesus would not go to Judaea, because the Jews laid wait to
kill him) and quarrelled with him about certain impertinent, unnecessary Rites,
derived to them not by Divine sanction, but ordinances of man; such as were
washing their hands often when they eat, baptizing cups and platters, and washing
tables and beds; which ceremonies the Apostles of Jesus did not observe, but
attended diligently to the simplicity and spiritual Holiness of their Master's
Doctrine. But, in return to their vain demands, Jesus gave them a sharp reproof
for prosecuting these and many other traditions to the discountenance of Divine
Precepts; and in particular they taught men to give to the Corban, and refused
to supply the necessity of their parents, thinking it to be Religion, though
they neglected Piety and Charity. And again he thunders out woes and sadnesses
against their impieties, for being curious of minutes, and punctual in rites
and ceremonials, but most negligent and incurious of Judgment and the love of
God; for their Pride, for their Hypocrisy, for their imposing burdens upon
others which themselves helped not to support; for taking away the key of
knowledge from the people, obstructing the passages to Heaven; for approving
the acts of their Fathers in persecuting the Prophets. But for the Question it
self concerning Washings, Jesus taught the people that no outward impurity did
stain the Soul in the sight of God, but all pollution is from within, from the
corruption of the heart, and impure thoughts, unchaste desires, and unholy
purposes, and that Charity is the best purifier in the world.

6. And thence Jesus departed into the coasts of Tire and Sidon, and entered
into a house, that he might not be known. The diligence of a Mother's love, and
sorrow and necessity, found him out in his retirement; for a Syrophoenician
woman came and be sought him that he would cast the Devil out of her daughter.
But Jesus discoursed to her by way of discomfort and rejection of her, for her
Nation's sake. But the seeming denial did but enkindle her desires, and made
her importunity more bold and undeniable; she begged but some crumbs that fell
from the childrens table, but one instance of favor to her daughter, which he
poured forth without measure upon the sons and daughters of Israel, Jesus was
pleased with her zeal and discretion, and pitied her daughter's infelicity, and
dismissed her with saying, The Devil was gone out of her Daughter.

7. But Jesus stayed not long here, but returning to the Sea of Galilee through
the midst of (...), they brought unto him a man deaf and dumb, whom Jesus cured
by touching his tongue, and putting his fingers in his ears: which caused the
people to give a large testimony in approbation of all his actions. And they
followed him unto a mountain, bringing to him multitudes of diseased people,
and he healed them all. But because the people had followed him three days, and
had nothing to eat, Jesus in pity to their need resolved to (...) them once
more at the charge of a Miracle: therefore taking seven (...) and a few small
fishes, he blessed them, and satisfied four thousand men, besides women and
children. And there remained seven baskets full of broken bread and fish. From
whence Jesus departed by ship to the coasts of Mageddon and Dalmanutha, whither
the Pharisees and Sadduces came, seeking of him a sign. But Jesus rejected
their impertinent and captious demand, knowing they did it to ill purposes and
with disaffection; reproving them, that they discerned the face of the sky, and
the prognostics of fair or foul weather, but not the signs of the times of the
Son of man. However, since they had neglected so great demonstrations of
Miracles, gracious Discourses, holy Laws and Prophecies, they must expect no
other sign but the (...) of the Prophet Jonas; meaning, the Resurrection of his
Body after three days burial: and so he dismissed the impertinent inquisitors.

8. And passing again over the Lake, as his Disciples were solicitous because
they had forgot to take bread, he gave them caution to beware of the leven of
the Pharisees and Sadduces, and the leven of Herod; meaning, the Hypocrisy and
vanities of the one, and the Heresy of the other. For Herod's leven was the
pretense that he was the Messiah, which the Sect of the (...) did earnestly and
spitefully promote. And after this (...) of themselves by the way, they came
together to Bethsaida, where Jesus cured a blind man with a collyrium of
spittle, salutary as Balsam or the purest Eyebright, when his divine
benediction once had hallowed it. But Jesus staid not there, but departing
thence into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, out of Herod's power, (for it was
in Philip's jurisdiction) after he had prayed with his Disciples, he enquired
what opinion the world had of him, and whom they reported him to be. They
answered, Some say thou art John the Baptist, some that thou art Elias, or
Jeremias, or one of the Prophets: for in (...) especially the Sect of the
Pharisees was mightily disseminated, whose opinion it was, that the Souls of
dead men according to their several merits did transmigrate into other bodies
of very perfect and excellent persons. And therefore in all this variety none
hit upon the right, or fansied him to be a distinct person from the ancients;
but although they differed in the assignation of his name, yet generally they
agreed it was the Soul of a departed Prophet which had passed into another
Body. But Jesus asked the Apostles their opinion, and Peter, in the name of all
the rest, made an open and confident Confession, Thou art CHRIST, the Son of
the living God.

9. This Confession Jesus not only confirmed as true, but as revealed by God,
and of fundamental necessity: for after the blessing of Peter's person, upon
allusion of Peter's name, Jesus said, that upon this Rock [ the article of
Peter's Confession] he would build his Church, promising to it assistances even
to perpetuity, insomuch that the gates of hell, that is, persecution and death
and the grave, should never prevail against it: adding withal a promise to
Peter, in behalf of all the rest, as he had made a Confession for them all,
that he would give unto him the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, so that
whatsoever he should bind on earth should be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever he
should loose on earth should be loosed in Heaven; a power which he never
communicated before or since, but to their successors; greater than the large
Charter of Nature and the donative of Creation, in which all the creatures
under Heaven were made subject to Man's Empire, but till now Heaven it self was
never subordinate to humane ministration.

10. And now the days from hence forward to the Death of Jesus we must reckon
to be like the Vigils or Eves of his Passion; for now he began and often did
ingeminate those sad predictions of his unhandsome usage he should shortly
find, that he (...) be rejected of the Elders, and chief Priests, and Scribes,
and suffer many things at Jerusalem, and be killed, and be raised up the third
day. But Peter, hearing that sad discourse so contrary to his hopes, which he
had blended with temporal expectances, (for he had learned the Doctrine of
Christ's Advent, but not the mystery of the Cross) in great and mistaken
civility took Jesus aside, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from
thee, Lord, this shall not be unto thee. But Jesus full of zeal against so soft
and humane admonition, that savoured nothing of God or of abstracted immaterial
considerations, chid Peter bitterly; Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an
offense unto me. And calling his Disciples to him, told them a second part of a
sad doctrine, that not only himself, but all they also must suffer. For when
the Head was to be crowned with thorns, if the Members were wrapped in
softnesses, it was an unhansome undecency, and a disunion too near an
antipathy; and therefore who ever will be the Disciple of Jesus must take up
his Cross, deny himself and his own fonder appetites, and trace his Master's
footsteps marked out with blood that he shed for our Redemption and
restitution. And that there be no escape from the participation of Christ's
suffering, Jesus added this Dilemma; He that will save his life shall lose it;
and he that will lose it shall save it to eternity. Which part soever we choose,
there is a life to be lost: but as the first are foolish to the extremest
misery, that will lose their Souls to gain the World; so they are most wise and
fortunate that will give their lives for him; because when the Son of Man shall
come in his own glory, and his Father's, and of his Angels, he shall reward
every man according to his works. This discourse Jesus concluded with a
Prophecy, that some standing in that presence should not die till they saw the
Son of Man coming in his Kingdom.

11. Of the greater glories of which, in due time to be revealed, Jesus after
eight days gave a bright and excellent probation. For, taking with him Peter
and James and John, he went up into the mountain Tabor to pray; and while he
prayed, he was transfigured before them, and his face did shine like the Sun,
and his garments were white and (...). And there appeared talking with him
Moses and Elias gloriously, speaking of the decease which he should accomplish
at Jerusalem, which glory these Apostles, after they had awaked from sleep, did
behold. And the Interlocutors with Jesus having finished their embassy of death
(which they delivered in forms of glory representing the excellencies of the
reward, together with the sharpness of the passage and interval) departed,
leaving the Apostles full of fear, and wonder, and (...), insomuch that Peter
talked he knew not what, but nothing amiss, something Prophetical, saying,
Master, it is good to be here; (...) us build three tabernacles. And some
devout persons in memory of the mystery did (...) (...), c, 17.
(...) three Churches in the same place in after-Ages. But after the departure
of those attendent Saints, a cloud incircled Jesus and the Disciples, and a
voice came from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, hear him. The
cloud quickly disappeared, and freed the Disciples from the fear it had put
them in. So they attended Jesus, and descended from the mountain, being
commanded silence, which they observed till the Resurrection.

12. The next day came to Jesus a man praying in behalf of his son, Lunatic
and sore troubled with a Devil, who sought often to destroy him in fire and
water, that Jesus would be pleased to deliver him. For his Apostles tried, and
could not, by reason of the want (...) aquis, (...) and (...).
of Faith; for this Grace, if it be true, though in a less degree, is of power
to remove mountains, to pluck up trees by the roots, and to give them solid
foundation in the waters. And Jesus rebuked the Devil, and (...) departed out
of him from that very hour. Thence Jesus departed privately into Galilee, and
in his journey repeated those sadnesses of his approaching Passion: Which so
afflicted the spirits of the Disciples, that they durst no more provoke him to
discourse, lest he should take occasion to interweave something of that
unpleasant argument with it. For sad and disconsolate persons use to create
comsorts to themselves by fiction of fancy, and use arts of avocation to remove
displeasure from them, and stratagems to remove it from their presence, by
removing it from their apprehensions, thinking the incommodity of it is then
taken away when they have lost the sense.

13. When Jesus was now come to Capernaum, the exactors of rates came to Simon
Peter, Exodus 30.
asking him if his Master paid the accustomed imposition, viz. a sicle or
didrachm, the fourth part of an ounce of silver, which was the tribute which
the Lord imposed upon all the sons of Israel from twenty years old and above,
to pay for redemption and propitiation, and for the use of the Tabernacle. When
Peter came into the house, Jesus knowing the message that he was big with,
prevented him, by asking him, Of whom do the Kings of the Nations take tribute?
of their own children, or of strangers? Peter answered, Of strangers. Then said
Jesus, then are the children free; meaning, that since the Gentile Kings do not
exact tribute of their sons, neither will God of his. And therefore this
Pension to be paid for the use of the Tabernacle, for the service of God, for
the redemption of their Souls, was not to be paid by him, who was the Son of
God, but by strangers. Yet to avoid offense, he sent Peter a-fishing, and
provided a fish with two didrachms of silver in it, which he commanded Peter to
pay for them two.

14. But when the Disciples were together with Jesus in the house, he asked
them what they discoursed of upon the way; for they had fallen upon an
ambitious and mistaken quarrel, which of them should be greatest in their
Master's Kingdom, which they still did dream should be an external and secular
Royalty, full of fancy and honor. But the Master was diligent to check their
forwardness, establishing a rule for Clerical deportment; He that will be
greatest among you, let him be your Minister: so supposing a greater and a
lesser, a Minister and a person to be ministered unto, but dividing the grandeur
of the Person from the greatness of Office, (that the higher the employment is,
the more humble should be the man;) because in Spiritual prelation it is not as
in Secular pomps, where the Dominion is despotick, the Coercion bloody, the
Dictates (...), the Laws externally compulsory, and the Titles arrogant and
vain; and all the advantages are so passed upon the Person, that making that
first to be splendid, it passes from the Person to the subjects, who in
abstracted essences do not easily apprehend Regalities in veneration, but as
they are subjected in persons made excellent by such superstructures of
Majesty: But in Dignities Ecelesiastical the Dominion is paternal, the (...)
persuasive and argumentative, the Coercion by censures immaterial, by cession
and consent, by denial of benefits, by the interest of virtues, and the
efficacy of hopes, and impresses upon the spirit; the Laws are full of
admonition and Sermon; the Titles of honor monitors of duty, and memorials of
labor and offices; and all the advantages, which from the Office usually pass
upon the Person, are to be divested by the humility of the man; and when they
are of greatest veneration they are abstracted excellencies and immaterial, not
passing through the Person to the people, and reslected to his luster, but
transmitted by his labor and ministry, and give him honor for his labor's
sake, (which is his personal excellency) not for his honor and title, which is
either a derivative from Christ, or from the constitution of pious persons,
estimating and valuing the relatives of Religion.

15. Then Jesus takes a little child, and sets him in the midst,
propounding him by way of Emblem a pattern of Humility and Simplicity, without
the mixtures of Ambition or caitive distempers; such infant candor and low
liness of spirit being the necessary port through which we must pass, if we
will enter into the Courts of Heaven. But as a current of wholesome waters
breaking from its restraint runs out in a succession of waters, and every
preceding draught draws out the next: so were the Discourses of Jesus excellent
and opportune, creating occasions for others, that the whole doctrine of the
Gospel and the entire will of the Father might be communicated upon design;
even the chances of words and actions being made regular and orderly by Divine
Providence. For from the instance of Humility in the symbol and Hieroglyphick
of the child, Jesus discourses of the care God takes of little children,
whether naturally or spiritually such; the danger of doing them scandal and
offenses; the care and power of their Angels guardian; of the necessity in the
event that Scandals should arise, and of the great woe and infelicity of those
persons who were the active ministers of such offenses.

16. But if in the traverses of our life discontents and injuries be done,
Jesus teaches (...) qui (...); qui fecit, (...). Tacit.
how the injured person should demean himself: First, reprove the offending
party privately; if he repent, forgive him for ever with a mercy as unwearied
and as multiplied as his repentance. For the servant to whom his Lord had
forgiven 10000 talents, because he refused to forgive his fellow servants 100
pence, was delivered to the (...) debitorum qui solvendo non sunt, vid. I
(...), (...). and 6. and (...). 6. and A. (...), 1. 20. c. 1. qui (...)
Gellius) (...) ad (...) in leges (...), and (...). Cod. Theod. l. 4. and 7. de
exact.
tormentors, till he should pay that debt which his Lord once forgave, till the
servant's impiety forced him to repent his donative and remission. But if he
refuses the charity of private correction, let him be reproved before a few
witnesses: and in case he be still incorrigible, let him be brought to the
tribunal of the Church; against whose advices if he shall kick, let him feel
her power, and be cut off from the communion of Saints, becoming a Pagan or a
Publican. And to make that the Church shall not have a dead and ineffectual
hand in her animadversions, Jesus promises to all the Apostles, what before he
promised to Peter, a power of binding and loosing on earth, and that it should
be ratified in Heaven what they shall so dispose on earth with an unerring key.

17. But John interrupted him, telling him of a stranger that cast out Devils
in the name of Jesus, but because he was not of the family, he had forbidden
him. To this Jesus replied, that he should in no wise have forbidden him, for
in all reason he would do veneration to that person whose Name he saw to be
energetical and triumphant over Devils, and in whose name it is almost
necessary that man should believe; who used it as an instrument of ejection of
impure spirits. Then Jesus proceeded in his excellent Sermon and union of
discourses, adding holy Precepts concerning offenses which a man might do to
himself; in which case he is to be severe, though most gentle to others. For in
his own case he must show no mercy, but abscission: for it it better to cut off
the offending hand or foot, or extinguish the offending eye, rather than upon
the support of a troublesome soot, and by the light of an offending eye, walk
into ruin and a sad eternity, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. And so Jesus ended this chain of excellent Discourses.

18. About this time was the Jews Feast of Tabernacles, whither Jesus went up
as it were in secret, and passing through Samaria he found the inhabitants of a
little village so inhospitable, as to refuse to give him entertainment; which
so provoked the intemperate zeal of James and John, that they would fain have
called for fire to consume them, even as Elias did. But Jesus rebuked the
furies of their anger, teaching them to distinguish the spirit of Christianity
from the ungentleness of the decretory zeal of Elias. For since the Son of man
came with a purpose to seek and save what was lost, it was but an indiscreet
temerity suddenly upon the lightest umbrages of displeasure to destroy a man,
whose redemption cost the effusion of the dearest blood from the heart of
Jesus. But contrariwise Jesus does a Miracle upon the ten Leprous persons which
came to him from the neighborhood, crying out with sad exclamations for help.
But Jesus sent them to the Priest to offer for their cleansing. Thither they
went, and but one only returned to give thanks, and he a stranger, who with a
loud voice glorified God, and with humble adoration worshipped, and gave thanks
to Jesus.

19. When Jesus had finished his journey, and was now come to Jerusalem, for
the first days he was undiscerned in public conventions, but heard of the
various opinions of men concerning him: some saying he was a good man, others,
that he (...) the people; and the Pharisees sought for him to do him a
mischief. But when they despaired of finding him in the midst of the Feast and
the people, he made Sermons openly in the midst of the Temple; whom when he had
convinced by the variety and divinity of his Miracles and Discourses, they gave
the greatest testimony in the world of humane weakness, and how prevalent a
prejudice is above the confidence and conviction of a demonstration. For a
proverb, a mistake, an error in matter of circumstance did in their
understandings outweigh multitudes of Miracles and arguments; and because
Christ was of Galilee, because they knew whence he was, because of the Proverb,
that (...) of Galilee comes no Prophet, because the Rulers did not believe in
him, these outweighed the demonstrations of his mercy, and his power, and
Divinity. But yet very many believed on him; and no man durst lay hands to take
him; for as yet his time was not come, in which he meant to give himself up to
the power of the Jews: and therefore when the Pharisees sent Officers to seize
him, they also became his Disciples, being themselves surprised by the
excellency of his Doctrine.

20. After this Jesus went to the mount of Olivet on the East of Jerusalem, and
the next day returned again into the Temple, where the Scribes and Pharisees
brought him a woman taken in the act of Adultery, tempting him to give
sentence, that they might accuse him of severity or intermedling if he
condemned her, or of remisness and popularity if he did acquit her. But Jesus
found out an expedient for their difficulty, and changed the Scene, by bidding
the innocent person among them cast the first stone at the Adulteress; and then
stooping down to give them fair occasion to withdraw, he wrote upon the ground
with his finger, whilst they left the woman and her crime to a more private
censure: Jesus was left alone, and the woman in the midst; whom Jesus
dismissed, charging her to sin no more. And a while after Jesus begins again to
discourse to them, of his Mission from the Father, of his Crucifixion and
exaltation from the earth, of the reward of Believers, of the excellency of
Truth, of spiritual Liberty and Relations, who are the sons of Abraham, and who
the children of the Devil, of his own eternal generation, of the desire of
Abraham to see his day. In which Sermon he continued, adding still new
excellencies, and confuting their malicious and vainer calumnies, till they,
that they also might (...) him, took up stones to cast at him; but he went out
of the Temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.

21. But in his passage he met a man who had been born blind: and after he had
discoursed cursorily of the cause of that Blindness, it being a misery not sent
as a punishment to his own or his parents sin, but as an occasion to make
public the glory of God; he, to manifest that himself was the light of the
World in all senses, said it now, and proved it by a Miracle: for sitting down
he made clay of spittle, and anointing the eyes of the blind man, bid him go
wash in Siloam; which was a Pool of limpid water Epiphan, de vita and (...). c.
7.
which God sent at the Prayer of Isaiah the Prophet, a little before his death,
to satisfy the necessities of his people oppressed with thirst and a strict
siege, and it stood at the foot of the mount Sion, and gave its water at first
by returns and periods, always to the Jews, but not to the enemies. And those
intermitted springings were still continued, but only a Pool was made from the
frequent effluxes. The blind man went, and washed, and returned seeing; and was
incessantly vexed by the Pharisees, to tell them the manner and circumstances
of the cure: and when the man had averred the truth, and named his Physician,
giving him a pious and charitable testimony, the Pharisees, because they could
not force him to disavow his good opinion of Jesus, cast him out of the (...).
But Jesus meeting him received him into the Church, told him he was CHRIST; and
the man became again enlightened, and he believed, and worshipped. But the
Pharisees blasphemed: for such was the dispensation of the Divine mysteries,
that the blind should see, and they which think they see clearly should become
blind, because they had not the excuse of ignorance to lessen or take off the
sin, but in the midst of light they shut their eyes, and doted upon darkness,
and therefore did their sin remain.

22. But Jesus continued his Sermon among the Pharisees, insinuating
reprehensions in his dogmatical discourses, which like light shined and
discovered error. For by discoursing the properties of a good Shepherd, and the
lawful way of intromission, he proved them to be thieves and robbers, because
they refused to enter in by Jesus, who is the door of the sheep; and upon the
same ground reproved all those false Christ's which before him usurped the title
of Messiah, and proved his own vocation and office by an argument which no
other shepherd would use, because he laid down his life for his sheep: others
would take the fleece and eat the flesh, but none but himself would die for his
sheep; but he would first die, and then gather his sheep together into one
fold, (intimating the calling of the Gentiles;) to which purpose he was enabled
by his Father to lay down his life, and to take it up; and had also endeared
them to his Father, that they should be preserved unto eternal life, and no
power should be able to take them out of his hand, or the hand of his Father:
for because Jesus was united to the Father, the Father's care preserved the
Son's flocks.

23. But the Jews, to requite him for his so divine Sermons, betook themselves
to their old argument, they took up stones again to cast at him, pretending he
had blasphemed: but Jesus proved it to be no blasphemy to call himself the son
of God, because they to whom the Word of God came are in Scripture called Gods.
But nothing could satisfy them, whose temporal interest was concerned not to
consent to such Doctrine which would save their souls by ruining their temporal
concernments. But when they sought again to take him, Jesus escaped out of
their hands, and went away beyond Jordan, where John at first baptized: which
gave the people occasion to remember that John did no Miracle, but this man
does many, and John, whom all men did revere and highly account of for his
Office and Sanctity, gave testimony to Jesus. And many believed on him there.

24. After this, Jesus, knowing that the harvest was great, and as yet the
laborers had been few, sent out seventy two of his Disciples with the like
commission as formerly the 12. Apostles, that they might go before to those
places whither himself meant to come. Of which number were the Seven, whom
afterward the Apostles set over the Widows, Epiphan. Pan. l. 1. (...). 1.
Eusebius. l. 1. c. 12.
and Matthias, Mark, and some say Luke, Justus, Barnabas, Apelles, Rufus,
Niger, Cephas, (not Peter) Thaddaeus, Aristion, and John. The rest of the names
Papias apud (...). l. 3. c. 33.
could not be recovered by the best diligence of Eusebius and Epiphanius. But
when they returned from their journey, they rejoiced greatly in the legation
and power, and Jesus also rejoiced in spirit, giving glory to God, that he had
made his revelations to babes and the more imperfect (...); like the lowest
Valleys which receive from Heaven the greatest floods of rain and blessings,
and stand thick with corn and flowers, when the Mountains are unfruitful in
their height and greatness.

25. And now a Doctor of the Law came to Jesus, asking him a Question of the
greatest consideration that a wise man could ask, or a Prophet answer; Master,
what shall I do to inherit eternal life? Jesus referred him to the Scriptures,
and declared the way to Heaven to be this only, to love the Lord with all our
powers and faculties, and our neighbor as our self. But when the Lawyer being
captious made a scruple in a smooth rush, asking what is meant by Neighbor:
Jesus told him, by a Parable of a Traveller fallen into the hands of robbers,
and neglected by a Priest and by a Levite, but relieved by a Samaritan, that no
distance of Country or Religion destroys the relation of Neighborhood; but
every person with whom we converse in peace and charity is that Neighbor whom
we are to love as our selves.

26. Jesus having departed from Jerusalem upon the forementioned danger, came
to a village called Bethany, where Martha making great and busy preparation
for his entertainment, to express her joy and her affections to his person,
desired Jesus to dismiss her Sister Mary from his feet, who sat there feasting
her self with the viands and sweetnesses of his Doctrine, incurious of the
provisions for entertainment. But Jesus commended her choice; and though he did
not expressly disrepute Martha's Civility, yet he preferred Mary's Religion and
Sanctity of affections. In this time (because the night drew on, in which no
man could work) Jesus hastened to do his Father's business, and to pour out
whole cataracts of holy Lessons, like the fruitful Nilus swelling over the
banks, and filling all the trenches, to make a plenty of corn and fruits great
as the inundation. Jesus therefore teaches his Disciples that Form of Prayer
the second time which we call the Lord's Prayer: teaches them assiduity and
indefatigable importunity in Prayer, by a Parable of an importunate Neighbor
borrowing loaves at midnight, and a troublesome Widow who forced an unjust
Judge to do her right by her clamorous and hourly addresses: encourages them to
pray, by consideration of the Divine goodness and fatherly affection, far more
indulgent to his Sons than natural Fathers are to their dearest issue; and adds
a gracious promise of success to them that pray. He reproves Pharisaical
ostentation; arms his Disciples against the fear of men and the terrors of
Persecution, which can arrive but to the incommodities of the Body; teaches the
fear of God, who is Lord of the whole Man, and can accurse the Soul as well as
punish the Body. He refuses to divide the inheritance between two Brethren, as
not having competent power to become Lord in temporal jurisdictions. He
preaches against Covetousness, and the placing felicities in worldly
possessions, by a Parable of a rich man, whose riches were too big for his
barns, and big enough for his Soul, and he ran over into voluptuousness, and
stupid complacencies in his perishing goods: he was snatched from their
possession, and his Soul taken from him in the violence of a rapid and hasty
sickness in the space of one night. Discourses of divine Providence and care
over us all, and descending even as low as grass. He exhorts to Alms-deeds, to
Watchfulness, and preparation against the sudden and unexpected coming of our
Lord to Judgment, or the arrest of death: tells the offices and sedulity of the
Clergy, under the Apologue of Stewards and Governors of their Lords houses;
teaches them gentleness and sobriety, and not to do evil upon confidence of
their Lord's absence and delay; and teaches the people even of themselves to
judge what is right concerning the signs of the coming of the Son of Man. And
the end of all these discourses was, that all men should repent, and live good
lives, and be saved.

27. At this Sermon there were present some that told him of the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices. For the Galileans were a sort
of people that taught it to be unlawful to pay tribute to strangers, or to pray
for the Romans; and because the Jews did both, they refused to communicate in
their sacred Rites, and would sacrifice apart: at which Solemnity when Pilate
the Roman Deputy had apprehended many of them, he caused them all to be slain,
making them to die upon the same Altars. These were of the Province of Judaea,
but of the same Opinion with those who taught in Galilee, from whence the Sect
had its appellative. But to the story; Jesus made reply, that these external
accidents, though they be sad and calamitous, yet they are no arguments of
condemnation against the persons of the men, to convince them of a greater
guilt than others, upon whom no such visible signatures have been imprinted.
The purpose of such chances is, that we should repent, lest we perish in the
like judgment.

28. About this time a certain Ruler of a Synagogue renewed the old Question
about the observation of the Sabbath, repining at Jesus that he cured a woman
that was crooked, loosing her from her infirmity, with which she had been
afflicted eighteen years. But Jesus made the man ashamed by an argument from
their own practice, who themselves loose an ox from the stall on the Sabbath,
and lead him to watering: And by the same argument he also stopped the mouths of
the Scribes and Pharisees, which were open upon him for curing an Hydropick
person upon the Sabbath. For Jesus, that he might draw off and separate
Christianity from the yoke of Ceremonies by abolishing and taking off the
strictest Mosaical Rites, chose to do very many of his Miracles upon the
Sabbath, that he might do the work of abrogation and institution both at once;
not much unlike the Sabbatical Pool in Judaea, which was dry six Joseph. de
(...) Jud. l. 7. c. 24.
days, but gushed out in a full stream upon the Sabbath. For though upon all
days Christ was operative and miraculous, yet many reasons did concur and
determine him to a more frequent working upon those days of public ceremony
and convention. But going forth from thence he went up and down the Cities of
Galilee, re-enforcing the same Doctrine he had formerly taught them, and daily
adding new Precepts and cautions, and prudent insinuations: advertising of the
multitudes of them that perish, and the paucity of them that shall be saved,
and that we should strive to enter in at the strait gate; that the way to
destruction is broad and plausible, the way to Heaven nice and austere, and few
there be that find it: teaches them modesty at Feasts, and entertainments of
the poor: discourses of the many excuses and unwillingnesses of persons who
were invited to the feast of the Kingdom, the refreshments of the Gospel; and
tacitly insinuates the rejection of the Jews, who were the first invited, and
the calling of the Gentiles, who were the persons called in from the high ways
and hedges. He reprehends Herod for his subtilty and design to kill him:
prophesies that he should die at Jerusalem; and intimates great sadnesses
future to them for neglecting this their day of visitation, and for killing the
Prophets and the Messengers sent from God.

29. It now grew toward Winter, and the Jews feast of Dedication was at hand;
therefore Jesus went up to Jerusalem to the Feast, where he preached in
Solomon's Porch, which part of the Temple stood entire from the first ruins:
and the end of his Sermon was, that the Jews had like to have stoned him. But
retiring from thence he went beyond Jordan, where he taught the people in a
most elegant and persuasive Parable concerning the mercy of God in accepting
Penitents, in the Parable of the Prodigal son returning; discourses of the
design of the Messiah coming into the world to recover erring persons from
their sin and danger, in the Apologues of the Lost sheep, and Goat; and under
the representment of an Unjust, but prudent, Steward, he taught us so to employ
our present opportunities and estates, by laying them out in acts of Mercy and
Religion, that when our Souls shall be dismissed from the stewardship and
custody of our body, we may be entertained in everlasting habitations. He
instructs the Pharisees in the question of Divorces, limiting the permissions
of Separations to the only cause of Fornication: prefers holy Coelibate
before the estate of Marriage, in them to whom the gift of Continency is given
in order to the Kingdom of Heaven. He tells a Story or a Parable (for which,
is uncertain) of a Rich man (whom Euthymius out of the tradition of the
Hebrews, names Nymensis) and Lazarus; the first a voluptuous person, and
uncharitable; the other pious, afflicted, sick, and a beggar: the first died,
and went to Hell; the second to Abraham's bosom: God so ordering the
dispensation of good things, that we cannot easily enjoy two Heavens, nor shall
the infelicities of our lives (if we be pious) end otherwise than in a
beatified condition. The Epilogue of which story discovered this truth also,
That the ordinary means of Salvation are the express revelations of Scripture,
and the ministeries of God's appointment; and whosoever neglects these shall
not be supplied with means extraordinary, or if he were, they would be totally
ineffectual.

30. And still the people drew water from the fountains of our Savior, which
streamed out in a full and continual emanation. For adding wave to wave, line
to line, precept upon precept, he reproved the Fastidiousness of the Pharisee,
that came with Eucharist to God and contempt to his brother; and commended the
Humility of the Publican's address, who came deploring his sins, and with
modesty and penance and importunity begged and obtained a mercy. Then he laid
hands upon certain young children, and gave them benediction, charging his
Apostles to admit infants to him, because to them in person, and to such in
emblem and signification, the Kingdom of Heaven does appertain. He instructs a
young man in the ways and counsels of perfection, besides the observation of
Precepts, by heroical Renunciations and acts of munificent Charity. Which
discourse because it alighted upon an indisposed and an unfortunate subject, (
for the young man was very rich) Jesus discourses how hard it is for a rich man
to be saved; but he expounds himself to mean, they that trust in riches; and
however it is a matter of so great temptation, that it is almost impossible to
escape, yet with God nothing is impossible. But when the Apostles heard the
Master bidding the young man sell all, and give to the poor, and follow him,
and for his reward promised him a heavenly treasure, Peter, in the name of the
rest, began to think that this was their case, and the promise also might
concern them: but they asked the Question, What shall we have, who have
forsaken all, and followed thee? Jesus answered, that they should sit upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

31. And Jesus extended this mercy to every Disciple that should forsake either
house, or wife, or children, or any thing for his sake and the Gospel's, and
that they should receive a hundred fold in this life, by way of comfort and
equivalency, and in the world to come thousands of glories and possessions in
fruition and redundancy. For they that are last shall be first, and the first
shall be last: and the despised people of this world shall reign like Kings,
and contempt it self shall swell up into glory, and poverty into an eternal
satisfaction. And these rewards shall not be accounted according to the
privileges of Nations, or priority of vocation, but readiness of mind and
obedience, and sedulity of operation after calling: which Jesus taught his
Disciples in the Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, to whom the Master
gave the same reward, though the times of their working were different; as
their calling and employment had determined the opportunity of their labors.

DISCOURSE XVII. Of Scandal, or Giving and taking Offense. (...) Number. 3.

1. A Sad curse being threatened in the Gospel to them who offend any of
Christ's little ones, that is, such as are novices and babes in Christianity,
it concerns us to learn our duty and perform it, that we may avoid the curse;
for, Woe to all them by Matthew. 18. 7.
whom offenses come. And although the duty is so plainly explicated and
represented in gloss and case by the several Commentaries of S. Paul upon this
menace of our Blessed Romans 14.
Savior; yet because our English word Offense, which is commonly used in this
Question 1 Cor. 8.
Galat. 2.
of Scandal, is so large and equivocal that it has made many pretenses, and
intricated this article to some inconvenience, it is not without good purpose
to draw into one body those Propositions which the Masters of Spiritual life
have described in the managing of this Question.

2. First, By whatsoever we do our duty to God we cannot directly do offense or
give scandal to our Brother; because in such cases where God has obliged us,
he has also obliged himself to reconcile our duty to the designs of God, to
the utility of Souls, and the ends of Charity. And this Proposition is to be
extended to our Obedience to the lawful Constitutions of our competent
Superiors, in which cases we are to look upon the Commandment, and leave the
accidental events to the disposition of that Providence who reconciles
dissonancies in nature, and concentres all the variety of accidents into his
own glory. And whosoever is offended at me for obeying God or God's Vicegerent,
is offended at me for doing my duty; and in this there is no more dispute, but
whether I shall displease God, or my peevish neighbor. These are such whom the
Spirit of God complains of under other representments: They think it strange we
run not into the same excess of riot; Their eye is evil because their Master's
eye is good; and the abounding of God's grace also may become to them an
occasion of falling, and the long-suffering of God the encouragement to sin. In
this there is no difficulty: for in what case soever we are bound to obey God
or Man, in that case and in that conjunction of circumstances we have nothing
permitted to our choice, and have no authority to remit of the right of God or
our Superior. And to comply with our neighbor in such Questions, besides that
it cannot serve any purposes of Piety if it declines from Duty in any instance,
it is like giving Alms out of the portion of Orphans, or building Hospitals
with the money and spoils of Sacrilege. It is pusillanimity, or hypocrisy, or
a denying to confess Christ before men, to comply with any man, and to offend
God, or omit a Duty. Whatsoever is necessary to be done, and is made so by God,
no weakness or peevishness of man can make necessary not to be done. For the
matter of Scandal is a duty beneath the prime obligations of Religion.

3. Secondly, But every thing which is used in Religion is not matter of
precise Duty, but there are some things which indeed are pious and religious,
but dispensable, voluntary, and commutable; such as are voluntary Fasts,
exterior acts of Discipline and Mortification not enjoined, great degrees of
exterior Worship, Prostration, long Prayers, Vigils: and in these things,
although there is not directly a matter of Scandal, yet there may be some
prudential considerations in order to Charity and Edification. By pious actions
I mean either particular pursuances of a general Duty, which are uncommanded in
the instance, such as are the minutes and expresses of Alms; or else they are
commended, but in the whole kind of them unenjoyned, such as Divines call the
Counsels of perfection. In both these cases a man cannot be scandalous. For the
man doing in charity and the love of God such actions which are aptly
expressive of love, the man (I say) is not uncharitable in his purposes; and
the actions themselves being either attempts or proceedings toward Perfection,
or else actions of direct Duty, are as innocent in their productions as in
themselves, and therefore without the malice of the recipient cannot induce him
into sin: and nothing else is Scandal. To do any pious act proceeds from the
Spirit of God, and to give Scandal, from the Spirit of Malice or Indiscretion;
and therefore a pious action, whose fountain is love and (...), cannot end in
Uncharitableness or Imprudence. But because when any man is offended at what I
esteem Piety, there is a question whether the action be pious or no: therefore
it concerns him that works to take care that his action be either an act of
Duty, though not determined to a certain particular; or else be something (...)
in Scripture, or practiced by a holy person there recorded, and nowhere
reproved; or a practice warranted by such precedents which modest, prudent and
religious persons account a sufficient inducement of such particulars: for he
that proceeds upon such principles derives the warrant of his actions from
beginnings which secure the particular, and quits the Scandal.

4. This, I say, is a security against the Uncharitableness and the Sin of
Scandal; because a zeal of doing pious actions is a zeal according to God: but
it is not always a security against the Indiscretion of the Scandal. He that
reproves a foolish person in such circumstances that provoke him, or make him
impudent or blasphemous, does not give Scandal, and brings no sin upon himself,
though he occasioned it in the other: But if it was probable such effects would
be consequent to the reprehension, his zeal was imprudent and rash; but so long
as it was zeal for God, and in its own matter lawful, it could not be an active
or guilty Scandal: but if it be no zeal, and be a design to entrap a man's
unwariness or passion or shame, and to disgrace the man, by that means or any
other to make him sin, then it is directly the offending of our Brother. They
that preached Christ out of envy intended to do offense to the Apostles: but
because they were impregnable, the sin rested in their own bosom, and God
wrought his own ends by it. And in this sense they are Scandalous persons who
fast for Strife, who pray for Rebellion, who entice simple persons into the
snare by colors of Religion. Those very exterior acts of Piety become an
Offense, because they are done to evil purposes, to abuse Proselytes, and to
draw away Disciples after them, and make them love the sin, and march under so
splendid and fair colors. They who out of strictness and severity of
persuasion represent the conditions of the Gospel alike to every person, that
is, nicer than Christ described them in all circumstances, and deny such
liberties of exterior desires and complacency which may be reasonably
permitted to some men, do very indiscreetly, and may occasion the alienation of
some men's minds from the entertainments of Religion: but this being accidental
to the thing it self, and to the purpose of the man, is not the Sin of Scandal,
but it is the Indiscretion of Scandal, if by such means he divorces any man's
mind from the cohabitation and unions of Religion: and yet if the purpose of
the man be to affright weaker and unwise persons, it is a direct Scandal, and
one of those ways which the Devil uses toward the peopling of his kingdom; it
is a plain laying of a snare to entrap feeble and uninstructed souls.

5. But if the pious action have been formerly joined with any thing that is
truly criminal, with Idolatry, with Superstition, with impious Customs or
impure Rites, and by retaining the Piety I give cause to my weak brother to
think I approve of the old appendage, and by my reputation invite him to
swallow the whole action without discerning; the case is altered: I am to omit
that pious action, if it be not under command, until I have acquitted it from
the suspicion of evil company. But when I have done what in prudence I guess
sufficient to thaw the frost of jealousy, and to separate those dissonancies
which formerly seemed united, I have done my duty of Charity, by endeavoring
to free my brother from the snare, and I have done what in Christian prudence I
was obliged, when I have protested against the appendent crime: If afterward
the same person shall entertain the crime upon pretense of my example, who have
plainly (...) it, he lays the snare for himself, and is glad of the pretense,
or will in spite enter into the net, that he might think it reasonable to rail
at me. I may not with Christian charity or prudence wear (...), (...), contra
(...) and inanes ceremonias (...) and popularis (...).
the picture of our Blessed Lord in rings or medals, though with great
affection and designs of doing him all the honor that I can, if by such
Pictures I invite persons, apt more to follow me than to understand me, to give
Divine honor to a Picture: but when I have declared my hatred of Superstitious
worshippings, and given my brother warning of the snare which his own mistake
or the Devil's malice was preparing for him, I may then without danger signify
my Piety and affections in any civil representments which are not against God's
Law, or the Customs of the Church, or the analogy of Faith. And there needs no
other reason to be given for this Rule than that there is no reason to be given
against it: if the nature of the thing be innocent, and the purpose of the man
be pious, and he has used his moral industry to secure his brother against
accidental mischances and abuses; his duty in this particular can have no more
parts and instances.

6. But it is too crude an assertion to affirm indefinitely, that whatsoever
has been abused to evil or superstitious purposes must presently be abjured,
and never entertained for fear of Scandal; for it is certain that the best
things have been most abused. Have not some persons used certain verses of the
Psalter as an antidote against the Toothache? and carried the blessed Sacrament
in pendants about their necks as a charm to countermand Witches? and S. John's
Gospel as a spell against wild beasts and wilder untamed spirits? Confession of
sins to the Ministers of Religion has been made an instrument to serve base
ends; and so indeed has all Religion been abused: and some persons have been
so receptive of Scandal, that they suspected all Religion to be a mere
stratagem, because they have observed very many men have used it so. For some
natures are like Spunges or Sugar, whose utmost verge if you dip in Wine, it
drowns it self by the moisture it sucks up, and is drenched all over, receiving
its alteration from within; its own nature did the mischief, and plucks on its
own dissolution. And these men are greedy to receive a Scandal, and when it is
presented but in small instances, they suck it up to the dissolution of their
whole Religion, being glad of a quarrel, that their impieties may not want all
excuse. But yet it is certainly very unreasonable to reject excellent things
because they have been abused; as if separable accidents had altered natures
and essences, or that they resolve never to forgive the duties for having once
fallen into the hands of unskilful or malicious persons. Hezekiah took away the
brazen Serpent because the people abused it to Idolatry; but the Serpent had
long before lost its use: and yet if the people had not been a peevish and
refractory and superstitious people, in whose nature it was to take all
occasions of Superstition; and farther yet, if the taking away such occasions
and opportunities of that Sin in special had not been most agreeable with the
designs of God, in forbidding to the people the common use of all Images in the
second Commandment, which was given them after the erection of that brazen
Statue; Hezekiah possibly would not, or at least had not been bound to have
destroyed that monument of an old story and a great blessing, but have sought
to separate the abuse from the minds of men, and retained the Image. But in
Christianity, when none of these circumstances occur, where by the greatness
and plenty of revelations we are more fully instructed in the ways of Duty, and
when the thing it self is pious, and the abuse very separable, it is infinite
disparagement to us, or to our Religion, either that our Religion is not
sufficient to cure an abuse, or that we will never part with it, but we must
unpardonably reject a good because it had once upon it a crust or spot of
leprosy, though since it has been washed in the waters of Reformation. The
Primitive Christians abstained from actions of themselves indifferent, which
the unconverted people used, if those actions were symbolical, or adopted into
false Religions, or not well understood by those they were bound to satisfy:
But when they had washed off the accrescences of Gentile Superstition, they
chose such Rites which their neighbors used, and had designs not imprudent or
unhandsome; and they were glad of a Heathen Temple to celebrate the Christian
Rites in them, and they made no other change, but that they ejected the Devil,
and invited their Lord into the possession.

7. Thirdly, In things merely indifferent, whose practice is not limited by
command, nor their nature heightened by an appendent Piety, we must use our
liberty so as may not offend our Brother, or lead him into a sin directly or
indirectly. For Scandal being directly against Charity, it is to be avoided in
the same measure and by the same proportions in which Charity is to be pursued.
Now we must so use our selves, that we must cut off a foot, or pluck out an
eye, rather than the one should bear us and the other lead us to sin and death;
we must rather rescind all the natural and sensual or dearest invitations to
Vice, and deny our selves lawful things, than that lawful things should betray
us to unlawful actions. And this rule is the measure of Charity: our
neighbor's Soul ought to be dearer unto us than any temporal privilege. It is
lawful for me to eat herbs, or fish, and to observe an ascetick diet: But if by
such austerities I lead others to a good opinion of Montanism, or the practices
of Pythagoras, or to believe flesh to be impure, I must rather alter my diet,
than teach him to sin by mistaking me. S. Paul gave an instance of eating flesh
sold in the shambles from the Idol Temples: to eat it in the relation of an
Idol-sacrifice is a great sin; but when it is sold in the shambles, the
property is altered to them that understand it so. But yet even this Paul would
not do, if by so doing he should encourage undiscerning people to eat all meat
conveyed from the Temple, and offered to Devils. It is not in every man's head
to distinguish formalities, and to make abstractions of purpose from exterior
acts, and to alter their devotions by new relations and respects depending upon
intellectual and Metaphysical notions. And therefore it is not safe to do an
action which is not lawful, but after the making distinctions, before ignorant
and weaker persons, who swallow down the bole and the box that carries it, and
never (...) their apple, or take the core out. If I by the law of Charity must
rather quit my own goods than suffer my brother to perish; much rather must I
quit my privilege, and those superstructures of favor and grace which Christ
has given me beyond my necessities, than wound the spirit and destroy the Soul
of a weak man, for whom Christ died. It is an inordinate affection to love my
own case, and circumstances of pleasure, before the soul of a Brother; and such
a thing are the privileges of Christian liberty: for Christ has taken off
from us the restraints which God had laid upon the Jews in meat and Holy Days;
but these are but circumstances of grace given us for opportunities, and cheap
instances of Charity; we should ill die for our brother, who will not lose a
meal to prevent his sin, or change a dish to save his Soul. And if the thing be
indifferent to us, yet it ought not to be indifferent to us whether our brother
live or die.

8. Fourthly, And yet we must not, to please peevish or froward people, betray
our liberty which Christ has given us. If any man opposes the lawfulness and
license of indifferent actions, or be disturbed at my using my privileges
innocently; in the first case I am bound to use them still, in the second I am
not bound to quit them to please him. For in the first instance, he that shall
cease to use his liberty, to please him that says his liberty is unlawful,
encourages him that says so in his false opinion, and by complying with him
gives the Scandal; and he who is angry with me for making use of it, is a
person that, it may be, is crept in to spy out and invade my liberty, but not
apt to be reduced into sin by that act of mine which he detests, for which he
despises me, and so makes my person unapt to be exemplar to him. To be angry
with me for doing what Christ has allowed me, and which is part of the liberty
he purchased for me when he took upon himself the form of a servant, is to
judge me, and to be uncharitable to me: and he that does so is beforehand with
me, and upon the active part; he does the Scandal to me, and by offering to
deprive me of my liberty he makes my way to Heaven narrower and more encumbred
than Christ left it, and so places a stumblingstone in my way; I put none in
his. And if such peevishness and discontent of a Brother engages me to a new
and unimposed yoke, then it were in the power of my enemy or any malevolent
person to make me never to keep Festival, or never to observe any private Fast,
never to be prostrate at my Prayers, nor to do any thing but according to his
leave, and his humor shall become the rule of my actions; and then my Charity
to him shall be the greatest uncharitableness in the world to my self, and his
liberty shall be my bondage. Add to this, that such complying and obeying the
peevishness of discontented persons is to no end of Charity: for besides that
such concessions never satisfy persons who are unreasonably angry, because by
the same reason they may demand more, as they ask this for which they had no
reason at all; it also incourages them to be peevish, and gives fuel to the
passion, and seeds the wolf, and so encourages the sin, and prevents none.

9. Fifthly, For he only gives Scandal who induces his Brother directly or
collaterally 1 Cor. 8. 10, 12 Romans 14. 21. Matthew. 5. 29. and 13. 57.
into sin, as appears by all the discourses in Scripture guiding us in this
Duty; and it is called laying a stumbling block in our Brother's way, a
wounding the Conscience of our weak Mark 14. 27 and 6. 3. and 4. 17.
Brother. Thus Balaam was said to lay a Scandal before the sons of Israel, by
tempting Luke 7. 23.
them to Fornication with the daughters of Moab. Every evil example, or
imprudent, John 16. 1.
sinful and unwary deportment, is a Scandal, because it invites others to do
the like leading them by the hand, taking off the strangeness and insolency of
the act, which deters many men from entertaining it; and it gives some offers
of security to others, that they shall escape as we have done; besides that it
is in the nature of all agents, natural and moral, to assimilate either by
proper efficiency, or by counsel and moral invitements, others to themselves.
But this is a direct Scandal: and such it is to give money to an idle person,
who you know will be drunk with it; or to invite an intemperate person to an
opportunity of excess, who desires it always, but without thee wants it.
Indirectly and accidentally, but very criminally, they give Scandal, who
introduce persons into a state of life from whence probably they pass into a
state of sin: so did the (...), who married their daughters to the idolatrous
Moabites; and so do they who entrust a Pupil to a vicious Guardian. For
although God can preserve children in the midst of flames without scorching;
yet if they sindge their hair or scorch their flesh, they that put them in are
guilty of the burning. And yet farther, if persons so exposed to danger should
escape by miracle, yet they escape not who expose them to the danger. They who
threw the Children of the Captivity into the furnace were burnt to death,
though the Children were not hurt: and the very offering a person in our trust
to a certain or probable danger foreseen and understood, is a likely way to
pass sin upon the person so exposed, but a certain way to contract it in our
selves; it is directly against Charity, for no man loves a Soul unless he loves
its safety, and he cares not to have his child safe that throws him into the
fire. Hither are to be reduced all false Doctrines aptly productive of evil
life; the Doctrines are scandalous, and the men guilty, if they understand the
consequents of their own propositions: or if they think it probable that
persons will be led by such Doctrines into evil persuasions, though themselves
believe them not to be necessary products of their Opinions, yetthe very
publishing such Opinions which ( of themselves not being necessary, or
otherwise very profitable) are apt to be understood, by weak persons at least,
to ill ends, is against Charity, and the duty we owe to our Brother's Soul.

10. Sixthly, It is not necessary for ever to abstain from things indifferent
to prevent the offending of a Brother, but only till I have taken away that
rock against which some did stumble, or have done my endeavor to remove it. In
Questions of Religion it is lawful to use primitive and ancient words, at which
men have been weakened and seem to stumble, when the objection is cleared, and
the ill consequents and suspicion disavowed: and it may be of good use, charity
and edification, to speak the language of the purest Ages, although that some
words were used also in the impurest Ages, and descended along upon changing
and declining Articles; when it is rightly explicated in what sense the best
men did innocently use them, and the same sense is now protested. But in this
case it concerns prudence to see that the benefit be greater than the danger.
And the same also is to be said concerning all the actions and parts of
Christian liberty. For if after I have removed the unevenness and objection of
the accident, that is, if when I have explained my disrelish to the crime which
might possibly be gathered up and taken into practice by my misunderstood
example, still any man will stumble and fall, it is a resolution to fall, a
love of danger, a peevishness of spirit, a voluntary misunderstanding; it is
not a misery in the man more than it is his own fault: and when ever the cause
of any sin becomes criminal to the man that sins, it is certain that if the
other who was made the occasion did disavow and protest against the crime, the
man that sins is the only guilty person both in the effect and cause too; for
the other could do no more but use a moral and prudent industry to prevent a
being mis-interpreted; and if he were tied to more, he must quit his interest
for ever in a perpetual scruple; and it is like taking away all Laws to prevent
Disobedience, and making all even to secure the world against the effects of
Pride or Stubbornness. I add to this, that since actions indifferent in their
own natures are not productive of effects and actions criminal, it is merely by
accident that men are abused into a sin; that is, by weakness, by misconceit,
by something that either discovers malice or indiscretion; which because the
act it self does not of it self, if the man does not voluntarily or by
intention, the sin dwells nowhere but with the man that entertains it: the man
is no longer weak than he is mistaken, and he is not mistaken or abused into
the sin by example of any man who has rightly stated his own question, and
divorced the suspicion of the sin from his action; whatsoever comes after this
is not weakness of understanding, but strength of passion; and he that is
always learning, and never comes to the knowledge of the truth, is something
besides a silly man: Men cannot be always (...). (...). 14. 1.
babes in Christ without their own fault; they are no longer Christ's little
(...) than they are 1 Cor. 8. 10, 12
inculpably ignorant. For it is but a mantle cast over pride and frowardness,
to think our selves able to teach others, and yet pretend Offense and Scandal;
to scorn to be instructed, and yet complain that we are offended, and led into
sin for want of knowledge of our Duty. He that understands his Duty is not a
person capable of Scandal by things indifferent. And it is certain, that no man
can say concerning himself that he is scandalized at another, that is, that he
is led into sin by mistake and weakness; for if himself knows it, the mistake
is gone: well may the Guides of their Souls complain concerning such persons,
that their sin is procured by offending persons or actions; but he that
complains concerning himself to the same purpose, pretends ignorance for other
ends, and contradicts himself by his complaint and knowledge of his error. The
boy was prettily peevish who, when his Father bid him pronounce Thalassius,
told him he could not pronounce Thalassius, at the same time speaking the word:
just so impotent, weak and undiscerning a person is that, who would forbid me
to do an indifferent action upon pretense that it makes him ignorantly sin; for
his saying so confutes his Ignorance, and argues him of a worse folly; it is
like asking my neighbor, whether such an action be done against my own will.

11. Seventhly, When an action is apt to be mistaken to contrary purposes, it
concerns the prudence and charity of a Christian to use such compliance as best
cooperates to God's glory, and has in it the less danger. The Apostles gave an
instance in the matter of Circumcision, in which they walked warily, and with
variety of design, that they might invite the Gentiles to the easy yoke of
Christianity, and yet not deter the Jew by a disrespect of the Law of Moses.
And therefore S. Paul circumcised Timothy, because he was among the Jews, and
descended from a Jewish parent, and in the instance gave sentence in compliance
with the Jewish persuasion, because Timothy might well be accounted for a Jew
by birth; unto them the Rites of Moses were for a while permitted: But when
Titus was brought upon the scene of a mixed assembly, Gal. 23, 4, etc.
and was no Jew, but a Greek, to whom Paul had taught they ought not to be
circumcised; although some Jews watched what he would do, yet he plainly
refused to circumcise him, choosing rather to leave the Jews angry, than the
Gentiles scandalized or led into an opinion that Circumcision was necessary, or
that he had taught them otherwise out of collateral ends, or that now he did
so. But when a case of Christian liberty happened to S. Peter, he was not so
prudent in his choice, but at the coming of certain Jews from Jerusalem
withdrew himself from the society of the Gentiles; not considering, that it was
worse if the Gentiles, who were invited to Christianity by the sweetness of its
liberty and compliance, should fall back, when they that taught them the
excellency of Christian liberty durst not stand to it, than if those Jews were
displeased at Christianity for admitting Gentiles into its communion, after
they had been instructed that God had broken down the partition wall, and made
them one sheepfold. It was of greater concernment to God's glory to gain the
Gentiles, than to retain the Jews; and yet if it had not, the Apostles were
bound to bend to the inclinations of the weaker, rather than be mastered by the
wilfulness of the stronger, who had been sufficiently instructed in the
articles of Christian liberty, and in the adopting the Gentiles into the Family
of God. Thus if it be a question whether I should abate any thing of my
external Religion or Ceremonies to satisfy an Heretic or a contentious
person, who pretends Scandal to himself, and is indeed of another Persuasion;
and at the same time I know that good persons would be weakened at such
forbearance, and estranged from the good persuasion and Charity of Communion,
which is part of their Duty; it more concerns Charity and the glory of God that
I secure the right, than twine about the wrong, wilful and malicious persons. A
Prelate must rather fortify and encourage Obedience, and strengthen
Discipline, than by remisness toward refractory spirits, and a desire not to
seem severe, weaken the hands of conscientious persons by taking away the marks
of difference between them that obey and them that obey not: and in all cases
when the question is between a friend to be secured from Apostasy, or an enemy
to be gained from Indifferency, S. Paul's rule is to be observed, Do good to
all, but especially to the household of Faith. When the Church in a particular
instance cannot be kind to both, she must first love her own children.

12. Eighthly, But when the question is between pleasing and contenting the
fancies of a Friend, and the gaining of an Enemy, the greater good of the Enemy
is infinitely to be preferred before the satisfying the unnecessary humor of
the Friend; and therefore, that we may gain persons of a different Religion, it
is lawful to entertain them in their innocent customs, that we may represent
our selves charitable and just, apt to comply in what we can, and yet for no
end complying farther than we are permitted. It was a policy of the Devil to
abuse Christians to the Rites of (...) by imitating the Christian Ceremonies;
and the Christians themselves were beforehand with him in that policy; for they
facilitated the reconcilement of Judaism with Christianity by common Rites, and
invited the Gentiles to the Christian Churches, because they never violated the
Heathen Temples, but loved the men, and imitated their innocent Rites, and only
offered to reform their Errors, and hallow their abused purposes: and this, if
it had no other contradictory or unhandsome circumstance, gave no offense to
other Christians, when they had learned to trust them with the government of
Ecclesiastical affairs to whom God had committed them, and they all had the
same purposes of Religion and Charity. And when there is no objection against
this but the furies or greater heats of a mistaken Zeal, the compliance with
evil or unbelieving persons, to gain them from their Errors to the ways of
Truth and sincerity, is great prudence and great Charity; because it chooses and
acts a greater good at no other charge or expense but the discomposing of an
intemperate Zeal.

13. Ninthly, We are not bound to intermit a good or a lawful action as soon as
any man tells us it is scandalous, (for that may be an easy stratagem to give
me laws, and destroy my liberty:) but either when the action is of it self, or
by reason of a public known indisposition of some persons, probably
introductive of a sin; or when we know it is so in fact. The other is but
affrighting a man; this only is prudent, that my Charity be guided by such
rules which determine wise men to actions or omissions respectively. And
therefore a light fame is not strong enough to wrest my liberty from me; but a
reasonable belief or a certain knowledge, in the taking of which estimate we
must neither be too credulous and easy, nor yet ungentle and stubborn, but do
according to the actions of wise men and the charities of a Christian. Hither
we may refer the rules of abstaining from things which are of evil report. For
not every thing which is of good report is to be followed, for then a false
opinion, when it is become popular, must be professed for Conscience sake; nor
yet every thing that is of bad report is to be avoided, for nothing endured
more shame and obloquy than Christianity at its first commencement. But by good
report we are to understand such things which are well reported of by good men
and wise men, or Scripture, or the consent of Nations. And thus for a woman to
marry within the year of mourning is scandalous, because it is of evil report,
gives suspicion of lightness or some worse confederacy before the death of her
husband: the thing it self is apt to minister the suspicion, and this we are
bound to prevent: And unless the suspicion be malicious, or imprudent and
unreasonable, we must conceal our actions from the surprises and deprehensions
of suspicion. It was scandalous amongst the old Romans not to marry; among the
Christians for a Clergyman to marry twice, because it was against an
Apostolical Canon: but when it became of ill report for any Christian to marry
the second time, because this evil report was begun by the errors of Montanus,
and is against a permission of holy Scripture, no Lay-Christian was bound to
abstain from a second bed for fear of giving scandal.

14. Tenthly, The precept of avoiding Scandal concerns the Governors of the
Church or State in the making and execution of Laws. For no Law in things
indifferent ought to be made to the provocation of the Subject, or against that
public disposition which is in the spirits of men, and will certainly cause
perpetual irregularities and Schisms. Before the Law be made, the Superior
must comply with the subject; after it is made, the subject must comply with
the Law. But in this the Church has made fair provision, accounting no Laws
obligatory till the people have accepted them, and given tacit approbation:
for Ecclesiastical Canons have their time of probation, and if they become a
burden to the people, or occasion Schisms, Tumults, public disunion of
affections, and jealousies against Authority, the Laws give place, and either
fix not when they are not first approved, or disappear by desuetude. And in the
execution of Laws no less care is to be taken; for many cases occur in which
the Laws can be rescued from being a snare to men's Consciences by no other way
but by dispensation, and slacking of the Discipline as to certain particulars.
Mercy and Sacrifice, the Letter and the Spirit, the words and the intention,
the general case and the particular exception, the present disposition and the
former state of things, are oftentimes so repugnant, and of such contradictory
interests, that there is no stumbling block more troublesome or dangerous than
a severe literal and rigorous exacting of Laws in all cases. But when
Stubbornness or a Contentious spirit, when Rebellion and Pride, when secular
Interest or ease and Licenciousness set men up against the Laws, the Laws then
are upon the defensive, and ought not to give place: It is ill to cure
particular Disobedience by removing a Constitution decreed by public wisdom
for a general good. When the evil occasioned by the Law is greater than the
good designed, or than the good which will come by it in the present
constitution of things, and the evil can by no other remedy be healed, it
concerns the Law-giver's charity to take off such positive Constitutions which
in the authority are merely humane, and in the matter indifferent, and evil in
the event. The sum of this whole duty I shall choose to represent in the words
of an excellent person, S. Jerome: We must, for the avoiding of Scandal, quit
everything which may be omitted without prejudice to the threefold truth, of
Life, of Justice, and Doctrine: meaning, that what is not expressly commanded by
God or our Superiors, or what is not expressly commended as an act of Piety and
Perfection, or what is not an obligation of Justice, that is, in which the
interest of a third person, or else our own Christian liberty, is not totally
concerned, all that is to be given in sacrifice to Mercy, and to be made matter
of Edification and Charity, but not of Scandal, that is, of danger, and sin,
and falling, to our neighbor.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal Jesus, who art made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
and Redemption, give us of thy abundant Charity, that we may love the eternal
benefit of our (...) Soul with a true, diligent and affectionate care and
tenderness: Give us a fellow-feeling of one another's calamities, a readiness
to bear each others burdens, aptness to forbear, wisdom to advise, counsel to
direct, and a spirit of meekness and modesty trembling at our (...), fearful in
our Brother's dangers, and joyful in his restitution and securities. Lord, let
all our actions be pious and prudent, our selves wise as Serpents and innocent
as Doves, and our whole life exemplar, and just, and charitable; that we may
like Lamps shining in thy Temple serve thee, and enlighten others, and guide
them to thy Sanctuary; and that shining clearly and burning zealously, when the
Bridegroom shall come to bind up his Jewels, and beautify his Spouse, and
gather his Saints together, we and all thy Christian people knit in a holy
fellowship may enter into the joy of our Lord, and partake of the eternal
refreshments of the Kingdom of Light and Glory, where thou, O Holy and Eternal
Jesu, live and reignest in the excellencies of a Kingdom, and the infinite
durations of Eternity.

Amen.
DISCOURSE XVIII. Of the Causes and Manner of the Divine Judgments. Ad Number. 21.
and 27.

1. GOD's Judgments are like the Writing upon the wall, which was a missive of
(...) Solon.
anger from God upon Belshazzar; it came upon an errand of Revenge, and yet was
writ in so dark characters that none could read it but a Prophet. Whenever God
speaks from Heaven, he would have us to understand his meaning; and if he
declares not his sense in particular signification, yet we understand his
meaning well enough, if every voice of God lead us to Repentance. Every sad
accident is directed against sin, either to prevent it, or to cure it; to
glorify God, or to humble us; to make us go forth of our selves and to rest
upon the center of all Felicities, that we may derive help from the same hand
that smote us. Sin and Punishment are so near relatives, that when God has
marked any person with a sadness or unhandsome accident, men think it warrant
enough for their uncharitable censures, and condemn the man whom God has
smitten, making God the executioner of our uncertain or ungentle sentences.
Whether sinned, this man, or his parents, that (...) was born blind? said the
Pharisees to our blessed LORD. Neither this man nor his parents, was the
answer: meaning, that God had other ends in that accident to serve; and it was
not an effect of wrath, but a design of mercy both directly and collaterally.
God's glory must be seen clearly by occasion of the curing the blind man. But
in the present case the answer was something different. Pilate slew the
Galileans when they were sacrificing in their Conventicles apart from the Jews.
For they first had separated from Obedience and paying Tribute to Caesar; and
then from the Church, who disavowed their mutinous and discontented Doctrines.
The cause of the one and the other are linked in mutual complications and
endearment, and he who despises the one will quickly disobey the other.
Presently upon the report of this sad accident the people run to the
Judgment Seat, and every man was ready to be accuser and witness and judge upon
these poor destroyed people. But Jesus allays their heat, and though he would
by no means acquit these persons from deserving death for their denying tribute
to Caesar, yet he alters the face of the tribunal, and makes those persons who
were so apt to be accusers and judges to act another part, even of guilty
persons too, that since they will needs be judging, they might judge
themselves; for, Think not these were greater sinners than all the other
Galileans, because Luke 13. 2.
they suffered such things. I tell you nay, but, except ye repent; ye shall all
likewise perish: meaning, that although there was great probability to believe
such persons, (...) (I mean) and Rebels, to be the greatest sinners of the
world, yet themselves, who had designs to destroy the Son of God, had deserved
as great damnation. And yet it is observable, that the Holy Jesus only compared
the sins of them that suffered with the estate of the other Galileans who
suffered not; and that also applies it to the persons present who told the
news: to consign this Truth unto us, That when persons consederate in the same
crimes are spared from a present Judgment falling upon others of their own
society, it is indeed a strong alarm to all to secure themselves (...). (...).
(...)
by Repentance against the hostilities and eruptions of sin; but yet it is no
exemption or security to them that escape, to believe themselves persons less
sinful: for God sometimes Pius (...) suae gladio, (...) omntbus simul and (...)
censuram, and (...). Salvian.
decimates or tithes delinquent persons, and they die for a common crime,
according as God has cast their lot in the decrees of Predestination; and
either they that remain are sealed up to a worse calamity, or left within the
reserves and mercies of Repentance; for in this there is some variety of
determination and undiscerned Providence.

2. The purpose of our Blessed Savior is of great use to us in all the
traverses and changes, and especially the sad and calamitous accidents, of the
world. But in the misfortune of others we are to make other discourses
concerning Divine Judgments than when the case is of nearer concernment to our
selves. For first, when we see a person come to an (...) An (...) and (...)
dixit (...), Digni (...) trant in (...) ab (...) vita, mundati castigatione
sibi (...) per mortem communem, (...) in (...). Idem ait S. Aug. l. 3. (...).
1. com. (...). and Cassian.
unfortunate and untimely death, we must not conclude such a man perishing and
miserable to all eternity. It was a sad calamity that fell upon the Man of
Judah, that returned to eat bread into the Prophet's house contrary to the word
of the Lord: He was abused into the act by a Prophet, and a pretense of a
command from God; and whether he did violence to his own understanding, and
believed the man because he was willing, or did it in sincerity, or in what
degree of sin or excuse the action might consist, no man there knew: and yet a
Lion slew him, and the lying Prophet that abused him escaped and went to his
grave in peace. Some persons joined in -- (...) qui (...) sacrum Vulgaris
arcanae, sub iisdem Sit trabibus, (...) mecum Solvat phaselum: (...) Di (...),
Neglectus, incesto (...) integrum. Hor. l. 3. ed. 2.
society or interest with criminals have perished in the same Judgments; and
yet it would be hard to call them equally guilty who in the accident were
equally miserable and involved. And they who are not strangers in the affairs
of the world cannot but have heard or seen some persons who have lived well and
moderately, though not like the (...) of the Holocaust, yet like the ashes of
Incense, sending up good perfumes, and keeping a constant and slow fire of
Piety and Justice, yet have been surprised in the midst of some unusual,
unaccustomed irregularity, and died in that sin: A sudden gayety of fortune, a
great joy, a violent change, a friend is come, or a marriage-day has
transported some persons to indiscretions and too bold a license; and the
indiscretion has betrayed them to idle company, and the company to drink, and
drink to a fall, and that has hurried them to their grave. And it were a sad
sentence to think God would not repute the untimely death for a punishment
great enough to that deflexion from duty, and judge the man according to the
constant tenor of his former life; unless such an act was of malice great
enough to outweigh the former habits, and interrupt the whole state of
acceptance and grace. Something like this was the case of (...), who espying
the tottering Ark went to support it with an unhallowed hand; God smote him,
and he died immediately. It were too severe to say his zeal and indiscretion
carried him beyond a temporal death to the ruins of Eternity. Origin and many
others have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven, and did well
after it; but those that did so, and died of the wound, were smitten of God,
and died in their folly: and yet it is rather to be called a sad consequence of
their indiscretion, than the express of a final anger from God Almighty. For as
God takes off our sins and punishments by parts, remitting to some persons the
sentence of death, and inflicting the fine of a temporal loss, or the gentle
scourge of a lesser sickness: so also he lays it on by parts, and according to
the proper proportions of the man and of the crime; and every transgression and
lesser deviation from our duty does not drag the Soul to death eternal, but God
suffers our Repentance, though imperfect, to have an imperfect effect, knocking
off the fetters by degrees, and leading us in some cases to a Council, in some
to Judgment, and in some to Hellfire: but it is not always certain that he who
is led to the prison-doors shall there lie entombed; and a Man may by a
Judgment be brought to the gates of Hell, and yet those gates shall not prevail
against him. This discourse concerns persons whose life is habitually fair and
just, but are surprised in some unhandsome, but less criminal, action, and
(...) or suffer some great Calamity as the instrument of its expiation or
amendment.

3. Secondly, But if the person upon whom the Judgment falls be habitually
vicious, or the crime of a clamorous nature or deeper tincture; if the man sin
a sin unto death, and either meets it, or some other remarkable calamity not so
feared as death; provided we pass no farther than the sentence we see then
executed, it is not against Charity or prudence to say, this calamity in its
own formality, and by the intention of God, is a Punishment and Judgment. In
the favorable cases of honest and just persons our sentence and opinions ought
also to be favorable, and in such questions to incline ever to the side of
charitable construction, and read other ends of God in the accidents of our
neighbor than Revenge or express Wrath. But when the impiety of a person is
scandalous and notorious, when it is clamorous and violent, when it is habitual
and yet corrigible, if we find a sadness and calamity dwelling with such a
sinner, especially if tho punishment be spiritual, we read the sentence of God
written with his own hand, and it is not (...) of opinion, or a pressing into
the secrets of Providence, to say the same thing which God has published to
all the world in the (...) of his Spirit. In such cases we are to observe the
severity of God, on them that fall severity; and to use those Judgments as
instruments of the fear of God, and arguments to hate sin; which we could not
well do, but that we must look on them as verifications of God's threatening
against great and impenitent sinners. But then if we descend to particulars, we
may easily be deceived.

4. For some men are diligent to observe the accidents and chances of
Providence upon those especially who differ from them in Opinion; and whatever
ends God can have, or whatever sins man can have, yet we lay that in fault
which we therefore hate because it is most against our interest; the contrary
Opinion is our enemy, and we also think God hates it. But such fancies do
seldom serve either the ends of Truth or Charity. Pierre Calceon died under the
Barber's hand: there wanted not some who said it was a Judgment upon him for
condemning to the fire the famous Pucelle Peudula dum (...) capilli, Exspirans
Eadit, and gelida (...) D. cubat: (...) sic pendunt crimina (...). Valerand.
of France, who prophesied the expulsion of the English out of the Kingdom.
They that thought this believed her to be a Prophetess; but others, that
thought her a Witch, were willing to (...) out another conjecture for the
sudden death of the Gentleman. Garnier Earl of Gretz kept the Patriarch of
Jerusalem from his right in David's Tower and the City, and died within three
days; and by Dabert the Patriarch it was called a Judgment upon him for his
Sacrilege. But the uncertainty of that censure appeared to them who considered
that Baldwin (who gave commission to Garnier to withstand the Patriarch) did
not die; but Godsrey of (...) did die immediately after he had passed the right
of the Patriarch: and yet when Baldwin was beaten at Rhamula, (...). A. D.
1100. and 2024.
some bold People pronounced that then God punished him upon the Patriarch's
score, and thought his Sacrilege to be the secret cause of his overthrow; and
yet his own Pride and Rashness was the more visible, and the Judgment was but a
cloud, and passed away quickly into a succeeding Victory. But I instance in a
trisle. Certain it is, that God removed the Candlestick from the Levantine
Churches because he had a quarrel unto them; for that punishment is never sent
upon pure designs of emendation, or for direct and immediate purposes of the
Divine glory, but ever makes reflection upon the past sin: but when we descend
to a judgment of the particulars, God walks so in the dark to us, that it is
not discerned upon what ground he smote them. Some say it was because they
dishonored the eternal Jesus, in denying the procession of the Holy Ghost
(...).
from the Son. And in this some thought themselves sufficiently assured by a
sign from Heaven, because the Greeks lost Constantinople upon Whitsunday, the
day of the Festival of the Holy Spirit. The Church of Rome calls the Churches
of the Greek Communion Schismatical, and thinks God righted the Roman quarrel
when he revenged his own. Some think they were cut off for being Breakers of
Images; others think that their zeal against Images was a means they were cut
off no sooner: and yet he that shall observe what innumerable Sects, Heresies
and Factions were commenced amongst them, and how they were wanton with
Religion, making it serve ambitious and unworthy ends, will see that, besides
the ordinary conjectures of interested persons, they had such causes of their
ruin which we also now feel heavily incumbent upon our selves. To see God
adding eighteen years to the life of Hezekiah upon his Prayer, and yet cutting
off the young Son of David begotten in adulterous embraces; to see him
rejecting Adonijah, and receiving Solomon to the Kingdom, begotten of the same
Mother whose Son God in anger formerly slew; to observe his mercies to
Manasses, in accepting him to favor, and continuing the Kingdom to him, and
his severity to Zedekiah, in causing his eyes to be put out; to see him
rewarding Nebuchadnezzar with the spoils of Egypt for destroying Tire, and
executing God's severe anger against it, and yet punishing others for being
executioners of his wrath upon Jerusalem, even then when he purposed to
chastise it; to see (...) raised from a Peasant to a Throne, and Pompey from a
great Prince reduced to that condition, that a Pupil and an Eunuch passed
sentence of death upon him; to see great fortunes fall into the hand of a Fool,
and Honorable old persons and Learned men descend to unequal Beggary; to see
him strike a stroke with his own hand in the Conversion of Saul, and another
quite contrary in the cutting off of Judas, must needs be some restraint to our
judgments concerning the general state of those men who lie under the rod; but
it proclaims an infinite uncertainty in the particulars, since we see contrary
accidents happening to persons guilty of the same crime, or put in the same
indispositions. God has marked all great sins with some signal and express
Judgments, and has transmitted the records of them, or represented them before
our eyes; that is, has done so in our Age, or it has been noted to have been
done before: and that being sufficient to affright us from those crimes, God
has not thought it expedient to do the same things to all persons in the same
cases, having to all persons produced instances and examples of fear by fewer
accidents, sufficient to restrain us, but not enough to pass sentence upon the
changes of Divine Providence.

5. But sometimes God speaks plainer, and gives us notice what crimes he
punishes in others, that we may the rather decline such rocks of offense. If
the Crime and the Punishment be symbolical, and have proportion and
correspondence of parts, the hand of God strikes the Man, but holds up one
finger to point at the Sin. The death of the child of Bathsheba was a plain
declaration that the anger of God was upon David for the Adulterous mixture.
That Blasphemer whose Tongue was presently struck with an ulcerous tumor, with
his tongue declared the glories of God and his own shame. And it was not
doubted but God, when he smote the Lady of Dominicus Silvius, the Duke of
Venice, with a loathsome and unsavory disease, did intend to chastise a
remarkable vanity of hers in various and costly Perfumes, which she affected in
an unreasonable manner, and to very evil purposes. And that famous person, and
of excellent Fulgos. lib. 9. c. 12.
learning, Giacchettus of Geneva, being by his Wife found dead in the unlawful
embraces of a stranger woman, who also died at the same instant, left an
excellent example of God's anger upon the crime, and an evidence that he was
then judged for his intemperate Lust. Such are all those punishments which are
natural consequents to a Crime: as Dropsies, Redness of eyes, Dissolution of
nerves, Apoplexies, Pana tamen praesens, cum (...) deponis (...), and crudum
pavonem in balnea portas. (...) subitae mortes atque (...). Juven. Sat. 1.
to continual Drunkenness; to intemperate Eating, Short lives and Sudden
deaths; to Lust, a Caitive slavish disposition, and a Foul diseased body; Fire
and Sword, and Depopulation (...) nimis (...) habui, (...) vapulo (...). Sic
luiur juvenis culp (...) dolor senis.
of Towns and Villages, the consequents of Ambition and unjust Wars; Poverty to
Prodigality; and all those Judgments which happen upon Cursings and horrid
Imprecations, when God is under a Curse called to attest a Lie, and to connive
at impudence; or when the Oppressed persons in the bitterness of their souls
wish evil and pray for vengeance on their Oppressors; or that the Church upon
just cause inflicts Spiritual censures, and delivers unto Satan, or curses and
declares the Divine sentence against sinners, as S. Peter against Ananias and
Sapphira, and S. Paul against Elymas, and of old Moses against Pharaoh and his
Egypt, (of this nature also was the plague of a withered hand inflicted upon
(...), for stretching forth his hand to strike the Prophet.) In these and all
such instances the offspring is so like the parent, that it cannot easily be
concealed. Sometime the crime is of that nature, that it cries aloud for
vengeance, or is threatened with a special kind of punishment, which by the
observation and experience of the World has regularly happened to a certain
sort of persons: such as are dissolutions of Estates, the punishment of
Sacrilege; a descending curse upon posterity for four generations, specially
threatened to the crime of Idolatry; any plague whatsoever to Oppression;
untimely death to Murder; an unthriving estate to the detention of Tithes, or
whatsoever is God's portion allotted for the services of Religion: untimely and
strange deaths to the Persecutors of Christian Religion: Nero killed himself;
Domitian was killed by his servants; Maximinus and Decius were murdered,
together with their children; Valerianus imprisoned, flayed and slain with
tortures by Sapor King of Persia; Diocletian perished by his own hand, and his
House was burnt with the fate of Sodom and Gomorrah, with fire from above;
Antiochus the President under Aurelian, while Agapetus was in his agony and
sufferance of Martyrdom, cried out of a flame within him, and died; Flaccus
vomited out his entrails presently after he had caused Gregory Bishop of
Spoleto to be slain; and Dioscorus, the father of S. Barbara, accused and
betrayed his Daughter to the Hangman's cruelty for being a Christian, and he
died by the hand of God by fire from Heaven. These are God's tokens, marks upon
the body of insected persons, and declare the malignity of the disease, and bid
us all beware of those determined crimes.

6. Thirdly, But then in these and all other accidents we must first observe
from the cause to the effect, and then judge from the effect concerning the
nature and the degree of the cause. We cannot conclude, This family is
lessened, beggered, or extinct, therefore they are guilty of Sacrilege: but
thus, They are Sacrilegious, and God has blotted out their name from among the
posterities, therefore this Judgment was an express of God's anger against
Sacrilege: the Judgment will not conclude a Sin, but when a Sin infers the
Judgment with a legible character and a prompt signification, not to understand
God's choice is next to stupidity or carelessness. Arius was known to be a
seditious, heretical and dissembling person, and his entrails descended on --
Ruit Arius alvo (...) cadens, (...) peremptu; Cum Juda (...), qui (...)
curvatus obit: nec poena sequestrat Quos par culpa ligat, qui (...) ab ore
parant. Hic prodidit, ille diremis Sacrilega de (...). -- (...). Christ. apud
Baron. T. 3. ad ann. Christ. 336.
the earth when he went to cover his feet: it was very suspicious that this was
the punishment of those sins which were the worst in him: But he that shall
conclude Arius was an Heretic or Seditious, upon no other ground but because
his bowels gushed out, begins imprudently, and proceeds uncharitably. But it is
considerable, that men do not arise to great crimes on the sudden, but by
degrees of carelessness to lesser impieties, and then to clamorous sins: And God
is therefore said to punish great crimes or actions of highest malignity,
because they are commonly productions from the spirit of Reprobation, they are
the highest ascents, and suppose a Body of sin. And therefore although the
Judgment may be intended to punish all our sins, yet it is like the Syrian
Army, it kills all that are its enemies, but it has a special commission to
fight against none but the King of Israel, because his death would be the
dissolution of the Body. And if God humbles a man for his great sin, that is,
for those acts which combine and consummate all the rest, possibly the Body of
sin may separate, and be apt to be scattered and subdued by single acts and
instruments of mortification: and therefore it is but reasonable, in our making
use of God's Judgments upon others, to think that God will rather strike at the
greatest crimes; not only because they are in themselves of greatest malice and
iniquity, but because they are the sum total of the rest, and by being great
progressions in the state of sin suppose all the rest included; and we, by
proportioning and observing the Judgment to the highest, acknowledge the whole
body of sin to lie under the curse, though the greatest only was named, and
called upon with the voice of thunder. And yet because it sometimes happens,
that upon the violence of a great and new occasion some persons leap into such
a sin which in the ordinary course of sinners uses to be the effect of an
habitual and growing state, then if a Judgment happens, it is clearly
appropriate to that one great crime, which as of it self it is equivalent to a
vicious habit, and interrupts the acceptance of all its former contraries, so
it meets with a curse, such as usually God chooses for the punishment of a whole
body and state of sin. However, in making observation upon the expresses of
God's anger, we must be careful that we reflect not with any bitterness or
scorn upon the person of our calamitous Brother, left we make that to be an
evil to him which God intends for his benefit, if the Judgment was medicinal;
or that we increase the load, already great enough to sink him beneath his
grave, if the Judgment was intended for a final abscission.

7. Fourthly, But if the Judgments descend upon our selves, we are to take
another course; not to enquire into particulars to find out the proportions,
(for that can only be a design to part with just so much as we must needs) but
to mend all that is amiss; for then only we can be secure to remove the Achan,
when we keep nothing within us or about us that may provoke God to jealousy or
wrath. And that is the proper product of holy fear, which God intended should
be the first effect of all his Judgments: and of this God is so careful, and
yet so kind and provident, that fear might not be produced always at the
expense of a great suffering, that God has provided for us certain prologues
of Judgment, and keeps us waking with alarms, that so he might reconcile his
mercies with our duties. Of this nature are Epidemical diseases, not yet
arrived at us, prodigious Tempests, Thunder and loud noises from Heaven; and he
that will not fear when God speaks so loud, is not yet made soft with the
impresses and perpetual droppings of Religion. Venerable Bede reports of S.
Chad, that if a great gust (...). Gent. Anglor. l. 3. c. 18.
of Wind suddenly arose, he presently made some holy ejaculation to beg favor
of God for all mankind, who might possibly be concerned in the effects of that
Wind; but if a Storm succeeded, he fell prostrate to the earth, and grew as
violent in Prayer as the Storm was (...) at Land or Sea. But if God added
Thunder and Lightning, he went to the Church, and there spent all his time
during the Tempest in reciting Litanies, Psalms, and other holy Prayers, till
it pleased God to restore his favor, and to seem to forget his anger. And the
good Bishop added this reason; Because these are the extensions and stretchings
forth of God's hand, and yet he did not strike: but he that trembles not when
he sees God's arm held forth to strike us, understands neither God's mercies
nor his own danger; he neither knows what those horrors were which the People
saw from mount Sinai, nor what the glories and amazements shall be at the great
day of Judgment. And if this Religious man had seen Tullus Hostilius, the Roman
King, and Anastasius, a Christian Emperor, but a reputed Heretic, struck dead
with Thunderbolts, and their own houses made their urns to keep their ashes in;
there could have been no posture humble enough, no Prayers devout enough, no
place holy enough, nothing sufficiently expressive of his fear, and his
humility, and his adoration, and Religion to the almighty and infinite power
and glorious mercy of God, sending out his Emissaries to denounce war with
designs of peace. A great Italian General, seeing the sudden death of Alfonsus
Duke of Ferrara, kneeled down instantly, saying, And shall not this sight make
me religious? Three and twenty thousand fell in one night in the Assyrian Camp,
who were all slain for Fornication. And this so prodigious a Judgment was
recorded in Scripture for our example and affrightment, that we should not with
such freedom entertain a crime which destroyed so numerous a body of men in the
darkness of one evening. Fear, and Modesty, and universal Reformation, are the
purposes of God's Judgments upon us, or in our neighborhood.

8. Fifthly, Concerning Judgments happening to a Nation or a Church, the
consideration is particular, because there are fewer capacities of making sins
to become national than personal; and therefore if we understand when a sin is
National, we may the rather understand the meaning of God's hand when he
strikes a People. For National sins grow higher and higher not merely according
to the degree of the sin, or the intension alone, but according to the
extension; (...) to its being (...), so it is productive of more or less
mischief to a Kingdom. Customary iniquities amongst the People do then amount
to the account of National sins, when they are of so universal practice as to
take in well-near every particular; such as was (...) inquinavere, and genus,
and (...) In (...) fluxit. Hor. l. 3. od. 6.
that of Sodom, not to leave ten righteous in all the Country: and such were
the sins of the Old world, who left but eight persons to escape the angry
baptism of the Flood. And such was the murmur of the children of Israel,
refusing to march up to Canaan at the commandment of God, they all murmured but
Caleb and (...); and this God in the case of the Amalekites calls the
fulfilling of their sins, and a filling up the measure of their iniquities. And
hither also I reckon the defection of the Ten Tribes from the House of Judah,
and the Samaritan Schism; these caused the total extirpation of the offending
People. For although these sins were personal and private at first, yet when
they come to be universal by diffusion and dissemination, and the good People
remaining among them are but like drops of Wine in a Tun of Water, of no
consideration with God, save only to the preservation of their own persons;
Ezekiel. 14. 20.
then, although the persons be private, yet all private or singular persons
make the Nation. But this has happened but seldom in Christianity: I think
indeed never, except in the case of Mutinies and Rebellion against their lawful
Prince, or the attesting violence done in unjust Wars. But God only knows, and
no man can say, that any sin is national by diffusion; and therefore in this
case we cannot make any certain judgment or advantage to our selves, or very
rarely, by observing the changes of Providence upon a People.

9. But the next above this in order to the procuring popular Judgments is
public impunities, the not doing Justice upon Criminals publicly complained
of and demanded, especially when the persons interested call for Justice and
execution of good Laws, and the Prince's arm is at liberty and in full
strength, and there is no contrary reason in the particular instance to make
compensation to the public for the omission, or no care taken to satisfy the
particular. Abimelech thought he had reason to be angry with Isaac for saying
(...) was his Sister; for one of the people might have ly'ne with thy wife, and
thou should have brought (...) upon us: meaning, that the man should have
escaped unpunished by reason of the mistake, which very impunity he feared
might be expounded to be a countenance and encouragement to the sin. But this
was no more than his fear. The case of the Benjamites comes home to this
present article; for they refused to do justice upon the men that had ravished
and killed the Levite's Concubine; they lost twenty five thousand in battle,
their Cities were destroyed, and the whole Tribe almost extinguished. For
punishing public and great acts of injustice is called in Scripture Deuteronomy. 17.
12. 19. 13. 19 21. 9, 21. and (...).
putting away the evil from the land; because to this purpose the sword is put
into the Prince's hand, and he bears the sword in vain who ceases to protect
his People: and not to punish the evil is a voluntary retention of it, unless a
special case intervene, in which the Prince thinks it convenient to give a
particular pardon; provided this be not encouragement to others, nor without
great reason, big enough to make compensation for the particular omission, and
with care to render some other satisfaction to the person injured: in all other
cases of impunity, that sin becomes National by forbearing, which in the acting
was personal; and it is certain the impunity is a spring of universal evils, it
is no thank to the public if the best man be not as bad as the worst.

10. But there is a step beyond this, and of a more public concernment: such
are the Laws of Omri, when a Nation consents to and makes ungodly Statutes;
when mischief is established as a Law, then the Nation is engaged to some
purpose. When I see the People despise their Governors, scorn and rob and
disadvantage the Ministers of Religion, make rude addresses to God, to his
Temple, to his Sacraments; I look upon it as the insolency of an untaught
People, who would as readily do the contrary, if the fear of God and the King
were upon them by good Examples, and Precepts, and Laws, and severe executions.
And farther yet, when the more public and exemplar persons are without sense
of Religion, without a dread of Majesty, without reverence to the Church,
without impresses of Conscience and the tendernesses of a religious fear
toward God; as the persons are greater in estimation of Law and in their
influences upon the People, so the score of the Nation advances, and there is
more to be paid for in popular Judgments. But when Iniquity or Irreligion --
(...) Judex,
is made a Sanction, and either God must be dishonored, or Et (...) In (...):
ex quo (...) D os (...) pacta (...) -- Hor. l. 3. od. 3.
the Church exauthorated, or her Rites invaded by a Law; then the fortune of
the Kingdom is at stake. No sin engages a Nation so much, or is so public, so
solemn iniquity, as is a wicked Law. Therefore it concerns Princes and States
to secure the Piety and innocence of their Laws: and if there be any evil Laws,
which upon just grounds may be thought productive of God's anger, because a
public misdemeanour cannot be expiated but by a public act of Repentance, or
a public Calamity, the Laws must either have their edge abated by a desuetude,
or be laid asleep by a non-execution, or dismembered by contrary proviso's, or
have the sting drawn forth by interpretation, or else by abrogation be quite
rescinded. But these are National sins within it self, or within its own Body,
by the act of the Body (I mean) diffusive or representative, and they are like
the personal sins of men in or against their own bodies in the matter of
Sobriety. There are others in the matter of Justice, as the Nation relates to
other People communicating in public Intercourse.

11. For as the Intercourse between man and man in the actions of commutative
and distributive Justice is the proper matter of Virtues and Vices personal; so
are the Transactions between Nation and Nation against the public rules of
Justice Sins National directly, and in their first original, and answer to
Injustice between man and man. Such are commencing War upon unjust titles,
Invasion of neighbors territories, Consederacies and aids upon tyrannical
interest, Wars against true Religion or Sovereignty, Violation of the Laws of
nations, which they have consented to as the public instrument of accord and
negotiation, Breach of public faith, desending Pirates, and the like. When a
public Judgment comes upon a Nation, these things are to be thought upon, that
we may not think our selves acquitted by crying out against Swearing and
Drunkenness and Cheating in manufactures, which, unless they be of universal
dissemination, and made national by diffusion, are paid for upon a personal
score; and the private infelicities of our lives will either expiate or punish
them severely. But while the People mourns for those sins of which their low
condition is capable, sins that may produce a popular Fever, or perhaps the
Plague, where the misery dwells in Cottages, and the Princes often have
indemnity, as it was in the case of David: yet we may not hope to appease a
War, to master a Rebellion, to cure the public Distemperatures of a Kingdom,
which threaten not the People only, or the Governors also, but even the
Government it self, unless the sins of a more public capacity be cut off by
public declarations, or other acts of national Justice and Religion. But the
duty which concerns us all in such cases is, that every man in every capacity
should enquire into himself, and for his own portion of the Calamity, put in
his own symbol of Emendation for his particular, and his Prayers for the
public interest: in which it is not safe that any private persons should
descend to particular censures of the crimes of Princes and States, no not
toward God, unless the matter be notorious and past a question; but it is a
sufficient assoilment of this part of his duty, if, when he has set his own
house in order, he would pray with indefinite significations of his charity and
care of the public, that God would put it into the hearts of all whom it
concerns, to endeavor the removal of the sin that has brought the
exterminating Angel upon the Nation. But yet there are sometimes great lines
drawn by God in the expresses of his anger in some Judgments upon a Nation; and
when the Judgment is of that danger as to invade the very Constitution of a
Kingdom, the proportions that Judgments many times keep to their sins intimate
that there is some National sin, in which either by diffusion, or
representation, or in the direct matter of sins, as false Oaths, unjust Wars,
wicked Confederacies, or ungodly Laws, the Nation in the public capacity is
delinquent.

12. For as the Nation has in Sins a capacity distinct from the sins of all
the People, inasmuch as the Nation is united in one Head, guarded by a distinct
and a higher Angel, as Persia by Saint Michael, transacts affairs in a public
right, transmits insluence to all particulars from a common fountain, and has
intercourse with other collective Bodies, who also distinguish from their own
particulars: so likewise it has Punishments distinct from those infelicities
which vex particulars, Punishments proportionable to it self and to its own
Sins; such as are Change of Governments, of better into worse, of Monarchy into
Aristocracy, and so to the lowest ebb of Democracy; Death of Princes, Infant
Kings, Foreign Invasions, Civil Wars, a disputable Title to the Crown, making a
Nation tributary, Conquest by a Foreiner, and, which is worst of all, removing
the Candlestick from a People by extinction of the Church, or that which is
necessary to its conservation, the several Orders and Ministeries of Religion:
and the last has also proper sins of its own analogy; such as are false
Articles in the public Confessions of a Church, Schism from the Catholic,
public Scandals, a general (...), but (...). Hor. l. 3. (...). 6.
Viciousness of the Clergy, an Indifferency in Religion, without warmth and
holy fires of Zeal, and diligent pursuance of all its just and holy interests.
Now in these and all parallel cases, when God by Punishments has probably
marked and distinguished the Crime, it concerns public persons to be the more
forward and importunate in consideration of public Irregularities: and for the
private also not to neglect their own particulars; for by that means, although
not certainly, yet probably, they may secure themselves from falling in the
public calamity. It is not infallibly sure that holy persons shall not be
smitten by the destroying Angel; for God in such deaths has many ends of
mercy, and some of Providence, to serve: but such private and personal
emendations and Devotions are the greatest securities of the men against the
Judgment, or the evil of it, preserving them in this life, or wasting them over
to a better. Thus many of the Lord's champions did fall in battle, and the
armies of the (...) did twice prevail upon the juster People of all Israel; and
the Greek Empire has declined and shrunk under the fortune and power of the
Ottoman Family; and the Holy Land, which was twice possessed by Christian
Princes, is now in the dominion of unchristened Saracens; and in the production
of these alterations many a gallant and pious person suffered the evils of war,
and the change of an untimely death.

13. But the way for the whole Nation to proceed in cases of epidemical
Diseases, Wars, great Judgments, and popular Calamities, is to do in the
public proportion the same that every man is to do for his private; by public
acts of Justice, Repentance, Fastings, pious Laws, and execution of just and
religious Edicts, making peace, quitting of unjust interests, declaring
publicly against a Crime, protesting in behalf of the contrary Virtue or
Religion: and to this also every man, as he is a member of the body politic,
must cooperate; that by a Repentance in diffusion help may come, as well as by
a Sin of universal dissemination the Plague was hastened and invited the
rather. But in these cases all the work of discerning and pronouncing
concerning the cause of the Judgment, as it must be without asperity, and only
for designs of correction and emendation, so it must be done by Kings and
Prophets, and the assistence of other public persons, to whom the public is
committed. Josua cast lots upon Achan, and discovered the public trouble in a
private instance; and of old the Prophets had it in commission to reprove the
popular iniquity of Nations, and the consederate sins of Kingdoms; and in this
Christianity altered nothing. And when this is done modestly, prudently, humbly
and penitently, oftentimes the tables turn immediately, but always in due time;
and a great Alteration in a Kingdom becomes the greatest Blessing in the
world, and fastens the Church, or the Crown, or the public Peace, in bands of
great continuance and security; and it may be the next Age shall feel the
benefits of our Sufferance and Repentance. And therefore, as we must endeavor
to secure it, so we must not be too decretory in the case of others, or
disconsolate or diffident in our own, when it may so happen, that all
succeeding generations shall see that God pardoned us and loved us even when he
smote us. Let us all learn to fear and walk humbly. The Churches of Laodicea
and the Colossians suffered a great calamity within a little while after the
Spirit of God had sent them two Epistles by the ministry of S. Paul; their
Cities were buried in an Earthquake: and yet we have reason to think they were
Churches beloved of God, and Congregations of holy People.

The PRAYER.
OEternal and powerful God, thou just and righteous Governor of the world, who
call all orders of men by Precepts, Promises and Threatenings, by Mercies and
by Judgments, teach us to admire and adore all the Wisdom, the effects and
infinite varieties of thy Providence; and make us to dispose our selves so by
Obedience, by Repentance, by all the manners of Holy living, that we may never
provoke thee to jealousy, much less to wrath and indignation against us. Keep
far from us the Sword of the destroying Angel, and let us never perish in the
public expresses of thy wrath, in diseases Epidemical, with the furies of War,
with calamitous, sudden and horrid Accidents, with unusual Diseases; unless
that our so strange fall be more for thy glory and our eternal benefit, and
then thy will be done: We beg thy grace, that we may cheerfully conform to thy
holy will and pleasure. Lord, open our understandings, that we may know the
meaning of thy voice, and the signification of thy language, when thou speak
(...) Heaven in signs and Judgments; and let a holy fear so soften our spirits,
and an intense love so (...) and sanctify our desires, that we may apprehend
every intimation of thy pleasure at its first and remotest and most obscure
representment, that so we may with Repentance go out to meet thee, and prevent
the expresses of thine anger. Let thy restraining grace and the observation of
the issues of thy Justice so allay our spirits, that we be not severe and
forward in condemning others, nor backward in passing sentence upon our selves.
Make us to obey thy voice described in holy Scripture, to tremble at thy voice
expressed in wonders and great effects of Providence, to condemn none but our
selves, nor to enter into the recesses of thy Sanctuary, and search the
forbidden records of Predestination; but that we may read our duty in the pages
of Revelation, not in the labels of accidental effects; that thy Judgments may
confirm thy Word, and thy Word teach us our Duty, and we by such excellent
instruments may enter in and grow up in the ways of Godliness, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
SECT. XV. Of the Accidents happening from the Death of Lazarus, until the
Death and Burial of JESUS.
Bartimeus healed of blindness.
Mark. 10. 46. And as he went out of Jericho with his Disciples, and a great
number of people, blind Bartimeus sat by the high way begging.

47. And when he heard, that it was Jesus of Nazareth he began to cry out, and
say, Jesus thou son of David have mercy on me.

Lazarus raised from death.
Ioh. 11. 44. And he that was dead came forth bound hand and foot with
gravecloths, and his face was bound about with a napkin, Jesus says unto them,
Loose him and let him go.

45. Then Many of the Jews, which came to Mary, and had seen the things, which
Jesus did believed on him.




1. While Jesus was in Galilee, messengers came to him from Martha and her
Sister Mary, that he would hasten into Judaea to Bethany, to relieve the
sickness and imminent dangers of their Brother Lazarus. But he deferred his
going till Lazarus was dead; purposing to give a great probation of his
Divinity, Power, and Mission, by a glorious Miracle; and to give God glory, and
to receive reflections of the glory upon himself. For after he had stayed two
days, he called his Disciples to go with him into Judaea, telling them, that
Lazarus was dead, but he would raise him out of that sleep of death. But by
that time Jesus was arrived at Bethany, he found that Lazarus had been dead
four days, and now near to putrefaction. But when Martha and Mary met him,
weeping their pious tears for their dead Brother, Jesus suffered the passions
of piety and humanity, and wept, distilling that precious liquor into the grave
of Lazarus, watering the dead plant, that it might spring into a new life, and
raise his head above the ground.

2. When Jesus had by his words of comfort and institution strengthened the
Faith of the two mourning Sisters, and commanded the stone to be removed from
the grave, he made an address of Adoration and Eucharist to his Father,
confessing his perpetual propensity to hear him, and then cried out, Lazarus,
come forth. And he that was dead came forth from his bed of darkness with his
night-cloaths on him, whom when the Apostles had unloosed at the command of
Jesus, he went to Bethany: and many that were present believed on him; but
others wondering and malicious went and told the Pharisees the story of the
Miracle, who upon that advice called their great Council, whose great and
solemn cognizance was of the greater causes of Prophets, of Kings, and of the
holy Law. At this great Assembly it was that Caiaphas, the High Priest,
prophesied, that it was expedient one should die for the people. And thence
they determined the death of Jesus. But he, knowing they had passed a decretory
sentence against him, retired to the City (...) in the Tribe of Judah near the
desert, where he stayed a few days, till the approximation of the Feast of
Easter.

3. Against which Feast when Jesus with his Disciples was going to Jerusalem,
he told them the event of the journey would be, that the Jews should deliver
him to the Gentiles, that they should scourge him, and mock him, and crucify
him, and the third day he should rise again. After which discourse the Mother
of (...)'s Children begged of Jesus for her two Sons, that one of them might
sit at his right hand, the other at the left, in his Kingdom. For no discourses
of his Passion or intimations of the mysteriousness of his Kingdom could yet
put them into right understandings of their condition. But Jesus, whose heart
and thoughts were full of fancy and apprehensions of the neighbor Passion,
gave them answer in proportion to his present conceptions and their future
condition. For if they desired the honors of his Kingdom, such as they were,
they should have them, unless themselves did decline them; they should drink of
his Cup, and dip in his Lavatory, and be washed with his baptism, and sit in
his Kingdom, if the heavenly Father had prepared it for them; but the donation
of that immediately was an issue of Divine election and predestination, and was
only competent to them who by holy living and patient suffering put themselves
into a disposition of becoming vessels of Election.

4. But as Jesus in this journey came near Jericho, he cures a blind man, who
sat begging by the way-side: and espying Zaccheus, the chief of the Publicans,
upon a tree, (that he being low of stature might upon that advantage of station
see Jesus passing by) he invited himself to his house; who received him with
gladness, and repentance of his crimes, purging his Conscience, and filling his
heart and house with joy and sanctity; for, immediately upon the arrival of the
Master at his house, he offered restitution to all persons whom he had injured,
and satisfaction, and half of his remanent estate he gave to the poor, and so
gave the fairest entertainment to Jesus, who brought along with him Salvation
to his house. There it was that he spoke the Parable of the King who
concredited diverse talents to his servants, and having at his return exacted an
account, rewarded them who had improved their bank, and been faithful in their
trust, with rewards proportionable to their capacity and improvement; but the
negligent servant, who had not meliorated his stock, was punished with
ablegation and (...) to outer darkness. And from hence sprang up that
dogmatical proposition, which is mysterious and (...) in Christianity, To him
that has shall be given; and from him that has not shall be taken away even
what he has. After this, going forth of Jericho, he cured two blind men upon
the way.

5. Six days before Easter Jesus came to Bethany, where he was feasted by
Martha and Mary, and accompanied by Lazarus, who sat at the table with Jesus.
But Mary brought a pound of Nard (...), id est, (...), corrupt, (...) ex
Latinis (...) solent (...). Vide
Pistick, and, as formerly she had done, again anoints the feet of Jesus, and
fills the house with the odor, till God himself smelt thence a savor of a
sweetsmelling sacrifice. But Judas Iscariot, the Thief and the Traitor, repined
at the vanity of the expense, (as he pretended) because it might have been sold
for three hundred pence, and have been given to the poor. But Jesus in his
reply taught us, that there is an Erasm. in 14. Marci.
opportunity for actions of Religion as well as of Charity. Mary did this
against the Burial of Jesus, and her Religion was accepted by him, to whose
honors the holocaust of love and the oblations of alms-deeds are in their
proper seasons direct actions of worship and duty. But at this meeting there
came many Jews to see Lazarus, who was raised from death, as well as to see
Jesus: and because by occasion of his Resurrection many of them believed on
Jesus, therefore the Pharisees deliberated about putting him to death. But God
in his glorious providence was pleased to preserve him as a trumpet of his
glories, (...). (...).
and a testimony of the Miracle, thirty years after the death of Jesus.

6. The next day, being the fifth day before the Passover, Jesus came to the
foot of the mount of Olives, and sent his Disciples to Bethphage, a village in
the neighborhood, commanding them to unloose an ass and a colt, and bring
them to him, and to tell the owners it was done for the Master's use; and they
did so: and when they brought the Ass to Jesus, he rides on him to Jerusalem;
and the People, having notice of his approach, took (...) Pindar. vccat (...)
ramos, Olymp. (...) and coronarum (...).
branches of Palm Trees, and went out to meet him, strewing branches and
garments in the way, crying out, Hosanna to the son of David: Which was a form
of exclamation used to the honor of God, and in great Solemnities, and (...)
de (...). H. b. N. T. c. 19. (...). (...) N. T.
signifies [Adoration to the Son of David by the rite of carrying branches;]
which when they used in procession about their Altars they used to pray, Lord,
save us, Lord, prosper us, which has occasioned the reddition of Hoschiannah
to be, amongst some, that Prayer which they repeated at the carrying of the
Hoschiannah, as if it self did signify, Lord, save us. But this honor was so
great and unusual to be done even to Kings, that the Pharisees, knowing this to
be an appropriate manner of address to God, said one to another by way of
wonder, Hear ye what these men say? For they were troubled to hear the People
revere him as a God.

7. When Jesus from the mount of Olives beheld Jerusalem, he wept over it, and
foretold great sadnesses and infelicities futurely contingent to it; which not
only happened in the sequel of the story according to the main issues and
significations of this Prophecy, but even to minutes and circumstances it was
verified. For in the mount of Olives, where Jesus shed tears over perishing
Jerusalem, the Romans first pitched their Tents Joseph. de (...) Jud. 1. 6. c.
3.
when they came to its final overthrow. From thence descending to the City he
went into the Temple, and still the acclamations followed him, till the
Pharisees were ready to burst with the noises abroad, and the tumults of envy
and scorn within, and by observing that all their endeavors to suppress his
glories were but like clapping their hands to veil the Sun, and that, in
despite of all their stratagems, the whole Nation was become Disciple to the
glorious Nazarene. And there (...) cured certain persons that were blind and
lame.

8. But whilst he abode at Jerusalem, certain Greeks, who came to the Feast to
worship, made their address to Philip, that they might be brought to Jesus.
Philip tells Andrew, and they both tell Jesus; who, having admitted them,
discoursed many things concerning his Passion, and then prayed a petition,
which is the end of his own Sufferings, and of all humane actions, and the
purpose of the whole Creation, Father, glorify thy Name. To which he was
answered by a voice from Heaven, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it
again. But this, nor the whole series of Miracles that he did, the Mercies, the
Cures, nor the divine Discourses, could gain the Faith of all the Jews, who
were determined by their humane interest; for many of the Rulers who believed
on him durst not confess him, because they loved the praise of men more than
the praise of God. Then Jesus again exhorted all men to believe on him, that so
they might in the same act believe on God; that they might approach unto the
light, and not abide in darkness; that they might obey the commandments of the
Father, whose express charge it was, that Jesus should preach this Gospel; and
that they might not be judged at the last Day by the Word which they have
rejected, which Word to all its observers is everlasting life. After which
Sermon retiring to Bethany, he abode there all Night.

9. On the morrow returning to Jerusalem, on the way being hungry he passed by
a Fig Tree, where expecting fruit he found none, and cursed the Fig Tree, which
by the next day was dried up and withered. Upon occasion of which preternatural
event Jesus discoursed of the power of Faith, and its power to produce
Miracles. But upon this occasion others, the Disciples of Jesus in after-Ages,
have pleased themselves with phancies and imperfect descants, as that he cursed
this Tree in mystery and secret intendment, (...). ad (...). l. 1. (...). 51.
it having been the tree in the eating whose fruit Adam, prevaricating the
Divine Law, made an inlet to sin, which brought in death, and the sadnesses of
Jesus's Passion. But Jesus having entered the City came into the Temple, and
preached the Gospel; and the chief Priests and Scribes questioned his
commission, and by what authority he did those things. But Jesus promising to
answer them, if they would declare their opinions concerning John's Baptism,
which they durst not for fear of displeasing the people, or throwing dirt in
their own faces, was acquitted of his obligation, by their declining the
proposition.

10. But there he reproved the Pharisees and Rulers by the Parable of two Sons;
the first whereof said to his Father, he would not obey, but repented, and did
his command; the second gave good words, but did nothing: meaning, that persons
of the greatest improbability were more heartily converted than they whose
outside seemed to have appropriated Religion to the labels of their frontlets.
He added a Parable of the Vineyard let out to Husbandmen, who killed the
servants sent to demand the fruits, and at last the Son himself, that they
might invade the inheritance: but made a sad commination to all such who should
either stumble at this stone, or on whom this stone should fall. After which,
and some other reprehensions, which he so veiled in Parable that it might not
be expounded to be calumny or declamation, although such sharp Sermons had been
spoken in the People's hearing, but yet so transparently, that themselves might
see their own iniquity in those modest and just representments, the Pharisees
would fain have seized him, but they durst not for the People, but resolved, if
they could, to entangle him in his talk; and therefore sent out spies, who
should pretend sanctity and veneration of his person, who with a goodly (...)
preface, that Jesus regarded no man's person, but spoke the word of God with
much simplicity and justice, desired to know if it were lawful to pay tribute
to (...), or not. A question which was of great dispute, because of the
numerous Sect of the (...), who denied it, and of the affections of the People,
who loved their Money, and their Liberty, and the Privileges of their Nation.
And now in all probability he shall fall under the displeasure of the People,
or of Caesar. But Jesus called to see a penny; and (...) it to be superscribed
with Caesar's image, with incomparable wisdom he brake their snare, and
established an Evangelical proposition for ever, saying, Give to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.

11. Having so excellently and so much to their wonder answered the Pharisees,
the Sadduces bring their great objection to him against the Resurrection, by
putting case of a Woman married to seven Husbands, and whose Wife should she be
in the Resurrection? thinking that to be an impossible state, which ingages
upon such seeming incongruities, that a woman should at once be wife to seven
men. But Jesus first answered their objection, telling them, that all those
relations whose (...) is in the imperfections and passions of (...) and blood,
and duties here below, shall cease in that state, which is so spiritual, that
it is like to the condition of Angels, amongst whom there is no difference of
sex, no cognations, no genealogies or derivation from one another; and then by
a new argument proves the Resurrection, by one of God's appellatives, who did
then delight to be called the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for since God
is not the God of the dead, but of the living, unto him even these men are
alive; and if so, then either they now exercise acts of life, and therefore
shall be restored to their bodies, that their actions may be complete, and they
not remain in a state of imperfection to all eternity; or if they be alive, and
yet cease from operation, they shall be much rather raised up to a condition
which shall actuate and make perfect their present capacities and dispositions,
lest a power and inclination should for ever be in the root, and never rise up
to fruit or herbage, and so be an eternal vanity, like an old bud, or an
eternal child.

12. After this, the Pharisees being well pleased, not that Jesus spoke so
excellently, but that the Sadduces were (...), came to him, asking, which was
the great Commandment, and some other things, more out of curiosity than pious
desires of satisfaction. But at last Jesus was pleased to ask them concerning
CHRIST, whose son he was. They answered, The Son of David: but he replying, How
then does David call him Lord? [ The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my
right hand, etc.] they had nothing to answer. But Jesus then gave his Disciples
caution against the Pride, the Hypocrisy, and the Oppression of the Scribes
and Pharisees; and commended the poor widow's oblation of her two mites into
the treasury, it being a great love in a little print, for it was all her
living. All this was spoken in the Temple, the goodly stones of which when the
Apostles beheld with wonder, they being white and firm, twenty cubits in
length, twelve in breadth, eight in depth, as Josephus reports, Jesus
prophesies the destruction Lib. 14. (...). cap. 14.
of the place: concerning which Prediction when the Apostles, being with him at
the mount of Olives, asked him privately concerning the time and the ligns of
so sad event, he discoursed largely of his coming to Judgment against that
City, and interweaved Predictions of the universal Judgment of all the world;
of which this, though very sad, was but a small adumbration: adding Precepts of
Watchfulness, and standing in preparation with hearts filled with grace, our
lamps always shining, that when the Bridegroom shall come we may be ready to
enter in; which was intended in the Parable of the five wise Virgins: and
concluded his Sermon with a narrative of his Passion, foretelling that within
two days he should be crucisied.

13. Jesus descended from the mount, and came to Bethany, and turning into the
house of Simon the Leper, Mary (...) Magdalen having been reproved by Judas for
spending ointment upon (...)'s (...), it being so unaccustomed and large a
profusion, thought now to speak her love once more, and trouble no body, and
therefore the poured ointment on his sacred head, believing that, being a
pompousness of a more accustomed festivity, would be indulged to the
expressions of her affection: but now all the Disciples murmured, wondering at
the prodigiousness of the woman's Religion, great enough to consume a Province
in the (...) of her thankfulness and duty. But Jesus now also entertained the
sincerity of her miraculous love, adding this Prophecy, that where the Gospel
should be preached, there also a record of this act should be kept, as a
perpetual monument of her Piety, and an attestation of his Divinity, who could
foretell future (...); Christianity receiving the greatest argument from that
which S. Peter calls the surer word of Prophecy, meaning it to be greater than
the testimony of Miracles, not easy to be dissembled by impure spirits, and
whose efficacy should descend to all Ages: for this Prophecy shall for ever be
fulfilling, and, being every day verified, does every day preach the Divinity
of Christ's (...) and of his Institution.

14. Two days before the (...) the Scribes and Pharisees called a council to
contrive crafty ways of (...) Jesus, they not daring to do it by open violence.
Of which meeting when Judas (...) had notice, (for those assemblies were
public and notorious) he ran from (...), and offered himself to betray his
Master to them, if they would give him a considerable reward. They agreed for
thirty pieces of silver. Of what value each piece was is uncertain; but their
own Nation has given a rule, that when Elias (...) (...). in (...) Montanus in
(...).
a piece of silver is named in the Pentateuch it signifies a sicle; if it be
named in the Prophets, it signifies a pound; if in the other writings of the
Old Testament, it signifies a talent: This therefore being alleged out of the
Prophet Matthew. 27 (...) pro (...), per (...) in (...). Nam (...) S. Augustini
in (...) in (...). T. (...) ex (...) in (...), and in N. T. (...) est (...)
apud (...) in (...).
Jeremy by one of the Evangelists, it is probable the price at which Judas sold
his Lord was thirty pound weight of silver; a (...) price for the Savior of
the world to be prized at by his undiscerning and unworthy Countrymen.

15. The next day was the first day of (...) bread, on which it was necessary
they should kill the Passover; therefore Jesus sent Peter and John to the City
to a certain man, (...). apud (...) 11. Junii. Vide (...). in descript. (...).
n. 6.
whom they should (...) carrying a pitcher of water to his house; him they
should follow, and there prepare the Passover. They went and found the man in
the same circumstances, and prepared for Jesus and his Family, who at the even
came to celebrate the Passover. It was the house of John surnamed Mark, which
had always been open to this blessed Family, where he was pleased to finish his
last Supper, and the mysteriousness of the Vespers of his Passion.

16. When evening was come, Jesus stood with his Disciples and (...) the
Paschal Lamb; after which he girt himself with (...), and taking a basin washed
the feet of his Disciples, not only by the ceremony, but in his discourses,
instructing them in the doctrine of Humility, which the Master by his so great
(...) to his Disciples had made sacred, and imprinted the lesson in lasting
characters by making it symbolical. But Peter was unwilling to be washed by his
Lord, until he was told he must renounce his part in him unless he were washed;
which option being given to Peter, he cried out, Not my feet only, but my hands
and my head. But Jesus said the ablution of the feet was sufficient for the
purification of the whole man; relating to the custom of those Countries who
used to go to supper immediately from the baths, who therefore were
sufficiently clean save only on their feet, by reason of the dust contracted in
their passage from the baths to the dining-rooms; from which when by the
hospitable master of the house they were caused to be cleansed, they needed no
more ablution: and by it Jesus, passing from the letter to the spirit, meant,
that the body of sin was washed in the baths of Baptism; and afterward, if we
remained in the same state of purity, it was only necessary to purge away the
filth contracted in our passage from the Font to the Altar; and then we are
clean all over, when the (...) state is unaltered, and the little adherencies
of imperfection and passions are also washed off.

17. But after the (...) of the Paschal Lamb it was the custom of the Nation to
sit down to a second Supper, in which they ate herbs and unlevened bread, the
Major-domo first dipping his morsel, and then the family; after which the
Father brake bread into pieces, and distributed a part to every of the Guests,
and first drinking himself, gave to the rest the chalice filled with wine,
according to the age and dignity of the person, adding to each distribution a
form of benediction proper to the mystery, which was Eucharistical and
commemorative of their Deliverance from Egypt. This Supper Jesus being to
celebrate, changed the forms of benediction, turned the Ceremony into Mystery,
and gave his body and blood in Sacrament and religious configuration; so
instituting the venerable Sacrament which from the time of its institution is
called the Lord's Supper: which rite Jesus commanded the Apostles to perpetuate
in commemoration of him their Lord until his second coming. And this was the
first delegation of a perpetual Ministry which Jesus made to his Apostles, in
which they were to be succeeded to in all generations of the Church.

18. But Jesus being troubled in spirit told his Apostles that one of them
should betray him; which Prediction he made, that they might not be scandalized
at the sadness of objection of the Passion, but be confirmed in their belief,
seeing so great demonstration of his wisdom and spirit of Prophecy. The
Disciples were all troubled at this (...) arrest, looking one on another, and
doubting of whom he spoke; but they beckned to the beloved Disciple, (...) on
Jesus's breast, that he might ask: for they who knew their own innocence and
infirmity were desirous to satisfy their curiosity, and to be rid of their
indetermination and their fear. But Jesus being asked gave them a sign, and a
(...) to Judas, commanding him to do what he list speedily; for Jesus was
extremely (...) till he had drunk the chalice off, and accomplished his
mysterious and (...) Baptism. After Judas received the sop, the Devil entered
into him, and Judas went forth immediately, it being now night.

19. When he was gone out, Jesus began his Farewel-Sermon, rarely mixed of
sadness and joys, and studded with mysteries as with Emeralds, discoursing of
the glorification of God in his Son, and of those glories which the Father had
prepared for him; of his sudden departure, and his migration to a place whither
they could not come yet, but afterward they should; meaning, first to death,
and then to glory: commanding them to love one another; and foretelling to
Peter, (who made consident protests that he would die with his Master) that
before the cock should crow twice, he should deny him thrice. But lest he
should afflict them with too sad representments of his present condition, he
comforts them with the comforts of Faith, with the intendments of his departure
to prepare places in Heaven for them, whither they might come by him, who is
the way, the truth, and the life; adding a promise in order to their present
support and future felicities, that if they should ask of God any thing in his
name, they should receive it; and upon condition they would love him, and keep
his Commandments, he would pray for the Holy Ghost to come upon them, to supply
his room, to furnish them with proportionable comforts, to enable them with
great Gifts, to lead them into all truth, and to abide with them for ever. Then
arming them against future Persecutions, giving them diverse holy Precepts,
discoursing of his emanation from the Father, and of the necessity of his
departure, he gave them his blessing, and prayed for them; and then, having
sung a Hymn, which was part of the great Allelujah beginning at the 114 Psalm,
[ When Israel came out of Egypt] and ending at the 118 inclusively, went forth
with his Disciples over the brook (...) unto the mount of Olives to a village
called Gethsemani, where there was a Garden, into which he entered to pray
together with his Disciples.

20. But taking Peter, James and John apart with him about a stone's cast from
the rest, he began to be exceeding sorrowful and sad even unto death. For now
he (...) the ingredients of his bitter Draught pouring into the Chalice, and
the sight was full of horror and amazement; he therefore fell on his face, and
prayed, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. In this
Prayer he fell into so sad an agony, that the pains inflicted by his Father's
wrath and made active by his own apprehension were so great, that Quidam ex
(...) (...), ex (...). tam (...). Sic Philippus (...) and (...).
a sweat distilled from his sacred body as great and conglobated as drops of
(...); and God, who heard his Prayer, but would not answer him in kind, sent an
Angel to comfort him in the sadness, which he was pleased not to take away. But
knowing that the drinking this Cup was the great end of his coming into the
world, he laid aside all his own interests, and divested himself of the
affections of flesh and blood, willing his Father's will; and because his
Father commanded, he, in desiance of sense and passion, was desirous to suffer
all our pains. But as when two seas meet, the billows (...) in ungentle
embraces, and make violent noises, till, having wearied themselves into smaller
waves and disunited drops, they run quietly into one stream: so did the spirit
and nature of Jesus assault each other with disagreeing interests and
distinguishing disputations, till the earnestness of the contention was
diminished by the demonstrations of the spirit, and the prevailings of Grace,
which the sooner got the victory, because they were not to contest with an
unsanctified or a rebellious nature, but a body of affections which had no
strong desires, but of its own preservation: and therefore Jesus went thrice,
and prayed the same prayer, that, if it were (...), the cup might pass from
him, and thrice made an act of resignation, and in the intervals came and found
his Apostles asleep, gently chiding their incuriousness, and warning them to
watch and pray, that they enter not into temptation; till the time that the
Traitor came with a multitude armed with swords and staves from the Priests and
Elders of the people to apprehend him.

21. Judas gave them the opportunity of the night, that was all the advantage
they had by him, because they durst not seize him by day for fear of the
people; and he signified the person of his Master to the soldiers by a Kiss,
and an address of seeming civility. But when they came toward him, Jesus said,
Whom seek ye? They said, JESUS of Nazareth. He said, I am he. But there was a
Divinity upon him, that they could not seize him at first: But as a wave
climbing of a Rock is beaten back and scattered into members, till falling down
it creeps with gentle waftings and kisses the feet of the stony mountain, and
so encirles it: so the Soldiers, coming at first with a rude attempt, were
twice repelled by the glory of his person, till they falling at his feet were
at last admitted to the seizure of his body, having by those involuntary
prostrations confessed his power greater than theirs, and that the luster and
influence of a GOD are greater than the violences and rudenesses of Soldiers.
And still they like weak eyes durst not behold the glory of this Sun, till a
cloud like a dark veil did interrupt the emissions of his glories; they could
not seize upon him, till they had thrown a veil upon his holy face: which
although it was a custom of the Easterlings, and of S. Hieron. in c. 9. Matt.
the I, Lictor, obnu^e caput Liberatoris Vrbis hujus. Livi.
Roman Empire generally; yet in this case was violence and necessity, because a
certain impetuosity and vigorousness of spirit and Divinity issuing from his
holy Face made them to take sanctuary in darkness, and to throw a veil over him
in that dead time of a sad and dismal night. But Peter, a stout (...) (...).
Galilean, bold and zealous, attempted a rescue, and smote a servant of the
High Priest, and cut off his ear; but Jesus rebuked the intemperance of his
passion, and commanded him to put up his sword, saying, all they that strike
with the sword shall perish with the sword; so putting a bridle upon the
illegal inflictions and expresses of anger or revenge from an incompetent
authority. But Jesus touched Malchus's ear, and cured it.

22. When Jesus had yielded himself into their power, and was now led away by
the chief Priests, Captains of the Temple, Elders of the people, and Soldiers,
who all came in combination and covenant to surprise him, his Disciples fled;
and John the Evangelist, who with grief and an overrunning fancy had forgot
to lay aside his upper garment, which in Festivals they are used to put on,
began to make escape, but being arrested by his linen upon his bare body, was
forced to leave that behind him, that himself might escape his Master's danger:
for now was verified the prophetical saying, I will smite the Shepherd, and the
sheep shall be scattered. But Peter followed afar off; and the greatness of
John's love, when he had mastered the first inconsiderations of his fear, made
him to return a while after into the High Priest's Hall.

23. Jesus was first led to Annas, who was the Prince of the Sanhedrim, and had
cognizance of Prophets and public Doctrines; who therefore enquired of Jesus
concerning his Disciples and his Discipline: but he answered, that his Doctrine
had been public or popular, that he never taught in Conventicles; and
therefore referred him to the testimony of all the people. For which free
answer, a servant standing by smote him on the face; and Jesus meekly asked him
what evil he had done. But Annas without the Seventy Assessors could judge
nothing, and therefore sent him bound to Caiaphas, who was High Priest that
year, President of the Rites of the Temple, as the other High Priest was of the
great Council. Thither Peter came, and had admission by the means of another
Disciple, supposed to be John, who, having sold his possessions in Galilee to
Caiaphas, came and dwelt near mount Sion, but was by intervention of that
bargain made known to the High Priest, and brought Peter into the house; where
when Peter was challenged three times by the servants to be a Galilean, and of
Jesus's family, he denied and forswore it; till Jesus, looking back, re-minded
him of his prediction, and the foulness of the crime, and the cock crew; for it
was now the second cock-crowing after ten of the clock in the fourth Watch. And
Peter went out, and wept bitterly, that he might cleanse his Soul, washing off
the foul stains he had contracted in his shameful Perjury and Denying of his
Lord. And it is reported of the same holy person, that ever after, Arse^^^s in
Vitis Pp.
when he heard the cock crow, he wept, remembering the old instrument of his
Conversion, and his own unworthiness, for which he never ceased to do actions
of sorrow and sharp Repentance.

24. On the morning the Council was to assemble; and whilst Jesus was detained
in expectation of it, the servants mocked him, and did all actions of affront
and ignoble despite to his Sacred head: and because the question was whether he
were a Prophet, they covered his eyes, and smote him in derision, calling on
him to prophecy who smote him. But in the morning, when the high Priests and
rulers of the people were assembled, they sought false witness against Jesus,
but found none to purpose; they railed boldly, and could prove nothing; they
accused vehemently, and the allegations were of such things as were no crimes,
and the greatest article which the united diligence of all their malice could
pretend was, that he said he would destroy the Temple, and in three days build
it up again. But Jesus neither answered this nor any other of their vainer
allegations; for the witnesses destroyed each others testimony by their
disagreeing: till at last Caiaphas, who, to verify his Prophecy, and to
satisfy his Ambition, and to bait his Envy, was furiously determined Jesus
should die, adjures him by the living God to say whether he were the CHRIST,
the Son of the living God. Jesus knew his design to be an inquisition of death,
not of Piety or curiosity; yet, because his hour was now come, openly affirmed
it without any expedient to elude the high Priest's malice, or to decline the
question.

25. When Caiaphas heard the saying, he accused Jesus of Blasphemy, and
pretended an apprehension so tragical, that he over-acted his wonder and
feigned (...); for he rent his garments, (which was the interjection of the
Country, and custom of the Nation, but forbidden to the High Priest) and
called presently to sentence: and, as it was agreed beforehand, they all
condemned him as guilty of death, and as far as they had power inflicted it;
for they beat him with their fists, smote him with the palms of their hands,
spit upon him, and abused him beyond the license of enraged (...). When Judas
heard that they had passed the final and decretory sentence of death upon his
Lord, he, who thought not it would have gone so far, repented him to have been
an instrument of so damnable a machination, and came and brought the silver
which they gave him for hire, threw it in amongst them, and said, I have sinned
in betraying the innocent (...). But they, incurious of those Hell Torments
Judas felt within him, because their own fires burnt not yet, dismissed him,
and upon consultation bought with the money a field to bury strangers in. And
Judas went and hanged himself: and the Judgment was made more notorious and
eminent by an unusual accident at such deaths, for he so swelled, that he
burst, and his bowels gushed out. But the Greek Scholiast and some Euthym, in
26. (...). Codren in (...). Oecumen. in c. 1. (...). Juvencus hist. Evang. l. 4
(...) de (...) Sanct. c. 4.
others report out of Papias, S. John's Scholar, that Judas fell from the
Fig Tree on which he hanged, before he was quite dead, and survived his attempt
some while, being so sad a spectacle of deformity, and pain, and a prodigious
tumor, that his plague was deplorable, and highly miserable, till at last he
burst in the very substance of his Trunk, as being extended beyond the
possibilities and capacities of nature.

26. But the High Priests had given Jesus over to the secular power, and
carried him to Pilate, to be put to death by his sentence and military power:
but coming thither, they would not enter into the Judgment-hall because of the
Feast, but Pilate met them, and, willing to decline the business, bid them
judge him according to their own Law. They replied, it was not lawful for them
to put any man to death; meaning, during the seven days of unlevened bread, (as
appears in the instance of Herod, who detained Peter S. Aug. tract. 114. in
Joan. Cyril. in Joan. l. 12. c. 6. (...) hom. 12. in Joan. Ambros. sermon. (...)
Calend. Januar. l. 20.
in prison, intending after Easter to bring him out to the people.) And their
malice was restless, till the Sentence they had passed were put in execution.
Others thinking that all the right of inflicting capital punishments was taken
from the Nation by the Romans; and (...). c. 8.
Josephus writes, that when Ananias their High Priest had by a Council of the
Jews condemned S. James the Brother of our Lord, and put him to death, without
the consent of the Roman President, he was deprived of his Priesthood. But
because Pilate, who either by common right, or at that time, was the Judge of
capital inflictions, was averse from intermedling in the condemnation of an
innocent person, they attempted him with excellent craft; for knowing that
Pilate was a great servant of the Roman Greatness, and a hater of the Sect of
the Galileans, the High Priest accused Jesus, that he was of that Sect, that he
denied paying tribute to (...), that he called himself King. Concerning which
when Pilate interrogated Jesus, he answered that his Kingdom was not of this
world; and Pilate thinking he had nothing to do with the other, came forth
again, and gave testimony, that he found nothing worthy of death in Jesus. But
hearing that he was a Galilean and of Herod's jurisdiction, Pilate sent him to
Herod, who was at Jerusalem at the Feast. And Herod was glad, because he had
heard much of him, and since his return from Rome had desired to see him, but
could not, by reason of his own avocations, and the ambulatory life of Christ;
and now he hoped to see a Miracle done by him, of whom he had heard so many.
But the event of this was, that Jesus did there no Miracle; Herod's soldiers
set him at Joseph. l. 16. c. 14. Idem in (...).
naught, and mocked him. And that day Herod was reconciled to Pilate. And Jesus
was sent back arrayed in a white and splendid garment: which though possibly it
might be intended for derision, yet was a symbol of Innocence, condemned
persons usually being arrayed in blacks. And when Pilate had again examined
him, Jesus, meek as a lamb, and as a sheep before the shearers, opened not his
mouth; insomuch that Pilate wondered, perceiving the greatest Innocence of the
man by not offering to excuse or lessen any thing: for though Pilate had power
to release him, or crucify him, yet his contempt of death was in just
proportion to his Innocence; which also Pilate concealed not, but published
Jesus's Innocence by Herod's and his own sentence; to the great regret of the
Rulers, who, like ravening wolves, thirsted for a draught of blood, and to
devour the morning prey.

27. But Pilate hoped to prevail upon the Rulers by making it a favor from
them to Jesus, and an indulgence from him to the Nation, to set him free: for
oftentimes even Malice it self is driven out by the Devil of Self-love, and so
we may be acknowledged the authors of a safety, we are content to rescue a man
even from our own selves. Pilate therefore offered that, according to the
custom of the Nation, Jesus should be released for the honor of the present
Festival, and as a donative to the people. But the spirit of Malice was here
the more prevalent, and they desired that Barabbas, a Murderer, a Thief, and a
seditious person, should be exchanged for him. Then Pilate casting about all
ways to acquit Jesus of punishment, and himself of guilt, offered to scourge
him, and let him go, hoping that a lesser draught of blood might stop the
furies and rabidness of their passion, without their bursting with a river of
his best and vital liquor. But these leeches would not so let go; they cry out,
Crucify him; and to engage him finally they told him, if he did let this man
go, he was no friend to Caesar.

28. But Pilate called for water, and washed his hands, to demonstrate his own
unwillingness, and to reject and transmit the guilt upon them, who took it on
them as greedily as they sucked the blood; they cried out, His blood be on us
and our children. As Pilate was going to give sentence, his Wife, being
troubled in her dreams, sent, with the earnestness and passion of a woman, that
he should have nothing to do with that just Person; but he was engaged: Caesar
and Jesus, God and the King, did seem to have different interests; or at least
he was threatened into that opinion; and Pilate, though he was satisfied it was
but Calumny and Malice, yet he was loath to venture upon his answer at Rome, in
case the High Priest should have accused him. For no man knows whether the
interest or the mistake of his Judge may cast the sentence; and who-ever is
accused strongly is never thought entirely innocent. And therefore, not only
against the Divine Laws, but against the Roman too, he condemned an innocent
person upon objections notoriously malicious; he adjudged him to a death which
was only due to public Thieves and Homicides, (crimes with which he was not
charged) upon a pretense of Blasphemy, of which he stood accused, but not
convicted, and for which by the Jewish Law he should have been stoned, if found
guilty. And this he did put into present execution, against the Tiberian Law,
which about twelve years before decreed in (...). in (...), c. 75.
favor of condemned persons, that after sentence execution should be deferred
ten Dio Romans (...). l. 57. Sub (...) and Druso Coss. (...) est codex Epist.
Sidonii, qui ait, (...) S. C. Tiberiano triginta dierum vitam post sententiam
(...).
days.

29. And now was the Holy Lamb to bleed. First therefore Pilate's soldiers
array him in a kingly robe, put a reed in his hand for a Scepter, plait a Crown
of thorns and put it on his head, they bow the knee, and mock him, they smite
him with his fantastic Scepter, and in stead of tribute pay him with blows
and spittings upon his holy head: and when they had emptied the whole stock of
poisonous contempt, they divest him of the robes of mockery, and put him on his
own; they lead him to a pillar, and bind him Lib. In (...), D. d. (...).
fast, and scourage him with whips, a punishment that Slaves only did use to
suffer, (free persons being in certain cases beaten with rods and clubs) that
they might add a new Lib. (...). de accus.
scorn to his afflictions, and make his sorrows like their own guilt, vast and
mountainous. After which Barabbas being set free, Pilate delivered Jesus to be
crucified.

30. The Soldiers therefore having framed a Cross sad and heavy, laid it upon
Jesus's shoulders, (who, like Isaac, bore the wood with which he was to be
sacrificed himself) and they drive him out to Crucifixion, who was scarce able
to stand under that load. It is generally supposed that Jesus bore the whole
Tree, that is, both the parts of his Lignum transversum (...) Jesus, scil.
Patibulum, ad locum ubi Crux, scil. lignum oblongum, (...) Plautus, Patibulum
(...), and (...) pictores (...) pingunt Josum, (...) lignum scil. Lipsius
tract, de supplicio (...).
Cross; but to him that considers it it will seem impossible: and therefore it
is more likely, and agreeable to the old manner of crucifying malefactors, that
Jesus only carried the cross part; the body of it being upon the place either
already fixed, or prepared for its station. Even that lesser part was grievous
and intolerable to his tender, virginal, and weakened body; and when he fainted,
they compel Simon a Cyrenian to help him. A great and a mixed multitude followed
Jesus to Golgotha, the (...)-house of the City, and the place of Execution. But
the Women wept with bitter exclamations, and their sadness was increased by the
sad predictions Jesus then made of their future misery, saying, Ye daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves and for your children: For
the time shall come that men shall say, Blessed are the barren that never bare,
and the paps that never gave (...); for they shall call on the hills to cover
them, and on the mountains to fall upon them, that by a sudden ruin they may
escape the lingering calamities of famine and fear, and the horror of a thousand
deaths.

31. When Jesus was come to Golgotha, a place in the mount of Calvary, (where,
according to the tradition of the Tertul. l. 2. contra Marcion. Origin. tract.
35. in Matthew. Basil. in (...). 5. Athan, de Pass. and (...), and (...) Pp.
unico (...) (...), in epist. (...) Ephesians. c. 5. and in c. 27. Matthew.
Ancients, (...). Nonnus in Joan.
Adam was buried, and where S. Aug. (...). 71. (...).
Abraham made an Altar for the sacrifice of his Son) by the piety of his
Disciples, Golgotha locus est (...). Calvaria quondam, Lingua paterna prior sic
illum nomine dixit. Hit (...) esse (...) medium (...) --.
and (it is probable) of those good women which did use to minister to him,
there was provided wine mingled with myrrh, which among the Levantines is an
(...). hist. l. 14. c. 13 Athenaeus l. 11. c. 30. Si calidum (...) Convenit,
and (...) sit sapor inde (...). l. 14.
excellent and pleasant mixture, and such as the piety and indulgence of the
nations used to administer to condemned persons. But Jesus, who by voluntary
susception did choose to suffer our pains, refused that refreshment which the
piety of the women presented to him. The soldiers having stripped him, nailed
him to the Cross with Ego (...) primus qui in (...) bis pedes, bis (...).
Plaut. (...).
four nails, and divided his Mantle into four parts, giving to each soldier a
part; but for his Coat, because it would be spoiled if parted, it being weaved
without seam, they cast lots for it.

32. Now Pilate had caused a title containing the cause of his death to be
superscribed on a Table in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, the Hebrew being first,
the Greek next, and the Latin nearest to the holy body; but all written after
the Jewish manner, from the right hand to the left; for so the Title is shown
in the Church of Santa Croce in Rome, the Latin letters being to be read as if
it were Hebrew: the reason of which I could never find sufficiently discovered,
unless it were to make it more legible to the Jews, who by conversing with the
Romans began to understand a little Latin. The title was, JESUS OF NAZARETH,
KING OF THE JEWS: But the Pharisees would have it altered, and that he said he
was King of the Jews. But Pilate out of wilfulness, or to do despite to the
Nation, (...) est, (...) lecta, (...) una, (...) recitata, (...) Provinciae
(...). Apul. 1. l. (...).
or in honor to Jesus, whom he knew to be a just person, or being overruled
by Divine providence, refused to alter it. And there were crucified with Jesus
two Thieves, Jesus being in the midst, according to the Prophecy, He was
reckoned with the transgressors. Then Jesus prayed for his Persecutors; Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do. But while Jesus was full of pain
and charity, and was praying and dying for his Enemies, the Rulers of the Jews
mocked him, upbraiding him with the good works he did and the expresses of his
power, saying, He saved others, himself he cannot save; others saying, Let him
come down from the Cross, if he be the King of the Jews, and we will believe in
him: and others, according as their Malice was determined by fancy and
occasion, added weight and scorn to his pains; and of the two Malefactors that
were crucified with him, one reviled him, saying, If thou be the CHRIST, save
thy self and us. And thus far the Devil prevailed, undoing himself in riddle,
provoking men to do despite to Christ, and to heighten his Passion out of
hatred to him; and yet doing and promoting that which was the ruin of all his
own Kingdom and potent mischiefs: like the (...): (...). Vide Dionys. (...) in
(...) Rab. R. Maimon.
Jew who in indignation against Mercury threw stones at his Image, and yet was
by his Superior judged idolatrous, that being the manner of doing honor to
the Idol among the Gentiles. But then Christ, who had upon the Cross prayed for
his enemies, and was heard of God in all that he desired, felt now the
beginnings of success. For the other Thief, whom the present pains and
circumstances of Jesus's Passion had softened and made believing, reproved his
fellow for not fearing God, confessed that this death happened to them
deservedly, but to Jesus causelessly: and then prayed to Jesus, Lord, remember
me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Which combination of pious acts and
miraculous Conversion Jesus entertained with a speedy promise of a very great
felicity, promising that upon that very day he should be with him in Paradise.

33. Now there were standing by the Cross the Mother of Jesus and her Sister,
and Mary Magdalen and John. And Jesus being upon his Deathbed, although he had
no temporal estate to bestow, yet he would make provision for his Mother, who,
being a Widow, and now childless, was likely to be exposed to necessity and
want; and therefore he did arrogate John the beloved Disciple into Marie's
kindred, making him to be her adopted Son, and her to be his Mother, by fiction
of Law: Woman, behold thy son; and, Man, behold thy Mother. And from that time
forward John took her home to his own house, which he had near mount Sion,
after he had sold his inheritance in Galilee to the High Priest.

34. While these things were doing, the whole frame of Nature seemed to be
dissolved and out of order, while their LORD and Creator suffered. For the Sun
was so darkened that the Stars appeared; and the Eclipse was prodigious Origin.
(...). l. 2. (...). Apolog. Lucian. in actis sui Mart. August. ep. 80. ad
(...). (...) in vita (...) cum dix (...), Aut Deus (...), aut (...) compatitur:
and hac de causa (...) aram (...) (...) quidam.
in the manner as well as in degree, because the Moon was not then in
Conjunction, but full: and it was noted by Phlegon, the freed man of the
Emperor Hadrian, by Lucian out of the Acts of the Gauls, and Dionysius while he
was yet a Heathen, excellent Scholars all, great Historians and Philosophers;
who also noted the day of the week and hour of the day, agreeing with the
circumstances of the Cross. For the Sun hid his head from beholding such a
prodigy of sin and sadness, and provided a veil for the nakedness of Jesus,
that the women might be present, and himself die, with modesty.

35. The Eclipse and the Passion began at the sixth hour, and endured till the
ninth, about which time Jesus, being tormented with the unsufferable load of
his Father's wrath due for our sins, and wearied with pains and heaviness,
cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and, as it is thought,
repeated the whole two and twentieth Psalm, which is an admirable Narrative of
the Passion, full of Prayer and sadness, and description of his pains at first,
and of Eucharist and joy and prophecy at the last. But these first words, which
it is certain and recorded that he spoke, were in a language of it self, or
else by reason of distance, not understood, for they thought he had called for
Elias to take him down from the Cross. Then Jesus, being in the agonies of a
high Fever, said, I thirst. And one ran, and filled a sponge with vinegar,
wrapping it with hyssop, and put it on a reed, that he might drink. The Vinegar
and the Sponge were in Executions of condemned persons set to stop the too
violent issues of blood, and to prolong the death; but Plin. Not. Hist. l. 31.
c. 11. (...) conglutinant vulnera. Tertul. de Spect. c. 25. (...) and de (...)
in morsus untorum, and spongias (...).
were exhibited to him in scorn; mingled with gall, to make the mixture more
horrid and ungentle. But Jesus tasted it only, and refused the draught. And now
knowing that the Prophecies were fulfilled, his Father's wrath appeased, and
his torments satisfactory, he said, It is finished, and crying with a loud
voice, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, he bowed his head, and
yielded up his spirit into the hands of God, and died, hastening to his Father's
glories. Thus did this glorious Sun set in a sad and clouded West, running
speedily to shine in the other world.

36. Then was the veil of the Temple, which separated the secret Mosaic Rites
from the eyes of the people, rent in the midst from the top to the bottom; and
the Angels, Presidents S. Hieron. (...). 150. q. 8.
of the Temple, called to each other to depart from their seats; and so great
an Earthquake happened, that the rocks did rend, the mountains trembled, the
graves opened, and the bodies of dead persons arose, walking from their
coemeteries to the Holy City, and appeared unto many: and so great
apprehensions and amazements happened to them all that stood by, that they
departed, smiting their breasts with sorrow and fear: and the Centurion that
ministered at the execution said, Certainly this was the Son of God; and he
(...) Metaph. (...) 16. October.
became a Disciple, renouncing his military employment, and died a Martyr.

37. But because the next day was the Jews Sabbath, and a Paschal Festival
besides, the Jews hastened that the bodies should be taken from the Cross; and
therefore sent to (...) to hasten their death by In hac ipsa (...) quadam
buccarum inanitas est, qua (...) jugulo, spiritus (...). Plin. l. 11. c. 45.
Vide Lactant. l. 1. c. 26. Cic. pro (...).
breaking their legs, that Philo de leg. special. (...).
before Sunset they might be taken away, according to the Commandment, and be
buried. The soldiers therefore came, and brake the legs of the two Thieves;
but espying, and wondering, that Jesus was already dead, they brake not his
legs; for the Scripture foretold, that a bone of him should not be broken: but
a soldier with his lance pierced his side, and immediately there streamed out
two rivulets of Water and Blood. But the Holy Virgin Mother, (whose Soul during
this whole passion was pierced with a sword and sharper sorrows, though she was
supported by the comforts of Faith, and those holy Predictions of his
Resurrection and future glories, which Mary had laid up in store against this
great day of expense) now that she saw her Holy Son had suffered all that our
necessities and their malice could require or inflict, caused certain
ministers, with whom she joined, to take her dead Son from the Cross; whose
Body when she once got free from the nails she kissed, and embraced with
entertainments of the nearest vicinity that could be expressed by a person that
was holy and sad, and a Mother weeping for her dead Son.

38. But she was highly satisfied with her own meditations, that now that great
Mystery determined by Divine Predestination before the beginning of all Ages
was fulfilled in her Son; and the Passion, that must needs be, was
accomplished: she Metaphr. August. 15.
therefore first bathes his cold body with her warm tears, and makes clean the
surface of the wounds, and delivering a winding napkin to Joseph of Arimathaea,
gave to him in charge to enwrap the Body and embalm it, to compose it to the
grave, and do it all the rites of Funeral, having first exhorted him to a
public confession of what he was privately till now: and he obeyed the counsel
of so excellent a person, and ventured upon the displeasure of the Jewish
Rulers, and went confidently to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. And
Pilate gave him the power of it.

39. Joseph therefore takes the body, binds his face with a napkin, washes the
body, anoints it with ointment, enwraps it in a composition of myrrh and aloes,
and puts it into a new tomb which he for himself had hewn out of a rock, (it
not being lawful among the Jews to interr a condemned person in the common
coemeteries:) for all these circumstances were in the Jews manner of burying.
But when the Sun was set, the chief Priests and Pharisees went to Pilate,
telling him that Jesus, whilst he was living, foretold (...) own resurrection
upon the third day; and lest his Disciples should come and steal the body, and
say he was risen from the dead, desired that the sepulcher might be secured
against the danger of any such imposture. Pilate gave them leave to do their
pleasure, even to Beda (...). cap. 2. Niceph. (...). 1. (...). 32.
the satisfaction of their smallest scruples. They therefore sealed the grave,
rolled a great stone at the mouth of it, and, as an ancient Tradition says,
bound it about with labels of iron, and set a watch of soldiers, as if they
had intended to have made it surer than the decrees of Fate, or the
never-failing laws of Nature.

Ad SECT. XV. Considerations of some preparatory Accidents before the entrance
of JESUS into his Passion.
Christ riding in triumph.
Matthew. 21. 7. And they brought ye Ass. and put on their clothes, and set him
thereon; and a very great multitude spread their garments, others cut down
branches from ye trees, and strawed them in ye way. And the multitude yt went
before, and yt followed after, cried; Hosannah, etc.

Mary pouring ointment on Christ's head.
Mark. 14. 3. As he sat at meat in the house of Simon ye leper, there came a
woman having an Alabaster-box of ointment very precious, and poured it on his
head. And Jesus said, let her alone she is come aforehand to anoint my body to
ye burying.




1. HE that has observed the Story of the Life of Jesus, cannot but see it all
the way to be strewed with thorns and sharp-pointed stones; and although by the
kisses of his feet they became precious and salutary, yet they procured to him
sorrow and disease: it was meat and drink to him to do his Father's will, but
it was bread of affliction, and rivers of tears to drink; and for these he
thirsted like the earth after the cool stream. For so great was his Perfection,
so exact the conformity of his Will, so absolute the subordination of his
inferior Faculties to the infinite love of God, which sat Regent in the Court
of his Will and Understanding, that in this election of accidents he never
considered the taste, but the goodness, never distinguished sweet from bitter,
but Duty and Piety always prepared his table. And therefore now knowing that
his time determined by the Father was nigh, he hastened up to Jerusalem; he
went before his Disciples, says S. Mark, and they followed him trembling and
amazed; and yet before that, even then when his brethren observed he had a
design of publication of himself, he suffered them to go before him, and went
up as it were in secret. For so we are invited to Martyrdom, and suffering in a
Christian cause by so great an example: the Holy Jesus is gone before us, and
it were a holy contention to strive whose zeal were forwardest in the designs
of Humiliation and Self-denial; but it were also well, if in doing our selves
secular advantage, and promoting our worldly interest, we should follow him,
who was ever more distant from receiving honors than from receiving a painful
death. Those affections which dwell in sadness, and are married to grief, and
lie at the foot of the Cross, and trace the sad steps of Jesus, have the wisdom
of recollection, the tempers of sobriety, and are the best imitations of Jesus,
and securities against the levity of a dispersed and a vain spirit. This was
intimated by many of the Disciples of Jesus in the days of the Spirit, and when
they had tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come;
for then we find many ambitious of Martyrdom, and that have laid stratagems and
designs by unusual deaths to get a Crown. The Soul of S. Laurence was so
scorched with ardent desires of dying for his Lord, that he accounted the coals
of his Gridiron but as a Julip or the aspersion of cold water to refresh his
Soul; they were chill as the Alpine snows in respect of the heats of his
diviner flames. And if these lesser Stars shine so brightly and burn so warmly,
what heat of love may we suppose to have been in the Sun of Righteousness? If
they went fast toward the Crown of Martyrdom, yet we know that the Holy Jesus
went before them all: no wonder that he comes forth as a Eridegroom from his
chamber, and rejoices as a giant to run his course.

2. When the Disciples had overtaken Jesus, he begins to them a sad Homily upon
the old Text of Suffering, which he had well nigh for a year together preached
upon; but because it was an unpleasing Lesson, so contradictory to those
interests upon the hopes of which they had entertained themselves, and spent
all their desires, they could by no means understand it: for an understanding
prepossessed with a fancy, or an unhandsome principle, construes all other
notions to the sense of the first; and whatsoever contradicts it, we think it
an objection, and that we are bound to answer it. But now that it concerned
Christ to speak so plainly, that his Disciples by what was to happen within
five or six days might not be scandalized, or believe it happened to Jesus
without his knowledge and voluntary entertainment, he tells them of his
Sufferings to be accomplished in this journey to Jerusalem. And here the
Disciples showed themselves to be but men, full of passion and indiscreet
affection; and the bold Galilean, S. Peter, took the boldness to dehort his
Master from so great an infelicity; and met with a reprehension so great, that
neither the Scribes, nor the Pharisees, nor Herod himself ever met with its
parallel: Jesus called him Satan; meaning, that no greater contradiction can be
offered to the designs of God and his Holy Son, than to dissuade us from
Suffering. And if we understood how great are the advantages of a suffering
condition, we should think all our Daggers gilt, and our pavements strewed with
Roses, and our Halters silken, and the Rack an instrument of pleasure, and be
most impatient of those temptations which seduce us into ease, and divorce us
from the Cross, as being opposite to our greatest hopes and most perfect
desires. But still this humor of S. Peter's imperfection abides amongst us: He
that breaks off the yoke of Obedience, and unties the bands of Discipline, and
preaches a cheap Religion, and presents Heaven in the midst of flowers, and
strews Carpets softer than the Asian luxury in the way, and sets the songs of
Sion to the tunes of Persian and lighter airs, and offers great liberty of
living, and bondage under affection and sins, and reconciles Eternity with the
present enjoyment, he shall have his Schools filled with Disciples; but he that
preaches the Cross, and the severities of Christianity, and the strictnesses of
a holy life, shall have the lot of his Blessed Lord, he shall be thought ill
of, and deserted.

3. Our Blessed Lord, five days before his Passion, sent his Disciples to a
village to borrow an Ass, that he might ride in triumph to Jerusalem; he had
none of his own, but yet he who was so dear to God could not want what was to
supply his needs. It may be God has laid up our portion in the repositories of
other men, and means to furnish us from their tables, to feed us from their
granaries, and that their wardrobe shall cloth us; for it is all one to him to
make a Fish bring us money, or a Crow to bring us meat, or the stable of our
neighbor to furnish our needs of Beasts: if he brings it to thy need as thou
want it, thou have all the good in the use of the Creature which the owners
can receive; and the horse which is lent me in charity does me as much ease,
and the bread which is given me in alms feeds me as well, as the other part of
it, which the good man that gave me a portion reserved for his own eating,
could do to him. And if we would give God leave to make provisions for us in
the ways of his own choosing, and not estimate our wants by our manner of
receiving, being contented that God by any of his own ways will minister it to
us, we should find our cares eased, and our content increased, and our
thankfulness engaged, and all our moderate desires contented by the
satisfaction of our needs. For if God is pleased to feed me by my neighbor's
charity, there is no other difference, but that God makes me an occasion of his
ghostly good, as he is made the occasion of my temporal; and if we think it
disparagement, we may remember that God conveys more good to him by me, than to
me by him: and it is a proud impatience to refuse or to be angry with God's
provisions, because he has not observed my circumstances and ceremonies of
election.

4. And now begins that great Triumph in which the Holy Jesus was pleased to
exalt his Office, and to abase his Person. He rode like a poor man upon an
Ass, a beast of burden and the lowest value, and yet it was not his own; and
in that equipage he received the acclamations due to a mighty Prince, to the
Son of the eternal King: telling us, that the smallness of fortune, and the
rudeness of exterior habiliments, and a rough wall, are sometimes the outsides
of a great glory; and that when God means to glorify or do honor to a person,
he needs no help from secular advantages. He hides great Riches in Renunciation
of the World, and makes great Honor break forth from the clouds of Humility,
and Victory to arise from Yielding and the modesty of departing from our
interest, and Peace to be the reward of him that suffers all the Hostilities of
men and Devils. For Jesus in this great Humility of his gives a great probation
that he was the Messiah, and the King of Sion, because no other King entered
into those gates riding upon an Ass, and received the honor of Hosannah in
that unlikelihood and contradiction of unequal circumstances.

5. The Blessed Jesus had never but two days of triumph in his life; the one
was on his (...) upon mount Tabor, the other, this his riding into the Holy
City. But that it may appear how little were his joys and present exterior
complacencies; in the day of his Transfiguration Moses and Elias appeared to
him, telling him what great things he was to suffer; and in this day of his
riding to Jerusalem he wet the Palms with a dew sweeter than the moistures upon
mount Hermon or the drops of Manna: for, to allay the little warmth of a
springing joy, he let down a shower of tears, weeping over undone Jerusalem in
the day of his triumph, leaving it disputable whether he felt more joy or
sorrow in the acts of love; for he triumphed to consider that the Redemption of
the world was so near, and wept bitterly that men would not be redeemed; his
joy was great to consider that himself was to suffer so great sadness for our
good, and his sorrow was very great to consider that we would not entertain
that Good that he brought and laid before us by his Passion. He was in figure,
as his servant S. (...) was afterward in letter and true story, crucified upon
Palms: which indeed was (...) victorum, palmae (...) es; ergd Laetus obi,
quoniam (...) nisi victor (...).
the emblem of a Victory; but yet such as had leaves sharp, poinant, and
vexatious. However, he entered into Jerusalem dressed in gayeties, which yet he
placed under his feet; but with such pomps and solemnities each Family,
according to its proportion, was accustomed to bring the Paschal Lamb to be
slain for the Passover: and it was not an undecent ceremony, that the Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world should be brought to his slaughter with
the acknowledgments of a religious solemnity, because now that real good was to
be exhibited to the world which those little Paschal Lambs did but signify and
represent in shadow: and that was the true cause of all the little joy he had.

6. And if we consider what followed, it might seem also to be a design to
heighten the dolorousness of his Passion: for to descend from the greatest of
worldly honors, from the adoration of a GOD, and the acclamations to a King,
to the death of a Slave, and the torments of a Cross, and the dishonours of a
condemned Criminal, were so great stoopings and vast changes that they gave
height and sense and excellency to each other. This then seemed an excellent
glory, but indeed was but an art and instrument of grief: for such is the
nature of all our Felicities, they end in sadness, and increase the sting of
sorrows, and add moment to them, and cause impatience and uncomfortable
remembrances; but the griefs of a Christian, whether they be instances of
Repentance, or parts of Persecution, or exercises of Patience, end in joy and
endless comfort. Thus Jesus, like a Rainbow, half made of the glories of light,
and half of the moisture of a cloud, half triumph, and half sorrow, entered into
that Town where he had done much good to others, and to himself received
nothing but affronts: yet his tenderness increased upon him, and that very
journey, which was Christ's last solemn visit for their recovery, he doubled
all the instruments of his Mercy and their Conversion: He rode in triumph, the
(...) sang Hosannah to him, he cured many diseased persons, he wept for them,
and pitied them, and sighed out the intimations of a Prayer, and did penance
for their ingratitude, and stayed all day there, looking about him toward
evening, and no man would invite him home, but he was forced to go to Bethany,
where he was sure of an hospitable entertainment. I think no Christian that
reads this but will be full of indignation at the whole City, who for malice or
for fear would not or durst not receive their Savior into their houses; and
yet we do worse: for now that he is become our Lord with mightier
demonstrations of his eternal power, we suffer him to look round about upon us
for months and years together, and possibly never entertain him, till our house
is ready to rush upon our heads, and we are going to unusual and stranger
habitations. And yet in the midst of a populous and mutinous City this great
King had some good subjects, persons that threw away their own garments, and
laid them at the feet of our Lord; that being divested of their own, they might
be re-invested with a robe of his Righteousness, wearing that till it were
changed into a stole of glory: the very ceremony of their reception of the Lord
became symbolical to them, and expressive of all our duties.

7. But I consider that the Blessed Jesus had affections not less than infinite
toward all mankind; and he who wept upon Jerusalem, who had done so great
despite to him, and within five days were to fill up the measure of their
iniquities, and do an act which all Ages of the world could never repeat in the
same instance, did also in the number of his tears reckon our sins as sad
considerations and incentives of his sorrow. And it would well become us to
consider what great evil we do, when our actions are such as for which our
Blessed Lord did weep. He who was seated in the bosom of Felicity, yet he
moistened his (...) Laurels upon the day of his Triumph with tears of love and
bitter allay. His day of Triumph was a day of Sorrow: and if we would weep for
our sins, that instance of sorrow would be a day of triumph and (...).

8. From hence the Holy Jesus went to Pethany, where he had another manner of
reception than at the Holy City. There he supped; for his goodly day of Triumph
had been with him a fasting-day. And Mary Magdalen, who had spent one box of
Nard pistick upon our Lord's feet as a sacrifice of Eucharist for her
Conversion, now bestowed another in thankfulness for the restitution of her
Brother Lazarus to life, and consigned her Lord unto his Burial. And here she
met with an evil interpreter: (...), an Apostle one of the Lord's own Family,
pretended it had been a better Religion to have given it to the poor; but it
was Malice, and the spirit either of Envy or Avarice, in him that passed that
sentence; for he that sees a pious action well done, and seeks to undervalue it
by telling how it might have been better, reproves nothing but his own spirit.
For a man may do very well, and God would accept it; though to say he might
have done better, is to say only that action was not the most perfect and
absolute in its kind: but to be angry at a religious person, and without any
other pretense but that he might have done better, is spiritual Envy; for a
pious person would have nourished up that infant action by love and praise,
till it had grown to the most perfect and intelligent Piety. But the event of
that man gave the interpretation of his present purpose; and at the best it
could be no other than a rash judgment of the action and intention of a
religious, thankful, and holy person. But she found her Lord, who was her (...)
in this, become her Patron and her Advocate. And hereafter, when we shall find
the Devil, the great Accuser of God's Saints, object against the Piety and
Religion of holy persons; a cup of cold water shall be accepted unto reward,
and a good intention heightened to the value of an exterior expression, and a
piece of gum to the equality of a (...), and an action done with great zeal and
an intense love be acquitted from all its adherent imperfections; Christ
receiving them into himself, and being like the Altar of incense, hallowing the
very smoke, and raising it into a flame, and entertaining it into the embraces
of the firmament and the bosom of Heaven. Christ himself, who is the Judge of
our actions, is also the entertainer and object of our Charity and Duty, and
the Advocate of our persons.

9. Judas, who declaimed against the woman, made tacit reflections upon his
Lord for suffering it: and indeed every obloquy against any of Christ's
servants is looked on as an arrow shot into the heart of Christ himself. And
now a Persecution being begun against the Lord within his own Family, another
was raised against him from without. For the chief Priests took crafty counsel
against Jesus and called a Consistory to contrive how they might destroy him:
and here was the greatest representment of the goodness of God and the
ingratitude of man that could be practiced or understood. How often had Jesus
poured forth tears for them? how many sleepless nights had he awaked to do them
advantage? how many days had he spent in Homilies and admirable visitations of
Mercy and Charity, in casting out Devils, in curing their sick, in correcting
their delinquencies, in reducing them to the ways of security and peace, and,
that we may use the greatest expression in the world, that is, his own in
gathering them as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, to give them
strength, and warmth, and life, and ghostly nourishment? And the chief Priests
together with their faction use all arts and watch all opportunities to get
Christ, not that they might possess him, but to destroy him; little considering
that they extinguish their own eyes, and destroy that spring of life which was
intended to them for a blissful immortality.

10. And here it was that the Devil showed his promptness to furnish every
evil-intended person with apt instruments to act the very worst of his
intentions: the Devil knew their purposes, and the aptness and proclivity of
Judas; and by bringing these together he served their present design, and his
own great intendment. The Devil never fails to promote every evil purpose; and,
except where God's restaining grace does intervene and interrupt the
opportunity, by interposition of different and cross accidents to serve other
ends of Providence, no man easily is fond of wickedness, but he shall receive
enough to ruin him. Indeed Nero and Julian, both witty men and powerful,
desired to have been Magicians, and could not: and although possibly the Devil
would have corresponded with them, who yet were already his own in all degrees
of security; yet God permitted not that, lest they might have understood new
ways of doing despite to Martyrs and (...) Christians. And it concerns us not
to tempt God, or invite a forward enemy: for as we are sure the Devil is ready
to promote all vicious desires, and bring them out to execution; so we are not
sure that God will not permit him; and he that desires to be undone, and cares
not to be prevented by God's restraining grace, shall find his ruin in the
folly of his own desires, and become wretched by his own election. Judas,
hearing of this Congregation of the Priests, went and offered to betray his
Lord, and made a Covenant, the Price of which was Thirty Pieces of Silver, and
he returned.

11. It is not intimated in the History of the Life of Jesus, that Judas had
any Malice against the Person of Christ; for when afterward he saw the matter
was to end in the death of his Lord, he repented: but a base and unworthy
spirit of Covetousness possessed him; and the relics of (...) for missing the
Price of the Ointment which the holy Magdalen had poured upon his feet burnt in
his bowels with a secret dark melancholic (...) and made an eruption into an
act which all ages of the world could never parallel. They appointed him for
hire thirty pieces, and some say that every piece did in value equal ten
ordinary current Deniers; and so Judas was satisfied by receiving the worth of
the three hundred pence at which he valued the Nard pistick. But hereafter let
no Christian be ashamed to be despised and undervalued; for he will hardly meet
so great a reproach as to have so disproportioned a price set upon his life as
was upon the Holy Jesus. S. Mary (...) thought it not good enough to aneal his
sacred feet, Judas thought it a sufficient price for his head: for Covetousness
aims at base and low purchaces, whilst holy Love is great and comprehensive as
the bosom of Heaven, and aims at nothing that is less than infinite. The love
of God is a holy fountain, limpid and pure, sweet and salutary, lasting and
eternal: the love of Money is a vertiginous pool sucking all into it to destroy
it; it is troubled and uneven, giddy and unsafe, serving no end but its own,
and that also in a restless and uneasy motion. The love of God spends it self
upon him, to receive again the reflections of grace and benediction: the love of
Money spends all its desires upon it sell, to purchase nothing but unsatisfying
instruments of exchange, or supernumerary provisions, and ends in
dissatisfaction, and emptiness of spirit, and a bitter curse. S. Mary Magdalen
was defended by her Lord against calumny, and rewarded with an honorable
mention to all Ages of the Church; besides the unction from above, which she
shortly after received to consign her to crowns and sceptres: but Judas was
described in the Scripture, the Book of life, with the black character of
death, he was disgraced to eternal Ages, and presently after acted his own
tragedy with a sad and ignoble death.

12. Now, all things being fitted, our Blessed Lord sends two Disciples to
prepare the Passover, that he might fulfill the Law of Moses, and pass from
thence to institutions Evangelical, and then fulfill his Sufferings. Christ
gave them a sign to guide them to the house, a man bearing a pitcher of water;
by which some, that delight in mystical significations, say was typified the
Sacrament of Baptism: meaning, that although by occasion of the Paschal
solemnity the holy Eucharist was first instituted, yet it was afterward to be
applied to practice according to the sense of this accident; only baptized
persons were apt suscipients of the other more perfective Rite, as the taking
nutriment supposes persons born into the world, and within the common
conditions of humane nature. But in the letter it was an instance of the Divine
omniscience, who could pronounce concerning accidents at distance as if they
were present: and yet also, like the provision of the Colt to ride on, it was
an instance of Providence, and security of all God's sons for their portion of
temporals. Jesus had not a Lamb of his own, and possibly no money in the bags
to buy one: and yet Providence was his guide, and the charity of a good man was
his Proveditore, and he found excellent conveniences in the entertainments of a
hospitable good man, as if he had dwelt in Ahab's Ivory-house, and had had the
riches of Solomon, and the meat of his household.

The PRAYER.
O Holy King of Sion, Eternal Jesus, who with great Humility and infinite Love
did enter into the Holy City, riding upon an Ass, that thou might verisie
the Predictions of the Prophets, and give example of Meekness and of the gentle
and paternal government which the eternal Father laid upon thy shoulders; be
pleased, deares^t Lord, to enter into my Soul with triumph, trampling over all
thine enemies: and give me grace to entertain thee with joy and adoration, with
abjection of my own desires, with lopping off all my supersluous branches of a
temporal condition, and spending them in the offices of Charity and Religion,
and devesting my self of all my desires, laying them at thy holy feet, that I
may bear the yoke and burden of the Lord with alacrity, with love, and the
wonders of a satisfied and triumphant spirit. Lord, enter in and take
possession; and thou, to whose honor the very stones would give testimony,
make my stony heart an instrument of thy praises; let me strew thy way with
flowers of Virtue, and the holy Rosary of Christian Graces: and by thy aid and
example let us also triumph over all our infirmities and hostilities, and then
lay our victories at thy feet, and at last follow thee into thy heavenly
Jerusalem with palms in our hands, and joy in our hearts, and eternal
acclamations on our lips, rejoicing in thee, and singing Hallelujahs in a happy
Eternity to thee, O holy King of Sion, eternal Jesus. Amen.

2.
O Blessed and dear Lord, who were pleased to permit thy self to be sold to the
assemblies of evil persons for a vile price by one of thy own servants, for
whom thou had done so great favors, and had designed a crown and a throne
to him, and he turned himself into a sooty coal, and entered into the portion of
evil Angels; teach us to value thee above all the joys of men, to prize thee at
an estimate beyond all the wealth of nature, to buy wisdom, and not to sell
it, to part with all that we may enjoy thee: and let no temptation abuse our
understandings, no loss vex us into impatience, no frustration of hope fill us
with indignation, no pressure of calamitous accidents make us angry at thee the
fountain of love and blessing, no Covetousness transport us into the suburbs of
Hell and the regions of sin; but make us to love thee as well as ever any
creature loved thee, that we may never burn in any fires but of a holy love,
nor sink in any inundation but what proceeds from penitential showrs, and
suffer no violence but of implacable desires to live with thee, and, when thou
call us, to suffer with thee, and for thee.

3.
LOrd, let me never be betrayed by my self, or any violent accident and (...)
temptation; let me never be sold for the vile price of temporal gain, or
transient pleasure, or a pleasant dream; but since thou have bought me with a
price, even then when thou were sold thy self, let me never be separated from
thy possession. I am thine, bought with a price, Lord, save me; and in the day
when thou bindest up thy Jewels remember, Lord, that I cost thee as dear as
any, and therefore cast me not into the portion of Judas: but let me walk and
dwell and bathe in the field of thy blood, and pass from hence pure and
sanctified into the society of the elect Apostles, receiving my part with them,
and my lot in the communications of thy inheritance, O gracious Lord and
dearest Savior Jesus.

Amen.
Considerations upon the Washing of the Disciples Feet by Ad Number. 16.
JESUS, and his Sermon of Humility.
He washes his Disciples feet.
John. 13. 5. After that he powers water into a baso^ and began to wash the
Disciples feet and to wipe them with the towel, wherewith he was girded.

6. Then comes he to Simon Peter, and Peter says unto him, Lord do thou
wash my feet?

The Institution of his last Supper.
Mark: 14. 22. And as they did eat, Lesus took bread; and blessed and brake it
and gave to them and said, Take eat, this is my body.

And he took ye Cup and when he had given thanks he gave it to them and they
all drank of it.

In the (...) of the Communion




1. THE Holy JESUS went now to eat his last Paschal Supper, and to finish the
work of his Legation, and to fulfill that part of the Law of Moses in every of
its smallest and most minute particularities, in which also the actions were
significant of spiritual duties: which we may transfer from the letter to the
spirit in our own instances, That as JESUS ate the Paschal Lamb with a staff in
his Hand, with his Loins girt, with sandals on his Feet, in great haste, with
unlevened Bread, and with bitter Herbs; so we also should do all our services
according to the signification of these symbols, leaning upon the Cross of
JESUS for a staff, and bearing the rod of his Government, with Loins girt with
Angelical Chastity, with shoes on our Feet, that so we may guard and have
custody over our affections, and be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace, eating in haste, as becomes persons hungring and thirsting after
Righteousness, doing the work of the Lord zealously and fervently, without the
leven of Malice and secular interest, with bitter herbs of Self-denial and
Mortification of our sensual and inordinate desires. The sense and mystery of
the whole act with all its circumstances is, That we obey all the Sanctions of
the Divine Law, and that every part of our Religion be pure and peaceable,
chaste and obedient, confident in God and diffident in our selves, frequent and
zealous, humble and resigned; just and charitable; and there will not easily be
wanting any just circumstance to hallow and consecrate the action.

2. When the Holy Jesus had finished his last Mosaic Rite, he descends to give
example of the first fruit of Evangelical Graces: he rises from Supper, lays
aside his garment like a servant, and with all the circumstances of an humble
ministry washes the feet of his Disciples, (...) (...).
beginning at the first, S. Peter, until he came to Judas the Traitor; that we
might in one scheme see a rare conjunction of Charity and Humility, of
Self-denial and indifferency, represented by a person glorious and great, their
Lord and Master, sad and troubled. And he chose to wash their Idcirco pides
(...) and capui; quia in lavandis pidibus, and (...) est gestus humilitatis,
and propinquior significatio charitatis, (...) nos (...) suo a (...) nostris.
(...).
feet rather than their head, that he might have the opportunity of a more
humble posture, and a more apt signification of his Charity. Thus God lays
every thing aside that he may serve his servants; Heaven stoops to earth, and
one abyss calls upon another, and the Miseries of man, which were next to
infinite, are excelled by a Mercy equal to the immensity of God. And this
washing of their feet, which was an accustomed civility and entertainment of
honored strangers at the beginning of their meal, Christ deferred to the end
of the Paschal Supper, that it might be the preparatory to the second, which he
intended should be festival to all the world. S. Peter was troubled that the
hands of his Lord should wash his servants feet, those hands which had opened
the eyes of the blind, and cured lepers, and healed all diseases, and when lift
up to Heaven were omnipotent, and could restore life to dead and buried
persons; he counted it a great indecency for him to suffer it: but it was no
more than was necessary, for they had but lately been earnest in dispute for
Precedence; and it was of it self so apt to swell into tumor and
inconvenience, that it was not to be cured but by some Prodigy of Example and
Miracle of Humility, which the Holy Jesus offered to them in this express,
calling them to learn some great Lesson; a Lesson which God descended from
Heaven to earth, from riches to poverty, from essential innocence to the
disreputation of a sinner, from a Master to a Servant, to learn us, that is,
that we should esteem our selves but just as we are, low, sinful, miserable,
needy and unworthy. It seems it is a great thing that man should come to have
just and equal thoughts of himself, that God used such powerful arts to
transmit this Lesson, and engrave it in the spirits of men; and if the Receipt
fails, we are eternally lost in the mists of vanity, and enter into the
condition of those Angels whom Pride transformed and spoiled into the condition
of Devils: and upon consideration of this great example (...) sub tam (...)
Dio? S. Bernard.
Guericus a good man cried out, Thou have overcome, O Lord, thou have overcome
my Pride; this Example has mastered me; I deliver my self up into thy hands,
never to receive liberty or exaltation but in the condition of thy humblest
servant.

3. And to this purpose S. Bernard has an affectionate and devout
consideration, saying, That some of the Angels as soon as they were created had
an ambition to become like God, and to aspire into the Throne which God had
appointed to the Holy Jesus in eternal ages. When God created Man, presently
the Devil rubbed his Leprosy upon him, and he would needs be like God too, and
Satan promised him that he should. As the evil Angels would have been like to
God in Power and Majesty, so Man would have been like him in Knowledge, and
have imitated the Wisdom of the Eternal Father. But Man had the fate of
Gehezi; he would needs have the talent and garments of Lucifer, and he had also
his plague; he lost Paradise for his Pride. And now what might befit the Son of
God to do, seeing Man so lost, and God so zealous of his honor? I see (says
he) that by occasion of me the Father loses his Creatures, for they have all
aspired to be like me, and are fallen into the greatest infelicities. Behold, I
will go toward man in such a form, that whosoever from henceforth would become
like me shall be so, and be a gainer by it. And for this cause the Son of God
came from Heaven, and made himself a poor humble person, and by all the actions
of his life commented upon the present discourse: Learn of me, for I am meek
and humble Matt. 11. 29.
of heart. Blessed be that mercy and bounty which moved Almighty God to
condescend to that so great appetite we had of being like him; for now (...)
may be like unto God, but it must be by Humility, of which he has given us an
example powerful as Miracles, and great as our own Pride and Misery.

4. And indeed our Blessed Lord, knowing that Examples are like Maps and
perfect Schemes in which the whole Continent may at once be represented to the
eye to all the purposes of art and benefit, did in the latter end of his life
draw up the dispersions and larger harvest of his Precepts, binding them in the
bundle of great Examples, and casting them into actions as into sums total:
for so this act of Washing the feet of his own Ministers, and then dying for
them, and for all his enemies, did preach the three great (...) of Evangelical
Perfection with an admirable energy and abbreviature; Humility, and Charity,
and Sufferings, being to Christianity as the Body, and the Soul, and the Spirit
are to the whole man. For no man brings a sad Funeral into the theater to make
Turgidus bic (...), (...) sulphureas (...). Pers. Sat. 3.
his spectators merry, nor can well preach Chastity in the impurity of the
Bordelli, or persuade Temperance when himself is full of wine and luxury, and
enters into the baths to boil his undigested meat that he may return to his
second supper, and breaths forth impure belchings together with his Homily; a
poor Eremite, or a severely-living Philosopher, into whose life his own
Precepts have descended, and his Doctrine is mingled with his Soul, mingles also
effect and virtue with Homilies, and incorporates his Doctrine in the hearts of
his Disciples. And this the Holy Jesus did in his own person, bearing the
burden first upon his own shoulders, that we may with better alacrity undergo
what our Blessed Lord bears with us and for us. But that we may the better
understand what our Blessed Lord designed to us in this Lecture, let us
consider the proper acts of Humility which integrate the Virtue.

5. The first is, Christ's Humble man thinks meanly of himself: and there is
great reason every man should. For his Body is but rottenness and infirmity
covered with a fair mantle, a dunghill overcast with snow: and if we consider
sadly, that from Trees and Plants come oil, balsam, wine, spices, and
aromatic odors, and that from the sinks of our Body no such sweet or salutary
emanations are observed, we may at least think it unreasonable to boast our
Beauty, which is nothing but a clear and well-colored skin, which every thing
in the world can spoil; nor our Strength, which an Ague tames into the
infirmities of a child, and in which we are excelled by a Bull; nor any thing
of our Body, which is nothing but an unruly servant of the Soul, marked with
characters of want and dependence, and begging help from all the elements, and
upon a little disturbance growing troublesome to it self by its own impurities.
And yet there is no reason in respect of the Soul for any man to exalt himself
above his Brother; because all reasonable Souls are equal; and that one is
wise, and another is foolish or less learned, is by accident and extrinsick
causes: God at first makes all alike; but an indisposed Body, or an mopportune
Education, or evil Customs superinduce variety and difference. And if God
discerns a man from his Brother by distinction of Gifts, it alters not the
case; still the man has nothing of himself that can call him excellent: it is
as if a Wall upon which the Sun reflects should boast it self against another
that stands in the shadow. Greater glory is to be paid to God for the
discerning Gifts; but to take any of it to our selves, and rise higher than our
Brother, or advance our own opinion, is as if a man should be proud of being in
debt, and think it the greater excellency that he is charged with heavier and
more severe accounts.

6. This act consists not in declamations and forms of Satyr against our
selves, saying, (...) patientia (...). S. Hier.
I am a miserable sinful creature, I am proud, or covetous, or ignorant. For
many men say so that are not willing to be thought so. Neither is Humility a
virtue made up of wearing old clothes, or doing servile and mean employments by
voluntary undertaking, or of sullen gestures, or demiss behavior, and artifice
of lowly expressions: for these may become snares to invite and catch at
Honor, and then they are collateral designs of Pride, and direct actions of
Hypocrisy. But it consists in a true understanding of our own condition, and a
separating our own Nothing from the good we have received, and giving to God
all the glory, and taking to our selves all the shame and dishonor due to our
sinful condition. He that thinks himself truly miserable and vilified by sin,
hates it perfectly; and he that knows himself to be nothing cannot be exalted
in himself: and whatsoever is besides these two extremes of a natural Nothing
and a superadded Sin, must be those good things we have received, which,
because they derive from God, must make all their returns thither. But this act
is of greater difficulty in persons pious, full of Gifts and eminent in Graces,
who, being fellow-workers together with God, sometimes grow tacitly and
without notice given to (...) in themselves, and with some freer fancy ascribe
too much of the good action to their own choice and diligence, and take up
their crowns, which lie at the foot of the throne, and set them upon their own
heads. For a Sinner to desire to be esteemed a sinner, is no more Humility than
it is for the son of a Plowman to confess his Father; but indeed it is hard
for a man to be cried up for a Saint, to walk upon the spire of glory, and to
have no adherence or impure mixtures of Vanity grow upon the outside of his
heart. All men have not such heads as to walk in great heights without
giddiness and unsettled eyes: Lucifer and many Angels walking upon the
battlements of Heaven grew top-heavy and fell into the state of Devils; and the
Father of the Christian Eremites, S. Antony, was frequently attempted by the
Devil, S. Hier. in (...) S. Anton.
and solicited to vanity, the Devil usually making fantastic noises to be
heard before him, Make room for the Saint and Servant of God: But the good man
knew Christ's voice to be a low Base of Humility, and that it was the noise of
Hell that invited to complacencies and vanity; and therefore took the example
of the Apostles, who in the midst of the greatest reputation and spiritual
advancements were dead unto the world, and seemed to live in the state of
separation. For the true stating our own Question and knowing our selves must
needs represent us set in the midst of infinite imperfections, laden with
sins, choked with the noises of a polluted Conscience, persons fond of
trifles, neglecting objects fit for wise men, full of ingratitude, and all such
things which in every man else we look upon as scars and deformities, and which
we use to single out, and take one alone as sufficient to disgrace and
disrepute all the excellencies of our Neighbor: But if we would esteem them
with the same severity in our selves, and remember with how many such
objections our little felicities are covered, it would make us charitable in
our censures, compassionate and gentle to others, apt to excuse, and as ready
to support their weaknesses, and in all accidents and chances to our selves to
be content and thankful, as knowing the worst of poverty and inconvenience to
be a mercy and a splendid fortune in respect of our demerits. I have read, that
when the Duke of Candia had voluntarily entered into the incommodities of a
Religious Poverty and retirement, he was one day spied and pitied by a Lord of
Italy, who out of tenderness wished him to be more careful and nutritive of his
person. The good Duke answered, Sir, be not troubled, and think not that I am
ill provided of conveniences, for I send a Harbinger before, who makes my
lodgings ready, and takes care that I be royally entertained. The Lord asked
him who was his Harbinger. He answered, The knowledge of my self, and the
consideration of what I deserve for my sins, which is eternal torments; and
when with this knowledge I arrive at my lodging, how unprovided soever I find
it, methinks it is ever better than I deserve. The sum of this Meditation
consists in believing, and considering, and reducing to practice those
thoughts, that we are nothing of our selves, that we have nothing of our own,
that we have received more than ever we can discharge, that we have added
innumerable sins, that we can call nothing our own but such things which we are
ashamed to own, and such things which are apt to ruin us. If we do nothing
contrary to the purpose and hearty persuasion of such thoughts, then we think
meanly of our selves. And in order to it, we may make use of this advice, To
let no day pass without some sad recollection and memory of somewhat which may
put us to confusion and mean opinion of our selves; either call to mind the
worst of our sins, or the undiscreetest of our actions, or the greatest of our
shame, or the uncivilest of our affronts, any thing to make us descend lower,
and kiss the foot of the mountain. And this consideration applied also to every
tumor of spirit as soon as it rises may possibly allay it.

7. Secondly, Christ's Humble man bears contumelies evenly and sweetly, and
desires not Ama nesciri and pro ^^hilo reputari. Gerson.
to be honored by others: He chooses to do those things that deserve honor and
a fair name, but then eats not of those fruits himself, but transmits them to
the use of others, and the glories of God. This is a certain consequence of the
other: for he that truly disesteems himself is content that others should do so
too; and he who with some regret and impatience hears himself scorned or
undervalued, has not acquired the grace of Humility. Which Serapion in Cassian
noted to a young person, who perpetually accused himself with the greatest
semblances of Humility, but was impatient when Serapion reproved him. Did you
hope that I would have praised Appetere de humilitale laudem humilitatis non
est virtus, sed subversio. Quid enim perversum magi^ aut indignius, quam ut
inde velu haberi melior, unde tibi videris deterior? S. Bernard.
your Humility, and have reputed you for a Saint? It is a strange perverseness
to desire others to esteem highly of you for that, in which to your self you
seem most unworthy. He that inquires into the faults of his own actions,
requiring Est qui nequiter humiliat si, and interiora ejus sunt plena dolo.
Eccle^. 12. 11.
them that saw them to tell him in what he did amiss, not to learn the fault,
but to engage them to praise it, cozens himself into Pride and makes Humility
the instrument. And a man would be ashamed if he were told that he used
stratagems for praise: but so glorious a thing is Humility, that Pride, to hide
her own shame, puts on the others vizor; it being more to a proud man's
purposes to seem humble than to be so. And such was the Cynick whom Lucian
derided, because that one searching his scrip in expectation to have found in
it moldy bread or old rags, he discovered a bale of dice, a box of perfumes,
and the picture of his fair Mistress. Carisianus walked in his Gown Nil
lascivius est Carisiano; In Saturnalibus ambulat regatus. Matt.
in the Feast of Saturn, and when all Rome was let loose in wantonness, he put
on the long Robe of a Senator, and a severe person; and yet nothing was more
lascivious than he. But the Devil Pride prevails sometimes upon the spirit of
Lust. Humility neither directly nor by consequence seeks for praise, and
suffers it not to rest upon its own pavement, but reflects it all upon God, and
receives all lessenings and instruments of affront and disgrace, that mingle
not with sin or undecencies, more willingly than Panegyricks. When others have
their desires, thou not thine; the sayings of another are esteemed, thine
slighted; others ask and obtain, thou beggest and art refused; they are cried
up, thou disgraced and hissed at; and while they are employed, thou art laid
by, as fit for nothing; or an unworthy person commands thee and rules thee like
a tyrant, he reproves thee, suspects thee, reviles thee; can thou bear this
sweetly, and entertain the usage as thy just portion, and as an accident most
fit and proper to thy person and condition? Do thou not raise Theaters to thy
self, and take delight in the suppletories of thy own good opinion, and the
flatteries of such whom thou endearest to thee, that their praising thee should
heal the wounds of thine honor by an imaginary and fantastic restitution? He
that is not content and patient in affronts, has not yet learned Humility of
the Holy Jesus.

8. Thirdly, As Christ's Humble man is content in affronts, and not greedy of
praise; so when it is presented to him, he takes no contentment in it: and if
it be easy to want Praise when it is denied, yet it is harder not to be
delighted with it when it is offered. But there is much reason that we should
put restraints upon our selves, lest if we be praised without desert, we find a
greater Judgment of God; or if we have done well and received (...) (David,)
(...) aut de his in (...), and non sunt, (...) judicium (...) at; (...) his
(...) quibus (...), and (...). S. Gieg.
praise for it, we (...) all our reward, which God has deposited for them that
receive not their good things in this life. For as silver is tried in the
melter, and gold in the Crucible: so is a man tried by the mouth of him that
praises him: that is, he is either clarified from his dross by looking upon the
praise as a homily to teach and an instrument to invite his duty; or else, if
he be already pure, he is consolidated, strengthened in the sobriety of his
spirit, and retires himself closer into the strengths and securities of
Humility. Nay, this step of Humility uses in very holy persons to be enlarged
to a delight in affronts and disreputation in the world. Now I begin to be
Christ' s Disciple, (said (...) the Martyr, when in his journey to Rome he
suffered perpetual revilings and abuse.) S. Paul rejoiced in his infirmities
and reproach: and all the Apostles at Jerusalem went from the tribunal
rejoicing that they were esteemed worthy to suffer shame Acts 5. 41.
for the name of Jesus. This is an excellent condition and degree of Humility.
But I choose to add one that is less, but in all persons necessary.

9. Fourthly, Christ's Humble man is careful never to speak any thing that may
redound to his own praise, unless it be with a design of Charity or Duty, that
either God's glory or the profit of his neighbor be concerned in it; but never
speaking with a design to be esteemed learned or honorable. S. Arsenius had
been Tutor to three Caesar's, Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius; but afterward
when he became Religious, no word escaped him that might represent and tell of
his former greatness: and it is observable concerning S. Jerome, that although
he was of noble extraction, yet in all his own Writings there is not the
smallest intimation of it. This I desire to be understood only to the sense and
purposes of Humility, and that we have no designs of vanity and fancy in
speaking learnedly, or recounting our exterior advantages: but if either the
(...) of our brother or the glory of God, if either there be Piety or Charity
in the design, it is lawful to publish all those excellencies with which God
has distinguished us from others. The young Marquess of Castilion being to do
public exercise in his course of Philosophy, made it a case of Conscience
whether he were bound to dispute his best, fearing lest vanity might transport
him in the midst of those praises which his Collegiates might give him. It was
an excellent consideration in the young Gentleman: but in actions civil and
humane, since the danger is not so immediate, and a little complacency becoming
the instrument of virtue and encouragement of studies may with like care be
referred to God as the giver, and (...) his praises; he might with more safety
have done his utmost, it being in some sense a duty to encourage others, to
give account of our Graces and our labors, and all the appendent vanity may
quickly be suppressed. A good name may give us opportunity of persuading others
to their duty, especially in an Age in which men choose their Doctrines by the
men that preach them: and S. Paul used his liberty when he was zealous for his
Corinthian Disciples, but restrained himself when it began to make reflections
upon his own spirit. But although a good name be necessary, and in order to
such good ends whither it may serve it is lawful to desire it; yet a great
name, and a pompous honor, and secular greatness, has more danger in it to
our selves than ordinarily it can have of benefit to others: and although a man
may use the greatest honors to the greatest purposes, yet ordinary persons may
not safely desire them; because it will be found very hard to have such
mysterious and abstracted considerations, as to separate all our proper
interest from the public end. To which I add this consideration, That the
contempt of Honor, and the instant pursuit of Humility, is more effective of
the ghostly benefit of others, than Honors and great Dignities can be, unless
it be rarely and very accidentally.

10. If we need any new incentives to the practice of this Grace, I can say no
more, but that Humility is Truth, and Pride is a Lie; that the one glorifies
God, the other dishonours him; Humility makes men like Angels, Pride makes
Angels to become Devils; that Pride is Folly, Humility is the temper of a holy
spirit and excellent Wisdom; that Humility is the way to glory, Pride to ruin
and confusion: Humility makes Saints on Earth, Pride undoes them: Humility
beatifies the Saints in Heaven, and the Elders throw their Crowns at the foot
of the Throne; Pride disgraces a man among all the Societies of Earth: God
loves one, and Satan solicits the cause of the other, and promotes his own
interest in it most of all. And there is no one Grace in which Christ
propounded himself imitable so signally as in this of Meekness and Humility:
for the enforcing of which he undertook the condition of a Servant, and a life
of Poverty, and a death of Disgrace; and washed the feet of his Disciples, and
even of Judas himself, that his action might be turned into a Sermon to preach
this Duty, and to make it as eternal as his own Story.

The PRAYER.
O Holy and Eternal Jesus, who were pleased to lay aside the Glories and
incomprehensible Majesty which clothed thy Infinity from before the beginning
of Creatures, and did put on a cloud upon thy Brightness, and were invested
with the impure and imperfect broken robe of Humane nature, and did abate
those Splendors which broke through the veil, commanding Devils not to publish
thee, and men not to proclaim thy Excellencies, and the Apostles not to reveal
those Glories of thine which they discovered incircling thee upon mount Tabor
in thy transfiguration, and did by perpetual Homilies and symbolical
mysterious actions, as with deep characters, engrave Humility into the spirits
of thy Disciples and the Discipline of Christianity; teach us to approach near
to these thy Glories which thou have so covered with a cloud that we might
without amazement behold thy Excellencies; make us to imitate thy gracious
Condescensions; take from us all vanity and fantastic complacencies in our
own persons or actions; and when there arises a reputation consequent to the
performance of any part of our Duty, make us to (...) the glory upon thee,
suffering nothing to adhere to our own spirits but shame at our own
imperfection, and thankfulness to thee for all thy assistences: let us never
seek the praise of men from unhandsome actions, from flatteries and unworthy
discourses, nor entertain the praise with delight, though it proceed from
better principles; but fear and tremble, lest we deserve punishment, or lose a
reward which thou have deposited for all them that seek thy glory, and despise
their own, that they may imitate the example of their Lord. Thou, O Lord, did
triumph over Sin and Death; subdue also my proud Understanding and my prouder
Affections, and bring me under thy yoke; that I may do thy work, and obey my
Superiors, and be a servant of all my brethren in their necessities, and
esteem my self inferior to all men by a deep sense of my own unworthiness, and
in all things may obey thy Laws, and conform to thy precedents, and enter into
thine inheritance, O Holy and Eternal Jesus.

Amen.
DISCOURSE XIX. Of the Institution and Reception of the Holy Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper.
1. AS the Sun among the Stars, and Man among the sublunary creatures, is the
most eminent and noble, the Prince of the inferiors, and their measure, or
their guide: so is this action among all the instances of Religion; it is the
most perfect and consummate, it is an union of Mysteries and a consolidation of
Duties, it joins God and Man, and confederates all the Societies of men in
mutual complexions, and the entertainments of an excellent Charity; it actually
performs all that could be necessary for Man, and it presents to Man as great a
thing as God could give; for it is impossible any thing should be greater than
himself. And when God gave his Son to the world, it could not be but he should
give us all things else: and therefore this Blessed Sacrament is a consigning
us to all Felicities, because after a mysterious and ineffable manner we
receive him who is Light and Life, the fountain of Grace, and the sanctifier of
our secular comforts, and the author of Holiness and Glory. But as it was at
first, so it has been ever since; Christ came into the world, and the world
knew him not: so Christ has remained in the world by the communications of
this Sacrament, and yet he is not rightly understood, and less truly valued.
But Christ may say to us as once to the woman of Samaria, Woman, if thou did
know the gift of God, and who it is that speaks to thee, thou would ask him:
So if we were so wise, or so fortunate, to know the excellency of this Gift of
the Lord, it would fill us full of wonder and adoration, joy and thankfulness,
great hopes and actual felicities, making us heirs of glory by the great
additions and present increment of Grace.

2. After supper Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and made it to be a heavenly
gift: He gave them bread, and told them it was his body; that Body which was
broken for the redemption of Man, for the Salvation of the world. S. Paul calls
it [ bread] even after 1 Cor. 10. 16.
Consecration; The Bread which we break, is it not the communication of the
Body of Christ? So that by divine Faith we are taught to express our belief of
this Mystery in these words; [The Bread, when it is consecrated and made
sacramental, is the Body of our Lord; and the fraction and distribution of it
is the communication of that Body which died for us upon the Cross.] He that
doubts of either of the parts of this Proposition must either think, Christ was
not able to verify his word, and to make bread by his benediction to become to
us to be his body; or that S. Paul did not well interpret and understand this
Mystery, when he called it bread. Christ reconciles them both, calling himself
the bread of life: and if we be offended at it, because it is alive, and
therefore less apt to become food, we are invited to it because it is bread;
and if the Sacrament to others seem less mysterious, because it is bread, we
are heightened in our Faith and reverence because it is life: The Bread of the
Sacrament is the life of our Soul, and the Body of our Lord is now conveyed to
us by being the Bread of the Sacrament. And if we consider how easy it is to
Faith, and how impossible it seems to Curiosity, we shall be taught confidence
and modesty; a resigning our understanding to the voice of Christ and his
Apostles, and yet expressing our own articles as Christ did, in indefinite
significations. And possibly it may not well consist with our Duty to be
inquisitive into the secrets of the Kingdom, which we see by plain event has
divided the Church almost as much as the Sacrament has united it, and which
can only serve the purposes of the School and of evil men, to make Questions
for that, and Factions for these, but promote not the ends of a holy life,
Obedience, or Charity.

3. Some so observe the literal sense of the words, that they understand them
also in a natural: Some so alter them by metaphors and preternatural
significations, that they will not understand them at all in a proper. We see
it, we feel it, we taste it, and we smell it to be Bread; and by Philosophy we
are led into a belief of that substance whose accidents these are, as we are to
believe that to be fire which burns and flames and shines: but Christ also
affirmed concerning it, This is my Body; and if Faith can create an assent as
strong as its object is infallible, or can be as certain in its conclusion as
sense is certain in its apprehensions, we must at no hand doubt but that it is
Christ's Body. Let the sense of that be what it will, so that we believe those
words, and (whatsoever that sense is which Christ intended) that we no more
doubt in our Faith than we do in our Sense; then our Faith is not reproveable.
It is hard to do so much violence to our Sense, as not to think it Bread; but
it is more unsafe to do so much violence to our Faith, as not to believe it to
be Christ's Body. But it would be considered, that no interest of Religion, no
saying of Christ, no reverence of Opinion, no sacredness of the Mystery is
disavowed, if we believe both what we hear and what we see. He that believes it
to be Bread, and yet verily to be Christ's Body, is only tied also by
implication to believe God's Omnipotence, that he who affirmed it can also
verify it. And they that are forward to believe the change of substance, can
intend no more but that it be believed verily to be the Body of our Lord. And
if they think it impossible to reconcile its being Bread with the verity of
being Christ's Body, let them remember that themselves are put to more
difficulties, and to admit of more Miracles, and to contradict more Sciences,
and to refuse the testimony of Sense, in affirming the special manner of
Transubstantiation. (...) and distributum (...) corpus suum (...) est corpus
(...), id est, figura (...). Figura a, (...), non fuisset, (...) corpus. (...).
lib. 4. (...). cap. 40. (...) si quicquid (...) in os, in (...) abit, and in
(...), and (...) cibus qui (...) per verbum Dei (...) quod (...) in (...), and
in (...), etc. and (...). Origin. in 15. cap. S. (...). (...). Theod. Dial. 2.
Idem disput. (...) Christi Naturam conversum iri in Divinam, (...). modo quo
(...) in corpus Christi, (...), Certe (...) scil. (...), hoc est, (...). (...),
etc. Our (...) Savior, who has called (...) the (...) Bread and a Vine, has
also honored the visible Signs with the title and (...) of his Body and Blood,
not changing their Nature, but adding to Nature Grace. See the Dialog. called
the Immovable. (...) quae suminus (...) and Sanguinis Christi divina res est.
(...) quod (...) consortes (...), and (...) non (...) esse (...) natura (...)
and (...); and (...) and (...) Corporis and (...) Christi in action (...). P.
Gelasius libr. (...) and (...). Non (...) panis, and poculum sanguis; sed quod
(...) corporis (...). Facundus. Si n. (...) quandam (...) non (...) quarum sunt
sacramenta, omnino sacramenta non essent: ex (...) a. (...) actipiunt. (...) S.
Aug. (...). 23. (...) contr. (...) Manich. lib. 10. c. 2. Quod ob omnibus (...)
est (...), in quo caro Christi post (...) per (...). Apud Grauanum de
Consecrat. did. 2. c. 48. (...) (...) in (...) in (...): virba: Sicut (...),
qui (...) est, suo (...) Corpus Christi, (...) corporis Christi, (...) viz.
quod visibile, quod palpabile, (...) in (...) ipsa (...) carnis quae (...)
Passio; Mors, Crucifixio, non (...) quod (...) est. * Si (...) vasa (...) est,
in quibus non est (...) Christi, sed mysterium corporis (...) mag's vasa
corporis (...), etc. S. Chrysostom. Opere imperf. in (...) in (...). ad
Caesarium, in (...). Pp. (...). 1618. (...) illum sanctificante gratia, (...)
quidem est ab (...) Panis, dignus autem (...) est (...) Corporis appellations,
(...) natura Panis in (...), etc.
And therefore it were safer to admit the words in their first sense, in which
we shall no more be at war with Reason, nor so much with Sense, and not at all
with Faith. And for persons of the contradictory persuasion, who to avoid the
natural sense affirm it only to be figurative, since their design is only to
make this Sacrament to be Christ's Body in the sense of Faith, and not of
Philosophy, they may remember that its being really present does not hinder but
that all that reality may be spiritual; and if it be Christ's Body, so it be
not affirmed such in a natural sense and manner, it is still only the object of
Faith and spirit; and if it be affirmed only to be spiritual, there is then no
danger to Faith in admitting the words of Christ's institution, This is my
Body. I suppose it to be a mistake, to think what soever is real must be
natural; and it is no less to think spiritual to be only figurative: that is too
much, and this is too little. Philosophy and Faith may well be reconciled; and
whatsoever objection can invade this union may be cured by modesty. And if we
profess we understand not the manner of this Mystery, we say no more but that
it is a Mystery; and if it had been necessary we should have construed it into
the most latent sense, Christ himself would have given a Clavis, and taught the
Church to unlock so great a Secret. Christ said, This is my Body, 1 Cor. 10.
16, 17.
this is my (...): S. Paul said, The bread of blessing that we break is the
communication of the body of Christ, and the Chalice which we bless is the
communication (...) non (...) Panem esse(...) sed (...), ut (...) corpus
Domini, (...) fiant unum participans and (...) and (...) Caro. (...) partem
aliquam sibi (...), (...) (...) particips est.
of the blood of Christ; and, We are all one body, because we eat of one bread.
One proposition as well as the other is the matter of Faith, and the latter of
them is also of Sense; one is as literal as the other: and he that
distinguishes in his belief, as he may place the impropriety upon which part he
please, and either say it is improperly called Bread, or improperly called
Christ's Body; so he can have nothing to secure his proposition from error, or
himself from boldness, in decreeing concerning Mysteries against the
testimonies of Sense, or beyond the modesty and simplicity of Christian Faith.
Let us love and adore the abyss of Divine Wisdom and Goodness, and entertain
the Sacrament with just and holy receptions; and then we shall receive all
those fruits of it which an earnest disputer, or a peremptory dogmatizer,
whether he happen right or wrong, has no warrant to expect upon the interest
of his Opinion.

4. In the Institution of this Sacrament Christ manifested, first, his Almighty
Power, secondly, his infinite Wisdom, and thirdly, his unspeakable Charity.
First, his Power is manifest in making the Symbols to be the instruments of
conveying himself to the spirit of the Receiver: He nourishes the Soul with
Bread, and feeds the Body with a Sacrament; he makes the Body spiritual by his
Graces there ministered, and makes the Spirit to be united to his Body by a
participation of the Divine nature: In the Sacrament that Body which is
reigning in Heaven is exposed upon the Table of blessing; and his Body which
was broken for us is now broken again, and yet remains impassible. Every
consecrated portion of bread and wine does exhibit Christ entirely to the
faithful Receiver; and yet Christ remains one, while he is wholly ministered in
10000 portions. So long as we call these mysterious, and make them intricate to
exercise our Faith, and to represent the wonder of the Mystery, and to increase
our Charity; our being inquisitive into the abyss can have no evil purposes.
God has instituted the Rite in visible Symbols, to make the secret Grace as
presential and discernible as it might, that by an instrument of Sense our
spirits might be accommodated as with an exterior object to produce an
internal act. But it is the prodigy of a miraculous power, by instruments so
easy to produce effects so glorious. This then is the object of Wonder and
Adoration.

5. Secondly, And this effect of Power does also remark the Divine Wisdom, who
has ordained such Symbols, which not only, like spittle and clay toward the
curing blind eyes, proclaim an Almighty Power, but they are apposite and proper
to signify a Duty, and become to us like the Word of Life, and from Bread they
turn into a Homily. For therefore our wisest Master has appointed Bread and
Wine, that we may be corporally united to him; that as the Symbols becoming
nutriment are turned into the substance of our bodies, so Christ being the food
of our Souls should assimilate us, making us partakers of the Divine Nature. It
also tells us, that from hence we derive life and holy motion; for in him we
live, and move, and have our being. He is the staff of our life, and the light
of our eyes, and the strength of our spirit; He is the Viand for our journey,
and the antepast of Heaven. And because this holy Mystery was intended to be a
Sacrament of Union, that Lesson is morally represented in the Symbols; That as
the salutary juice is expressed from many clusters running into one (...), and
the Bread is a mass made of many grains of Wheat; so we also (as the Apostie
infers from hence, himself observing the analogy) should be one bread and one
bodr, because we partake of that one bread. And it were to be wished that from
hence also all Christians would understand a signification of another Duty, and
that they would (...) communicate, as remembering that the Soul may need a
frequent ministration, as well as the Body its daily proportion. This
consideration of the Divine Wisdom is apt to produce Reverence, Humility, and
Submission of our understanding to the immensity of God's unsearchable abysses.

6. Thirdly, But the story of the Love of our dearest Lord is written in
largest characters, who not only was at that instant busy in doing Man the
greatest good, even then when man was contriving his death and his dishonor,
but contrived to represent his bitter Passion to us without any circumstances
of horror, in symbols of pleasure and delight; that we may taste and see how
gracious our LORD is, who would not transmit the record of his Passion to us in
any thing that might trouble us. No Love can be greater than that which is so
beatifical as to bestow the greatest good; and no Love can be better expressed
than that which, although it is productive of the greatest blessings, yet is
curious also to observe the smallest circumstances. And not only both these,
but many other circumstances and arguments of Love concur in the Holy
Sacrament. 1. It is a tenderness of affection that ministers wholesome Physic
with arts and instruments of pleasure: And such was the Charity of our Lord,
who brings health to us in a golden Chalice; life, not in the bitter drugs of
Egypt, but in spirits and quintessences; giving us apples of Paradise, at the
same time yielding food and health and pleasure. 2. Love desires to do all good
to its beloved object, and that is the greatest love which gives us the
greatest blessings: And the Sacrament therefore is the argument of his greatest
love; for in it we receive the honey and the honeycomb, the Paschal Lamb with
his bitter herbs, Christ with all his griefs, and his Passion with all the
salutary effects of it. 3. Love desires to be remembered, and to have his object
in perpetual representment: And this Sacrament Christ designed to that purpose,
that he, who is not present to our eyes, might always be present to our
spirits. 4. Love demands love again, and to desire to be beloved is of it self
a great argument of love: And as God cannot give us a greater blessing than his
Love, which is himself with an excellency of relation to us superadded; so what
greater demonstration of it can he make to us, than to desire us to love him
with as much earnestness and vehemence of desire, as if we were that to him
which he is essentially to us, the author of our being and our blessing? 5. And
yet to consummate this Love, and represent it to be the greatest and most
excellent, the Holy Jesus has in this Sacrament designed that we should be
united in our spirits with him, incorporated to his body, partake of his Divine
nature, and communicate in all his Graces; and Love has no expression beyond
this, that it desires to be united unto its object. So that what Moses said to
the men of Israel, What nation is so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as
the Lord our God is in all things for which we call upon him? we can enlarge in
the meditation of this Holy Sacrament: for now the Lord our God calls upon us,
not only to be nigh unto him, but to be all one with him; not only as he was in
the Incarnation, flesh of our flesh and bone of our bone, but also to
communicate in spirit, in grace, in nature, in Divinity it self.

7. Upon the strength of the premises we may sooner take an estimate of the
Graces which are conveyed to us in the reception and celebration of this Holy
Sacrament and Sacrifice. For as it is a Commemoration and representment of
Christ's Death, so it is a commemorative Sacrifice: as we receive the symbols
and the mystery, so it is a Sacrament. In both capacities the benefit is next
to infinite. First, For whatsoever Christ did at the Institution, the same he
commanded the Church to do in remembrance and repeated rites; and himself also
does the same thing in Heaven for us, making perpetual Intercession for his
Church, the body of his redeemed ones, by representing to his Father his death
and sacrifice: there he sits a high Priest continually, and offers still the
same one perfect sacrifice, that is, still represents it as having been once
finished and consummate in order to perpetual and never-failing events. And
this also his Ministers do on earth, they offer up the same Sacrifice to God,
the sacrifice of the Cross, by prayers, and a commemorating rite and
representment according to his holy Institution. And as all the effects of
Grace and the titles of glory were purchased for us on the Cross, and the
actual mysteries of Redemption perfected on earth, but are applied to us and
made effectual to single persons and communities of men by Christ's
Intercession in Heaven; so also they are promoted by acts of Duty and Religion
here on earth, that we may be workers together with God, (as S. Paul expresses
it) and in virtue of the eternal and allsufficient 2 Cor. 6. 1.
Sacrifice may offer up our prayers and our duty, and by representing that
sacrifice may send up together with our prayers an instrument of their
graciousness and acceptance. The Funerals of a deceased friend are not only
performed at his first interring, but in the monthly minds and anniversary
commemorations, and our grief returns upon the fight of a picture, or upon any
instance which our dead friend desired us to preserve as his memorial: we
celebrate and exhibit the Lora's death in sacrament and symbol: and this is
that great express, which when the Church offers to God the Father, it obtains
all those blessings which that sacrifice purchased. Themistocles snatched up
the son of King Admetus, and held him between himself and death, to mitigate
the rage of the King, and prevailed accordingly. Our very holding up the Son of
God, and representing him to his Father, is the doing an act of mediation (...)
advantage to our selves in the virtue and efficacy of the Mediator. As Christ
is a Priest in Heaven for ever, and yet does not sacrifice himself afresh, nor
yet without a sacrifice could he be a Priest, but by a daily ministration and
intercession represents his sacrifice to God, and offers himself as sacrificed:
so he does upon earth by the ministry of his servants; he is offered to God,
that is, he is by Prayers and the Sacrament represented or offered up to God as
sacrificed, which, in effect, is a celebration of his death, and the applying
it to the present and future necessities of the Church, as we are capable, by a
ministry like to his in Heaven. It follows then, that the celebration of this
Sacrifice be in its proportion (...) calix, (...), ad (...) and (...), ad (...)
and (...), exsi (...). S. Cyp. di (...).
an instrument of applying the proper Sacrifice to all the purposes which it
first designed; It is ministerially and by application an instrument
propitiatory, it is Eucharistical, it is an homage, and an act of adoration,
and it is impetratory, and obtains for us and for the whole Church all the
benefits of the sacrifice, which is now celebrated and applied; that is, As
this Rite is the remembrance and ministerial celebration of Christ's sacrifice,
so it is destined to do honor to God, to express the homage and duty of his
servants, to acknowledge his supreme dominion, to give him thanks and worship,
to beg pardon, blessings and supply of all our needs. And its profit is
enlarged not only to the persons celebrating, but to all to whom they design
it, according to the nature of Sacrifices and Prayers, and all such solemn
actions of Religion.

8. Secondly, If we consider this, not as the act and ministry of
Ecclesiastical persons, but as the duty of the whole Church communicating, that
is, as it is a (...), so it is like the Springs of Eden, from whence issue many
Rivers, or the Trees of celestial Jerusalem, bearing various kinds of Fruit.
For whatsoever was offered in John 6. (...).
the Sacrifice, is given in the Sacrament; and whatsoever the Testament
bequeaths, the holy Mysteries dispense. 1. He that (...) my (...) and drinks
my blood abides in me, and (...) in him; Christ in his Temple and his
resting place, and the worthy Communicant is in Sanctuary and a place of
protection: and every holy Soul having feasted at his Table may say as S. Paul,
(...). 2. (...).
(...) live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. (...). 1. (...).
So that to live is Christ: Col. 3. 4.
Christ is our life, and he dwells in the body and the spirit of every one that
eats Christ's flesh and drinks his blood. Happy is that man that sits at the
Table of Angels, that puts his hand into the dish with the King of all the
Creatures, and feeds upon the eternal Son of God, joining things below with
things above, Heaven with Earth, Life with Death, that mortality might be
swallowed up of life, and Sin be destroyed by the inhabitation of its greatest
Conqueror. And now I need not enumerate any particulars, since the Spirit of
God has ascertained us that Christ enters into our hearts, and takes
possession, and abides there; that we are made Temples and celestial mansions;
that we are all one with our Judge, and with our Redeemer; that our Creator is
bound unto his Creature with bonds of charity which nothing can dissolve,
unless our own hands break them; that Man is united with God, and our weakness
is fortified by his strength, and our miseries wrapped up in the golden leaves
of glory. 2. Hence it follows that the Sacrament is an instrument of
reconciling us to God, and taking off the remanent guilt, and stain, and
obligations of our sins. This is the (...) that was shed for you for the
remission of sins. For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus. And such are all they who worthily eat the flesh of Christ; by receiving
him, they more and more receive remission of sins, redemption, sanctification,
wisdom, and certain hopes of glory. (...) as the Soul touching and united to
the flesh of Adam contracts the stain of original misery and imperfection; so
much the (...) shall the Soul united to the flesh of Christ receive pardon and
purity, and all those blessed emanations from our union with the Second Adam.
But this is not to be understood, as if the first beginnings of our pardon were
in the holy Communion; for then a man might come with his impurities along with
him, and lay them on the holy Table, to stain and pollute so bright a presence.
No; first, Repentance must (...) the ways of the Lord: and in this holy Rite
those words of our Lord are verified, He that is justified, let him be
justified (...), that is, here he may receive the increase of Grace; and as it
grows, so sin dies, and we are reconciled by nearer unions and approximations
to God.

9. Thirdly, The holy Sacrament is the pledge of Glory and the earnest of
Immortality; for when we have received him (...) apud S. Ignat. ep. ad (...).
Optar. Milevit. (...). 6. (...) S. Joh. 6. 54. Qui (...) and (...) in novissimo
(...).
who has overcome Death, and henceforth dies no more, he becomes to us like
the Tree of life in Paradise; and the consecrated Symbols are like the seeds of
an eternal duration, springing up in us to eternal life, nourishing our spirits
with Grace, which is but the prologue and the infancy of Glory, and differs
from it only as a Child from a Man. But God first raised up his Son to life,
and by giving him to us has also consigned us to the same state; for our life
is hid with Christ in God: When Colos. 3. 3.
we lay down and cast aside the impurer robes of flesh, they are then but
preparing for glory; and if by the only touch of Christ bodies were
redintegrate and restored to natural perfections, how shall not we live for
ever who eat his flesh and drink his blood? It is the discourse of S. Cyril.
Whatsoever the Spirit can convey to the body S. Cyril. Alex. l. 4. in Joh. c.
14. Et Irenae. l. 4. c. 34.
of the Church, we may expect (...) this Sacrament; for as the Spirit is the
instrument of life and action, so the blood of Christ is the conveyance of his
Spirit. And let all the mysterious places of holy Scripture concerning the
effects of Christ communicated in the Sic and (...) percipientia (...) non sunt
(...), spim (...).
blessed Sacrament be drawn together in one Scheme, we cannot but observe, that
although they are so expressed as (...) their meaning may seem intricate and
involved, yet they cannot be drawn to any meaning at all, but it is as glorious
in its sense as it is mysterious in the expression; and the more intricate they
are, the greater is their purpose; no words being apt and proportionate to
signify this spiritual secret, and excellent effects of the Spirit. A veil is
drawn before all these testimonies, because the people were not able to behold
the glory which they cover with their curtain; and Christ dwelling in us, and
giving us his flesh to (...) and his blood to drink, and the hiding of our life
with God, and the communication of the body of Christ, and Christ being our
life, are such secret glories, that as the fruition of them is the portion of
the other world, so also is the full perception and understanding of them: for
therefore God appears to us in a cloud, and his glories in a veil, that we
understanding more of it by its concealment than we can by its open face, which
is too bright (...) our weak eyes, may with more piety also entertain the
greatness by these indefinite and mysterious significations, than we can by
plain and direct intuitions, which like the Sun in a direct ray enlightens the
object, but confounds the organ.

10. I should but in other words describe the same glories, if I should add,
That this holy Sacrament does enlighten the spirit of Man, and clarify it with
spiritual discernings; and as he was to the two Disciples at (...), so also to
other faithful people, Christ is known in the breaking of bread; That it is a
great (...). S. (...) quo (...). S. Ambros. Ser. 15. in Psalm. 118.
defense against the hostilities of our ghostly enemies, this Holy Bread being
like the Cake in (...)'s Camp, overturning the tents of (...); That it is the
relief of our sorrows, the antidote and preservative of Souls, the viand of our
journey, the guard and passe-port of our death, the wine of Angels; (...) Homer.
That it is more healthful than Rhubarb, more pleasant than Cassia; That the
Betele and (...) of the (...), the (...)
Moly or Nepenthe of Pliny, the Lirinon of the (...), the Balsam of (...), the
Manna of Israel, the Honey of Jonathan, are but weak expressions to tell us
that this is excellent above Art and Nature, and that nothing is good enough in
Philosophy to become its (...). All these must needs fall very short of those
plain words of Christ, This is my Body. The other may become the ecstasies of
Piety, the transportation of joy and wonder, and are like the discourse of S.
(...) upon mount Tabor, he was resolved to say some great thing, but he knew
not what: but when we remember that the Body of our Lord and his Blood is
communicated to us in the Bread and the Chalice of blessing, we must sit down
and rest our selves, for this is the mountain of the Lord, and we can go no
farther.

11. In the next place it will (...) our enquiry to consider how we are to
prepare our selves: For at the gate of life a man may meet with death: and
although this holy Sacrament be like Manna, in which the obedient find the
relishes of Obedience, the chaste of Purity, the meek persons of Content and
Humility; yet vicious and corrupted palats find also the gust of death and
Coloquintida. The Sybarites invited their women (...).
to their solemn sacrifices a full year before the solemnity, that they might
by previous dispositions and a long foresight (...) with gravity and fairer
order the celebration of the rites. And it was a reasonable answer of Pericles,
to one that asked him why he, being a Philosophical and severe person, came to
a wedding trimmed and adorned like a Paranymph; I come adorned to an adorned
person, trimmed, to a Bridegroom. And we also, if we come to the marriage of
the Son with the Soul, (which marriage is celebrated in this sacred Mystery)
and have not on a wedding garment, shall be cast into outer darkness, the
portion of undressed and unprepared souls.

12. For from this Sacrament are excluded all unbaptized persons, and such who
lie in a known sin, of which they have not purged themselves by the apt and
proper instruments of Repentance. For if the Paschal Lamb was not to be eaten
but by persons pure and clean according to the sanctifications of the Law; the
Son of God can less endure the impurities of the Spirit, than God could (...)
the uncleanness of the Law. S. Paul has given us instruction in this: First,
let a man examine himself, and so let him eat: For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning (...) Cor. 11.
28, 29.
the Lord's body. That is, although in the Church of Corinth, by reason of the
present Schism, the public Discipline of the Church was neglected, and every
man permitted to himself; yet even then no man was disobliged from his duty of
private Repentance, and holy preparations to the perception of so great a
mystery; that the Lord's body may be discerned from common nutriment. Now
nothing can so unhallow and desecrate the rite as the remanent affection to a
sin, or a crime unrepented of. And Selfexamination is prescribed, not for it
self, but in order to abolition of sin and death; for it self is a relative
term and an imperfect duty, whose very nature is in order to something beyond
it. And this was in the Primitive Church understood to so much severity, that
if a man had relapsed after one public Repentance into a (...) crime, he was
never Council. (...). (...). 3.
again readmitted to the holy Communion; and the Fathers of the Council of
(...) call it [a mocking and jesting at the Communion of our Lord, to give it
once again after a Repentance and a relapse, and a second or third
postulation.] And indeed we use to make a sport of the greatest instruments of
Religion, when we come to them after an habitual vice, whose face we have, it
may be, wetted with a tear, and breathed upon it with a sigh, and abstained
from the worst of crimes for two or three days, and come to the Sacrament to be
purged, and to take our rise by going a little back from our sin, that
afterward we may leap into it with more violence, and enter into its utmost
angle: This is dishonouring the body of our Lord, and deceiving our selves.
Christ and Belial cannot cohabit; unless we have left all our sins, and have no
fondness of affection toward them, unless we hate them, (which then we shall
best know when we leave them, and with complacency entertain their contraries:)
then Christ has washed our feet, and then he invites us to his holy Supper.
Hands dipped in blood, or polluted with unlawful gains, or stained with the spots
of flesh, are most unfit to handle the holy body of our Lord, and minister
nourishment to the Soul. Christ loves not to enter into the mouth full of
cursings, oaths, blasphemies, revilings or evil speakings; and a heart full of
vain and vicious thoughts stinks like the lake of Sodom; he finds no rest
there, and when he enters he is vexed with the unclean conversation of the
impure inhabitants, and flies from thence with the wings of a Dove, that he may
retire to pure and whiter habitations. S. Justin Martyr, reckoning the
predispositions required of every faithful S. (...). l. 2. de Bapt. c. 3. (...).
soul for the entertainment of his Lord, says, that it is not S. (...). l. 6.
c. 37. in Luc. 9.
Vbique (...) per (...). in (...) S. Ambros.
lawful for any to eat the Eucharist, but to him that is washed in the laver of
regeneration sor the remission of sins, that believes Christ's Doctrine to be
true, and that lives according Si Dux quispiam, si Consul ipse, si qui (...)
indigne (...) and (...) si ipse pellere non (...), non (...) fieri; (...)
Dominicum (...). S. (...). hom. 83. in (...).
to the Discipline of the Holy Jesus. And therefore S. Ambrose refused to
minister the holy Communion to the Emperor Theodostus, till by public
Repentance he had reconciled himself to God and the society of faithsul people,
after the furious and choleric rage and slaughter committed at Thessalonica:
And as this act was like to cancellating and a circumvallation of the holy
mysteries, and in that sense and so far was a proper duty sor a Prelate, to
whose dispensation the rites are committed; so it was an act of duty to the
Emperor, of paternal and tender care, not of proper authority or jurisdiction,
which he could not have over his Prince, but yet had a care and the supravision
of a Teacher over him, whose Soul S. Ambrose had betrayed, unless he had
represented his indisposition to communicate in expressions of Magisterial or
Doctoral authority and truth. For this holy Sacrament is a nourishment of
spiritual life, and therefore cannot with effect be ministered to them who are
in the state of spiritual death; it is giving a Cordial to a dead man; and
although the outward rite be ministered, yet the Grace of the Sacrament is not
communicated, and therefore it were well that they also abstained from the rite
it self. For a Exta (...) inter (...) omnia; In (...) Regis (...) visum (...)
oscula. Phaedr. Jab. 80.
fly can boast of as much privilege as a wicked person can receive from this
holy Feast; and oftentimes pays his life sor his access to sorbidden
delicacies, as certainly as they.

13. It is more generally thought by the Doctors of the Church, that our
Blessed Lord administered the Sacrament to Judas, although he knew he sold him
to the Jews. (...) Romans 5. Constable. c. 16. ab Hilario ca. 30. in (...). (...) l.
3. (...). c. 13. a Ruperto Hildebrand. Cenoman. and (...).
Some others deny it, and suppose Judas departed presently after the sop given
him, before he communicated. However it was, Christ, who was Lord of the
Sacraments, might dispense it as he pleased; but we must minister and receive
it according to the rules he has since described: but it becomes a precedent
to the Church in all succeeding Ages, although it might also have in it
something extraordinary and apter to the first institution; for because the
fact of Judas was secret, not yet made notorious, Christ chose rather to admit
him into the rites of external Communion, than to separate him with an open
shame for a fault not yet made open. For our Blessed Lord did not reveal the
man and his crime till the very time of ministration, if Judas did communicate.
But if Judas did not communicate, and that our Blessed Lord gave him the sop at
the Paschal Supper, (...) at the interval between it and the institution of his
own, it is certain that Judas went out as soon as he was discovered, and left
this part of Discipline upon record, That when a crime is made public and
notorious, the Governors of the Church, according to their power, are to deny
to give the blessed Sacrament, till by Repentance such persons be restored.
(...) quenquam (...) consessum, aut in (...) seculari (...) Judicio (...)
convictum. S. Aug. l. 50. (...). 50. S. Thomas 3. p. q. 81. a. 2.
In private sins, or sins not known by solemnities of Law, or evidence of fact,
good and bad are entertained in public communion; and it is not to be
accounted a crime in them that minister it, because they cannot avoid it, or
have not competent authority to separate persons, whom the public act of the
Church has not separated: but if once a public separation be made, or that
the fact is notorious, and the (...) of Law is in such cases already declared,
they that come, and he that rejects them not, both pollute the blood of the
everlasting Covenant. And here it is applicable what God spoke by the Prophet,
(...). 15. 19.
If thou will separate the precious thing from the vile, thou shall be as my
mouth.

But this is wholly a matter of Discipline, arbitrary, and in the power of the
Church; nothing in it of Divine commandment, but what belongs to the
Communicants themselves: For S. Paul reproves them that receive disorderly, but
gives no orders to the Corinthian Presbyters to reject any that present
themselves. Neither did our Blessed Lord leave any Commandment concerning it,
nor has the holy Scripture given rules or measures concerning its actual
reduction to practice; neither who are to be separated, nor for what offenses,
nor by what authority, nor who is to be the Judge. And indeed it is a judgment
that can only belong to God, who knows the secrets of hearts, the degrees of
every sin, the beginnings and portions of Repentance, the sincerity of
purposes, by what thoughts and designs men begin to be accepted, who are
hypocrites, and who are true men. But when many and common men come to judge,
they are angry upon trisling mistakes and weak disputes; they call that Sin
that angers their Party, or grieves their Interest; they turn Charity into
Pride, and Admonition into Tyranny; they set up a tribunal that themselves may
sit higher, not that their Brethren may walk more securely: And then concerning
sins, in most cases, they are most incompetent (...); they do not know all
their kinds; they miscall many; they are ignorant of the ingredient and
constituent parts and circumstances; they themselves make false measures, and
give out according to them, when they please; and when they list not, they can
change the balance. When the matter is public, evident and notorious, the man
is to be admonished of his danger by the Minister, but not by him to be forced
from it: for the power of the Minister of holy things is but the power of a
Preacher and a Counselor, of a Physician and a Guide; it has in it no
coercion or violence, but what is indulged to it by humane laws and by consent,
which may vary as its (...).

Add to this, that the Grace of God can begin the work of Repentance in an
instant, and in what period or degree of Repentance the holy Communion is to be
administered no Law of God declares; which therefore plainly allows it to every
period, and leaves no difference, except where the Discipline of the Church and
the authority of the Supreme power does intervene. For since we do not find in
Scripture that the Apostles did drive from the communion of holy things even
those whom they delivered over to Satan or other Censures, we are left to
consider that, in the nature of the thing, those who are in the state of
weakness and (...) have more need of the solemn Prayers of the Church, and
therefore, by presenting themselves to the holy Sacrament, approach toward
that Ministry which is the most effectual cure; especially since the very
presenting themselves is an act of Religion, and therefore supposes an act of
Repentance and Faith, and other little introductions to its fair reception: and
if they may be prayed for, and prayed with, why they may not also be
communicated, which is the (...) of the greatest Prayer, is not yet clearly
revealed.

This discourse relates only to private Ministry: for when I affirm, that
there is no command from Christ to all his Ministers to refuse whom they are
pleased to call scandalous or sinners, I intend to defend good people from the
tyranny and arbitrary power of those great companies of Ministers, who in so
many hundred places would have a Judicature supreme in Spirituals, which would
be more intolerable than if they had in one Province 20000 Judges of life and
death. But when the power of separation and interdiction is only in some more
eminent and authorized persons, who take public cognizance of causes by
solemnities of Law, and exercise their power but in some rare instances, and
then also for the public interest, in which although they may be (...), yet
they are the most competent and likely Judges, much of the inconvenience which
might otherwise follow is avoided: and then it only remains that they consider,
in what cases it can be a competent and a proper infliction upon sinners, to
take from them that which is the means and ministry of grace and recovery;
whether they have any warrant from Christ, or precedent in the Apostles
practice, and how far. As for the sorms and (...) of the Primitive Church, they
were hugely different, sometimes for one cause sometimes for another. Sometimes
whole Churches have been excommunicated; sometimes the criminal and all his
household for his offense, as it happened in the Excommunication of Andronicus
and Thoas in Synesius, in the year Synes. ep. 79.
411: sometimes they were absolved and restored by Lay Confessors, sometimes by
Emperors, as it happened to Eusebius of Nicomedia and Theognis of Nice, who
were absolved by Constantine from the sentence of Excommunication inflicted by
the Nicene Fathers; and a Monk did excommunicate Theodosius the younger. So
that in this there Theod. (...). l. 5. 36. (...). tom. 5. A. D. 425. Sect. 16.
can be no certainty to make a measure and a rule. The surest way, most
agreeable to the precedents of Scripture and the Analogy of the Gospel, is,
that by the word of their proper ministry all sinners should be separate from
the holy Communion, that is, threatened by the words of God with damnation, and
fearful temporal dangers, if themselves, knowing an unrepented sin, and a
remanent affection to sin to be within them, shall dare to profane that Body
and Blood of our Lord by so impure an address. The evil is to themselves, and
if the Ministers declare this powerfully, they are acquitted. But concerning
other judgments or separations, The Supreme power can forbid all assembling,
and therefore can permit them to all, and therefore can deny them or grant them
to single persons; and therefore when he by Laws makes separations in order to
public benefit they are to be obeyed: but it is not to be endured that single
Presbyters should upon vain pretenses erect so high a tribunal and tyranny over
Consciences.

14. The duty of Preparation, that I here discourse of, is such a Preparation
as is a disposition to life: it is not a matter of convenience or advantage, to
repent of our sins before the Communion, but it is of absolute necessity, we
perish if we neglect it; for we cat (...), and Satan enters into us, not
Christ. And this Preparation is not the act of a day or a week; but it is a new
state of life: no man that is an habitual sinner must come to this Feast, till
he has wholly changed his course of life. And then, according as the actions
of infirmity have made (...) or greater invasion upon his peace and health, so
are the acts of Repentance to be proportioned; in which the greatness of the
prevarications, their neighborhood to death, or their frequent repetition, and
the conduct of a Spiritual man, are to give us counsel and determination. When
a ravening and hungry Wolf is destitute of prey, he (...) the turf, and loads
his stomach with the glebe he treads on; but as soon as he finds better food,
he vomits up his first load. Our secular and sensual affections are loads of
earth upon the Conscience, and when we approach to the Table of the Lord to eat
the bread of the elect, and to drink the wine of Angels, we must reject such
impure adhesions, that holy persons, being nourished with holy Symbols, may be
sanctified and receive the eternal reward of Holiness.

15. But as none must come hither but they that are in the state of Grace, or
Charity, and the love of God and their Neighbors, and that the abolition of
the state of sin is the necessary preparation, and is the action of years, and
was not accepted as sufficient till the expiration of diverse years by the
Primitive Discipline, and in some cases not till the approach of Death: so
there is another Preparation which is of less necessity, which supposes the
state of Grace, and that oil is burning in our lamps; but yet it is a
preparation of ornament, a trimming up the Soul, a dressing the spirit with
degrees and instances of Piety and progresses of perfection: and it consists in
setting apart some portion of our time before the Communion, that it be spent
in Prayer, in Meditations, in renewing the vows of holy Obedience, in Examining
our Consciences, in Mortifying our lesser irregularities, in Devotions and
actions of precise Religion, in acts of Faith, of Hope, of Charity, of Zeal and
holy desires, in acts of Eucharist or Thanksgiving, of Joy at the approach of
so blessed opportunity, and all the acts of Virtue whatsoever, which have
indefinite relation to this and to other mysteries; but yet are specially to be
exercised upon this occasion, because this is the most perfect of external
(...), and the most mysterious instrument of sanctification and perfection.
There is no time or degree to be determined in this Preparation; but they to
whom much is forgiven will love much; and they who (...) the excellence and
holiness of the Mystery, the glory of the Guest that comes to inhabit, and the
undecency of the closet of their Hearts by reason of the adherencies of
impurity, the infinite benefit then designed, and the increase of degrees by
the excellence of these previous acts of Holiness, will not be too inquisitive
into the necessity of circumstances and measures, but do it heartily, and
devoutly, and reverently, and as much as they can, ever esteeming it necessary,
that the actions of so great solemnity should by some actions of Piety
attending like handmaids be distinguished from common employments, and remarked
for the principal and most solemn of religious actions. The Primitive Church
gave the holy Sacrament to Infants Clem. Romans l. 8. (...). 20. Council. Tolet.
1. c. 11. S. Aug, (...). 23, (...). and (...). 107. and lib. 4. de (...). c. 10.
immediately after Baptism, and by that act transmitted this Proposition, That
nothing was of absolute necessity (...) quam (...): sed (...) de iis (...) quos
(...) and mortalia (...). Gennad. l. 3. de Eccl. (...). c. 53.
but Innocence and purity from sin, and a being in the state of Grace; other
actions of Religion are excellent addition to the dignity of the person and
honor of the mystery, but they were such of which Infants were not capable.
The sum is this; After the greatest consociation of religious duties for
Preparation, no man can be sufficiently worthy to communicate: let us take care
that we be not unworthy, by bringing a guilt with us, or the remanent affection
to a sin. Est gloriosus sane convictus Die;
Sed illi qui invitatur, non qui invisus est.


16. When the happy hour is come in which the Lord vouchsafes to enter into us,
and dwell with us, and be united with his servants, we must then do the same
acts over again with greater (...) and intension; confess the glories of God
and thy own unworthiness, praise his mercy with ecstasie of thanksgiving and
joy, make oblation of thy self, of all thy faculties and capacities, pray, and
read, and meditate, and worship: And that thou may more opportunely do all
this, rise early to meet the Bridegroom, pray for special assistance, enter
into the assembly of faithful people cheerfully, attend there diligently,
demean thy self reverently, and before any other meat or drink receive the Body
of thy Savior with pure hands, with holy intention, with a heart full of joy,
and faith, and hope, and wonder, and Eucharist. These things I therefore set
down irregularly and without method, because in these actions no rule can be
given to all persons; and only such a love and such a Religion in general is to
be recommended, which will overrun the banks, and not (...) stand confined
within the margent of rules and artificial prescriptions. Love and Religion are
boundless, and all acts of grace relating to the present Mystery are sit and
proportioned entertainments of our Lord. This only remember, that we are by the
Mystery of one bread confederated into one body, and the communion of Saints,
and that the (...), which we then commemorate was designed by our Lord for the
benefit of all his Church: Let us be sure to draw all faithful people into the
society of the present Blessing, joining with the holy Man that ministers in
prayers and offerings of that Mystery for the (...) of all sorts of men, of
Christ's Catholic Church. And it were also an excellent act of Christian
communion, and agreeable to the practice of the Church in all Ages, to make an
Oblation to God for the poor; that as we are (...) by Christ's body, so we also
should (...) Christ's body, making such returns as we can, a grain of
Frankincense in exchange for a Province, an act of duty and Christian Charity
as Eucharistical for the present Grace, that all the body may rejoice and glory
in the Salvation of the Lord.

17. After thou have received that pledge of immortality and antepast of glory,
even the Lord's Body in a mystery, leave not thy Savior there alone, but
attend him with holy thoughts and colloquies of Prayer and Eucharist. It was
sometime counted infamous for a woman to entertain a second love, till the body
of her dead Husband was dissolved into ashes, and disappeared in the form of a
body. And it were well, that (...) olim actum est, cum (...).
so long as the consecrated Symbols remain within us according to common
estimate, we should keep the flame bright, and the perfume of an actual
Devotion burning, that our Communion be not a transient act, but a permanent
and lasting intercourse with our Lord. But in this every man best knows his own
opportunities and necessities of (...). Philo.
diversion. I only commend earnestly to practice, that every Receiver should
make a recollection of himself, and the actions of the day, that he improve it
to the best advantage, that he show unto our Lord all the defects of his house,
all his poverty and weaknesses: and this let every man do by such actions and
Devotions which he can best attend, and himself by the advice of a Spiritual
man finds of best advantage. I would not make the practice of Religion,
especially in such irregular instances, to be an art, or a burden, or a snare
to scrupulous persons: What S. Paul said in the (...) of Charity, I say also in
this; He that sows plentifully shall reap plentifully, and he that (...)
sparingly shall gather at the same rate; let every man do as himself purposes
in his heart. Only it were well in this Sacrament of Love we had some
correspondency, and proportionable returns of Charity and religious affections.

18. Some religious persons have moved a Question, Whether it were better to
communicate often or seldom: some thinking it more reverence to those holy
Mysteries to come but seldom; while others say, it is greater Religion or
Charity to come frequently. But I suppose this Question does not differ much
from a dispute, Whether is better to pray often, or to pray seldom? For
whatsoever is commonly pretended against a frequent Communion, may in its
proportion object against a solemn Prayer; (...) affection to a sin, enmity
with neighbors, secular avocations to the height of care and trouble: for
these either are great undecencies in order to a holy Prayer; or else are
direct irregularities, and unhallow the Prayer. And the celebration of the holy
Sacrament is in it self and its own formality a sacred, solemn, and ritual
Prayer, in which we invocate God by the Merits of Christ, expressing that
adjuration not only in words, but in actual representment and commemoration of
his Passion. And if the necessities of the Church were well considered, we
should find that a daily Sacrifice of Prayer and a daily Prayer of Sacrifice
were no more but what her condition requires: and I would to God the Governors
of Churches would take care, that the necessities of Kings and Kingdoms, of
Churches and States, were represented to God by the most solemn and (...)
intercessions; and Christ has taught us none greater than the praying in the
virtue and (...) of his Sacrifice. And this is the counsel that the Church
received from Ignatius; Haslen frequently to approach the (...), the glory of
God. For when this is daily celebrated, we break the powers of Satan, who turns
all his actions into (...) and darts of fire. But this concerns the Ministers
of Religion, who living in Communities and Colleges must make Religion the
business of their lives, and support Kingdoms, and serve the interest of Kings
by the prayer of a daily sacrifice. And yet in this ministry the Clergy may
serve their own necessary affairs, if the ministration be divided into courses,
as it was by the economy and wisdom of Solomon for the Temple.

19. But concerning the Communion of Secular and lay persons, the consideration
is something different. Gennadius, c. 54. de Eccl. s. dogmat.
S. Austin gave this answer to it: To receive the Sacrament every day I neither
praise nor reprove; at least let them receive it every Lord's day. And this he
spoke to Husbandmen and Merchants. At the first commencement of Christianity,
while the fervors Apostolical and the calentures of infant Christendom did
last, the whole assembly of faithsul people communicated every day; and this
lasted in Rome Epist. 80. ad Lucinum.
and Spain until the time of S. Jerome: concerning which diligence he gives the
same (...) which I now recited from S. Austin; for it suffered inconvenience by
reason of (...) vel jejunare semper, vel semper (...), and (...) Dominicum,
(...) Domini, (...), etc. Idem.
a declining Piety, and the intervening of secular interests. But then it came
to once a week; and yet that was not everywhere strictly observed. But that it
be received once every fortnight S. (...) counsels very strongly to Eustochium
a holy Virgin; Let the (...) confess their sins twice every month, or (...),
and being fortified with the communion of the Lord's Body, let them manfully
fight against the Devil's forces and attempts. A while (...) it came to once a
month, then once a year, then it fell from that too; till all the Christians in
the West were commanded to communicate every Easter by the Decree of a Council.
Lat.
great Council above 500 years since. But the Church of England, finding that
too little, has commanded all her Children to receive thrice every year at
least, intending that they should come oftener; but of this she demands an
account. For it has fared with this Sacrament as with other actions of
Religion, which have descended (...) flames to still fires, from fires to
sparks, from sparks to embers, from embers to smoke, from smoke to nothing. And
although the public (...) of Piety is such, that in this present conjuncture
of things it is impossible men should be reduced to a daily Communion; yet that
they are to communicate frequently is so a Duty, that as no excuse but
impossibility can make the omission innocent, so the loss and consequent want
is infinite and invaluable.

20. For the holy Communion being a remembrance and sacramental repetition of
Christ's Passion, and the application of his Sacrifice to us and the whole
Catholic Church; as they who seldom communicate delight not to remember the
Passion of our Lord, and sin against his very purpose, and one of the designs
of institution; so he cares not to receive the benefits of the Sacrifice who so
neglects their application, and reducing them to actual profit and (...).
Whence came the sanctimony of the primitive Christians? whence came their
strict observation of the Divine Commandments? whence was it that they
persevered in holy actions with hope and an unweary diligence? from whence did
their despising worldly things come, and living with common possession, and the
distributions of an universal Charity? Whence came these and many other
excellencies, but from a constant Prayer, and a daily Eucharist? They who every
day represented the death of Christ, every day were ready to die for Christ. It
was the discourse of an ancient and excellent person. And if we consider this
Sacrament is intended to unite the spirits and affections of the world, and
that it is diffusive and powerful to this purpose, [ for we are one body,
(says S. Paul) because we partake of one bread;] possibly we may have reason
to say, that the wars of Kingdoms, the animosity of Families, the infinite
multitude of Lawsuits, the personal hatreds, and the (...) want of Charity,
which has made the world miserable and wicked, may in a great degree be
attributed to the neglect of this great symbol and instrument of Charity. The
Chalice of the Sacrament is called by S. Paul, The cup of blessing; and if
children need every day to beg blessing of their Parents, if we also thirst not
after this Cup of blessing, blessing may be far from us. It is called The
communication of the blood of Christ; and it is not imaginable that man should
love Heaven, or felicity, or his Lord, that desires not perpetually to bathe in
that salutary stream, the Blood of the Holy Jesus, the immaculate Lamb of God.

21. But I find that the religious fears of men are pretended a color to
excuse this Irreligion. Men are wicked, and not prepared, and busy, and full
of cares and affairs of the world, and cannot come with due Preparation; and
therefore better not come at all: Nay, men are not ashamed to say, they are at
(...) with certain persons, and therefore cannot come. Concerning those persons
who are unprepared because they are in a state of sin or uncharitableness, it
is true, they must not come; but this is so far from excusing their not coming,
that they increase their sin, and secure misery to themselves, because they do
not lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset them, that
they may come to the Marriage-supper. It is as if we should excuse our selves
from the duties of Charity, by saying we are uncharitable; from giving Alms, by
saying we are covetous; from Chastity, by saying we are lascivious. To such men
it is just that they graze with the Goats, because they refuse to wash their
hands, that they may come to the Supper of the Lamb. 2. Concerning those that
pretend cares and encumbrances of the world; If their affairs make sin and
impure affections to stick upon them, they are in the first consideration: but
if their office be necessary, just, or charitable, they imitate Martha, and
choose the less perfect part, when they neglect the offices of Religion for
duties oeconomical. 3. But the other sort have more pretense and fairer virtue
in their outside. They suppose, like the Persian Princes, the seldomer such
mysterious rites are seen, the more reverence we shall have, and they the more
majesty: and they are fearful lest the frequent attrectation of them should
make us less to value the great earnests of our Redemption and Immortality. It
is a pious consideration, but not becoming them: For it cannot be that the
Sacrament be under-valued by frequent reception, without the great unworthiness
of the persons, so turning God's grace into lightness and loathing Manna: nay,
it cannot be without an unworthy communication; for he that receives worthily
increases in the love of God and Religion, and the fires of the Altar are apt
to kindle our sparks into a slame; and when Christ our Lord enters into us, and
we grow weary of him, or less fond of his frequent entrance and perpetual
cohabitation, it is an infallible sign we have let his enemy in, or are
preparing for it. For this is the difference between secular and spiritual
objects: Nothing in this world has any pleasure in it long beyond the hope of
it, for the possession and enjoyment is found so empty, that we grow weary of
it; but whatsoever is spiritual, and in order to God, is less before we have
it, but in the fruition it swells our desires, and enlarges the appetite, and
makes us more receptive and forward in the entertainment: and therefore those
acts of Religion that set us forward in time, and backward in affection, do
declare that we have not well done our duty, but have communicated unworthily.
So that the mending of our fault will answer the objection. Communicate with
more devotion, and repent with greater contrition, and walk with more caution,
and pray more earnestly, and meditate diligently, and receive with reverence
and godly fear; and we shall find our affections increase together with the
spiritual emolument; ever remembering that pious and wise advice of S. Ambrose,
Receive every day, that which may profit thee every day. But De Sacram, l. 5.
c. 4.
he that is not disposed to receive it every day, is not fit to receive it
every year.

22. And if after all diligence it be still feared that a man is not well
prepared, I must say that it is a scruple, that is, a trouble beyond a doubt
and without reason, next to Superstition and the dreams of Religion; and it is
nourished by imagining that no duty is accepted, if it be less than perfection,
and that God is busied in Heaven, not only to destroy the wicked, and to dash
in pieces vessels of dishonor, but to break a bruised reed in pieces, and to
cast the smoking flax into the flames of hell. In opposition to (...) accessum
sola (...) integrltas facit. S. Chrysostom.
which we must know, that nothing makes us unprepared but an evil Conscience, a
state of sin, or a deadly act: but the lesser infirmities of our life, against
which we daily strive, and for which we never have any kindness or affections,
are not spots in these Feasts of Charity, but instruments of Humility, and
stronger invitations to come to those Rites which are ordained for (...)
against infirmities of the Soul, and for the growth of the spirit in the
strengths of God. For those other acts of Preparation which precede and
accompany the duty, the better and more religiously they are done, they are
indeed of more advantage, and honourary to the Sacrament; yet he that comes in
the state of Grace, though he takes the opportunity upon a sudden offer, sins
not: and in such indefinite duties, whose degrees are not described, it is good
counsel to do our best; but it is ill to make them instruments of scruple, as
if it were essentially necessary to do that in the greatest height, which is
only intended for advantage and the fairer accommodation of the mystery. But
these very acts, if they be esteemed necessary preparations to the Sacrament,
are the greatest arguments in the world that it is best to communicate often;
because the doing of that which must suppose the exercise of so many Graces,
must needs promote the interest of Religion, and dispose strongly to habitual
Graces by our frequent and solemn repetition of the acts. It is necessary that
every Communicant be first examined concerning the state of his Soul, by
himself or his Superior; and that very Scrutiny is in admirable order toward
the reformation of such irregularities which time and temptation, negligence
and incuriousness, infirmity or malice have brought into the secret regions of
our Will and Understanding. Now although this Examination be therefore
enjoined, that no man should approach to the holy Table in the state of ruin
and reprobation, and that therefore it is an act not of direct Preparation, but
an enquiry whether we be prepared or no; yet this very Examination will find so
many little irregularities, and so many great imperfections, that it will
appear the more necessary, to repair the breaches and lesser ruins by such
acts of Piety and Religion; because every Communication is intended to be a
nearer approach to God, a (...) step in Grace, a progress toward glory, and an
instrument of perfection; and therefore upon the stock of our spiritual
interests, for the purchase of a greater hope, and the advantages of a growing
Charity, ought to be frequently received. I end with the words of a pious and
learned person: It is a vain fear and an imprudent (...), that procrastinates
and desers going to the Lord Joan. Gerson in Magnificat.
that calls them: they deny to go to the fire, pretending they are cold; and
refuse Physic, because they need it.

The PRAYER,
O Blessed and Eternal Jesus, who gave thy self a Sacrifice for our sins, thy
Body for our spiritual food, thy (...) to nourish our spirits, and to quench
the flames of Hell and Lust, who did so love us, who were thine enemies, that
thou desiredst to reconcile us to thee, and becamest all one with us, that we
may live the same life, think the same thoughts, love the same love, and be
partakers of thy Resurrection and Immortality; open every window of my Soul,
that I may be full of light, and may see the excellency of thy Love, the merits
of thy Sacrifice, the bitterness of thy Passion, the glories and virtues of the
mysterious Sacrament. Lord, let me ever hunger and thirst after this instrument
of Righteousness; let me have no gust or relish of the unsatisfying delights of
things below, but let my Soul dwell in thee; let me for ever receive thee
spiritually, and very frequently communicate with thee sacramentally, and
imitate thy Virtues pionsly and strictly, and dwell in the pleasures of thy
house eternally. Lord, thou have prepared a table for me, against them that
trouble me: let that holy Sacrament of the Eucharist be to me a defense and
shield, a nourishment and medicine, life and health, a means of sanctification
and spiritual growth; that I receiving the body of my dearest Lord may be one
with his mystical body, and of the same spirit, united with indissoluble bonds
of a strong Faith, and a holy Hope, and a never-failing Charity, that from this
veil I may pass into the visions of eternal clarity, from eating thy Body to
beholding thy face in the glories of thy everlasting Kingdom, O Blessed and
Eternal Jesus.

Amen.
Considerations upon the Accidents happening on the Vespers of the Passion.
The Prayer in the Garden.
Luk: 22. 41. And he was withdrawn from them about a stones cast, and kneeled
down and prayed. 42 Saying, Father, if thou be willing remove this Cup from me:
nevertheless not my will but thine be done. 43 And there appeared an Angel from
heaven strengthening him.

Judas betrayeth Christ:
Mat: 26. 47. And while he yet spoke, Lo. Judas one of the twelve came, and
with him a great multitude with swords and staves from the chief Priests and
Elders of the people. 48. Now he that be trayed him gave them a sign saying
whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he, hold him fast. 49. And forthwith he
came to Jesus and said, Hail Master, and kissed him.




1. WHen Jesus had supped and sang a Hymn, and prayed, and exhorted and
comforted his Disciples with a Farewell-Sermon, in which he repeated (...) of
his former Precepts which were now apposite to the present condition, and
reinforced them with proper and pertinent arguments, he went over the brook
Cedron, and entered into a Garden, and into the prologue of his Passion; choosing
that place for his Agony and satisfactory pains, in which the first scene of
humane misery was represented, and where he might best attend the offices of
Devotion preparatory to his Death. Besides this, he therefore departed from the
house, that he might give opportunity to his Enemies surprise, and yet not
incommodate the good man by whose hospitality they had eaten the Paschal Lamb;
so that he went like a Lamb to the slaughter, to the Garden (...) in horto
tanquam in (...).
as to a prison, as if by an agreement with his persecutors he had expected
their arrest, and stayed there to prevent their farther enquiry. For so great
was his desire to pay our S. Chrysostom. (...) laborem minuat (...) se (...),
Theophyl.
Ransom, that himself did assist by a forward patience and active opportunity
toward the persecution: teaching us, that by an active zeal and a ready spirit
we assist the designs of God's glory, though in our own sufferings and secular
infelicities.

2. When he entered the Garden, he left his Disciples at the entrance of it,
calling with him only Peter, James and John: he withdrew himself from the rest
about a stone's cast, and began to be exceeding heavy. He was not sad till he
had called them, (for his sorrow began when he pleased:) which sorrow he also
chose to represent to those three who had seen his Transfiguration, the earnest
of his future Glory, that they might see of how great glory for our sakes he
disrobed himself; and that they also might by the confronting those
contradictory accidents observe, that God uses to dispense his comforts, the
irradiations and emissions of his glory, to be preparatives to those sorrows
with which our life must be allayed and seasoned; that none should refuse to
partake of the sufferings of Christ, if either they have already felt his
comforts, or hope hereafter to wear his crown. And it is not ill observed, that
S. Peter, being the chief of the Apostles and Doctor of the Circumcision, S.
John, being a Virgin, and S. James the first of the Apostles that was martyred,
were admitted to Christ's greatest retirements and mysterious secrecies, as
being persons of so singular and eminent dispositions, to whom, according to
the pious opinion of the Church, especially Coronets are prepared in Heaven,
besides the great Crown of rightcousness, which in common shall beautify the
heads of all the Saints; meaning this, that Doctors, Virgins and Martyrs shall
receive, even for their very state of life and accidental Graces, more eminent
degrees of accidental Glory, like as the Sun, reflecting upon a limpid
fountain, receives its rays doubled, without any increment of its proper and
natural light.

3. Jesus began to be exceeding sorrowful, to be sore amazed and sad even to
death. And because he was now to suffer the pains of our sins, there began his
Passion whence our sins spring. From an evil heart and a prevaricating spirit
all our sins arise; and in the spirit of Christ began his sorrow, where he
truly felt the full value and demerit of Sin, which we think not worthy of a
tear or a hearty sigh, but he groaned and fell under the burden. But therefore
he took upon him this sadness, that our imperfect sorrow and contrition might
be heightened in his example, and accepted in its union and consederacy with
his. And Jesus still designed a farther mercy for us; for he sanctified the
passion of Fear, and hallowed natural sadnesses, that we might not think the
infelicities of our nature and the calamities of our temporal condition to
become criminal, so long as they make us not omit a duty, or dispose us to the
election of a crime, or force us to swallow a temptation, nor yet to exceed the
value of their impulsive cause. He that grieves for the loss of friends, and
yet had rather lose all the friends he has than lose the love of God, has the
sorrow of our Lord for his precedent. And he that fears death, and trembles at
its approximation, and yet had rather die again than sin once, has not sinned
in his fear; Christ has hallowed it, and the necessitous condition of his
nature is his excuse. But it were highly to be wished, that in the midst of our
caresses and levities of society, in our festivities and triumphal merriments,
when we laugh at folly and rejoice in sin, we would remember that for those
very merriments our Blessed Lord felt a bitter sorrow; and not one vain and
sinful laughter; but cost the Holy Jesus a sharp pang and throe of Passion.

4. Now that the Holy Jesus began to taste the bitter Cup, he betook him to his
great Antidote, which himself, the great Physician of our Souls, prescribed to
all the world to cure their calamities, and to make them pass from miseries
into virtue, that so they may arrive at glory; he prays to his heavenly Father,
he kneels down, and not only so, but falls flat upon the earth, and would in
humility and fervent adoration have descended low as the center; he prays with
an intension great as his sorrow, and yet with a dereliction so great, and a
conformity to the Divine will so ready, as if it had been the most indifferent
thing in the world for him to be delivered to death, or from it: for though his
nature did decline death, as that which has a natural horror and
contradiction to the present interest of its preservation; yet when he looked
upon it as his heavenly Father had put it into the order of Redemption of the
World, it was that Baptism which he was straightened till he had accomplished. And
now there is not in the world any condition of prayer which is essential to the
duty, or any circumstances of advantage to its performance, but were concentred
in this one instance; Humility of spirit, lowliness of deportment, importunity
of desire, a fervent spirit, a lawful matter, resignation to the will of God,
great love, the love of a Son to his Father, (which appellative was the form of
his address) perseverance, (he went thrice, and prayed the same prayer.) It was
not long, and it was so retired as to have the advantages of a sufficient
solitude and opportune recollection; for he was withdrawn from the most of his
Disciples: and yet not so alone as to lose the benefit of communion; for Peter
and the two Boanerges were near him. Christ in this prayer, which was the most
fervent that he ever made on earth, intending to transmit to all the world a
precedent of Devotion to be transcribed and imitated; that we should cast all
our cares, and empty them in the bosom of God, being content to receive such a
portion of our trouble back again, which he assigns us for our spiritual
emolument.

5. The Holy Jesus having in a few words poured out torrents of innocent
desires, was pleased still to interrupt his Prayer, that he might visit his
charge, that little flock which was presently after to be scattered: he was
careful of them in the midst of his Agonies; they in his sufferings were fast
asleep. He awakens them, gives them command to watch and pray, that is to be
vigilant in the custody of their senses, and obervant of all accidents, and to
pray that they may be strengthened against all incursions of (...) Luke 22. 44.
Extensius orabat, sic Latinus Interpres (...): Alii (...) per [ (...).]
enemies and temptations; and then returns to prayer; and so a third time; his
Devotion still increasing with his sorrow. And when his Prayer was full, and
his sorrow come to a great measure, after the third, God sent his Angel to
comfort him; and by that act of grace then only expressed, has taught us to
continue our Devotions so long as our needs last. It may be God will not send a
Comsorter till the third time, that is, after a long expectation, and a patient
(...), and a lasting hope: in the interim God supports us with a secret hand,
and in his own time will refresh the spirit with the visitations of his Angels,
with the emissions of comfort from the Spirit, the Comforter. And know this
also, that the holy Angel, and the Lord of all the Angels, stands by every holy
person when he prays; and although he draws before his glories the curtain of a
cloud, yet in every instant he takes care we shall not perish, and in a just
season dissolves the cloud, and makes it to distill in holy dew, and drops
sweet as Manna, pleasant as Nard, and wholesome as the breath of Heaven. And
such was the consolation which the Holy Jesus received by the ministry of the
Angel, (...), sed (...) quae (...) non minuit (...) magis auxit: (...) est ex
(...). non (...) doloris (...). Beda in Lucae 22.
representing to Christ the Lord of the Angels, how necessary it was that he
should die for the glory of God; that in his Passion his Justice, Wisdom,
Goodness, Power and Mercy should shine; that unless he died all the World
should perish, but his blood should obtain their pardon; and that it should
open the gates of Heaven, repair the ruin of Angels, establish a holy Church,
be (...) of innumerable adoptive children to his Father, whom himself should
make heirs of glory; and that his Passion should soon pass away, his Father
hearing and granting his Prayer, that the Cup should pass speedily, though
indeed it should pass through him; that it should be attended and followed with
a glorious Resurrection, with eternal rest and glory of his Humanity, with the
exaltation of his Name, with a supreme dominion over all the world, and that
his Father should make him King of Kings, and Prince of the Catholic Church.
These, or whatsoever other comforts the Angel ministered, were such
considerations which the Holy Jesus knew, and the Angel knew not but by
communication from that God to whose assumed Humanity the Angel spoke; yet he
was pleased to receive comfort from his servant, just as God receives glory
from his creatures, and as he rejoices in his own works, even Cum (...),
solamen (...) solatur (...). Res miranda! (...) dans (...) Rex a (...) sumit
(...). (...) Anglus.
because he is good and gracious, and is pleased so to do; and because himself
had caused a voluntary sadness to be interposed between the habitual knowledge
and the actual consideration of these discourses; and we feel a pleasure when a
friendly hand lays upon our wound the plaster which our selves have made, and
applies such instruments and considerations of comfort which we have in notion
and an ineffective habit, but cannot reduce them to act, because no man is so
apt to be his own comforter; which God has therefore permitted, that our needs
should be the occasion of a mutual Charity.

6. It was a great season for the Angel's coming, because it was a great
necessity which was incumbent upon our Lord; for his sadness and his Agony was
so great, mingled and compounded of sorrow and zeal, fear and desire, innocent
nature and perfect grace, that he sweat drops as great as if the blood had
started through little undiscerned fontinels, and outrun the streams and rivers
of his Cross. In c. 24. Mat.
Euthymius and In 22. (...).
Theophylact say, that the Evangelists use this as a tragical expression of the
greatest Agony, and an unusual sweat, it being usual to call the tears of the
greatest sorrow tears of (...). But from the beginning of the Church it has
been more generally apprehended literally, and that some blood mingled with the
(...) substance issued from his veins in so great abundance, that they
moistened the ground, and bedecked his garment, which stood like a new
firmament studded with stars, portending an approaching storm. Now he came from
Bozrah with his garments red and bloody. And this Justin, (...). Dial, (...).
Athan (...). 6. (...) Beat. (...). Aug. (...). 6. (...). 5. de Consecr. (...).
Hier. l. de (...). Heb. Iren. l. 4. (...) 31. (...). Idem aiunt Dionys. Alex,
Aymonius, Epiphan, and (...).
Agony verified concerning the Holy Jesus those words of David, I am poured out
like water, my bones are dispersed, my heart in the midst of my body is like
melting wax, says Justin Martyr. Lib. 6. in (...).
Venerable Bede says, that the descending of these drops of blood upon the
earth, besides the general purpose, had also a particular relation to the
present infirmities of the Apostles, that our Blessed Lord obtained of his
Father, by the merits of those holy drops, mercies and special support for
them; and that effusion redeemed them from the present participation of death.
And S. Austin meditates, that the Body of our Lord all overspread with drops of
bloody sweat did prefigure the future state of Martyrs, and that his Body
mystical should be clad in a red garment variegated with the symbols of labor
and passion, sweat and blood; by which himself was pleased to purify his
Church, and present her to God holy and spotless. What collateral designs and
tacit significations might be designed by this mysterious sweat, I know not;
certainly it was a sad beginning of a most dolorous Passion: and such griefs,
which have so violent, permanent and sudden effects upon the body, which is not
of a nature symbolical to interior and immaterial causes, are proclaimed by
such marks to be high and violent. We have read of some persons, that the grief
and fear of one night has put a cover of snow upon their heads, as if the
labors of thirty years had been extracted, and the quintessence drank off in
the passion of that night: but if Nature had been capable of a greater or more
prodigious impress of passion than a bloody sweat, it must needs have happened
in this Agony of the Holy Jesus, in which he undertook a grief great enough to
make up the imperfect Contrition of all the Saints, and to satisfy for the
impenitencies of all the world.

7. By this time the Traitor Judas was arrived at Gethsemani, and being in the
vicinage of the Garden, Jesus rises from his prayers, and first calls his
Disciples from their sleep, and by an Irony seems to give them leave to sleep
on, but reproves their drousiness, when danger is so near, and bids them
henceforth take their rest; meaning, if they could for danger, which now was
indeed come to the Garden-doors. But the Holy Jesus, that it might appear he
undertook the Passion with choice and a free election, not only refused to
fly, but called his Apostles to rise, that they might meet his Murderers, who
came to him with swords and staves, as if they were to surprise a Prince of
armed Outlaws, whom without force they could not reduce. So also might
Butchers do well to go armed, when they are pleased to be afraid of Lambs, by
calling them Lions. Judas only discovered his Master's retirements, and
betrayed him to the opportunities of an armed band; for he could not accuse his
Master of any word or private action, that might render him obnoxious to
suspicion or the Law. For such are the rewards of innocence and prudence, that
the one secures against sin, the other against suspicion and appearances.

8. The Holy Jesus had accustomed to receive every of his Disciples after
absence with entertainment of a Kiss, which was the endearment of persons, and
the expression of the oriental civility: and Judas was confident that his Lord
would not reject him, whose feet he had washed at the time when he foretold
this event, and therefore had agreed to signify him by this O signum (...)! O
(...) osculo incipitur (...), and (...) pacis (...) pacis (...). Aug. (...). 12.
sign; and did so, beginning war with a Kiss, and breaking the peace of his
Lord by the symbol of kindness: which because Jesus entertained with much
evenness and charitable expressions, calling him Si (...), and (...) Domine,
(...) Amici (...), Qu (...) Qui (...) and (...)? Hondem. de Passione.
Friend, he gave evidence, that if he retained civilities to his greatest
enemies in the very acts of hostility, he has banquets and crowns and scepters
for his friends, that adore him with the kisses of Charity, and love him with
the sincerity of an affectionate spirit. But our Blessed Lord, besides his
essential sweetness and serenity of spirit, understood well how great benefits
himself and all the World were to receive by occasion of that act of Judas: and
our greatest enemy does by accident to holy persons the offices of their
dearest friends; telling us our faults without a cloak to cover their
deformities, but out of malice laying open the circumstances of aggravation,
doing us affronts, from whence we have an instrument of our Patience, and
restraining us from scandalous crimes, lest we become a scorn and reproof to
them that (...) us. And it is none of God's least mercies, that he permits
enmities amongst men, that animosities and peevishness may reprove more
sharply, and correct with more severity and simplicity, than the gentle hand of
friends, who are apter to bind our wounds up, than to discover them and make
them smart; but they are to us an excellent probation how friends may best do
the offices of friends, if they would take the plainness of enemies in
accusing, and still mingle it with the tenderness and good affections of
friends. But our Blessed Lord called Judas Friend, as being the instrument of
bringing him to glory, and all the World to pardon, if they would.

9. Jesus himself begins the enquiry, and leads them into their errand, and
tells them he was JESUS of Nazareth whom they sought. But this also, which was
an answer so gentle, had in it a strength greater than the Eastern wind or the
voice of thunder; for God was in that still voice, and it (...). (...).
struck them down to the ground. And yet they, and so do we still persist to
persecute our Lord, and to provoke the eternal God, who can with the breath of
his mouth, with a word, or a sign, or a thought, reduce us into nothing, or
into a worse condition, even an eternal duration of torments, and cohabitation
with a never-ending misery. And if we cannot bear a soft answer of the merciful
God, how shall we dare to provoke the wrath of the Almighty Judge? But in this
instance there was a rare mixture of effects, as there was in Christ of
Natures; S. Cyril. S. (...). S. (...), etc.
the voice of a Man, and the power of God. For it is observed by the Doctors of
the Primitive Ages, that from the Nativity of our Lord to the day of his Death,
the Divinity and Humanity did so communicate in effects, that no great action
passed, but it was like the Sun shining through a cloud, or a beauty with a
thin veil drawn over it, they gave illustration and testimony to each other.
The Holy Jesus was born a tender and a crying Infant; but is adored by the Magi
as a King, by the Angels as their GOD. He is circumcised as a Man; but a name
is given him to signify him to be the SAVIOR of the World. He flies into
Egypt like a distressed Child under the conduct of his helpless Parents; but as
soon as he enters the Country, the Idols fall down and confess his true
Divinity. He is presented in the Temple as the Son of man; but by Simeon and
Anna he is celebrated with divine praises for the MESSIAH, the SON OF GOD. He
is baptized in Jordan as a Sinner; but the Holy Ghost descending upon him
proclaimed him to be the well-beloved of God. He is hungry in the Desert as a
Man; but sustained his body without meat and drink for forty days together by
the power of his Divinity: There he is tempted of Satan as a weak Man, and the
Angels of light minister unto him as their supreme Lord. And now a little
before his death, when he was to take upon him all the affronts, miseries and
exinanitions of the most miserable, he receives testimonies from above, which
are most wonderful: For he was tranfigured upon Mount Tabor, entered
triumphantly into Jerusalem, had the acclamations of the people: when he was
dying, he darkened the Sun; when he was dead, he opened the sepulchers; when he
was fast nailed to the Cross, he made the earth to tremble; now when he suffers
himself to be apprehended by a guard of Soldiers, he strikes them all to the
ground only by replying to their answer, that the words of the Prophet might be
verified, Therefore my people shall Isai. 52. 6.
know my Name; therefore they shall know in that day, that I am he that does
speak, behold it is I.

10. The Soldiers and servants of the Jews having recovered from their fall,
and risen by the permission of Jesus, still persisted in their enquiry after
him, who was present, ready, and desirous to be sacrificed. He therefore
permitted himself to be taken, but not his Disciples: for he it was that set
them their bounds; and he secured his Apostles to be witnesses of his suffering
and his glories; and this work was the Redemption of the world, Simovit (...),
non (...) solum (...) illud and opus salutis (...). Regnantis (...), and non
(...) opus est. S. Cyril.
in which no man could have an active share, he alone was to tread the
wine press; and time enough they should be called to a fellowship of
sufferings. But Jesus went to them, and they bound him with cords: and so began
our liberty and redemption from slavery, and sin, and cursings, and death. But
he was bound faster by bands of his own; his Father's Will, and Mercy, Pity of
the world, Prophecies, and Dominum omnium (...), non arma, (...). S. Amb. in
Lue (...).
Mysteries, and Love held him fast: and these cords were as strong as death;
and the cords which the Soldiers malice put upon his holy hands were but
symbols and figures, his own compassion and affection were the morals. But yet
he undertook this short restraint and condition of a prisoner, that all sorts
of persecution and exterior calamities might be hallowed by his susception,
and these pungent sorrows should like bees sting him, and leave their sting
behind, that all the sweetness should remain for us. Some melancholic
Devotions have from uncertain stories added sad circumstances of the first
violence done to our Lord; That they bound him with three cords, and that with
so much violence, that they caused blood to start from his tender hands; That
they (...) then also upon him with a violence and incivility like that which
their Fathers had used toward Hur the brother of Aaron, whom they choked with
impure spittings into his throat, because he refused to consent to the making a
golden Calf. These particulars are not transmitted by certain Records. Certain
it is, they wanted no malice, and now no power; for the Lord had given himself
into their hands.

11. S. Peter seeing his Master thus ill used asked, Master, shall we strike
with the sword? and before he had his answer cut off the ear of Malchus. Two
swords there were in Christ's family, and S. Peter bore one; either because he
was to kill the Paschal Lamb, or, according to the custom of the Country, to
secure them against beasts of prey, which in that region were frequent, and
dangerous in the night. But now he used it in an unlawful war; he had no
competent authority, it was against the Ministers of his lawful Prince, and
against our Prince we must not draw a sword for Christ himself, himself having
forbidden us; as his kingdom is not of this world, so neither were his defenses
secular: he could have called for many legions of Angels for his guard, if he
had so pleased; and we read that one Angel slew 185000 armed men in one night;
and therefore it was a vast power which was at the command of our Lord; and he
needs not such low auxiliaries as an army of Rebels, or a navy of Pirates, to
(...) his cause: he first lays the foundation of our happiness in his
sufferings, and has ever since supported Religion by patience and suffering,
and in poverty, and all the circumstances and conjunctures of improbable
causes. Fighting for Religion is certain to destroy Charity, but not certain to
support Faith. S. Peter therefore may use his keys, but he is commanded to put
up his sword; and he did so; and presently he and all his fellows fairly ran
away: and yet that course was much the more Christian, for though it had in it
much infirmity, yet it had no malice. In the mean time the Lord was pleased to
touch the ear of Malchus, and he cured it; adding to the first instance of
power, in throwing them to the ground, an act of miraculous mercy, curing the
wounds of an enemy made by a friend. But neither did this pierce their callous
and obdurate spirits; but they led him in uncouth ways, and through the brook
Cedron, in which it is said (...) in via (...).
the ruder soldiers plunged him, and passed upon him all the affronts and
rudenesses Psalm. 110. (...).
which an insolent and cruel multitude could think of, to signify their
contempt and their rage. And such is the nature of evil men, who, when they are
not softened by the instruments and arguments of Grace, are much hardened by
them; such being the purpose of God, that either Grace shall cure sin, or
accidentally increase it; that it shall either pardon it, or bring it to
greater punishment: for so I have seen healthful medicines abused by the
incapacities of a heathless body become fuel to a fever, and increase the
distemperature from indisposition to a sharp disease, and from thence to the
margent of the grave. But it was otherwise in Saul, whom Jesus threw to the
ground with a more angry sound than these persecutors: but Saul rose a Saint,
and they persisted Devils, and the grace of God distinguished the events.

The PRAYER.
O Holy Jesus, make me by thy example to conform to the will of that Eternal
God who is our Father, merciful and gracious, that I may choose all those
accidents which his Providence has actually disposed to me, that I may know no
desires but his commands, and his will, and that in all afflictions I may fly
thither for mercy, pardon, and support, and may wait for deliverance in such
times and manners which the Father has reserved in his own power, and
graciously dispenses according to his infinite wisdom and compassion. Holy
Jesus, give me the gift and spirit of Prayer, and do thou by thy gracious
intercession supply my ignorances and passionate desires and imperfect choices,
procuring and giving to me such returns of favor which may support my needs,
and serve the ends of Religion and the Spirit, which thy wisdom chooses, and thy
Passion has purchased, and thy grace loves to bestow upon all thy Saints and
servants. Amen.

II.
ETernal God, sweetest Jesu, who did receive Judas with the affection of a
Savior, and sufferedst him to kiss thy cheek, with the serenity and
tranquillity of God, and did permit the soldiers to bind thee, with Patience
exemplary to all ages of Martyrs, and did cure the wound of thy enemy with
the Charity of a Parent, and the tenderness of an infinite pity; O kiss me with
the kisses of thy mouth, embrace me with the entertainments of a gracious Lord,
and let my Soul dwell and feast in thee, who art the repository of eternal
sweetness and refreshments. Bind me, O Lord, with those bands which tied thee
fast, the chains of Love; that such holy union may dissolve the cords of
vanity, and confine the bold pretensions of usurping Passions, and imprison all
extravagancies of an impertinent spirit, and lead Sin captive to the dominion
of Grace and sanctified Reason; that I also may imitate all the parts of thy
holy Passion, and may by thy bands get my liberty, by thy kiss enkindle
charity, by the touch of thy hand and the breath of thy mouth have all my
wounds cured and restored to the integrity of a holy Penitent, and the purities
of Innocence, that I may love thee, and please thee, and live with thee for
ever, O Holy and sweetest Jesu.

Amen.
Considerations upon the Scourging and other Accidents happening from the
Apprehension till the Crucifixion of JESUS.
Christ brought before the Highpreist.
John. 18: 12. Then the Band and the Captain and the Officers of the Jews took
Jesus and bound him. 25. And lead him away to Annas first for he was
Father-in-law to Cajaphas, which was Highpreist that same year.

Christ arraigned before Herod.
Luke 23. 7. 8. 11. And as soon as he knew that he belonged to Herod's
jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod. 8. And when Herod saw Jesus, he was
exceeding glad: 11. And Herod with his men of war set him at naught, and mocked
him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate.




1. THE house of Annas stood in the mount Sion, and in the way to the house of
Caiaphas; and thither he was led as to the first stage of their triumph for
their surprise of a person so feared and desired; and there a naughty person
smote the (...) Jesus upon the face, for saying to Annas that he had made his
Doctrine public, and that all the people were able to give account of it: to
whom the Lamb of God (...) as much meekness and patience in his answer, as in
his answer to Annas he had (...) prudence and modesty. For now that they had
taken Jesus, they wanted a crime to object against him, and therefore were
desirous to snatch occasion from his discourses, to which they resolved to
tempt him by questions and affronts: but his answer was general and indefinite,
safe and true, enough to acquit his Doctrine from suspicions of secret designs,
and yet secure against their present snares; for now himself, who always had
the innocence of Doves, was to join with it the prudence and wariness of
Serpents; not to prevent death, (for that he was resolved to suffer) but that
they might be destitute of all appearance of a just cause on his part. Here it
was that Judas received his money; and here that holy Face which was designed
to be that object in the beholding of which much of the celestial glory does
consist, that Face which the Angels stare upon with wonder, like infants at a
bright Sunbeam, was smitten extrajudicially by an incompetent person, with
circumstances of despite, in the presence of a Judge, in a full assembly, and
none reproved the insolency and the cruelty of the affront: for they resolved
to use him as they use Wolves and Tigres, with all things that may be
destructive, violent and impious: and in this the injury was heightened, because
the blow (...) missus (...) ab (...).
was said to be given by Malchus an Idumaean slave, and therefore a
contemptible person; but far more unworthy by his ingratitude, for so he
repayed the Holy Jesus for working a Miracle and healing his ear. But so the
Scripture was fulfilled; He shall Vida, (...). 2. (...). Isa. 50. 6. Micah 5. 1.
give his body to the smiters, and his cheeks to the nippers, says the Prophet
Isay; and, They shall smite the cheek of the Judge of Israel, says Micah. And
this very circumstance of the Passion Lactantius. Lib. 4. (...). cap. 18.
affirms to have been foretold by the Erythraean Sibyll. But no meekness or
indifferency could engage our Lord not to protest his innocence: (...)
and though following his steps we must walk in the regions of patience, and
tranquillity, and admirable toleration of injuries; yet we may represent such
defenses of our selves, which by not resisting the sentence may testify that
our suffering is undeserved: and if our Innocence will not preserve our lives,
it will advance our title to a better; and every good cause ill judged shall be
brought to another tribunal to receive a just and unerring sentence.

2. Annas having suffered this unworthy usage toward a person so excellent,
sent him away to Caiphas, who had formerly in a full council resolved he should
die; yet Victor in S. (...).
now palliating the design with the scheme of a tribunal, they seek out for
witnesses, and the witnesses are to seek for allegations; and when they find
them, they are to seek for proof, and those proofs were to seek for unity and
consent, and nothing was ready for their purposes; but they were forced to use
the semblance of a judicial process, that, because they were to make use of
Pilate's authority to put him to death, they might persuade Pilate to accept of
their examination and conviction without farther enquiry. But such had been the
excellency and exemplar Piety and prudence of the life of Jesus, that if they
pretended against him questions of their Law, they were not capital in a Roman
Court: if they affirmed that he had moved the people to sedition and affected
the Kingdom, they saw that all the world would convince them of (...)
testimony. At last, after many attempts, they accused him for a figurative
speech, a trope which they could not understand; which if it had been spoken in
a literal sense, and had been acted too according to the letter, had been so
far from a fault, that it would have been a prodigy of power; and it had been
easier to raise the Temple of Jerusalem, than to raise the temple of his Body.
In the mean time, the Lamb of God left his cause to defend it self under the
protection of his heavenly Father; not only because himself was determined to
die, but because if he had not, those premises could never have inferred it.
But this Silence of the Holy Jesus fulfilled a Prophecy, it made his enemies
full of murmur and amazement, it made them to see that he despised the
accusations as certain and apparent calumnies; but that himself was fearless of
the issue, and in the sense of morality and mysteries taught us not to be too
apt to excuse our selves, when the semblance of a fault lies upon us, unless by
some other duty we are obliged to our (...). S. Hieron, in (...).
defenses; since he who was most innocent, was most silent: and it was
expedient, that as the first Adam increased his sin by a vain apology, the
silence and sufferance of the second Adam should expiate and reconcile it.

3. But Caiaphas had a reserve, which he knew should do the business in that
assembly; he adjured him by God to tell him if he were the CHRIST. The Holy
Jesus, being adjured by so sacred a Name, would not now refuse an answer, lest
it might not consist with that honor which is due to it, and which he always
paid, and that he might neither despise the authority of the High Priest, nor
upon so solemn occasion be wanting to that great truth which he came down to
earth to persuade to the world. And when three such circumstances concur, it is
enough to open our mouths, though we let in death. And so did our Lord,
confessed himself to be the CHRIST, the Son of the living God. And this the
High Priest was pleased, as the design was laid, to call Blasphemy; and there
they voted him to die. Then it was the High Priest rent his clothes; the veil
of the Temple was rent when the Passion was finished, the clothes of the
Priests at the beginning of it: and as that signified the departing of the
Synagogue, and laying Religion open; so did the rending the garments of
Caiaphas prophetically signify that the Priesthood (...) sua, ostendens (...),
and (...), and (...) manifestans, (...) esse (...). Origin. (...) S. (...).
should be rent from him, and from the Nation. And thus the personated and
theatrical admiration at Jesus became the type of his own punishment, and
consigned the Nation to delition: and usually God so dispenses his Judgments,
that when men personate the tragedies of others, they really act their own.

4. Whilst these things were acting concerning the Lord, a sad accident
happened to his servant Peter: for being engaged in strange and evil company in
the midst of danger, surprised with a question without time to deliberate an
answer, to find subterfuges, or to fortify himself, he denied his Lord
shamefully, with some boldness at first, and this grew to a licencious
confidence, and then to impudence, and denying with perjury, that he knew not
his Lord, who yet was known to him as his own heart, and was dearer than his
eyes, and for whom he professed but a little before he would die; but did not
do so till many years after. But thus he became to us a sad example of humane
infirmity; and if (...) (...). (...). Capit. (...). 69. Ieo (...). 9. (...)
pass. Dom. and Euthym, in (...).
the Prince of the Apostles fell so (...), it is full of pity, but not to be
upbraided, if we see the fall of lesser stars. And yet that we may prevent so
great a ruin, we must not mingle with such company who will provoke or scorn
us into sin; and if we do, yet we must stand upon our guard that a sudden
motion do not surprise us: or if we be arrested, yet let us not enter farther
into our sin, like wild beasts intricating themselves by their impatience. For
there are some who, being ashamed and impatient to have been engaged, take
sanctuary in boldness and a shameless abetting it, so running into the darkness
of Hell to hide their nakedness. But he also by returning, and rising
instantly, became to us a rare example of Penitence; and his not lying long in
the crime did facilitate this restitution. For the spirit of God being
extinguished by our works of darkness, is like a taper, which if, as soon as
the (...) is blown out, it be brought to the fire, it sucks light, and without
trouble is re-enkindled; but if it cools into death and stiffness, it requires
a longer stay and trouble. The Holy Jesus in the midst of his own sufferings
forgot not his servant's danger, but was pleased to look upon him when the Cock
crew; and the Cock was the Preacher, and the Look of Jesus was the Grace that
made the Sermon effectual: and because he was but newly fallen, and his
habitual love of his Master, though interrupted, yet had suffered no natural
abatement, he returned with the swiftness of an Eagle to the embraces and
primitive affections of his Lord.

5. By this time suppose Sentence given, Caiaphas prejudging all the Sanhedrim;
for he first declared Jesus to have spoken Blasphemy, and the fact to be
notorious, and then asked their votes; which whosoever then should have denied,
must have contested the judgment of the High Priest, who by the favor of the
Romans was advanced, ( Valerius Gratus, who was President of Judaea, having
been his Patron) and his Faction potent, and his malice great, and his heart
set upon this business: all which inconveniences none of them durst have
suffered, unless he had had the confidence greater than of an Apostle at that
time. But this Sentence was but like strong dispositions to an enraged fever;
he was only declared apt and worthy for death, they had no power at that time
to inflict it; but yet they let loose all the fury of madmen and insolency of
wounded smarting soldiers: and although from the time of his being in the
house of Annas till the Council met, they had used him with studied
indignities; yet now they renewed and doubled the unmercifulness, and their
injustice, to so great a height, that their injuries must needs have been
greater than his Patience, if his Patience had been less than infinite. For
thus Man's Redemption grows up as the load swells which the Holy Jesus bare for
us; for these were our portion, and we, having turned the flowers of Paradise
into thistles, should for ever have felt their infelicity, had not Jesus paid
the debt. But he bearing them upon his tender body with an even and excellent
and dispassionate spirit, offered up these beginnings of sufferings to his
Father, to obtain pardon even for them that injured him, and for all the World.

6. Judas now seeing that this matter went farther than he intended it,
repented of his fact. For although evil persons are in the progress of their
iniquity invited on by new arguments, and supported by confidence and a
careless spirit: yet when iniquity is come to the height, or so great a
proportion that it is apt to produce Despair or an intolerable condition, then
the Devil suffers the Conscience to thaw and grow tender; but it is the
tenderness of a Bile, it is soreness rather and a new disease; and either it
comes when the time of Repentance is past, or leads to some act which shall
make the pardon to be impossible: and so it happened here. For Judas, either
impatient of the shame or of the sting, was thrust on to despair of pardon,
with a violence as hasty and as great as were his needs. And Despair is very
often used like the bolts and bars of Hell-gates, it (...) upon them that had
entered into the suburbs of eternal death by an habitual sin, and it secures
them against all retreat. And the Devil is forward enough to bring a man to
Repentance, provided it be too late; and Esau wept bitterly and repented him,
and the five foolish Virgins lift up their voice aloud when the gates were
shut, and in Hell men shall repent to all eternity. But I consider the very
great folly and infelicity of Judas: it was at midnight he received his money
in the house of Annas, betimes in that morning he repented his bargain; he
threw the money back again, but his sin stuck close, and it is thought to a
(...) eternity. Such is the purchase of Treason and the reward of Covetousness;
it is cheap in its offers, momentany in its possession, unsatisfying in the
fruition, uncertain in the stay, sudden in its (...), horrid in the
remembrance, and a ruin, a certain and miserable ruin is in the event. When
Judas came in that sad condition, and told his miserable story to them that set
him on work, they (...) him go away unpitied; he had served their ends in
betraying his Lord, and those that hire such servants use to leave them in the
disaster, to shame and to sorrow: and so did the Priests, but took the money,
and (...) to put it into the treasury, because it was the price Inde (...) quod
(...) jam condere (...), ((...) dare (...), dum (...) -- Juvencus (...). 4.
(...).
of blood; but they made no scruple to take it from the treasury to buy that
blood. Any thing seems lawful that serves the ends of ambitious and bloody
persons, and then they are scrupulous in their cases of Conscience when nothing
of Interest does intervene: for evil men make Religion the servant of Interest;
and sometimes weak men think that it is the (...) of (...) Religion, and
suspect that all of it is a design, because many great Politics make it so.
The end of the Tragedy was, that Judas died with an ignoble death, marked with
the circumstances of Non (...) Judas (...) and (...), S. August. (...). c. 17.
a horrid Judgment, and perished by the most infamous hands in the world, that
is, by his own. Which if it be confronted against the excellent spirit of S.
Peter, who did an act as contradictory to his honor and the grace of God as
could be easily imagined; yet taking sanctuary in the arms of his Lord, he
lodged in his heart for ever, and became an example to all the world of the
excellency of the Divine Mercy, and the efficacy of a holy Hope, and a hearty,
timely and an operative Repentance.

7. (...) now all things were ready for the purpose, the High Priest and all
his Council go along with the Holy Jesus to the house of Pilate, hoping he
would verify their Sentence, and bring it to execution, that they might (...)
be rid of their fears, and enjoy In (...) S. (...).
their sin and their reputation quietly. S. (...) (...), that the High Priest
caused the Holy Jesus to be led with a cord about his neck, and, in memory of
that, the Priests for many Ages (...) a stole about theirs. But the Jews did it
according to the custom of the Nation, to signify he was condemned to death:
they desired Pilate that he would crucify him, they having (...) him worthy.
And when Pilate enquired into the particulars, they gave him a general and an
indefinite answer; If he were not guilty, we would not have brought him (...)
thee: they intended not to make Pilate Judge of the cause, but (...) of their
cruelty. But Pilate had not learned to be guided by an implicit faith of such
persons, which he knew to be malicious and violent; and therefore still called
for instances and arguments of their Accusation. And that all the world might
see with how great unworthiness they prosecuted the (...), they chiefly there
accused him of such crimes upon which themselves condemned him not, and which
they knew to be false, but yet likely to move Pilate, if he had been passionate
or inconsiderate in his sentences; [ He offered to make himself a King.] This
(...) happened at the entry of the Praetorium; for the (...), who made no
conscience of killing the King of Heaven, made a conscience of the external
customs and ceremonies of their Law, which had in them no interior sanctity,
which were apt to separate them (...) the Nations, and remark them with
characters of Religion and abstraction: it would defile them to go to a Roman
Forum, (...) a capital action was to be judged; and yet the effusion of the
best blood in the world was not esteemed against their (...): so violent and
blind is the spirit of malice, which turns humanity into (...), wisdom into
craft, diligence into subornation, and Religion into Superstition.

8. Two other articles they alleged against him: but the first concerned not
Pilate, and the second was involved in the third, and therefore he chose to
examine him upon this only of his being a King. To which the Holy Jesus
answered, that it is true, he was (...) King indeed, but not of this world; his
Throne is Heaven, the Angels are his Courtiers, and the (...) Creation are his
Subjects: His Regiment is spiritual, his (...) are the Courts of Conscience and
Church-tribunals, and at Doomsday the Clouds: The Tribute which he demands are
conformity to his Laws, Faith, (...), and Charity; no other Gabels but the
duties of a holy Spirit, and the expresses of a religious Worship, and obedient
Will, and a consenting Understanding. And in all this Pilate thought the
interest of (...) was not invaded. For certain it is, the Discipline of Jesus
confirmed it much, and supported it by the strongest pillars. And here Pilate
saw how impertinent and malicious their Accusation was: And we, who declaim
against the unjust proceedings of the Jews against our dearest Lord, should do
well to take care that we, in accusing any of our Brethren either with
malicious purpose, or with an uncharitable circumstance, do not commit the same
fault which in them we so hate and accuse. Let no man speak any thing of his
neighborhood but what is true: and yet if a truth be heightened by the biting
Rhetoric of a satirical spirit, extended and drawn forth in circumstances and
arts of aggravation, the truth becomes a load to the guilty person, is a
prejudice to the sentence of the Judge, and has not so much as the excuse of
Zeal, much less the Charity of Christianity. Sufficient to every man is the
plain story of his crime; and to excuse as much of it as we can, would better
become us, who perish unless we be excused for infinite irregularities. But if
we add this also, that we accuse our Brethren (...) them that may amend them
and reform their error, if we pity their persons and do not hate them, if we
seek nothing of their disgrace and make not their shame public, but when the
public is necessarily concerned or the state of the man's sin requires it;
then our accusations are charitable: but if they be not, all such accusations
are accepted by Christ with as much displeasure in proportion to the degree of
the malice and the proper effect, as was this Acculation of his own person.

9. But Pilate having pronounced Jesus innocent, and perceiving he was a
Galilean, sent him to (...), as being a more competent person to determine
(...) one of his own jurisdiction. Herod was glad at the honor done to him and
the person brought him, being now desirous to see some Miracle (...) before
him. But the Holy Jesus spoke not one word there, nor did any sign; so to
reprove the sottish carelessness of Herod, who, living in the place of Jesus's
abode, never had seen his person or heard his Sermons. And if we neglect the
opportunities of Grace, and refuse to hear the (...) of Christ in the time of
mercy and Divine appointment, we may arrive at that state of (...) in which
Christ will refuse to speak one word of comfort to us; and the Homilies of the
Gospel shall be dead letters, and the spirit not at all refreshed, nor the
Understanding instructed, nor the Affections moved, nor the Will determined;
but because we have during all our time stopped our ears, in his time God will
stop his mouth, and shut up the springs of Grace, that we shall receive no
refreshment, or instruction, or pardon, or felicity. Jesus suffered not himself
to be moved at the pertinacious accusations of the (...), nor the desires of
the Tyrant, but persevered in silence, till Herod and his servants despised him
and dismissed him. For so it became our High Priest, who was to sanctify all
our sufferings, to consecrate affronts and scorn, that we may learn to endure
contempt, and to suffer our selves in a religious cause to be despised; and
when it happens in any other, to remember that we have our dearest Lord for a
precedent of bearing it with admirable simplicity and equanimity of deportment:
and it is a mighty stock of Self-love that dwells in our spirits, which makes
us of all afflictions most impatient of this. But Jesus endured this despite,
and suffered this to be added, that he was exposed in scorn to the boys of
(...) streets. For (...) caused him to be arrayed in white, sent him out to be
scorned by the people and hooted at by idle persons, and so remitted him to
Pilate. And since that Accident to our Lord, the Church has not undecently
chose to cloth her Priests with Albs or white garments; and it is a symbolical
intimation and representment of that part of the Passion and (...) which Herod
passed upon the Holy Jesus: and this is so far from deserving a reproof, that
it were to be wished all the children of the Church would imitate all those
(...) (...).
Graces which Christ exercised when he wore that garment, which she has taken
up in ceremony and thankful memory; that is, in all their actions and
sufferings be so estranged from secular arts and mixtures of the world, so
intent upon Religion, and active in all its interests, so indifferent to all
acts of Providence, so equal in all chances, so patient of every accident, so
charitable to enemies, and so undetermined by exterior events, that nothing
may draw us forth from (...) severities of our Religion, or entice us from the
retirements of a (...) and sober and patient spirit, or make us to depart from
the courtesies of Piety, though for such adhesion and pursuit we be esteemed
fools, or ignorant, or contemptible.

Jesus is scourged by the Soldiers
Mar: 15: 14. Then Pilate said unto them why what evil has he done and they
cried the more exceedingly Crucify him.

15 And so Pilate willing to content the People released Barabbas unto them and
delivered Jesus when he had scourged him to be Crucified.

They Crown him with Thorns.
Mat: 27. 28. And they stripped him and put on him a Scarlet robe.

29 And when they had platted a crown of Thorns, they put it upon his head and
a reed in his right hand, and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him,
saying, Hayle King of the Jews.



10. When Pilate had received the Holy Jesus, and found that Herod had sent him
back uncondemned, he attempted to rescue him from their malice, by making him a
donative and a freed man at the petition of the people. But they preferred a
Murderer and a Rebel, Barabbas, before him; for themselves being Rebels
against the King of Heaven, loved to acquit persons criminal in the same kind
of sin, rather than their Lord, against whom they took up all the arms which
they could receive from violence S. Aug. (...). 15. in Joann.
and perfect malice, desiring to have him crucified who raised the dead, and to
have the other (...) who destroyed the living. And when Pilate saw they were
set upon it, he consented, and delivered him first to be scourged; which the
soldiers (...) in his Dominus (...) ut (...) columna. (...). Prudent.
executed with violence and unrelenting hands, opening his virginal body to
nakedness, and tearing his tender flesh till the pavement was purpled with a
shower of holy blood. Itis reported in the Ecclesiastical story, that when S.
Agnes and (...) in (...) amor. Naz. in (...).
S. Barbara, holy Virgins and Martyrs, were stripped naked to execution, God,
pitying their great shame and trouble to have their nakedness discovered, made
for them a veil of light, and sent them to a modest and desired death. But the
Holy Jesus, who chose all sorts of shame and confusion, that by a fullness of
suffering he might expiate his Father's anger, and that he might consecrate to
our sufferance all kind of affront and passion, endured even the shame of
nakedness at the time of his scourging, suffering himself to be divested of his
robes, that we might be clothed with that stole he put off: for (...) he (...)
on him the state of sinning Adam, and became naked, that we might (...) be
(...) with Righteousness, and then with Immortality.

11. After they had scourged him without remorse, they clothed him with purple,
and crowned him with thorns, and put a cane in his hand for a scepter, and
bowed their knees before him, and saluted him with mockery, with a [ Hail King
of the Jews,] and (...) beat him and spate upon him; and then Pilate brought
him forth, and showed this sad spectacle to the people, hoping this might move
them to compassion, who never loved to see a man prosperous, and are always
troubled to see the same man in misery. But the Earth, which was cursed for
Adam's sake, and was sowed with thorns and thistles, produced the full harvest
of them, and the Second Adam gathered them all, and made garlands of them as
ensigns of his Victory which he was now in pursuit of against Sin, the Grave,
and Hell. And we also may make our thorns, which are in themselves (...) and
dolorous, to be a Crown, if we bear (...) patiently, and unite them to Christ's
Passion, and offer them to his honor, and bear them in his cause, and rejoice
in them for his sake. And indeed, after such a grove of (...) growing upon the
head of our Lord, to see one of Christ's members soft, delicate and effeminate,
is a great indecency, next to this of seeing the Jews use the King of glory
with the greatest reproach and infamy.

12. But nothing prevailing, nor the Innocence of Jesus, nor his immunity from
the sentence of Herod, nor the industry and diligence of Pilate, nor the misery
nor the sight of the afflicted Lamb of God, at last (for so God decreed to
permit it, and Christ to (...) it) Pilate gave sentence of death upon him,
having first washed his hands; of which God served his end, to declare the
Innocence of his Son, of which in this whole process he was most curious, and
suffered not the least probability to adhere to him; yet Pilate served no end
of his, nor preserved any thing of his innocence. He that (...) upon a Prince,
and cries, Saving your honor, you are a Tyrant; and he that strikes a man upon
the face, and cries him mercy, and undoes him, and says it was in jest, does
just like that person that sins against God, and thinks to be excused by saying
it was against his Conscience; that is washing our hands when they are stained
in blood, as if a ceremony of purification were enough to cleanse a soul from
the stains of a spiritual impurity. So some refuse not to take any Oath in
times of Persecution, and say it obliges not, because it was forced, and done
against their wills; as if the doing of it were washed off by protesting
against it, whereas the protesting against it declares me criminal, if I rather
choose not death than that which I profess to be a sin. But all the persons
which cooperated in this death were in this life consigned to a fearful
judgment after it. The Jews took the blood (which Pilate seemed to wash off)
upon themselves and their children, and the blood of this Paschal Lamb stuck
upon their forehead and marked them, not to escape, but to fall under the sword
of the destroying Angel, and they perished either by a more hasty death, or
shortly after in the extirpation and miserable ruin of their Nation. And
Pilate, who had a less share in the crime, (...) a black character of a secular
Judgment; for not long after he was by Vitellius the President of Syria sent to
Rome to answer to the crimes objected against him by the Jews, whom to please
he had done so much violence to his Conscience; and by (...) sentence he was
banished to Vienna, deprived of all his honors, where he lived ingloriously,
till by impatience of his calamity he killed himself with his own hand. And
thus the blood of Jesus shed for the Salvation of the world became to them a
Curse, and that which purifies the Saints stuck to them that shed it, and
mingled it not with the tears of Repentance, to be a leprosy loathsome and
incurable. So Manna turns to worms, and the wine of Angels to Vinegar and Lees,
when it is received into impure vessels, or tasted by wanton palats; and the
Sun himself produces Rats and Serpents, when it reflects upon the dirt of Nilus.

The PRAYER.
O Holy and immaculate Lamb of God, who were pleased to (...) shame and sorrow,
to be brought before tribunals, to be accused maliciously, betrayed
treacherously, condemned unjustly, and scourged most (...), suffering the most
severe and most unhandsome inflictions which could be procured by potent,
subtle and extremest malice, and did (...) this out of love greater than the
love of Mothers, more affectionate than the tears of joy and pity dropped from
the eyes of most passionate women, by these fontinels of blood issuing forth
life and health and pardon upon all thine enemies; teach me to apprehend the
baseness of Sin, in proportion to the greatest of those calamities which my sin
made it necessary for thee to susfer, that I may hate the cause of thy (...),
and adore thy mercy, and imitate thy charity, and copy (...) thy patience and
humility, and love thy person to the uttermost extent and degrees of my
affections. Lord, what am I, that the eternal Son of God should (...) one
stripe for me? But thy Love is infinite: and how great a misery is it to
provoke by sin so great a mercy, and despise so miraculous a goodness, and to
do fresh despite to the Son of God? But our sins are innumerable, and our
infirmities are mighty. Dearest Jesu, pity me, for I am accused by my own
Conscience, and am found guilty; I am stripped naked of my Innocence, and bound
fast by Lust, and tormented with stripes and wounds of enraged Appetites. But
let thy Innocence excuse me, the robes of thy Righteousness cloth me, thy
Bondage set me free, and thy Stripes heal me; that thou being my Advocate, my
Physician, my Patron, and my Lord, I may be adopted into the union of thy
Merits, and partake of the efficacy of thy Sufferings, and be crowned as thou
art, having my sins changed to virtues, and my thorns to rays of glory under
thee our Head, in the participations of Eternity, O Holy and immaculate Lamb of
God.

Amen.
DISCOURSE XX. Of Death, and the due manner of Preparation to it.


1. THE Holy Spirit of God has in Scripture revealed to us but one way of
preparing to Death, and that is, by a holy life; and there is nothing in all
the Book of Life concerning this exercise of address to Death, but such advices
which suppose the dying person in a state of Grace. S. James indeed counsels,
that in sickness we should send for the Ministers Ecclesiastical, and that they
pray over us, and that we James 5. 14, etc.
confess our sins, and they shall be forgiven; that is, those prayers are of
great efficacy for the removing the sickness, and taking off that punishment of
sin, and healing them in a certain degree, according to the efficacy of the
ministry, and the dispositions or capacities of the sick person. But we must
know that oftentimes universal effects are attributed to partial causes;
because by the analogy of Scripture we are taught, that all the body of holy
actions and ministeries are to unite in production of the event, and that
without that adunation one thing alone cannot operate; but because no one alone
does the work, but by an united power, therefore indefinitely the effect is
ascribed sometimes to one, sometimes to another, meaning, that one as much as
the other, that is, all together, are to work the Pardon and the Grace. But the
doctrine of Preparation to Death we are clearest taught in the (...). 25.
(...). AEschyl. (...).
Parable of the ten Virgins. Those who were wise stood waiting for the coming
of the Bridegroom, their Lamps burning; only when the Lord was at hand, at the
notice of his coming published, they trimmed their Lamps, and they, so
disposed, went forth and met him, and entered with him into his interior and
eternal joys. They whose Lamps did not stand ready beforehand, expecting the
uncertain hour, were shut forth, and bound in darkness. [ Watch therefore, so
our Lord applies and expounds the Parable, for ye know not the day nor Matt.
25. 13.
the hour of the coming of the Son of man.] Whenever the arrest of Death seises
us, unless before that notice we had Oil in our Vessels, that is, Grace in our
hearts, habitual Grace, (for nothing else can reside or dwell there, an act
cannot inhabit or be in a Vessel) it is too late to make preparation. But they
who have it, may and must prepare, that is, they must stir the fire, trim the
vessel, make it more actual in its exercise and productions, full of ornament,
advantages and degrees. And that is all we know from Scripture concerning
Preparation.

2. And indeed since all our life we are dying, and this minute in which I now
write death divides with me, and has got the surer part and more certain
possession, it is but reasonable that we should always be doing the Offices of
Preparation. If to day we were not dying and passing on to our grave, then we
might with -- (...) Elosculus (...) --
more safety defer our work till the morrow: But as fuel in a furnace in every
degree of its heat and reception of the flame -- (...) (...) Agam.
is converting into fire and ashes, and the disposing it to the last mutation
is the same work with the last instance of its change: so is the age of every
day a beginning of death, and the night composing us to sleep bids us go to our
lesser rest; because (...). Quid quasi (...) lux (...), Jam cras (...) hos
annoi, and (...). Sat. 5.
that night, which is the end of the preceding day, is but a lesser death; and
whereas now we have died so many days, the last day of our life is but the
dying so many more, and when that last day of dying will come we know not.
There is nothing then added but the circumstance of Sickness, which also
happens many times before; only men are pleased to call that Death which is the
end of dying, when we cease to die any more: and therefore to put off our
Preparation till that which we call Death, is to put off the work of all our
life, till the time comes in which it is to cease and determine.

3. But to accelerate our early endeavor, (besides what has been formerly
considered upon the proper grounds of Repentance) I here reinforce the
consideration of Death in such circumstances which are apt to engage us upon an
early industry. 1. I consider, that no man is sure that he shall not die
suddenly; and therefore Quid (...), nunquam homini (...) in (...). Navita (...)
ultra Caca (...) aliunde (...): Miles (...) and (...) Parthus and Italum Robur.
Sod (...). Hor. l. 2. od. 13.
if Heaven be worth securing, it were fit that we should reckon every day the
Vespers of death, and therefore that according to the usual rites of Religion
it be begun and spent with religious offices: And let us consider, that those
many persons who are remarked in history to have died suddenly, either were
happy by an early Piety, or miserable by a sudden death. And if uncertainty of
condition be an abatement of felicity, and spoils the good we possess, no man
can be happy but he that has lived well, that is, who has secured his
condition by an habitual and living Piety. For since God has not told us we
shall not die suddenly is it not certain he intended we should prepare for
sudden death, as well as against death clothed in any other circumstances?
Fabius surnamed Pictor was choked with a Hair in a mess of Milk, Anacreon with
a Raisin, Cardinal Colonna with Figs crusted with Ice, Adrian the fourth with a
Fly, Drusius Pompeius with a Pear, Domitius Afer, Quintilian's Tutor, with a
full Cup, (...). Crom. l. 6. Volaterran. l. 4. c. 22. Cui nasci contigit, (...)
Quintil. Divesne, (...) natus ab Inacho, Nil interest, an (...) and infima
(...), sub dio (...), Victima nil miserantis (...). Omnes (...) -- Hor. l. 2.
od. 3.
Casimire the Second, King of Polonia, with a Little draught of Wine, Amurath
with a Full goblet, Tarquinius Priscus with a Fish-bone. For as soon as a man
is born, that which in nature only remains to him is to die; and if we differ
in the way or time of our abode, or the manner of our Exit, yet we are even at
last: and since it is (...).
not determined by a natural cause which way we shall go, or at what age, a
wise Man will suppose himself always upon his Deathbed; and such supposition
is like making of his Will, he is not the nearer Death for doing it, but he is
the readier for it when it comes.

4. Saint Jerome said well, He deserves not the name of a Christian, who will
live in that state of life in which he will not die: And indeed it is a great
venture to be in an evil state of life, because every minute of it has a
danger; and therefore a succession of actions, in every one of which he may as
well perish as escape, is a boldness that has no mixture of wisdom or
probable venture. How many persons have died in the midst of an act of sport,
or at a merry meeting? Grimoaldus, a Lombard King, died with shooting of a
Pidgeon; Thales the Milesian in the Theater: Lucia, the sister of Aurelius the
Emperor, playing with her little son, was wounded in her breast with a Needle,
and died: Benno, Bishop of Adelburg, with great ceremony and joy consecrating
S. (...) l. 3. c. 51. Matthiol. in (...).
Michael's Church, was crowded to death by the People; so was the Duke of
Saxony at the Inauguration of Albert I. The great Lawyer Baldus, playing with a
little Dog, was bitten upon the lip, instantly grew mad, and perished: Charles
the Eighth of France, seeing certain Gentlemen playing at Tenniscourt, swooned,
and recovered not: Henry II. was killed running at Tilt: Ludovicus Borgia with
riding the great Horse: and the old Syracusan, Archimedes, was slain by a rude
Soldier as he was making Diagrams in the sand, which was his greatest
pleasure. How many Men have died laughing, or in the ecstasies of a great joy?
Plin. l. 7. c. 53.
Philippides the Comedian, and Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily, died with joy at
the news of a victory: (...). 1. (...).
Diagoras of Rhodes, and Chilo the Philosopher, expired in the embraces of
their sons crowned with an Olympic Laurel: Plut. and Gel. de illust. (...).
Polycrita Naxia, being saluted the Savioress of her Country; Marcus
Juventius, when the Senate decreed him honors; the Emperor Cuspin.
Conrade the Second, when he triumphed after the conquest of Italy, had a joy
bigger than their heart, and their fancy swelled it, till they burst and died.
Death can enter in at any door: (...) of Nice died with excessive laughter; so
did the Poet Philemon, being provoked to it only by seeing an Ass eat sigs.
And the number of persons Lotus (...) est, (...), and (...) est (...). Mart.
(...). 6.
who have been found suddenly dead in their beds is so great, that as it
ingages many to a more certain and regular devotion for their Compline, so it
were well it were pursued to the utmost intention of God; that is, that all the
parts of Religion should with zeal and assiduity be entertained and finished,
that, as it becomes wise men, we never be surprised with that we are sure will
sometime or other happen. A great General in Italy at the sudden death of
Alsonsus of Ferrara, and Lodovico (...) at the sight of the sad accident upon
Henry II. of France now mentioned, turned religious, and they did what God
intended in those deaths. It concerns us to be curious of single actions,
because even in those shorter periods we may expire and (...) our Graves. But
if the state of life be contradictory to our hopes of Heaven, it is like
affronting of a Cannon (...) a beleaguered Town a month together; it is a
contempt of safety, and a rendering all Reason useless and unprofitable: but he
only is wise who, having made Death familiar to him by expectation and daily
apprehension, does at all instants go forth to meet it. The wise Virgins went
forth to meet the Bridegroom, for they were ready. Excellent (...). 18. 19, etc.
therefore is the counsel of the Son of Sirach; Use Physic or ever thou be
sick. (...) Judgment examine thy self, and in the day of visitation thou shall
find mercy. Humble thy self before then be sick, and in the time of sins show
Repentance. Let nothing hinder thee to pay thy (...) in due time, and defer not
until death to be justified.

5. Secondly, I consider, that it osten happens that in those few days of our
last visitation, which many Men design for their Preparation and Repentance,
God has expressed by an exterior accident, that those persons have deceived
themselves and neglected their own Salvation. S. Gregory reports of
Chrysaurius, a Gentleman in the Province (...). 12. (...) Evang.
of (...), rich, vicious and witty, lascivious, covetous and proud, that being
cast upon his Deathbed he phansied he saw evil spirits coming to arrest him
and drag him to Hell. He fell into great agony and trouble, shrieked out,
called for his son, who was a very religious person, flattered him, as willing
to have been rescued by any thing: but perceiving his danger increase and grown
desperate, he called loud with repeated clamours, Give me respite but till the
morrow, and with those words he died, there being no place left (...) his
Repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears and groans. The same was
the case of a drunken Monk, whom Venerable Bede mentions. Upon his L. 5. (...).
15. hist. Gent. Anglor.
Death bed he seemed to see Hell opened, and a place assigned him near to
Caiaphas and those who crucified our dearest Lord. The religious persons that
stood about his Bed called on him to repent of his sins, to implore the mercies
of God, and to trust in Christ: But he answered with reason enough, This is no
time to change my life, the sentence is passed upon me, and it is too late. And
it is very considerable and sad Biblioth. Ss. Pp. (...). 3.
which Petrus Damianus tells of Gunizo, a sactious and ambitious person, to
whom, it is said, the Tempter gave notice of his approaching death: but when
any Man preached Repentance to him, out of a strange incuriousness, or the
spirit of reprobation, he seemed like a dead and unconcerned person; in all
other discourses he was awake and apt to answer. For God had shut up the gates
of Mercy, that no streams should issue forth to quench the flames of Hell; or
else had shut up the gates of reception and entertainment, that it should not
enter: either God denies to give them pardon when they call, or denies to them
a power to call; they either cannot pray, or God will not answer. Now since
these stories are related by Men learned, pious and eminent in their
generations, and because they served no design but the ends of Piety, and have
in them nothing dissonant from revelation or the frequent events of Providence,
we may upon their stock consider, that God's Judgments and visible marks being
set upon a state of Life, although they happen but seldom in the instances, yet
they are of universal purpose and signfication. Upon all Murderers God has
not thrown a thunderbolt, nor broke all sacrilegious persons upon the wheel of
an inconstant and ebbing estate, nor spoken to every Oppressor from Heaven in a
voice of thunder, nor cut off all Rebels in the first attempts of insurrection:
But because he has done so to some, we are to look upon those Judgments as
Divine accents, and voices of God, threatening all the same crimes with the like
events, and with the ruins of eternity. For though God does not always make
the same prologues to death, yet by these few accidents happening to single
persons we are to understand his purposes concerning all in the same condition;
it was not the person so much as the estate which God then remarked with so
visible characters of his displeasure.

6. And it seems to me a wonder, that since from all the records of Scripture
urging Matt. 25. 13. and 24. 42.
the uncertainty of the day of death, the horror of the day of Judgment, the
severity of God, the dissolution of the world, the certainty of our account,
still from all these Mark 13. 33. 2 Pet. 3. 10.
premises the Spirit of God makes no other inference, but that we watch, and
stand in a readiness, that we live in all holy conversation and godliness, and
that there is no one word concerning any other manner of an
essentially-necessary Preparation, none but this; yet that there are Doctrines
commenced, and Rules prescribed, and Offices set down, and Suppletories
invented by Curates of Souls how to prepare a vicious person, and upon his
Deathbed to reconcile him to the hopes and promises of Heaven. Concerning
which I desire that every person would but enquire, where any one promise is --
tecum prius ergo volut^ Haec animo (...): galeatum fero duelli Poenitetmdash;
Juven. Sat. 1.
recorded in Scripture concerning such addresses, and what Articles CHRIST has
drawn up between his Father and us concerning a Preparation begun upon our
Deathbed: and if he shall find none (as most certainly from Genesis to the
Revelation there is not a word concerning it, but very much against it) let him
first build his hopes upon this proposition, that A holy life is the only
Preparation to a happy death, and then we can without danger proceed to some
other Considerations.

7. When a good man, or a person concerning whom it is not certain he has
lived in habitual Vices, comes to die, there are but two general ways of
intercourse with him; the one to keep him from new sins, the other to make some
emendations of the old; the one to fortify him against special weaknesses and
proper temptations of that estate, and the other to trim his lamp, that by
excellent actions he may adorn his spirit, making up the omissions of his life,
and supplying the imperfections of his estate, that his Soul may return into
the hands of its Creator as pure as it can, every degree of perfection being an
advantage so great, as that the loss of every the least portion of it cannot be
recompensed with all the good of this World. Concerning the first; The
Temptations proper to this estate are either Weakness in Faith, Despair, or
Presumption: for whatsoever is besides these, as it is the common infelicity of
all the several states of life, so they are oftentimes arguments of an ill
condition, of immortification of vicious habits, and that he comes not to this
combat well prepared; such as are Covetousness, unwillingness to make
Restitution, remanent affections to his former Vices, an unresigned spirit, and
the like.

8. In the Ecclesiastical story we find many dying persons mentioned, who have
been very much afflicted with some doubts concerning an Article of Faith. S.
Gregory in an Epistle he writ to S. Austin instances in the temptation which
Fusebius suffered De traec^^^^ S. Hieron.
upon his Deathbed. And although sometimes the Devil chooses an Article that is
not proper to that state, knowing that every such doubt is well enough for his
purpose, because of the incapacity of the person to suffer long disputes, and
of the jealousy and suspicion of a dying and weak man, fearing lest every
thing should cozen him; yet it is commonly instanced in the Article of the
Resurrection, or the state of Separation or reunion. And it seems to some
persons incredible, that from a bed of sickness, a state of misery, a cloud of
ignorance, a load of passions, a man should enter into the condition of a
perfect understanding, great joy, and an intellectual life, a conversation with
Angels, a fruition of God; the change is greater than his Reason; and his Faith
being in conclusion tottering like the Ark, and ready to fall, seems a Pillar
as unsafe and unable to rely on, as a bank of turf in an Earthquake. Against
this a general remedy is prescribed by Spiritual persons; That the sick man
should apprehend all changes of persuasion which happened to him in his
sickness, contradictory to those assents which in his clearest use of Reason he
had, to be temptations and arts of the Devil. And he has reason so to think,
when he remembers how many comforts of the Spirit of God, what joys of
Religion, what support, what assistences, what strengths he had in the whole
course of his former life upon the stock of Faith, and interest of the Doctrine
of Christianity. And since the disbelieving the Promises Evangelical at that In
hunc fere (...) Socrates, apud Platonem in (...); (...). Non abs re (...) crit
(...) morthundus, si (...) de (...) Fidei disserat and (...) de siducia
compertae verit: it is, at (...) ((...) de Socrate dixit (...)) de (...).
time can have no end of advantage, and that all wise men tell him it may have
an end to make him lose the title to them, and do him infinite disadvantage;
upon the stock of interest and prudence he must reject such fears which cannot
help him, but may ruin him. For all the works of Grace which he did upon the
hopes of God, and the stock of the Divine revelations, (if he fails in his hold
upon them) are all rendered unprofitable. And it is certain, if there be no such
thing as Immortality and Resurrection, he shall lose nothing for believing
there is; but if there be, they are lost to him for not believing it.

9. But this is also to be cured by proper arguments. And there is no Christian
man but has within him, and carries about him, demonstrations of the
possibility and great instances of the credibility of those great changes,
which these tempted persons have no reason to distrust, but because they think
them too great, and too good to be true. And here, not only the consideration
of the Divine Power and his eternal Goodness is a proper Antidote, but also the
observation of what we have already received from God. To be raised from
nothing to something is a mutation not less than insinite; and from that which
we were in our first conception to pass into so perfect and curious bodies, and
to become discursive, sensible, passionate, and reasonable, and next to Angels,
is a greater change, than from this state to pass into that excellency and
perfection of it which we expect as the melioration and improvement of the
present: for this is but a mutation of degrees, that of substance: this is more
sensible, because we have perception in both states; that is of greater
distance, because in the first term we were so far distant from what we are,
that we could not perceive what then we were, much less desire to be what we
now perceive: and yet God did that for us unasked, without any obligation on
his part, or merit on ours; much rather then may we be confident of this
alteration of accidents and degrees, because God has obliged himself by
promise; he has disposed us to it by qualities, actions, and habits, which are
to the state of Glory as infancy is to manhood, as (...) are to excellent
discourses, as blossoms are to ripe fruits. And he that has wrought miracles
for us, preserved us in dangers, done strange acts of Providence, sent his Son
to take our Nature, made a Virgin to bear a Son, and GOD to become Man, and two
Natures to be one individual Person, and all in order to this End of which we
doubt, has given us so many arguments of credibility, that if he had done any
more, it would not have been lest in our choice to believe or not believe; and
then much of the excellency of our Faith would have been lost. Add to this,
that we are not tempted to disbelieve the Roman story, or that Virgil's
AEneids, were writ by him, or that we our selves are descended of such Parents;
because these things are not only transmitted to us by such testimony which we
have no reason to distrust, but (...) the Tempter cannot serve any end upon us
by producing such doubts in us: and therefore since we have greater testimony
for every Article of Faith, and to believe it is of so much concernment to us,
we may well suspect it to be an artifice of the Devil to rob us of our reward;
this proceeding of his being of the same nature with all his other Temptations,
which in our lifetime like fiery darts he threw into our face, to despoil us
of our glory, and blot out the Image of God imprinted on us.

10. Secondly, If the Devil tempts the sick person to Despair, he who is by God
(...) (...).
appointed to minister a word of comfort must fortify his spirit with
consideration and representment of the Divine Goodness, manifest in all the
expresses of Nature and Grace, of Providence and Revelation; that God never
extinguishes the smoking slax, nor breaks the bruised reed; that a constant
and a hearty endeavor is the Sacrifice which God delights in; that in the
firmament of Heaven there are little Stars, and they are most in (...) (...).
number, and there are but few of the greatest magnitude; that there are
children and babes in Christ as well as strong men, and amongst these there are
great difference; that the interruptions of the state of Grace by intervening
crimes, if they were rescinded by Repentance, they were great danger in the
intervall, but served as increment of the Divine Glory, and arguments of care
and diligence to us at the restitution. These and many more are then to be
urged when the sick person is in danger of being swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow; and therefore to be insisted on in all like cases as the Physician
gives him Cordials, that we may do charity to him and minister comfort, not
because they are always necessary, even in the midst of great sadnesses and
discomforts. For we are to secure his love to God, that he acknowledge the
Divine Mercy, that he believe the Article of Remission of sins, that he be
thankful to God for the blessings which already he has received, and that he
lay all the load of his discomfort upon himself, and his own incapacities of
mercy: and then the sadness may be very great, and his tears clamorous, and his
heart broken all in pieces, and his Humility lower than the earth, and his Hope
indiscernible; and yet no danger to his final condition. Despair reflects upon
God, and dishonours the infinity of his Mercy: And if the sick person do but
confess that God is not at all wanting in his Promises, but ever abounding in
his Mercies, and that it is want of the condition on his own part that makes
the misery, and that if he had done his duty God would save him; let him be
assisted with perpetual prayers, with examples of lapsed and returning sinners,
whom the Church celebrates for Saints, such as Mary Magdalen, Mary of Egypt,
Asra, Thasis, Pelagia; let it be often inculcated to him, that as God's Mercy
is of it self infinite, so its demonstration to us is not determined to any
certain period, but has such latitudes in it and reservations, which as they
are apt to restrain too great boldness, so also to become sanctuaries to
disconsolate persons; let him be invited to throw himself upon God upon these
grounds, that he who is our Judge is also our Advocate and Redeemer, that he
knows and pities our infirmities, and that our very hoping in him does indear
him, and he will deliver us the rather for our confidence, when it is balanced
with reverence and humility: and then all these supernumerary fears are
advantageous to more necessary Graces, and do more secure his final condition
than they can disturb it.

11. When Saint Arsenius was near his death, he was observed to be very
tremulous, sad, weeping and disconsolate. The standers by asked the reason of
his fears, wondering that he, having lived in great Sanctity for many years,
should not now rejoice at the going forth of his prison. The good man confessed
the fear, and withal said it was no other than he had always born about with
him in the days of his pilgrimage; and what he then thought a duty, they had no
reason now to call either a fault or a misery. Great sorrows, fears and
distrustings of a man's own condition, are oftentimes but abatements of
confidence, or a remission of joys and gayeties of spirit; they are but like
salutary clouds, dark and fruitful: and if the tempted person be strengthened
in a love of God, though he go not farther in his hopes than to believe a
possibility of being saved, than to say, God can save him, if he please, and to
pray that he will save him, his condition is a state of Grace, it is like a
root in the ground, trod upon, humble and safe, not so fine as the state of
flowers; yet that which will spring up in as glorious a Resurrection as that
which looks fairer, and pleases the sense, and is indeed a blessing, but not a
duty.

12. But there is a state of Deathbed which seems to have in it more Question,
and to be of nicer consideration, A sick person after a vicious and base life:
and if upon whatsoever he can do, you give him hopes of a Pardon, where is your
promise to warrant it? if you do not give him hopes, do you not drive him to
Despair, and ascertain his ruin, to verify your proposition? To this I answer
that Despair is opposed to Hope, and Hope relies upon the Divine Promises; and
where there is no Promise, there the Despair is not a sin, but a mere
impossibility. The accursed Spirits which are sealed up to the Judgment of the
last Day cannot hope; and he that repents not, cannot hope for pardon. And
therefore if all which the state of Deathbed can produce be not the duty of
Repentance, which is required of necessity to Pardon, it is not in such a
person properly to be called Despair, any more than it is Blindness in a stone
that it cannot see: Such a man is not within the capacities of Pardon, and
therefore all those acts of exterior Repentance, and all his sorrow and
resolution and tears of emendation, and other preparatives to interior
Repentance, are like oil poured into mortal wounds; they are the care of the
Physician; and these are the cautions of the Church, and they are at no hand to
be neglected. For if they do not alter the state, they may lessen the judgment,
or procure a temporal blessing; and if the person recover, they are excellent
beginnings of the state of Grace, and if they be pursued in a happy
opportunity, will grow up into Glory.

13. But if it be demanded, whether in such cases the Curate be bound to give
Absolution; I can give no other answer but this, that if he lie under the
Censure of the Church, the Laws of the Church are to determine the particular,
and I know no Church in the World but uses to absolve Deathbed Penitents upon
the instances of those actions of which their present condition is capable;
though in the Primitive Ages in some cases they denied it. But if the sick
person be under no positive Censure, and is bound only by the guilt of habitual
vice, if he desires the Prayers of the Church, she is bound in charity to grant
them, to Pray for Pardon to him, and all other Graces in order to Salvation:
and if she absolves the Penitent, toward God it has no other efficacy but of
a solemn Prayer; and therefore it were better that all the charity of the
Office were done, and the solemnity omitted; because in the earnest Prayer she
co-operates to his Salvation as much as she can, and by omitting the solemnity
distinguishes evil livers (...) ab (...) est: (...) it. (...) qua a (...) and
ipsa moriatur. S. Aug. Sermon. de (...) Vide (...) l. 50. bom l. 41.
from holy persons, and walks securely, whilst she refuses to declare him
pardoned whom God has not declared to be so. And possibly that form of
Absolution which the Churches of the West now use, being indicative and
declaratory of a present Pardon, is for the very form sake not to be used to
Death bed Penitents after a vicious life; because if any thing more be intended
in the form than a Prayer, the truth of the affirmation may be questioned, and
an Ecclesiastical person has no authority to say to such a man, I absolve
thee: but if no more be intended but a Prayer, it is better to use a mere
Prayer and common form of address, than such words which may countenance
unsecure confidences, evil purposes, and worse lives.

14. Thirdly, If the Devil tempts a sick person, who has lived well, to
Presumption, and that he seems full of Confidence and without trouble, the care
that is then to be taken is to consider the Disease, and to state the Question
right. For at some instants and periods God visits the spirit of a man, and
sends the immission of a bright ray into him; and some good men have been so
used to apprehensions of the Divine mercy, that they have an habitual
cheerfulness of spirit and hopes of Salvation. Saint Egredere, anima, quid
(...) annis (...), and jam (...) times? S Hier, in vita (...).
Hierome reports that Hilarion in a Deathbed agony felt some tremblings of
heart, till reflecting upon his course of life, he found comforts springing
from thence by a proper emanation, and departed cheerfully: and Hezekiah
represented to God in Prayer the integrity of his life, and made it the
instrument of his hope. And nothing of this is to be calied Presumption,
provided it be in persons of eminent Sanctity and great experience, old
Disciples, and the more perfect Christians: But because such persons are but
seldom and rare, if the same Confidence be observed in persons of common
imperfection and an ordinary life, it is to be corrected and allayed with
consideration of the Va vita (...) laudabili, si sine (...) eam. S. Aug. l. 9.
Confess.
Divine Severity and Justice, and with the strict requisites of a holy life,
with the deceit of a man's own heart, with consideration and general
remembrances of secret sins, and that the most perfect state of life has very
great needs of mercy, and if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
ungodly and the sinner appear? And the spirit of the man is to be promoted and
helped in the increase of Contrition, as being the proper deletery to cure the
extravagancies of a forward and intemperate spirit.

15. But there is a Presumption commenced upon opinion, relying either upon a
persuasion of single Predestination, or else (which is worse) upon imaginary
securities, that Heaven is to be purchased upon conditions easier than a Day's
labor, and that an evil life may be reconciled to Heaven by the intervening of
little or single acts of Piety or Repentance. If either of them both have
actually produced ill life, to which they are apt, or apt to be abused, the
persons are miserable in their condition, and cannot be absolutely remedied by
going about to cure the Presumption; that was the cause of all, but now it is
the least thing to be considered: his whole state is corrupted, and men will
not by any discourses or spiritual arts used on their Deathbeds be put into a
state of Grace; because then is no time to change the state, and there is no
mutation then but by single actions; from good to better a dying man may
proceed, but not from the state of Reprobation to the life of Grace. And yet it
is good charity to unloose the bonds of Satan, whereby the man is bound and led
captive at his will, to take off the Presumption by destroying the cause; and
then let the work of Grace be set as forward as it can, and leave the event to
God; for nothing else is left possible to be done. But if the sick man be of a
good life, and yet have a degree of Confidence beyond his Virtue upon the
phancie of Predestination, it is not then a time to rescind his opinion by a
direct opposition, but let him be drawn off from the consideration of it by
such discourses as are apt to make him humble and penitent; for they are the
most apt instruments to secure the condition of the man, and attemper his
spirit. These are the great Temptations incident to the last scene of our
lives; and are therefore more particularly suggested by the Tempter, because
they have in them something contrary to the universal effect of a holy life,
and are designs to interpose between the end of the journey and the reception
of the crown: and therefore it concerns every man who is in a capacity of
receiving the end of his Faith, the Salvation of his Soul, to lay up in the
course of his life something against this great day of expense, that he may be
better fortified with the armor of the Spirit against these last assaults of
the Devil, that he may not shipwreck in the haven.

16. Eschewing evil is but the one half of our work, we must also do good. And
now in the few remanent days or hours of our life there are certain exercises
of Religion which have a special relation to this state, and are therefore of
great concernment to be done, that we may make our condition as certain as we
can, and our portion of Glory greater, and our Pardon surer, and our Love to
increase, and that our former omissions and breaches be repaired with a
condition in some measure proportionable to those great hopes which we then are
going to possess. And first, Let the sick person, in the beginning of his
sickness, and in every change and great accident of it, make acts of
Resignation to God, and entirely submit himself to the Divine will; remembering,
that Sickness may, to men properly disposed, do the work of God, and produce
the effect of the Spirit, and promote the interest of his Soul, as well as
Health, and oftentimes better, as being in it self and by the grace of God apt
to make us confess our own impotency and dependencies, and to understand our
needs of mercy, and the continual influences and supports of Heaven; to
withdraw our appetites from things below, to correct the vanities and
insolences of an impertinent spirit, to abate the extravagancies of the flesh,
to put our carnal lusts into fetters and disability, to remember us of our
state of pilgrimage, that this is our way and our stage of trouble and
banishment, and that Heaven is our Country: for so Sickness is the trial of
our Patience, a fire to purge us, an instructor to teach us, a bridle to
restrain us, and a state inferring great necessities of union and adhesions
unto God. And as upon these grounds we have the same reason to accept sickness
at the hands of God, as to receive Physic from a Physician; so it is argument
of excellent Grace to give God hearty thanks in our Disease, and to accept it
cheerfully, and with spiritual joy.

17. Some persons create to themselves excuses of discontent, and quarrel not
with the pain, but the ill consequents of Sickness, It makes them troublesome
to their friends; and consider not that their friends are bound to accept the
trouble, as themselves to accept the sickness; that to tend the sick is at that
time allotted for the portion of their work, and that Charity receives it as a
duty, and makes that duty to be a pleasure. And however, if our friends account
us a burden, let us also accept that circumstance of affliction to our selves
with the same resignation and indifferency as we entertain its occasion, the
Sickness it self; and pray to God to enkindle a flame of Charity in their
breasts, and to make them compensation for the charge and trouble we put them
to; and then the care is at an end. But others excuse their discontent with a
more religious color, and call the disease their trouble and affliction,
because it impedes their other parts of Duty; they cannot preach, or study, or
do exterior assistences of Charity and Alms, or acts of Repentance and
Mortification. But it were well if we could let God proportion out our work,
and set our task; let him choose what virtues we shall specially exercise: and
when the will of God determines us, it is more excellent to endure afflictions
with patience, equanimity and thankfulness, than to do actions of the most
pompous Religion, and laborious or expensive Charity; not only because there is
a deliciousness in actions of Religion and choice, which is more agreeable to
our spirit than the toleration of sickness can be, which has great reward, but
no present pleasure; but also because our suffering and our employment is
consecrated to us when God chooses it, and there is then no mixture of
imperfection or secular interest, as there may be in other actions even of an
excellent Religion, when our selves are the chusers. And let us also remember,
that God has not so much need of thy works, as thou have of Patience,
Humility, and Resignation. S. Paul was far a more considerable person than thou
can be, and yet it pleased God to shut him in prison for two years, and in
that intervall God secured and promoted the work of the Gospel: and although
(...) was an excellent Minister, yet God laid a sickness upon him, and even in
his disease gave him work enough to do, though not of his own choosing. And
therefore fear it not but the ends of Religion or Duty will well enough proceed
without thy health; and thy own eternal interest, when God so pleases, shall
better be served by Sickness, and the Virtues which it occasions, than by the
opportunities of Health, and an ambulatory active Charity.

18. When thou art resigned to God, use fair and appointed means for thy
Recovery; trust not in thy spirit upon any instrument of health; as thou art
willing to be disposed by God, so look (...) for any event upon the stock of
any other cause or principle; be ruled by the Physician and the people
appointed to tend thee, that thou neither become troublesome to them, nor give
any sign of impatience or a peevish spirit. But this advice only means, that
thou do not disobey them out of any evil principle; and yet if Reason be thy
guide to choose any other aid, or sollow any other counsel, use it temperately,
prudently, and charitably. It is not intended for a Duty, that thou should
drink Oil in stead of Wine, if thy Minister reach it to thee, as did Saint
Bernard; nor that thou should accept a Cake tempered with Linseed-oil in
stead of Oil of Olives, as did F. Stephen, mentioned by (...): but that thou
tolerate the defects of thy servants, and accept the evil accidents of thy
disease, or the unsuccessfulness of thy Physician's care, as descending on thee
from the hands of God. Asa was noted in Scripture, 2 Chronicles. (...). 12.
that in his sickness he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians. Lewis
the XI. of France was then the miserablest person in his Kingdom, when he made
himself their servant, courting them with great pensions and rewards, attending
to their Rules as Oracles, and from their mouths waited for the sentence of
life or death. We are, in these great accidents, especially to look upon God as
the disposer of the events, which he very often disposes contrary to the
expectation we may have of probable causes; and sometimes without Physic we
recover, and with Physic and excellent applications we grow worse and worse;
and God it is that makes the remedies unprosperous. In all these and all other
accidents, if we take care that the sickness of the Body derive not it self
into the Soul, nor the pains of one procure impatience of the other, we shall
alleviate the burden, and make it supportable and profitable. And certain it
is, if men knew well to bear their sicknesses, humbly toward God, charitably
toward our Ministers, and cheerfully in themselves, there were no greater
advantage in the world to be received than upon a sick bed; and that alone has
in it the benefits of a Church, of a religious Assembly, of the works of
Charity and labor. And since our Soul's eternal well-being depends upon the
Charities and Providence and Veracity of God, and we have nothing to show for
it but his word and Goodness, and that is infinitely enough; it is but reason
we be not more nice and scrupulous about the usage and accommodation of our
Body: if we accept (...) (...). (...).
at God's hand sadness and dryness of affection and spiritual desertion
patiently and with indifferency, it is unhandsome to express our selves less
satisfied in the accidents about our body.

19. But if the Sickness proceed to Death, it is a new charge upon our spirits,
and God calls for a final and entire Resignation into his hands. And to a
person who was of 15. Peto, (...), suspice coelum; (...) enim tibi vita (...),
sed (...) in (...), Dixit matter (...), in vita Symphor. Sermon. in c. 7. Jobi.
humble affections, and in his lifetime of a mortified spirit, accustomed to
bear the yoke of the Lord, this is easy, because he looks upon Death not only
as the certain condition of Nature, but as a necessary (...) Strabo lib.
transition to a state of Blessedness, as the determination of his sickness,
the period of humane inselicities, the last change of condition, the beginning
of a new, strange, and excellent life, a security against sin, a freedom from
the importunities of a Tempter, from the tyranny of an imperious Lust, from the
rebellion of Concupiscence, from the disturbances and tempests of the Irascible
faculty, and from the fondness and childishness of the Concupiscible; and (S.
Ambrose says well) the trouble of this life and the dangers are so many, that
in respect of them Hoc homo morte lucratur, ne malum (...) esset. Naz.
Death is a remedy, and a fair proper object of desires. And we find that many
Saints have prayed for death, that they might -- (...) AEschyl. (...).
not see the Persecutions and great miseries incumbent upon the Church: and if
the desire be not out of Impatience, but of Charity, and with resignation,
there is no reason to reprove it. Elias prayed that God would take his life,
that 1 King. 19. 4.
he might not see the evils of Ahab and Jezebel, and their vexatious
intendments against the Prophets of the Lord. And S. Austin, upon the Incursion
of the Vandals into Africa, In vita S. Aug. c. 16.
called his Clergy together, and at their Chapter told them, he had prayed to
God either to deliver his People from the present calamity, or grant them
patience to bear it, or that he would take him out of the world, that he might
not see the miseries of his Diocese; adding, that God had granted him the last:
and he presently fell sick, and died in the siege of his own Hippo. And if
Death in many (...) animum mortis terrore carentem, Qui sp (...) vitae (...)
inter muner a (...) Naturae, qui far queat quoseunque labores, (...), cupiat
(...) -- Juven.
cases be desirable, and for many reasons, it is always to be submitted to,
when God calls. And as it is always a misery to fear death, so it is very often
a sin, or the effect of sin. If our love to the world has fastened our
affections here, it is a direct sin: and this is by the son of Sirach noted to
be the case of rich and great personages; How bitter, O death, is thy (...).
41. 1.
remembrance to a man that is at rest in his possessions! But if it be a fear
to perish in the ruins of Eternity, they are not to blame for fearing, but
that their own ill lives have procured the fear. And yet there are persons in
the state of Grace, but because they are in great imperfection, have such
lawful fears of Death and of entering upon an uncertain Sentence, which must
stand eternally irreversible, be it good or bad, that they may with piety and
care enough pray David's prayer, O spare me a little, that I may recover my
strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen. But in this and in all other
cases Death must be accepted without murmur, though without fear it cannot. A
man may pray to be delivered from it; and yet if God will not grant it, he must
not go as one haled to execution: but if with all his imperfect fears he shall
throw himself upon God, and accept his sentence as righteous, whether it speak
life or death, it is an act of so great excellency, that it may equal the good
actions of many succeeding and surviving days; and peradventure a longer life
will be yet more imperfect, and that God therefore puts a period to it, that
thou may be taken into a condition more certain, though less eminent.
However, let not the fears of Nature, or the fear of Reason, or the fears of
Humility become accidentally criminal by a murmur or a pertinacious contesting
against the event, which we cannot hinder, but ought to accept by an election
secondary, rational and pious, and upon supposition that God will not alter the
sentence passed upon thy temporal life; always remembering, that in Christian
Philosophy Death has in it an excellency of which the Angels are not capable.
For by the necessity of our Nature we are made capable of dying for the Holy
Jesus: and next to the privilege of that act, is our willingness to die at his
command, which turns necessity into virtue, and nature into grace, and grace to
glory.

20. When the sick person is thus disposed, let him begin to trim his
wedding garment, and dress his Lamp with the repetition of acts of Repentance,
perpetually praying to God for pardon of his sins, representing to himself the
horror of them, the multitude, the obliquity, being helped by arguments apt to
excite Contrition, by repetition of penitential Psalms and holy Prayers; and he
may, by accepting and humbly receiving his sickness at God's hand, transmit it
into the condition of an act or effect of (...), acknowledging himself by sin
to have deserved and procured it, and praying that the punishment of his crimes
may be here, and not reserved for the state of Separation, and for ever.

21. But above all single acts of this exercise, we are concerned to see that
nothing of other men's Goods stick to us, but let us shake it off as we would a
burning coal (...) our flesh; for it will destroy us, it will carry a curse
with us, and leave a curse behind us. Those who by thy means or importunity
have become vicious, exhort to Repentance (...) sunt qui vitam (...) corrum
punt, kis qui (...) and (...). S. Greger.
and holy life; those whom thou have cozened into crimes, restore to a right
understanding; those who are by violence and interest led captive by thee to
any undecency, restore to their liberty, and encourage to the prosecution of
holiness; discover and confess thy fraud and unlawful arts, cease thy violence,
and give as many advantages to Virtue as thou have done to Viciousness. Make
recompense for bodily wrongs, such as are wounds, dismembrings and other
disabilities: restore every man (as much as thou can) to that good condition
from which thou have removed him; restore his Fame, give back his Goods, return
the Pawn, release (...), and take off all unjust invasions or surprises of his
Estate, pay Debts, satisfy for thy fraud and injustice as far as thou can,
and as thou can, and as soon; or this alone is weight enough, no less than a
Mil-stone about thy Neck. But if the dying man be of God, and in the state of
Grace, that is, if he have lived a holy life, repented seasonably, and have led
a just, sober and religious conversation in any acceptable degree, it is to be
supposed he has no great account to make for unpretended injuries and unjust
detentions: for if he had detained the goods of his neighbor fraudulently or
violently without amends, when it is in his power and opportunity to restore,
he is not the man we suppose him in this present Question: and although in all
cases he is bound to restore according to his ability, yet the act is less
excellent when it is compelled, and so it seems to be, if he have continued the
injustice till he is forced to quit the purchase. However, if it be not done
till then, let it be provided for then. And that I press this duty to pious
persons at this time, is only to oblige them to a diligent scrutiny concerning
the lesser omissions of this duty in the matter of fame, or lesser debts, or
spiritual restitution; or that those unevennesses of account which were but of
late transaction may now be regulated; and that whatsoever is undone in this
matter, from what principle soever it proceeds, whether of sin, or only of
forgetfulness, or of imperfection, may now be made as exact as we can, and are
obliged; and that those excuses which made it reasonable and lawful to defer
Restitution, as want of opportunity, clearness of ability, and accidental
inconvenience, be now laid aside, and the action be done or provided for in the
midst of all objections and inconvenient circumstances, rather than to omit it,
and hazard to perform it.

22. Hither also I reckon resolutions and forward purposes of emendation and
greater severity, in case God return to us hopes of life; which therefore must
be reinforced, that we may serve the ends of God, and understand all his
purposes, and make use of every opportunity; every sickness laid upon us being
with a design of drawing us nearer to God; and even holy purposes are good
actions of the Spirit, and Principles of Religion: and though alone they cannot
do the work of Grace, or change the state, when they are ineffectual, that is,
when either we will not bring them into act, or that God will not let us; yet
to a Man already in the state of Grace they are the additions of something
good, and are like blowing of coals, which although it can put no life into a
dead coal, yet it makes a live coal shine brighter, and burn clearer, and adds
to it some accidental degrees of heat.

23. Having thus disposed himself to the peace of God, let him make peace with
all those in whom he knows or suspects any minutes of anger, or malice, or
displeasure toward him, submitting himself to them with humility whom he
unworthily has displeased, asking pardon of them who say they are displeased,
(...)
and offering pardon to them that have displeased him; and then let him crave
the peace of Holy Church. For it is all this while to be supposed that he has
used the assistence and prayers, the counsel and the advices of a spiritual
man, and that to this purpose he has opened to him the state of his whole
life, and made him to understand what emendations of his faults he has made,
what acts of Repentance he has done, how lived after his fall and reparation,
and that he has submitted all that he did or undid to the discerning of a holy
man, whose office it is to guide his Soul in this agony and last offices. All
men cannot have the blessing of a wise and learned Minister, and some die where
they can have none at all: yet it were a safer course to do as much of this as
we can, and to a competent person, if we can; if we cannot, then to the best we
have, according as we judge it to be of spiritual advantage to us: for in this
conjuncture of accidents it concerns us to be sure, if we may, and not to be
deceived, where we can avoid it; because we shall never return to life to do
this work again. And if after this intercourse with a Spiritual guide we be
reconciled by the solemn prayer of the Church, the prayer of Absolution, it
will be of great advantage to us; we depart with our Father's blessing, we die
in the actual Communion of the Church, we hear the sentence of God applied
after the manner of men, and the promise of Pardon made circumstantiate,
material, present, and operative upon our spirits, and have our portion of the
promise which is recorded by S. James, that if the Elders of the Church pray
over a sick Jam. 6. 14. 15.
person fervently and effectually, (add solemnly) his sins shall be forgiven
him, (that is, supposing him to be in a capacity to receive it) because such
prayers of such a man are very prevalent.

24. All this is in a spiritual sense washing the hands in innocence, and then
let him go to the altar: let him not for any excuse less than impossibility
omit to receive the holy Sacrament; which the Fathers assembled in the great
Nicene (...). Conc. Nicen. (...). 13.
Council have taught all the Christian world to call the most necessary
provisions for our last journey; which is the memory of that Death by which we
hope for life; which is the seed of Immortality and Resurrection of our bodies;
which unites our spirit to Christ; which is a great defensative against the
hostilities of the Devil; which is the most solemn Prayer of the Church, united
and made acceptable by the Sacrifice of Christ, which is then represented and
exhibited to God; which is the great instrument of spiritual increase and the
growth of Grace; which is duty and reward, food and Physic, health and
pleasure, deletery and cordial, prayer and thanksgiving, an union of mysteries,
the marriage of the Soul, and the perfection of all the Rites of Christianity:
dying with the holy Sacrament in us is a going to God with Christ in our arms,
and interposing him between us and his angry sentence. But then we must be sure
that we have done all the duty, without which we cannot communicate worthily.
For else Satan comes in the place of Christ, and it is a horror not less than
infinite to appear before God's Tribunal possessed in our Souls with the spirit
of darkness. True it is, that by many Laws of the Church the Bishop and the
Minister are bound to give the holy Eucharist to every person Council. Nicen.
(...). Conc. Ancyr. c. 6. (...). Aurelian. 2. c. 12.
who in the article or apparent danger of death desires it, provided that he
has submitted himself to the imposition and counsels of the Bishop or Guide of
his Soul, that, in case he recovers, he may be brought to the peace of God and
his Church by such steps and degrees of Repentance by which other public
sinners are reconciled. But to this gentleness of Discipline and easiness of
Administration those excellent persons who made the Canons thought themselves
compelled by the rigor of the (...): and because they admitted not lapsed
persons to the peace of the Church upon any terms, though never so great, so
public, or so penal a Repentance; therefore these not only remitted them to
the exercise and station of Penitents, but also to the Communion. But the
Fathers of the Council of Eliberis denied this favor (...). Elib. (...). 1.
to persons who after Baptism were Idolaters; either intending this as a great
argument to affright persons from so great a crime, or else believing that it
was unpardonable after Baptism, a contradiction to that state which we entered
into by Baptism and the Covenant Evangelical. However, I desire all learned
persons to observe it, and the less learned also to make use of it, that those
more ancient (...), Council. (...). c. 13. (...). Conc. Anc. (...). 9. (...) qui
in (...) vacuum (...). Conc, Aurel. 2. (...). 12.
Councils of the Church which commanded the holy Communion to be given to dying
persons, meant only such which, according to the custom of the Church, were
under the conditions of Repentance, that is, such to whom punishment and
Discipline of diverse years were enjoined; and if it happened they died in the
intervall, before the expiration of their time of reconciliation, then they
admitted them to the Communion. Which describes to us the doctrine of those
Ages when Religion was purer, and Discipline more severe, and holy life secured
by rules of excellent Government; that those only were fit to come to that
Feast who before their last sickness had finished the Repentance of many years,
Vide Council. Eliber. c. 46. and (...). 69.
or at least had undertaken it. I cannot say it was so always, and in all
Churches; for as the Disciples grew slack, or men's persuasions had variety, so
they were more ready to grant Repentance as well as Absolution to dying
persons: but it was otherwise in the best times, and with severer Prelates. And
certainly it were great charity to deny the Communion to persons who have lived
viciously till their death; provided it be by competent authority, and done
sincerely, prudently; and without temporal interest: to other persons, who have
lived good lives, or repented of their bad, though less perfectly, it ought not
to be denied, and they less ought to neglect it.

25. But as every man must put himself, so also he must put his house in order,
make his Will, if he have an Estate to dispose of; and in that he must be
careful to do Justice to every man, and Charity to the poor, according as God
has enabled him: and though Charity is then very late, if it begins not
earlier; yet if this be but an act of an ancient habit, it is still more
perfect, as it succeeds in time, and superadds to the former stock. And among
other acts of Duty let it be remembered, that it is excellent Charity to leave
our Will and desires clear, plain and determinate, that contention and Lawsuits
may be prevented by the explicate declaration of the Legacies. At last and in
all instances and periods of our following days let the former good acts be
renewed; let God be praised for all his Graces and Blessings of our life, let
him be entreated for Pardon of our sins, let acts of Love and Contrition, of
Hope, of Joy, of Humility be the work of every day which God still permits us,
always remembering to ask remission for those sins we remember not. And if the
condition of our sickness permits it, let our last breath expire with an act of
Love; that -- (...) vixisse beatum (...), and exacto contentus tempore (...)
conviva satur -- Hor. (...). 1.
it may begin the Charities of Eternity, and, like a Taper burnt to its lowest
base, it may go out with a great emission of light, leaving a sweet smell
behind us to perfume our Coffin; and that these lights, newly made brighter or
trimmed up in our sickness, may shine about our Hearse, that they may become
arguments of a pious sadness to our friends, (as the charitable Coats which
Dorcas made were to the widows) and exemplar to all those who observed, or
shall hear of, our holy life and religious death. But if it shall happen that
the disease be productive of evil accidents, as a disturbed fancy, a weakened
understanding, wild discoursings, or any deprivation of the use of Reason, it
concerns the sick persons, in the happy intervalls of a quiet untroubled
spirit, to pray earnestly to God that nothing may pass from him in the rages of
a Fever or worse distemper which may less become his duty, or give scandal, or
cause trouble to the persons in attendance: and if he shall also renounce and
disclaim all such evil words which his disease may speak, not himself, he shall
do the duty of a Christian and a prudent person. And after these (...), he may
with Piety and confidence resign his Soul into the hands of God, to be
deposited in holy receptacles till the day of restitution of all things; and in
the mean time with a quiet spirit descend into that state which is the lot of
Caesar's, and where all Kings and Conquerours have laid aside their glories.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal and Holy Jesus, who by Death have overcome Death, and by thy Passion
have taken out its sting, and made it to become one of the gates of Heaven, and
an entrance to Felicity; have mercy upon me now and at the hour of my death:
let thy Grace accompany me all the days of my life, that I may by a holy
Conversation, and an habitual performance of my Duty, wait for the coming of
our Lord, and be ready to enter with thee at whatsoever hour thou shall come.
Lord, let not my death be in any sense unprovided, nor untimely, nor hasty, but
after the common manner of men, having in it nothing extraordinary, but an
extraordinary Piety, and the manifestation of a great and miraculous Mercy. Let
my Senses and Understanding be preserved entire till the last of my days, and
grant that I may die the death of the righteous, having first discharged all my
obligations of justice, leaving none miserable and unprovided in my departure;
but be thou the portion of all my friends and relatives, and let thy blessing
descend upon their heads, and abide there, till they shall meet me in the bosom
of our Lord. Preserve me ever in the communion and peace of the Church; and
bless my Death bed with the opportunity of a holy and a spiritual Guide, with
the assistence and guard of Angels, with the perception of the holy Sacrament,
with Patience and dereliction of my own (...), with a strong Faith, and a firm
and humble Hope, with just measures of Repentance, and great treasures of
Charity to thee my God, and to all the world; that my Soul in the arms of the
Holy Jesus may be deposited with safety and joy, there to expect the revelation
of thy Day, and then to partake the glories of thy Kingdom, O Eternal and Holy
Jesus.

Amen.
Considerations upon the Crucifixion of the Holy JESUS.
He bears his Cross
Ioh: 19. 16. 17. And they took Jesus and lead him away:

17. And he bearing his Cross went forth into a place called the place of a
Scult; which is called in ye Hebrew, Golgotha.

They Erect the Crucifixe.
Ioh: 3. 14. 15. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in ye wilderness, even so
must ye Son of man be lifted up.

15. That whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have eternal life.




1. WHen the Sentence of Death pronounced against the Lord was to be put in
execution, the Soldiers pulled off the Robe of mockery, the scarlet Mantle,
which in jest they put upon him, and put on his own garments. But, as Origin
observes, the Evangelist mentioned not that they took off the Crown of thorns;
what might serve their interest they pursue, but nothing of remission or mercy
to the afflicted Son of man: but so it became the King of Sufferings; not to
lay aside his Imperial thorns, till they were changed into Diadems of Glory.
But now Abel is led forth by his brother to be slain. A gay spectacle to
satisfy impious eyes, who would not stay behind, but attended and waited upon
the hangman to see the Catastrophe of this bloody Tragedy. But when Piety looks
on, she beholds a glorious mystery. Sin S. Aug. (...). 119. in Joan.
laughed to see the King of Heaven and Earth, and the great lover of Souls, in
stead of the Scepter of his Kingdom to bear a Tree of (...) and shame. But
Plety wept tears of pity, and knew they would melt into joy, when she should
behold that Cross which loaded the shoulders of her Lord afterward sit upon the
Scepters, and be engraved and signed upon the Foreheads of Kings.

2. It cannot be thought but the Ministers of Jewish malice used all the
circumstances of affliction which in any case were accustomed toward
malefactors and persons to be crucified, and therefore it was that in some old
Figures we see our Blessed Lord described with a Table appendent to the fringe
of his garment, set full of nails and pointed iron; for so sometimes they
afflicted O (...) quod (...), si (...). Plaut, (...).
persons condemned to that kind of Death, and S. Cyprian affirms that Christ
did stick to the wood that he carried, being (...) quod toleras, (...) and
(...) and (...). S. (...). de (...).
galled with the iron at his heels, and nailed even before his Crucifixion. But
this and the other accidents of his journey and their malice so crushed his
wounded, tender and virginal body, that they were forced to lay the load upon a
Cyrenian, fearing that he should die with less shame and smart than they
intended him. But so he was pleased to take man unto his aid, not only to
represent his own need and the dolorousness of his Passion, but to consign the
duty unto man, that we must enter into a (...) of Christ's sufferings, taking
up the Cross of Martyrdom when God requires us, enduring affronts, being
patient under affliction, loving them that hate us, and being benefactors to
our enemies, abstaining from sensual and intemperate delight, forbidding to our
selves lawful festivities and recreations of our weariness, when we have an end
of the spirit to serve upon the ruins of the body's strength, mortifying our
desires, breaking our own will, not seeking our selves, being entirely resigned
to God. These are the Cross, and the Nails, and the Spear, and the Whip, and
all the instruments of a Christian's Passion. And we may consider, that every
man in this world shall in some sense or other bear a Cross, few men escape it,
and it is not well with them that do: but they only bear it well that (...)
Christ, and tread in his steps, and bear it for his sake, and walk as he
walked; and he that follows his own desires, when he meets with a cross there,
(as it is certain enough he will) bears the cross of his Concupiscence, and
that has no fellowship with the Cross of Christ. By the Precept of bearing the
Cross we are not tied to pull evil upon our selves, that we may imitate our
Lord in nothing but in being afflicted; or to personate the punitive exercises
of Mortification and severe Abstinencies which were eminent in some Saints, and
to which they had special assistances, as others had the gift of Chastity, and
for which they had special reason, and, as they apprehended, some great
necessities: but it is required that we bear our own Cross, so said our dearest
Lord. For when the Cross of Christ is laid upon us, and we are called to
Martyrdom, (...). 16. 24.
then it is our own, because God made it to be our portion: and when by the
necessities of our spirit and the rebellion of our body we need exterior
mortifications and acts of self-denial: then also it is our own cross, because
our needs have made it so; and so it is when God sends us sickness or any other
calamity: whatever is either an effect of our ghostly needs, or the condition
of our temporal estate, it calls for our sufferance, and patience, and
equanimity; for therefore Christ has suffered for us, (says S. Peter) (...)
Pet. 2. 21.
leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, who bore his Cross as
long as he could, and when he could no longer, he murmured not, but sank under
it; and then he was content to receive such aid, not which he chose himself,
but such as was assigned him.

3. Jesus was led out of the gates of Jerusalem, that he might become the
sacrifice for Heb. 13. 13.
persons without the pale, even for all the world: And the daughters of
Jerusalem followed him with pious tears till they came to Calvary, a place
difficult in the ascent, eminent and apt for the publication of shame, a hill
of death and dead bones, polluted and impure, and there beheld him stripped
naked, who clothes the field with flowers, and all the world with robes, and
the whole globe with the canopy of Heaven, and so dressed, that now every
circumstance was a triumph: By his Disgrace he trampled upon Athanas. de Pass.
and (...) Domini.
our Pride; by his Poverty and nakedness he triumphed over our Covetousness and
love of riches; and by his Pains chastised the Delicacies of our flesh, and
broke in pieces the fetters of Concupiscence. For as soon as Adam was clothed
he quitted Paradise; and Jesus was made naked, that he might bring us in again.
And we also must be despoiled of all our exterior adherencies, that we may
pass through the regions of duty and divine love to a society of blessed
spirits, and a clarified, immortal, and beatified estate.

4. There they nailed Jesus with four nails, fixed his Cross in the ground,
which with its fall into the place of its station -- (...) -- Nonn.
gave infinite torture by so violent a concussion of the body of Albigenses
primi (...) uno (...), and Virginem Mariam monoculam; (...) in (...): sed (...)
prior (...) est, and (...) in (...). Lucas Tud. (...). 2. contra Albig.
our Lord, which rested upon nothing but four great wounds; where he was
designed to suffer a long and lingering torment. For Crucifixion, as it was an
excellent pain, sharp and passionate, so it was not of quick effect toward
taking away the life. S. Andrew was two whole days upon the Cross; and some
Martyrs have upon the Cross been rather starved and devoured with birds, than
killed with the proper torment of the tree. But Jesus took all his Passion with
a voluntary susception, God heightning it to the great degrees of torment
supernaturally; and he laid down his life voluntarily, when his Father's wrath
was totally appeased toward mankind.

5. Some have phansied that Christ was pleased to take something from every
condition of which Man ever was or shall be possessed; taking Immunity from sin
from Adam's state of Innocence, Punishment and misery from the state of Adam
fallen, the fullness of Grace from the state of Renovation, and perfect
Contemplation of the Divinity and beatifick joys from the state of
Comprehension and the blessedness of Heaven; meaning, that the Humanity of our
Blessed Savior did in the sharpest agony of his Passion behold the face of
God, and communicate in glory. But I consider that, although the two Natures of
Christ were knit by a mysterious union into one Person, yet the Natures still
retain their incommunicable properties. Christ as God is not subject to
sufferings, as a man he is the subject of miseries; as God he is eternal, as
man, mortal and commensurable by time; as God, the supreme Lawgiver, as man,
most humble and obedient to the Law: and therefore that the Humane nature was
united to the Divine, it does not infer that it must in all instances partake
of the Divine felicities, which in God are essential, to man communicated
without necessity, and by an arbitrary dispensation. Add to this, that some
virtues and excellencies were in the Soul of Christ which could not consist
with the state of glorified and beatified persons; such as are Humility,
Poverty of spirit, Hope, Holy desires; all which, having their seat in the
Soul, suppose even in the supremest (...) a state of pilgrimage, that is, a
condition which is imperfect, and in order to something beyond its present. For
therefore Christ ought to Luke 24. 26. (...) vulg. (...).
suffer, (says our Blessed Lord himself) and so enter into his glory. And S.
Paul affirms, that we see Jesus made a little lower than the Angels, for the
suffering of death, (...) with Heb. 2. 9.
glory and honor. And again, Christ humbled himself, and became obedient unto
death, Philip. 2. 8, 9.
even the death of the Cross: Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and
given him a Name above every name. Thus his present life was a state of merit
and work, and as a reward of it he was crowned with glory and immortality, his
Name was exalted, his Kingdom glorified, he was made the Lord of all the
Creatures, the first fruits of the Resurrection, the exemplar of glory, and the
Prince and Head of the Catholic Church: and because this was his recompense,
and the fruits of his Humility and Obedience, it is certain it was not a
necessary consequence and a natural efflux of the personal union of the Godhead
with the Humanity. This I discourse to this purpose, that we may not in our
esteem lessen the suffering of our dearest Lord by thinking he had the supports
of actual Glory in the midst of all his Sufferings. For there is no one minute
or ray of Glory but its fruition does outweigh and make us insensible of the
greatest calamities, and the spirit of pain, which can be extracted from all
the infelicities of this world. True it is, that the greatest beauties in this
world are receptive of an allay of sorrow, and nothing can have pleasure in all
capacities. The most beauteous feathers of the birds of Paradise, the Estrich,
or the Peacock, if put into our throat, are not there so pleasant as to the
eye: But the beatifick joys of the least glory of Heaven take away all pain,
wipe away all tears from our eyes; and it is not possible that at the same
instant the Soul of Jesus should be ravished with Glory, and yet abated with
pains grievous and (...). On the other side, some say that the Soul of Jesus
upon the Cross suffered the pains of Hell, and all the torments of the damned,
and that without such sufferings it is not imaginable he should pay the price
which God's wrath should demand of us. But the same that reproves the one does
also reprehend the other; for the Hope that was the support of the Soul of
Jesus, as it confesses an imperfection that is not consistent with the state of
Glory, so it excludes the Despair that is the torment proper to accursed souls.
Our dearest Lord suffered the whole condition of Humanity, Sin only excepted,
and freed us from Hell with suffering those sad pains, and merited Heaven for
his own Humanity, as the Head, and all faithful people, as the Members of his
mystical Body. And therefore his life here was only a state of pilgrimage, not
at all trimmed with beatifick glories. Much less was he ever in the state of
Hell, or upon the Cross felt the formal misery and spirit of torment which is
the (...) of damned spirits; because it was impossible Christ should despair,
and without Despair it is impossible there should be a Hell. But this is highly
probable, that in the intension of degrees and present anguish the Soul of our
Lord might feel a greater load of wrath than is incumbent in every instant upon
perishing souls. For all the sadness which may be imagined to be in Hell
consists in acts produced from principles that cannot surpass the force of
humane or Angelical nature; but the pain which our Blessed Lord endured for the
expiation of our sins was an issue of an united and concentred anger, was
received into the heart of God and Man, and was commensurate to the whole
latitude of the Grace, Patience and Charity of the Word incarnate.

The Crucisixion.
Mark: 15: 25. Erat autem Hora tertia and crucifixerunt eum.

Mark. 15: 25. And is was the third hour and they crucified him.

The taking down from the Cross.
Luke 23: 50 And there was a man named Joseph, a Counselor and he was a good
man and a lust (ye same had not consented to ye counsel and deed of them. 52.
This man went unto Pilate and begged ye Body of Jesus.

53 And he took it down and wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a Sepulehre,
that was hewn in stone wherein never man before was laid.



6. And now behold the Priest and the Sacrifice of all the world laid upon the
Altar of the Cross, bleeding, and tortured, and dying, to reconcile his Father
to us: and he was arrayed with ornaments more glorious than the robes of Aaron.
The Crown of Thorns was his Mitre, the Cross his Pastoral staff, the Nails
piercing his hands were in stead of Rings, the ancient ornament of Priests, and
his flesh rased and checkered with blew and blood in stead of the
parti-colored Robe. But as this object calls for our Devotion, our Love and
Eucharist to our dearest Lord; so it must needs irreconcile us to Sin, which in
the eye of all the world brought so great shame and pain and amazement upon the
Son of God, when he only became engaged by a charitable substitution of himself
in our place; and therefore we are assured, by the demonstration of sense and
experience, it will bring death and all imaginable miseries as the just
expresses of God's indignation and hatred: for to this we may apply the words
of our Lord in the prediction of miseries to Jerusalem, If this be done in the
green tree, what shall be done in the dry? For it is certain, Christ infinitely
pleased his Father even by becoming the person made (...) in estimate of Law;
and yet so great Charity of our Lord, and the so great love and pleasure of his
Father, exempted him not from suffering pains intolerable: and much less shall
those escape who provoke and displease God, and despise so great Salvation,
which the Holy Jesus has wrought with the expense of blood and so precious a
life.

7. But here we see a great representation and testimony of the Divine Justice,
who was so angry with sin, who had so severely threatened it, who does so
essentially hate it, that he would not spare his only Son, when he became a
conjunct person, relative to the guilt by undertaking the charges of our
Nature. For although God has set Deuteronomy. 14. 16.
down in holy Scripture the order of his Justice, and the manner of its
manifestation, Ezekiel. 18. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.
that one Soul shall not perish for the sins of another; yet this is meant for
Justice and for Mercy too, that is, he will not curse the Son for the Father's
fault, or in any relation whatsoever substitute one person for another to make
him involuntarily guilty: But when this shall be desired by a person that
cannot finally perish, and does a mercy to the exempt persons, and is a
voluntary act of the suscipient, and shall in the event also redound to an
infinite good, it is no deflection from the Divine Justice to excuse many by
the affliction of one, who also for that very suffering shall have infinite
compensation. We see that for the sin of Cham all his posterity were accursed:
the Subjects of David died with the Plague, because their Prince numbered the
people: Idolatry is punished in the children of the fourth generation: Readiness
seven sons were hanged for breaking the League of Gibeon; and Ahab's sin was
punished in his posterity, he escaping, and the evil was brought upon his house
in his son's days. In all these cases the evil descended upon persons in near
relation to the sinner, and was a punishment to him and a misery to these, and
were either chastisements also of their own sins, or if they were not, they
served other ends of Providence, and led the afflicted innocent to a condition
of recompense accidentally procured by that infliction. But if for such
relation's sake and oeconomical and political conjunction, as between Prince
and People, the evil may be transmitted from one to another, much rather is it
just, when by contract a competent and conjunct person undertakes to quit his
relative. Thus when the Hand steals, the Back is whipped; and an evil Eye is
punished with a hungry Belly. Treason causes the whole Family to be miserable;
and a Sacrilegious Grandfather has sent a Locust to devour the increase of the
Nephews.

8. But in our case it is a voluntary contract, and therefore no Injustice; all
parties are voluntary. God is the supreme Lord, and his actions are the measure
of Justice: we, who had deserved the punishment, had great reason to desire a
Redeemer: and yet Christ, who was to pay the ransom, was more desirous of it
than we were, for we asked it not before it was promised and undertaken. But
thus we see that Sureties pay Livius. Vide l. Si quis (...) D. (...). and
exhib. (...) L. Si a (...), D. De sidejussoribus.
the obligation of the principal Debtor, and the Pledges of Contracts have been
by the best and wisest Nations slain when the Articles have been broken: The
Thessalians slew 250 Pledges; the Romans 300 of the Volsci, and threw the
Tarentines from the Tarpeian rock. And that it may appear Christ was a person
in all senses competent to do this for us, himself John 10. 10.
testifies that he had power over his own life, to take it up, or lay it down.
And therefore as there can be nothing against the most exact justice and reason
of Laws and punishments; so it magnifies the Divine Mercy, who removes the
punishment from us who of necessity must have sunk under it, and yet makes us
to adore his Severity, who would not forgive us without punishing his Son for
us; to consign unto us Apud Diodorum Sicul. and (...).
his perfect hatred against Sin, to conserve the sacredness of his Laws, and to
imprint upon us great characters of fear and love. The famous Locrian Zaleucus
made a Law, that all Adulterers should lose both their eyes: his son was first
unhappily surprised in (...).
the crime; and his Father, to keep a temper between the piety and soft spirit
of a Parent, and the justice and severity of a Judge, put out one of his own
eyes, and one of his Sons. So God did with us; he made some abatement, that is,
as to the person with whom he was angry, but inflicted his anger upon our
Redeemer, whom he essentially loved, to secure the dignity of his Sanctions and
the sacredness of Obedience; so marrying Justice and Mercy by the intervening
of a commutation. Thus David escaped by the death of his Son, God choosing that
penalty for the expiation: and Cimon offered himself to prison, to purchase the
liberty of his Father Miltiades. It was a filial duty in Cimon, and yet the Law
was satisfied. And both these concurred in our great Redeemer. For God, who was
the sole Arbitrator, so disposed it, and the eternal Son of God submitted to
this way of expiating our crimes, and became an argument of faith and belief of
the great Article of Remission of sins, and other its appendent causes and
effects and adjuncts; it being wrought by a visible and notorious Passion. It
was made an encouragement of Hope; for he that spared not his own Son to
reconcile us, will with him give all things else to us so reconciled: and a
great endearment of our Duty and Love, as it was a demonstration of his. And in
all the changes and traverses of our life he is made to us a great example of
all excellent actions and all patient sufferings.

9. In the midst of two Thieves three long hours the holy Jesus hung clothed
with pain, agony and dishonor, all of them so eminent and vast, that he who
could not but hope, whose Soul was enchased with Divinity, and dwelt in the
bosom of God, and in the Cabinet of the mysterious Trinity, yet had a cloud of
misery so thick and black drawn before him, that he complained as if God had
forsaken him: but this was the pillar of cloud which conducted Israel into
Canaan. And as God behind the Cloud supported the Holy Jesus, and stood ready
to receive him into the union of his Glories; so his Soul in that great
desertion had internal comforts proceeding from consideration of all those
excellent persons which should be adopted into the fellowship of his
Sufferings, which should imitate his Graces, which should communicate his
Glories. And we follow this Cloud to our Country, having Christ for our Guide:
and though he trod the way, leaning upon the Cross, which like the staff of
Egypt pierced his hands; yet it is to us a comfort and support, pleasant to our
spirits as the sweetest Canes, strong as the pillars of the earth, and made apt
for our use by having been born and made smooth by the hands of our Elder
Brother.

10. In the midst of all his torments Jesus only made one Prayer of sorrow to
represent his sad condition to his Father; but no accent of murmur, no syllable
of anger against his enemies: In stead of that he sent up a holy, charitable
and effective Prayer for their forgiveness, and by that Prayer obtained of God
that within 55 days 8000 of his enemies were converted. So potent is the prayer
of Charity, that it prevails above the malice of men, turning the arts of Satan
into the designs of God; and when malice occasions the Prayer, the Prayer
becomes an antidote to malice. And by this instance our Blessed Lord consigned
that Duty to us which in his Sermons he had preached, That we should forgive
our enemies, and pray for them: and by so doing our selves are freed from the
stings of anger, and the storms of a revengeful spirit; and we oftentimes
procure servants to God friends to our selves, and heirs to the Kingdom of
Heaven.

11. Of the two Thieves that were crucified together with Latro non simper
(...) M (...), qui (...) ob (...) aliquid contra (...) Romanas secerat: alioqui
vir suit non omnino malus.
our Lord, the one blasphemed; the other had at that time the greatest Piety in
the world, except that of the Blessed Virgin, and particularly had such a
Faith, that all the Ages (...) qui viderunt (...) mortuos (...); credidit (...)
qui videbat secum in ligno (...), quam non (...) Christus (...) in Discipulis
suis. S. Aug Sermon. 144. de (...).
of the Church could never show the like. For when he saw Christ in the same
condemnation with himself, crucisied by the Romans, accused and scorned by the
Jews, forsaken by his own Apostles, a dying distressed Man, doing at that time
no Miracles to attest his Divinity or Innocence; yet then he confesses him to
be a Lord, and a King, and his Savior: He confessed his own shame and
unworthiness, he submitted to the death of the Cross, and, by his voluntary
acceptance and tacit volition of it, made it equivalent to as great a
punishment of his own susception; he showed an incomparable modesty, begging
but for a remembrance only, he knew himself so sinful, he durst ask no more; he
reproved the other Thief for Blasphemy; he confessed the world to come, and
owned Christ publicly, he prayed to him, he hoped in him, and pitied him,
showing an excellent Patience in this sad condition. And in this I consider,
that besides the excellency of some of these acts, and the goodness of all, the
like occasion for so exemplar Faith never can occur; and until all these things
shall in these circumstances meet in any one man, he must not hope for so safe
an Exit after an evil life (...) the confidence of this example. But now Christ
had the key of Paradise in his hand, and God blessed the good Thief with this
opportunity of letting him in, who at another time might have waited longer,
and been tied to harder conditions. And indeed it is very probable that he was
much advantaged by the intervening accident of dying at the same time with
Christ; there being a natural compassion produced in us toward the partners of
our miseries. For Christ was not void of humane passions, though he had in them
no imperfection or irregularity, and therefore might be invited by the society
of misery, the rather to admit him to participate his joys; and S. Paul proves
him to be a merciful high Priest, because he was touched with a feeling of our
infirmities: the first expression of which was to this blessed Thief; Christ
and he together sat at the Supper of bitter herbs, and Christ paid his
symbol, promising that he should that day be together with him in Paradise.

12. By the Cross of Christ stood the Holy Virgin Mother, upon whom old
Simeon's Prophecy was now verified: for now she felt a sword passing through
her very soul: she S. Ambros. l. 10. (...).
stood without clamor and womanish noises, sad, silent, and with a modest
grief, deep as the waters of the abyss, but smooth as the face of a pool, full
of Love, and Patience, and Sorrow, and Hope. Now she was put to it to make use
of all those excellent discourses her Holy Son had used to build up her spirit,
and fortify it against this day. Now she felt the blessings and strengths of
Faith, and she passed from the griefs of the Passion to the expectation of the
Resurrection, and she rested in this Death as in a sad remedy; for she knew it
reconciled God with all the World. But her Hope drew a veil before her Sorrow;
and though her Grief was great enough to swallow her up, yet her Love was
greater, and did swallow up her grief. But the Sun also had a veil upon his
face, and taught us to draw a curtain before the Passion, which would be the
most artificial expression of its greatness, whilst by silence and wonder we
confess it great beyond our expression, or, which is all one, great as the
burden and baseness of our sins. And with this veil drawn before the face of
Jesus let us suppose him at the gates of Paradise, calling with his last words
in a loud voice to have them opened, that the King of glory might come in.

The PRAYER.
O Holy Jesus, who for our sakes did suffer incomparable anguish and pains
commensurate to thy Love, and our Miseries, which were infinite, that thou
might purchase for (...) blessings upon Earth, and an inheritance in Heaven;
dispose us by Love, Thankfulness, Humility and Obedience, to receive all the
benefit of thy Passion, granting unto us and thy whole Church remission of all
our sins, integrity of mind, health of body, competent maintenance, peace in
our days, a temperate air, fruitfulness of the earth, unity and integrity of
Faith, extirpation of Heresies, reconcilements of Schisms, destruction of all
wicked counsels intended against us; and bind the hands of Rapine and
Sacrilege, that they may not destroy the vintage, and root up the Vine it
self. Multiply thy Blessings upon us, sweetest Jesus, increase in us true
Religion, sincere and actual devotion in our Prayers, Patience in troubles, and
whatsoever is necessary to our Soul's health, or conducing to thy Glory. Amen.

II.
O Dearest Savior, I adore thy mercies and thy incomparable love expressed in
thy so voluntary susception and affectionate suffering such horrid and sad
Tortures, which cannot be remembered without a sad compassion; the waters of
bitterness entered into thy Soul, and the storms of Death and thy Father's anger
broke thee all in pieces: and what shall I do, who by my sins have so tormented
my dearest Lord? what Contrition can be great enough, what tears sufficiently
expressive, what hatred and detestation of my crimes can be equal and
commensurate to those sad accidents which they have produced? Pity me, O Lord,
pity me, dearest God, turn those thy merciful eyes toward me, O most merciful
Redeemer; for my sins are great, like unto thy Passion, full of sorrow and
shame, and a burden too great for me to bear. Lord, who have done so much for
me, now only speak the word, and thy servant shall be whole: Let thy Wounds
heal me, thy Virtues amend me, thy Death quicken me; that I in this life
suffering the cross of a sad and salutary Repentance, in the union and merits
of thy (...) and Passion, may die with thee, and rest with thee, and rise again
with thee, and live with thee for ever in the possession of thy Glories, O
dearest Savior Jesus.

Amen.
SECT. XVI. Of the Resurrection and Ascension of JESUS.
The Burial of Jesus.
Mat 27 57 When the even was come there came a rich man of Arimathea, named Jo
seph, who also himself was Jesus Disciple, he went to Pilate, and beggd the
body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered. And when Joseph
had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and laid it in his
own new tomb, which he had hewn out in ye rock.

The Resurrection of Jesus.
Mat 28 2 And behold there was a great earthquake: for the Angel of the Lord
descended from heaven and came and rolled back ye stone from the door, and
sat upon it And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead
men. And the Angel said unto the woman. Fear not ye, for I know, that ye seek
Jesus, that was crucified. He is not here for he is Risen, as he said.




1. WHile it was yet early in the morning, upon the first day of the week, Mary
Magdalen and Mary the mother of James and Salome brought sweet spices to the
Sepulcher, that they might again embalm the Holy Body; (for the rites of
Embalming among the Hebrews used to last forty days) and their love Genesis 50.
Tacit. annal. l. 21.
was not satisfied with what Joseph had done. They therefore hastened to the
grave; and after they had expended their money, and bought the spices, then
begin to consider, who shall remove the stone: but yet they still go on, and
their love answers the objection, not knowing how it should be done, but yet
resolving to go through all the difficulties; but never remember or take care
to pass the guards of Soldiers. But when they came to the Sepulcher, they
found the Guard affrighted and removed, and the stone rolled away; for there
had a little before their arrival been a great Earthquake, and an Angel
descending from Heaven rolled away the stone, and sat Aurora lucis ritulat,
Coelum laudibus intonat, Mundus exsultans jubila, Gemens infernus ululat; Cum
Rex ille fortissimus, Mortis consractis viribus, Pede conculcans Tartara,
Solvit a poena miseres. Ille qui clausus lapid^ Custoditur sub milite,
Triumphans pompa nobili, Victor surgit de funere. Hymn. Paschal,
upon it; and for fear of him the guards about the tomb became astonished with
fear, and were like dead men: and some of them ran to the High Priests, and
told them what happened. But they now resolving to make their iniquity safe and
unquestionable by a new crime, hire the Soldiers to tell an incredible and a
weak fable, that his Disciples came by night and stole him away: Against which
accident the wit of man could give no more security than themselves had made.
The women entered into the Sepulcher, and missing the body of Jesus, Mary
Magdalen ran to the eleven Apostles, complaining that the body of our Lord was
not to be found. Then Peter and John ran as fast as they could to see: for the
unexpectedness of the relation, the wonder of the story and the sadness of the
person moved some affections in them, which were kindled by the first
principles and sparks of Faith, but were not made actual and definite, because
the Faith was not raised to a flame: they looked into the Sepulcher, and
finding not the body there, they returned. By this time Mary Magdalen was come
back, and the women who stayed weeping for their Lord's body saw two Angels
sitting in white, the one at the head, and the other at the (...); at which
unexpected sight they trembled, and bowed themselves: but an Angel bid them not
to fear, telling them that Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified, was also
risen, and was not there, and called to mind what Jesus had told them in
Galilee concerning his Crucifixion, and Resurrection the third day.

2. And Mary Magdalen turned her self back, and saw Jesus; but supposing him to
be the Gardener, she said to him, Sir, if thou have born him hence, tell me
where thou have laid him, and I will take him away. But Jesus said unto her,
Mary. Then she knew his voice, and with ecstasie of joy and wonder was ready to
have crushed his feet with her embraces: but he commanded her not to touch him,
but go to his Erethren, and say, I ascend unto my Father, and to your Father,
to my God, and your God. Mary departed with satisfaction beyond the joys of a
victory or a full vintage, and told these things to the Apostles: but the
narration seemed to them as talk of abused and fantastic persons. About the
same time Jesus also appeared unto Simon Peter. Toward the declining of the
day, two of his Disciples going to Emmans sad, and discoursing of the late
occurrences, Jesus puts himself into their company, and upbraids their
incredulity, and expounds the Scriptures, that Christ ought to suffer, and rise
again the third day, and in the breaking of bread disappeared; and so was known
to them by vanishing away, whom present they knew not. And instantly they
hasten to Jerusalem, and told the Apostles what had happened.

3. And while they were there, that is, the same day at evening, when the
Apostles were assembled all save Thomas, secretly for fear of the Jews, the
doors being shut, Jesus came and stood in the midst of them. They were
exceedingly troubled, supposing it had been a Spirit. But Jesus confuted them
by the Philosophy of their senses, by feeling his (...) and bones, which
spirits have not. For he gave them his benediction, showing them his hands and
his feet. At which sight they rejoiced with exceeding joy, and began to be
restored to their indefinite hopes of some future felicity by the returns of
their Lord to life: and there he first breathed on them, giving them the holy
Ghost, and performing the promise twice made before his death, the promise of
the Keys, or of binding and loosing, saying, Whose soever sins ye remit, they
are remitted to them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. And
that was the second part of Clerical power with which Jesus instructed his
Disciples, in order to their great Commission of Preaching and Government
(...). These things were told to Thomas, but he believed not, and resolved
against the belief of it, unless he might put his finger into his hands, and
his hand into his side. Jesus therefore on the Octaves of his Resurrection
appeared again to the Apostles met together, and makes demonstration to Thomas,
in conviction and reproof of his unbelief, promising a special benediction to
all succeeding Ages of the Church; for they are such who saw not, and yet have
believed.

4. But Jesus at his early appearing had sent an order by the women, that the
Disciples should go into (...); and they did so after a few days. And Simon
Peter being there went a fishing, and six other of the Apostles with him, to
the Sea of Tiberias, where they labored all night, and caught nothing. Toward
the morning Jesus appeared to them, and bad them cast the net on the right side
of the ship; which they did, and enclosed an hundred and fifty three great
fishes: by which prodigious draught John the beloved Disciple perceived it was
the Lord. At which instant Peter threw himself into the Sea, and went to Jesus;
and when the rest were come to shore, they dined with broiled fish. After
dinner Jesus, taking care for those scattered sheep which were dispersed over
the face of the earth, that he might gather them into one Sheepfold under one
(...), asked Peter, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me more than these? Peter
answered, Yea, Lord, thou that know all things know that I love thee.
Then Jesus said unto him, Feed my Lambs. And Jesus asked him the same question,
and gave him the same Precept the second time, and the third time: for it was a
considerable and a weighty employment, upon which Jesus was willing to spend
all his endearments and stock of affections that Peter owed him, even upon the
care of his little Flock. And after the intrusting of this charge to him, he
told him, that the reward he should have in this world should be a sharp and an
honorable Martyrdom; and withal checks at Peter's curiosity in busying
himself about the temporal accidents of other men, and enquiring what should
become of John the beloved Disciple. Jesus answered his question with some
sharpness of reprehension, and no satisfaction; If I will that he tarry till I
come, what is that to thee? Then they phansied that he should not die: But they
were mistaken, for the intimation was expounded and verified by S. John's
surviving the destruction of Jerusalem; for after the attempts of persecutors,
and the miraculous escape of prepared torments, he died a natural death in a
good old age.

5. After this, Jesus having appointed a solemn meeting for all the Brethren
that could be collected from the dispersion, and named a certain mountain in
(...), appeared to five hundred Brethren at once; and this was his most public
and solemn manifestation: and while some doubted, Jesus came according to the
designation, and spoke to the eleven, sent them to preach to all the world
Repentance and Remission of sins in his Name, promising to be with them to the
end of the world. He appeared also unto James, but at what time is uncertain;
save that there is something concerning it in the Gospel of S. Matthew which
the Nazarens of (...) used, and which it is likely themselves added out of
report; for there is nothing of it in our Greek Copies. The words are these:
When the Lord had given the linen in which he was wrapped to the servant of the
High Priest, he went and appeared unto James. For James had vowed, after he
received the Lord's Supper, that he would eat no bread till he saw the Lord
risen from the grave. Then the Lord called for bread, he blessed it and brake
it, and gave it to James the Just, and said, My Brother, eat bread, for the Son
of man is risen from the sleep of death. So that by this it should seem to be
done upon the day of the Resurrection. But the relation of it by S. Paul puts
it between the appearance which he made to the five hundred, and that last to
the Apostles when he was to ascend into Heaven. Last of all, when the Apostles
were at dinner, he appeared to them, upbraiding their incredulity: and then he
opened their understanding, that they might discern the sense of Scripture, and
again commanded them to preach the Gospel to all the world, giving them power
to do Miracles, to cast out Devils, to cure (...); and instituted the Sacrament
of Baptism, which he commanded should together with the Sermons of the Gospel
be administered to all Nations in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Then he led them into Judaea, and they came to Bethany, and
from thence to the mount Olivet; and he commanded them to stay in Jerusalem,
till the Holy Ghost, the promise of the Father, should descend upon them, which
should be accomplished in few days; and then they should know the times, and
the seasons, and all things necessary for their ministration and service, and
propagation of the Gospel. And while he discoursed many things concerning the
Kingdom, behold a Cloud came and parted Jesus from them, and carried him in
their sight up into Heaven, where he sits at the right hand of God blessed for
ever. Amen.

6. While his Apostles stood gazing up to Heaven, two Angels appeared to them,
and told them, that Jesus should come in like manner as he was taken away, viz.
with glory and majesty, and in the clouds, and with the ministry of Angels.
Amen. Come, Lord JESUS; come quickly.

Ad SECT. XVI. Considerations upon the Accidents happening in the intervall
after the Death of the Holy JESUS, until his Resurrection.
Jesus and Mary in the Garden.
Joh. 20. 14. 15. 16. Mary turning about saw Jesus standing and knew not yt it
was Jesus, Jesus says, woman, whom seek thou? She supposing him to be the
garidner, says. sir, if thou have born him hence, tell me, etc. Jesus says
unto her, Mary: she turned her self, and says unto him, Rabboni, which is
Master. Jesus says unto her, touch me not for, etc. Mary Magdalen came and
told the desciples, that she had seen the Lord.

Our Lords Ascension.
Acts. 1. 9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their sight. 10. And while they
steadfastly looked toward heaven, behold two men stood by them in white
apparel. 11. Which also said, this same Jesus shall so come, as you have seen
him go into heaven.




1. THE Holy Jesus promised to the blessed Thief, that he should that day be
with him in Paradise; which therefore was certainly a place or state of
Blessedness, because it was a promise; and in the society of Jesus, whose penal
and afflictive part of his work of Redemption was finished upon the Cross. Our
Blessed Lord did not promise he should that day be with him in his Kingdom, for
that day it was not opened, and the everlasting doors of those interior
recesses were to be shut till after the Resurrection, that himself was to
ascend thither, and make way for all his servants to enter, in the same method
in which he went before us. Our Blessed Lord (...), and ex to (...).
descended into Hell, says the Creed of the Apostles, from the Sermon of Saint
Peter, as he from the words of David, that is, into the state of Separation and
common receptacle of Spirits, according to the style of Scripture. But the name
of [ Hell] is nowhere in Scripture an appellative of the Kingdom of Christ, of
the place of final and supreme Glory. But concerning the verification of our
Lord's promise to the beatified Thief, and his own state of Separation, we must
take what light we can from Scripture, and what we can from the Doctrine of the
Primitive Church. -- Vbi duat (...) (Paulm,) (...) in (...) raptum; (...) ad
(...) ad paradisum. Methodius cont. Origin, apud (...). (...) Moses Barcephas,
(...). de (...); p. 4. (...). 7.
S. Paul had two great Revelations; he was rapt up into Paradise; and he was
rapt up into the third Heaven: and these he calls visions and revelations, not
one, but diverse: for Paradise is distinguished from the Heaven of the blessed,
being it self a receptacle of holy Souls, made illustrious with visitation of
Angels, and happy by being a repository for such spirits who at the day of
Judgment shall go forth into eternal glory. In the interim Christ has trod all
the paths before us, and Dial. adv. (...).
this also we must pass through to arrive at the Courts of Heaven. Justin
Martyr said it was the doctrine of heretical persons to say that the Souls of
the Blessed instantly upon the separation from their Bodies enter into the
highest Heaven. And l. 5. c. 3.
Irenaeus makes Heaven and the intermediate receptacle of Souls to be distinct
places: both blessed, but hugely differing in degrees. L. (...) Anima; and de
Praescript. Idem sentiunt Scriptor (...) ad Orthod. q. 76. S. Greg. Naz. (...).
10. S. (...). hom. 15. in (...). S. Ambr. in (...), Cyrilli (...). Epiphan.
(...). apud S. Hier. Theodoretus, Theophylactus, and (...). passim.
Tertullian is dogmatical in the assertion, that till the voice of the great
Archangel be heard, and as long as Christ sits at the right hand of his Father
making intercession for the Church, so long blessed Souls must expect the
assembling of their brethren, the great Congregation of the Church, that they
may all pass from their outer courts into the inward tabernacle, the Holy of
Holies, to the Throne of God. And as it is certain that no Soul could enter
into glory before our Lord (...), by whom we hope to have access: so it is most
agreeable to the proportion (...) the mysteries of our Redemption, that we
believe the entrance into Glory to have been made by our Lord at his glorious
Ascension, and that his Soul went not thither before (...), to come back again,
to be contracted into the span of Humanity, and dwell forty days in his body
upon earth. But that he should return from Paradise, that is, from the common
receptacle of departed Spirits who died in the love of God, to earth again, had
in it no lessening of his condition, since himself in mercy called back Lazarus
from thence, and some others also returned to live a life of grace, which in
all senses is less than the least of glories. Sufficient it is to us, that all
holy Souls departing go into the hands, that is, into the custody, of our Lord;
that Revel. 14. 13.
they rest from their labors; that their works shall follow them, and overtake
them too, at the day of Judgment; that they are happy presently; that they are
visited by Angels; Just. Mart. 75. inter quaest. (...) ait, (...) duci a morte
ad Paradisum, ubi consuetudo and (...) est Angelorum and (...).
that God sends, as he pleases, excellent irradiations and types of glory to
entertain them in their mansions; that their condition is secured: but 2 Timothy
4. 8.
the crown of (...) is laid up against the great day of Judgment, and then to
be produced and given to S. Paul, and to all that love the coming of our Lord;
that is, to all who either here in duty, or in their receptacles, with joy and
certain hope long for the revelation of that day. At the day of Judgment Christ
will (...). 13. 41. and 24. 31.
send the Angels, and they shall gather together the elect from the four winds;
and all the refuse of men, evil persons, they shall throw into everlasting
burning. Then our Blessed Lord shall call to the elect to enter into the
Kingdom, and reject the cursed into the portion of Devils; for whom the fire is
but now prepared in the intervall. For 2 Cor. 5. 10. (...) (...). and (...).
we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, (says S. Paul) that
every man may receive in his body according as he has done, whether it be good
or evil. Out of the body the reception of the reward is not. And therefore 2
Pet. 2. 4.
S. Peter affirms, that God has delivered the evil Angels into chains of
darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment. And Jude 6.
S. Jude says, that the Angels which kept not their first faith, but left
their first habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness
unto the Judgment of the great day. And therefore the (...). 8. 29
Devils expostulated with our Blessed Savior, Art thou come to torment us
before the time? And the same also he does to evil men, 2 Pet. 2. 9. (...)
tamen quisquam (...) animas post (...) judicari: Nam omnes in una (...);
custodia (...), donec (...) maximus (...) faciat examen. (...). l. 7. (...). 21.
reserving the unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished. For since the
actions which are to be judged are the actions of the whole man, so also must
be the Judicature. And our Blessed Savior intimated this to his Apostles; Joh.
14. 2, 3.
In my Father's house are many mansions: but I go to prepare a place for you.
And if I go away, I will come again, and take you unto me; that where I am,
there ye may be also. At Christ's Second coming this is to be performed. Many
Outer courts, many different places or Satiabor (...). Psalm, 17. 15.
different states there may be; and yet there is a place whither holy Souls
shall arrive at last, which was not then ready for us, and was not to be entered
into until the entrance of our Lord had made the preparation: and that is,
certainly, the highest Heaven, called by S. Paul the third Heaven; because the
other receptacles were ready, and full of holy Souls, Patriarchs and Prophets
and holy men of God; concerning whom Heb. 11. 40. Irenae. l. 5. adv. Haeres. ad
sin. Origin. (...). 7. in (...). Chrysostom. hom. 39. in 1 Cor. Theodoret.
Theophylact. Oecumenius in (...). 11, S. Aug. l. 1. (...). c. 14. Victorin.
(...). in c. 6. Apoc, (...), (...) Bono mortis, c. 10, and 11.
S. Paul affirms expressly, that the Fathers received not the Promises: God
having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be
made perfect: Therefore certain it is that their condition was a state of
imperfection, and yet they were placed in Paradise, in Abraham's bosom; and
thither Christ went, and the blessed Thief attended him. And then it was that
Christ made their condition better: for though still it be a place of relation
in order to something beyond it, yet the term and object of their hope is
changed: they sat in the regions of darkness, expecting that great Promise
made to Adam and the Patriarchs, the Promise of the Messiah; but when he that
was promised came, he preached to the spirits in Prison, he communicated to
them the Mysteries of the Gospel, the Secrets of the Kingdom, the things hidden
from eternal Ages, and taught them to look up to the glories purchased by his
Passion, and made the term of their expectation be his Second coming, and the
objects of their hope the glories of the beatifick vision. And although the
state of Separation is sometimes in Scripture called (...), and sometimes
(...), (for these words in Scripture are of large significations;) yet it is
never called the third (...), nor the Hell of the damned: for although
concerning it nothing is clearly revealed, or what is their portion till the
day of Judgment; yet it is intimated in a Parable, that between good and evil
spirits even in the state of Separation there is distance of place: certain it
is there is great distance of condition; and as the holy Souls in their regions
of light are full of love, joy, hope, and longing for the coming of the great
Day, so the accursed do expect it with an insupportable amazement, and are
presently tormented with apprehensions of the future. Happy are they that
through Paradise pass into the Kingdom, who from their highest hope pass to the
(...) Charity, from the state of a blessed Separation to the Mercies and 2 Timothy
1. 18.
gentle Sentence of the day of Judgment, which S. Paul prayed to God to grant
(...); and more explicitly for the Thessalonians, 1 Thesl. 5. 23. Vide (...)
in (...), l 5 c. 6. adv. (...). ubi (...), absque unione corporis, (...), and
(...), beminem non (...).
that their whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus. And I pray God to grant the same to me, and all
faithful people whatsoever.

2. As soon as the Lord had given up his spirit into the hands of God, the veil
of the Temple was rent, the Angels Guardians of the place deserted it, the
Rites of Moses were laid open, and the enclosures of the Tabernacle were
dispark'd, the earth trembled, the graves were opened, and all the old world
and the old Religion were so shaken toward their first Chaos, that if God had
not supported the one, and reserved the other for an honorable burial, the
earth had left to support her children, and the Synagogue had been thrown out
to an inglorious exposition and contempt. But yet in these symbols these were
changed from their first condition, and passed into a new dominion; all old
things passed away, and all things became new; the Earth and the Heavens were
reckoned as a new creation, they passed into another kingdom, under Christ
their Lord; and as before the creatures were servants of humane necessities,
they now become servants of election, and in order to the ends of Grace, as
before of Nature; Christ having now the power to dispose of them in order to
his Kingdom, and by the administration of his own Wisdom. And at the instant of
these accidents, God so determined the persuasions of men, that they referred
these Prodigies of the honor to Christ, and took them as testimonies of that
truth for the affirmation of which the High Priest had condemned our dearest
Lord: and although the heart of the Priest rent not, even then S. (...). l. 10.
in Lucam.
when rocks did tear in pieces; yet the people, who saw the Passion, (...)
their breasts, and returned, and confessed Christ.

3. The graves of the dead were opened at the Death, but the dead boys of the
Saints that slept arose not till the Resurrection Eusebius. Emiss. (...). 6. de
(...). -- tumuloque (...), resurgentes (...) sipulios. Prudent. (...).
of our Lord; for he was the first fruits, and they followed him as instant
witnesses, to publish the Resurrection of their Head, which it is possible they
declared to those to whom they appeared in the Holy City. And amongst these,
the curiosity or pious credulity of some have supposed Adam and Eve, Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, who therefore were (...) to be buried in the Land of Promise,
as having some intimation or hope that they might be partakers of the earliest
glories of the Messiah, in whose (...) and distant expectation they lived and
died. And this calling up of company from their graves did publish to all the
world, not only that the Lord himself was risen, according to his so (...) and
repeated predictions, but that he meant (...) S. (...). (...). and Ch is, hom.
88. in 27. (...).
to raise up all his servants, and that all who believe in him should be
partakers of the Resurrection.

4. When the soldiers observed that Jesus was dead, out of spite and impotent
ineffective malice, one of them pierced his holy side with a spear; and the
rock being smitten it gushed out with water and (...), streaming forth two
Sacraments to refresh the Church, and opening a gate that all his brethren
might enter in, and dwell in the heart of God. And so great a love had our
Lord, that he suffered his heart to be opened, to show, as Eve was formed from
the side of Adam, so was the Church to be from the side of her Lord, receiving
from thence life and spiritual nutriment; which he ministered in so great
abundance, and suffered himself to be pierced, that all his blood did stream
over us, until he made the fountain dry, and reserved nothing of that by which
he knew his Church was to live, and move, and have her being. Thus the stream
of Blood issued out to become a fountain for the Sacrament of the Chalice, and
Water gushed out to fill the Fonts of Baptism and Repentance. The Blood, being
the testimony of the Divine Love, calls upon us to die for his love, when he
requires it; and the noise of the Water calls upon us to (...) our spirits, and
present our Conscience to Christ holy and pure, without spot or wrinkle. The
Blood running upon us, makes us to be of the cognation and family of God; and
the Water quenches the flames of Hell, and the fires of Concupiscence.

5. The friends and Disciples of the Holy Jesus, having devoutly composed his
Body to Burial, anointed it, washed it, and condited it with spices and
perfumes, laid it in a Sepulcher hewn from a rock in a Garden; which (says
(...)) was therefore done, to represent, that we were by this death returned to
Paradise, and the Gardens of pleasures and Divine favors, from whence by the
prevarication of Adam man was expelled. Here he finished the work of his
Passion, as he had begun it in a Garden; and the place of sepulcher, being a
Rock, serves the ends of pious succeeding Ages: for the place remains in all
Changes of government, of Wars, of Earthquakes and ruder accidents, to this
day, as a (...) of the Sepulcher of our dearest Lord, as a sensible and proper
confirmation of the persuasions of some persons, and as an entertainment of
their pious fancy and religious affections.

6. But now it was that in the dark and undiscerned mansions there was a scene
of the greatest joy and the (...) horror represented, which yet was known
since the first falling of the morning stars. Those holy souls whom the Prophet
Zechary calls prisoners Zech. 9. 11, 12.
of hope, (...) in the lake where there is no water, that is, no constant
stream of joy to refresh their present condition, (yet supported with certain
showers and gracious visitations from God, and illuminations of their hope) now
that they saw their Redeemer come to change their condition, and to improve it
into the neighbourhoods of glory and clearer revelations, must needs have the
joy of intelligent and beatified understandings, of redeemed captives, of men
forgiven after the sentence of death, of men satisfied after a tedious
expectation, enjoying and seeing their Lord, whom for so many Ages they had
expected. But the accursed spirits, seeing the darkness of their prison shine
with a new light, and their Empire invaded, and their retirements of horror
discovered, wondered how a man durst venture thither, or if he were a GOD, how
he should come to die. But the Holy Jesus was like that body of light,
receiving into himself the reflection of all the lesser rays of joy which the
Patriarchs felt, and being united to his (...) of felicity apprehended it yet
more glorious. He now felt the effects of his bitter Passion to return upon him
in Comforts; every hour of which was abundant recompense for three hours
Passion upon the Cross, and became to us a great precedent, to invite us to a
toleration of the acts of Repentance, Mortification, and Martyrdom, and that in
times of suffering we live upon the stock and expense of Faith, as remembering
that (...) few moments of infelicity are infinitely paid with every minute of
glory, and yet that the glory which is certainly consequent is so lasting and
perpetual, that it were enough in a lower joy to make amends by its
continuation of eternity. And let us but call to mind what thoughts we shall
have when we die, or are (...) Musonius apud A. Gellium l. 16. (...). 1.
dead, how we shall then without prejudice consider, that if we had done our
duty, the trouble and the affliction would now be past, and nothing remain but
pleasures and felicities eternal, and how infinitely happy we shall then be if
we have done our duty, and how miserable if not; all the pleasures of sin
disappearing, and nothing surviving but a certain and everlasting torment. Let
us carry always the same thoughts with us which must certainly then intervene,
and we shall meet the Holy Jesus, and partake of his joys, which over-flowed
his holy Soul when he first entered into the possession of those excellent
fruits and effects of his Passion.

7. When the third day was come, the Soul of Jesus returned from Paradise, and
the visitation of separate spirits, and re-entred into his holy Body, which he
by his Divine power did redintegrate, filling his veins with blood, healing all
the wounds, excepting those five of his hands, feet and side, which he reserved
as Trophies of his victory, and argument of his Passion. And as he had
comforted the Souls of the Fathers with the presence of his Spirit; so now he
saw it to be time to bring comfort to his Holy Mother, to re-establish the
tottering Faith of his Disciples, to verify his Promise, to make demonstration
of his Divinity, to lay some superstructures of his Church upon the foundation
of his former Sermons, to instruct them in the mysteries of his Kingdom, to
prepare them for the reception of the Holy Ghost: and as he had in his state of
Separation triumphed over Hell, so in his Resurrection he set his foot upon
Death, and brought it under his dominion; so that although it was not yet
destroyed, yet it is made his subject: it has as yet the condition of the
Gibeonites, who were not banished out of the land, but they were made drawers
of water and bewers of wood; so is Death made instrumental to Christ's Kingdom,
but it abides still, and shall till the day of Judgment, but shall serve the
ends of our Lord, and promote the interests of Eternity, and do benefit to the
Church.

8. And it is considerable, that our Blessed Lord having told them that after
three days he would rise again, yet he shortened the time as much as was
possible, that he might verify his own prediction, and yet make his absence
the less troublesome; he rises early in the morning the first day of the week:
for so our dearest Lord abbreviates the days of our sorrow, and lengthens the
years of our consolation; for he knows that a day of sorrow seems a year, and a
year of joy passes like a day; and therefore God lessens the one, and (...) the
other, to make this perceived, and that supportable. Now the Temple which the
Jews destroyed God raised up in six and thirty hours: but this second Temple
was more glorious than the first; for now it was clothed with robes of glory,
with clarity, agility, and immortality: and though, like Moses descending from
the mount, he wore a veil, that the greatness of his splendour might not render
him unapt for conversation with his servants; yet the holy Scripture affirms
that he was now no more to see corruption; meaning, that now he was separate
from the passibility and affections of humane bodies, and could suffer S.
Thomas to thrust his hand into the wound of his side, and his singer into the
holes of his hands, without any grief or smart.

9. But although the graciousness and care of the Lord had prevented all
diligence, and satisfied all desires, returning to life before the most forward
faith could expect him; yet there were three Mary's went to the grave so early,
that they prevented the rising of the Sun, and though with great obedience they
stayed till the end of the Sabbath, yet, as soon as that was done, they had
other parts of duty and affection, which called with greatest importunity to be
speedily satisfied. And if Obedience had not bound the feet of Love, they had
gone the day before; but they became to us admirable patterns of Obedience to
the Divine Commandments. For though Love were stronger than death, yet
Obedience was stronger than Love, and made a rare dispute in the spirits of
those holy Women, in which the flesh and the spirit were not the litigants, but
the spirit and the spirit; and they resisted each other as the Angel-guardian
of the Jews resisted the tutelar Angel of Persia, each striving who should with
most love and zeal perform their charge, and God determined. And so he did here
too. For the Law of the Sabbath was then a Divine Commandment; and although
piety to the dead, and to such a dead, was ready to force their choice to do
violence to their will, bearing them up on wings of desire to the grave of the
LORD, yet at last they reconciled Love with Obedience. For they had been taught
that Love is best expressed in keeping of the Divine Commandments. But now they
were at liberty; and sure enough they made use of its first minute: and going
so early to seek Christ, they were sure they should find him.

10. The Angels descended Guardians of the Sepulcher; for God sent his guards
too, and they affrighted the Watch appointed by Pilate and the Priests: but
when the women came, they spoke like comforters, full of sweetness and
consolation, laying aside their affrighting glories, as knowing it is the will
of their Lord, that they should minister good to them that love him. But a
conversation with Angels could not satisfy them who came to look for the Lord
of the Angels, and found him not: and when the Lord was pleased to appear to
Mary Magdalen, she was so swallowed up with love and sorrow, that she entered
into her joy, and perceived it not; she saw the Lord, and knew him not. For so,
from the closets of darkness they that immediately stare upon the Sun perceive
not the beauties of the light, and feel nothing but amazement. But the voice of
the Lord opened her eyes, and she knew him, and worshipped him, but was denied
to touch him, and commanded to tell the Apostles: for therefore God ministers
to us comforts and revelations, not that we may dwell in the sensible fruition
of them our selves alone, but that we communicate the grace to others. But when
the other women were returned and saw the Lord, then they were all together
admitted to the embracement, and to kiss the feet of Jesus. For God has his
opportunities and periods, which at another time he denies; and we must then
rejoice in it, when he vouchsafes it, and submit to his Divine will, when he
denies it.

11. These good women had the first fruits of the apparition: for their forward
love and the passion of their Religion made greater haste to entertain a Grace,
and was a greater endearment of their persons to our Lord, than a more sober,
reserved, and less active spirit. This is more safe, but that is religious;
this goes to God by the way of understanding, that by the will; this is
supported by discourse, that by passions; this is the sobriety of the Apostles,
the other was the zeal of the holy women: and because a strong fancy and an
earnest passion sixed upon holy objects are the most active and forward
instruments of Devotion, as Devotion is of Love, therefore we find God has
made great expressions of his acceptance of such dispositions. And women, and
less knowing persons, and tender dispositions, and pliant natures, will make up
a greater number in Heaven, than the severe and wary and enquiring people, who
sometimes love because they believe, and believe because they can demonstrate,
but never believe because they love. When a great Understanding and a great
Affection meet together, it makes a Saint great like an Apostle; but they do
not well who make abatement of their religious passions by the severity of
their Understanding. It is no matter by which we are brought to Christ, so we
love him and obey him; but if the production admit of (...), that instrument is
the most excellent which produces the greatest love: and (...) discourse and a
sober spirit be in it self the best, yet we do not always suffer that to be a
parent of as great Religion as the good women make their fancy, their softness,
and their passion.

12. Our Blessed Lord appeared next to Simon: and though he and John ran
forthtogether, and S. John outran Simon, although Simon Peter had denied and
forsworn his Lord, and S. John never did, and followed him to his Passion and
his death; yet Peter had the savor of seeing Jesus first. Which some Spiritual
persons understand as a testimony, that penitent (...) have accidental
eminences and privileges sometimes (...) to them beyond the temporal graces of
the just and innocent, as being such who not only (...) against the remanent
and inherent evils even of repented sins, and their aptnesses to relapse; but
also because those who are true Penitents, who understand the infiniteness of
the Divine mercy, and that for a sinner to pass from (...).
death to (...), from the state of sin into pardon and the state of Grace, is a
greater gift, and a more excellent and improbable mutation, than for a just man
to be taken into glory, out of gratitude to God, and indearment (...) so great
a change, added to a fear of returning to such danger and misery, will
re-enforce all their industry, and double their study, and (...) more
diligently, and watch more carefully, and redeem the (...), and make amends for
their omissions, and oppose a good to the former evils, beside the duties of
the (...) employment; and then, commonly, the life of a holy Penitent is more
holy, active, zealous, and impatient of Vice, and more rapacious of Virtue and
holy actions, and arises to greater (...) of Sanctity, than the even and
moderate affections of just persons, who (as our Blessed Savior's expression
is) (...) no Repentance, that is, no change of state, nothing but a
perseverance, and an improvement of degrees. There is more joy in heaven before
the Angels of God over (...) that (...), than (...) ninety nine just persons
that need it not: for, where sin has Luke 15. 7.
abounded, there does grace super abound; and that makes joy in Heaven.

13. The Holy Jesus having received the affections of his most passionate
Disciples, the women and S. (...), puts himself upon the way into the company
of two good men going to Emmaus with troubled spirits and a reeling faith,
shaking all its upper building, but leaving some of its foundation firm. To
them the Lord discourses of the necessity of the Death and Resurrection of the
(...), and taught them not to take estimate of the counsels of God by the
designs and proportions of man: for God by ways contrary to humane judgment
brings to pass the purposes of his eternal Providence. The glories of Christ
were not made pompous by humane circumstances; his Kingdom was spiritual: he
was to enter into Felicities through the gates of Death; he refused to do
Miracles before (...), and yet did them before the people; he confuted his
accusers by silence, and did not descend from the Cross, when they offered to
believe in him, if he would, but (...) them to be persuaded by greater
arguments of his power, the miraculous circumstances of his Death, and the
glories of his Resurrection; and by walking in the secret paths of Divine
election has commanded us to adore his footsteps, to admire and revere his
Wisdom, to be satisfied with all the events of Providence, and to rejoice in
him, if by Afflictions he makes us holy, if by Persecutions he supports and
enlarges his Church, if by Death he brings us to life; so we arrive at the
communion of his Felicities, we must let him choose the way; it being sufficient
that he is our guide, and our support, and our exceeding great reward. For
therefore Christ preached to the two Disciples going to (...) the way of the
Cross, and the necessity of that passage, that the wisdom of God might be
glorified, and the conjectures of man ashamed. But whilst his discourse
lasted, they knew him not; but in the breaking of bread he discovered himself.
For he turned their meal into a Sacrament, and their darkness to light; and
having to his Sermon added the Sacrament, opened all their discerning
faculties, the eyes of their body, and their understanding too; to represent to
us, that when we are blessed with the opportunities of both those instruments,
we want no exterior assistence to guide us in the way to the knowing and
enjoying of our Lord.

14. But the Apparitions which Jesus made were all upon the design of laying
the foundation of all Christian Graces; for the begetting and establishing
Faith, and an active Confidence in their persons, and building them up on the
great fundamentals of the Religion. And therefore he appointed a general
meeting upon a mountain in Galilee, that the number of witnesses might not only
disseminate the same, but establish the Article of the Resurrection; for upon
that are built all the hopes of a Christian; and if the dead rise not, then are
we of all men most miserable, in quitting the present possessions, and
entertaining injuries and affronts without hopes of reparation. But we lay two
gages in several repositories; the Body in the bosom of the earth, the Soul in
the (...) of God: and as we here live by Faith, and lay them down with hope; so
the (...) is a restitution of them both, and a state of reunion. And therefore
although the glory of our spirits without the body were joy great enough to
make compensation for mere than the troubles of all the world; yet because one
shall not be glorified without the other, they being of themselves incomplete
substances, and God having revealed nothing clearly concerning actual and
complete felicities till the day of Judgment, when it is promised our bodies
shall rise; therefore it is that the Resurrection is the great Article upon
which we rely, and which Christ took so much care to prove and ascertain to so
many persons, because if that should be disbelieved with which all our
felicities are to be received, we have nothing to establish our Faith, or
entertain our Hope, or satisfy our desires, or make retribution for that state
of secular inconveniences in which, by the necessities of our nature and the
humility and patience of our Religion, we are engaged.

15. But I consider that holy Scripture only instructs us concerning the life
of this world and the life of the Resurrection, the life of Grace and the life
of Glory, both in the body, that is, a life of the whole man; and whatsoever is
spoken of the Soul, considers it as an essential part of man, relating to his
whole constitution, not as it is of it self an intellectual and separate
substance; for all its actions which are separate and removed from the body are
relative and incomplete. Now because the Soul is an incomplete substance, and
created in relation to the Body, and is but a part of the whole man, if the
Body were as eternal and incorruptible as the Soul, yet the separation of the
one from the other would be as now it is, that which we call natural death; and
supposing that God should preserve the Body for ever, or restore it at the day
of Judgment to its full substance and perfect organs, yet the man would be dead
for ever, if the Soul for ever should continue separate from the Body. So that
the other life, that is, the state of Resurrection, is a re-uniting Soul and
Body. And although in a Philosophical sense the Resurrection, is of the Body,
that is, a restitution of our flesh and blood and bones, and is called
Resurrection as the entrance into the state of Resurrection may have the
denomination of the whole; yet in the sense of Scripture the Resurrection is
the restitution of our life, the renovation of the whole man, the state of
Reunion; and until that be, the man is not, but he is dead, and only his
essential parts are deposited and laid up in trust: and therefore whatsoever
the Soul does or perceives in its incomplete condition, is but to it as
embalming and honorable funerals to the Body, and a safe monument to preserve
it in order to a living again; and the felicities of the intervall are wholly
in order to the next life. And therefore if there were to be no Resurrection,
as these intermedial joys should not be at all; so, as they are, they are but
relative and incomplete: and therefore all our hopes, all our felicities depend
upon the Resurrection; without it we should never be persons, men or women; and
then the state of Separation could be nothing but a phantasm, trees ever in
blossom, never bearing fruit, corn for ever in the blade, eggs always in the
shell, a hope eternal, never to pass into fruition, that is, for ever to be
deluded, for ever to be miserable. And therefore it was an elegant expression
Coloss. 3. 3.
of S. Paul, Our life is hid with Christ in God; that is, our life is passed
into custody, the dust of our body is numbered, and the Spirit is refreshed,
visited and preserved in celestial mansions: but it is not properly called a
Life; for all this while the man is dead, and shall then live when Christ
produces this hidden life at the great day of restitution. But our faith of all
this Article is well wrapped up in the words of S. John: Beloved, John 3. 2.
now we are the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but
we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is. The middle state is not it which Scripture has propounded to our Faith,
or to our Hope; the reward is then when Christ shall appear: but in the mean
time the Soul can converse with God and with Angels, just as the holy Prophets
did in their Dreams, in which (...). (...) apud Sextum Empirie.
they received great degrees of favor and revelation. But this is not to be
reckoned any more than an entrance or a waiting for the state of our Felicity.
And since the glories of Heaven is the great fruit of Election, we may consider
that the Body is not predestinate, nor the Soul, alone, but the whole Man; and
until the parts embrace again in an essential complexion, it cannot be expected
either of them should receive the portion of the predestinate. But the article
and the event of future things is rarely set in order by Saint Paul; But ye are
come into the mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, Heb. 12, 22, 23.
the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, To the
general assembly and Church of the first born, which are written in heaven, and
to God the Judge of all, (and then follows, after this general assembly, after
the Judge of all appears, [ to the spirits of just men made perfect,] that is,
reunited to their bodies, and entering into glory. The beginning of the
contrary Opinion brought some new practices and appendent persuasions into the
Church, or at least promoted them much. For those Doctors who, receding from
the Primitive belief of this Article, taught that the glories of Heaven are
fully communicated to the Souls before the day of Judgment, did also upon that
stock teach the Invocation of Saints, whom they believed to be received into
glory, and insensibly also brought in the opinion of Purgatory, that the less
perfect Souls might be glorified in the time that they assigned them. But the
safer opinion and more agreeable to Piety is that which I have now described
from Scripture and the purest Ages of the Church.

16. When Jesus appeared to the Apostles, he gave them his Peace for a
Benediction, and when he departed, he left them Peace for a Legacy, and gave
them, according to two former promises, the power of making Peace, and
reconciling Souls to God by a ministerial act; so conveying his Father's mercy,
which himself procured by his Passion, and actuates by his Intercession and the
giving of his Grace, that he might comply with our infirmities, and minister to
our needs by instruments even and proportionate to our selves; making our
brethren the conduits of his Grace, that the excellent effect of the Spirit
might not descend upon us, as the Law upon Mount Sinai, in expresses of
greatness and terror, but in earthen vessels, and images of infirmity: so God
manifesting his power in the smalness of the instrument, and descending to our
needs, not only in giving the grace of Pardon, but also in the manner of its
ministration. And I meditate upon the greatness of this Mercy, by comparing
this Grace of God, and the blessing of the Judgment and Sentence we receive at
the hand of the Church, with the Judgment which God makes at the hour of death
upon them who have despised this mercy, and neglected all the other parts of
their duty. The one is a Judgment of mercy, the other of vengeance: In the one
the Devil is the Accuser, and Heaven and earth bear witness; in the other the
penitent sinner accuses himself: In that the sinner gets a pardon, in the other
he finds no remedy: In that all his good deeds are remembered and returned, and
his sins are blotted out; in the other all his evil deeds are represented with
horror and a sting, and remain for ever: In the first the sinner changes his
state for a state of Grace, and only smarts in some temporal austerities and
acts of exterior mortification; in the second his temporal estate is changed
to an eternity of pain: In the first the sinner suffers the shame of one man or
one society, which is sweetened by consolation, and homilies of mercy and
health; in the latter all his sins are laid open before all the world, and
himself confounded in eternal amazement and confusions: In the judgment of the
Church the sinner is honored by all for returning to the bosom of his Mother,
and the embraces of his heavenly Father; in the judgment of vengeance he is
laughed at by God, and mocked by accursed spirits, and perishes without pity:
In this he is prayed for by none, helped by none, comforted by none, and he
makes himself a companion of Devils to everlasting ages; but in the judgment of
Repentance and Tribunal of the Church the penitent sinner is prayed for by a
whole army of militant Saints, and causes joy to all the Church triumphant. And
to establish this Tribunal in the Church, and to transmit pardon to penitent
sinners, and a salutary judgment upon the person and the crime, and to appoint
Physicians and Guardians of the Soul, was one of the designs and mercies of the
Resurrection of Jesus. And let not any Christian man either by false opinion,
or an unbelieving spirit, or an incurious apprehension, undervalue or neglect
this ministry, which Christ has so sacredly and solemnly established. Happy
is he that dashes his sins against the rock upon which the Church is built,
that the Church gathering up the planks and fragments of the shipwreck, and the
shivers of the broken heart, may reunite them, pouring Oil into the wounds
made by the blows of sin, and restoring with meekness, gentleness, care,
counsel, and authority, persons overtaken in a fault. For that act of Ministry
is not ineffectual which God has promised shall be ratified in Heaven; and
that Authority is not contemptible which the Holy Jesus conveyed by breathing
upon his Church the Holy Ghost. But Christ intended that those whom he had made
Guides of our Souls, and Judges of our Consciences in order to counsel and
ministerial pardon, should also be used by us in all cases of our Souls, and
that we go to Heaven the way he has appointed, that is, by offices and
ministeries Ecclesiastical.

17. When our Blessed Lord had so confirmed the Faith of the Church and
appointed an Ecclesiastical Ministry, he had but one work more to do upon
earth, and that was the Institution of the holy Sacrament of Baptism, which he
ordained as a solemn Initiation and mysterious Profession of the Faith upon
which the Church is built; making it a solemn Publication of our Profession,
the rite of Stipulation or entering Covenant with our Lord, the solemnity of the
Paction Evangelical, in which we undertake to be Disciples to the Holy Jesus,
that is, to believe his Doctrine, to fear his Threatenings, to rely upon his
Promises, and to obey his Commandments all the days of our life: and Mark 16.
16.
he for his part actually performs much, and promises more; he takes off all
the guilt Act. 2. 38. and 22. 16.
of our preceding days, purging our Souls, and making them clean as in the day
of innocence; Romans 6. 3, 4.
promising withal, that if we perform our undertaking, and remain in the
(...). 4. 5, etc.
state in which he now puts us, he will continually assist us with his Matt.
28. 20.
Spirit, prevent 1 Cor. 12. 13.
(...). 2. 12.
and attend us with his Grace, he will deliver us from the power of the Devil,
he will Galat. 3. 17.
keep our Souls in merciful, joyful and safe custody till the great Day of the
Lord, he 1 Per. 3. 21.
will then raise our Bodies from the Grave, he will make them to be spiritual
and immortal, he will reunite them to our Souls, and beatifie both Bodies and
Souls in his own Kingdom, admitting them into eternal and unspeakable glories.
All which that he might verify and prepare respectively, in the presence of
his Disciples he ascended into the bosom of God, and the eternal
comprehensions of celestial Glory.

The PRAYER.
O Holy and Eternal Jesus, who have overcome Death, and triumphed over all the
powers of Hell, Darkness, Sin, and the Grave, manifesting the truth of thy
Promises, the power of thy Divinity, the majesty of thy Person, the rewards of
thy Glory, and the mercies and excellent designs of thy Evangelical Kingdom, by
thy glorious and powerful Resurrection; preserve my Soul from eternal death,
and make me to rise from the death of Sin, and to live the life of Grace,
loving thy Perfections, adoring thy Mercy, pursuing the interest of thy
Kingdom, being united to the Church under thee our Head, conforming to thy holy
Laws, established in Faith, entertained and confirmed with a modest, humble,
and certain Hope, and sanctified by Charity; that I engraving thee in my heart,
and submitting to thee in my spirit, and imitating thee in thy glorious
example, may be partaker of thy Resurrection, which is my hope and my desire,
the support of my Faith, the object of my Joy, and the strength of my
Confidence. In thee, Holy Jesus, do I trust: I confess thy Faith, I believe all
that thou have taught; I desire to perform all thy injunctions and my own
undertaking: my Soul is in thy hand, do thou support and guide it, and pity my
infirmities; and when thou shall reveal thy great Day, show to me the mercies
and effects of thy Advocation and Intercession and Redemption. Thou shall
answer for me, O Lord my God; for in thee have I trusted, let me never be
confounded. Thou art just, thou (...) merciful, thou art gracious and
compassionate, thou have done miracles and prodigies of favor to me and all
the world. Let not those great actions and sufferings be ineffective, but make
me capable and receptive of thy Mercies, and then I am certain to receive them.
I am thine, O save me; thou art mine, O Holy Jesus, O dwell with me for ever,
and let me dwell with thee, adoring and praising the eternal glories of God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Amen.
THE END. (...).
THE TABLE OF The Life of CHRIST.
Where are more Numbers than one, the first Number denotes the Page, the
latter, the Number of the Section.

A.
ABsolution of dying Persons of what benefit 407. 23. Whether to be given to
all that desire it 408. 24. Acceptable Year of the Lord, what it means 186. 22.
Actions of Jesus confuted his Accusers 390. 2. Acts of Virtue to be done by
sick and dying Persons 405, 406. 19, 20. Accusation of Criminals not to be
aggravated odiously 393. 8. It ought to be only for purposes of Charity ibid.
Accusation of innocent persons ought to be born patiently by the innocent 393.
9. Accusation of Jesus 352. 24. Adam buried in Golgotha 354. 31. Adoption of
Sons 316. 7. Advent of our Lord must be entertained with joy 156. 3. Adultery
made more criminal under the Gospel than under the Law 249. 37, etc. Adultery
of the eyes 250. 36. Adrian the Emperor built a Temple to Venus and Adonis in
the place of Christ's Birth 14. 6. Agony of Jesus in the Garden 350. 20.
Agesilaus was more commended for his modesty and obedience than for his
prosperous good Conduct 50. 25. Albes or white garments wore by the Church, and
why 393. 9, 10. Alms intended for a defensative against Covetousness 258. 1.
Ordinarily to be according to our ability ibid. Sometimes beyond, in what cases
ibid. Necessities of all indigent people are the object of our Alms 259. 3.
Manner of Alms an office of Christian prudence ibid. The two Altars in
Solomon's Temple, what they did represent 83. 4. Ambitious seeking
Ecclesiastical Dignities very criminal 96. 2. Ambition is an affliction to him
that has it 69, 70. 6. Amorous young man cured of his Vanity by a Stratagem
273. 2. Angels ministered at the Birth of Jesus 14. 4. Angels invited Shepherds
to see the newborn Prince 26. 4. Angels multiplied into a Quire to sing Gloria
Patri at the Birth of Christ 26. 5. Angels taught the Church the Christian Hymn
ibid. That the Star appearing to the Wise men was an Angel, the Opinion of the
Greeks 27. 8. They rejoiced greatly when Mankind was redeemed 29. 1. They that
fell not admitted to Repentance, and why 198. 2. Are appointed to observe them
that fast piously 274. 3. One of them comforted Jesus 385. 5. In what manner
ibid. One of them rolled the Stone from the Grave of Jesus 419. 1. They were
Guardians of the Sepulcher 427. 10. Anger forbidden in the 6. Commandment 245.
28. In what cases allowable ibid. Rules and measures of a lawful anger 246. 31.
How long to abide 245. 30. That of the Heart forbidden ib. 27. Remedies against
it 248. 35. Annas chief of the Sanhedrim 351. 23. He sent Jesus to Caiaphas
ibid. Anniversaries of Christ's Nativity, Resurrection and Ascension to be
religiously observed 243. 24, 26. Of Saints ibid. Anna the Prophetess received
Christ as a reward to her long Fasting and Prayer 36. 5. and 53. 6. Mark
Antony, to stir the Peoples affections, presented the Body of Caesar 56. 9.
Antichrist's pretense not furthered but hindered by his Miracles 280. 11.
Apostasy from Christianity unpardonable; in what sense true 201. 10, 11.
Apostles chosen by Christ 290. 5. Sent to preach by two and two ibid. Rejoice
at their power over Devils 203. 17. Who saw the Transfiguration, saw also the
Agony 383. 2. Apocryphal Miracles feigned of Christ's younger years 153. 8.
Arsenius sad and troubled upon his Deathbed 402. 11. Arms not to be taken up
against our Prince for Religion 492. 11. Ascension of Jesus into Heaven 421. 5.
Attention to our Prayers. Vid. Prayers. S. Augustine entered into the Tomb of
Caesar 114. 36. Authority of Ecclesiastical Censures 430. 16. Of the Contempt
of Authority in smaller Impositions 46. 20, 21. Augustus Caesar refused to be
called Lord about the time of Christ's Nativity 25. 2.
B.
BAlaam's Prophecy of Christ's Star 27. 8. His Prayer explicated 303. 14. Babes
of Bethlehem had the Reward of Martyrs 72. 11. Baptism sanctifies the worthy
Suscipient 97. 4. Baptism is the only state, wherein our sins in this life are
declared to be fully and absolutely pardoned 314. 3. In it all our sins are
forgiven 199. 7. To it Faith and Repentance are necessary Preparatories ibid.
It is necessary before the Reception of the Eucharist 349. 16. and 374. 12.
Ordained by Christ 431. 17. what it operates and signifies ibid. Vide Disc. of
Baptism 106. Baptism not only pardons for the present, but puts into a lasting
state of easier pardon for the future 203. 17. S. Barbara to Execution
miraculously veiled 394. 10. Basil recalled from Exile for his reverent and
grave saying his Offices 178. 13. Prayed for Headache 85. 9. The Baptist's
Character of himself 151. 1. His Death, and the occasion 169. 5. His Death
revenged 169. 6. Beginners in Religion to be ruled by an experienced Guide 109,
110. 22. They have a conditional certainty of Salvation 316. 7. Beginnings of
Evil to be resisted 111. 26. Birth of Christ illustrated with Miracles 25. 1.
Its place turned to a Church 14. 6. Peace universal at his Birth 25. 3. It was
signified to Jews and Gentiles in the persons of Shepherds and Wisemen 31. 1.
and 34. 12. Whether Saints enjoy the Beatifick Vision before the day of
Judgment 423. 1. and 429. 15. Binding Jesus with Cords with circumstances of
cruelty 387. 10. Blasphemy falsely charged upon Jesus 325. 23. Bloody sweat of
Christ what it did then effect, and what it did then prefigure 385. 6.
Blessings of the Gospel 429. 16. Assurance of Blessing made to them who are or
do, where or what God commands 68. 3. Breasts that are dry, a curse 22.
Bramble of Judaea an emblem of Anger 245. 30. Buffeting of Jesus foretold by a
Sibyl. 389, 390. 1.
C.
CAmbyses sent the Ethiopian King a box of Nard 291. 9. Care for our Families
how far to regard the future 258. 2. Ceadwalla's Vow 270. 20. Gentarion of the
Iron Legion comes to Christ 291. 7. Charity makes us partake of the Joys and
Sufferings of all Christians 29. 2. It is the measure of our own Peace 29, 30.
5. Charity of Christians converted Pachomius 79. 2. It is consistent with
repeating our own right 256. 9. It is part of the definition of Christian Faith
161. 5, 6. Charity of Christians greater than civil Relations 158. 8. Is the
last of graces 171. 5. Being exercised toward Christ's Servants is accepted as
done to Christ 189. 4. It must increase with our Wealth 258. 2. S. Chad prayed
for others in stormy times 340. 7. Chastity wittily represented by Libanius
111. 27. Easier to die for it than to live with it 230. 15. Chastity of the
Mind, of the Eyes, of all the Members, enjoined 249. 38. It abstains from all
undecencies ibid. Caiaphas prophesied and determined the Death of Jesus 345. 2.
He rent his Clothes against the Law 352. 25. Casual and contingent Causes cut
off the life of a Sinner 308. 24. Certainty of Salvation 313. per tot. Cheap
Offering not accepted, when a better may be given 177. 12. Christ chose to do
all the Ministeries of Religion 96. 1. His Passion in every minute was
sufficient for Reconcilement of all the World 1. Exh. 3. The surplusage for
example ibid. Christ paid mere for our Obedience than our Pardon 1. Exh. 3. He
for himself merited the exaltation of his Humanity, his Name, his Kingdom, etc.
413. 5. How and to what purposes he overcame Death 426. 7. He is our Pattern 2.
Exh. 7. How far imitable by us 4. Exh. 11. His Sufferings of value infinite 1.
Exh. 3. He honored Virginity and Marriage in the choice of his Mother ibid. He
manifested his power in the instances of Mercy 5. Exh. 11. and 278. 2. He is to
be followed in the like proportion as he followed his Father V. 11. 5. Exh. 11.
His Life easy, compliant and imitable 9. 4. and IV. 8, 9. It helps us to its
own imitation 3, 4. Exh. 8, 9. ibid. His Life is imitable by Practice and
Religion VI. Exh. 15, 16. He is God and Man 16. 6. He was first revealed to
poor men 30. 6. By his Humility, his Poverty and uneasiness fought against the
Lust of the Flesh, of the Eyes, and the pride of Life 30. 8. He put himself to
pain to be reckoned among Sinners 37. 3. He was redeemed at first, and sold at
last, for an ignoble price 52. 3. He is best relished by them who least relish
worldly things 53. 5. He is a Physician and a Lawgiver 249. 36. His servants
are most honorable 253. 5. He did no Miracles before 30 years of age 154. 6,
8. He entertains five Disciples ibid. He is to be sought for in his Ordinances
156. 4. He ejected the Merchants out of the Temple 169. 2. He mingled no Injury
with his Zeal 170. 4. He Baptized Peter only 181. 1. He ends the Samaritan's
Qu. about the place of Worship 182. 4. He made a Covenant of Faith and
Repentance 200. 9. This Covenant is consigned in Baptism ibid. His Miracles
were greater than any man did before him 277. 2. His Passion cured our Miseries
411. 2. He was viator, not comprehensor, in his Passion 413. 5. His Prayer for
his Enemies was effectual 416. 10. He first ascended into Heaven 419. 1. His
side streamed forth two Sacraments 426. 4. He raised the Widow's son to life
291. 7. He showed the power of a God with the infirmities of a Man 387. 9.
Crowned with thorns 395. 11. His Commission to Peter 419. 4. and 420. 4. He is
our Advocate for actions relative to him 360. 8, 9. A King 28. 13. A Star was
his evidence ibid. Christians ought to be exemplary in their Lives 231. 1.
Their Righteousness to exceed the Pharisaical 232, 233. Christian prudence 157.
6. Christian simplicity 157. 6. They for the most part choose not their Religion
160. 1. They are to be like Children 325. 15. Christian Liberty not to be
betrayed 331. 8. Christianity an easy Yoke 295. 1. More pleasant than Sin
ibid. More natural ibid. and vide Praes. Not so troublesome as sin 297. It is
the way of peace 299. 7. Of Content ibid. and 300. Of Riches and of long life
302. 13, 14. and seq. Of Health ibid. Of Wisdom 308. 27. Children of God
exposed to Temptations 98. 7, 8. Church deserves great Revenues, but needs them
not 70. 8, 9. Her endowments are of advantage to the People ibid. Dangerous for
the Church to be Rich in Temporal possessions ibid. Church ought to be more apt
to remit of Temporal rights than others ibid. Church-Tribunal to be of great
mercy 430. 16. Compared with God's Tribunal ibid. It is impregnable against
Hell-gates 321. 9. Built upon the Confession of Peter ibid. Churches built upon
Mount Tabor 322. 11. They are Holy Places, to what sense, and to what purposes
172. How to be used 176. 11. Church in Paradise called the presence of God 175.
7. The residence of Angels ibid. 8. Their best ornament is the holiness of
worshippers 178. 14. They are desecrated by Vice ibid. Circumcision an earnest
of the Passion 36. 1. Not declared to be remissive of original sin ibid.
Circumcision of Christ served many purposes 37. 2. It was an act of Obedience
ibid. Complying with customs of civility sometimes a Temptation 108. 16.
Company-keeping to be avoided as it can ibid. Communion of Saints profitable
and pleasant 75. Comforts more necessary to (...) Converts 33. 9. Clergie's
duty under the Parable of a Steward 326. 26. Covetousness its fruits 361. 10.
390. Confession to a Minister of Religion 218. 51. Contrition alone not
sufficient for Pardon ibid. Consecration of the Eucharist mysterious 369. 2.
Cure of Souls a dangerous and grave Employment 96. 2.
D.
DEscription of Jesus by way of Meditation and Mystery 16. 5, 6. Decalogue
expounded 231. Death happening untimely does not always consign to Damnation
336. Preparation to Death 397. and seq. It comes by all accidents ibid. Deaths
sudden and rare ibid. Deathbed Repentance too late 339. 5. (Vide Repentance)
It is desirable 405. 19. How far it may be prayed against ibid. To be submitted
to in all cases ibid. Death of Man sanctified and conquered by Christ's Death
426. 7. and 405. 19. Dying persons how to be treated and assisted 400. 6.
Devils confessed Christ 290. 4. That the Devil had the managing of the Roman
Empire, was the Opinion of some Wisemen 100. 14. One deaf and dumb ejected
321. 7. He furnishes evil persons with apt instruments 361. 10. How they did
appear to Jesus in the Desert 95. 7. They are impotent in their malice 100. Can
hurt no Soul without its consent ibid. 13. The Tribute of the Didrachm. 322.
13. Diligence in our Calling accepted, though our Calling be mean 32.
Dispensations not to be accepted too freely 37. Disobedience to God in great
and small instances compared 44. 12, 13. Disobedience to GOD and Man compared
46. A deliberate choice of the smallest disobedience in its formality is
destructive, though in the matter it be otherwise pardonable. 44. 12. Defense
of our selves permitted 252. 2. Not against our Prince ibid. Defense of our
innocence in Judgment permitted 252. Dove descending on Christ was mysterious
97. 5. Doubting the issue of our Prayers, in what sense lawful 267. 15. Duels
unlawful 253. 5. and seq. Doubting in an Article, how to be cured 400. 8.
Despair, how to be cured. 401. 10.
E.
EGyptian Idols fell to the Ground at Christ's coming thither 67. 9. In Egypt
Christ dwelt in a Garden of Balsam ibid. Egyptians worshipped an Infant in a
Cradle, and a Virgin in a Bed ibid. Envy reproved by the example of Angels 29.
2. Envy spiritual 360. 9. Eat for necessity, not delight 87. 15. Eli's Family
short-lived 308. 24. Cured by Repentance ibid. Election what it signifies in
Scripture 313. 2. It depends upon Duty 314. uncertain to us ibid.
Ecclesiastical Regiment how differing from Secular 323. 14. Ecclesiastical
power verified in Heaven 323. 16. Ecclesiastical persons bound to communicate
often 379. 18. Ecclesiastical Persons are to imitate Christ in Meekness,
Innocence, Suffering 393. 8, 9. Ecclesiastical Judicatories compared with the
Divine 430. Earnest of the Spirit what it signifies 316. 7. Eclipse of the Sun
at the Passion was miraculous 355. 34. Enemies occasion to us of much good 386.
8. Erring persons how to be treated 188. 2. and 10. 7. Evil counsels come to
naught 85. 2. Though they succeed, it is not Prosperity ibid. Elizabeth carried
her Son the Baptist into the Wilderness 77. 1. She died after 40 days ibid.
Example of Preachers is the best Sermon 78. 5. and 364. 4. Examples of Divine
Judgments 338. 5. Esau's Repentance 391. 7. Excuses from frequent communion not
valid 379. 20. Evenness and moderation of a religious state most necessary for
young beginners, and safest for all men 407, 408. Expenses unnecessary to be
cut off and spent in Alms. 252. 2.
F.
FAlse witness highly criminal 250. 40. Familiarity with God, what it should
signify 33. 26. Faith described 160. 2. Charity is part of its constitution
ibid. However it be produced, whether it be proved or not, it is sufficient
157. 7. and 162. 1. Pref. 28. Faith of ignorant and knowing men compared 160.
1, 2. Faith of Christians how it differs from that of Devils 163. 7.
Excellencies and effects of Faith 163. 9. and seq. The marks of a truly
Christian Faith ibid. Vide Disc. of Faith per tot. Fasting before the Sacrament
272. 1. Degrees, Manner, and Rules of Fasting 274. and 275. It is no duty of it
self, but in order to certain ends 272. 1. Why Jesus fasted Forty Days 128. 9.
Vide Disc. of Fasting per tot. Fear hallowed by Christ's fear 384. 3. It is the
first of Graces 171. 5. Farewell-Sermon made by Jesus 350. 19. Flaminius
condemned to Death for wanton Cruelty 168. 5. Fornication against the Law of
God in all Ages 249. 37. Permitted to Strangers among the Jews ibid. Forgiving
Injuries a Christian duty. 252.
G.
GAdara built by Pompey 184. 15. Full of Sepulchers and Witches ibid. Gabriel
ministers to the exaltation of his inferiors 3. 4. Galilaeans, why slain by
Pilate, and what they were 326. 27. Garden, why chosen for the place of the
Agony 364. and 383. 2. Gentleness a duty of Christians 323. 16. Giacchetus of
Geneva his Death in the midst of his Lust 338. 5. God, his Gifts effects of
Predestination 156. 5. Those Gifts how to be prayed for 261, 264. Consideration
of his Presence a good remedy against Temptations 112. 29. The Vision of God
preserves the Blessed Souls from Sin ibid. 30. GOD's method in bringing us to
him, and treating us after 32. 4. He gives his Servants more than they look for
155. He gives more Grace to them that use the first well ibid. and 32. 6. He
rejoices in his own works of mercy 187. 1. And in ours 227. 13. He requires not
always the greatest degree of Virtue 234. 11. He is never wanting in
necessaries to us 32. He changes his purpose of the death of a Man for several
reasons 308. 24. He works his ends by unlikely means 427. GOD certainly
supports those in their necessities, who are doing his work 68. 3. Gold, and
Frankincense, and Myrrh, what signification they had in the gift of the Magi
34. 11. and 28. 12. Grace, it helps our Faculties, but creates no new ones 31.
2. It works severally at several times 32. Being refused it hardens our Hearts
387. 369. Government supported by Christianity 68. 7. Gospel and the Law, how
they differ 193. 3. and 296. and 232. 3.
H.
HAsty persons and actions always unreasonable, sometimes criminal 15. 1. Herod
mocked by the Magi 65. 1. and 84. 1. His stratagem to surprise all the male
children 66. The cause why he slew Zecharias 66. 5. Caesar's saying concerning
him 66. 3. He felt the Divine vengeance 67. 6. His Malice near his Death
defeated 67. 7. He pretended Religion to his secret design 68. 1. He slew 14000
Infants 66. 4. Fear of the Child Jesus proceeded from his mistake 70. 7. The
Tetrarch overthrown by the King of Arabia 169. 6. His reception of Christ 352.
26. Is careless of inquiring after Christ 393. 9. Herodians, what they were
290. 3. Herodias Daughter beheaded with Ice 169. 6. She and Herod banished
ibid. Heron the Monk abused with an illusion 61. 23. Herminigilda refused to
communicate with an Arian Bishop 188. 2. Heretics served their ends of Heresy
upon Women, upon whom also they served their Lust 189. 5. Heroical actions of
Repentance at our Deathbed more prevalent than any other hope then left 217.
49. Health promised and consigned in the Gospel by Miracles and by an ordinary
Ministry 304. 15, 16. There were two Highpriests, the one President of the
Rites of the Temple, the other of the great Council 351. 23. Honor done to us
to be returned to God 9. 6. It is due to what the Supreme power separates from
common usages 172. 3. How it is to be estimated 253. 5. Honorable and Sacred
all one 173. S. Hilarion a great Faster 273. 2. S. Hierom's advice concerning
Fasting ibid. Holy Ghost descending upon Jesus at his Baptism 94. 3. Holiness
of Religious places 172. It is a great preservative of Life 302. 13. Hope, of
Salvation increases according to degrees of holy walking 315. Necessary in our
Prayers 267. House of John Mark consecrated into a Church 174. 5. Hosanna, what
it signifies 347. 6. Only sung to God ibid. Humane Nature by the Incarnation
exalted above the Angels 3. Humane infirmity to be pitied, not to be upbraided
384. Humility, of Jesus 14. The surest way to Heaven 37. Of the Baptist 68. It
makes good men more honorable 186. Its excellencies 302. 11, 12. and 367. Its
Properties and Acts 364. and seq. Humility of the young Mar. of Castilion 367.
9. Hunger after Righteousness 373. 11. Hunger and Thirst spiritual, how they
differ ibid. Its Acts and Reward ibid. Husbands converted by their Wives 189.
3.
J.
JAirus begs help of Jesus for his Daughter 185. 20. His Daughter restored to
Life 186. 21. Jesus, discoursing wonderfully with the Doctors 75. 1. He wrought
in the Carpenter's Trade before and after Joseph's death 76. 6. Baptized by
John 93. 1. Attended by good Angels in the Wilderness 95. Was angry when the
Devil tempted him to dishonor God 95. 8. and 101. 15. He slept in a Storm 184.
14. Preached the first Year in peace 186. 22. Appeared several times after his
Resurrection 419. He was known in the breaking of Bread ibid. He had but two
days of Triumph all his Life 359. 5. And they both allayed with Sorrow ibid.
and 360. He was used inhospitably at Jerusalem ibid. Infinitely loving 360. He
received all his Disciples with a Kiss 386. 8. Civil to his Enemies, and
beneficial to his Friends ibid. He was stripped naked, and why 394. 10. He came
eating and drinking, and why 291. He invites all to him ibid. The Pharisees
report him mad 291. He refused to be made a King 319. 1. Transfigured 322. 13.
He shamed the Accusers of the Adulteress 324. 20. He teaches his Disciples to
pray the second time 326. 26. Refuses to judge a Title of Land ibid. Blesses
(...) 327. 30. The Price of him 349. 14. All his great Actions in his Life had
a mixture of Divinity and Humanity 387. 9. He was not compelled to bear the
transverse Beam of the Cross 354. 30. He wept for Lazarus 345. And over
Jerusalem 347. 7. Answered the Pharisees concerning Tribute to Caesar 347. 10.
Prayed against the bitter Cup 450. 20. Smitten upon the Face 351. Accused of
Blasphemy before the High Priest ibid. Of Treason before Pilate 352. 26. Nailed
with Four Nails 354. 31. Provided for his Mother after his Death 355. 33.
Recited the two and twentieth Psalm, or part of it, upon the Cross ibid. He
felt the first Recompense of his Sorrows in the state of Separation 426. At the
Resurrection he did redintegrate all his Body but the five Wounds ibid. He
arose with a glorified Body 427. But veiled with a Cloud of common Appearance
ibid. Jewish Women hoped to be the Mother of the Messiah 2. 5. Jews looked to
be justified by external Innocence 243. 26. They were scrupulous in Rites,
careless of Moral Duties 392. 7. Could not put any Man to Death at Easter 352.
26. They eat not till the Solemnities of their Festival is over 272. 1. Jezabel
pretended Religion to her design of Murder and Theft 68. 1. Illusions come
often in likeness of Visions 61. 23. Sins of Infirmity explicated 105. 10. and
seq. Intentions, though good, excuse not evil Actions 107. 13. Incontinence
destroys the Spirit of Government 189. 5. Instruments weak and unlikely used by
GOD to great purposes 197. Incarnation of Jesus instrumental to God's Glory and
our Peace 31. Inevitable Infirmities consistent with a state of Grace 207.
Injuries great and little to be forgiven 252. Intention of Spirit, how
necessary in our Prayers 267. 17. Images, their Lawfulness or unlawfulness
considered 237. 16. Admitted into the Church with difficulty and by degrees
237. 16. Images of Jupiter and Diana Cyndias did ridiculous and weak Miracles
279. 7. Imprisonment sanctified by the binding of Jesus 387. Ingratitude of
Judas 360. 9. John the Baptist, his Life and Death 66. 5. and 77. and 78. and
79. and 93. and 292. 18. His Baptism 93. Whether the form of it were in the
Name of Christ to come ibid. Joys spiritual increase by communication 156. 3.
Joys of Eternity recompense all our Sorrows in every instant of their
fruition 426. Joys sudden and violent are to be allayed by reflection on the
vilest of our Sins 196. 7. John Patriarch of Alexandria appeased the anger of
Patricius 245. 30. Innocence is security against evil Actions 10. Justice of
GOD in punishing Jesus cleared 415. 7, 8. Several degrees of Justification
answerable to several degrees of Faith 162. 7. Judgment of Life and Death is to
be only by the supreme Power, or his Deputy 253. A Jew condemned of Idolatry
for throwing stones (though in detestation) at the Idol of Mercury 354. 32.
Judging our Brother, how far prohibited 260. 5. Judas's name written in Heaven,
and blotted (...) again 313. 1. His manner of death 352. 25. Ungrateful 360. 8.
He valued the Ointment at the same rate he sold his Lord 361. 11. He enjoyed
his Money not Ten Hours 386. 7. Julian desired, but could not be a Magician
361. 10. Judgment of GOD upon Sinners, their causes and manner 336. 1. and seq.
Judgments National 340. 8. Not easily understood by Men 339. 5. Joseph of
Arimath. embalmed the Body of Jesus 356. 38. Whether Judas received the Holy
Sacrament. 375. 13.
K.
KIng and Church have the same Friends and Enemies 336. Kingdom of Christ not
of this World 352. What it is 392. 8. Kingdom of God what 263. 5. Kingdom of
Grace and Glory ibid. A King came to Jesus in behalf of his Son 182. 6. Kings
specially to be prayed for 365. 13. King's Enemies how to be prayed against
ibid. To Kill the assaulting Person in what cases lawful. 253. 3.
L.
LAws evil make a National Sin 341. 10. Law of Nature, Vide Pref. per tot. and
20. 7. Laws of Man to be obeyed, but not always to be thought most reasonable
42. 7. and 48. 21. Laws of God and Man in respect of the greatness of the
subject matter compared 46. and 49. Laws of Men bind not to Death or an
insufferable Calamity, rather than not to break them 48. 21. Laws of Superiors
not to be too freely disputed by Subjects 49. 23. Laws of order to be observed
even when the first reason ceases 52. 1. It is not safe to do all that is
lawful 45. 15, 16. Law and Gospel, how differ 194. 3. and 232. 3. and 295. S.
Paul often by a Fiction of Person speaks of himself not as in the state of
Regeneration under the Gospel, but as under the imperfections of the Law 104.
8. Law of Nature perfected by Christianity Pref. Law of Moses a Law of Works,
how 232. Law of Jesus a Law of the Spirit, and not of Works, in what sense
ibid. Lawsuits to be managed charitably 256. When lawful to be undertaken
ibid. Lazarus restored to Life 345. 2. Leonigildus killed his Daughter for not
communicating with the Arians 188. 2. Leven of Herod, what 321. 8. Lepers cured
324. 18. Sent to the Priest ibid. Unthankful ibid. The Levantine Churches
afflicted, the cause uncertain 338. 4. S. Laurence his Gridiron less hot than
his Love 358. 2. 7. (...). 17. Life of Man cut off for Sin 303. and 305. It
has several periods ibid. and 274. Good life necessary to make our Prayers
acceptable 266. 13. A comparison between a Life in Solitude, and in Society 80.
5. Lord's Supper the greatest of Christian Rites 369. It manifests God's Power
371. 4. His Wisdom and his Charity 371. 5, 6. It is a Sacrament of Union 371.
5, 6. A Sacrament and a Sacrifice, in what sense 372. 7. As it is an act of the
Ecclesiastical Officer, of what efficacy 373. 8. It is expressed in mysterious
words, when the value is recited 373. Not to be administered to vicious persons
374. 12. Whether persons vicious under suspicion only are to be deprived of it
376. 13. How to be received 377. 15. What deportment to be used after it 378.
17. To be received by dying Persons 407. 23. Of what benefit it is to them
ibid. Love and Obedience Duties of the first Commandment 234. 8. Love and
Obedience reconciled 427. 9. Love of God, its extension 234. 9. Its intension
ibid. n. 11. Love the fulfilling of the Law, explicated 233. 5. It consists in
latitude 236. 13. It must exclude all affection to sin ibid. 14. Signs of true
love to God 236. 14. Love to God with all our hearts possible, and in what
sense ibid. Love of God and love of money compared 361. 11. Lord's Day by what
authority to be observed 244. 24. And how ibid. Lucian's Cynick an Hypocrite
366. 7. Likeness to God being desired at first ruined us, now restores us 364.
3. Lying in that degree is criminal as it is injurious. 250. 40.
M.
MArriage, honored by Christ's presence and the first Miracle 154. Hallowed to
a Mystery 158. 8. Marriage-breakers are more criminal now than under Moses's
Law 158. The smaller undecencies must be prevented or deprecated Of Martyrdom
229. 18. Magi at the sight of Christ's Poverty renounce the World, and retire
into Philosophy 28. 13. Mary, a Virgin always 14. and 2. An excellent
Personage 2, 3. and 8. She conceived Jesus without Sin, and brought him forth
without Pain 13. Her joy at the Prophecies concerning her Son attempered with
Predictions of his Passion 30. 4. Full of Fears, when she lost Jesus 73. 1. She
went to the Temple to pray, and there found him ibid. Full of Piety in Her
countenance and deportment 113. 32. She converted many to thoughts of Chastity
by her countenance and aspect ibid. Mary Magdalen's Story 377. 9. and 360. 5.
and 391. 9. and 346. 5. and 349. 13. Mary's Choice preferred 326. 26. Mark for
sook Jesus upon a Scandal taken, but was reduced by S. Peter 320. 3. Malchus an
Idumaean Slave smote Jesus on the Face 389. 1. Meditation described 54. It
turns the understanding into spirit 55. Its Parts, Actions, manner of Exercise,
Fruits and Effects Disc. 3. per tot. 54. Men ought not to run into the
Ministry, till they are called 99. 3. Ordinary Means and Ministeries are to be
used when they are to be had, whereof the Star appearing to the Wise men was an
emblem 33. 6. What is signified by the Inheritance of the Earth in the reward
of Meekness 224. 9. The Parts, Actions and Reward of Meekness ibid.
Mortification described, its Parts, Actions, Rules, Designs and Benefits 82.
Master of the Feast, his Office among the Jews 152. 5. Mercy, a mark of
Predestination 227. To be expressed in Affections and Actions ibid. Its Object,
Acts, Reward ibid. Merope's answer to Polyphontes 254. 6. A Mason's withered
hand cured by Jesus 290. 3. Members of Christ ought not to be soft and nice
393. 9. Miseries of this Life not always tokens of precedent Sin 325. and 326.
Miracles of Christ and his Apostles weakly imitated by the Devil 279. (...).
Greater than the pretenses of their Enemies 280. 10. Which were done by Christ
were primarily for conviction of the Jews, those by the Apostles for the
Gentiles 279. 6. Vide 277. Were confirmed by Prophecies of Jesus ibid. Mount
Olivet the place of the Romans first Incamping 347. 7. Mourning a duty, its
Acts, Duty, Reward 223. Multitudes fed by Christ 319. and 321. 7.
N.
NAme of God put into H. places, in what sense 172. 1. Name of Jesus, its
mysteriousness explicated 39. 8. Its excellency and efficacy ibid. Good Name to
be sought after 367. Names of some of the LXXII 325. 24. Names of some that
were supposed to rise after the Passion of Jesus 425. 3. Good Nature an
Instrument of Virtue 91. 24. Nard pistick poured upon Jesus's Head and Feet
346. 5. and 361. 11. Natural to love God when we understand him 296. 3. Natures
of Christ communicated in Effects 387. 9. National Sins and Judgments 340. 8.
Their Cure ibid. Necessity to Sin laid upon no Man 105. 9. Necessity to be
obeyed before positive Constitutions 289. Necessity of Holy Living 204. (...).
Necessities of our selves and other men in several manner to be prayed for 265.
12. Nicodemus his (...) with Jesus 167. New Creation at the Passion 431. Nero
first among the Romans (...) with Nard 291. 9. Nursing Children a duty of
Mothers. 19.
O.
OAths forbidden, and how 240. Oaths (...) Judicature, if contradictory, not to
be admitted 241. Oaths promissory not to be exacted by Princes but in great
necessity 240. Vide Swearing Obedience to God and Man, its Parts, Actions,
Necessity, Definition and Constitution 41. and 224. and 205. Obedience in small
instances stated 44. 12, 13. Obedience to GOD our only security for defense and
provisions 68. 3. Obedience of Jesus to his Parents 72. Obedience and Love
(...) in the holy Women, and how reconciled 427. 9. Occasions of Sin to be
avoided 110. 24. Offending Hand or Eye to be cut off or pulled out 323. 17.
Ordinary means of Salvation to be pursued 32. 5. Original Sin disputed to evil
purposes 37. Considered and stated in order to Practice 38. 4. Opinion of our
selves ought to be small and true 365. 5. It was the Duke of Candia's Harbinger
365. 6. In what mean opinion of our selves consists ibid. Oswy's Vow 270. 19.
Outward (...) adds reverence to Religion 177. 12.
P.
PAradise distinct from Heaven 424. 1. Place of GOD's special appearance in
Paradise 175. 7. Patriarchs why desirous to be (...) in the Land of Promise
425. 3. Pardon of Sins by Christ is most properly of Sins committed before
Baptism 193. Pardon of Sins after Baptism how consigned 200. and 201. It is
more uncertain and difficult ibid. It is less and to fewer purposes 204.
Always imperfect after Baptism ibid. It is by Parts ibid. Possibility of
Pardon has a period in this life 210. Patrons to present able persons to their
Benefices 194. 2. How far lawful to prefer their Kindred ibid. Parents in order
of Nature next to God 244. 25. Duty to Parents the band of Republics ibid.
What it consists of ibid. Passion of Jesus 355. and 412. Passions sanctified by
Jesus 384. 3. Paschal Rites representative of moral Duties 364. Patience to be
preserved by Innocents accused 393. And in Sickness 404. 17. Paul calling
himself the greatest Sinner, in what sense he understood it 264. 8. He hoped
for Salvation more confidently toward his end 317. 9. Palms cut down for the
Reception of Jesus 347. Persecution an earnest of future Bliss 229. 18. It is
lawful to fly it 290. and 69. 4. Not, to fight against it 70. The Duty of
Suffering explicated 229. 18. Peacefulness. its Acts and Reward 228. 17. Peace
(...) from God by Christ 29. 5. Personal Privileges not to be insisted upon so
much as strict Duty 37. Personal Infirmity of Princes excuses not our
Disobedience 46. Person of a Man first accepted, and then his Gift, in what
sense true 33. Parental Piety of the Virgin Mary 15. Person of Christ of great
excellency 15. Presentation of Jesus the only Present that was commensurate to
God's excellency 52. Poverty of Christ's Birth in many circumstances 15. Christ
chose his Portion among the poor of this World 52. 3. Poverty better than
Riches ibid. and 222. 3. No shame to be poor ibid. and 29. and 15. 4. Christ
was revealed first to poor Men 29. Poverty of Spirit described 222. Its Parts,
Acts and Offices ibid. Peter for want of Faith ready to drown 320. Providence
of God provides Bread for us It unites causes disparate in one event 13.
Providence of GOD disposes evil Men to evil events 66. And good Men to good,
secretly, but certainly ibid. It is wholly to be relied upon for provisions and
defense 67. and 71. and 99. It supplies all our needs 358. and 361. and 371.
Sometimes it shortens Man's life 264. 307. 22. S. Paphnutius converted a Harlot
by the argument of the Divine Presence 113. 32. Plato's reproof of Diogenes
112. 30. Preachers ought to be of good Example 79. 2. Ambitious seeking of
Prelacy has been the Pest of the Church 96. 2. For liberty of Prophesying 187.
2. and 233. 18. Presbyters have no power by Divine right to reject from the
Communion those that present themselves, and desire to receive it 376. 13.
Passions, if violent, though for God, are irregular 10. and 270. Public and
private Devotions compared 75. 2. Presence of God an Antidote against
Temptations 168. 29. Publication to be made of the Divine Excellencies 9.
Prosperity dangerous; how to be managed ibid. Podavivus his imitation of
Wenceslaus 4. Exh. 10. Prodigies of Greatness and Goodness in Christ's Person
16. Prayer the easiest and most pleasant Duty, and yet we are averse from it,
and why 83. A great Remedy against Temptation 115. 37. It must be joined with
our own endeavor ibid. Its Definition, Conditions, Matter, Manner, Efficacy,
Excellency, Rules 267. Lord's Prayer explicated 267. Mental and Vocal Prayer
compared 271. 23. Presumption in dying persons carefully to be distinguished
from Confidence 403. 15. Means of curing it ibid. Presumption upon false
Opinions in Religion how to be cured 402. Physicians to be obeyed in Sickness,
or suffered, how far 404. 18. Predestination to be searched for in the Books of
Scripture and Conscience 313. It is God's great Secret, not to be inquired into
curiously ibid. It was revealed to the Apostles concerning their own
particulars, and how ibid. It was conditional ibid. The ground of true Joy 223.
17. To be estimated above Privileges ibid. Phavorinus his Discourse concerning
enquiring into Fortunes 313. 2. Preparation to the Lord's Supper 374. 11. Of
two sorts, viz. of Necessity, and of Ornament 365. A Duty of unlimited time
ibid. Preparation to Death no other but a holy Life 397. 1. Parables 292. 10.
and 326. 25. and 323. and 345. Pilate's usage and deportment toward Jesus 395.
and 352. 26. He broke the Jewish and Tiberian Law in the Execution of Jesus
352. 28. Sent to Rome by Vitellius 395. 12. Banished to Vienna ibid. Killed
himself ibid. Prayer of Jesus in the Garden made excellent by all the
requisites of Prayer 384. 4. Prelates are Shepherds and Fishers 330. Their Duty
and Qualifications ibid. and 153. Pride incident to spiritual Persons 100. and
88. Gifts extraordinary ought not to make us proud 156. Promise to God, and
Swearing by him in the matter of Vows, is all one 269. 20. Promises made to
single Graces not effectual, but in conjunction with all parts of our Duty 218.
Promises Temporal do also belong to the Gospel 302. Pierre Calceon condemned
the Pucelle of France 337. 4. Peter rebuked for fighting 322. 21. Rebuked the
saying of his Lord concerning the Passion 321. 10. He was sharply reproved for
it ibid. and 358. 2. He received the power of the Keys for himself and his
Successors in the Apostolate 322. and 324. Denied his Master 351. 23. Repented
ibid. and 391. Prophets must avoid suspicion of Incontinence 189. 4. Prophecy
of Jesus 349. Prudence of a Christian described 156. Piety an excellent
disposition to justifying Faith 190. Publican an Office of Honor among the
Romans 185. 18. Hated by the Jews and Greeks ibid. Prejudice an enemy to
Religion 189. It brings a Curse ibid. Public fame a Rule of Honor 172. Purity
Evangelical described 228. Its Act and Reward ibid.
Q.
QUarrel between Jews and Samaritans 182. The ground of it ibid. Question of
Original Sin stated in order to Practice 38. 4. and 296. 3.
Questions.
Whether we are bound to suffer Death or Imprisonment, rather than break a
Humane Law 47. 21. Whether Christ did truly or in appearance only increase in
Wisdom 74. 5. Whether is more advantage to Piety, a retired and contemplative,
or a public and active Life 80. 5, 6. Whether way of serving God is better,
the way of (...) or the way of Affections 42. 8. and 424. 11. Whether Faith of
Ignorant persons produced by insufficient Arguments be acceptable 157. 7. and
159. Whether purposes of good Life upon our Deathbed can be (...) 212. 39. How
long time must Repentance of an evil Life begin before our Death 217. 48.
Whether we be always bound to do absolutely the best thing 234. 11. Whether it
be lawful for Christians to swear 238. 18. Whether it be lawful to swear by a
Creature in such cases, wherein it is permitted to swear by God 241. 23.
Whether a Virgin may not kill a Ravisher 255. 7. Whether it be lawful to pray
for Revenge 257. 10. Whether it be lawful for Christians to go to Law, and in
what cases 255. 8. Whether actual Intention in our Prayers be simply necessary
267. 16. Whether is better, Public or Private Prayer 270. 22. and 75. Whether
is better, Vocal or Mental Prayer 270. 23. Whether a Christian ought to be, or
can be, in this Life ordinarily certain of Salvation 313. Whether a thing in
its own nature indifferent is to be thrown off, if it have been abused to
Superstition 330. 6. Whether it be lawful to fight a Duel 253. 5, 6, etc.
Whether men be to be kept from receiving the Sacrament for private Sins 376.
13. Whether is better, to communicate often, or seldom 378. 18. Whether a
Deathbed Penitent after a wicked Life is to be absolved, if he desires it 403.
13. Whether the same Person is to be communicated 407. 23. Whether Christ was
in the state of Comprehension during his Passion 413. and 414. Whether Christ
suffered the pains of Hell upon the Cross ibid. How the Divine Justice could
consist with Punishing the innocent Jesus 415. 7, 8. Whether Saints enjoy the
(...) Vision before the Day of Judgment 423. and 429. 15.
R.
RAshness an enemy to good Counsels and happy Events 11. Religion as excellent
in its silent Affections, as in its exterior Actions 4. and 30. Religion, its
Comforts and Refreshments 58. When necessary ibid. Not greedily to be sought
after 100. 11, 12. Vide Spiritual Sadness. Religion pretended to evil purposes
66. 1. It is a public Virtue 75. It observes the smallest things 272. Its
Pretense does not hallow every Action 170. Religion of Holy Places 171. In
differing Religions how the parties are to deem an themselves 187. Ministers of
Religion to be content, if their Labors be not successful 195. They are to
have a Calling from the Church 196. Ought to live well ibid. Religion of a
Christian purifies and reigns in the Soul 232. 3. It best serves our Temporal
ends 303. Not to be neglected upon pretense of Charity 346. Affections of
Religion are estimated by their own Excellency, not by the Donative, so it be
our best 360. 8. Religious Actions to be submitted to the Conduct of spiritual
Guides 48. A religious person left a Vision to obey his Orders 49. 25.
Religious Actions to be repeated often by Sick and Dying persons 406. Rebellion
against Prince and Priest more severely punished than Murmurers against GOD 50.
26. Repentance necessary to humane nature 198. The ends of its Institution 198.
Revealed first by Christ as a Law 199. Not allowed in the Law of Moses for
greater Crimes ibid. Repentance and Faith the two hands to apprehend Christ
ibid. After Baptism not so clearly expressed to be accepted, nor upon the same
terms as before 199. and 201. It is a collection of holy Duties 210. The
extirpation of all vicious Habits 210. Described ibid. It is not merely a
Sorrow 211. 36. Nor merely a Purpose 212. Too late upon our Deathbed 214.
Public Repentance must use the instruments of the Church 218. Must begin
immediately after Sin 391. and 398. Promoted by the Devil, when it is too late
392. 7. Repentance of Esau ibid. Repentance accidentally may have advantages
beyond Innocence 391. Repenting often, and sinning often, and (...) changing,
is a sign of an ill condition 106. Revenues not to be greedily sought for by
Ecclesiastics 71. 9. They are dangerous to all men ib. That the Roman Empire
was permitted to the power and management of the Devil, the opinion of some
100. 14. How the Righteousness of Christians must exceed the Righteousness of
Pharisees 233. Revenge forbidden 245. and 253. Praef. n. 40. Recidivation or
Relapse into a state of sin unpardonable, and how 156. Reproachful Language
prohibited 247. Reprehension of evil Persons may be in Language properly
expressive of the Crime ibid. Resisting evil in what sense lawful 225.
Reverence of posture to be used in Prayer 271. 23. Remedies against Anger 248.
35. Repetition of Prayers 270. Relations secular must be quitted for Religion,
in what sense 320. They must not hinder Religious Duties 236. Reformation
begins ill, if it begins with Sacrilege 171. 5. Reward propounded in the
beginning and end of Christian Duties 222. It makes the labor easy 295. 1.
Restitution to the state of Grace is divisible, and by parts 314. Restitution
made by Zacchaeus 346. 4. Resurrection proved and described by Jesus 348. 11.
All Relations of Kindred or (...) cease then ibid. Resurrection of Jesus 393.
Given for a sign 160. and 279. It is the support of Christianity 428.
Resignation of himself to be made by a dying or sick person 405. 17. Rich men
less disposed for reception of Christianity 29. Riches are surest and to best
purposes obtained by Christianity 301. 10. Rites of Burial among the Jews
lasted Forty days. 419.
S.
SArabaitae great Mortifiers, but not obedient 49. 24. Sacrilege a robbing of
God 52. Saints to inherit the Earth, in what sense 224. 9. Sacraments
ineffectual without the conjunction of something moral 97. They operate by way
of Prayers ibid. Sacrament of the Lord's Supper instituted 349. 17. Its manner
ibid. To be received Fasting 272. Of the Presence of Christ's Body in it 370.
3. Sabbath of the Jews abolished 327. 28. and 243. 25. Primitive Christians
kept both the Sabbath and the Lord's Day 243. 24. Second Sabbath after the
first, what it means 290. 2. Sabbatick pool streamed only upon the Sabbath
327. 28. Salome presented John Baptist's Head to her Mother 169. She was killed
with Ice ibid. Samaritans were Schismatics 182. 3. They hated the Jews ibid.
They were cast in their Appeal to Ptolemy ibid. Samaritan (...), a Concubine
after the death of her fifth Husband 187. 1. Scandal cannot be given by any
thing that is our Duty 328. and 334. 13. Sin of Scandal, and the indiscretion
of Scandal 330. 6. Scandalous persons who 328. and 334. 13. No Man can say that
himself is scandalized 333. 10. The Rules, Measure and Judgment of Scandal
328. Between a Friend and an Enemy how we are to do in the question of Scandal
334. 12. Scandal how to be avoided in making and executing Laws 334. 14. State
of Separation 423. and 429. 15. The Pool of Siloam 325. 21. Scorn must not be
cast upon our calamitous Brother 339. Secular Persons tied to a frequent
Communion 379. 19. Secular and Spiritual Objects their difference 380. 21.
Serapion's Reproof of a young proud Monk 366. 7. Sepulcher of Jesus sealed 501.
39. Sermon of Christ upon the Mount 183. 11. His Farewell-Sermon 350. 19.
Severity to our selves and Gentleness to others, a Duty 324. 17. Sensuality.
Vide Temptations Simon's name changed 151. 2. His Wifes Mother cured 184. 12.
Simeon Stylites commended for Obedience 49. 24. Simon Magus brought a new Sin
into the world 104. 6. Sins of Infirmity. Vide (...) Sins small in themselves
are made great when they come by design 44. 12. When they are acted by
deliberation ibid. When they are often repeated and not interrupted by
Repentance ibid. 13. When they are (...) 45. 14. Sin pleasant at the first,
bitter in the end 159. It carries a whip with it 170. They are forgiven when
the Punishment is remitted 184. After Pardon they may return in guilt 211. It
is more troublesome than Virtue is 297. 4. Not cared for, unless it be
difficult 299. 6. It shortens our lives naturally 305. 19. It made Jesus weep
359. To be accounted as great Blemishes to our selves as we account them to
others 365. 6. Sinners Prayers not heard, in what sense 266. 13. Sinners in
need are to be relieved 258. Sinners are Fools 310. 28. State of Sin totally
opposed to the Mercies of the Covenant 200. Sin against the Holy Ghost, what it
is 201. 10. Simplicity of Spirit, a Christian Duty 157. Shame of Lust more
violent to Nature than the Severities of Continence 295. The good Shepherd 325.
Shepherds by Night watchful had a Revclation of Christ 29. Spiritual Shepherds
must be watchful ibid. Spiritual Sadness is often a Mercy, and a Grace 236.
When otherwise 160. Spiritual persons apt to be tempted to Pride 86, and 100.
Spiritual Mourning 224. Spiritual Pleasures distinguished from Temporal 191.
Spiritual good things how to be prayed for 266. and 262. Spiritual (...) 360.
8. Spirit makes Religion (...) 295. It is the earnest of Salvation 316. Spirit
of Adoption ibid. It is quenched by some ibid. Spirit is (...) to be offered to
God 176. Solemnities of Christ's Kingdom 392. Soldiers plunged Jesus into the
Brook Cedron 388. 11. They pierced his Side 355. They mock and beat Him 351.
and 353. They cover his Face at his Attachment 351. They fell to the ground at
the glory of his Person ibid. Sun's Eclipse at the Passion, miraculous 354.
Stones of the Temple, of what bigness 348. 12. Star at Christ's Birth moved
irregularly 27. 9. That the Star appearing to the Wise Men was an Angel, the
Opinion of the Greeks 27. 8. Swine kept by the Jews, and why 194 Statue of
Brass erected by the Woman cured of her Bloody issue 185. 20. Success of our
endeavors depends on God 196. 5. Sudden Joys are dangerous 196. 7. Schism to
be avoided in the Occasions 194. Swearing in common Talk a great Crime 304. By
Creatures, forbidden ibid. Suits at Law, with what Cautions permitted 264.
Syrophoenician importunate with Jesus for her Daughter 321. 6. Solomon's Porch
a fragment of the first Temple 327. 29. Sweat of Christ in the Agony, as great
as drops of Blood. 350. 20. and 385. 6.
T.
TAble with Nails fastened to Christ's Garment when he bore the Cross 413. 2.
Teachers of others should be exemplary 33. and 79. They should learn first of
their Superiors 75. Not to make too much haste into the Employment 79. Teresa
a Jesu, her Vow 235. 22. Temporal Privileges inferior to Spiritual 292.
Temporal good things how to be prayed for 261. Temptation not always a sign of
immortification 91. Not to be voluntarily entered into 91. and 110. Not always
an argument of GOD's Disfavour 97. and 361. It is every Man's Lot 105. Not
always to be removed by Prayer 102. The several manners of Temptation ibid.
Remedies against it 112. 29. and seq. 1. Consideration, 1. Of the Presence of
God 112. 29. 1. Consideration, 2. Of Death 114. 34. 2. Prayer 115. 37. Temple
of Jerusalem, how many Highpriests it had in Succession 303. 14.
Transmigration of Souls maintained by the Pharisees 321. 8. Tribute to be paid
347. Traitor discovered by a Sop 350. Trinity meeting at the (...) of our
Blessed Lord by some manners of exterior Communication 94. 3. Triumphant
riding of Jesus 359. 4. Thief upon the Cross pardoned, and in what sense 200.
8. An excellent Penitent 354. 32. Themistocles appeased King Admetus by (...)
his Son to his sight 372. 7. Thomas's Infidelity 420. 3. Tongue-murther 247.
V.
VAin Repetitions in Prayer to be avoided 270. Value of the Silver pieces Judas
had 349. 14. Value of Jesus in this World was always at a low rate 57. 4.
Vespasian upon the Prophecies concerning the Messiah (...) himself into hopes
of the Empire 25. 2. Vinegar and Gall offered to Jesus 355. 35. Virginity
preserred before Marriage 327. Virtue is honorable 301. 11. Productive of
(...) 299. 7. More pleasant than Vice 69. 6. The holy Virgin encouraged Joseph
of Arimathea to a public Confession of Jesus 356. 38. She caused Ministers to
take her Son's Body from the Cross 356. Full of sorrow at the Passion 356. 37.
She was saluted Blessed by a Capernaite 292. 12. Vice a great Spender 301. 9.
It (...) from Virtue sometimes but in one nice degree 45. 15. Why we are more
prone to Vice than Virtue 37. 4. A Virgin shut her self up twelve Years in a
Sepulcher to cure her Temptation 114. 34. Vicious persons not to be admitted to
the Sacrament 374. 12. Unitive way of Religion to be practiced with caution 60.
20. Vows are a good instance of Importunity in Prayer 270. 20. To be made with
much caution and prudence ibid. Uncleanness of Body and Spirit forbidden to
Christians 249
W.
WAter-pots among the Jews at Feasts, and why 152. 7. Way to Heaven narrow, in
what sense 297. Washing the Feet an hospitable civility to Strangers 350. 16.
Washing the Disciples Feet ib. Wandering thoughts in Prayer to be prayed against
268. Watchfulness designed in the Parable of the ten Virgins 348. Want cannot
be, where God undertakes the Provision 77. Wenceslaus King of Bohemia led his
Servant by a vigorous example 4. Exh. 10. Widows two Mites accepted 348.
Widowhood harder to preserve Continence than Virginity 86. Wise-mens
expectation lessened at the sight of the Babe lying in a Stable 28. But not
(...) ibid. They publicly consess him 33. Wilderness chosen by Christ, he was
not involuntarily driven by the evil Spirit 95. Works of Religion upon our
Deathbed, after a pious Life, are of great concernment 403. Women must be
lovers of Privacy 9. Instrumental to Conversion of Men 182. 3. To Heresy 189.
5. Not to be conversed withal too freely by Spiritual persons ibid. They (...)
Religious Friendships with Apostles and Bishops ibid. 6. Cautions concerning
Conversation with Women ibid. They ministered to Christ 293. 17. Go early to the
Sepulcher 419. Will for the Deed accepted, how to be understood 213. 41. Will
of God is to be chosen before our own 247. and 267. World to be refused when
the Devil offers it 100. Wine mixed with Myrrh offered to Jesus 353.
Y.
Yoke of Christianity easy 295. Yoke of Moses and Yoke of Sin broken by Christ
295. 1.
Z.
ZEal of Elias not imitable by us 324. 18. Zeal of Prayer of great efficacy
269. 18. It discomposed Moses and Elisha 85. 8. Zacchaeus his Repentance 346.
4. Zebedee's Sons Petition ibid. Zechary slain by Herod, and why 66. 5. His
Blood left a Tincture in the Pavement for a long while after. ibid.


The End of the TABLE.
ERRATA.
PAge 85. Line 13. for Consulted by three things, read Consulted by three Kings.

Antiquitates Apostolicae: OR, THE LIVES, ACTS and MARTYRDOMS OF THE HOLY
APOSTLES OF OUR SAVIOR. To which are added The Lives of the two EVANGELISTS,
SS. MARK and LVKE.

By WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his MAJESTY.

(...).

Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 10. page 28. (...).

Chrysostom. Praesat. in Epist. ad Philem. page 1733. LONDON, Printed by R.
Norton, for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred Majesty, at the Angel in
Amen-Corner, 1675.

TO THE READER.
IT will not, I suppose, seem improbable to the Reader, when I tell him, with
how much reluctance and unwillingness I set upon this undertaking. Besides the
disadvantage of having this piece annexed to the Elaborate Book of that
excellent Prelate, so great a Master both of Learning and Language, I was
intimately conscious to mine own unfitness for such a Work at any time, much
more when clogged with many habitual Infirmities and Distempers. I considered
the difficulty of the thing it self, perhaps not capable of being well managed
by a much better Ten than mine; few of the Ancient Monuments of the Church
being extant, and little of this nature in those few that are. Indeed I could
not but think it reasonable, that all possible honor should be done to those,
that first Preached the Gospel of peace, and brought glad tidings of good
things, that it was fit men should be taught how much they were obliged to
those excellent Persons, who were willing at so dear a rate to plant
Christianity in the World, who they were, and what was that Piety and that
Patience, that Charity and that Zeal, which made them to be reverenced while
they lived, and their Memories ever since to be honorably celebrated through
the World, infinitely beyond the glories of Alexander, and the triumphs of a
Pompey or a Caesar. But then how this should be done out of those few imperfect
Memoires, that have escaped the general shipwreck of Church-Antiquities, and
much more by so rude and unskilful a hand as mine, appeared, I confess, a very
difficult task, and next door to impossible. These, with some other
considerations, made me a long time obstinately resolve against it, till being
overcome by importunity, I yielded to do it, as I was able, and as the nature
of the thing would bear.

THAT which I primarily designed to my self, was to draw down the History of
the New Testament especially from our Lord's death, to enquire into the first
Originals and Plantations of the Christian Church by the Ministry of the
Apostles, the success of their Doctrine, the power and conviction of their
Miracles, their infinite Labors and hardships, and the dreadful Sufferings
which they underwent; to consider in what instances of Piety and Virtue they
ministered to our imitation, and served the purposes of Religion and an Holy
Life. Indeed the accounts that are left us of these things are very short and
inconsiderable, sufficient possibly to excite the appetite, not to allay the
hunger of an importunate Enquirer into these matters. A consideration that
might give us just occasion to lament the irreparable loss of those Primitive
Records, which the injury of time has deprived us of, the substance being
gone, and little left us but the shell and carcass. Had we the Writings of
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, and Scholar, says Irenaeus, to S. John, (wherein,
as himself tells us, he set down what he had learnt from (...). Eccl. lib. 3.
c. 39. p. 111.
those who had familiarly conversed with the Apostles, the sayings and
discourses of Andrew and Peter, of Philip and Thomas, etc.) Had we the Ancient
Commentaries of Hegesippus, Clemens Alexandrinus his Institutions, Africanus
his Chronography, and some others, the Reader might expect more entire and
particular relations. But alas! these are long since perished, and little
besides the names of them transmitted to us. Nor should we have had most of
that little that is left us, had not the commendable care and industry of
Eusebius preserved it to us. And if he complained in his time (when those
Writings were extant) that toward H. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 2. p. 4.
the composing of his History he had only some few particular accounts here and
there left by the Ancients of their times; what cause have we to complain, when
even those little portions have been ravished from us? So that he that would
build a work of this nature, must look upon himself as condemned to a kind of
Egyptian Task, to make Brick without Straw, at least to pick it up where he can
find it, though after all it amounts to a very slender parcel. Which as it
greatly hinders the beauty and completeness of the structure, so does it
exceedingly multiply the labor and difficulty. For by this means I have been
forced to gather up those little fragments of Antiquity, that lie dispersed in
the Writings of the Ancients, thrown some into this corner, and others into
that: which I have at length put together, like the pieces of a broken Statue,
that it might have at least some kind of resemblance of the person, whom it
designs to represent.

HAD I thought good to have traded in idle and frivolous Authors, Abdias
Babylonius, the Passions of Peter and Paul, Joachim Perionius, Peter de
Natalibus, and such like, I might have presented the Reader with a larger, not
a better account. But besides the averseness of my nature to falsehoods and
trifles, especially in matters wherein the honor of the Christian Religion is
concerned, I knew the World to be wiser at this time of day, than to be imposed
upon by Pious frauds, and cheated with Ecclesiastical Romances, and Legendary
Reports. For this reason I have more fully and particularly insisted upon the
Lives of the two first Apostles, so great a part of them being secured by an
unquestionable Authority, and have presented the larger portions of the Sacred
History, many times to very minute circumstances of action. And I presume the
wise and judicious Reader will not blame me, for choosing rather to enlarge upon
a story, which I knew to be infallibly true, than to treat him with those,
which there was cause enough to conclude to be certainly false.

THE Reader will easily discern, that the Authors I make use of are not all of
the same rank and size. Some of them are Divinely inspired, whose Authority is
Sacred, and their reports rendered not only credible, but unquestionable, by
that infallible and unerring Spirit that presided over them. Others such, of
whose faith and testimony, especially in matters of fact, there is no just
cause to doubt, I mean the genuine Writings of the Ancient Fathers, or those,
which though unduly assigned to this or that particular Father, are yet
generally allowed to be Ancient, and their credit not to be despised, because
their proper Parent is not certainly known. Next these come the Writers of the
middle and later Ages of the Church, who though below the former in point of
credit, have yet some particular advantages that recommend them to us. Such I
account Symeon Metaphrastes, Nicephorus Callistus, the Menaea and Menologies of
the Greek Church, etc. wherein though we meet with many vain and improbable
stories, yet may we also rationally expect some real and substantial accounts
of things, especially seeing they had the advantage of many Ancient and
Ecclesiastic Writings, extant in their times, which to us are utterly lost.
Though even these too I have never called in, but in the want of more Ancient
and Authentic Writers. As for others, if any passages occur either in
themselves of doubtful and suspected credit, or borrowed from spurious and
uncertain Authors, they are always introduced or dismissed with some kind of
censure or remark, that the most easy and credulous Reader may know what to
trust to, and not fear being secretly surpised into a belief of doubtful and
fabulous reports. And now after all I am sufficiently sensible, how lank and
thin this Account is, nor can the Reader be less satisfied with it, than I am
my self; and I have only this piece of justice and charity to beg of him, that
he would suspend his censure, till he has taken a little pains to enquire into
the state of the Times and Things I Write of: And then however he may challenge
my prudence in undertaking it; he will not, I hope, see reason to charge me
with want of care and faithfulness in the pursuance of it.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction.
The Life of S. Peter.
SECT. I. Of S. Peter, from his Birth, till his first coming to Christ. Page 1.
SECT. II. Of S. Peter, from his first coming to Christ, till his being called
to be a Disciple. p. 6. SECT. III. Of S. Peter, from his Election to the
Apostolate, till the confession which he made of Christ. p. 8. SECT. IV. Of S.
Peter, from the time of his Confession, till our Lord's last Passover. p. 11.
SECT. V. Of S. Peter, from the last Passover, till the Death of Christ. p. 15.
SECT. VI. Of S. Peter, from Christ's Resurrection, till his Ascension. p. 19.
SECT. VII. S. Peter's Acts, from our Lord's Ascension, till the dispersion of
the Church. p. 22. SECT. VIII. Of S. Peter's Acts from the dispersion of the
Church at Jerusalem, till his contest with S. Paul at Antioch. p. 28. SECT. IX.
Of S. Peter's Acts, from the End of the Sacred story, till his Martyrdom. p.
33. SECT. X. The Character of his Person and Temper, and an account of his
Writings. p. 37. SECT. XI. An Enquiry into S. Peter's going to Rome. p. 41.
The Life of S. Paul.
SECT. I. Of S. Paul, from his Birth, till his Conversion. Page 45. SECT. II.
Of S. Paul, from his Conversion, till the Council at Jerusalem. p. 50. SECT.
III. Of S. Paul, from the time of the Synod at Jerusalem, till his departure
from Athens. P. 55. SECT. IV. Of S. Paul's Acts at Corinth and Ephesus. p. 62.
SECT. V. S. Paul's Acts, from his departure from Ephesus, till his Arraignment
before Felix. p. 67. SECT. VI. Of S. Paul, from his first Trial before Felix,
till his coming to Rome. p. 72. SECT. VII. S. Paul's Acts, from his coming to
Rome, till his Martyrdom. p. 76. SECT. VIII. The description of his Person and
Temper, together with an account of his Writings. p. 82. SECT. IX. The
principal Controversies that exercised the Church in his time. p. 88.
The Life of S. Andrew. P. 99. The Life of S. James the Great. P. 105. The Life
of S. John. P. 113. The Life of S. Philip. P. 123. The Life of S. Bartholomew.
P. 127. The Life of S. Matthew. P. 131. The Life of S. Thomas. P. 137. The Life
of S. James the Less. P. 143. The Life of S. Simon the Zealot. P. 149. The Life
of S. Jude. P. 153. The Life of S. Matthias. P. 157. The Life of S. Mark the
Evangelist. P. 161. The Life of S. Luke the Evangelist. P. 167.
Diptycha Apostolica, Or, an Enumeration of the Apostles, and their Successors
for the first three hundred years in the five great Churches said to have been
founded by them. page 171.


IMPRIMATUR.

THO. TOMKYNS.
Ex AEd. Lambeth. Feb. 25. 1674.
THE INTRODUCTION.
Christ's faithfulness in appointing Officers in his Church. The dignity of the
Apostles above the rest. The importance of the word (...). The nature of the
Apostolic Office considered. Respect had in founding it to the custom among
the Jews. Their Apostoli, who. The number of the Apostles limited. Why twelve,
the several conjectures of the Ancients. Their immediate election. Their work
wherein it consisted. The Universality of their Commission. Apostolical
Churches, what. How soon the Apostles propagated Christianity through the
World. An argument for the Divinity of the Christian Religion inferred thence.
The power conveyed to the Apostles, equally given to all. Peter's superiority
over the rest disproved both from Scripture and Antiquity. The Apostles how
qualified for their Mission. Immediately taught the Doctrine they delivered.
Infallibly secured from Error in delivering it. Their constant and familiar
converse with their Master. Furnished with a power of working Miracles. The
great evidence of it to prove a Divine Doctrine. Miraculous powers conferred
upon the Apostles particularly considered. Prophecy, what, and when it ceased.
The gift of discerning Spirits. The gift of Tongues. The gift of
Interpretation. The unreasonable practice of the Church of Rome in keeping the
Scripture and Divine Worship in an Unknown Tongue. The gift of Healing: Greatly
advantageous to Christianity. How long it lasted. Power of Immediately
inflicting corporal punishments; and the great benefit of it in those times.
The Apostles enabled to confer miraculous powers upon others. The Duration of
the Apostolical Office. What in it extraordinary, what ordinary. Bishops in
what sense styled Apostles.

I. JESUS CHRIST, the great Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, being
appointed by God to be the Supreme Ruler and Governor of his Church, was, like
Moses, faithful in all his house: but with this honorable advantage, that
Moses was faithful as a Servant, Christ as a Son over his own house, which he
erected, established and governed with all possible care and diligence. Nor
could he give a greater instance either of his fidelity toward God, or his
love and kindness to the Souls of men, than that after he had purchased a
Family to himself, and could now no longer upon earth manage its interests in
his own person, he would not return back to Heaven, till he had constituted
several Orders of Officers in his Church, who might superintend and conduct its
affairs; and according to the various circumstances of its state, administer to
the needs and exigencies of his Family. Accordingly therefore he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ; till we all come into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. The first and prime Class of Officers is that of Apostles:
God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, then secondarily Prophets,
etc. First Apostles, as far in office as honor before the rest, their election
more immediate, their commission more large and comprehensive, the powers and
privileges where with they were furnished greater and more honorable:
Prophecy, the gift of Miracles, and expelling Demons, the order of Pastors and
Teachers were all spiritual powers, and ensigns of great authority, (...), says
Sermon. de util. lection. S. Script. Tom. 8. Edit. Savil. p. 114.
Chrysostom, but the Apostolic eminency is far greater than all these, which
therefore he calls a spiritual Consulship, an Apostle having as great
pre-eminence above all other officers in the Church, as the Consul had above
all other Magistrates in Rome. These Apostles were a few select persons whom
our Lord chose out of the rest, to devolve part of the Government upon their
shoulders, and to depute for the first Luke 6 13.
planting and settling Christianity in the World: He chose twelve, whom he named
Apostles: of whose Lives and Acts being to give an Historical account in the
following work, it may not possibly be unuseful to premise some general remarks
concerning them, not respecting this or that particular person, but of a
general relation to the whole, wherein we shall especially take notice of the
importance of the word, the nature of the employment, the fitness and
qualification of the persons, and the duration and continuance of the Office.

II. The word (...), or sent, is among ancient Writers applied either to
things, actions, or persons. To things; thus those Dimissory letters that were
granted to such who appealed from an Inferior to a Superior Judicature, were
in the language of the (...). 6. vid. L. 1^6 T^. 16 lib 50. and Paul. l. C. S^n
(...). 39.
Roman Laws usually called Apostoli: thus a Packet-boat was styled, (...),
because sent up and down for advice and dispatch of business: thus though in
somewhat a different sense, the lesson taken out of the Epistles is in the
Ancient Greek Vid Chrysostom. Lu^^ in Ritual Gras. p. 68
Liturgies called (...), because usually taken out of the Apostles Writings.
Sometimes it is applied to actions, and so imports no more than mission, or the
very act of sending; thus the setting out a Fleet, or a Naval expedition was
wont to be called (...), so Suid, in voc. (...) ex D(...)h. vid. H^^^^^^ Lex.
in Dec. Rhet.
Suidas tells us, that as the persons designed for the care and management of
the Fleet were called '(...), so the very sending sorth of the Ships
themselves, (...), were styled (...). Lastly, what principally falls under our
present consideration, it is applied to persons, and so imports no more than a
messenger, a person sent upon some special errand, for the discharge of some
peculiar affair in his name that sent him. Thus Epaphroditus is called the
Apostle or Messenger Phil. 2. 25.
of the Philippians, when sent by them to S. Paul at Rome: thus Titus and his
companions 2 Cor. 8. 23.
John 13. 16.
are styled (...), the Messengers of the Churches. So our Lord, he that is
sent, (...), an Apostle or Messenger is not greater than him that sent him.
This then being the common notion of the word, our Lord fixes it to a
particular use, applying it to those select persons, whom he had made choice of
to act by that peculiar authority and commission, which he had derived upon
them. Twelve, whom he also named Apostles; that is, Commissioners, those who
were to be Ambassadors for Christ, to be sent up and down the World in his
name, to plant the Faith, to govern and superintend the Church at present, and
by their wise and prudent settlement of affairs, to provide for the future
exigencies of the Church.

III. The next thing then to be considered is the nature of their Office, and
under this enquiry we shall make these following remarks. First, it is not to
be doubted but that our Lord in founding this Office had some respect to the
state of things in the Jewish Church, I mean not only in general, that there
should be superior and subordinate Officers, as there were superior and
inferior Orders under the Mosaic dispensation; but that herein he had an eye
to some usage and custom common among them. Now amongst the Jews as all
Messengers were called (...), or Apostles, so were they wont to dispatch some
with peculiar (...) Eusebius in Caien. MS. apud H^ns. (...). in Luc. 6.
letters of authority and Commission, whereby they acted as Proxies and
Deputies of those that sent them, thence their Proverb, (...) every man's
Apostle is as himself, that is, whatever he does is looked upon to be as firm
and valid, as if the person himself had done it. Thus when Saul was sent by the
Sanhedrim to Damascus to apprehend the Jewish converts, he was furnished with
letters from the High Priest, enabling him to act as his Commissary in that
matter. Indeed Haeros. 30. p. 60.
Epiphanius tells us of a sort of persons called Apostles, who were Assessors
and Counselors to the Jewish Patriarch, constantly attending upon him to
advise him in matters pertaining to the Law, and sent by him (as Ibid. p. 63.
he intimates) sometimes to inspect and reform the manners of the Priests and
Jewish Clergy, and the irregularities of Country-Synagogues, with commission to
gather the Tenths and First Fruits due in all the Provinces under his
jurisdiction. Such Apostles we find mentioned both by Epist. 25. p. 153.
Julian the Emperor in an Epistle to the Jews, and in a Law of the Emperor L.
14. C. T^. de Judaeis lib. 16. T^^. 8.
Honorius, employed by the Patriarch to gather once a year the Aurum Coronarium
or Crown-Gold, a Tribute annually paid by them to the Roman Emperors. But these
Apostles could not under that notion be extant in our Savior's time; though
sure we are there was then something like it, Lib. de (...), ad Caium, p. 1023.
vid. p. 1035. ^.
Philo the Jew more than once mentioning the (...) the sacred messengers
annually sent to collect the holy treasure paid by way of First Fruits, and to
carry it to the Temple at Jerusalem. However our Lord in conformity to the
general custom of those times, of appointing Apostles or Messengers, as their
Proxies and Deputies to act in their names, called and denominated those
Apostles, whom he peculiarly chose to represent his person, to communicate his
mind and will to the World, and to act as Ambassadors or Commissioners in his
room and stead.

IV. Secondly, We observe that the persons thus deputed by our Savior were not
left uncertain, but reduced to a fixed definite number, confined to the just
number of Twelve: he ordained twelve that they should be with him. A number
that seems to carry something Mark 3. 15.
of mystery and peculiar design in it, as appears in that the Apostles were so
careful upon the fall of Judas immediately to supply it. The Fathers are very
wide and different in their conjectures about the reason of it. Sermon. 3. in
Psalm. 103. Col 1192. Tom. 8. vid. in Psalm. 59. Ce^. 603.
S. Augustine thinks our Lord herein had respect to the four quarters of the
World, which were to be called by the preaching of the Gospel, which being
multiplied by three (to denote the Trinity, in whose name they were to be
called) make Twelve. Adv. (...). lib. 4. c. 13. p. 425.
Tertullian will have them typified by the twelve fountains in Elim, the
Apostles being sent out to water and refresh the dry thirsty World with the
knowledge of the truth; by the twelve precious stones in Aaron's breast plate,
to illuminate the Church, the garment which Christ our great High Priest has
put on; by the twelve stones which Joshua chose out of Jordan to lay up within
the Ark of the Testament, respecting the firmness and solidity of the Apostles
Faith, their being chosen by the true Jesus or Joshua at their Baptism in
Jordan, and their being admitted in the inner Sanctuary of his Covenant. By
others we are told that it was shadowed out by the twelve Spies taken out of
every Tribe, and sent to discover the Land of Promise: or by the twelve gates
of the City in Ezekiel's vision; or by the twelve Bells appendant to Aaron's
garment, J. Mart. dial. cum Tryph, p. 260.
their sound going out into all the World, and their words unto the ends of the
Earth. But it were endless, and to very little purpose to reckon up all the
conjectures of this nature, there being scarce any one number of Twelve
mentioned in the Scripture, which is not by some of the Ancients adapted and
applied to this of the Twelve Apostles, wherein an ordinary fancy might easily
enough pick out a mystery. That which seems to put in the most rational plea
is, that our Lord pitched upon this number, in conformity either to the twelve
Patriarchs as founders of the twelve Tribes of Israel, or to the twelve (...),
or chief heads; as standing Rulers of those Tribes among the Jews, as we shall
afterward possibly more particularly See S. Peter's Life, Sect. 3. Number. 2.
remark. Thirdly, these Apostles were immediately called and sent by Christ
himself, elected out of the body of his Disciples and followers, and received
their Commission from his own mouth. Indeed Matthias was not one of the first
election, being taken in upon Judas his Apostasy after our Lord's Ascension
into Heaven. But besides that he had been one of the seventy Disciples, called
and sent out by our Savior, that extraordinary declaration of the Divine will
and pleasure that appeared in determining his election, was in a manner
equivalent to the first election. As for S. Paul, he was not one of the Twelve,
taken in as a supernumerary Apostle, but yet Gal. 1. 1.
an Apostle as well as they, and that not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus
Christ, as he pleads his own cause against the insinuations of those Impostors
who traduced him as an Apostle only at the second hand; whereas he was
immediately called by Christ as well as they, and in a more extraordinary
manner; they were called by him, while he was yet in his state of meanness and
humiliation, he, when Christ was now advanced upon the Throne, and appeared to
him encircled with those glorious emanations of brightness and majesty, which
he was not able to endure.

V. Fourthly, The main work and employment of these Apostles was to preach the
Gospel, to establish Christianity, and to govern the Church that was to be
founded, as Christ's immediate Deputies and Vicegerents: they were to instruct
men in the doctrines of the Gospel, to disciple the World, and to baptize and
initiate men into the Faith of Christ; to constitute and ordain Guides and
Ministers of Religion, persons peculiarly set apart for holy ministrations, to
censure and punish obstinate and contumacious offenders, to compose and
overruled disorders and divisions, to command or countermand as occasion was,
being vested with an extraordinary authority and power of disposing things for
the edification of the Church. This Office the Apostles never exercised in its
full extent and latitude during Christ's residence upon Earth; for though upon
their election he sent them forth to Preach and to Baptize, yet this was only a
narrow and temporary employment, and they quickly returned to their private
stations, the main power being still executed and administered by Christ
himself, the complete exercise whereof was not actually devolved upon them,
till he was ready to leave the World: for then it was that he told them, as my
father has sent me, even so send I you; John 20. 21, 22, 23.
receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and
whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. Whereby he conferred in some
proportion the same authority upon them, which he himself had derived from his
Father. Fisthly, This Commission given to the Apostles was unlimited and
universal, not only in respect of power, as enabling them to discharge all acts
of Religion relating either to Ministry or Government, but in respect of place,
not confining them to this (...)115. (...). 8. Edit. Savil.
or that particular Province, but leaving them the whole World as their Diocese
to Preach in, they being destinati Nationibus Magistri, in De praescript.
Haerit. c. 20. p. 208.
Tertullian's phrase, designed to be the Masters and Instructors of all
Nations: so runs their Commission, Mark 16. 15.
Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every creature, that is, to
all men, the (...) of the Evangelist answering to the (...) amongst the Jews,
to all creatures, whereby they used to denote all men in general, but
especially the Gentiles in opposition to the Jews. Indeed while our Savior
lived, the Apostolical ministry extended no further than Judaea; but he being
gone to Heaven, the partition wall was broken down, and their way was open into
all places and Countries. And herein how admirably did the Christian Economy
transcend the Jewish dispensation! The preaching of the Prophets like the (...)
Macar. Homil. 14. p. 171.
light that comes in at the window, was confined only to the house of Israel,
while the doctrine of the Gospel preached by the Apostles was like the light of
the Sun in the Firmament, that diffused its beams, and propagated its heat and
influence into all quarters of the World; their sound going out into all the
Earth, and their words unto the ends of the World. It Is true, for the more
prudent and orderly management of things they are generally said by the
Ancients to have divided the World into so many quarters and portions, to which
they were severally to betake themselves; Peter to Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
etc. S. John to Asia, S. Andrew to Scythia, etc. But they did not strictly tie
themselves to those particular Provinces that were assigned to them; but as
occasion was, made excursions into other parts; though for the main they had a
more peculiar inspection over those parts that were allotted to them; usually
residing at some principal City of the Province, as S. John at Ephesus, S.
Philip at Hierapolis, etc. whence they might have a more convenient prospect of
affairs round about them, and hence it was that these places more peculiarly
got the title of Apostolical Churches, because first planted, or eminently
watered and cultivated by some Apostle, Matrices and Originales Fidei, as Di
praescript. Haeret. c. 21. p. 209.
Tertullian calls them, Mother-Churches, and the Originals of the Faith,
because here the Christian doctrine was first sown, and hence planted and
propagated to the Countries round about, Ecclesias apud unamquamque civitatem
condiderunt, a quibus traducem fidei and semina doctrinae, caeterae exinde
Ecclesiae mutuatae sunt, as his own words (...). c. 20. p. 208.
are.

VI. In pursuance of this general Commission we find the Apostles not long
after our Lord's Ascension traversing almost all parts of the then known World;
S. Andrew in Scythia and those Northern Countries, S. Thomas and Bartholomew in
India, S. Simon and S. Mark in Afric, Egypt, and the parts of Libya and
Mauritania, S. Paul, and probably Peter and some others in the farthest Regions
of the West: And all this done in the space of less than forty years, viz.
before the destruction of the Jewish State by Titus and the Roman Army. For so
our Lord had expressly foretold, that the Gospel of Matthew. 24. 14.
the Kingdom should be preached in all the World for a witness unto all
Nations, before the end came, that is, the end of the Jewish State, which the
Apostles a little before had called the end of the World, (...), the shutting
up or consummation of the Age, Verse 3.
the putting a final period to that present State and dispensation that the
Jews were under. And indeed strange it is to consider, that in so few years
these Evangelical Messengers should overrun all Countries; with what an
incredible swiftness did the Christian Faith like lightning pierce from East to
West, and diffuse it self over all quarters of the World, and that not only
unassisted by any secular advantages, but in defiance of the most fierce and
potent opposition, which every where set it self against it? It Is true the
impostures of Muhammed in a very little time gained a great part of the East.
But besides that this was not comparable to the universal spreading of
Christianity, his doctrine was calculated on purpose to gratify men's lusts,
and especially to comply with the loose and wanton manners of the East, and,
which is above all, had the sword to hew out its way before it: and we know how
ready even without force in all changes and revolutions of the world, the
conquered have been to follow the Religion of the Conquerors. Whereas the
Apostles had no visible advantages, nay, had all the enraged powers of the
world to contend against them. And yet in despite of all went on in triumph,
and quickly made their way into those places, where for so many Ages no other
conquest ever came; those parts of Britain (as (...). Jud. c. 7 p. 189.
Tertullian observes) which were unconquerable and unapproachable by the power
of the Roman Armies, submitting their necks to the yoke of Christ. A mighty
evidence (as he there argues) of Christ's Divinity, and that he was the true
Messiah. And indeed no reasonable account can be given of the strange and
successful progress of the Christian Religion in those first Ages of it, but
that it was the birth of Heaven, and had a Divine and Invisible power going
along with it to succeed and prosper it. Lib. qued. Chr. (...) Deus, c. 1. Tim.
5. p. 726.
S. Chrysoslom discourses this argument at large, some of whose elegant
reasonings I shall here transcribe. He tells the Gentile (with whom he was
disputing) that he would not prove Christ's Deity by a demonstration from
Heaven, by his Creation of the World, his great and stupendous miracles, his
raising the dead, curing the blind, expelling Devils; nor from the mighty
promises of a future state, and the resurrection of the dead (which an Infidel
might easily not only question, but deny) but from what was sufficiently
evident and (...) to the meanest Idiot, his planting and propagating
Christianity in the World. For it is not ( says he) in the power of a mere man,
in so short a time to encircle the World, to compass Sea and Land, and in
matters of so great importance to rescue mankind from the slavery of absurd and
unreasonable customs, and the powerful tyranny of evil habits: and these not
Romans only, but Persians, and the most barbarous Nations of the world. A
reformation which he wrought not by force and the power of the sword; nor by
pouring into the world numerous Legions and Armies: but by a few inconsiderable
men (no more at first than Eleven) a company of obscure and mean, simple and
illiterate, poor and helpless, naked and unarmed persons, who had scarce a
shoe to tread on, or a coat to cover them. And yet by these he persuaded so
great a part of mankind to be able freely to reason, not only of things of the
present, but of a future state; to renounce the Laws of their Country, and
throw off those ancient and inveterate customs, which had taken root for so
many Ages, and planted others in their room; and reduced men from those easy
ways, whereinto they were hurried, into the more rugged and difficult paths of
virtue. All which he did, while he had to contend with opposite powers, and
when he himself had undergone the most ignominious death, even the death of the
Cross. Afterward he addresses himself to the Jew, and discourses with him much
after the same rate. Consider ( says Ibid. c. 11. p. 746.
he) and bethink thy self, what it is in so short a time to fill the whole
world with so many famous Churches, to convert so many Nations to the Faith, to
prevail with men to forsake the Religion of their Country, to root up their
rites and customs, to shake off the Empire of lust and pleasure, and the Laws
of vice like dust; to abolish and abominate their Temples and their Altars,
their Idols and their Sacrifices, their profane and impious Festivals as dirt
and dung; and instead hereof to set up Christian Altars in all places, among
the Romans, Persians, Scythians, Moors and Indians; and not there only, but in
the Countries beyond this World of ours. For even the British Islands that lie
beyond the Ocean, and those that are in (...), have felt the power of the
Christian Faith; Churches and Altars being erected there to the service of
Christ. A matter truly great and admirable, and which would clearly have
demonstrated a Divine and Supereminent Power, although there had been no
opposition in the case, but that all things had run on calmly and smoothly, to
think that in so few years the Christian Faith should be able to reclaim the
whole World from its vicious customs, and to win them over to other manners,
more laborious and difficult, repugnant both to their native inclinations, and
to the Laws and principles of their education, and such as obliged them to a
more strict and accurate course of life; and these persons not one or two, not
twenty or an hundred, but in a manner all mankind: and this brought about by no
better instruments than a few rude and unlearned, private and unknown
tradesmen, who had neither estate nor reputation, learning nor eloquence,
kindred nor Country to recommend them to the world; a few Fishermen and
Tent-makers, and whom distinguished by their Language as well as their
Religion, the rest of the world scorned as barbarous. And yet these were the
men, by whom our Lord built up his Church, and extended it from one end of the
world unto the other. Other considerations there are with which the Father does
urge and illustrate this argument, which I forbear to insist on in this place.

VII. Sixthly, The power and authority conveyed by this Commission to the
Apostles, was equally conferred upon all of them. They were all chosen at the
same time, all equally empowered to Preach and Baptize, all equally entrusted
with the power of binding and loosing, all invested with the same mission, and
all equally furnished with the same gifts and powers of the Holy Ghost. Indeed
the Advocates of the Church of Rome do with a mighty zeal and fierceness
contend for S. Peter's being Head and Prince of the Apostles, advanced by
Christ to a supremacy and prerogative not only above, but over the rest of the
Apostles; and not without reason, the fortunes of that Church being concerned
in the supremacy of S. Peter. No wonder therefore they ransack all corners,
press and force in whatever may but seem to give countenance to it. Witness
those thin and miserable shifts, which Bellarmine calls arguments, to prove and
make it good; so utterly devoid of all rational conviction, so unable to
justify themselves to sober and considering men, that a man would think they
had been contrived for no other purpose, than to cheat sools, and make wise men
laugh. And the truth is, nothing with me more shakes the reputation of the
wisdom of that learned man, than his making use of such weak and trifling
arguments in so important and concerning an Article, so vital and essential to
the constitution of that Church. As when he argues Peter's (...) Romans Pontis.
lib. 1. c. 17. 18. and siq.
superiority from the mere changing of his name, (for what is this to supremacy?
besides that it was not done to him alone, the same being done to James and
John) from his being first reckoned up in the Catalogue of Apostles, his
walking with Christ upon the water, his paying tribute for his Master and
himself, his being commanded to let down the Net, and Christ's teaching in
Peter's ship, (and this ship must denote the Church, and Peter's being owner of
it, entitle him to be supreme Ruler and Governor of the Church, so Bellarmine
in terms as plain as he could well express it) from Christ's first washing
Peter's feet (though the story recorded by the Evangelist says no such thing)
and his foretelling only his death: all which and many more prerogatives of S.
Peter, to the number of no less than XXVIII. are summoned in to give in
evidence in this cause; and many of these too drawn out of Apocryphal and
supposititious Authors, and not only uncertain, but absurd and fabulous: and
yet upon such arguments as these do they found his paramount authority. A plain
evidence of a desperate and sinking cause, when such twigs must be laid hold on
to support and keep it above water. Had they suffered Peter to be content with
a primacy of Order (which his age and gravity seemed to challenge for him) no
wise and peaceable man would have denied it, as being a thing ordinarily
practiced among equals, and necessary to the well governing a society: but when
nothing but a primacy of Power will serve the turn, as if the rest of the
Apostles had been inferior to him, this may by no means be granted, as being
expressly contrary to the positive determination of our Savior, when the
Apostles were contending about this very thing, which of them should be
accounted the greatest, he thus quickly decides the case, The Kings of the
Gentiles exercise Lordship Matthew. 20, 25, 26, 27.
over them, and they that are great, exercise authority upon them. But ye shall
not be so: but Luke 22, 24, 25, 26,
whosover will be great among you, let him be your Minister, and whosoever will
be chief among you, let him be your Servant. Than which nothing could have been
more peremptorily spoken, to rebuke this naughty spirit of pre-eminence. Nor do
we ever find S. Peter himself laying claim to any such power, or the Apostles
giving him the least shadow of it. In the whole course of his affairs there are
no intimations of this matter; in his Epistle he styles himself but their
fellow-Presbyter, and expressly forbids the governors of the Church to Lord it
over God's heritage. When dispatched by the rest of the Apostles upon a message
to Samaria, he never disputes their authority to do it; when accused by them
for going in unto the Gentiles, does he stand upon his prerogative? no, but
submissively apologizes for himself; nay, when smartly reproved by S. Paul at
Antioch (when, if ever, his credit lay at stake) do we find him excepting
against it as an affront to his supremacy, and a saucy controlling his
superior? surely the quite contrary; he quietly submitted to the reproof, as
one that was sensible how justly he had (...) it. Nor can it be supposed but
that S. Paul would have carried it toward him with a greater reverence, had
any such peculiar sovereignty been then known to the World. How confidently
does S. Paul assert himself to be no whit inferior to the chiefest Apostles,
not to Peter himself? the Gospel of the uncircumcision being committed to him,
as that of the circumcision was to Peter. Is Peter often named first among the
Apostles? elsewhere others, sometimes James, sometimes Paul and Apollos, are
placed before him. Did Christ honor him with some singular commendations? an
honorable elogium conveys no super-eminent power and sovereignty. Was he dear
to Christ? we know another, that was the beloved Disciple. So little warrant is
there to exalt one above the rest, where Christ made all alike. Hic erant
utique and ceteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti. and
honoris and pote ^^^^. Cyprian de unitat. Eccles. p. 180.
If from Scripture we descend to the ancient Writers of the Church; we shall
find that though the Fathers bestow very great and honorable Titles upon
Peter; yet they give the same, or what are equivalent to others of the
Apostles. Orat. in S. Jac. ap (...). Cod. (...). Col. 1525.
Hesychius styles S. James the Great, the Brother of our Lord, the Commander of
the new Jerusalem, the Prince of Priests, the Exarch or chief of the Apostles,
(...) the top or crown amongst the heads, the great light amongst the Lamps,
the most illustrious and resplendent amongst the stars: 'twas Peter that
preached, but 'twas James that made the determination, etc. Of S. Andrew he
gives this encomium, (...). S. Thom. ibid.
that he was the sacerdotal Trumpet, the first born of the Apostolic Quire,
(...), the prime and firm (...). col. 1488.
Pillar of the Church, Peter before Peter, the foundation of the foundation,
the first fruits of the beginning. Peter and John are said to be (...), equally
honorable, by S. Cyril In Conc. Ephesians. (...). Tom. 2. p. 209.
with his whole Synod of Alexandria. S. John (says Prolog. in (...). p. 2.
Chrysostom) was Christ's beloved, the Pillar of all the Churches in the world,
who had the Keys of Heaven, drank of his Lords cup, was washed with his
Baptism, and with confidence lay in his bosom. And of De Pet. (...). Zeb. p.
378. Tom. 1.
S. Paul he tells us, that he was the most excellent of all men, the Teacher of
the world, the Bridegroom of Christ, the Planter of the Church, the wise
Master Builder, greater than the Apostles, and much more to the same purpose.
Elsewhere he says, In illud. sal. Aquil and (...). p. 218. (...) 5.
that the care of the whole world was committed to him, that nothing could be
more noble or illustrious, yea that (his Miracles considered) he was more
excellent than Kings themselves. And a little after Ibid. p. 221.
he calls him the tongue of the earth, the light of the Churches, (...) the
foundation of the faith, the pillar and ground of truth. And in a discourse on
purpose, wherein he compares Peter and Paul together, he makes them of equal
esteem and virtue; (...). in Petr. and Paul. p. 261. Tom. 6.
(...) What greater than Peter? What equal to Paul? a Blessed pair! (...), who
had the Souls of the whole world committed to their charge. But instances of
this nature were endless and infinite. If the Fathers at any time style Peter,
Prince of the Apostles, they mean no more by it, than the best and purest
Latin writers mean by princeps, the first or chief person of the number, more
considerable than the rest, either for his age or zeal. Thus (...). l. 2. c.
14. p. 52.
Eusebius tells us, Peter was (...), the prolocutor of all the rest, (...) for
the greatness and generosity of his mind, that is, in In (...). c. 16. p. 483.
Chrysostom's language, he was the mouth and chief of the Apostles, (...)
because eager and forward at every turn, and ready to answer those questions
which were put to others. In short, as he had no Prerogative above the rest,
besides his being the Chairman and President of the Assembly, so was it
granted to him upon no other considerations, than those of his age, zeal, and
gravity, for which he was more eminent than the rest.

VIII. We proceed next to enquire into the fitness and qualification of the
Persons commissionated for this employment; and we shall find them admirably
qualified to discharge it, if we consider this following account. First, They
immediately received the Doctrine of the Gospel from the mouth of Christ
himself; he intended them for Legati a latere, his peculiar Embassaders to the
World, and therefore furnished them with instructions from his own mouth; and
in order hereunto he trained them up for some years under his own Discipline
and institution: he made them to understand the mysteries of the Kingdom of
(...), when to others it was not given; treated them with the affection of a
Father, and the freedom and familiarity of a friend. Henceforth I call Joh. 15.
15.
you not servants, for the servant knows not what his Lord does, but I have
called you friends: for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made
known unto you. They heard all his Sermons, were privy both to his public and
private discourses; what he preached abroad, he expounded to them at home; he
gradually instructed them in the knowledge of Divine things, and imparted to
them the notions and mysteries of the Gospel, not all at once, but as they were
able to bear them. By which means they were sufficiently capable of giving a
satisfactory account of that doctrine to others, which had been so immediately,
so frequently communicated to themselves. Secondly, They were insallibly
secured from error in delivering the Doctrins and Principles of Christianity:
for though they were not absolutely priviledg'd from failures and miscarriages
in their lives, (these being of more personal and private consideration) yet
were they infallible in their Doctrine, this being a matter whereupon the
salvation and eternal interests of men did depend. And for this end they had
the spirit of truth promised to Joh. 16. 13.
them, who should guide them into all truth. Under the conduct of this unerring
Guide they all steered the same course, taught and spoke the same things,
though at different times, and in distant places: and for what was consigned to
writing, all Scripture was given by inspiration of God, and the holy men spoke
not, but as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Hence that exact and admirable
harmony that is in all their writings and relations, as being all equally
dictated by the same spirit of truth. Thirdly, They had been eyewitnesses of
all the material passages of our Savior's life, continually conversant with
him from the commencing of his public ministry, till his ascension into
heaven; they had surveyed all his actions, seen all his miracles, observed the
whole method of his conversation, and some of them attended him in his most
private solitudes and retirements. And this could not but be a very rational
satisfaction to the minds of men, when the publishers of the Gospel solemnly
declared to the world, that they reported nothing concerning our Savior, but
what they had seen with their own eyes, and of the truth whereof they were as
competent Judges, as the acutest Philosopher in the world. Nor could there be
any just (...) to suspect that they imposed upon men in what they delivered;
for besides their naked plainness and simplicity in all other passages of their
lives, they cheerfully submitted to the most exquisire hardships, tortures, and
sufferings merely to attest the truth of what they published to the World. Next
to the evidence of our own senses, no testimony is more valid and forcible,
than his who relates what himself has seen. Upon this account our Lord told his
Apostles, that they should be witnesses to him both in Judaea and Samaria, and
to the uttermost parts of the earth. And Act. 1. 8.
so necessary a qualification of an Apostle was this thought to be, that it was
almost the only condition propounded in the choice of a new Apostle after the
fall of Judas: Wherefore (says Peter) of these men which have companied with us
all the time that the Lord Act. 1. 21, 22.
Jesus went (...) and out among us, beginning from the Baptism of John, unto
the same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness
with us of his (...). Accordingly we find the Apostles constantly making use of
this argument as the most rational evidence to convince those whom they had to
deal with. We are witnesses of all things which Jesus did both in the Land of
the Jews, and in Jerusalem, whom they slew and Act. 10. 39, 40, etc.
hanged on a tree: Him God raised up the third day, and showed him openly, not
to all the people, but unto witnesses, chosen (...) of God, even to us, who did
eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead: And he commanded us to
preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he that is ordained of God
to be Judge of the quick and dead. Thus S. John after the same way of arguing
appeals to sensible demonstration, That which was from the beginning, 1 John 1.
1, 2, 3.
which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life: (For the life was
manifested, and we have seen it and bear witness, and show unto you that
cternal life which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us) That which
we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship
with us. This, to name no more, S. Peter thought a sufficient vindication of
the Apostolical doctrine from the suspicion of forgery and imposture, 2 Pet. 1.
16, 17.
We have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the
power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his
majesty. God had frequently given testimony to the divinity of our blessed
Savior, by visible manifestations and appearances from Heaven, and
particularly by an audible voice, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased. Now this Voice which came from Heaven (says he) we heard, when we were
with him in the holy Mount.

IX. Fourthly, The Apostles were invested with a power of working Miracles, as
the readiest means to procure their Religion a firm belief and entertainment in
the minds of men. For Miracles are the great confirmation of the truth of any
doctrine, and the most rational evidence of a divine commission. For seeing God
only can create, and control the Laws of nature, produce something out of
nothing, and call things that are not, as if they were, give eyes to them that
were born blind, raise the dead, etc. things plainly beyond all possible powers
of nature; no man that believes the wisdom and goodness of an infinite being,
can suppose that this God of truth should affix his seal to a lie, or
communicate this power to any that would abuse it, to confirm and countenance
delusions and impostures. Nicodemus his reasoning was very plain and
convictive, when he concludes that Christ must needs be a teacher come from
God, for that no man could do those Joh. 3. 2.
Miracles that he did, except God were with him. The force of which argument
lies here, that nothing but a Divine power can work Miracles, and that Almighty
God cannot be supposed miraculously to assist any but those, whom he himself
sends upon his own errand. The stupid and barbarous Lycaonians, when they
beheld the Man who had been a Cripple from his Mothers womb, cured by S. Paul
in an instant only with the speaking Act. 14. 10, 11.
of a word, saw that there was something in it more than humane, and therefore
concluded that the Gods were come down to them in the likeness of men. Upon
this account 2 Cor. 12 12.
S. Paul reckons Miracles among the (...), the signs and evidences of an
Apostle, whom therefore (...). Chiysott. (...). 29. in (...). p. 302, 303.
Chrysostom brings in elegantly pleading for himself, that though he could not
show as the signs of his Priesthood and Ministry, long Robes, and gaudy
Vestments, with Bells sounding at their borders, as the Aaronical Priests did
of old; though he had no golden Crowns or holy Mitres, yet could he produce
what was infinitely more venerable and regardable than all these,
unquestionable Signs and Miracles: he came not with Altars and Oblations, with
a number of strange and symbolick Rites; but what was greater, raised the dead
cast out Devils, cured the blind, healed the lame, making the Gentiles obedient
by word and deed, thorough many signs and wonders wrought by the power of the
spirit of God. These were the things that clearly showed that their mission and
ministry was not from men, nor taken up of their own heads, but that they acted
herein by a Divine warrant and authority. That therefore it might plainly
appear to the World, that they did not falsify in what they said, or deliver
any more than God had given them in commission, he enabled them to do strange
and miraculous operations, bearing them witness both with signs and wonders,
and with diverse miracles and gifts Hebr. 2. 4.
of the Holy Ghost. This was a power put into the first draught of their
commission, when confined only to the Cities of Israel; As ye go, preach,
saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is Matt. 10. 7, 8.
at hand; Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out Devils,
freely you have received, freely give: but more fully confirmed upon them, when
our Lord went to Heaven, then he told them, that these signs should follow them
that believe, that in his Name (...) 16. 17. (...).
they should cast out Devils, and speak with new tongues; that they should take
up serpents, and if they drank any deadly thing it should not hurt them, that
they should lay hands on the sick and they should recover: And the event was
accordingly, for they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working
with them, and confirming the word with signs following. When Paul and Barnabas
came up to the Council at Jerusalem, this was one of the first things they gave
an account of, all the multitude keeping silence, while they declared Act. 15.
12.
what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them. Thus the
very shadow of Peter as he passed by cured the sick: thus God wrought special
miracles by Act. 19. 11, 12.
the hands of Paul: so that from his body were brought unto the sick,
handkerchiefs, or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil
spirits went out of them. So that besides the innate characters of Divinity
which the Christian religion brought along with it, containing nothing but what
was highly reasonable, and very becoming God to reveal; it had the highest
external evidence that any Religion was capable of, the attestation of great
and unquestionable Miracles, done not once or twice, not privately and in
corners, not before a few simple and credulous persons, but frequently and at
every turn, publicly and in places of the most solemn concourse, before the
wisest and most judicious enquirers, and this power of miracles continued not
only during the Apostles time, but for some Ages after.

X. But because besides Miracles in general, the Scripture takes particular
notice of many gifts and powers of the Holy Ghost conferred upon the Apostles
and first Preachers of the Gospel, it may not be amiss to consider some of the
chiefest and most material of them, as we find them enumerated by the Apostle,
only premising this observation, 1 Cor. 12. 9, 10.
that though these gifts were distinctly distributed to persons of an inferior
order, so that one had this, and another that, yet were they all conferred upon
the Apostles, and doubtless in larger proportions than upon the rest. First, we
take notice of the gift of Prophecy, a clear evidence of divine inspiration,
and an extraordinary mission, the testimony Rev. 19. 10.
of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. It had been for many Ages the signal and
honorable privilege of the Jewish Church, and that the Christian Economy
might challenge as sacred regards from men, and that it might appear that God
had not withdrawn his Spirit from his Church in this new state of things, it
was revived under the dispensation of the Gospel, according to that famous
prophecy of Joel exactly accomplished (as Peter told the Jews) upon the day of
(...), when the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost were so plentifully shed
upon the Apostles and Primitive Christians; This is that which was spoken by
the Prophet Joel, It shall come to pass in the last days (says God) I will
pour Joel 2. 18, 19. Act. 2. 16, 17, (...).
out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall (...),
and your young Men shall see (...), and your old Men shall dream Dreams; and on
my servants, and on my Hand-maidens I will pour out in those days of my spirit,
and they shall prophecy. It lay in general in revealing and making known to
others the mind of God, but discovered it self in particular instances; partly
in forctelling things to come, and what should certainly happen in aftertimes:
a thing set beyond the reach of any finite understanding; for though such
effects as depend upon natural agents, or moral and political causes, may be
foreseen by studious and considering persons, yet the knowledge of futurities,
things purely contingent, that merely depend upon men's choice, and their
mutable and uncertain wills, can only fall under his view, who at once beholds
things past, present, and to come. Now this was conferred upon the Apostles and
some of the first Christians, as appears from many instances in the History of
the Apostolic Acts, and we find the Apostles writings frequently interspersed
with prophetical predictions concerning the great apostasy from the (...), the
universal corruption and degeneracy of manners, the rise of particular
heresies, the coming of Antichrist, and several other things which the spirit
said (...) should come to pass in the latter times; besides that S. John's
whole Book of Revelation is almost entirely made up of prophecies concerning
the future state and condition of the Church. Sometimes by this spirit of
prophecy God declared things that were of present concernment to the exigences
of the Church, as when he signified to them that they should set apart Paul and
Barnabas for the conversion of the Gentiles, and many times immediately
designed particular persons to be Pastors and Governors of the Church. Thus we
read of the gift that was given to Timothy by prophecy, with the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery, that is, his Ordination, to which he was
particularly pointed out by some prophetic designation. But the main use of
this prophetic gift in those times was to explain some of the more difficult
and particular parts of the Christian doctrine, especially to expound and apply
the ancient prophecies concerning the (...) and his Kingdom in their public
Assemblies; whence the gift of prophecy is explained by understanding all
mysteries, and all knowledge, that is, the most dark 1 Cor. 18. 2.
and difficult places of Scripture, the types and figures, the ceremonies and
prophecies of the Old Testament. And thus we are commonly to understand those
words, Prophets, and prophesying, that so familiarly occur in the New
Testament. Having (...) differing Romans 12. 8.
according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy
according to the proportion of faith, that is, expound Scripture according to
the generally-received principles of Faith and Life. So the Apostle elsewhere
prescribing Rules for the decent and orderly managing of Divine worship in
their public Assemblies, let the Prophets 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31, 32.
(says he) speak two or three (that is, at the same Assembly) and let the other
judge; and if while any is thus expounding, another has a Divine (...), whereby
he is more particularly enabled to explain some difficult and emergent passage,
let the first hold his peace: for ye may all, all that have this gift,
prophecy one by one, that so thus orderly proceeding, all may learn, and all
may be comforted. Nor can the (...) pretend that this interruption is an
unseasonable check to his revelation, seeing he may command himself; for though
among the Gentiles the prophetic and (...) impulse did so violently press upon
the inspired Person, that he could not govern himself, yet in the Church of God
the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, may be so ruled and
restrained by them, as to make way for others. This order of Christian Prophets
considered as a distinct Ministry by it self is constantly placed next to the
Apostolical Office, and is frequently by Saint Paul preferred before any other
spiritual Gifts then bestowed upon the Church. When this spirit of Prophecy
ceased in the Christian Church, we cannot certainly find. It continued some
competent time beyond the Apostolic Age. ( Dial, cum (...). p. 308.
) Justin Martyr expressly tells Trypho the Jew, (...), the gifts of Prophecy are
even yet extant among us; an argument, as he there tells him, that those things
which had of old been the great Privileges of their Church, were now
translated into the Christian Church. And ( H. (...). 5. (...). 3. p. 168.
) (...) speaking of a Revelation made to one Alcibiades, who lived about the
time of Irenaeus, adds, that the Divine Grace had not withdrawn its Presence
from the Church, but that they still had the Holy Ghost as their Councellor to
direct them.

XI. Secondly, They had the gift of discerning spirits, whereby they were
enabled to discover the truth or falsehood of men's pretenses, whether their
gifts were real or counterfeit, and their persons truly inspired or not. For
many men acted only by diabolical impulses, might entitle themselves to Divine
inspirations, and others might be imposed upon by their delusions, and mistake
their dreams and fancies for the Spirits dictates and revelations; or might so
subtly and artificially counterfeit revelations, that they might with most
pass for current, especially in those times when these supernatural gifts were
so common and ordinary; and our Lord himself had (...) told them that false
Prophets would arise, and that many would confidently plead for themselves
before him, that they had prophesied in his name. That therefore the Church
might not be imposed upon, God was pleased to endue the Apostles, and it may be
some others, with an immediate faculty of discerning the Chafe from the Wheat,
true from false Prophets; nay, to know when the true Prophets delivered the
revelations of the Spirit, and when they expressed only their own conceptions.
This was a mighty privilege, but yet seems to me to have extended farther, to
judge of the sincerity or hypocrisy of men's hearts in the profession of
Religion, that so bad men being discovered, suitable censures and punishments
might be passed upon them, and others cautioned to avoid them. Thus Peter at
first sight discovered Ananias and Saphira, and the rotten hypocrisy of their
intentions, before there was any external evidence in the case; and told Simon
Magus, though baptized before upon his embracing Christianity, that his Act, 8
21, 23.
heart was not right in the sight of God, for I perceive (says he) that thou
art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. Thirdly, the
Apostles had the gift of Tongues, furnished with variety of utterance, able to
speak on a sudden several languages which they had never learnt, as occasion
was administered, and the exigences of persons and Nations with whom they
conversed, did require. For the (...) being principally designed to convert the
world, and to plant Christianity in all Countries and Nations; it was
absolutely necessary that they should be able readily to express their minds in
the Languages of those Countries to which they addressed themselves: seeing
otherwise it would have been a work of time and difficulty, and not consistent
with the term of the Apostles lives, had they been first to learn the different
Languages of those Nations, before they could have preached the Gospel to them.
Hence this gift was diffused upon the Apostles in larger measures and
proportions than upon other men; I speak 1 Cor. 14
with Tongues more than you all, says S. Paul; that is, than all the gifted
persons in the Church of Corinth. Our Lord had told the Apostles before his
departure from them, that they should be endued with power from on high, which
upon the day of Pentecost was particularly made good in this instance, when in
a moment they were enabled to speak almost all the Languages of the then known
World, and this as a specimen and firstfruits of the rest of those miraculous
powers that were conferred upon them.

XII. A fourth gift was that of Interpretation, or unfolding to others what had
been delivered in an unknown tongue. For the Christian Assemblies in those days
were frequently made up of men of different Nations, and who could not
understand what the Apostles or others had spoken to the Congregation; this God
supplied by this gift of interpretation, enabling some to interpret what others
did not understand, and to speak it to them in their own native language. S.
Paul largely discourses the necessity 1 Cor. 14.
of this gift in order to the instructing and edifying of the Church, seeing
without it their meetings could be no better than the Assembly at Babel after
the confusion of Languages, where one man must needs be a Barbarian to another,
and all the praying and preaching of the Minister of the Assembly be to many
altogether fruitless and unprofitable, and no better than a speaking into the
Air. What Is the speaking though with the tongue of Angels to them that do not
understand it? How can the Idiot and unlearned say Amen, who understands not
the language of him that gives thanks? The duty may be done with admirable
quaintness and accuracy, but what is he the better, from whom it is locked up in
an unknown tongue? A consideration that made the Apostle solemnly profess, that
he had rather speak five words in the Church with his understanding, that Verse
by his voice he may teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown
tongue. Therefore if any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be but by two,
or at most by three, and let Verse
one interpret what the rest have spoken: but if there be no interpreter, none
present able to do this, let him keep silence in the Church, and speak to
himself and to God. A man that impartially reads this discourse of the Apostle,
may wonder how the Church of Rome in defiance of it can so openly practice, so
confidently defend their Bible and Divine Services in an unknown tongue, so
flatly repugnant to the dictates of common reason, the usage of the first
Christian Church, and these plain Apostolical commands. But this is not the
only instance wherein that Church has departed both from Scripture, Reason, and
the practice of the first and purest Ages of Christianity. Indeed there is some
cause why they are so zealous to keep both Scripture and their Divine Worship
in a strange Language, lest by reading the one the people should become wise
enough to discover the gross errors and corruptions of the other. Fifthly, The
Apostles had the gift of Healing, of curing diseases without the arts of
Physic; the most inveterate distempers being equally removable by an Almighty
power, and vanishing at their speaking of a word. This begot an extraordinary
veneration for them and their Religion among the common sort of men, who, as
they are strongliest moved with sensible effects, so are most taken with those
miracles that are beneficial to the life of man. Hence the infinite Cures done
in every place, God mercifully providing that the Body should partake with the
Soul in the advantages of the Gospel, the cure of the one ushering in many
times the conversion of the other. This gift was very common in those early
days, bestowed not upon the Apostles only, but the ordinary Governors of the
Church, who were wont to lay their hands upon the sick, and sometimes to anoint
them Jam. 5. 14. 15, 16.
with oil (a symbolick rite in use among the Jews, to denote the grace of God)
and to pray over, and for them in the name of the Lord Jesus, whereby upon a
hearty confession and forsaking of their sins, both health and pardon were at
once bestowed upon them. How long this gift, with its appendant ceremony of
Unction lasted in the Church, is not easy to determine; that it was in use in
Ad (...). c. 4. p. (...).
Tertullian's time, we learn from the instance he gives us of Proculus a
Christian, who cured the Emperor Severus, by anointing him with oil; for which
the Emperor had him in great honor, and kept him with him at Court all his
life; it afterward vanishing by degrees, as all other miraculous powers, as
Christianity gained firm sooting in the World. As for Extreme (...), so
generally maintained and practiced in the Church of Rome, nay, and by them made
a Sacrament, I doubt it will receive very little countenance from this
Primitive usage. Indeed could they as easily restore sick men to health, as
they can anoint them with oil, I think no body would contradict them; but till
they can pretend to the one, I think it unreasonable they should use the other.
The best is, though founding it upon this Apostolical practice, they have
turned it to a quite contrary purpose, instead of recovering men to life and
health, to dispose and fit them for dying, when all hopes of life are taken
from them.

XIII. Sixthly, The Apostles were invested with a power of immediately
inflicting corporal punishments upon great and notorious sinners; and this
probably is that which he means by his (...), operations of powers, or working
miracles, which 1 Cor. 12. 10.
surely cannot be meant of miracles in general, being reckoned up amongst the
particular gifts of the Holy Ghost, nor is there any other to which it can with
equal probability refer. A power to inflict diseases upon the body, as when S.
Paul struck Elymas the Sorcerer with blindness, and sometimes extending to the
loss of life it self, as in the sad instance of Ananias and Saphira. This was
the Virga Apostolica, the Rod (mentioned by S. Paul) which the Apostles held
and shak'd over scandalous and insolent offenders, 1 Cor. 4. 21.
and sometimes laid upon them: What will ye? shall I come to you with a rod? or
in love, and the spirit of meekness? Where, observe (says (...). Chrysostom.
(...). 14. in 1. ad Corinth. p. 444. vid. (...). in loc, Tom. 9. p. 305.
Chrysostom) how the Apostle tempers his discourse; the love and meekness, and
his desire to know, argued care and kindness; but the rod spoke dread and
terror: a Rod of severity and punishment, and which sometimes mortally
chastised the offender. Elsewhere he frequently gives intimations of this
power, when he has to deal with stubborn and incorrigible persons; Having in a
readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled; for
though I should boast something more of our authority (which the Lord has
given us for edification, and 2 Cor. 10. 6, 8, 9.
not for your destruction) I should not be ashamed; that I may not seem as if I
would terrify you by letters. And he again puts them in mind of it at the
close of his Epistle, I told you Chap. 13. 2.
before, and foretell you as if I were present the second time, and being
absent now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all others,
that if I come again I will not spare. But he hoped these smart warnings would
supersede all further severity against them; Therefore I write these things
being absent, lest being present I Verse 10.
should use sharpness, according to the power which the Lord has given me to
edification, and 1 Cor. 5. 5. vid. (...). and (...). in loc.
not to destruction. Of this nature was the delivering over persons unto Satan
for the destruction of the flesh, the chastising the body by some present pain
or sickness, that the spirit might be saved by being brought to a seasonable
repentance. Thus he dealt with Hymeneus and Alexander, who had made shipwreck
of Faith and a good Conscience, he delivered 1 Timothy 1. 20.
them unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme. Nothing being more
usual in those times than for (...) excommunicate, and cut off from the body of
the Church, to be presently arrested by Satan, (...) the common Sergeant and
Executioner, and by him either actually possessed, or tormented in their bodies
by some diseases which he brought upon them. And indeed this severe discipline
was no more than necessary in those times, when Christianity was wholly
destitute of any civil or coercive power, to beget and keep up a due reverence
and regard to the sentence and determinations of the Church, and to secure the
Laws of Religion, and the holy censures from being slighted by every bold and
contumacious offender. And this effect we find it had after the dreadful
instance of (...) and Saphira, Great fear came upon all the Acts 5. 11.
Church, and upon as many as heard these things. To what has been said
concerning these Apostolical gifts, let me further observe, That they had not
only these gifts residing in themselves, but a power to bestow them upon
others, so that by imposition of hands or upon hearing and embracing the
Apostle's doctrine, and being baptized into the Christian Faith, they could
confer these miraculous powers upon persons thus qualifisied to receive them,
whereby they were in a moment enabled to speak diverse Languages, to Prophecy,
to Interpret, and do other miracles to the admiration and astonishment of all
that heard and saw them. A privilege peculiar to the Apostles; for we do not
find that any inferior Order of gifted persons were entrusted with it. And
therefore as (...). (...), 18. in Act. (...).
Chrysostom well observes, though Philip the Deacon wrought great miracles at
Samaria, to the conversion of many, yea to the conviction of Simon Magus
himself, yet the Holy Ghost fell upon none of them, only they were baptized in
the Name of the Lord Jesus: till Peter and John came down to them, who having
prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost, they laid their hands
upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost. Which when the Magician beheld, he
offered the Apostles money to enable him, that on whom soever he laid his
hands, he might derive these miraculous powers upon them.

XIV. Having seen how sitly furnished the Apostles were for the execution of
their Office, let us in the last place enquire into its duration and
continuance. And here it must be considered, that in the Apostolical Office
there was something extraordinary, and something ordinary. What was (...) was
their immediate Commission derived from the mouth of Christ himself, their
unlimited charge to preach the Gospel up and down the World, without being tied
to any particular places; the supernatural and miraculous powers conferred upon
them as Apostles; their infallible guidance in delivering the doctrines of the
Gospel; and these all expired and determined with their persons. The standing
and perpetual part of it was to teach and instruct the people in the duties and
principles of Religion, to administer the Sacraments, to constitute Guides and
(...), and to exercise the discipline and government of the Church: and in
these they are succeeded by the ordinary Rulers and Ecclesiastic Guides, who
were to superintend and discharge the affairs and offices of the Church, to the
end of the World. Whence it is that Bishops and Governors came to be styled
Apostles, as being their successors in ordinary; for so they frequently are in
the writings of the Church. Thus Timothy, who was Bishop of Ephesus, is called
an (...) H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 2. p. 24.
Apostle; Clemens of Rome, Clemens the (...). Al. Strom. (...). 4. p 516.
Apostle; S. Mark Bishop of Alexandria, by H. Eccl. (...). 2. c. 24. p. 66.
(...) styled both an Apostle and Evangelist; Ignatius, a Bishop and (...).
Encom. S. Ignat. p. 499. T. (...).
Apostle. A title that continued in after Ages, especially given to those that
were the first planters or restorers of Christianity in any Country. In the
Coptick Calendar, published by (...). lib. 3. (...). 15. p. 398.
Mr. Seldom, the VIIth day of the month Baschnes, answering to our Second of
May, is dedicated to the memory of S. Athanasius the Apostle. Acacius and
Paulus in their Praefix. (...). de (...). p. 1.
Letter to Epiphanius, style him (...), a new Apostle and Preacher: and Lib. 6.
Ep. 4. p. 147. (...). Ep. 7. p. 150.
Sidonius Apollinaris writing to Lupus Bishop of Troyes in France, speaks of
the honor due to his eminent Apostleship. An observation which it were easy
enough to confirm by abundant instances, were it either doubtful in it self, or
necessary to my purpose, but being neither, I forbear.

Joan. Euchait. Metropolitae (...). p. 70.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
THE LIFE OF S. PETER.
S. PETER.
He was crucified at Rome with his head downwards, and Buried in the Vatican
there. S. Hierom. after he had planted a Christian Church first at Antioch and
afterward at Rome.

S. Peter's Martyrdom.
Ioh. 21. 18. 19. Verily verily I say unto thee when thou wast young thou
girdedst thy self and walkedst whither thou would but when thou shall be old
thou shall stretch forth thy hands and another shall gird thee and carry thee
whither thou would not. This spoke he signifying by what death he should
glorify God




SECT. I. Of S. Peter from his Birth till his First coming to Christ.
Bethsaida S. Peter's Birthplace: Its dignity of old, and fate at this day.
The time of his Birth enquired into. Some Errors noted concerning it. His
names; Cephas, the imposing of it notes no Superiority over the rest of the
Apostles. The custom of Popes assuming a new Name at their Election to the
Papacy, whence. His kindred and relations; whether He or Andrew the elder
Brother. His Trade and way of life what, before his coming to Christ. The Sea
of Galilee, and the convenience of it. The meanness and obscurity of his Trade.
The remarkable appearances of the Divine Providence in propagating Christianity
in the World by mean and unlikely Instruments.

THE Land of Palestine was, at and before, the coming of our Blessed Savior,
distinguished into three several Provinces, Judaea, Samaria, and Galilee. This
last was divided into the Upper, and the Lower. In the Upper, called also
Galilee of the Gentiles, within the division anciently belonging to the Tribe
of Nephthali, stood Bethsaida, formerly an obscure and inconsiderable Village,
till lately reedified and enlarged by Joseph. Antiqu. Judaic. lib. 18. cap. 3.
p. 618.
Philip the Tetrarch, by him advanced to the place and title of a City,
replenished with inhabitants, and fortified with power and strength; and in
honor of Julia the daughter of Augustus Caesar, by him styled Julias. Situate
it was upon the banks of the Sea of Galilee, and had a Wilderness on the other
side, thence called the Desert of Bethsaida, whither our Savior used often to
retire, the privacies and solitudes of the place advantageously ministering to
Divine contemplations. But Bethsaida was not so remarkable for this adjoining
Wilderness, as it self was memorable for a worse sort of Barrenness,
Ingratitude and Unprofitableness under the influences of Christ's Sermons and
Miracles, thence severely upbraided by him, and threatened with one of his
deepest woes, Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto Matthew. 11. 21.
thee Bethsaida, etc. A woe that it seems stuck close to it, for whatever it
was at this time, J. Co^ovic. Itiner. Hierosol. lib. 3. c. 8. p. 358
one who surveyed it in the last Age tells us, that it was shrunk again into a
very mean and small Village, consisting only of a few cottages of Moors and
wild Arabs; and later travelers have since assured us, that even these are
dwindled away into one poor cottage at this day. So fatally does sin undermine
the greatest, the goodliest places; so certainly does God's Word take place,
and not one lot a either of his promises or threatenings fall to the ground.
Next to the honor that was done it by our Savior's presence, who living most
in these parts frequently resorted hither, it had nothing greater to recommend
it to the notice of posterity, than that (besides some other of the Apostles)
it was the Birthplace of S. Peter; a person how inconsiderable soever in his
private fortunes, yet of great note and eminency, as one of the prime
Ambassadors of the Son of God, to whom both Sacred and Ecclesiastical stories
give, though not a superiority, a precedence in the College of Apostles.

2. THE particular time of his Birth cannot be recovered, no probable footsteps
or intimations being left of it: in the general we may conclude him at least
Ten years elder than his Master; his married condition, and settled course of
life at his first coming to Christ, and that authority and respect which the
gravity of his person procured him amongst the rest of the Apostles, can speak
him no less: but for any thing more particular and positive in this matter, I
see no reason to affirm. Indeed might we trust the account, which one (who
pretends to calculate his Nativity with ostentation enough) has given of it, we
are told that he was born three years before the Blessed Virgin, and just XVII.
before the Incarnation of our Savior. But let us view his account.

Not. est Ann.
ab Orb Cond. 4034 a Diluvio 2378 V. G. 734 Ann.
Oct. August. 8 a 10 ejus consul. 24 a pugna Actiac. 12
An.
Herodis Reg. 20 ante B. Virg. 3 Surgel. de S. Petro cap. 1.
ante Chr. not. 17

When I met with such a pompous train of Epocha's, the least I expected was
truth and certainty. This computation he grounds upon the date of S. Peter's
death, placed (as Ib. c. 49.
elsewhere he tells us) by Bellarmine in the LXXXVI. year of his Age; so that
recounting from the year of Christ LXIX. when Peter is commonly said to have
suffered, he runs up his Age to his Birth, and spreads it out into so many
several dates. But alas, all is built upon a sandy bottom. For besides his
mistake about the year of the World, few of his dates hold due correspondence.
But the worst of it is, that after all this, Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 2.
c. 9. col. 624.
Bellarmine (upon whose single testimony all this fine fabric is erected) says
no such thing, but only supposes, merely for arguments sake, that S. Peter
might very well be LXXXVI. ('it is erroneously printed LXXVI.) years old at the
time of his Martyrdom. So far will confidence, or ignorance, or both carry men
aside, if it could be a mistake, and not rather a bold imposing upon the World.
But of this enough, and perhaps more than it deserves.

3. BEING circumcised according to the Rites of the Mosaic Law, the name given
him at his circumcision was Simon or Symeon, a name common amongst the Jews,
especially in their latter times. This was afterward by our Savior not
abolished, but additioned with the title of Cephas, which in Syriack (the
vulgar Language of the Jews at that time) signifying a stone or rock, was
thence derived into the Greek, (...), and by us, Peter: so far was (...)
Hesych. in voc. (...)
Hesychius out, when rendering (...), by (...), an Expounder or Interpreter,
probably deriving it from (...), which signifies to explain and interpret. By
this new imposition our Lord seemed to denote the firmness and constancy of his
Faith, and his vigorous activity in building up the Church, as a spiritual
house upon the the true rock, the living and cornerstone, chosen of God and
precious, as S. Peter himself expresses it. Nor can our Savior be understood
to have hereby 1 Pet. 2, 4, 5, 6.
conferred upon him any peculiar Supremacy or Sovereignty above, much less over
the rest of the Apostles; for in respect of the great trusts committed to them,
and their being sent to plant Christianity in the World, they are all equally
styled Foundations: Rev. 21. 14.
nor is it accountable either to Scripture, or reason to suppose, that by this
Name our Lord should design the person of Peter to be that very rock, upon
which his Church was to be built. In a fond imitation Pap Masson. (...). in
(...). 4. (...). 172. p. 2. ex (...). Vict.
of this new name given to S. Peter, those who pretend to be his Successors in
the Sea of Rome, usually lay by their own, and assume a new name upon their
advancement to the Apostolic Chair, it being one of the first questions Sac.
(...). Romans Sect. 1. fol. 18.
which the Cardinals put to the new-elected Pope, by what name he will please
to be called. This custom first began about the Year 844, when Peter di
Bocca-Porco (or Swines-mouth) being chosen Pope, changed his name into Sergins
the Second: probably not so much to avoid the uncomeliness of his own name, as
if unbefitting the dignity of his place (for this being but his Paternal name
would after have been no part of his Pontifical style and title) as out of a
mighty reverence to S. Peter, accounting himself not worthy to bear his name;
though it was his own baptismal name. Certain it is that none of the Bishops of
that See ever assumed S. Peter's name, and some who have had it as their
Christian name before, have laid it aside upon their election to the Papacy.
But to return to our Apostle.

4. HIS Father was Jonah, probably a Fisherman of Bethsaida, for the sacred
story takes no further notice of him, than by the bare mention of his Name; and
I believe there had been no great danger of mistake, though Com. de Petr. and
Paul. apud Sur. ad (...) (...). Jun.
Metaphrastes had not told us, that it was not Jonas the Prophet, who came out
of the Belly of the Whale. Brother he was to S. Andrew the Apostle, and some
question there is amongst the Ancients which was the elder Brother. (...). 51.
p. 192.
Epiphanius (probably from some Tradition current in his time) clearly adjudges
it to S. Andrew, herein universally followed by those of the Church of Rome,
that the precedence given to S. Peter may not seem to be put upon the account
of his Seniority. But to him we may oppose the authority of (...). de (...).
Andr. quem (...) Metaphrast. ap. (...) potius, (...). 6. vid. Baron. not. ad
Martyrol. November. XXX. p. 737.
S. Chrysostom, a Person equal both in time and credit, who expressly says,
that though Andrew came later into life than Peter, yet he first brought him to
the knowledge of the Gospel: which Baronius against all pretense of reason
would understand of his entering into eternal life. Besides (...). lib. 1. adv.
Jovin. p. 35. (...). 2.
S. Hierom, Cassian. de Incarn. Dom. lib. 3. c. 12. p. 996.
Cassian, Bed. Comment. in (...). 1. Joan. Tom. 5.
Bid, and others, are for S. Peter being elder Brother, expressly ascribing it
to his Age, that he rather than any other, was President of the College of
Apostles. However it was, it sounds not a little to the honor of their Father,
(as of Zebedee also in the like case) that of but twelve Apostles two of his
Sons were taken into the number. In his Youth he was brought up to Fishing,
which we may guess to have been the staple-trade of Bethsaida, (which hence
probably borrowed its name, signifying an house or habitation of Fishing,
though others render it by Hunting; the word (...) equally bearing either) much
advantaged herein by the Neighborhood of the Lake of Gennesareth (on whose
banks it stood) (...) also the Sea of Galilee, and the Sea of Tiberias,
according to the mode of the Hebrew language, wherein all greater confluences
of Waters are called Seas. Of this Lake the Jews have a saying, Midr. (...).
sol. 41. ap. (...). Cent. (...). in Matthew. c. 70. p. 131.
that of all the seven Seas which God created, he made choice of none but the
Sea of Gennesareth: which however intended by them, is true only in this
respect, that our blessed Savior made choice of it, to honor it with the
frequency of his presence, and the power of his miraculous operations. In
length it was an hundred furlongs, Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 3. (...) p. 860.
and about XI over; the Water of it pure and clear, sweet and most fit to
drink; stored it was with several sorts of Fish, and those different both in
kind and taste from those in other places. Here it was that Peter closely
followed the exercise of his calling; from whence it seems he afterward
removed to Capernaum, (probably upon Matthew. 8. 14. -- 17 24.
his marriage, at least frequently resided there) for there we meet with his
House, and there we find him paying Tribute: an House, over which H. Eccl. lib.
8. c. 30. p. 596.
Nicephorus tells us, that Helen the Mother of Constantine erected a beautiful
Church to the honor of S. Peter. This place was equally advantageous for the
managery of his Trade, standing upon the Influx of Jordan into the Sea of
Galilee, and where he might as well reap the fruits of an honest and
industrious diligence. A mean, I confess, it was, and a more servile course of
life, as which besides the great pains and labor it required, exposed him to
all the injuries of wind and weather, to the storms of the Sea, the darkness
and tempestousness of the Night, and all to make a very small return. An
employment, whose restless troubles, constant hardships, frequent dangers, and
amazing horrors are (for the satisfaction of the learned Reader) thus
elegantly described by one, whose Poems may be justly styled Golden Verses,
receiving from the Emperor Antoninus a piece of Gold for every Verse. (...)
Optian. (...) d. non long ab init.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
But meanness is no bar in God's way, the poor, if virtuous, are as dear to
Heaven, as the wealthy and the honorable, equally alike to him, with whom
there is no respect of persons. Nay our Lord seemed to cast a peculiar honor
upon this profession, when afterward calling him and some others of the same
Trade from catching of Fish, to be (as he told them) Fishers of men.

5. AND here we may justly reflect upon the wise and admirable methods of the
Divine providence, which in planting and propagating the Christian Religion in
the World, made choice of such mean and unlikely instruments, that he should
hide these things from the wise and prudent, and reveal them unto babes, men
that had not been educated in the Academy, and the Schools of Learning, but
brought up to a Trade, to catch Fish, and mend Nets; most of the Apostles being
taken from the meanest Trades, and all of them (S. Paul excepted) unfurnished
of all arts of learning, and the advantages of liberal and ingenuous education:
and yet these were the men that were designed to run down the World, and to
overturn the learning of the prudent. Certainly had humane wisdom been to
manage the business, it would have taken quite other measures, and chosen out
the profoundest Rabbis, the acutest Philosophers, the smoothest Orators, such
as would have been most likely by strength of reason and arts of rhetoric to
have triumphed over the minds of men, to grapple with the stubberness of the
Jews, and baffle the finer notions and speculations of the Greeks. We find that
those Sects of Philosophy that gained most credit in the Heathen-world, did it
this way, by their eminency in some Arts and Sciences, whereby they recommended
themselves to the acceptance of the wiser and more ingenious part of mankind.
(...) (...), Epist. page 541. Tom. 1.
Julian the Apostate thinks it a reasonable exception against the Jewish
Prophets, that they were incompetent messengers and interpreters of the Divine
will, because they had not their minds cleared and purged, by passing through
the Circle of polite arts and learning. Why, now this is the wonder of it, that
the first Preachers of the Gospel should be such rude unlearned men, and yet so
suddenly, so powerfully prevail over the learned World, and conquer so many,
who had the greatest parts and abilities, and the strongest prejudices against
it, to the simplicity of the Gospel. When Celsus objected that the Apostles
were but a company of mean and illiterate persons, sorry Mariners and
Fishermen, (...). lib. (...). p. 47, 48.
Origin quickly returns upon him with this answer, That hence 'twas plainly
evident, that they taught Christianity by a Divine power, when such persons
were able with such an uncontrouled success to subdue men to the obedience of
the Word; for that they had no eloquent tongues, no subtle and discursive
heads, none of the refined and rhetorical Arts of Greece to conquer the minds
of men. For my part ( says he lib. 3. p. 135.
in another place) I verily believe that the Holy Jesus purposely made use of
such Preachers of his Doctrine, that there might be no suspicion, that they
came instructed with Arts of Sophistry, but that it might be clearly manifest
to all the World, that there was no crafty design in it, and that they had a
Divine power going along with them, which was more efficacious, than the
greatest volubility of expression, or ornaments of speech, or the artifices
which were used in the Grecian compositions. Had it not been for this Divine
power that upheld it (as he lib. 1. p. 6.
elsewhere argues) the Christian Religion, must needs have sunk under those
weighty pressures that lay upon it, having not only to contend with the potent
opposition of the Senate, Emperors, People, and the whole power of the Roman
Empire, but to conflict with those homebred wants and necessities, wherewith
its own professors were oppressed and burdened.

6. IT could not but greatly vindicate the Apostles from all suspicion of
forgery and imposture in the thoughts of sober and unbyassed persons, to see
their Doctrine readily entertained by men of the most discerning and
inquisitive minds. Had they dealt only with the rude and the simple, the idiot
and the unlearned, there might have been some pretense to suspect, that they
lay in wait to deceive, and designed to impose upon the World by crafty and
insinuative arts and methods. But alas they had other persons to deal with, men
of the acutest wits, and most profound abilities, the wisest Philosophers, and
most subtle disputants, able to weigh an argument with the greatest accuracy,
and to decline the force of the strongest reasonings, and who had their parts
edged with the keenest prejudices of education, and a mighty veneration for the
Religion of their Country, a Religion that for so many Ages had governed the
World, and taken firm possession of the minds of men. And yet notwithstanding
all these disadvantages these plain men conquered the wise and the learned, and
brought them over to that Doctrine that was despised and scorned, opposed and
persecuted, and that had nothing but its own native excellency to recommend it:
A clear evidence that there was something in it beyond the craft and power of
men. Is not this (says an elegant Arnob. adv. Gent. lib. 2. p. 21.
Apologist, making his address to the Heathens) enough to make you believe and
entertain it, to consider that in so short a time it has diffused it self over
the whole World, civilized the most barbarous Nations, softened the roughest and
most intractable tempers, that the greatest Wits and Scholars, Orators,
Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Lawyers, Physicians, and Philosophers have quitted
their formerly dear and beloved sentiments, and heartily embraced the Precepts
and Doctrines of the Gospel? Upon this account De Curand. Grac. (...). Sermon. 9.
de (...). p. 123.
Theodoret does with no less truth than elegancy insult and triumph over the
Heathens: He tells them that whoever would be at the pains to compare the best
Lawmakers either amongst the Greeks or Romans, with our Fishermen and
Publicans, would soon perceive what a Divine virtue and efficacy there was in
them above all others, whereby they did not only conquer their neighbors, not
only the Greeks and Romans, but brought over the most barbarous Nations to a
compliance with the Laws of the Gospel, and that not by force of Arms, not by
numerous bands of Soldiers, Ibid. p. 125.
not by methods of torture and cruelty, but by meek perswasives, and a
convincing the World of the excellency and usefulness of those Laws which they
propounded to them. A thing which the wisest and best men of the Heathen-world
could never do, to make their dogmata and institutions universally obtain, nay
that Plato himself could Ibid. p. 128.
never by all his plausible and insinuative arts make his Laws to be
entertained by his own dear Athenians. He farther shows them, that the Laws
published by our Fishermen Ibid. p. 126.
and Tentmakers could never be abolished (like those made by the best amongst
them) by the policies of Caius, the power of Claudius, the cruelties of Nero,
or any of the succeding Emperors, but still they went on conquering and to
conquer, and made Millions both Ibid. p. 135.
of Men and Women willing to embrace flames, and to encounter Death in its most
horrid shapes, rather than dis-own and forsake them: whereof he calls to
witness those many Churches and Monuments every where erected to the memory of
Christian Martyrs, no less to the honor than advantage of those Cities and
Countries, and in some sense to all Mankind.

7. THE sum of the Discourse is, in the Apostles words, that God chose the 1
Cor. 1. 27. 28.
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, the weak to confound those
that are mighty, the base things of the world, things most vitified and
despised, yea and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are.
These were the things, these the Persons, whom God sent upon this errand to
silence the Wise, the Scribe, and the verse. 22, 23, 24, 25.
Disputer of this World, and to make foolish the wisdom of this world. For
though the Jews required a sign, and the Greeks sought after wisdom, though
the preaching a crucified Savior was a scandal to the Jews, and foolishness
to the learned (...), yet by this foolishness of preaching God was pleased to
save them that believed: and in the event made it appear that the foolishness
of God is wiser than (...) primi vocati sunt, (...) Dominum (...) and
illiterati (...) ad pradicandum, ne (...) credentium non (...), sed (...) fieri
putaretur. (...). comm. in Matthew. c. 4. Tom. 9. p. 17.
men, and the weakness of God stronger than men. That so the honor of all
might entirely redound to himself; so the Apostle concludes, that no Flesh
should glory in his presence, but that he that glories, should glory in the
Lord.

SECT. II. Of S. Peter from his first coming to Christ, till his being called
to be a Disciple.
Peter, before his coming to Christ, (...) Disciple (probably) of John the
Baptist. His first approaches to Christ. Our Lord's communication with him. His
return to his Trade. Christ's entering into Peter's Ship, and preaching to the
people at the Sea of Galilee. The (...) draught of Fishes. Peter's great
astonishment at this evidence of our Lord's Divinity. His call to be a
Disciple. Christ's return to Capernaum, and healing Peter's Mother-in-Law.

THOUGH we find not whether Peter before his coming to Christ was engaged in
any of the particular Sects at this time in the Jewish Church, yet is it
greatly probable, that he was one of the Disciples of John the Baptist. For
first, it is certain that his brother Andrew was so, and we can hardly think,
these two brothers should draw contrary ways, or that he who was so ready to
bring his brother the early tidings of the Messiah, that the Sun of
righteousness was already risen in those parts, should not be as solicitous to
bring him under the discipline and influences of John the Baptist, the Day Star
that went before him. Secondly, Peter's forwardness and curiosity at the first
news of Christ's appearing, to come to him, and converse with him, show that
his expectations had been awakened, and some light in this matter conveyed to
him by the preaching and ministry of John, who was the voice of one crying in
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight,
showing them who it was that was coming after him.

2. HIS first acquaintance with Christ commenced in this manner. The Blessed
Jesus having for thirty years passed through the solitudes of a private life,
had lately been baptized in Jordan, and there publicly owned to be the Son of
God by the (...) solemn attestations that Heaven could give him, whereupon he
was immediately (...) into the wilderness to a personal contest with the Devil
for forty days together. So natural is it to the enemy of mankind to malign our
happiness, and to seek to blast our joys, when we are under the highest
instances of the Divine grace and favor. His enemy being conquered in three
set battles, and fled, he returned hence, and came down to Bethabara beyond
Jordan, where John was baptizing his Proselytes, and endeavoring to satisfy
the Jews, who had sent to him curiously to enquire concerning this new Messiah
that appeared among them. Upon the great testimony which the Baptist gave him,
and his pointing to our Lord then passing by him; two of John's disciples John
1. 37.
who were then with him presently followed after Christ, one of which was
Andrew, Simon's brother. It was toward Evening when they came, and therefore
probably stayed with him all night, during which Andrew had opportunity to
inform himself, and to satisfy his most scrupulous enquiries. Early the next
morning (if not that very evening) he hastened to acquaint his brother Simon
with these glad tidings. It Is not enough to be good and happy alone; Religion
is a communicative principle, (...). sub (...).
that like the circles in the water, delights to multiply it self, and to
diffuse its influences round about it, and especially upon those, whom nature
has placed nearest to us. He tells him, they had found the long-look'd for
Messiah, him whom Moses and the Prophets had so signally foretold, and whom all
the devout and pious of that Nation had so long expected.

3. SIMON (one of those who looked for the Kingdom of God, and waited for
redemption in Israel) ravished with this joyful news, and impatient of delay,
presently follows his brother to the place: whither he was no sooner come, but
our Lord to give John 1. 42.
him an evidence of his Divinity, salutes him at first (...) by name, tells him
what, and who he was, both as to his name and kindred, what title should be
given him, that that he should be called Cephas, or Peter; a name which he
afterward actually conferred upon him. What passed further between them, and
whether these two brothers henceforward personally attended our Savior's
motions in the number of his Disciples, the Sacred Story leaves us in the dark.
It seems probable, that they stayed with him for some time, till they were
instructed in the first rudiments of his doctrine, and by his leave departed
home. For it is reasonable to suppose, that our Lord being unwilling, at this
time especially, to awaken the jealousies of the State by a numerous retinue,
might dismiss his Disciples for some time, and Peter and Andrew amongst the
rest, who hereupon returned home to the exercise of their calling, where he
found them afterward.

4. IT was now somewhat more than a year, since our Lord having entered upon the
public stage of action, constantly went about doing good, healing the sick,
and preaching (...). 4. (...).
the Gospel of the Kingdom, residing usually at (...), and the parts about it,
where by the constancy of his preaching, and the reputation of his miracles,
his fame spread about all those Countries; by means whereof multitudes of
people from all parts flocked to him, greedily desirous to become his Auditors.
And what wonder if the parched and barren Earth thirsted for the showers of
Heaven? It happened that our Lord retiring out of the City, to enjoy the
privacies of contemplation upon the banks of the Sea of Galilee, it was not
long before the multitude found him out; to avoid the (...) 5. (...).
crowd and press whereof he stepped into a Ship or Fisher-Boat, that lay near to
the shore, which belonged to Peter, who together with his companions after a
tedious and unsuccessful night, were gone ashore to wash and dry their Nets.
He who might have commanded, was yet pleased to entreat Peter (who by this time
was returned into his Ship) to put a little from the shore. Here being sat, he
taught the people, who stood along upon the shore to hear him. Sermon ended, he
resolved to seal up his doctrine with a miracle, that the people might be the
more effectually convinced, that he was a Teacher come from God. To this
purpose, he bad Simon lanch out further, and cast his Net into the Sea: Simon
tells him, they had don't already, that they had been fishing all the last
night, but in vain; and if they could not succeed then (the most proper season
for that employment) there was less hope to speed now, it being probably about
Noon. But because where God commands, it is not for any to argue, but obey; at
our Lord's instance he let down the Net, which immediately enclosed so great a
multitude of Fishes, that the Net began to break, and they were forced to call
to their partners, who were in a Ship hard by them, to come in to their
assistence. A draught so great, that it loaded both their Boats, and that so
full, that it endangered their sinking before they could get safe to shore: An
instance, wherein our Savior gave an ocular demonstration, (...). 8. 6, 7, 8.
that, as Messiah, God had put all things under his feet, not only Fowls of the
Air, but the Fish of the Sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the
Seas.

5. AMAZED they were all at this miraculous draught of Fishes, whereupon Simon
in an (...) of admiration, and a mixture of humility and fear, threw himself at
the feet of Christ, and prayed him to depart from him, as a vile and a sinful
person. So evident were the appearances of Divinity in this miracle, that he
was over-powred and dazzled with its brightness and luster, and reflecting upon
himself, could not but think himself unworthy the presence of so great a
person, so immediately sent from God; and considering his own state (Conscience
being hereby more sensibly awakened) was afraid, that the Divine vengeance
might pursue and overtake him. But our Lord to abate the (...) of his fears,
assures him that this miracle was not done to amaze and terrify him, but to
strengthen and confirm his Faith; that now he had nobler work and employment
for him; instead of catching Fish, he should, by persuading men to the
obedience of the Gospel, catch the Souls of men: And accordingly commanded him
and his brother to follow him: (the same command which presently after he gave
to the two Sons of (...).) The word was no sooner spoken, and they landed, but
disposing their concerns in the hands of friends (as we may presume prudent and
reasonable men would) they immediately left all, and followed him; and from
this time Peter and the rest became his constant and inseparable Disciples,
living under the rules of his Discipline and Institutions.

6. FROM hence they returned to (...), where our Lord entering into Simon's
house (the place in all likelihood where he was wont to lodge during his
residence in that City) found his Mother-in-law visited with a violent Fever.
No privileges (...). 8. 14.
Mark 1. 29.
afford an exemption from the ordinary Laws of humane Nature; Christ under her
roof Luke 4. 38.
did not protect this Woman from the assaults and invasions of a Fever: Lord,
behold, John 11. 3.
he whom thou love is sick, as they said concerning Lazarus. Here a fresh
opportunity offered it self to Christ of exerting his Divine Power. No sooner
was he told of it, but he came to her bedside, rebuked the Paroxysms,
commanded the Fever to be gone, and taking her by the hand to lift her up, in a
moment restored her to perfect health, and ability to return to the business of
her Family, all cures being equally easy to Omnipotence.

SECT. III. Of S. Peter from his Election to the Apostolate, till the
Confession which he made of Christ.
The Election of the Apostles; and our Lord's solemn preparation for it. The
Powers and Commission given to them. Why Twelve chosen. Peter the first in
order, not power. The Apostles when and by whom Baptized. The Tradition of
Euodius of Peter's being immediately Baptized by Christ, rejected, and its
authorities proved in sufficient. Three of the Apostles more intimately
conversant with our Savior. Peter's being with Christ at the raising Jairus
his Daughter. His walking with Christ upon the Sea. The creatures at God's
command act contrary to their natural Inclinations. The weakness of Peter's
Faith. Christ's power in commanding down the storm, an evidence of his
Divinity. Many Disciples desert our Savior's preaching. Peter's prosession of
constancy in the name of the rest of the Apostles.

OUR Lord being now to elect some peculiar persons, as his immediate
Vicegerents upon Earth, to whose care and trust he might commit the building up
of his Church, and the planting that Religion in the World, for which he
himself came down from Heaven; In order to it he privately overnight withdrew
himself into a solitary (...) 5. 12.
Mountain (commonly called the Mount of Christ, from his frequent repairing
thither, though some of the Ancients will have it to be Mount Tabor) there to
make his solemn address to Heaven for a prosperous success on so great a work.
Herein leaving an excellent copy and precedent to the Governors of his Church,
how to proceed in setting apart persons to so weighty and difficult an
employment. Upon this Mountain we may conceive there was an Oratory or place of
prayer (probably intimated by S. Luke's (...), for such Proseucha's or houses
of Prayer, usually uncovered, and standing in the fields, the Jews had in
several places) wherein our Lord continued all night, not in one continued and
entire act of devotion, but probably by intervals, and repeated returns of duty.

2. EARLY the next morning his Disciples came to him, out of whom he made
(...). 10. 1.
choice of Twelve to be his Apostles, that they might be the constant
attendants upon (...) 3. 14.
Luke 6. 13.
his person, to hear his Discourses, and be Eyewitnesses of his Miracles; to
be always conversant with him while he was upon Earth, and afterward to be
sent abroad up and down the World to carry on that work which he himself had
begun; whom therefore he invested with the power of working Miracles, which was
more completely conferred upon them after his Ascension into Heaven. Passing by
the several fancies and conjectures of the Ancients, why our Savior pitched
upon the just number of Twelve; (whereof before) it may deserve to be
considered, whether our Lord being now to appoint the Supreme Officers and
Governors of his Church, which the Apostle styles the Commonwealth of Israel,
might not herein have a more peculiar allusion to the twelve (...). 2. 12.
Patriarchs, as founders of their several Tribes, or to the constant Heads and
Rulers of those twelve Tribes of which the body of the Jewish Nation did
consist: Especially since he himself seems elsewhere to give countenance to it,
when he tells the Apostles that when the Son of man shall sit on the Throne of
his Glory, that is, be gone back to Heaven, and have taken full possession of
his Evangelical Kingdom, which principally commenced from his Resurrection,
that then they also should sit upon twelve Thrones, judging Matthew. 19. 28.
the twelve Tribes of Israel, that is, they should have great powers and
authorities in the Church, such as the power of the Keys, and other Rights of
Spiritual Judicature and Sovereignty, answerable in some proportion to the
power and dignity which the Heads and Rulers of the twelve Tribes of Israel did
enjoy.

3. IN the enumeration of these twelve Apostles, all the Evangelists constantly
place S. Peter in the front; and S. Matthew expressly tells us, that he was the
first, Matthew. 10. 2.
that is, he was the first that was called to be an Apostle: his Age also and
the gravity of his person more particularly qualifying him for a Primacy of
Order amongst the rest of the Apostles, as that without which no society of men
can be managed or maintained. (...) than this, as none will deny him, so more
than this, neither Scripture nor (...) antiquity do allow him. And now it was,
that our Lord actually conferred that (...) upon him, which before he had
promised him, Simon he surnamed Peter. It Mark 3. 16.
(...) here be enquired, when, and by whom the Apostles were baptized. That
they were is unquestionable, being themselves appointed to confer it upon
others; but when, or how, the Scripture is altogether silent. Hist. (...). lib.
2. c. 3. p. 134.
Nicephorus from no worse an Author, as he pretends, than Euodius, next (...)
S. Peter's immediate successor in the (...) of Autioch, tells us, That of all
the Apostles Christ baptized none but Peter with his own hands; that Peter
baptized Andrew, and the two sons of (...), and they the rest of the Apostles.
This, if so, would greatly make for the honor of S. Peter. But, alas! his
authority is not only suspicious, but (...), in a manner deserted by S. Peter's
best friends, and the strongest champions of his cause: Baronius himself,
however (...) (...) An. (...). number. 40.
willing to make use of him, elsewhere (...) An. 71. (...). 13.
confessing that this Epistle of (...) is altogether unknown to any of the
Ancients. As for the testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus, which to the same
purpose he quotes out of Sophronius, (though not Sophronius, but Vid. Jo.
Moschi Prat. Spir. (...). 176. Bibl. P. (...). L. (...). 2 p. 1133.
Johannes Moschus, as is notoriously known, be the Author of that Book)
besides, that it is delivered upon an uncertain report, pretended to have been
alleged in a discourse between one Dionysius Bishop of Ascalon and his Clergy,
out of a Book of Clemens, not now extant; his Authors are much alike, that is,
of no great value and authority.

4. AMONGST these Apostles, our Lord chose a Triumvirate, Peter and the two
sons of Zebedee to be his more intimate companions, whom he admitted more
familiarly than the rest, unto all the more secret passages and transactions of
his Life. The first instance of which was on this occasion. Jairus, a Ruler of
the Synagogue, Mark 5. 22.
had a daughter desperately sick, whose disease having baffled all the arts of
Physic, was (...) curable by the immediate agency of the God of Nature. He
therefore in all humility addresses himself to our Savior; which he had no
sooner done, but servants (...) post to tell him, that it was in vain to
trouble our Lord, for that his daughter was dead. Christ bids him not despond,
if his Faith held out, there was no danger. And (...) none to follow him, but
Peter, James, and John, goes along with him to the house; where he was derided
by the sorrowful friends, and neighbors, for telling them that she was not
perfectly dead. But our Lord entering in, with the commanding efficacy of two
words, restored her at once both to life and perfect health.

5. OUR Lord after this preached many Sermons, and wrought many Miracles:
amongst which, none more remarkable, than his feeding a multitude of five
thousand men, besides women and children, with but five Loaves, and two Fishes;
of which, nevertheless, Matthew. 14. 17.
twelve Baskets of sragments were taken up. Which being done, and the multitude
dismissed, he commanded the Apostles to take Ship, it being now near night, and
to cross over to Capernaum, whilst he himself, as his manner was, retired to a
neighboring mountain, to dispose himself to Prayer and Contemplation. The
Apostles were (...) got into the middle of the Sea, when on a sudden a violent
Storm and Tempest began to arise, whereby they were brought into present danger
of their lives. Our Savior, who knew how the case stood with them, and how
much they labored under infinite pains and fears, having himself caused this
Tempest, for the greater trial of their Faith, a little before morning (for so
long they remained in this imminent danger) immediately conveyed himself upon
the Sea, where the Waves received him, being proud to carry their Master. He
who refused to (...) the Devil, when tempting him to throw himself down from
the Pinnacle of the Temple, did here commit himself to a boisterous and
instable Element, and that in a violent Storm, walking upon the water, as if it
had been dry ground. But that infinite power that made and supports the World,
as it gave rules to all particular beings, so can when it please countermand
the Laws of their Creation, and make them act contrary to their natural
inclinations. If God say the word, the Sun will stand still in the middle of
the Heavens; if Go back, 'twill retrocede, as upon the Dial of Ahaz: if he
command it, the Heavens will become as Brass, and the Earth as Iron, and that
for three years and an half together, as in the case of (...)'s prayer; if he
say to the Sea Divide, 'twill run upon heaps, and become on both sides as firm
as a wall of Marble. Nothing can be more natural, than for the fire to burn,
and yet at God's command it will forget its nature, and become a screen and a
fence to the three Children in the Babylonian Furnace. What heavier than Iron,
or more natural than for gravity to tend downwards? and yet when God will have
it, Iron shall float like Cork on the top of the water. The proud and raging
Sea that naturally refuses to bear the bodies of men while alive, became here
as firm as Brass, when commanded to wait upon, and do homage to the God of
Nature. Our Lord walking toward the Ship, as if he had an intention to pass by
it, he was espied by them, who presently thought it to be the Apparition of a
Spirit. Hereupon they were seized with great terror and consternation, and
their fears in all likelihood heightened by the vulgar opinion, that they are
evil Spirits that choose rather to appear in the night than by day. While they
were in this agony, our Lord taking compassion on them, calls to them, and bids
them not be afraid, for that it was no other than he himself. Peter (the
eagerness of whose temper carried him forward to all bold and resolute
undertakings) entreated our Lord, that if it was he, he might have leave to
come upon the water to him. Having received his orders, he went out of the
Ship, and walked upon the Sea to meet his Master. But when he found the wind to
bear hard against him, and the waves to rise round about him, whereby probably
the sight of Christ was intercepted, he began to be afraid, and the higher his
fears arose, the lower his Faith began to sink, and together with that, his
body to sink under water: whereupon in a passionate fright he cried out to our
Lord to help him, who, reaching out his arm, took him by the hand, and set him
again upon the top of the water, with this gentle reproof, O thou of little
Faith, wherefore did thou doubt? It being the weakness of our Faith that
makes the influences of the Divine power and goodness to have no better effect
upon us. Being come to the Ship, they took them in, where our Lord no sooner
arrived, but the winds and waves observing their duty to their Sovereign Lord,
and having done the errand which they came upon, mannerly departed, and
vanished away, and the Ship in an instant was at the shore. All that were in
the Ship being strangely astonished at this Miracle, and fully convinced of the
Divinity of his person, came and did homage to him, with this confession, Of a
truth thou art the Son of God. After which they went ashore, and landed in the
Country of Genezareth, and there more fully acknowledged him before all the
people.

6. THE next day great multitudes flocking after him, he entered into a
Synagogue at Capernaum, and taking occasion from the late Miracle of the
loaves, which he had John 6. 24.
wrought amongst them, he began to discourse concerning himself, as the true
Manna, and the Bread that came down from Heaven; largely opening to them many
of the more sublime and Spiritual mysteries, and the necessary and important
duties of the Gospel. Hereupon a great part of his Auditory, who had hitherto
followed him, finding their understandings gravelled with these difficult and
uncommon Notions, and that the duties he required were likely to grate hard
upon them, and perceiving now that he was not the Messiah they took him for,
whose Kingdom should consist in an external Grandeur and plenty, but was to be
managed and transacted in a more inward and Spiritual way; hereupon fairly left
him in open field, and henceforth quite turned their backs upon him. Whereupon
our Lord turning about to his Apostles, asked them whether they also would go
away from him? Peter (spokes-man generally for all the rest) answered, whither
should they go, to mend and better their condition? should they return back to
Moses? Alas! he laid a yoke upon them, which neither they nor their Fathers
were able to bear. Should they go to the Scribes and Pharisees? they would feed
them with Stones instead of Bread, obtrude humane Traditions upon them for
Divine dictates and Commands. Should they betake themselves to the Philosophers
amongst the Gentiles? they were miserably blind and short-sighted in their
Notions of things, and their sentiments and opinions not only different from,
but contrary to one another. No, 'twas he only had the words of Eternal life,
whose doctrine could instruct them in the plain way to Heaven; that they had
fully assented to what both John and he had said concerning himself, that they
were fully persuaded both from the efficacy of his Sermons, which they heard,
and the powerful conviction of his Miracles, which they had seen, that he was
the Son of the living God, the true Messiah and Savior of the World. But
notwithstanding this fair and plausible testimony, he tells them, that they
were not all of this mind, that there was a Satan amongst them, one that was
moved by the spirit and impulse, and that acted according to the rules and
interest of the Devil: intimating Judas who should betray him. So hard is it to
meet with a body of so just and pure a constitution, wherein some rotten member
or distempered part is not to be found.

SECT. IV. Of S. Peter from the time of his Confession, till our Lord's last
Passover.
Our Savior's Journey with his Apostles to Caesarea. The Opinions of the People
concerning Him. Peter's eminent Confession of Christ, and our Lord's great
commendation of it. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, etc. The Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven how given. The advantage the Church of Rome makes of these
passages. This confession made by Peter in the name of the rest, and by others
before him. No personal privilege intended to S. Peter: the same things
elsewhere promised to the other Apostles. Our (...) discourse concerning his
(...). Peter's unseasonable zeal in dissuading him from it, and our Lord's
severe rebuking him. Christ's Transfiguration, and the glory of it: Peter how
affected with it. Peter's paying Tribute for Christ and himself. This Tribute,
what. Our Savior's discourse upon it. Offending brethren how often to be
forgiven. The young man commanded to sell all. What compensation made to the
followers of Christ. Our Lord's triumphant entrance into Jerusalem. Preparation
made to keep the Passover.

1. IT was some time since our Savior had kept his third Passover at
Jerusalem, when he directed his Journey toward Caesarea Philippi, where by the
way having like a (...) 8. 27.
Matthew. 16. (...).
lawful Master of his Family first prayed with his Aposlles, he began to ask
them (having Luke 9. 18.
been more than two Years publicly conversant amongst them) what the world
thought concerning him. They answered, that the Opinions of Men about him were
various and different; that some took him for John the Baptist, lately risen
from the dead, between whose Doctrine, Discipline, and way of life, in the main
there was so great a Correspondence. That others thought he was Elias; probably
judging so, from the gravity of his Person, freedom of his Preaching, the fame
and reputation of his Miracles, especially since the Scriptures assured them he
was not dead, but taken up into Heaven; and had so expressly foretold, that he
should return back again. That others looked upon him as the Prophet Jeremiah
alive again, of whose return the Jews had great expectations, in so much that
some of them thought the Soul of Jeremias was re-inspired into (...). Or if not
thus, at least that he was one of the more eminent of the ancient Prophets, or
that the Souls of some of these Persons had been breathed into him; The
Doctrine of the (...), or Transmigration of Souls first broached and propagated
by Pythagoras, being at this time current amongst the Jews, and owned by the
Pharisees as one of their prime Notions and Principles.

2. THIS Account not (...), our Lord comes closer and nearer to them; tells
them, It was no wonder if the common People were divided into these wild
thoughts concerning him: but since they had been always with him, had been
hearers of his Sermons, and Spectators of his Miracles, he enquired, what they
themselves thought of him. Peter, ever forward to return an Answer, and
therefore by the Fathers frequently styled The Mouth of the Apostles, (...)
(...) in (...). 16, (...). 483.
told him in the name of the rest, That he was the Messiah, The Son of the
living God, promised of old in the Law and the Prophets, heartily desired and
looked for by all good men, anointed and set apart by God to be the King,
Priest, and Prophet of his People. To this excellent and comprehensive
confession of Peter's, Our Lord returns this great Eulogie and Commendation;
Blessed art thou Simon Bar Jonah, Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven: That is, this Faith which thou have now
confessed is not humane, contrived by Man's wit, or built upon his testimony,
but upon those Notions and Principles which I was sent by God to reveal to the
World, and those mighty and solemn attestations, which he has given from Heaven
to the truth both of my Person and my Doctrine. And because thou have so freely
made this Confession, therefore I also say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it: That is, that as thy Name signifies a Stone or Rock, such shall
thou thy self be, firm, solid, and immovable, in building of the Church, which
shall be so orderly erected by thy care and diligence, and so firmly founded
upon that faith which thou have now confessed, that all the assaults and
attempts which the powers of Hell can make against it, shall not be able to
overturn it. Moreover I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven: That is, thou
shall have that spiritual authority and power within the Church, whereby as
with Keys thou shall be able to shut and lock out obstinate and impenitent
sinners, and upon their repentance to unlock the door, and take them in again:
And what thou shall thus regularly do, shall be owned in the Court above, and
ratified by God in Heaven.

3. UPON these several passages, the Champions of the Church of Rome, mainly
build the unlimited Supremacy and Infallibility of the Bishops of that See;
with how much truth, and how little reason, it is not my present purpose to
discuss. It may suffice here to remark, that though this place does very much
tend to exalt the honor of Saint Peter, yet is there nothing herein personal
and peculiar to him alone, as distinct from, and preserred above the rest of
the Apostles. Does he here make confession of Christ's being the Son of God?
Yet, besides that herein he spoke but the sense of all the rest, this was no
more than what others had said as well as he, yea besore he was so much as
called to be a Disciple. Thus Nathanael at his first coming to Christ expressly
told him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, Thou art the King of Israel. Does our
Lord here style Joh. 1. 49.
him a Rock? All the Apostles are elsewhere equally called Foundations, yea
said to be the Twelve Foundations, upon which the Wall of the new Jerusalem,
that is, the Evangelical Rev. 21. 14.
Church is (...); and sometimes others of them besides Peter are called
Pillars, as (...). 2. 20.
Gal. 2. 9.
they have relation to the Church already built. Does Christ here promise the
Keys to Peter? that is, Power of Governing, and of exercising Church Censures,
and of absolving penitent sinners? The very same is elsewhere promised to all
the Apostles, and almost in the very same terms and words. If thine offending
Brother, prove obstinate, (...). 18. 17, 18.
tell it unto the Church; but, if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be
unto thee as an Heathen and a Publican. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye
shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on
Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. And elsewhere, when ready to leave the World,
he tells them, As my Father has sent me, even so send I Joh.. 20. 21-23.
you: whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever
sins ye retain, they are retained. By all which it is evident, that our Lord
did not here give any personal prerogative to S. Peter, as Universal Pastor and
Head of the Christian Church, much less to those who were to be his Successors
in the Sea of Rome; But that as he made this Confession in the name of the rest
of the Apostles, so what was here promised unto him, was equally intended unto
all. Nor did the more considering and judicious part of the Fathers (however
giving a mighty reverence to S. Peter) ever understand it in any other sense.
Sure I am, that Comment. in (...) 3. (...). 1. (...). 2.
Origin tells us, that every true Christian that makes this confession with the
same Spirit and Integrity which S. Peter did, shall have the same blessing and
commendation from Christ conferred upon him.

4. THE Holy Jesus knowing the time of his Passion to draw on, began to prepare
the minds of his Apostles against that fatal Hour; telling them what hard and
bitter things he should suffer at Jerusalem, what affronts and indignities he
must undergo, and Matthew. 16. 21.
be at last put to death with all the arts of torture and disgrace, by the
Decree of the (...) 8. 31.
(...) 9. 22.
Jewish Sanhedrim. Peter, whom our Lord had infinitely encouraged and indeared
to him, by the great things which he had lately said concerning him, so that
his spirits were now afloat, and his passions ready to overrun the banks, not
able to endure a thought that so much evil should befall his Master, broke out
into an over-confident and unseasonable interruption of him: He took him and
began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord, this shall not be unto
thee. Besides his great kindness and affection to his Master, the minds of the
Apostles were not yet thoroughly purged from the hopes and expectations of a
glorious reign of the Messiah, so that Peter could not but look upon these
sufferings as unbecoming and inconsistent with the state and dignity of the Son
of God. And therefore thought good to advise his Lord, to take care of himself,
and while there was time to prevent and avoid them. This, our Lord, who valued
the redemption os Mankind infinitely before his own ease and safety, resented
at so high a rate, that he returned upon him with this tart and stinging
reproof, Get thee behind me Satan; The very same treatment which he once gave
to the Devil himself, when he made that insolent proposal to him, To fall down
and worship him: though in Satan Luke 4. 8.
it was the result of pure malice and hatred; in Peter only an error of love,
and great regard. However our Lord could not but look upon it as mischievous
and diabolical counsel, prompted and promoted by the great Adversary of
Mankind. A way therefore, says Christ, with thy hellish and pernicious counsel,
Thou art an offense unto me, in seeking to oppose and undermine that great
design, for which I purposely came down from (...): In this thou savourest not
the things of God, but those that be of men, in suggesting to me those little
shifts and arts of safety and self-preservation, which humane prudence, and the
love of men's own selves are wont to dictate to them. By which, though we may
learn Peter's mighty kindness to our Savior, yet that herein he did not take
his measures right. A plain evidence that his infallibility had not yet taken
place.

5. About a week after this, our Savior being to receive a Type and Specimen
of his Matthew. 17. 1.
(...) 9. 2.
future (...), took with him his three more intimate Apostles, Peter, and the
two Luke 9. 28.
sons of Zebedee, and went up into a very high mountain, which the Ancients
generally conceive to have been Mount Thabor, a round and very high mountain,
situate in the plains of Galilce. And now was even literally fulfilled what the
Psalmist had spoken, (...) 89. 12.
Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy Name: for what greater joy and triumph,
than to be peculiarly chosen to be the holy Mount, whereon our Lord in so
eminent a manner received from God the Father, honor and glory, and made such
magnificent displays of his Divine power and Majesty? For while they were here
earnestly employed in Prayer, (as seldom did our Lord enter upon any eminent
action, but he first made his address to Heaven) he was suddenly transformed
into another manner of appearance; such a luster and radiancy darted from his
face, that the Sun it self shines not brighter at Noonday; such beams of light
reflected from his garments, as out-did the light it self that was round about
them, so exceeding pure and white, that the Snow might blush to compare with
it; nor could the Fullers art purify any thing into half that whiteness: an
evident and sensible representation of the glory of that state, wherein the
just shall walk in white, and shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father.
During this Heavenly scene, there appeared Moses and Elias, (who, as the Jews
say, shall come together) clothed with all the brightness and majesty of a
glorified state, familiarly conversing with him, and discoursing of the death
and sufferings which he was shortly to undergo, and his departure into Heaven.
Behold here together the three greatest persons that ever were the Ministers of
Heaven: Moses, under God, the Instituter and promulgator of the Law; Elias the
great reformer of it, when under its deepest degeneracy and corruption; and the
blessed Jesus the Son of God, who came to take away what was weak and
imperfect, and to introduce a more manly and rational institution, and to
communicate the last Revelation which God would make of his mind to the World.
Peter and the two Apostles that were with him, were in the mean time fallen
asleep, heavy through want of natural rest, (it being probably night when this
was done) or else over-powred with these extraordinary appearances, which the
frailty and weakness of their present state could not bear, were fallen into a
Trance. But now awaking, were strangely surprised to behold our Lord surrounded
with so much glory, and those two great persons conversing with him, knowing
who they were, probably by some particular marks and signatures that were upon
them, or else by immediate revelation, or from the discourse which passed
betwixt Christ and them, or possibly from some communication which they
themselves might have with them. While these Heavenly guests were about to
depart, Peter in a great rapture and ecstasie of mind addressed himself to our
Savior, telling him how infinitely they were pleased and delighted with their
being there; and to that purpose desiring his leave, that they might erect
three Tabernacles, one for him, one for Moses, and one for Elias. While he was
thus saying, a bright cloud suddenly over-shadowed, and wrapped them up: out of
which came a voice, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye
him: which when the Apostles heard, and saw the cloud coming over them, they
were seized with a great consternation, and fell upon their faces to the
ground, whom our Lord gently touched, bade them arise and disband their fears:
whereupon looking up, they saw none but their Master, the rest having vanished
and disappeared. In memory of these great transactions, (...) Loc. Sanct. c. 17.
Bid tells us, that in pursuance of S. Peter's petition about the three
Tabernacles, there were afterward three Churches built upon the top of this
Mountain, which in after times were had in great veneration, which might
possibly give some foundation to (...) report which (...). a Bridenb. (...)
Sanct. vid. J. Cotovic. (...). lib. 3. c. 7 p. 355.
one makes, that in his time there were showed the ruins of those three
Tabernacles, which were built according to S. Peter's desire.

6. After this, our Lord and his Apostle's having traveled through Galilce,
the gatherers of the Tribute-money came to Peter, and asked him, whether his
Master was Matthew. 17. 24.
not obliged to pay the Tribute, which God, under the Mosaic Law, commanded to
be yearly paid by every Jew above Twenty years old, to the use of the Temple,
which so continued to the times of Vespatian, under whom the Temple being
destroyed, it was by him transferred to the use of the Capitol at Rome, being
to the value of half a Shekel, or Fifteen pence of our money. To this question
of theirs, Peter positively answers, yes; knowing his Master would never be
backward, either to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, or to God
the things that are God's. Peter going into the house to give an account to his
Master, and to know his mind concerning it, Christ prevented him with this
question, What think thou, Simon, of whom do (...) Kings exact Tribute, of
their own Children and Family, or from other people? Peter answered, Not from
their own Servants, and Family, but from Strangers. To which our Lord presently
replied, That then according to his own argument and opinion, both he himself,
as being the Son of God, and they whom he had taken to be his Menial and
Domestic (...), were free from this Tax of Head-money, yearly to be paid to
God. But rather than give offense, by seeming to despise the Temple, and to
undervalue that Authority that had settled this Tribute, he resolves to put
himself to the expense and charges of a Miracle, and therefore commanded Peter
to go to the Sea, and (...) up the first Fish which came to his Hook, in whose
mouth he should find a piece of money (a Stater, in value a Shekel or half a
Crown) which he took and gave to the Collectors, both for his Master and
himself.

7. OUR Lord after this, discoursing to them, how to carry themselves toward
their offending Brethren, Peter being desirous to be more particularly informed
in this Matthew, 18. 21.
matter, asked our Savior, How often a man was obliged to forgive his Brother,
in case of offense and trespass, whether seven times were not enough? He told
him, That upon his Neighbors repentance, he was not only bound to do it seven
times, but until seventy times seven, that is, he must be indulgent to him, as
often as the offender returns and begs it, and heartily professes his sorrow and
repentance. Which he further illustrates by a plain and excellent Parable, and
thence draws this Conclusion, That the same measures, either of compassion or
cruelty, which men show to their fellow Brethren, they themselves shall meet
with at the hands of God, the Supreme Ruler and Justiciary of the World. It was
not long after when a brisk young man addressed Matthew. 19. 16.
(...) 10. 17.
himself to our Savior, to know of him, by what methods he might best attain
Eternal Luke 18. 18.
life. Our Lord, to humble his confidence, bade him sell his Estate, and give
it to the poor; and putting himself under his discipline, he should have a much
better treasure in Heaven. The man was rich, and liked not the counsel, nor was
he willing to purchase happiness at such a rate; and accordingly went away
under great sorrow and discontent. Upon which Christ takes occasion to let them
know, how hardly those men would get to Heaven, who build their comfort and
happiness upon the plenty and abundance of these outward things. Peter taking
hold of this opportunity, asked, What return they themselves should make, who
had quitted and renounced whatever they had for his sake and service? Our
Savior answers, that no man should be a loser by his service; that, for their
parts, they should be recompensed with far greater privileges; and that
whoever should forsake houses or lands, kindred and relations, out of love to
him, and his Religion, should enjoy them again with infinite advantages in this
World, if consistent with the circumstances of their state, and those troubles
and persecutions which would necessarily arise from the profession of the
Gospel: however, they should have what would make infinite amends for all;
Eternal life in the other World.

8. OUR Savior in order to his last fatal journey to Jerusalem, that he might
the better comply with the prophecy that went before of him, sent two of his
Apostles, who in all probability were Peter and John, with an Authoritative
Commission to Matthew. 21. 1.
fetch him an Ass to ride on, (he had none of his own; he who was rich, for
our sakes made himself poor; he lived upon charity all his life, had neither an
Ass to ride on, nor an House where to lay his head, no nor after his death a
Tomb to lie in, but what the charity of others provided for him) whereon being
mounted, and attended with the festivities of the people, he set forward in his
journey; wherein there appears an admirable mixture of humility and Majesty:
The Ass he rode on became the meanness and meekness of a Prophet; but his
arbitrary Commission for the fetching it, and the ready obedience of its
owners, spoke the prerogative of a King: The Palms born before him, the
Garments strewn in his way, and the joyful Hosannahs and Acclamations of the
people, proclaim at once both the Majesty of a Prince, and the Triumph of a
Savior. For such expressions of joy we find were usual in public and festival
solemnities; thus the (...). lib. 1. in (...). Comm. p. 17.
Historian describing the Emperor Commodus his triumphant return to Rome, tells
us, that the Senate and whole people of Rome, to testify their mighty kindness
and veneration for him, came out of the City to meet him, (...), carrying Palms
and Laurels along with them, and throwing about all sorts of Flowers that were
then in season. In this manner our Lord being entered the City, he soon after
retired to Bethany, whence he dispatched Matthew. 26. 17.
Mark 14. 12.
Peter and John, to make preparation for the Passover; giving them
instructions where Luke 22. 7.
he would have it kept. Accordingly they found the person whom he had described
to them, whom they followed home to his house. Whether this was the house of
John the Evangelist (as Nicephorus tells us) situate near Mount Sion, or of
Simon the Leper, H. (...). lib. 1.
or of Nicodemus, or of Joseph of Arimathea, as others severally conjecture,
seeing none (...). 28. p. 104.
of the Evangelists have thought fit to tells us, it may not become us
curiously to enquire.

SECT. V. Of S. Peter from the last Passover, till the death of Christ.
The Passover celebrated by our Lord and his Apostles. His washing their feet.
Peter's imprudent modesty. The mystery and meaning of the action. The Traitor,
who. The Lord's Supper instituted. Peter's confident promise of suffering with
and for Christ. Our Lord's dislike of his confidence, and foretelling his
denial. Their going to the Mount of Olives. Peter renews his resolution. His
(...) zeal and affection. Our Savior's Passion, why begun in a Garden. The
bitterness of his Ante-passion. The drowziness of Peter, and the two sons of
Zebedee. Our Lord's great candor toward them, and what it ought to teach us.
Christ's apprehension, and Peter's bold attempt upon Malchus. Christ deserted
by the Apostles. Peter's following his Master to the Highpriests Hall, and
thrice denying him, with Oaths and Imprecations. The Galilean dialect, what.
The Cock-crowing, and Peter's repentance upon it.

ALL things being now prepared, our Savior with his Apostles comes down for
the celebration of the Passcover. And being entered into the house, they all
orderly took their places. Our Lord, who had always taught them by his
practice, no less than by his doctrine, did now particularly design to teach
them humility and charity by his own example. And that the instance might be
the greater, he underwent the meanest offices of the Ministry: toward the end
therefore of the Paschal Supper, John 13. 4.
he arose from the Table, and laying aside his upper garment (which, according
to the fashion of those Eastern Countries, being long, was unfit for action)
and himself taking a Towel, and pouring water into a Basin, he began to wash
all the Apostles feet; not disdaining those of Judas himself. Coming to Peter,
he would by no means admit an instance of so much condescension. What? the
Master do this to the Servant? the Son of God to so vile a sinner? This made
him a second time refuse it, Thou shall never wash my feet. But our Lord soon
corrects his imprudent modesty, by telling him, That if he washed him not, he
could have no part with him: Insinuating the mystery of this action, which was
to denote Remission of sin, and the purifying virtue of the Spirit of Christ to
be poured upon all true Christians. Peter satisfied with this answer, soon
altered his resolution, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands, and my head.
If the case be so, let me be washed all over, rather than come short of my
portion in thee. This being done, he returned again to the Table, and
acquainted them with the meaning and tendency of this mystical (...). Nonn.
(...). in (...).
action, and what force it ought to have upon them toward one another. The
washing it self denoted their inward and Spiritual cleansing by the Blood and
Spirit of Christ, symbolically typified and (...) by all the washings and
Baptisms of the Mosaic Institution: The washing of the feet respected our
entire sanctification in our whole Spirit, Soul and Body, no part being to be
left impure. And then, that all this should be done by so great a person, their
Lord and Master, preached to their very senses a Sermon of the greatest
humility and condescension, and taught them how little reason they had to
boggle at the meanest offices of kindness and charity toward others, when he
himself had stooped to solow an abasure toward them. And now he began more
immediately to reflect upon his sufferings, and upon him, who was to be the
occasion of them; telling them that one of them would be the Traitor to betray
him. Whereat they were strangely troubled, and every one began to suspect
himself, till Peter (whose love and care for his Master commonly made him start
sooner than the rest) made signs to S. John, who lay in our Savior's bosom, to
ask him particularly who it was? which our Savior presently did, by making
them understand, that it was Judas Iscariot, who not long after left the
company.

2. AND now our Lord began the Institution of his Supper, that great solemn
Institution which he was resolved to leave behind him, to be constantly
celebrated in all Ages of the Church, as the standing monument of his love in
dying for mankind. For now he told them, that he himself must leave them, and
that whither he went, they John 13. 36.
could not come. Peter, not well understanding what he meant, asked him whither
it (...) 22. 31.
was that he was going? Our Lord replied, It was to that place, whither he
could not now follow him: but that he should do it afterward: intimating the
Martyrdom he was to undergo for the sake of Christ. To which Peter answered,
that he knew no reason why he might not follow him, seeing that if it was even
to the laying down of his life for his sake, he was most ready and resolved to
do it. Our Lord liked not this over-confident presumption, and therefore told
him, they were great things which he promised, but that he took not the true
measures of his own strength, nor espied the snares and designs of Satan, who
desired no better an occasion than this, to sift and winnow them. But that he
had prayed to Heaven for him, That his faith might not fail: by which means
being strengthened himself, he should be obliged to strengthen and confirm his
brethren. And whereas he so confidently assured him, that he was ready to go
along with him, not only into prison, but even to death it self; our Lord
plainly told him, That not withstanding all his confident and generous
resolutions, before the Cock crowed twice, that is, before three of the Clock
in the morning, he would that (...) (...). Com. in Luc. 22. in Bibl. Pp. Gr.
(...). 2 p. 829.
very night three several times deny his Master. With which answer our Lord
wisely rebuked his confidence, and taught him (had he understood the lesson)
not to trust to his own strength, but entirely to depend upon him, who is able
to keep us from salling. Withal insinuating, that though by his sin he would
justly forseit the Divine grace and favor, yet upon his repentance he should
be restored to the honor of the Apostolate, as a certain evidence of the
Divine goodness and indulgence to him.

3. HAVING sung an Hymn, and concluded the whole affair, he left the house
where all these things had been transacted, and went with his Apostles unto the
Mount (...). 26. 30.
of Olives: where he again put them in mind how much they would be offended at
those Mark 14. 26.
things which he was now to suffer; and Peter again renewed his resolute and
undaunted promise of suffering, and dying with him; yea, out of an excessive
confidence told him, That though all the rest should for sake and deny him, yet
would not (...) deny him. How far will zeal and an (...) affection transport
even a good man into vanity and presumption! Peter questions others, but never
doubts himself. So natural is self-love, so apt are we to take the fairest
measures of our selves. Nay, though our Lord had but a little before, once and
again reproved this vain humor, yet does he still, not only persist, but grow
up in it. So hardly are we brought to espy our own faults, or to be so
thoroughly convinced of them, as to correct and reform them. This confidence of
his inspired all the rest with a mighty courage, all the Apostles likewise
assuring him of their constant and unshaken adhering to him. Our Lord returning
the same answer to Peter which he had done before. From hence they went down
into the Village of Gethsemane, where, leaving the rest of the Apostles, he
accompanied with none but Peter, James, and John, retired into a neighboring
Garden, (whither, De loc. Hebr. in (...). (...) p. 134.
(...) tells us, Christians even in his time were wont to come solemnly to
offer up their Prayers to Heaven, and where, as the (...). Nub. Clim. 3. part.
5. p. 114.
Arabian Geographer informs us, a fair and stately Church was built to the
honor of the Virgin Mary) to enter upon the Antescene of the fatal Tragedy
that was now approaching; it bearing a very fit proportion (as some of the
Cyril. comment. in (...). 18. Tom. 4. (...). in (...). 18.
Fathers have observed) that as the first Adam fell and ruined mankind in a
Garden, so a Garden should be the place where the second Adam should begin his
Passion, in order to the Redemption of the World. Gardens, which to us are
places of repose and pleasure, and scenes of divertisement and delight, were to
our Lord a school of Temptation, a Theater of great horrors and sufferings, and
the first approaches of the hour of darkness.

4. HERE it was that the Blessed Jesus labored under the bitterest Agony that
could fall upon humane Nature, which the holy Story describes by words
sufficiently expressive of the higest grief and sorrow, he was afraid,
sorrowful, and very heavy, yea, his Soul was (...), exceeding sorrowful, and
that even unto death, he was fore amazed, and very heavy, he was troubled,
(...), his Soul was shaken with a vehement commotion; yea, he was in an Agony,
a word by which the Greeks are wont to represent the greatest conflicts and
anxieties. The effect of all which was, that he prayed more earnestly, offering
up prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears, as the Apostle
expounds it, and sweat, as it were, great drops of blood falling to the ground.
What this bloody sweat was, and how far natural or extraordinary, I am not now
concerned to enquire. Certain it is, it was a plain evidence of the most
intense grief and sadness: for if an extreme fear or trouble will many times
cast us into a cold sweat, how great must be the commotion and conflict of our
Savior's mind, which could force open the pores of his body, locked up by the
coldness of the night, and make not drops of sweat, but great drops, or (as the
word (...) signifies) clods of blood to issue from them. While our Lord was
thus contending with these AntePassions, the three Apostles, whom he had left
at some distance from him, being tired out with watching, and disposed by the
silence of the Night, were fallen fast asleep. Our Lord, who had made three
several addresses unto Heaven, that if it might consist with his Father's will,
this bitter Cup might pass from him, (expressing herein the harmless and
innocent desires of humane Nature, which always studies its own preservation)
between each of them came to visit the Apostles, and calling to Peter, asked
him. Whether they could not watch with him one hour? advising them to watch and
pray, that they entered not into temptation, adding this Argument, That the
spirit indeed was willing, but that the flesh was weak, and that therefore
there was the more need that they should stand upon their guard. Observe here
the incomparable sweetness, the generous candor of our blessed Savior, to pass
so charitable a censure upon an action, from whence malice and ill nature might
have drawn monsters and prodigies, and have represented it black as the shades
of darkness. The request which our Lord made to these Apostles, was infinitely
reasonable, to watch with him in this bitter Agony, their company at least
being some refreshment to one, under such sad fatal circumstances; and this but
for a little time, one hour, it would soon be over, and then they might freely
consult their own ease and safety: 'Twas their dear Lord and Master, whom they
now were to attend upon, ready to lay down his life for them, sweating already
under the first skirmishes of his sufferings, and expecting every moment when
all the powers of darkness would fall upon him. But all these considerations
were drowned in a profound security, the men were fast asleep, and though often
awakened and told of it, regarded it not, as if nothing but ease and softness
had been then to be dreamed of. An action that looked like the most prodigious
ingratitude, and the highest unconcernedness for their Lord and Master, and
which one would have thought had argued a very great coldness and indifferency
of affection toward him. But he would not set it upon the Tenters, nor stretch
it to what it might easily have been drawn to: he imputes it not to their
unthankfulness, or want of affection, nor to their carelessness of what became
of him, but merely to their infirmity and the weakness of their bodily temper,
himself making the excuse, when they could make none for themselves, the spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. Hereby teaching us, to put the most
candid and favorable construction upon those actions of others, which are
capable of various interpretations, and rather with the Be to suck honey, than
with the Spider to draw poison from them. His last Prayer being ended, he came
to them, and told them with a gentle rebuke, That now they might sleep on if
they pleased, that the hour was at hand, that he should be betrayed, and
delivered into the hands of men.

5. WHILE he was thus discoursing to them, a Band of Soldiers sent from the
High Priests, with the Traitor Judas to conduct and direct them, rushed into
the Garden, and seized upon him: which when the Apostles saw, they asked him
whether they should attempt his rescue. Peter (whose ungovernable zeal put him
upon all dangerous undertakings) without staying for an answer, drew his Sword,
and espying one more busy than the rest in laying hold upon our Savior, which
was Malchus (who, though carrying Kingship in his name, was but Servant to the
High Priest) struck at him, with an intention to dispatch him: but God
overruling the stroke, it only cut off his right Ear. Our Lord liked not this
wild and unwarrantable zeal, and therefore entreated their patience, whilst he
miraculously healed the Wound. And turning to Peter, bad him put up his Sword
again; told him, that they who unwarrantably use the Sword, should themselves
perish by it; that there was no need of these violent and extravagant courses;
that if he had a mind to be rid of his Keepers, he could ask his Father, who
would presently send more than twelve Legions of Angels to his rescue and
deliverance: But he must drink the Cup which his Father had put into his hand:
for how else should the Scriptures be fulfilled, which had expressly foretold,
That these things must be? Whereupon, all the Apostles forsook him, and fled
from him; and they who before in their promises were as bold as Lions, now it
came to it like fearful and timorous Hares ran away from him: Peter and John,
though staying last with him, yet followed the same way with the rest,
preferring their own safety, before the concernments of their Master.

6. NO sooner was he apprehended by the Soldiers, and brought out of the
Garden, but he was immediately posted from one Tribunal to another, brought
first to Matthew. 26. 57.
Annas, then carried to Caiaphas, where the Jewish Sanhedrim met together in
order to his Muk 14. 53.
Luke 22. 54.
Trial and Condemnation. Peter having a little recovered himself, and gotten
loose Joh. 18. 12.
from his fears, probably encouraged by his Companion S. John, returns back to
seek his Master: And finding them leading him to the High Priest's Hall,
followed afar off, to see what would be the event and issue. But coming to the
Door, could get no admittance, till one of the Disciples who was acquainted
there, went out and persuaded the Servant, who kept the Door, to let him in.
Being let into the Hall, where the Servants and Officers stood round the Fire,
Peter also came thither to warm himself, where being espied by the Servant-maid
that let him in, and earnestly looking upon him, she charged him with being one
of Christ's Disciples; which Peter publicly denied before all the Company,
positively affirming, that he knew him not; And presently withdrew himself into
the Porch, where he heard the Cock crow: An intimation which one would have
thought should have awakened his Conscience into a quick sense of his duty, and
the promise he had made unto his Master. In the Porch, another of the Maids set
upon him, charging him that he also was one of them that had been with Jesus of
Nazareth: which Peter stoutly denied, saying, that he knew not Christ; and the
better to gain their belief to what he said, ratified it with an Oath. So
natural is it for one sin to draw on another.

7. ABOUT an Hour after, he was a third time set upon, by a Servant of the High
Priest, Malchus his Kinsman, whose Ear Peter had lately cut off: By him he was
charged to be one of Christ's Disciples; Yea, that his very speech betrayed him
to be a Galilean. For the Galileans, though they did not speak a different
language, had yet a different Dialect, using a more confused and barbarous, a
broader and more unpolished way of pronunciation than the rest of the Jews;
whereby they were easily distinguishable in their speaking from other men:
abundant instances whereof there are extant in the Talmud at this day. Nay, not
only gave this evidence, but added, that he himself had seen him with Jesus in
the Garden. Peter still resolutely denied the matter, and to add the highest
accomplishment to his sin, ratified it not only with an Oath, but a solemn
Curse and execration, that he was not the person, that he knew not the man.
It Is but a very weak excuse, which (...) deum. Ambr. in (...). 22. Tom. 5. p.
157. vid. (...). comment. in Matthew. p. 328.
S. Ambrose, and some others make for this Act of Peter's, in saying, I knew
not the Man. He did well (says he) to deny him to be Man, whom he knew to be
God. Hieron. in (...). 26. p. 81. Tom. 9. vid. August. in Joan. Tract. lxvi.
col. 417. Tom. 9.
S. Hierom takes notice of this pious and well-meant excuse made for Peter,
though out of modesty he conceals the name of its Authors, but yet justly
censures it as trifling and frivolous, and which to excuse Man from folly,
would charge God with falsehood: for if he did not deny him, then our Lord was
out, when he said, that, that Night he should thrice deny him, that is, his
Person, and not only his humanity. Certainly the best Apology that can be made
for Peter is, that he quickly repented of this great sin, for no sooner had he
done it, but the Cock crew again; at which intimation our Savior turned about,
and earnestly looked upon him: a glance that quickly pierced him to the Heart,
and brought to his remembrance, what our Lord had once and again foretold him
of, how foully and shamefully he should deny him: whereupon not being able to
contain his sorrow, he ran out of Doors to give it vent, and wept bitterly,
passionately bewailing his folly, and the aggravations of his sin; thereby
endeavoring to make some reparation for his fault, and recover himself into
the favor of Heaven, and to prevent the execution of Divine Justice, by taking
a severe revenge upon himself: by these penitential tears he endeavored to
wash off his guilt: as indeed Repentance is the next step to Innocence.

SECT. VI. Of S. Peter from Christ' s Resurrection till his Ascension.
Our Lord's care to acquaint Peter with his Resurrection. His going to the
Sepulcher. Christ's appearance to Peter, when, and the Reasons of it: The
Apostles Journey into Galilee: Christ's appearing to them at the Sea of
Tiberias; His being discovered by the great draught of Fishes. Christ's
questioning Peter's love, and why. Feed my Sheep, commended to Peter, imports
no peculiar supereminent power and sovereignty. Peter's death and sufferings
foretold. Our Lord takes his last leave of the Apostles at Bethany. His
Ascension into Heaven. The Chapel of the Ascension. The Apostles joy at their
Lord's Exaltation.

1. WHAT became of Peter after his late Prevarication, whether he followed our
Savior through the several stages of his Trial, and personally attended, as a
Mourner at the Funerals of his Master, we have no account left upon Record. No
doubt he stayed at Jerusalem, and probably with S. John, together with whom we
first find him mentioned, when both setting forwards to the Sepulcher: which
was in this manner. Early on that Morning, whereon our Lord was to return from
the Grave, Mary Mark 16. 1.
Magdalen, and some other devout and pious Women brought Spices and Ointments,
with a design to Imbalm the Body of our crucified Lord. Coming to the Sepulcher
at Sunrising, and finding the Door open, they entered in, where they were
suddenly (...) by an Angel, who told them, that Jesus was risen, and bad them
go and (...) his Apostles, and particularly Peter, that he was returned from
the dead; and that he would go before them into Galilee, where they should meet
with him. Hereupon they returned back, and acquainted the Apostles with what
had passed, who beheld the story as the product of a weak frighted fancy. But
Peter and John presently hastened toward the Garden; John being the younger and
nimbler, out-ran his Companion, and Luke 24. 12.
Joh. 20. 2.
came first thither, where he only looked, but entered not in, either out of
fear in himself, or a great Reverence to our Savior. Peter, though behind in
space, was before in zeal, and being elder and more considerate, came and
resolutely entered in, where they found nothing but the Linen Clothes lying
together in one place, and the Napkin that was about his Head wrapped together
in another; which being disposed with so much care and order, showed (what was
falsely suggested by the Jews) that our Savior's Body was not taken away by
Thieves, who are wont more to consult their escape, than how to leave things
orderly disposed behind them.

2. THE same Day about Noon we may suppose it was, that our Lord himself
appeared alone to Peter; being assured of the thing, though not so precisely of
the time. That he did so, S. Paul expressly tells us; and so did the Apostles
the two Disciples that 1 Cor. 15. 5.
came from Emmaus, The Lord is risen, and had appeared unto Simon: which
probably intimates, Luke 24. 34.
that it was before his appearing to those two Disciples. And indeed we cannot
but think that our Lord would hasten the manifestation of himself to him, as
compassionating his case, being overwhelmed with sorrow for the late shameful
denial of his Master: and was therefore willing in the first place to honor
him with his presence, at once to confirm him in the Article of his
Resurrection, and to let him see, that he was restored to the place which
before he had in his grace and favor. S. Paul mentioning his several
appearances after his Resurrection, seems to make this the first of them, That
he was seen of Cephas. Not that it was simply the first, for he first appeared
to the Women. But as (...). (...). in. 1. ad Cor. (...). 15. Hom. 38. p. 666.
(...) observes, it was the first, that was made to men. He was first seen by
him who most desired to see him. He also adds several probable conjectures, why
our Lord first discovered himself to Peter: As, that it required a more than
ordinary firmness and resolution of mind, to be able to bear such a sight: For
they who beheld him after others had seen him, and had heard their frequent
Testimonies and Reports, had had their Faith greatly prepared and encouraged to
entertain it; But he who was to be honored with the first appearance had need
of a bigger, and more Ibid. p. 667.
undaunted faith, lest he should be overborn, (...), with such a strange and
unwonted sight: That Peter was the first that had made a signal confession of
his Master, and therefore it was fit and reasonable, that he should first see
him alive after his Resurrection: That Peter had lately denied his Lord, the
grief whereof lay hard upon him, that therefore our Savior was willing to
administer some consolation to him, and as soon as might be to let him see,
that he had not cast him off; like the kind Samaritan, he made haste to help
him, and to pour Oil into his wounded Conscience.

3. SOME time after this, the Apostles began to resolve upon their journey into
Galilee, as he himself had commanded them. If it be inquired why they went no
sooner, seeing this was the first message and intimation, they had received
from him; (...). in Lut. 24. in fin. p. 170. Tom. 5.
S. Ambrose his resolution seems very rational, that our Lord indeed had
commanded them to go thither, but that their fears for some time kept them at
home; not being as yet fully satisfied in the truth of his Resurrection, till
our Lord by often appearing to them, had confirmed their minds, and put the
case beyond all dispute. They went, as we may suppose, in several Companies,
lest going all in one Body, they should awaken the power and malice of their
enemies, and alarm the care and vigilance of the state, which by reason of the
Noise that our Savior's Trial and Execution had made up and down the City and
Country, was yet full of jealousies and fears. We find Peter, Thomas,
Nathanael, and the two Sons of (...), and two more of the Disciples arrived at
Joh. 21. 1.
some Town about the Sea of Tiberias: Where, the Providence of God guiding the
Instance of their employment, Peter accompanied with the rest, returns to his
old Trade of Fishing. They labored all Night, but caught nothing. Early in the
Morning a grave Person, probably in the habit of a Traveller, presents himself
upon the shore: And calling to them, asked them whether they had any meat: When
they told him, No; He advised them to cast the Net on the right side of the
Ship, that so the Miracle might not seem to be the effect of chance, and they
should not fail to speed. They did so, and the Net presently enclosed so great
a draught, that they were scarce able to drag it a shore. S. John amazed with
the strangeness of the matter, told (...) that surely this must be the Lord,
whom the Winds and the Sea, and all the Inhabitants of that watery Region were
so ready to obey. Peter's zeal presently took fire, not withstanding the
coldness of the Season, and impatient of the least moments being kept from the
company of his dear Lord -- (...). (...). in (...).
and Master, without any consideration of the danger to which he exposed
himself, he girt his Fishers Coat about him, and throwing himself into the Sea,
swam to shore, not being able to stay till the Ship could arrive, which came
presently after. Landing, they found a Fire ready made, and Fish laid upon it,
either immediately created by his Divine power, or which came to the shore of
its own accord, and offered it self to his hand. Which notwithstanding, he
commands them to bring of the Fish which they had lately caught, and prepare it
for their Dinner, He himself dining with them; both that he might give them an
instance of mutual love and fellowship, and also assure them of the truth of
his humane nature, since his return from the dead.

4. DINNER being ended, our Lord more particularly addressed himself to Peter;
urging him to the utmost diligence in his care of Souls: and because he knew,
that nothing but a mighty love to himself could carry him through the troubles
and hazards of so dangerous and difficult an employment; an employment attended
with all the impediments, which either the perverseness of men, or the malice
and subtilty of the Devil could cast in the way to hinder it; therefore he
first enquired of him, whether he loved him more than the rest of the Apostles,
herein mildly reproving his former over-confident resolution, that though all
the rest should deny him, yet would not he deny him. Peter modestly replied,
not censuring others, much less preferring himself before them, that our Lord
knew the integrity of his affection toward him. This Question he put three
several times to Peter, who as often returned the same Answer: It being
Redditur (...) trina trina Confessio, (...) minus amori lingua serviat, quam
timori; and plus (...) elicuisse videatur mors (...), quam vita (...), Aug. in
(...). Tract. 123. col. 566.
but just and reasonable, that he who by a threefold denial had given so much
cause to question, should now by a threefold consession (...). (...). lib. 1.
Ep. 103. p. 27.
give more than ordinary assurance of his sincere affection to his Master.
Peter was a little troubled at this frequent questioning of his love, and
therefore more expressly appeals to our Lord's omnisciency, that He who knew all
things, must needs know that he loved him. To each of these confessions our
Lord added this signal trial of his affection; then, Feed my sheep, that is,
faithfully instruct and teach them, carefully rule and guide them, persuade,
not compel them, feed, not fleece, nor kill them. And so it is plain S. Peter
himself understood it, by the charge which he gives to the Guides and Rulers of
the Church, that they should feed the Flock of God, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy (...) (...), 1, 2, 3.
but of a ready mind: Neither as being Lords over God's heritage, but as
examples to the slock. But that by feeding Christ's Sheep and Lambs, here
commended to S. Peter, should be meant an universal and uncontrollable Monarchy
and Dominion over the whole Christian Church, and that over the Apostles
themselves and their Successors in ordinary, and this power and supremacy
solely invested in S. Peter, and those who were to succeed him in the Sea of
Rome, is so wild an inference, and such a melting down words to run into any
shape, as could never with any face have been offered, or been possible to have
been imposed upon the belief of mankind, if men had not first subdued their
reason to their interest, and captivated both to an implicit faith and a blind
obedience. For granting that our Lord here addressed his speech only unto
Peter, yet the very same power in equivalent terms is elsewhere indifferently
granted to all the Apostles, and in some measure to the ordinary Pastors and
Governors of the Church: As when our Lord told them, That all power was given
him in Heaven and in Earth, by virtue whereof they should go teach and baptize
all Nations, and preach the Gospel to every Creature: That they should feed
God's slock, Rule well, inspect and watch ever those over whom they had the
Authority and the Rule. Words of as large and more express signification, than
those which were here spoken to S. Peter.

5. OUR Lord having thus engaged Peter to a cheerful compliance with the
dangers that might attend the discharge and execution of his Office, now
particularly intimates to him what that fate was that should attend him:
telling him, that though when he was young he girt himself, lived at his own
pleasure, and went whither he pleased; yet when he was old, he should stretch
forth his hands, and another should gird and bind him, and lead him whither he
had no mind to go: intimating, as the Evangelist tells us, by what death he
should glorify God, that is, by Crucifixion, the Martyrdom which he afterward
underwent. And then rising up, commanded him to follow him; by this bodily
attendance mystically implying his conformity to the death of Christ, that he
should follow him in dying for the truth and testimony of the Gospel. It was
not Acts'1. 8.
long after, that our Lord appeared to them to take his last farewell of them,
when Luke 24. 49.
leading them out unto Bethany, a little Village upon the Mount of Olives, he
briefly told them, That they were the persons, whom he had chosen to be the
witnesses both of his Death and Resurrection; a testimony which they should
bear to him in all parts of the World: In order to which he would after his
Ascension pour out his Spirit upon them in larger measures, than they had
hitherto received, that they might be the better fortified to grapple with that
violent rage and sury, wherewith both Men and Devils would endeavor to oppose
them; and that in the mean time they should return to Jerusalem, and stay till
these miraculous powers were from on high conferred upon them. His discourse
being ended, laying his hands upon them, he gave them his solemn blessing;
which done, he was immediately taken from them, and being attended with a
glorious guard and train of Angels, was received up into Heaven. Paulin. Epist.
3. ad Sever. lib. 2. p. 130 Sulp. Sever. Hist. Sacr. lib; 2. p. 145. (...). de
l. c. Heb. in Act. App. p. 297. Tom. 3.
Antiquity tells us, that in the place where he last trod upon the rock, the
impression of his feet did remain, which could never afterward be filled up or
impaired, over which Helena, mother of the Great Constantine, afterward built
a little Chapel, called the Chapel of the Ascension; in the floor whereof
upon a whitish kind of stone, modern J Cotovic. (...). lib. 2. c. 11. p. 271.
vid. Sands (...). lib. 3. p. 156.
Travelers tell us, that the impression of his Foot is showed at this day; but
it is that of his right foot only, the other being taken away by the Turks, and
as it is said, kept in the Temple at Jerusalem. Our Lord being thus taken from
them, the Apostles were filled with a greater sense of his glory and majesty,
than while he was wont familiarly to converse with them; and having performed
their solemn adorations to him, returned back to Jerusalem, waiting for the
promise of the Holy Ghost, which was shortly after Luke 24. 52.
conferred upon them. They worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great
joy. They who lately were overwhelmed with sorrow at the very mention of their
Lord's departure from them, entertained it now with joy and triumph, being
fully satisfied of his glorious advancement at God's right hand, and of that
particular care and providence which they were sure he would exercise toward
them, in pursuance of those great trusts he had committed to them.

SECT. VII. S. Peter's Acts, from our Lord's Ascension, till the Dispersion of
the Church.
The Apostles return to Jerusalem. The (...), or upper-room where they
assembled, what. Peter declares the necessity of a new Apostles being chosen in
the room of Judas. The promise of the Holy Ghost made good upon the day of
Pentecost. The Spirit descended in the likeness of siery cloven tongues, and
why. The greatness of the Miracle. Peter's vindication of the Apostles from the
standers of the Jews, and proving Christ to be the promised Messiah. Great
numbers converted by his Sermon. His going up to the Temple. What their stated
hours of Prayer. His curing the impotent Cripple there, and discourse to the
Jews upon it. What numbers converted by him. Peter and John seized, and cast
into Prison. Brought before the Sanhedrim, and their resolute carriage there.
Their refusing to obey, when commanded not to preach Christ. The great security
the Christian Religion provides sor subjection to Magistrates in all lawful
instances of Obedience. The great severity used by Peter toward Ananias and
Saphira. The great Miracles wrought by him. Again cast into Prison, and
delivered by an Angel. Their appearing before the Sanhedrim; and deliverance,
by the prudent counsels of Gamaliel.

1. THE Holy Jesus being gone to Heaven, the Apostles began to act according to
the Power and Commission he had left with them. In order whereunto, the first
thing they did after his Ascension, was to fill up the vacancy in their
College, lately made by the unhappy fall and Apostasy of Judas. To which end
no sooner were they returned to Jerusalem, but they went (...), into an
upper-room. Where this (...) was, whether in the house of S. John, or of Mary
John-Mark's mother, or in some of the out-rooms belonging to the Temple, (for
the Temple had over the Cloisters several Chambers for the service of the
Priests and Levites, and as Repositories, where the consecrated Vessels and
Utensils of the Temple were laid up, though it be not probable, that the Jews,
and especially the Priests would suffer the Apostles and their company to be so
near the Temple) I stand not to enquire. It Is certain that the Jews usually had
their (...), private Oratories in the upper parts of their houses, called
(...), for the more private exercises of their devotions. Thus Daniel had his
Dan^. 6. 10.
(...), his upper-Chamber ((...) the LXX render it) whither he was wont to
retire to pray to his God: and (...). p. 76.
Benjamin the Jew tells us, that in his time ( Ann. Chr. 1172.) the Jews at
Babylon were wont to pray both in their Synagogues, (...), and in that ancient
upper-room of Daniel, which the Prophet himself built. Such an (...), or
upper-Chamber, was that wherein S. Paul preached at Troas: and Acts 20. 8.
such probably this, where the Apostles were now met together, and in all
likelihood the same, where our Lord had lately kept the Passover, where the
Apostles and the Church were assembled on the day of Pentecost, and which was
then the usual place of their Religious Assemblies, as we have elsewhere
observed more at Prim. (...). Part 1. Chapter 6. (...). 126.
large. Here the Church being met, to the number of about CXX, Peter, as
President of the Assembly, put them in mind, that Judas, one of our Lord's
Apostles, being betrayed by his own Acts 1. 15.
covetous and insatiable mind, had lately fallen from the honor of his place
and ministry: that this was no more than what the Prophet had long since
foretold should come to pass, and that the rule and oversight in the Church,
which had been committed unto him, should be devolved upon another: that
therefore it was highly necessary, that one should be substituted in his room,
and especially such a one as had been familiarly conversant with our Savior,
from first to last, that so he might be a competent witness both of his
doctrine and miracles, his life and death, but especially of his Resurrection
from the dead. For seeing no evidence is so valid and satisfactory, as the
testimony of an eyewitness, the Apostles all along mainly insisted upon this,
that they delivered no other things concerning our Savior to the World, than
what they themselves had seen and heard. And seeing his rising from the dead
was a principle likely to meet with a great deal of opposition, and which would
hardliest gain belief and entertainment with the minds of men, therefore they
principally urged this at every turn, that they were eyewitnesses of his
Resurrection, that they had seen, felt, eaten, and familiarly conversed with
him after his return from the Grave. That therefore such an Apostle might be
chosen, two Candidates were proposed, Joseph called Barsabas, and Matthias. And
having prayed, that the Divine Providence would immediately guide and direct
the choice, they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Matthias, who was accordingly
admitted into the number of the twelve Apostles.

2. FIFTY days since the last Passover being now run out, made way for the
Acts 2. 1.
Feast of Pentecost. At what time the great promise of the Holy Ghost was fully
made good unto them. The Christian Assembly being met together, for the public
services of their Worship, on a sudden a sound, like that of a mighty wind,
rushed in upon them; representing the powerful efficacy of that Divine Spirit,
that was now to be communicated to them: After which there appeared little
flames of fire, which in the fashion of Cloven Tongues, not only descended, but
sat upon each of them, probably to note their perpetual enjoyment of this gift
upon all occasions, that when necessary, they should never be without it; not
like the Prophetic gifts of old, which were conferred but sparingly, and only
at some particular times and seasons. As the seventy Numb. 11. 25.
Elders prophesied and ceased not, but it was only at such times as the Spirit
came down and rested upon them. Hereupon they were all immediately filled with
the Holy Ghost, which enabled them in an instant to speak several Languages,
which they had never learned, and probably never heard of, together with other
miraculous gifts and powers. Thus as the confounding of Languages became a
curse to the old World, separating men from all mutual offices of kindness and
commerce, rendering one part of mankind Barbarians to another: so here the
multiplying several Languages became a blessing, being intended as the means to
bring men of all Nations into the unity of the says, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, into the fellowship of that Religion, that would banish
discords, cement differences, and unite men's hearts in the bond of peace. The
report of so sudden and strange an action presently spread it self into all
corners of the City, and there being at that time at Jerusalem multitudes of
Jewish Proselytes, Devout men out of every Nation under Heaven, Parthians,
Medes, Elamites (or Persians) the dwellers in Mesopotamia and Judaea,
Gappadocia, Pontus, and Asia minor, from Phrygia and Pamphylia, from Egypt and
the parts of Libya and Cyrene, from Rome, from Crete, from Arabia, Jews and
Proselytes (probably drawn thither by the general report and expectation which
had spread it self over all the (...) toto vetus and (...) opinio, (...) in
(...) tempore Judaea (...). Id de (...), etc. Sueton. in vit. Vespas. c. 4. p.
728. (...) (...) Histor. l. 5. c. 13. p. 540.
Eastern parts, and in a manner over all places of the Roman Empire, of the
Jewish Messiah, that about this time should be born at Jerusalem) they no
sooner heard of it, but universally flocked to this Christian Assembly: where
they were amazed to hear these Galileans speaking to them in their own native
Languages, so various, so vastly different from one another. And it could not
but exceedingly increase the wonder to reflect upon the meanness and
inconsiderableness of the persons, neither assisted by natural parts, nor
polished by education, nor improved by use and custom: which three things
Philosophers require to render a man accurate and extraordinary in any art or
discipline, (...), says Plutarch; Natural disposition without (...).
institution is blind, instruction without a genius and disposition is
defective, and (...). p. 2.
exercise without both is lame and imperfect. Whereas these Disciples had not
one of these to set them off; their parts were mean, below the rate of the
common people, the Galileans being generally accounted the rudest and most
stupid of the whole Jewish Nation; their education had been no higher than to
catch Fish, and to mend Nets; nor had they been used to plead causes, or to
deliver themselves before great Assemblies; but spoke on a sudden, not
premeditated discourses, not idle stories, or wild roving fancies, but the
great and admirable works of God, and the mysteries of the Gospel beyond humane
apprehensions to find out, and this delivered in almost all the Languages of
the then known World. Men were severally affected with it, according to their
different tempers and apprehensions. Some admiring, and not knowing what to
think on it, others deriding it, said, that it was nothing else but the wild
raving effect of drunkenness and (...). At so wild a rate are men of profane
minds wont to talk, when they take upon them to pass their censure in the
things of God.

3. HEREUPON the Apostles rose up, and Peter in the name of the rest, took this
occasion of discoursing to them: He told them, that this scandalous slander
proceeded from the spirit of (...) and (...); that their censure was as
uncharitable, as it was unreasonable; that they that are drunken, are drunk in
the night; that it was against nature and custom for men to be in drink so
soon, too early for such a suspicion (...). Joseph. (...). p. 1020.
to take place, it being now but about nine of the clock, the hour for Morning
Prayer, till when men even of ordinary sobriety and devotion on Festival days
were wont to fast. That these extraordinary and miraculous passages were but
the accomplishment of an ancient prophecy, the fulfilling of what God had
expressly foretold should come to pass in the times of the Messiah; that Jesus
of Nazareth had evidently approved himself to be the Messiah sent from God by
many unquestionable miracles, of which they themselves had been eyewitnesses:
And though by God's permission, who had determined by this means to bring about
the Salvation of mankind, they had wickedly crucified and slain him, yet that
God had raised him from the dead: That it was not possible he should be holden
always under the dominion of the Grave; nor was it consistent with the justice
and goodness of God, and especially with those Divine predictions which had
expressly foretold he should rise again from the dead: David having more
particularly foretold, That his (...) should rest in hope, that God would not
leave his Soul in Hell, neither suffer his holy one to see corruption; but
would make known to him the ways of life: That this prophecy could not be meant
concerning David himself, by whom it was spoken, he having many Ages since been
turned to ashes, his body resolved into rottenness and putrefaction, his Tomb
yet visible among them, from whence he never did return; that therefore it must
needs have been prophetically spoken concerning Christ, having never been truly
fulfilled in any but him, who both died, and was risen again, whereof they were
witnesses. Yea, that he was not only risen from the dead, but ascended into
Heaven, and according to David's prediction, State down on God's right hand,
until he made his Enemies his footstool: which could not be primarily meant of
David, he never having yet bodily ascended into Heaven; that therefore the
whole house of Israel ought to believe, and take notice, that this very Jesus,
whom they had crucified, was the person whom God had appointed to be the
Messiah and the Savior of his Church.

4. THIS discourse in every part of it, like so many daggers, pierced them to
the heart; who thereupon cried out to Peter and his Brethren to know what they
should do. Peter told them, that there was no other way, than by an hearty and
sincere repentance, and a being baptized into the Religion of this crucified
Savior, to (...) their guilt, to obtain pardon of sin, and the gifts and
benefits of the Holy Ghost. That upon these terms the promises of the new
Covenant, which was ratified by the death of Christ, did belong to them, and
their children, and to all that should effectually believe and embrace the
Gospel: Further pressing and persuading them by doing thus, to save themselves
from that unavoidable ruin and destruction, which this wicked and untoward
generation of obstinate unbelieving Jews were shortly to be exposed to. The
effects of his preaching were strange and wonderful: as many as believed, were
baptized: there being that day added to the Church no less than three thousand
souls. A quick and plentiful harvest; the late sufferings of our Savior, as
yet fresh bleeding in their memories, the present miraculous powers of the Holy
Ghost, that appeared upon them, the zeal of his Auditors, though heretofore
misplaced and misguided, and above all, the efficacy of Divine grace,
contributing to this numerous conversion.

5. THOUGH the converting so vast a multitude might justly challenge a place
amongst the greatest miracles, yet the Apostles began now more particularly to
exercise their miraculous power. Peter and John going up to the Temple, about
three of Acts 3. (...)
the clock in the afternoon, toward the conclusion of one of the solemn hours
of prayer, (for the Jews divided their day into four greater hours, each
quarter containing three lesser under it, three of which were public and
stated times of prayer, instituted ( say Vid. (...). in Act. 3. 1.
they) by the three great Patriarchs of their Nation; the first from six of the
clock in the morning till nine, called hence the third hour of the day,
instituted by Abraham, this was called (...) or morning prayer: the second from
nine till twelve, called the sixth hour, and this hour of prayer ordained by
Isaac, this was called (...) or midday prayer: the third from twelve till
three in the afternoon, called the ninth hour, appointed by Jacob, called (...)
or evening prayer; and at this hour it was that these two Apostles went up to
the Temple, where) they found a poor impotent Cripple, who, though above forty
years old, had been lame from his Birth, lying at the beautiful Gate of the
Temple, and asking an Alms of them. Peter earnestly looking on him, told him,
he had no money to give him, but that he would give him that which was a great
deal better, restore him to his health; and lifting him up by the hand,
commanded him in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth to rise up and walk. The word
was no sooner said, than the thing was done: Immediately the Nerves and Sinews
were enlarged, and the Joints returned to their proper use. The man standing up
went into the Temple walking, leaping, and praising God. The beholding so
sudden and extraordinary a Cure begot great admiration in the minds of the
People, whose curiosity drew them to the Apostles to see those who had been the
Authors of it. Which Peter taking notice of, began to discourse to them to this
effect; That there was no reason they should wonder at them, as if by their own
skill and art they had wrought this Cure, it being entirely done in the Name of
their crucified Master, by the Power of that very Christ, that Holy and Just
Person, whom they themselves had denied and delivered up to Pilate, and
preferred a Rebel and a Murderer before him, when his Judge was resolved to
acquit him: and that though they had put him to death, yet that they were
witnesses that God had raised him up again, and that He was gone to Heaven,
where he must remain till the times of the General Restitution: That he
presumed that this in them, as also in their Rulers, was in a great measure the
effect of ignorance, and the not being thoroughly convinced of the Greatness and
Divinity of his Person; which yet God made use of for the bringing about his
Wife and Righteous Designs, the accomplishing of what he had foretold
concerning Christ's Person and Sufferings, by Moses and Samuel, and all the
holy Prophets which had been (...) the World began: That therefore it was now
high time for them to repent, and turn to God, that their great wickedness
might be expiated, and that when Christ should shortly come in Judgment upon
the Jewish Nation, it might be a time of comfort and refreshing to them, what
would be of vengeance and destruction to other men: that they were the peculiar
persons, to whom the blessings of the promises did primarily appertain, and
unto whom God in the first place sent his Son, that he might derive his
blessing upon them by turning them away from their iniquities. While Peter was
thus discoursing to the People in one place, we may suppose that John was
preaching to them in another; and the success was answerable. The Apostles cast
out the seed, and God immediately gave the increase. There being by this means
no (...) than Five Thousand brought over to the Faith: though'tis possible the
whole Body of Believers Act. 4. 4.
might be comprehended in that Number.

6. WHILE the Apostles were thus Preaching, the Priests and Sadducees (who Act.
4. (...)
particularly appeared in this business, as being enemies to all tumults, or
what ever might disturb their present ease and quiet, the only portion of
happiness they expected; besides that they hated Christianity, because so
expressly asserting the Resurrection) being vexed to hear this Doctrine vented
amongst the People, intimated to the Magistrate, that this Concourse might
probably tend to an Uproar and Insurrection: Whereupon they came with the
Captain of the Temple (Commander of the Tower of (...), which stood close by,
on the North side of the Temple, wherein was a Roman Garrison to prevent or
suppress, especially at Festival times, Popular Tumults and Uproars) who seized
on the Apostles, and put them into Prison. The next Day they were convented
before the Jewish Sanhedrim; and being asked by what Power and Authority they
had done this; Peter resolutely answered, That as to the Cure done to this
impotent Person, Be it known to them and all the Jews, that it was perfectly
wrought in the Name of that Jesus of Nazareth, whom they themselves had
crucified, and God had raised from the dead, and whom, though they had thrown
him by as waste and rubbish, yet God had made head of the corner; and that
there was no other way, wherein they, or others, could expect salvation, but by
this crucified Savior. Great was the boldness of the Apostles, admired by the
Sanhedrim it self, in this matter; especially if we consider, that this
probably was the very Court that had so lately sentenced and condemned their
Master, and being fleshed in such sanguinary proceedings, had no other way but
to go on and justify one cruelty with another: that the Apostles did not say
these things in corners, and behind the curtain, but to their very faces, and
that in the open Court of Judicature, and before all the People: That the
Apostles had not been used to plead in such public places nor had been
polished with the Arts of education, but were ignorant unlearned men, known not
to be versed in the study of the Jewish Law.

7. THE Council (which all this while had beheld them with a kind of wonder,
and now remembered that they had been the companions and attendants of the late
crucisied Jesus) commanded them to withdraw, and debated amongst themselves
what they should do with them. The Miracle they could not deny, the fact being
so plain and evident, and therefore resolved strictly to charge them, that they
should Preach no more in the Name of Jesus. Being called in again, they
acquainted them with the Resolution of the Council, to which Peter and John
replied, That they could by no means yield obedience to it, appealing to
themselves, whether it was not more sit, that they should obey God, rather than
them: And that they could not but testify what they had seen and heard. Nor
did they in this answer make any undue reflection upon the power of the
Magistrates, and the obedience (...). Muson. apud Siob. (...). 77. (...) honor.
and (...). p. 458. (...) pluribus (...) and (...) hac (...).
due to them, it being a ruled (...) by the first dictates of reason, and the
common vote and suffrage of Mankind, that Parents and Governors are not to be
obeyed, when their commands interfere with the obligations under which we stand
to a superior power. All authority is originally derived from God, and our
duty to him may not be superseded by the Laws of any Authority deriving from
him: and even Socrates himself in a parallel instance, when persuaded to (...).
(...). in (...). apud (...). 11. p. 25.
leave off his excellent way of institution and instructing youth, and to
comply with the humor of his Athenian Judges to save his life, returned this
answer, that indeed he loved and honored the Athenians; but yet resolved to
obey God, rather than them. An answer almost the same both in substance and
words, with that which was here given by our Apostles. In all other cases where
the Laws of the Magistrate did not interfere with the commands of Christ, none
more loyal, more compliant than they. As indeed no Religion in the World ever
secured the interests of Civil authority like the Religion of the Gospel. It
positively charges every soul of what rank or condition soever to be subject to
the higher powers, as a Divine ordinance and institution, and that not for
wrath only, but for conscience sake; it puts men in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates, to submit to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, both to the King as supreme, and unto
Governors as unto them that are sent by him: for so it the will of God. So far
is it from allowing us to violate their persons, that it suffers us not boldly
to censure their actions, to revile the gods, despise (...), and speak evil of
Dignities, or to vilify and injure them so much, as by a dishonorable
thought; commanding us when we cannot obey to suffer the most rigorous
penalties imposed upon us with calmness, and to possess our souls in patience.
Thus when these two Apostles were shortly after again summoned before the
Council, commanded no more to Preach the Christian Doctrine, and to be scourged
for what they had done already, though they could not obey the one, they
cheerfully submitted to the other without any peevish or tart reflections, but
went away rejoicing. But what the carriage of Christians was in this matter in
the first and best ages of the Gospel, we have in another place sufficiently
discovered to the World. We may not withhold our obedience, till the (...),
Christ.
Magistrate invades God's Throne, and countermands his authority, and may then
appeal Part. 3. (...). 4.
to the sense of Mankind, whether it be not most reasonable that Gods authority
should first take place, as the Apostles here appealed to their very Judges
themselves. Nor do we find that the Sanhedrim did except against the Plea. At
least whatever they thought, yet not daring to punish them for fear of the
People, they only threatened them, and let them go: who thereupon presently
returned to the rest of the Apostles and Believers.

8. The Church exceedingly multiplied by these means: And that so great a
Company (most whereof were poor) might be maintained, they generally sold their
Estates, and brought the Money to the Apostles, to be by them deposited in one
common Treasury, and thence distributed according to the several exigencies of
the Church: which gave occasion to this dreadful Instance. Ananias and his Wife
Saphira having taken Act. 5. 1.
upon them the profession of the Gospel, according to the free and generous
spirit of those times, had consecrated and devoted their Estate to the honor
of God, and the necessities of the Church. And accordingly sold their
Possessions, and turned them into Money. But as they were willing to gain the
reputation of charitable Persons, so were they loath wholly to cast themselves
upon the Divine providence, by letting go all at once, and therefore privately
withheld part of what they had devoted, and bringing the rest, laid it at the
Apostles feet: hoping herein they might deceive the Apostles, though
immediately guided by the Spirit of God. But Peter at his first coming in
treated Ananias with these sharp inquiries; Why he would suffer Satan to fill
his heart with so big a wickedness, as by keeping back part of his estate, to
think to deceive the Holy Ghost? That before it was sold, it was wholly at his
own disposure; and after, it was perfectly in his own power fully to have
performed his vow: So that it was capable of no other interpretation, than that
herein he had not only abused and injured men, but mocked God, and, what in him
lay, lied to, and cheated the Holy Ghost; who, he knew, was privy to the most
secret thoughts and purposes of his heart. This was no sooner said, but
suddenly to the great terror and amazement of all that were present, Ananias
was arrested with a stroke from Heaven, and fell down dead to the ground.
Not long after his Wife came in, whom Peter entertained with the same severe
reproofs, vvherevvith he had done her Husband, adding, that the like sad fate
and doom should immediately seize upon her, who thereupon dropped down dead: As
she had been Copartner with him in the Sin, becoming sharer with him in the
punishment. An Instance of great severity, filling all that heard of it with
fear and terror, and became a seasonable prevention of that hypocrisy and
dissimulation, wherewith many might possibly think to have imposed upon the
Church.

9. THIS severe Case being extraordinary, the Apostles usually exerted their
power in such Miracles as were more useful and beneficial to the World: Curing
all manner Act. 5. 12.
of Diseases, and dispossessing Devils: In so much that they brought the Sick
into the Streets, and laid them upon Beds and Couches, that at least Peter's
shadow, as he passed by, might come upon them. These astonishing Miracles could
not but mightily contribute to the propagation of the Gospel, and convince the
World that the Apostles were more considerable Persons, than they took them
for, poverty and meanness being no bar to true worth and greatness. And
methinks (...). in loc.
Erasmus his reflection here is not unseasonable; that no honor or
sovereignty, no power or dignity was comparable to this glory of the Apostle;
that the things of Christ, though in another way, were more noble and
excellent, than any thing that this World could afford. And therefore he tells
us, that when he beheld the state and magnificence wherewith Pope Julius the
Second appeared first at Bononia, and then at Rome, equalling the triumphs of a
Pompey, or a Caesar; he could not but think how much all this was below the
greatness and majesty of S. Peter, who converted the World, not by Power or
Armies, not by Engines, or (...) of pomp and grandeur, but by faith in the
power of Christ, and drew it to the admiration of himself: and the same state (
says he) would no doubt attend the Apostles Successors, were they Men of the
same temper and holiness of life. The Jewish Rulers alarmed with this News, and
awakened with the growing numbers of the Church, sent to apprehend the
Apostles, and cast them into Prison. But God who is never wanting to his own
cause, sent that Night an Angel from Heaven to open the Prison doors,
commanding them to repair to the Temple, and to the exercise of their
Ministry. Which they did early in the Morning, and there taught the People.
How unsuccessful are the projects of the wisest Statesmen, when God frowns upon
them! how little do any counsels against Heaven prosper! In vain is it to shut
the doors, where God is resolved to open them; the firmest Bars, the strongest
Chains cannot hold, where once God has designed and decreed our liberty. The
Officers returning the next Morning, found the Prison shut and guarded, but the
Prisoners gone: Wherewith they acquainted the Council, who much wondered at it:
but being told where the Apostles were, they sent to bring them without any
noise or violence before the Sanhedrim: where the High Priest asked them, how
they durst go on to propagate that Doctrine which they had so strictly
commanded them not to preach? Peter in the name of the rest told them, That
they must in this case obey God rather than men: That though they had so
barbarously and contumeliously treated the Lord Jesus, yet that God had raised
him up, and exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior to give both repentance
and remission of sins: That they were witnesses of these things, and so were
those Miraculous Powers which the Holy Ghost conferred upon all true
Christians. Vexed was the Council with this Answer, and began to consider how
to cut them off. But Gamaliel, a grave and learned Senator, having commanded
the Apostles to withdraw, bad the Council take heed what they did to them;
putting them in mind, that several persons had heretofore raised parties and
factions, and drawn vast Numbers after them; but that they had miscarried, and
they and their designs come to naught: that therefore they should do well to
let these men alone: that if their doctrines and designs were merely humane,
they would in time of themselves fall to the ground; but if they were of God,
it was not all their power and policies would be able to defeat and overturn
them: and that they themselves would herein appear to oppose the counsels and
designs of Heaven. With this prudent and rational advice they were satisfied;
and having commanded the Apostles to be scourged, and charged them no more to
preach this doctrine, restored them to their liberty. Who notwithstanding this
charge and threatening returned home in a kind of triumph, that they were
accounted worthy to suffer in so good a cause, and to undergo shame and
reproach (...). (...). 1. c. 29. p. 163.
for the sake of so good a Master. Nor could all the hard usage they met with
from men discourage them in their duty to God, or make them less zealous and
diligent both publicly and privately to preach Christ in every place.

SECT. VIII. Of S. Peter's Acts, from the Dispersion of the Church at
Jerusalem, till his contest with S. Paul at Antioch.
The great care of the Divine Providence over the Church. Peter dispatched by
the Apostles to confirm the Church newly planted at Samaria. His (...) and
silencing Simon Magus there. His going to Lydda, and curing AEneas. His raising
Dorcas at Joppa. The (...) of all sorts of Creatures presented to him, to
prepare him for the conversion of the Gentiles. His going to Cornelius, and
declaring God's readiness to receive the Gentiles into the Church. The
Baptizing Cornelius and his Family. Peter censured by the Jews for conversing
with the Gentiles. The mighty prejudices of the Jews against the Gentiles noted
out of Heathen Writers. Peter cast into prison by Herod Agrippa: miraculously
delivered by an Angel. His discourse in the Synod at Jerusalem, that the
Gentiles might be received without being put under the obligation of the Law of
Moses. His unworthy compliance with the Jews at Antioch in opposition to the
Gentiles. Severely checked and resisted by S. Paul. The ill use Porphyry makes
of this difference. The conceit of some that it was not Peter the Apostle, but
one of the Seventy.

1. THE Church had been hitherto tossed with gentle storms, but now a more
violent tempest overtook it, which began in the Proto-Martyr Stephen, and was
more vigorously carried on afterward; by occasion whereof the Disciples were
dispersed. Acts 8. 1.
And God, who always brings good out of evil, hereby provided, that the Gospel
should not be confined only to Jerusalem. Hitherto the Church had been crowded
up within the City-walls, and the Religion had crept up and down in private
corners; but the professors of it being now dispersed abroad by the malice and
cruelty of their enemies, carried Christianity along with them, and propagated
it into the neighbourCountries, accomplishing hereby an ancient prophecy, That
out of Sion should go forth (...). 2. 3.
the Law, and the (...) of the Lord from Jerusalem. Thus God overrules the
malice of men, and makes intended poison to become food, or physic. That
Divine Providence that governs the World, more particularly superintends the
affairs and interests of his Church, so that no weapon (...) against Israel
shall prosper; curses shall be turned into blessings, and that become an
eminent means to enlarge and propagate the Gospel, which they designed as the
only way to suppress and stifle it. Amongst those that were scattered, Philip
the Deacon was driven down unto Samaria, where he preached the Gospel, and
confirmed his preaching by many miraculous cures, and dispossessing Devils. In
this City there was one Simon, who by Magic Arts and Diabolical Sorceries
sought to advance himself into a great fame and reputation with the people,
insomuch that they generally beheld him as the great power of God, for so the
J. Mart. Apol. 2 p. 69. (...). 1. (...). 20. p. 115.
Ancients tell us, he used to style himself, giving out himself to be the first
and chiefest Deity, the Father, who is God over all, that is, that he was that
which in every Nation was accounted the supreme Deity. This man hearing the
Sermons, and beholding (...). de (...). 1. 46. p. 219.
the Miracles that were done by Philip, gave up himself amongst the number of
believers, and was baptized with them. The Apostles, who yet remained at
Jerusalem, having heard of the great success of Philip's ministry at Samaria,
thought good to send some of their number to his assistance. And accordingly
deputed Peter and John, who came thither. Where having prayed for, and laid
their hands upon these new converts, they presently received the Holy Ghost.
Simon the Magician observing, that by laying on of the Apostle's hands,
miraculous gifts were conferred upon men, offered them a considerable sum of
money to invest him with this power, that on whom he laid his hands they might
receive the Holy Ghost. Peter perceiving his rotten and insincere intentions,
rejected his impious motion with scorn and detestation: Thy money perish with
thee. He told him that his heart was naught and hypocritical; that he could
have no share nor portion in so great a privilege; that it more concerned him
to repent of so great a wickedness, and sincerely seek to God, that so the
thought of his heart might be forgiven him; for that he perceived that he had a
very vicious and corrupt temper and constitution of mind, and was as yet bound
up under a very wretched and miserable state, displeasing to God, and dangerous
to himself. The Conscience of the man was a little startled with this, and he
prayed the Apostles to intercede with Heaven, that God would pardon his sin,
and that none of these things might fall upon him. But how little cure this
wrought upon him, we shall find elsewhere, when we shall again meet with him
afterward. The Apostles having thus confirmed the Church at Samaria, and
preached up and down in the Villages thereabouts, returned back to Jerusalem,
to join their counsel and assistance to the rest of the Apostles.

2. THE storm, though violent, being at length blown over, the Church enjoyed a
time of great calmness and serenity: during which Peter went out to visit the
Churches lately planted in those parts by those Disciples who had been
dispersed by the persecution at Jerusalem. Coming down to Lydda, the first
thing he did was to work Acts 9. 32.
a cure upon one AEneas, who being crippl'd with the Palsy, had layn bedridden
for eight years together. Peter coming to him, bad him in the name of Christ to
arise, and the man was immediately restored to perfect health. A miracle that
was not confined only to his person, for being known abroad generally brought
over the inhabitants of that place. The fame of this miracle having flown to
Joppa, a Seaport Town, some six miles thence; the Christians there presently
sent for Peter upon this occasion. Tabitha, whose Greek name was Dorcas, a
woman venerable for her piety and diffusive charity, was newly dead, to the
great lamentation of all good men, and much more to the loss of the poor that
had been relieved by her. Peter coming to the house, found her dressed up for
her Funeral solemnity, and compassed about with the sorrowful Widows, who
showed the Coats and Garments wherewith she had clothed them, the badges of her
charitable liberality. Peter shutting all out, kneeled down and prayed, and
then turning him to the body, commanded her to arise, and lifting her up by the
hand, presented her in (...) health to her friends, and those that were about
her: by which he confirmed many, and converted more to the Faith. After which
he staid some considerable time at Joppa, lodging in the house of Simon a
Tanner.

3. WHILE he abode in this City, retiring one morning to the housetop to pray,
Acts 10. 9.
(as the Jews frequently did, having thence a free and open prospect toward
Jerusalem and the Temple) it being now near Noon, which was the conclusion of
one of their stated times of Prayer, he found himself hungry, and called for
meat: but while it was preparing he himself fell into a Trance, wherein were
presented to him a large sheet let down from Heaven, containing all sorts of
Creatures, clean and unclean; a voice at the same time calling to him, that he
should rise, kill freely, and indifferently (...) upon them; Peter tenacious as
yet of the Rites and Institutions of the Mosaic Law, rejoined, That he could
not do it, having never eaten any thing that was common or unclean. To which
the voice replied, That what God had cleansed he should not account or call
common. Which being done thrice, the vessel was again taken up into Heaven, and
the Vision presently disappeared. By this symbolick representment, though Peter
at present knew not what to make of it, God was teaching him a new lesson, and
preparing him to go upon an Errand and Embassy, which the Spirit at the same
time expressly commanded him to undertake. While he was in this doubtful posture
of mind, three messengers knocked at the door, enquiring for him, from whom he
received this account: That Cornelius a Roman, Captain of a Band of Italian
Soldiers at Caesarea, a person of great Piety and Religion (being a Proselyte
of the Gate, who though not observing an exact conformity to the Rites of the
Mosaic Law, did yet maintain some general correspondence with it, and lived
under the obligation of the seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah) had by an
immediate command from God sent for him. The next day Peter accompanied with
some of the Brethren, went along with them, and the day after they came to
Caesarea. Against whose arrival Cornelius had summoned his friends and kindred
to his house. Peter arriving, Cornelius (who was affected with a mighty
reverence for so great a person) fell at his feet, and worshipped him: a way of
address frequent in those Eastern Countries toward Princes and great men, but
by the Greeks and Romans appropriated as a peculiar honor to the Gods. Peter
rejecting the honor, as due only to God, entered into the house, where he first
made his Apology to the company, that though they could not but know, that it
was not lawful for a Jew to (...) in the duties of Religion with those of
another Nation, yet that now God had taught him another lesson. And then
proceeded particularly to enquire the reason of Cornelius his sending for him.
Whereupon Cornelius told him, That four days since, being conversant in the
duties of Fasting and Prayer, an Angel had appeared to him, and told him, that
his Prayers and Alms were come up for a memorial before God, that he should
send to Joppa for one Simon Peter, who lodged in a Tanners house by the Sea
side, who should further make known his mind to him; that accordingly he had
sent, and being now come, they were there met to hear what he had to say to
them. Where we see, that though God sent an Angel to Cornelius to acquaint him
with his will, yet the Angel was only to direct him to the Apostle for
instruction in the Faith; which no doubt was done, partly that God might put
the greater honor upon an institution, that was likely to meet with contempt
and scorn enough from the World; partly to let us see, that we are not to
expect extraordinary and miraculous ways of teaching and information, where God
affords ordinary means.

4. HEREUPON Peter began this discourse, that by comparing things it was now
plain and evident, that the partition wall was broken down; that God had no
longer a particular kindness for Nations or Persons; that it was not the
Nation, but the Religion; not the outward quality of the man, but the inward
temper of the mind that recommends men to God; that the devout and the pious,
the righteous and the Vas (...) Domini, and Spiritus Sanctus habitat in (...).
Et (...), and de Britannia (...). Regnum (...) intra vos (...). ad (...). p.
102. Tom. 1.
good man, wherever he be, is equally dear to Heaven; that God has as much
respect for a just and a virtuous person in the Wilds of Scythia, as upon Mount
Sion: that the reconciling and making peace between God and Man by Jesus
Christ, was the Doctrine published by the Prophets of old, and of late, since
the times of John, preached through Galilee and Judaea, viz. that God had
anointed and consecrated Jesus of Nazareth with Divine Powers and Graces, in
the exercise whereof he constantly went about to do good to men: that they had
seen all he had done amongst the Jews, whom though they had slain and
crucified, yet that God had raised him again the third day, and had openly
showed him to his Apostles and followers, whom he had chosen to be his peculiar
witnesses, and whom to that end he had admitted to eat and drink with him after
his Resurrection, commanding them to preach the Gospel to mankind, and to (...)
that he was the person whom God had ordained to be the great Judge of the
World: that all the Prophets with one consent bore witness of him: that this
Jesus is he, in whose Name whosoever believes, should certainly receive
remission of sins. While Peter was thus preaching to them, the Holy Ghost fell
upon a great part of his Auditory, enabling them to speak several Languages,
and therein to magnify the giver of them. Whereat the (...), who came along
with Peter, did sufficiently wonder, to see that the gifts of the Holy Ghost
should be poured upon the Gentiles. Peter seeing this, told the company that he
knew no reason why these persons should not be baptized, having received the
Holy Ghost as well as they; and accordingly commanded them to be baptized. For
whose further confirmation he staid some time longer with them. This act of
Peter's made a great noise among the Apostles and Brethren at Jerusalem, who
being lately converted from their Judaism, were as yet zealous for the Religion
of Acts 11. 1.
their Country, and therefore severely charged Peter at his return for his too
familiar conversing with the Gentiles. See here the powerful prejudice of
education. The Jews had for several Ages conceived a radicated and inveterate
prejudice against the Gentiles. Indeed the Law of Moses commanded them to be
peculiarly kind to their own Nation; and the Rites and Institutions of their
Religion, and the peculiar form of their Commonwealth made them different from
the fashion of other Countries: a separation which in aftertimes they drew
into a narrower compass. Besides they were mightily (...) up with their
external privileges, that they were the seed of Abraham, the people whom God
had peculiarly chosen for himself, above all other Nations of the World, and
therefore with a lofty scorn proudly rejected the Gentiles as Dogs and
Reprobates, utterly refusing to show them any office of common kindness and
converse. We find the Heathens frequently charging them with this rudeness and
inhumanity. Satyr. p. 439.
Juvenal accuses them, that they would not show a Traveller the right way, nor
give give him a draught of water, if he were not of their Religion. (...). lib.
5. (...). 4, 5. p. 535.
Tacitus tells us, that they had adversus omnes alios hostile odium, a bitter
hatred of all other people: Ap. (...). Antiqu. Jud. lib. (...). c. 6.
Haman represented them to Ahasuerus as (...), etc. A people that would never
kindly mix and correspond with any other, as different in their Manners, as in
their Laws and Religion from other Nations. The friends of Antiochus (as the
Diod. (...). lib. 34. apud (...). Cod. CCXLIV. Col. 1149.
Historian reports) charged them (...), That they alone of all others were the
most unsociable people under Heaven; that they held no converse or
correspondence with any other, but accounted them as their mortal enemies; that
they would not eat or drink with men of another Nation, no nor so much as wish
well to them, their Ancestors having leavened them with an hatred of all
mankind. This was their humor; and that the (...) herein did not wrong them,
is sufficiently evident from their ordinary practice, and is openly avowed by
their own Vid. (...), in (...) cap. 12. and (...). 11.
writings. Nay, at their first coming over to Christianity, though one great
design of it was to soften the manners of men, and to oblige them to a more
extensive and universal charity, yet could they hardly quit this common
prejudice, quarrelling with Peter for no other reason, but that he had eaten
and drunken with the Gentiles: insomuch that he was forced to Apologize for
himself, and to justify his actions as immediately done by Divine warrant and
authority. And then, no sooner had he given them a naked and impartial account
of the whole transaction, from first to last, but they presently turned their
(...) against him, into thanks to God, that he had granted to the Gentiles also
Repentance unto life.

5. IT was now about the end of Caligula's Reign, when Peter having finished
his visitation of the new planted Churches, was returned unto Jerusalem. Not
long after Herod Agrippa, Grand child to Herod the great, having attained the
Kingdom, the better Acts 12. 1.
to ingratiate himself with the people, had lately put S. James to death. And
finding that this gratified the Vulgar, resolved to send Peter the same way
after him. In order whereunto he apprehended him, cast him into prison, and set
strong guards to watch him: the Church in the mean time being very instant and
importunate with Heaven for his life and safety. The night before his intended
execution, God purposely sent an Angel from Heaven, who coming to the Prison,
found him fast asleep between two of his Keepers. So soft and secure a pillow
is a good Conscience, even in the confines of death, and the greatest danger.
The Angel raised him up, knocked off his Chains, bad him gird on his Garments,
and follow him. He did so, and having passed the first and second Watch, and
entered through the Iron-Gate into the City (which opened to them of its own
accord) after having passed through one Street more, the Angel departed from
him. By this time Peter came to himself, and perceived that it was no Vision,
but a reality that had happened to him. Whereupon he came to Marie's house, where
the Church were met together at Prayer for him. Knocking at the door, the Maid,
who came to let him in, perceiving 'twas his voice, ran back to tell them, that
Peter was at the door. Which they at first looked upon as nothing, but the
effect of fright or fancy, but she still affirming it, they concluded that it
was his Angel, or some peculiar messenger sent from him. The door being open,
they were strangely amazed at the sight of him: but he briefly told them the
manner of his deliverance, and charging them to acquaint the Brethren with it,
presently withdrew into another place. It Is easy to imagine what a bustle and
a stir there was the next morning among the Keepers of the Prison, with whom
Herod was so much displeased, that he commanded them to be put to death.

6. SOME time after this it happened, that a controversy arising between the
Acts. 15. 1.
Jewish and the Gentile Converts, about the observation of the Mosaic Law, the
minds of men were exceedingly disquieted and disturbed with it; the Jews
zealously contending for Circumcision, and the observance of the Ceremonial Law
to be joined with the belief and profession of the Gospel, as equally necessary
to Salvation. To compose this difference, the best expedient that could be
thought on, was to call a General Council of the Apostles and Brethren, to meet
together at Jerusalem, which was done accordingly, and the case thoroughly
scanned and canvassed. At last Peter stood up, and acquainted the Synod, that
God having made choice of him among all the Apostles, to be the first that
preached the Gospel to the Gentiles; God who was best able to judge of the
hearts of men, had born witness to them, that they were accepted of him, by
giving them his Holy Spirit as well as he had done to the Jews; having put no
difference between the one and the other. That therefore it was a tempting and
a provoking God, to put a (...) upon the necks of the Disciples, which neither
they themselves nor their Fathers were able to bear: there being ground enough
to believe, that the Gentiles as well as the Jews should be saved by the grace
of the Gospel. After some other of the Apostles had declared their judgments in
the case, it was unanimously decreed, that except the temporary observance of
some few particular things, equally convenient both for Jew and Gentile, no
other burden should be imposed upon them. And so the decrees of the Council
being drawn up into a Synodical Epistle, were sent abroad to the several
Churches, for allaying the heats and controversies that had been raised about
this matter.

7. PETER a while after the celebration of this Council, left Jerusalem, and
Gal. 2. 11.
came down to Antioch, where using the liberty which the Gospel had given him,
he familiarly ate and conversed with the Gentile Converts, accounting them, now
that the partition wall was broken down, no longer strangers and foreigners,
but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God: This he had
been taught by the Vision of the sheet let down from Heaven; this had been
lately decreed, and he himself had promoted and subscribed it, in the Synod at
Jerusalem: this he had before practiced toward Cornelius and his Family, and
justified the action to the satisfaction of his accusers; and this he had here
freely and innocently done at Antioch, till some of the Jewish Brethren coming
thither, for fear of offending and displeasing them, he withdrew his converse
with the Gentiles, as if it had been unlawful for him to hold Communion with
uncircumcised persons, when yet he knew, and was fully satisfied, that our Lord
had wholly removed all difference, and broken down the Wall of separation
between Jew and Gentile. In which affair, as he himself acted against the light
of own mind and judgment, condemning what he had approved, and destroying what
he had before built up, so hereby he confirmed the Jewish zealots in their
inveterate error, cast infinite scruples into the minds of the Gentiles,
filling their Consciences with fears and dissatisfactions, reviving the old
feuds and prejudices between Jew and Gentile; by which means many others were
ensnared, yea, the whole number of Jewish Converts followed his example,
separating themselves from the company of the Gentile Christians. Yea, so far
did it spread, that Barnabas himself was carried away with the stream and
torrent of this unwarrantable practice. S. Paul, who was at this time come to
Antioch, unto whom Peter gave the right hand of fellowship, acknowledging his
Apostleship of the Circumcision, observing these evil and unevangelical
actings, resolutely withstood Peter to the face, and publicly reproved him as
a person worthy to be blamed for his gross prevarication in this matter;
severely expostulating and reasoning with him, that he who was himself a Jew,
and thereby under a more immediate obligation to the Mosaic Law, should cast
off that Yoke himself, and yet endeavor to impose it upon the Gentiles, who
were not in the least under any obligation to it. A smart, but an impartial
charge; and indeed so remarkable was this carriage of S. Paul toward our
Apostle, that though it set things right for the present, yet it made some
noise abroad in the World. Yea, Apud Hieron. pr^oem. in Ep. ad Gal. p. 159.
Tom. 9.
Porphyry himself, that acute and subtle enemy of Christianity, makes use of it
as an argument against them both: charging the one with error and falsehood, and
the other with rudeness and incivility; and that the whole was but a compact of
forgery and deceit, while the Princes of the Church did thus fall out among
themselves. And so sensible were some of this in the first Ages of
Christianity, that rather than such a dishonor and disgrace, as they accounted
it, should be reflected upon Peter; they tell Hieron. Com. in Gal. 2. p. 168
us of two several Cephas's, one the Apostle, the other one of the seventy
Disciples; and that it was the last of those, that was guilty of this
prevarication, and whom S. Paul so vigorously resisted and reproved at Antioch.
But for this plausible and well-meant Evasion the Champions of the Romish
Church conn them no great thanks at this day. Nay, S. Hierom long since fully
confuted it in his Notes upon this place.

SECT. IX. Of S. Peter's Acts from the End of the Sacred Story till his
Martyrdom.
Peter's story prosecuted out of Ecclesiastical Writers. His planting of a
Church, and an Episcopal Sea at Antioch; when said to be. His first Journey to
Rome, and the (...) it brought to the Roman Empire. His preaching in other
places, and return to Rome. His encounter with Simon Magus. The impostures of
the Magician. His familiarity with the Emperors, and the great honors said to
be done to him. Of his Statue, and Inscription at Rome. Peter's victory over
him by raising one from the Dead. Simon attempting to fly is by Peter's Prayers
hindered, falls down, and dies. Nero's displeasure against Peter, whence. His
being cast into Prison. His flight thence, and being brought back by Christ
appearing to him. Crucified with his head downwards, and why. The place of his
Martyrdom, and Burial. The original and greatness of S. Peter's Church in Rome.
His Episcopal Chair pretended to be still kept there.

HITHER TO in drawing of the Life of this great Apostle, we have had an
infallible Guide to conduct and lead us: But the sacred story breaking off
here, forces us to look abroad, and to pick up what Memoires the Ancients have
left us in this matter: which we shall for the main digest according to the
order, wherein Baronius, and other Ecclesiastic Writers have disposed the
series of S. Peter's Life: Reserving what is justly questionable, to a more
particular examination afterward. And that we may present the account more
entire and perfect, we must step back a little in point of time, that so we may
go forward with greater advantage. We are to know therefore, that during the
time of peace and calmness which the Church enjoyed after Readiness Persecution,
when S. Peter went down to visit the Churches, he is said to have gone to
Antioch, where great Numbers of Jews inhabited, and there to have planted the
Christian faith. That he founded a Church here, (...). ad (...). Chr. xliii.
(...) expressly tells us, and by (...) 2 ad (...). p. 168. T. 9.
others it is said, that he himself was the first Bishop of this See. Sure I am
that (...). S. (...). p. 503. Tom. 1.
S. Chrysostom reckons it one of the greatest honors of that City, that S.
Peter staid so long there, and that the Bishops of it succeeded him in that
See. The care and precedence of this Church he had between Six and Seven Years.
Not that he staid there all that time, but that having ordered and disposed
things to the best advantage, he returned to other affairs and exigencies of
the Church: confirming the new Plantations, bringing in Cornelius and his
Family, and in him the first fruits of the Gentiles conversion to the faith of
Christ. After which he returned unto Jerusalem, where he was imprisoned by
Herod, and miraculously delivered by an Angel sent from Heaven.

2. WHAT became of Peter after his deliverance out of Prison, is not certainly
known: probably he might preach in some parts a little further distant from
Judaea, as we are told Bar. ad An. Chr. xliv. Number. 12. vid. Epist. (...). ad
(...). in V. (...). sub Men. (...). Tom. 4. page 24.
he did at (...), and in the Countries thereabouts (though, I confess, the
evidence to me is not convincing.) After this he resolved upon a Journey to
Rome; where most agree he arrived about the Second Year of the Emperor
Claudius. (...). lib. 7. c. 6. sol. 296. and seq.
Orosius tells us, that coming to Rome, he brought prosperity along with him to
that City: For besides several other extraordinary advantages which at that
time happened to it, this was not the least observable, that Camillus
Scribonianus Governor of Dalmatia, soliciting the Army to rebel against the
Emperor, the Eagles, their Military Standard, remained so fast in the Ground,
that no power, nor strength was able to pluck them up. With which unusual
accident the minds of the Soldiers were surprised and startled, and turning
their Swords against the Author of the sedition, continued firm and loyal in
their obedience. Whereby a dangerous Rebellion was prevented, likely enough
otherwise to have broken out. This he ascribes to S. Peter's coming to Rome,
and the first Plantation of the Christian faith in that City. Heaven beginning
more particularly to smile upon that place at his first coming thither. It Is
not to be doubted, but that at his first arrival, he disposed himself amongst
the Jews his Countrymen, who ever since the time of Augustus, had dwelt in the
Region beyond Tybur. But when afterward he began to preach to the Gentiles, he
was forced to change his Lodging, and was taken in by one Pudens, a Senator
lately converted to the Faith. Here he closely plied his main office and
employment, to establish Christianity in that place. Here we are told Eusebius. H.
Eccl. l. 2. c. 17. p. 53. (...) script. (...). in Phil. p 270.
he met with Philo the Jew, lately come on his second Embassy unto Rome, in the
behalf of his Countrymen at Alexandria, and to have contracted an intimate
friendship and acquaintance with him. And now it was, says ad An. 45. Number. 16.
Baronius, that Peter being mindful of the Churches which he had founded in
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bithynia, and Asia the less, wrote his first
Epistle to them, which he probably infers hence, that S. Mark being yet with
him at the time of the date of this Epistle, it must be written at least some
time this Year, for that now it was that S. Mark was sent to preach and
propagate the Faith in Egypt. Next to the planting Religion at Rome, he took
care to propagate it in the Western parts. And to that end (if we may believe
one (...). Ep. 1. ad Dic Eug. (...). Tom. 1. p. 751.
of those that pretend to be his Successors) he sent abroad Disciples into
several Provinces. That so their sound might go into all the Earth, and their
words into the ends of the World.

3. IT happened that after S. Peter had been several Years at Rome, Claudius the
Emperor taking advantage of some seditions and tumults raised by the Jews, by a
public Edict Vid. (...). 7. c. 6. fol. 297.
banished them out of Rome. In the Number of whom S. Peter (they say) departed
thence, and returned back to Jerusalem, where he was present at that great
Apostolical Synod, of which before. After this we are left under great
uncertainties, how he disposed of himself for many Years. Confident we may be,
that he was not idle, but spent his time sometimes in preaching in the Eastern
parts, sometimes in other parts of the World, as in Vid. (...). Epist. (...)
supr.
Africa, Sicily, Italy, and other places. And here it may not be amiss to
insert a claim in behalf of our own Country. Eusebius telling us (as (...). and
(...). ad (...) 29. Jun. Number. 23. vid. (...) N. 10. ibid.
Metaphrastes reports it) that Peter was not only in these Western parts, but
particularly that he was a long time in Britain, where he converted many
Nations to the Faith. But we had better be without the honor of S. Peter's
company, than build the story upon so sandy a foundation: Metaphrastes his
Authority being of so little value in this case, that it is slighted by the
more learned and moderate Writers of the Church of Rome. But wherever it was,
that S. Peter employed his time, toward the latter part of Nero's Reign, he
returned to Rome: where he found the minds of People strangely bewitched and
hardened against the embracing of the Christian Religion by the subtilties and
Magic arts of Simon Magus, whom (as we have before related) he had formerly
baffled at Samaria. This Simon was born at J. (...). Apol. 2. p. 69-91. vid.
Dial. cum (...). p. 349.
Gitton, a Village of Samaria, bred up in the Arts of Sorcery and Divination,
and by the help of the Diabolical powers performed many strange feats of wonder
and activity. Insomuch that People generally looked upon him as some great
Deity come down from Heaven. But being discovered and confounded by Peter at
Samaria, he left the East and fled to Rome. Where by Witchcraft and Sorceries
he insinuated himself into the favor of the People, and at last became very
acceptable to the Emperors themselves, insomuch that no honor and veneration
was too great for him. Vbi supr. (...). 2.
Justin Martyr assures us, that he was honored as a Deity that a Statue was
erected to him in the Insula Tyberina between two Bridges with this
Inscription, SIMONI DEO SANCTO: To Simon the holy God: that the Samaritans
generally, and very many of other Nations did own and worship him as the chief
principal Deity. I know the credit of this Inscription is shrewdly shaken by
some later Antiquaries, who tell us, that the good Father being a Greek might
easily mistake in a Latin Inscription, or be imposed upon by others; and that
the true Inscription was SEMONI SANGO DEO FIDIO, etc. such an Inscription being
in the last Age dug up in the Tyberine Island, and there preserved to this day.
It is not impossible but this might be the foundation of the story. But sure I
am, that it is not only reported by the Martyr, who was himself a Samaritan,
and lived but in the next Age, but by others almost of the same time (...).
adv. (...). lib. 1. c. 20. p. 115.
Irenaeus, (...). Apol. c. 13. p. 14.
Tertullian, and by others Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 14. p. 51. Aug. de (...). in
Simon. Tom. 6. col. 13.
after them. It further deserves to be considered, that J. Martyr was a person
of great learning and gravity, inquisitive about matters of this nature, at
this time at Rome, where he was capable fully to satisfy himself in the truth
of things, that he presented this Apology to the Emperor and the Senate of
Rome, to whom he would be careful what he said, and who as they knew whether it
was true or no, so if false, could not but ill resent to be so boldly imposed
upon by so notorious a fable. But be it as it will, he was (...). lib. 2. c.
14. page 154.
highly in favor both with the People, and their Emperors; especially Nero,
who was the Great Patron of Magicians, Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 30. c. 2. p.
606.
and all who maintained secret ways of commerce with the infernal powers. With
him Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 14. page 51, 52.
S. Peter thought fit in the first place to encounter, and to undeceive the
People, by discovering the impostures and delusions of that wretched man.

4. THAT he did so, is generally affirmed by the Ancient Fathers, Damas. in
vit. Petr. Conc. Tom. 1. Constable. App. lib. 6. c. 8, 9. p. 944. Arnob. adv.
(...). lib. 2. p. 23. Epiph. (...). 21. p. 31. Sulp. (...). lib. 2. page 137.
and (...).
who tell us of ome particular Instances, wherein he baffled and confounded
him. But because the (...) is more entirely drawn up by Higes. d. Excid. (...).
3. c. 2 p. 293.
Hegesippus the younger, an Author contemporary with S. Ambrose, if not (which
is most probable) S. Ambrose himself, we shall from him (...) the summary of
the story. There was at this time at Rome an eminent young Gentleman, and a
Kinsman of the Emperors, lately dead. The fame which Peter had for raising
persons to life, persuaded his friends that he might be called. Others also
prevailing that Simon the Magician might be sent for. Simon glad of the
occasion to magnify himself before the People, propounded to Peter, that if he
raised the Gentleman unto life, then Peter, who had so injuriously provoked the
great power of God, (as he styled himself) should lose his life: But if Peter
prevailed, he himself would submit to the same fate and sentence. Peter
accepted the terms, and Simon began his Charms and Enchantments: Whereat the
dead Gentleman seemed to move his hand. The People that stood by, presently
cried out, that he was alive, and that he talked with Simon, and began to sall
foul upon Peter, for daring to oppose himself against so great a power. The
Apostle entreated their patience, told them, that all this was but a phantasm
and appearance, that if Simon was but taken from the Bedside, all this
pageantry would quickly vanish. Who being accordingly removed, the Body
remained without the least sign of motion. Peter standing at a good distance
from the Bed, silently made his address to Heaven, and then before them all
commanded the young Gentleman in the Name of the Lord Jesus to arise: who
immediately did so, spoke, walked, and ate and was by Peter restored to his
Mother. The People who saw this, suddenly changed their opinions, and fell upon
the Magician with an intent to stone him. But Peter begged his life, and told
them, that it would be a sufficient punishment to him, to live and see that in
despite of all his power and malice, the Kingdom of Christ should increase and
flourish. The Magician was inwardly tormented with this defeat and vexed to see
the triumph of the Apostle, and therefore mustering up all his powers, summoned
the People, told them that he was offended at the Galileans, whose Protector
and Guardian he had been, and therefore set them a Day, when he promised that
they should see him fly up into Heaven. At the time appointed he went up to the
Mount of the Capitol, and throwing himself from the top of the Rock, began his
flight. A sight which the People entertained with great wonder and veneration,
affirming that this must be the power of God, and not of man. Peter standing in
the Crowd, prayed to our Lord, that the People might be undeceived, and that
the vanity of the Impostor might be discovered in such a way, that he himself
might be sensible of it. Immediately the Wings which he had made himself, began
to fail him, and he fell to the ground, miserably bruised and wounded with the
fall: Whence being carried into a neighboring Village, he soon after dyed.
This is the story, for the particular circumstances whereof, the Feader must
rely upon the credit of my Author, the thing in general being sufficiently
acknowledged by most ancient Writers. This contest of Peter's with Simon Magus
is placed by Eusebius under the Reign of Claudius, but by the generality both
of ancient and later Authors, it is referred to the Reign of Nero.

5. SUCH was the end of this miserable and unhappy Man. Which no sooner came to
the ears of the Emperor, to whom by wicked artifices he had indeared himself,
but it became an occasion of hastening Peter's ruin. The Emperor probably had
before been displeased with Peter, not only upon the account of the general
disagreement and inconformity of his Religion, but because he had so strictly
pressed temperance and chastity, Vid. (...). in (...). Ep. lib. 5. p. 125. Tom.
(...).
and reclaimed so many Women in Rome from a dissolute and vicious life, thereby
crossing that wanton and lascivious temper, to which that Prince was so
immoderate a slave and vassal. And being now by his means robbed of his dear
favorite and companion, he resolved upon revenge, commanded Peter (as also S.
Paul, who was at this time at Rome) to be apprehended, and cast into the
Mamertine Prison: Vid. Martyr. Romans ad (...) 14. (...). p. 165.
where they spent their time in the exercises of Religion, and especially in
Preaching to the Prisoners, and those who resorted to them. And here we may
suppose it was (if not a little before) that Peter wrote his second (...) to
the dispersed Jews, wherein he endeavors to confirm them in the belief and
practice of Christianity, and to fortify them against those poisonous and
pernicious principles and practices, which even then began to break in upon the
Christian Church.

6. NERO returning from Achaia, and entering Rome with a great deal of pomp and
triumph, resolved now the Apostles should fall as a Victim and Sacrifice to his
cruelty and revenge. While the fatal stroke was daily expected, the Christians
in Rome did by daily prayers and importunities solicit Vid. Ambr. (...). and
Heges. ib. p. 279.
S. Peter, to make an escape, and to reserve himself to the uses and services
of the Church. This at first he rejected, as what would ill reflect upon his
courage and constancy, and argue him to be afraid of those sufferings for
Christ, to which he himself had so often persuaded others. But the prayers and
the tears of the People overcame him, and made him yield. Accordingly the next
Night having prayed with, and taken his farewell of the Brethren, he got over
the Prison-wall, and coming to the City-Gate, he is there said to have met with
our Lord, who was just entering into the City. Peter asked him, Lord, whither
art thou going? from whom he presently received this answer, I am come to Rome,
to be crucified a second time. By which answer, Peter apprehended himself to be
reproved, and that our Lord meant it of his death, that he was to be
recrucified in his Servant. Whereupon he went back to the Prison, and delivered
himself into the hands of his Keepers, showing himself most ready and cheerful
to acquiesce in the will of God. And we are told Romans (...). lib. 3. c. 21. N.
15. Tom. 1. page 292.
that in the stone, whereon our Lord stood while he talked with Peter, he left
the impression of his Feet, which stone has been ever since preserved as a very
sacred Relic, and after several translations was at length fixed in the
Church of S. Sebastian the Martyr, where it is kept and visited with great
expressions of reverence and devotion at this day. Before his suffering he was
no question scourged, according to the manner of the Romans, who were wont
first to whip those Malefactors, who were adjudged to the most severe and
capital punishments: Having saluted his Brethren, and especially having taken
his last farewell of S. Paul, he was brought out of the Prison, and led to the
top of the Vatican Mount, near to Tybur, the place designed for his Execution.
The death he was adjudged to was crucifixion, as of all others accounted the
most shameful, so the most severe and terrible. But he entreated the favor of
the Officers, that he might not be crucified in the ordinary way, (...). lib.
3. in (...). Eccles. lib. 3. c. 1. p. 71. (...). de (...). in (...). p. 262.
Heges. p. 279.
but might suffer with his Head downwards, and his Feet up to Heaven, affirming
that he was unworthy to suffer in the same posture wherein (...) Prudent.
Peristeph (...) XI. in (...). and Paul.
his Lord had suffered before him. Happy man (as (...) in Petr. and Paul. p.
267. T. 6.
Chrysostom glosses) to be set in the readiest posture of traveling from Earth
to Heaven. His Body being taken from the Cross, is said, to have been imbalmed
by Marcellinus the Presbyter after the Jewish manner, and was then buried in
the Vatican, near the Triumphal way. Over his Grave a small Church (...). de
VII. Vrb B (...) c. 4. p. 45, etc.
was soon after erected, which being destroyed by Heliogabalus, his Body was
removed to the Coemetery in the Appian way, two Miles from Rome: where it
remained till the time of Pope Cornelius, who re-conveyed it to the Vatican,
where it rested somewhat obscurely until the Reign of Constantine, who out of
the mighty reverence which he had for the Christian Religion, caused many
Churches to be built at Rome, but especially rebuilt and enlarged the Vatican
to the honor of S. Peter. In the doing whereof Himself is said to have been
the first that began to dig the Foundation, and to have carried thence twelve
Baskets of Rubbish with his own hands, in honor, as it should seem, of the
twelve Apostles. He infinitely enriched the Church with Gifts and Ornaments,
which in every Age increased in (...) and Riches, till it is become one of the
wonders of the World at this day. Of whose glories, stateliness, and beauty,
and those many venerable Monuments of antiquity that are in it, they who desire
to know more, may be plentifully satisfied by Onuphrius. Only one amongst the
rest must not be forgotten: there being (...). supr. (...).
kept that very wooden Chair, wherein S. Peter sat when he was at Rome, by the
only touching whereof many Miracles are said to be performed. But surely (...)
Ann. 45. (...). 11.
Baronius his wisdom and gravity were from home, when speaking of this Chair,
and fearing that Heretics would imagine, that it might be rotten in so long a
time, he tells us, that it is no wonder that this Chair should be preserved so
long, when Eusebius affirms, that the wooden Chair of S. James Bishop of
Jerusalem was extant in the time of Constantine. But the Cardinal it seems
forgot to consider, that there is some difference between three, and sixteen
hundred Years. But of this enough. S. Peter was crucified according to the
common computation in the Year of Christ, sixty nine, and the 13th. (or as
Eusebius, the 14th.) of Nero, how truly may be inquired afterward.

SECT. X. The Character of his Person and Temper: and an Account of his
Writings.
The description of S. Peter's person. An account of his Temper. A natural
fervor and eagerness predominant in him. Fierceness and animosity peculiarly
remarkable in the Galileans. The abatements of his Zeal and courage. His
humility and lowliness of mind. His great love to, and zeal for Christ. His
constancy and resolution in confessing Christ. His faithfulness and diligence
in his Office. His Writings genuine and supposititious. His first Epistle; what
the design of it. What meant by Babylon, whence it was dated. His second
Epistle a long time questioned, and why, Difference in the style no
considerable objection. Grotius his conceit of its being written by Symeon
Bishop of Jerusalem, exploded. A concurrence of circumstances to entitle S.
Peter to it. (...) things in it referred to, which he had preached at Rome,
particularly the destruction of Jerusalem. Written but a little before his
death. The spurious Writings attributed to him, mentioned by the Ancients. His
Acts. Gospel. Petri Praedicatio. His Apocalypse. Judicium Petri. Peter's
married relation. His Wife the companion of his Travels. Her Martyrdom. His
Daughter (...).

1. HAVING run through the current History of S. Peter's Life, it may not be
amiss in the next place to survey a little his Person and Temper. His Body (if
we may believe the description given of him by Hist. (...). lib. 2. c 37. p.
195.
Nicephorus) was somewhat slender, of a middle size, but rather inclining to
tallness, his complexion very pale, and almost white: The hair of his Head and
Beard curled and thick, but withal short; though Com. in Gal. 2. p. 164. T. 9.
ex lib. dicto (...).
S. Hierom tells us out of Clemens his Periods, that he was Bald, which
probably might be in his declining age; his Eyes black, but speckt with red,
which Ad An. 69. n. 31.
Baronius will have to proceed from his frequent weeping; his Eyebrows thin,
or none at all; his Nose long, but rather broad and flat than sharp; such was
the Case and outside. Let us next look inwards, and view the Jewel that was
within. Take him as a Man, and there seems to have been a natural eagerness
predominant in his Temper, which as a Whetstone sharpened his Soul for all bold
and generous undertakings. It was this (...). (...) Ham. 32. in Joan. p. 170.
in a great measure that made him so forward to speak, and to return answers,
sometimes before he had well considered them. It was this made him expose his
person to the most eminent danger, promise those great things in behalf of his
Master, and resolutely draw his Sword in his quarrel against a whole Band of
Soldiers, and wound the Highpriests Servant; and possibly he had attempted
greater matters, had not our Lord restrained, and taken him off by that
seasonable check that he gave him.

2. THIS Temper he owed in a great measure to the Genius and nature of his
Country, of which (...). de (...) Jud. lib. 3. c. 4. p. 833.
Josephus gives this true character, That it naturally bred in men a certain
fierceness and animosity, whereby they were fearlesly carried out upon any
action, and in all things showed a great strength and courage both of mind and
body. The Galileans (says he) being (...) from their childhood, the men being
as seldom overtaken with cowardice, as their Country with want of men. And yet
notwithstanding this, his fervor and fierceness had its intervals; there being
some times when the Paroxysms of his heat and courage did intermit, and the man
was surprised and betrayed by his own fears. Witness his passionate crying out,
when he was upon the Sea in danger of his life, and his fearful deserting his
Master in the Garden, but especially his carriage in the HighPriests Hall, when
the confident charge of a sorry Maid made him sink so far beneath himself, and
not withstanding his great and resolute promises so shamefully deny his Master,
and that with curses and imprecations. But he was in danger, and passion
prevailed over his understanding, and fear betrayed the succors which reason
offered, and being intent upon nothing but the present safety of his life, he
heeded not what he did, when he (...) his Master, to save himself; so dangerous
is it to be left to our selves, and to have our natural passions let loose upon
us.

3. CONSIDER him as a Disciple and a Christian, and we shall find him exemplary
in the great instances of Religion. Singular his Humility, and the lowliness of
mind. With what a passionate earnestness upon the conviction of a Miracle, did
he beg of our Savior to depart from him: accounting himself not worthy, that
the Son of God should come near so vile a sinner. When our Lord by that
wonderful condescension stoopt to wash his Apostles feet, he could by no means
be persuaded to admit it, not thinking it sit, that so great a person should
submit himself to so servile an office toward so mean a person as himself; nor
could he be induced to accept it, till our Lord was in a manner forced to
threaten him into obedience. When Cornelius heightened in his apprehensions of
him by an immediate command from God concerning him, would have entertained him
with expressions of more than ordinary honor and veneration; so far was he
from complying with it, that he plainly told him, he was no other than such a
man as himself. With how much candor and modesty does he treat the inferior
Rulers and Ministers of the Church. He, upon whom Antiquity heaps so many
honorable titles, stiling himself no other than their fellow-Presbyter.
Admirable his love to, and zeal for his Master, which he thought he could never
express at too high a rate: for his sake venturing on the greatest dangers, and
exposing himself to the most imminent hazards of his life. 'Twas in his quarrel
that he drew his Sword against a Band of Soldiers, and an armed multitude; and
'twas love to his Master drew him into that imprudent advice, that he should
seek to save himself, and avoid those sufferings that were coming upon him,
that made him promise and engage so deep, to suffer and die with him. Great was
his forwardness in owning Christ to be the Messiah and Son of God; which drew
from our Lord that honorable Encomium, Blessed art thou Simon Bar Jonah. But
greater his courage and constancy in confessing Christ before his most
inveterate enemies, especially after he had recovered himself of his fall. With
how much plainness did he tell the Jews at every turn to their very faces, that
they were the Murderers and Crucifiers of the Lord of Glory. Nay, with what an
undaunted courage, with what an Heroic greatness of mind, did he tell that
very Sanhedrim, that had sentenced and condemned him, that they were guilty of
his murder, and that they could never be saved any other way, than by this very
Jesus, whom they had crucified and put to death.

4. LASTLY, let us reflect upon him as an Apostle, as a Pastor and Guide of
Souls. And so we find him faithful and diligent in his office, with an infinite
zeal endeavoring to instruct the ignorant, reduce the erroneous, to strengthen
the weak, and confirm the strong, to reclaim the vicious, and turn Souls to
righteousness. We find him taking all opportunities of preaching to the people,
converting many thousands at once. How many voiages and travels did he undergo?
with how unconquerable a patience did he endure all conflicts and trials, and
surmount all difficulties and oppositions, that he might plant and propagate
the Christian Faith? Not thinking much to lay down his own life, to promote and
further it. Nor did he only do his duty himself, but as one of the prime
Superintendents of the Church, and as one that was sensible of the value and
the worth of Souls, he was careful to put others in mind of theirs, earnestly
pressing and persuading the Pastors and Governors of it, To feed the flock of
God, To (...) Pet. 5. 3, 4.
take upon them the Rule and Inspection of it freely and willingly, not out of
a sinister end, merely of gaining advantages to themselves, but out of a
sincere design of doing good to Souls; that they would treat them mildly and
gently, and be themselves examples of Piety and Religion to them, as the best
way to make their Ministry successful and effectual. And because he could not
be always present to teach and warn men, he ceased not by Letters to stir up
their minds to the remembrance and practice of what they 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 15.
had been taught. A course, he tells them, which he was resolved to hold as
long as he lived, as thinking it meet while he was in this Tabernacle, to stir
them up, by putting them in mind of these things, that so they might be able
after his decease, to have them always in remembrance. And this may lead us to
the consideration of those Writings, which he left behind him for the benefit
of the Church.

5. NOW the Writings that entitle themselves to this Apostle, were either
genuine, or supposititious. The genuine Writings are his two Epistles, which
make up part of the Sacred Canon. For the first of them, no certain account can
be had when it was written. Though Baronius and most Writers commonly assign it
to the year of Christ Forty Four. But this cannot be, Peter not being at Rome
(from whence it is supposed to have been written) at that time, as we shall see
anon. He wrote it to the Jewish Converts, dispersed through Pontus, Galatia,
and the Countries thereabouts, chiefly upon the occasion of that persecution,
which had been raised at Jerusalem. And accordingly the main design of it, is
to confirm and comfort them under their present sufferings and persecutions,
and to direct and instruct them how to carry themselves in the several states
and relations, both of the Civil, and the Christian life. For the place whence
it was written, it is expressly dated from Babylon. But what, or where this
Babylon is, is not so easy to determine. Some think it was Babylon in Egypt,
and probably (...); and that there Peter preached the Gospel. Others will have
it to have been Babylon the Ancient Metropolis of Assyria, and where great
numbers of Jews dwelt ever since the times of their Captivities. But we need
not send Peter on so long an Errand, if we embrace the Notion of a Learned L.
Capell. (...). ad Hist. App. page 42.
man, who by Babylon will figuratively understand Jerusalem, no longer now the
holy City, but a kind of spiritual Babylon, in which the Church of God did at
this time groan under great servitude and captivity. And this Notion of the
Word he endeavors to make good, by calling in to his assistance two of the
Ancient Cyril. Alex. and (...). Gaz. in Esa. 53.
Fathers, who so understand that of the Prophet, We have healed Babylon, but
she was not healed. Where the Prophet ( say they) by Babylon means Jerusalem,
as differing nothing from the wickedness of the Nations, nor conforming it self
to the Law of God. But generally the Writers of the Romish Church, and the more
moderate of the Reformed party, acquiescing herein in the Judgment of
Antiquity, by Babylon understand Rome. And so it is plain S. John calls it in
his Revelation, either from its conformity in power and greatness to that
ancient Chap. 18. v. 2, 10, 21.
City, or from that great Idolatry which at this time reigned in Rome. And so
we may suppose S. Peter to have written it from Rome, not long after his coming
thither, though the precise time be not exactly known.

6. AS for the Second Epistle, it was not accounted of old of equal value and
authority with the First, and therefore for some Ages not taken into the Sacred
Canon, as is expressly affirmed by H. (...). l. 3. c. 3. p. 72. Orig. apud
(...). l. b. 5. c. 16. p. 365.
(...), and many of the Ancients before him. The Ancient Syriack Church did not
receive it, and accordingly it is not to be found in their ancient (...). ad
Epist. Sir. d se edit.
Copies of the New Testament. Yea, those of that Church at this day do not own
it as Canonical, but only read it privately, as we do the Apocryphal Books. The
greatest Hier. de script. Eccl in Petr.
exception that I can find against it, was the difference of its style from the
other Epistle; and therefore it was presumed, that they were not both written
by the same hand. But S. (...), who tells us the objection, does (...). 11. ad
Hedib. (...). 3. p. 151.
elsewhere himself return the answer, That the difference in the style and
manner of writing might very well arise from hence, that S. Peter according to
his different circumstances, and the necessity of affairs, was forced to use
several Amanuenses and Interpreters; sometimes S. Mark, and after his departure
some other person, which might justly occasion a difference in the style and
character of these (...). Not to say, that the same person may vastly alter and
vary his style according to the times when, or the persons to whom, or the
subjects about which he writes, or the temper and disposition he is in at the
time of writing, or the care that is used in doing it. Who sees not the vast
difference of Jeremie's writing in his Prophecy, and in his Book of
Lamentations? between S. John's in his Gospel, his (...), and Apocalypse? How
often does S. Paul alter his style in several of his Epistles, in some more lofty
and elegant, in others more rough and harsh? Besides hundreds of instances that
might be given both in Ecclesiastical and Foreign Writers, too obvious to need
insisting on in this place. The Learned Annot. in 2 (...). 1.
Grotius will have this Epistle to have been written by Symeon, S. James his
immediate Successor in the Bishopric of Jerusalem, and that the word [ Peter]
was inserted into the Title by another hand. But as a Judicious Dr. Ham. in
Argum. (...).
person of our own observes, these were but his Posthume Annotations, published
by others, and no doubt never intended as the deliberate result of that great
man's Judgment: especially since he himself tacitly acknowledges, that all
Copies extant at this day read the Title and Inscription, as it is in our
Books. And indeed there is a concurrence of circumstances to prove S. Peter to
be the Author of it. It bears his name in the Front and Title, yea, somewhat
more expressly than the former, which has only one, this, both his Names.
There Is a passage in it, that cannot well relate to any but him. When he tells
us, that he was present with 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17, 18.
Christ in the holy Mount, When he received from God the Father honor, and
glory; Where he heard the voice which came from Heaven, from the excellent
glory, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. This evidently refers
to Christ's Tranfiguration, where none were present, but Peter, and the two Sons
of Zebedee, neither of which were ever thought of to be the Author of this
Epistle. Besides, that there is an admirable consent and agreement in many
passages between these two Epistles, as it were easy to show in particular
instances. Add to this, that S. Jude speaking of the Scoffers who Jud. v. 17,
18.
should come in the last time, walking after their own ungodly lusts, cites
this as that which had been before spoken by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ: wherein he plainly quotes the words of this Second Epistle of Peter,
affirming, That there should come in the last 2 (...). 3. 2, 3.
days scoffers, walking after their own lusts. And that this does agree to
Peter, will further appear by this, that he tells us of these Scoffers, that
should come in the last days, that is, before the destruction of Jerusalem (as
that phrase is often used in the New Testament) that they should say, Where is
the promise of his coming? Which clearly respects their making light of those
threatenings of our Lord, whereby he had foretold, that he would shortly come in
Judgment for the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Jewish Nation. This he now
puts them in mind of, as what probably he had before told them of (...) vocc,
when he was amongst them. For so we find he did elsewhere. Lactantius assuring
us, That amongst many strange and wonderful things which Peter Lib. 4 c. 21. p.
422.
and Paul preached at Rome, and lest upon Record, this was one, That within a
short time God would send a Prince, who should destroy the Jews, and lay their
Cities level with the ground, straightly besiege them, destroy them with Famine,
so that they should feed upon one another: That their Wives and Daughters
should be ravished, and their Childrens brains dashed out before their faces;
that all things should be laid waste by Fire and Sword, and themselves
perpetually banished from their own Country; and this for their insolent and
merciless usage of the innocent and dear Son of God. All which, as he observes,
came to pass soon after their death, when (...) came upon the Jews, and
extinguished both their Name and Nation. And what Peter here foretold at Rome,
we need not question but he had done before to those Jews, to whom he wrote
this Epistle. Wherein he especially antidotes them against those corrupt and
poisonous principles, wherewith many, and especially the followers of Simon
Magus began to insect the Church of Christ. And this but a little time before
his death, as appears from that passage in it, where he tells them, That he
knew he must shortly put off his earthly Tabernacle. Chap. 1. v. 14.


7. BESIDES these Divine Epistles, there were other supposititious writings
which in the first Ages were fathered upon S. Peter. Such was the Book called
his Acts, mentioned by Orig. Tom. 20 in Joan.
Origin, (...). lib. 3. c. 3. p. (...).
Eusebius, and others, but rejected by them. Such was his Gospel, which
probably at first was nothing else but the Gospel written by S. Mark, dictated
to him (as is generally thought) by S. Peter; and therefore as In Petro, ut
(...).
S. (...) tells us, said to be his. Though in the next Age there appeared a
Book under that Title, mentioned by (...) 6. c. 12. p. 213.
Serapion Bishop of Antioch, and by him at (...) suffered to be read in the
Church, but afterward upon a more careful perusal of it, he rejected it as
Apocryphal, as it was by others after him. Another was the Book styled, His
Preaching, mentioned and quoted both by (...). lib. (...). p. 635. and in
(...). ex (...). p 809.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and by (...). Tom. 13. in (...).
Origin, but not acknowledged by them to be Genuine: Nay, expressly said to have
been forged by Heretics, by an ancient D: (...). non (...). apud Cypr. p. 142.
Author contemporary with S. Cyprian. The next was his Apocalypse, or
Revelation, rejected, as H. Eccl. lib. 7. c 19. p. 735.
Sozomen tells us, by the (...) as Spurious, but yet read in some Churches in
Palestine in his time. The last was the Book called, His Judgment, which
probably was the same with that called Vid. Russin. (...) Symbol. inter (...).
T. (...). 4. p. 113.
Hermes, or Pastor, a Book of good use and esteem in the first times of
Christianity, and which, as H. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 3. p. 72.
Eusebius tells us, was not only frequently cited by the Ancients, but also
publicly read in Churches.

8. WE shall conclude this Section by considering Peter with respect to his
several Relations: That he was married, is unquestionable, the Sacred History
mentioning his Wives Mother: his Wife (might we believe (...). de S. Petr.
(...) Sur. ad (...) 29 Jun. n. 2.
Metaphrastes) being the Daughter of Aristobulus, Brother to Barnabas the
Apostle. And though Ep. ud Julian. Tom. 1. p. 207. 1 Cor. 95. Vid. (...). lit.
7. (...) 76. p. 2.
S. Hierom would persuade us, that he left her behind him, together with his
Nets, when he forsook all to follow Christ; yet we know that Father too well,
to be over-confident upon his word in a case of Marriage or Single life,
wherein he is not over-scrupulous sometimes to strain a point, to make his
opinion more fair and plausible. The best is, we have an infallible Authority
which plainly intimates the contrary, the testimony of S. Paul, who tells us of
Cephas, that he led about a Wife, a Sister, along with him, who for the most
part mutually cohabited and lived together, for ought that can be proved to the
contrary. Strom. lib. 7. p. 736.
Clemens Alexandrinus gives us this account, though he tells us not the time or
place, That Peter seeing his Wife going toward Martyrdom, exceedingly rejoiced
that she was called to so great an honor, and that she was now returning home,
encouraging and earnestly exhorting her, and calling her by her Name, bad her
to be mindful of our Lord. Such ( says he) was the Wedlock of that blessed
couple, and the perfect disposition and agreement in those things that were
dearest to them. By her he is said to have had a (...). ad An. 60. H 32.
Daughter, called Petronilla ( (...).
Metaphrastes adds a Son) how truly I know not. This only is certain, that
(...). lib. (...). p. 448.
S. Clemens of Alexandria reckons Peter for one of the Apostles that was
Married and had Children. And surely he who was so good a man, and so good an
Apostle, was as good in the relation both of an Husband and a Father.

SECT. XI. An Enquiry into S. Peter's going to Rome.
Peter's being at Rome granted in general. The account of it given by Baronius
and the Writers of that Church rejected, and disproved. No foundation for it in
the History of the Apostolic Acts. No mention of it in S. Paul's Epistle to
the Romans. No news of his being there, at S. Paul's coming to Rome, nor
intimation of any such thing in the several Epistles which S. Paul wrote from
thence. S. Peter's first being at Rome inconsistent with the time of the
Apostolical Synod at Jerusalem. And with an Ancient Tradition, that the
Apostles were commanded to stay Twelve years in Judaea after Christ's death.
Apassage out of Clemens Alexandrinus noted and corrected to that purpose.
Difference among the (...) of the Romish Church in their Accounts. Peter's
being XXV. years Bishop of Rome, no solid foundation for it in Antiquity. The
Planting and Governing that Church equally attributed to Peter and Paul. S.
Peter when (probably) came to Rome. Different dates of his Martyrdom assigned
by the Ancients. A probable account given of it.

1. THOUGH it be not my purpose to swim against the Stream and Current of
Antiquity, in denying S. Peter to have been at Rome, an Assertion easilier
perplexed and entangled, than confuted and disproved; yet may we grant the
main, without doing any great service to that Church, there being evidence
enough to every impartial and considering man, to spoil that smooth and
plausible Scheme of Times, which (...) and the Writers of that Church have
drawn with so much care and diligence. And in order to this we shall first
enquire, whether that Account which Bellarmine and Baronius give us of Peter's
being at Rome be tolerably reconcilable with the History of the Apostles Acts
recorded by S. Luke, which will be best done by briefly presenting S. Peter's
Acts in their just Series and order of Time, and then seeing what countenance
and foundation their Account can receive from hence.

2. AFTER our Lord's Ascension, we find Peter, for the first year at least,
staying with the rest of the Apostles at Jerusalem. In the next year he was
sent, together with S. John, by the command of the Apostles, to Samaria, to
preach the Gospel to that City, and the parts about it. About three years after
S. Paul meets him at Jerusalem, with whom he staid some time. In the two
following years he visited the late planted Churches, preached at Lydda and
Joppa, where having tarried many days, he thence removed to (...), where he
preached to, and baptized Cornelius and his Family. Whence after some time he
returned to Jerusalem, where he probably staid, till cast into prison by Herod,
and delivered by the Angel. After which we hear no more of him, till three or
four years after we find him in the Council at Jerusalem. After which he had
the contest with S. Paul at Antioch. And thence forward the Sacred Story is
altogether silent in this matter. So that in all this time, we find not the
least footstep of any intimation that he went to Rome. This Ad (...). 39. number.
12. ad An. 34. (...).
Baronius well foresaw, and therefore once and again inserts this caution, that
S. Luke did not design to record all the Apostles Acts, and that he has omitted
many things which were done by Peter. Which surely no man ever intended to
deny. But then that he should omit a matter of such vast moment and importance
to the whole Christian World, that not one (...) should be said of a Church
planted by Peter at Rome; a Church that was to be Paramount, the seat of all
Spiritual Power and Infallibility, and to which all other Churches were to vail
and do homage; nay, that he should not so much as mention that ever he was
there, and yet all this said to be done within the time he designed to write
of, is by no means reasonable to suppose. Especially considering, that S. Luke
records many of his journeys and travels, and his preaching at several places,
of far less consequence and concernment. Nor let this be thought the worse of,
because a negative Argument, since it carries so much rational evidence along
with it, that any man who is not plainly biased by Interest, will be satisfied
with it.

3. BUT let us proceed a little further to enquire, whether we can meet any
probable footsteps afterward. About the year Fifty three, toward the end of
Claudins his Reign S. Paul is thought to have writ his Epistle to the Church at
Rome, wherein he spends the greatest part of one Chapter in saluting particular
persons that were there; amongst whom it might reasonably have been expected,
that S. Peter should have had the first place. And supposing with Ad An. 58.
(...). 51.
Baronius, that Peter at this time might be absent from the City, preaching the
Gospel in some parts in the (...), yet we are not sure that S. Paul knew of
this, and if he did, it is strange that in so large an Epistle, wherein he had
occasion enough, there should be neither direct nor indirect mention of him, or
of any Church there founded by him. Nay, S. Paul himself intimates, Romans 1. 10,
11, 12.
what an earnest desire he had to come thither, that he might impart unto them
some spiritual gists, to the end they might be established in the Faith, for
which there could have been no such apparent cause had Peter been there so
lately, and so long before him. Well, S. Paul himself not many years after is
sent to Rome, Ann. Chr. LVI. or as Eusebius, LVII. (though Barontus makes it
two years after) about the second year of Nero; when he comes thither, does he
go to sojourn with Peter, as it is likely he would, had he been there? No, but
dwelt by himself in his own hired house. No sooner was he Acts 28. 17.
come, but he called the chief of the Jews together, acquainted them with the
cause and end of his coming, explains the doctrine of Christianity, which when
they rejected, he tells them, That henceforth the Salvation of God was sent
unto the Gentiles who would hear it, to whom he would now address himself.
Which seems to intimate, that however some few of the Gentiles might have been
brought over, yet that no such harvest had been made before his coming, as
might reasonably have been expected from S. Peter s having been so many years
amongst them. Within the two first years after S. Paul s coming to Rome, he
wrote Epistles to several Churches, to the Colossians, Fphesians, Philippians,
and one to Philemon, in none whereof there is the least mention of S. Peter, or
from whence the least probability can be derived, that he had been there. In
that to the Colossians, he tells them, that of the Jews at Rome, he had had no
Chap. 4. 10, 11.
other fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of God, which had been a comfort unto
him, save only Aristarchus, Marcus, and Jesus who was called Justus, which
evidently excludes S. Peter. And in that to Timothy, which Baronius consesses
to have been written a little before his Martyrdom, (though probably it was
written the same time with the rest above mentioned) he tells him, That at his
first answer at Rome, no man stood with 2 Timothy 4. 16.
him, but that all men for sook him. Which we can hardly believe S. Peter would
have done, had he then been there. He further tells him, That only Luke was
with him, that Crescens was gone to this place, Titus to that, and Tychicus
left at another. Strange! that if Peter was at this time gone from Rome, S.
Paul should take no notice of it as well as the rest. Was he so inconsiderable
a person, as not to be worth the remembering? or his errand of so small
importance, as not to deserve a place in S. Paul's account, as well as that of
Crescens to Galatia, or of Titus to Dalmatia? Surely, the true reason was, that
S. Peter as yet had not been at Rome, and so there could be no foundation for
it.

4. IT were no hard matter, further to demonstrate the inconsistency of that
Account which Bellarmine and Baronius give us of Peter's being at Rome, from
the time of the Apostolical Synod at Jerusalem. For if S. Paul went up to that
Council Fourteen years after his own Conversion, as he plainly intimates; and
that he himself was converted Gal. 2. 1.
Ann. XXXV. somewhat less than two years after the death of Christ, then it
plainly appears, that this Council was holden Ann. XLVIII. in the sixth year of
Claudius, if not somewhat sooner, for S. Paul's (...) does not necessarily
imply, that Fourteen years were completely past, (...) signifying circa, as
well as post, but that it was near about that time. This being granted (and if
it be not, it is easy to make it good) then three things amongst others will
follow from it. First, That whereas, according to (...) de Romans Pontif. lib. 2.
c. 6. Col. 615.
Bellarmine and Bar. ad An. 39. n. 15.
Baronius, S. Peter after his first coming to Rome (which they place Ann. XLIV.
and the second of Claudius) was seven years before he returned thence to the
Council at Jerusalem, they are strangely out in their story, there being but
three, or at most four years between his going thither, and the celebration of
that Council. Secondly, That when they tell Ibid. and Bar. ad An. 51. n. 1, 3.
us, that S. Peter's leaving Rome to come to the Council, was upon the occasion
of the decree of Claudius, banishing all Jews out of the City, this can no ways
be. For Lib. 7. c. (...), fol. 297. p. 2.
Orosius does not only (...), but prove it from Josephus, that Claudius his
Decree was published in the Ninth Year of his Reign, or Ann. Chr. LI. Three
Years at least after the Celebration of the Council. Thirdly, That when Ad An.
58, n. 51.
Baronius tells us, that the Reason why Peter went to Rome after the breaking
up of the Synod, was because Claudius was now dead, he not daring to go before
for fear of the Decree, this can be no reason at all, the Council being ended
at least Three Years before that Decree took place: so that he might (...) have
gone thither without the least danger from it. It might further be showed (if
it were necessary) that the account which even they themselves give us, is not
very consistent with it self. So fatally does a bad cause draw Men whether they
will or no into Errors and Mistakes.

5. THE truth is, the learned Men of that Church are not well agreed among
themselves, to give in their verdict in this case. And indeed, how should they,
when the thing it self affords no solid foundation for it? Onuphrius a man of
great learning and industry in all matters of antiquity, and who (as the Hier.
Batnab, de vin. Bar. l. 1. c. 18.
writer of Baronius his life insorms us) designed before Baronius to write the
History of the Church, goes a way by himself, in assigning the time of S.
Peter's founding his See both at Antioch and Onuphr. Annot. ad Plat. in nit.
Petr. p. 9. and in (...).
Rome. For finding by the account of the sacred story, that Peter did not leave
(...) for the Ten first Years after our Lord's Aseension, and consequently
could not in that time erect his See at Antioch; he affirms, that he went first
to Rome, whence returning to the Council at Jerusalem, he thence went to
Antioch, where he remained Seven Years, till the Death of Claudius, and having
spent almost the whole Reign of Nero in several parts of Europe, returned in
the last of Nero's Reign to Rome, and there dyed. An opinion, for which he is
sufficiently chastised by Ad Ann. 39. N. 12.
Baronius, and others of that Party. And here I cannot but remarque the
ingenuity (for the learning sufficiently commends it self) of (...). ad (...).
lib. 2. c. 16.
Monsieur l'alois, who freely confesses the mistake of Baronius, Petavius, etc.
in making Peter go to Rome, Ann. XLIV. the Second Year of Claudius, when as it
is plain ( says he) from the History of the Acts, that Peter went not out of
Judaea and Syria, till the Death of Herod, Claudii Ann. IV. Two whole Years
after. Consonant to which, as he observes, is what Apollonius, a Writer of the
Second Century, reports from a Tradition current in his time, that the Apostles
did not depart asunder till the Twelfth Year after Christ's Ascension, our Lord
himself having so commanded them. In confirmation whereof, let me add a passage
that I meet with in Clemens of Stromat. lib. 6. p. 636.
Alexandria, where from S. Peter he records this Speech of our Savior to his
Apostles, spoken probably either a little before his Death, or after his
Resurrection. (...). If any Israelite shall repent, and believe in God through
my Name, his sins shall be forgiven him after twelve years. Go ye into the
World, lest any should say, we have not heard. This passage, as ordinarily
pointed in all Editions that I have seen, is scarce capable of any tolerable
sense: for what is the meaning, of a penitent Israelite's being pardoned after
twelve years? It is therefore probable, yea certain with me, that the stop
ought to be after (...), and (...) joined to the following clause, and then the
sense will run clear and smooth; If any Jew shall repent, and believe the
Gospel, he shall be pardoned; but after twelve years go ye into all the World,
that none may pretend that they have not heard the sound of the Gospel. The
Apostles were first to Preach the Gospel to the Jews for some considerable
time, Twelve Years after Christ's Ascension, in and about Judaea, and then to
betake themselves to the Provinces of the Gentile-World, to make known to them
the glad tidings of Salvation; exactly answerable to the Tradition mentioned by
Apollonius. Besides, the Chronicon Alexandrinum tells us, that Peter came not
to Rome till the Seventh Year of Claudius, Ann. Christi XLIX. So little
certainty can there be of any matter, wherein there is no truth. Nay, the samo
excellent Men before H. (...) Annot. in Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 18. p. 37.
mentioned does not stick elsewhere to profess, he wonders at Baronius, that he
should make Peter come from Rome, banished thence by Claudius his Edict, to the
Synod at Jerusalem, the same Year, viz. Ann. Claudii 9. a thing absolutely
inconsistent with that story of the Apostles Acts, recorded by S. Luke, wherein
there is the space of no less than Three Years from the time of that Synod, to
the Decree of Claudius. It being evident, what he observes, that after the
celebration of that Council, S. Paul went back to Antioch, afterward into
Syria and Cilicia to Preach the Gospel; thence into Phrygia, Galatia and Mysia;
from whence he went into Macedonia, and first Preached at Philippi, then at
Thessalonica and Beraea, afterward stayed some consider time at Athens, and
last of all went to Corinth, where he met with Aquila and Priscilla, lately
come from Italy, banished Rome with the rest of the Jews, by the Decree of
Claudius: all which by an easy and reasonable computation can take up no less
than Three Years at least.

6. THAT which caused Baronius to split upon so many Rocks, was not so much
want of seeing them, which a Man of his parts and industry could not but in a
great measure see, as the unhappy necessity of defending those (...) principles
which he had undertaken to maintain. For being to make good Peter's five and
twenty years presidency over the Church of Rome, he was forced to confound
times, and dislocate stories, that he might bring all his ends together. What
foundation this story of Peter's being five and twenty years Bishop of Rome,
has in antiquity, I find not, unless it sprang from hence, that (...) places
Peter's coming to Rome in the Second Year of Claudius, and his Martyrdom in the
Fourteenth of Nero, between which there is the just space of five and twenty
years. Whence those that came after concluded, that he sat Bishop there all
that time. It cannot be denied, but that in S. Hierom's Translation it is
expressly said, that he continued five and twenty years Bishop of that City. But
then it is as evident, that this was his own addition, who probably set things
down as the report went in his time, no such thing being to be found in the
Greek Copy of (...). (...). ad Number. (...). p. 204.
Eusebius. Nor indeed does he ever there or elsewhere positively affirm S.
Peter to have been Bishop of Rome, but only that he preached the Gospel there.
And expressly H. Eccl. lib. 3. (...). 2. p. 71.
affirms, that he and S. Paul being dead, Linus was the first Bishop of Rome.
To which I may add, that when the Ancients speak of the Bishops of Rome, and
the first Originals of that Church, they equally attribute the founding, and
the Episcopacy and Government of it to Peter and Paul, making the one as much
concerned in it as the other. Thus Contr. Carpocrat. (...). XXVII. p. 51.
Epiphanius reckoning up the Bishops of that See, places Peter and Paul in the
front, as the first Bishops of Rome, (...), Peter and Paul Apostles became the
first Bishops of Rome, then Linus, etc. And again a little after, (...), the
succession of the Bishops of Rome was in this manner, Peter and Paul, Linus,
Cletus, etc. And De (...). Jud. lib. 3. c. 2. p. 292.
Egesippus speaking of their coming to Rome, equally says of them, that they
were Doctores Christianorum, sublimes operibus, clari magisterio, the
Instructors of the Christians, admirable for miracles, and renowned for their
authority. However granting not only that he was there, but that he was Bishop,
and that for five and twenty years together, yet what would this make for the
unlimited Sovereignty and Universality of that Church, unless a better evidence
than Feed my sheep could be produced for its uncontrollable Supremacy and
Dominion over the whole Christian World?

7. THE sum is this, granting what none that has any reverence for Antiquity
will deny, that S. Peter was at Rome, he probably came thither some few Years
before his death, joined with, and assisted S. Paul in Preaching of the Gospel,
and then both sealed the Testimony of it with their Blood. The date of his
Death is differently assigned by the Ancients. Chron. p. 162.
Eusebius places it Ann. LXIX. in the Fourteenth of Nero, (...). 27. p. 51.
Epiphanius in the Twelfth. That which seems to me most probable is, that it
was in the Tenth, or the Year LXV. which I thus compute: Nero's burning of Rome
is placed by Annal. lib. 15. c. 38. 41. p. 316, etc.
Tacitus, under the Consulship of C. Lecanius, and M. Licinius, about the Month
of July, that is, Ann. Chr. LXIV. This act procured him the infinite hatred and
clamours of the People, which having in vain endeavored several ways to remove
and pacify, he at last resolved upon this project, to derive the Odium upon
the Christians, whom therefore both to appease the Gods, and please the People,
he condemned as guilty of the fact, and caused to be executed with all manner
of acute and exquisite Tortures. This Persecution we may suppose began about
the end of that, or the beginning of the following Year. And under this
Persecution, I doubt not, it was that S. Peter suffered, and changed Earth for
Heaven.

The End of S. Peter's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. PAUL.
S. PAUL.
He was beheaded by the command of Nero the Roman Emperor. Place this to the
Epistle for the Conversion of S. Paul.

St. Paul's Conversion.
Act. 9. 3. 4. And as he journied he came near to Damascus and suddenly there
shined round about him a light from heaven and he fell to the earth and heard a
voice saying unto him Saul Saul etc. Ver. 7 And the men which journied with him
stood speechless hearing a voice but seeing no man.




SECT. I. Of S. PAUL, from his Birth till his Conversion.
S. Paul, why placed next Peter. Tarsus the place of his Birth; an University,
and a Roman Corporation. His Parents of the old stock of Israel; descended of
the Tribe of Benjamin. Jacob's Prophecy applied to him by the Ancients. His
Names; Saul, whence; Paul, when assumed, and why. His Education in the Schools
of Tarsus, and in the Trade of Tent-making. The Custom of the Jews in bringing
up their Youth to Manual Trades. His study of the Law under the Tutorage of
Gamaliel. This Gamaliel, who. Why said to have been a Christian. Sitting at the
feet of their Masters the posture of learners. His joining himself to the Sect
of the Pharisees. An Enquiry into the Temper and Manners of that Sect. The
fiery Zeal and Activity of his Temper. His being engaged in Stephen's
Martyrdom. His violent persecution of the Church. His journey to Damascus. His
Conversion by the way, and the manner of it. His blindness. His rapture into
the third Heaven, when (probably.) His sight restored. His being Baptized, and
preaching Christ.

THOUGH S. Paul was none of the Twelve Apostles, yet had he the honor of being
an Apostle extraordinary, and to be immediately called in a way peculiar to
himself. He justly deserves a place next S. Peter; for as in their lives they
were pleasant and lovely, so in their death they were not divided: especially
if it be true, that they both suffered not only for the same cause, but at the
same time, as well as place. S. Paul was born at Tarsus, the Metropolis of
Cilicia; a City infinitely rich and populous, and what contributed more to the
fame and honor of it, an Academy, furnished with Schools of Learning, where
the Scholars so closely plied their Studies, that as Geograph. lib. 14. p. 463.
Strabo informs us, they excelled in all Arts of polite Learning and Philosophy
those of other places, yea, even of Alexandria, and Athens it self; and that
even Rome was beholden to it for many of its best Professors. It was a Roman
Municipium, or free Corporation, invested with many Franchises and Privileges
by Julius Caesar, and Augustus, who granted to the Inhabitants of it the
honors and immunities of Citizens of Rome. In which respect S. Paul owned and
asserted it as the privilege of his Act. 22. 25, 26
Birthright, that he was a Roman, and thereby free from being bound or beaten.
True it is, that De Script, Eccl. in Paul.
S. Hierom (followed herein by Bellon. Ob. scr v. lib. 2 c. 99. p. 366.
one, who himself traveled in these parts) makes him born at Gischalis, a well
fortified Town in Judaea, which being besieged and taken by the Roman Army, his
Parents fled away with him and dwelt at Tarsus. But besides that this
contradicts S. Paul, who expressly affirms, that he was born at Tarsus, there
needs no more to confute this opinion, than that Com. in Philem p. 263. Tom. 9.
S. Hierom elsewhere slights it as a fabulous report.

2. HIS Parents were Jews, and that of the Ancient stock, not entering in by
the Gate of proselytism, but originally descended from that Nation, which
surely he means, when he says, That he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews, either
because both his Parents were Jews, or rather, that all his Ancestors had been
so. They belonged to the Tribe of Benjamin, whose Founder was the youngest son
of the old Patriarch Jacob, who thus prophesied of him. Benjamin shall raven as
a Wolf, in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide
the spoil. This prophetical character Adv. Marc. lib. 5. c. 1. p. 461
Tertullian, and others Genesis 49. 27.
after him will have to be accomplished in our Apostle. As a ravening Wolf in
the morning devouring the prey, that is, as a persecutor of the Churches, in
the first part of his life destroying the flock of God: In the evening dividing
the spoil, that is, in his declining and reduced age, as Doctor of the Nations,
feeding and distributing to Christ's sheep.

3. WE find him described by two names in Scripture, one Hebrew, and the other
Latin; probably referring both to his Jewish and Roman capacity and relation.
The one, Saul, a name frequent and common in the Tribe of Benjamin ever since
the first King of Israel, who was of that name, was chosen out of that Tribe.
In memory whereof they were wont to give their Children this name at their
Circumcision. His other was, Paul, assumed by him, as some think, at his
Conversion, to denote his humility; as others, in memory of his converting
Sergius Paulus the Roman Governor, in imitation of the Generals and Emperors
of Rome, who were wont from the places and Nations that they conquered, to
assume the name, as an additional honor and title to themselves, as Scipio
Africanus, Caesar Germanicus, Parthicus, Sarmaticus, etc. But this seems no way
consistent with the great humility of this Apostle. More probable therefore it
is, what Praefat. in F^p ad Romans fol. 132. Tom. 3.
Origin thinks, That he had a double name given him at his Circumcision; Saul,
relating to his Jewish original; and Paul, referring to the Roman Corporation,
where he was born. And this the Scripture seems to favor, when it says, Saul,
who also is called Paul. Or if it was taken up by him afterward, it was
probably done at his Conversion, according to the custom and manner of the
Hebrews, who used many times upon solemn and eminent occasions, especially upon
their entering upon a more strict and religious course of life, to change their
names, and assume one which they had not before.

4. IN his Youth he was brought up in the Schools of Tarsus, fully instructed
in all the liberal Arts and Sciences, whereby he became admirably acquainted
with foreign and external Authors. Together with which he was brought up to a
particular Trade and course of life; according to the great Maxim and principle
of the Jews, That, (...) Talm. Tract. Kidduseh. c. 1. ap. Buxtorf, in voc.
He who teaches not his son a Trade, teaches him to be a Thief. They thought it
not only fit, but a necessary part of Education, for their wisest and most
learned Rabbis to be brought up to a manual Trade, whereby, if occasion was,
he might be able to maintain himself. Hence (as Annot. in Act. 18. 3.
Drusius observes) nothing more common in their writings, than to have them
denominated from their callings, Rabbi Jose the Tanner, Rabbi Jochanan the
Shoemaker, Rabbi Juda the Baker, etc. A custom taken up by the (...)
Christians, especially the Epith. 80. p. 451.
Monks and Asceticks of the Primitive times, who together with their strict
profession and almost incredible exercises of devotion, each took upon him a
particular Trade, whereat he daily wrought, and by his own hand-labour
maintained himself. And this course of life the Jews were very careful should
be free from all suspicion of scandal. (...) (as they call (...) supr.
it) a clean, that is, honest Trade, being wont to say, That he was happy that
had his Parents employed in an honest and commendable Calling; as he was
miserable, who saw them conversant in any sordid and dishonest (...) of life.
The Trade our Apostle was put to, was that Acts 18. 3.
of Tent-making, whereat he wrought, for some particular reasons, even after
his calling to the Apostolate. An honest, but mean course of life, and as De
(...) S. Paul. Tim. 5. p. 512.
Chrysostom observes, an argument that his Parents were not of the nobler and
better rank; however, it was an useful and gainful Trade, especially in those
warlike Countries, where Armies had such frequent use of Tents.

5. HAVING run through the whole circle of the Sciences, and laid the sure
foundations of humane Learning at Tarsus; he was by his Parents sent to
Jerusalem, to be perfected in the study of the Law, and put under the Tutorage
of Rabban Gamaliel. Acts 22. 3. and 5. 34.
This Gamaliel was the son of Rabban Symeon (probably presumed to be the same
Symeon that came into the Temple, and took Christ into his arms) President of
the Court of the Sanhedrim: he was a Doctor of the Law, a person of great
wisdom and prudence, and head at that time of one of the Families of the
Schools at Jerusalem. A man of chief eminency and authority in the Jewish
Sanhedrim, and President of it at that very time when our Blessed Savior was
brought before it. He lived to a great age, and was buried by (...) the
proselyte, Author of the Chaldee Paraphrase (one who (...) loved and honored
him) at his own vast expense and charge. He it was that made that wise and
excellent speech in the Sanhedrim, in favor of the Apostles and their
Religion. Nay, he himself is (...). lib. 1. p. 16. 17.
said (though I know not why) to have been a Christian, and his sitting amongst
the Senators to have been connived at by the Apostles, that he might be the
better friend to their affairs. Ap. (...). CIXXI. Col. 384. (...) ad 3. Aug. p.
31. and Bar. ad Ann. 415.
Chrysippus, (...) of the Church of Jerusalem adds, that he was brothers son to
(...), together with whom he and his son Abib were baptized by Peter and John.
This account he derives from Lucian, a Presbyter also of that Church under John
Patriarch of Jerusalem, who in an Epistle of his still extant, tells us, that
he had this, together with some other things, communicated to him in a Vision
by Gamaliel himself. Which if true, no better evidence could be desired in this
matter. At the feet of this Gamaliel, 8. Paul tells us, he was brought up,
alluding to the custom of the Jewish Masters, who were wont to sit, while their
Disciples and Scholars stood at their feet. Which honorary custom continued
till the death of this Gamaliel, and was then left off. Their own (...). c. 9.
(...). 15. (...). Hor. H. in (...). 13. 2
Talmud telling us, That since old Rabban Gamaliel died, the honor of the Law
was perished, (...) and Pharisaism were destroyed: which the Gloss thus
explains, That whilst he lived, men were sound, and studied the Law standing;
but he being dead, weakness crept into the World, and they were forced to sit.

6. UNDER the Tuition of this great Master S. Paul was Educated in the
knowledge of the Law, wherein he made such quick and vast improvements, that he
Gal. 1. 14.
soon out-stript his fellow-Disciples. Amongst the various Sects at that time
in the Jewish Church, he was especially Educated in the Principles and
Institutions of the Pharisees: Of which Sect was both his Father and his
Master, whereof he became a most earnest and zealous professor. This being, as
himself tells us, the strictest Sect of their Religion. For the understanding
whereof, it may not be (...) a little to enquire into the Temper and Manners of
this Sect. Antiq. Jud. lib. 17. cap. 3. p. 585.
Josephus, though himself a Pharisee, gives this character of them, That they
were a crafty and subtle generation of men, and so perverse even to Princes
themselves, that they would not fear many times openly to affront and oppose
them. And so far had they Id (...). lib. 13 c. 23. p. 463
insinuated themselves into the affections and estimations of the populacy,
that their good or ill word was enough to make, or blast any one with the
people, who would implicitly believe them, let their report be never so false
or malicious. And therefore Alexander (...), when he lay a dying, wisely
advised his Queen by all means to comply with them, and to seem to Govern by
their counsel and direction, affirming, that this had been the greatest cause
of his fatal miscarriage, and that which had derived the odium of the Nation
upon him, that he had offended this sort of men. Certain it is, that they were
infinitely proud and insolent, surly and ill-natured, that they hated all
mankind but themselves, and censured whoever would not be of their way, as a
Villain and a Reprobate: greatly zealous to gather (...) to their party, not to
make them more religious, but more fierce and cruel, more carping and
censorious, more heady and high-minded, in short, twofold more the children of
the Devil, than they were before. All Religion and kindness was confined within
the bounds of their own party, and the first principles wherewith they inspired
their new converts were, That none but they were the godly party, and that all
other persons were slaves and sons of the Earth: and therefore especially
endeavored to inspire them with a mighty zeal and fierceness against all that
differed from them, so that if any one did but speak a good word of our
Savior, he should be presently excommunicated and cast out, persecuted and
devoted to the death. To this end they were wont, not only to separate, but
(...) themselves from the herd and community, by some peculiar notes and badges
of distinction; such as their long Robes, broad (...), and their large Fringes
and Borders of their Garments, whereby they made themselves known from the rest
of men. These dogged and ill-natured principles, together with their seditious,
unnatural, unjust, unmerciful, and uncharitable behavior, which otherwise
would have made them stink above-ground in the nostrils of men, they sought to
palliate and (...) over with a more than ordinary pretense and profession of
Religion: but were especially active and diligent in what cost them little, the
outward instances of Religion, such duties especially as did more immediately
refer to God, as frequent fasting, and praying, which they did very often, and
very long, with demure and mortified looks, in a whining and an affected tone,
and this almost in every corner of the streets: and indeed so contrived the
scheme of their Religion, that what they did, might appear above ground, where
they might be seen of men to the best advantage.

7. THOUGH this seems to have been the general temper and disposition of the
party, yet doubtless there were some amongst them of better and honester
principles than the rest. In which number we have just reason to reckon our
Apostle: who yet was deeply leavened with the active and fiery genius of the
Sect; not able to brook any opposite party in Religion, especially if late and
novel. Insomuch that when the Jews were resolved to do execution upon Stephen,
he stood by and kept the clothes of them that did it. Whether he was any
further engaged in the death of this innocent and good man, we do not find.
However this was enough loudly to proclaim his approbation and consent. And
therefore elsewhere we find him indicting himself for this fact, and pleading
guilty. When the blood of thy Martyr Stephen was shed, I also was Acts 22. 20.
standing by, and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that
slew him. God chiefly inspects the heart, and if the vote be passed there,
writes the man guilty, though he stir no farther. It Is easy to murder another
by a silent wish, or a passionate desire. In all moral actions God values the
will for the deed, and reckons the man a companion in the sin, who, though
possibly he may never actually join in it, does yet inwardly applaud and like
it. The storm thus begun, increased a pace, and a violent persecution began to
arise, which miserably afflicted and dispersed the Christians at Jerusalem. In
which our Apostle was a prime Agent and Minister, raging about in all parts
with a mad and ungovernable zeal, searching out the Saints, beating them in the
Synagogues, compelling many to blaspheme, imprisoning others, and procuring
them to be put to death. Indeed he was a kind of Inquisitor (...) pravitatis to
the HighPriest, by whom he was employed to hunt and find out these upstart
(...), who preached against the Law of Moses, and the Traditions of the
Fathers. Accordingly having made strange havoc at Jerusalem, he addressed
himself to the Sanhedrim, and Acts 9. 1.
there took out a Warrant and Commission to go down and ransack the Synagogues
at Damascus. How eternally infatiable is fury and a misguided zeal! how
restless and unwearied in its designs of cruelty! it had already (...) harassed
the poor Christians at Jerusalem, but not content to have vexed them there, and
to have driven them thence, it persecuted them unto strange Cities, following
them even to Damascus it self, whither many of these persecuted Christians had
(...) for shelter, resolving to bring up those whom he found there to
Jerusalem, in order to their punishment and execution. For the Jewish Sanhedrim
had not only power of seizing and scourging offenders against their Law within
the bounds of their own Country, but by the connivence and favor of the
Romans, might send into other Countries, where there were any Synagogues that
acknowledged a dependence in Religious matters upon the Council at Jerusalem,
to apprehend them; as here they sent Paul to Damascus to fetch up what
Christians he could find, to be arraigned and sentenced at Jerusalem.

8. BUT God who had designed him for work of another nature, and separated him
from his Mothers womb to the preaching of the Gospel, stopped him in his journey.
For Gal. 1. 15.
while he was together with his company traveling on the Road, not far from
Damascus, on a sudden a gleam of light beyond the splendour and brightness of
the Sun, was darted from Heaven upon them, whereat being strangely amazed and
confounded, they all fell to the ground, a voice calling to him, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? To which he replied, Lord, who art thou? Who told him,
That he was Jesus whom he persecuted, that what was done to the members was
done to the head, that it was hard for him to kick against the pricks, that he
now appeared to him, to make choice of him for a Minister, and a (...) of what
he had now seen, and should after hear; that he would stand by him, and
preserve him, and make him a great instrument in the conversion of the Gentile
World. This said, He asked our Lord, what he would have him to do? who bad him
go into the City, where he should receive his Answer. S. Paul's companions, who
had been present at this transaction, heard the voice, but saw not him that
spoke to him: though elsewhere the Apostle himself affirms, that they saw Acts
22. 9.
the light, but heard not the voice of him that spoke, that is, they heard a
confused sound, but not a distinct and articulate voice; or, more probably,
being ignorant of the Hebrew Language, wherein our Lord spoke to S. Paul, they
heard the words, but knew not the sense and the meaning of them.

9. S. PAUL by this time was gotten up, but though he found his feet, yet he
had lost his eyes, being stricken blind with the Extraordinary brightness of
the light, and was accordingly led by his companions into Damascus. In which
condition he there remained fasting three days together. At this time, we may
probably suppose it was, that he had that vision and ecstasie, wherein he was
taken up into the third 2 Cor. 12. 1.
Heaven, where he saw and heard things great and unutterable, and was fully
instructed in the mysteries of the Gospel, and hence expressly affirms, that he
was not taught the Gospel which he preached by man, but by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ. There was at Gal. 1. 10, 11.
this time at Damascus one Ananias, a very devout and religious man, (one of
the seventy Disciples, as the Ancients inform us, and probably the first
planter of the Christian Church in this City) and though a Christian, yet of
great reputation amongst all the Jews. To him our Lord appeared, commanding him
to go into such a street, and to such an house, and there enquire for one Saul
of Tarsus, who was now at Prayer, and had seen him in a Vision coming to him,
to lay his hands upon him, that (...) might receive his sight. Ananias startled
at the name of the man, having heard of his bloody temper and practices, and
upon what errand he was now come down to the City. But our Lord to take off his
fears, told him, that he mistook the man, that he had now taken him to be a
chosen vessel, to preach the Gospel both to Jews and Gentiles, and before the
greatest Potentates upon Earth, acquainting him with what great things he
should both do and suffer for his sake, what chains and imprisonments, what
racks and scourges, what hunger and thirst, what shipwracks and death, he
should undergo. Upon this Ananias went, laid his hands upon him, told him that
our Lord had sent him to him, that he might receive his sight, and be filled
with the Holy Ghost, which was no sooner done, but thick films like scales fell
from his eyes, and his sight returned. And the next thing he did was to be
baptized, and solemnly initiated into the Christian Faith. After which he
joined himself to the Disciples of that place, to the equal joy and wonder of
the Church: that the Wolf should so soon lay down its fierceness, and put on
the meek nature of a Lamb; that he who had lately been so virulent a
persecutor, should now become not a professor only, but a preacher of that
Faith, which before he had routed and destroyed.

SECT. II. Of S. Paul, from his Conversion, till the Council at Jerusalem.
S. Paul's leaving Damascus, and why. His Three Years Ministry in Arabia. His
return to Damascus. The greatness of that City. The design of the Jews to
surprise S. Paul, and the manner of his escape. His coming to Jerusalem, and
converse with Peter and James. His departure thence. The Disciples first styled
Christians (...) Antioch. This when done, and by whom. The solemnity of it. The
importance of the word (...), what. S. Paul's Journey to Jerusalem with
contributions. His voyage to Cyprus, and planting Christianity there. The
opposition made by Elymas, and his severe punishment. The Proconsuls
conversion. His preaching to the Jews at Antioch of Pisidia. His curing a
Cripple at Lystra; and discourse to the people about their Idolatry. The
Apostles way of arguing noted; and his discourse concerning the Being and
Providence of God illustrated. His confirming the Churches in the Faith. The
controversy at Antioch; and S. Paul's account of it in the Synod at Jerusalem.

SAINT Paul staid not long at Damascus after his Conversion, but having
received an immediate intimation from Heaven, probably in the Ecstasie wherein
he was caught up thither, he waited for no other counsel or direction in the
case, lest he should seem to derive his Mission and Authority from Men, and
being not disobedient to the Heavenly Vision, he presently retired out of the
City; and the sooner probably, to decline the Odium of the Jews, and the
effects of that rage and malice, which he was sure would pursue and follow him.
He withdrew into the parts of Arabia, where he Gal. 1. 17. 18.
spent the first fruits of his Ministry, Preaching up and down for three Years
together. After which he returned back to Damascus, Preached openly in the
Synagogues, and convinced the Jews of Christ's Messiah-ship, and the truth of
his Religion. Angry Act. 9. 23. 2 Cor. 11. 32, 33.
and enraged hereat, they resolved his Ruin, which they knew no better way to
effect, than by exasperating and incensing the Civil powers against him.
Damascus was a place, not more venerable for its Antiquity, if not built by, at
least it gave title to Abraham's steward, hence called, Eliezer of Damascus,
than it was considerable for its strength, stateliness and situation: it was
the noblest City of all Syria (as Just. lib. 36. 1. 2. p. 425.
Justin of old, and the Arabian (...). Nub. Clim. 3. (...). 5. p. 116. (...).
7. 7.
Geographer has since informed us, and the Prophet Isaiah before both calls it
(...) the head of Syria) seated in a most healthful Air, in a most fruitful
Soil, watered with most pleasant Fountains and Rivers, rich in Merchandise,
adorned with stately Buildings, goodly and magnificent Temples, and fortified
with strong Guards and Garrisons: in all which respects Epist. XXIV. p. 145.
Julian calls it the Holy and great Damascus, (...), the Eye of the whole East.
Situate it was between Libanus and Mount Hermon, and though properly belonging
to Syria, yet Arabiae retro deputabatur (as Alv. Mart. 1. 3. (...). 13. p. 404.
Tertullian tells us) was in after times reckoned to Arabia. Accordingly at
this time it was under the Government of Aretas (Father-inlaw to Herod the
Tetrarch) King of Arabia Petraea, a Prince tributary to the Roman Empire. By
him there was an (...), or Governor, who had Jurisdiction over the whole Syria
Damascena, placed over it, who kept constant residence in the City, as a place
of very great importance. To him the Jews made their address, with crafty and
cunning insinuations persuading him to apprehend S. Paul, possibly under the
notion of a Spy, there being War at this time between the Romans, and that
King. Hereupon the Gates were shut, and extraordinary Guards set, and all
Engines that could be laid to take him. But the Disciples to prevent their
cruel designs, at Night put him into a Basket, and let him down over the
City-wall. And the place, we are G. (...). and J. (...). c. 4. p. 11.
told, is still showed to Travelers, not far from the Gate, thence called S.
Paul's Gate at this day.

2. HAVING thus made his escape, he set forwards for Jerusalem, where when he
Act. 9. 26.
arrived, he addressed himself to the Church. But they knowing the former
temper and Gal. 1. 18, 19.
principles of the Man, universally shunned his company; till Barnabas brought
him to Peter, who was not yet cast into Prison, and to James, our Lord's
Brother, Bishop of Jerusalem, acquainting them with the manner of his
conversion, and by them he was familiarly entertained. Here he staid fifteen
days, preaching Christ, and confuting the Hellenist Jews with a mighty courage
and resolution. But snares were here again laid to entrap him, as malice can as
well cease to be, as to be restless and active. Whereupon he was warned by God
in a Vision, that his Testimony would not find acceptance in that place, that
therefore he should leave it, and betake himself to the Gentiles. Accordingly
being conducted by the Brethren to Caesarea, he set sail for Tarsus, his
Native Act. 9. 30.
City, from whence not long after he was fetched by Barnabas to Antioch, to
assist him in propagating Christianity in that place. In which employment they
continued Act. 11. 26.
there a whole Year. And now it was that the Disciples of the Religion were at
this place first called Christians; according to the manner of all other
Institutions, who were wont to take their denominations from the first Authors
and Founders of them. Before this they were usually styled (...). Eu (...) loc.
Hebr. in voc. (...).
Nazarens, as being the Disciples and followers of Jesus of Nazareth, a Name by
which the Jews in scorn call them to this day, with the same intent that the
Gentiles of old used to call them Galileans. The name of Nazarenes was
hence-forward fixed upon those Jewish converts, who mixed the Law and the
Gospel, and compounded a Religion out of Judaism and Christianity. The fixing
this honorable Name upon the Disciples of the crucified Jesus was done at
Antioch (as an ancient Joan. (...). in Chronol. MS. (...), cit. (...) Synedr.
l. 1. c. 8. p. 226. vid. Suid. in voc. (...).
Historian informs us) about the beginning of Claudius his Reign, Ten Years
after Christ's Ascension; nay, he further adds, that Euodius lately ordained
Bishop of that place was the person that imposed this name upon them, stiling
them Christians, who before were called Nazarenes and Galilaeans, (...), as my
Authors words are. I may not omit, what a learned J. Greg. (...). and obs.
(...). 36.
Man has observed, that the word (...) used by S. Luke (they were called)
implies the thing to have been done by some public and solemn act and
declaration of the whole Church, such being the use of the word in the Imperial
Edicts and proclamations of those times, the Emperors being said (...), to
style themselves, when they publicly proclaimed by what titles they would be
called. When any Province submitted it self to the Roman Empire, the Emperor
was wont by public Edict (...), to entitle himself to the Government and
Jurisdiction of it, and the People to several great privileges and immunities.
In a grateful sense whereof the People usually made this time the solemn date
of their common Epoch or computation. Thus (as the forementioned J. (...).
Chron. lib. 9.
Historian informs us) it was in the particular case of Antioch, and thence
their public Era was called (...), the Ascription of the People of Antioch.
Such being the general acception of the word, S. Luke (who was himself a Native
of this City) makes use of it to express that solemn declaration, whereby the
Disciples of the Religion entitled themselves to the Name of Christians.

3. IT happened about this time that a terrible Famine, foretold by Agabus,
afflicted Act. 11. 27.
several parts of the Roman Empire, but especially Judaea: The consideration
whereof made the Christians at Antioch compassionate the case of their
suffering Brethren, and accordingly raised considerable contributions for their
relief and succor, which they sent to Jerusalem by Barnabas and Paul, who
having dispatched their Errand in that City, went back to Antioch. Where while
they were joining in the public exercises of their Religion, it was revealed
to them by the H. Ghost, that they should set apart Act. 13. 2.
Paul and Barnabas to preach the Gospel in other places. Which was done
accordingly, and they by Prayer, Fasting and Imposition of Hands immediately
deputed for that service. Hence they departed to Seleucia, and thence sailed to
Cyprus, where at Salamis, a great City in that Island, they Preached in the
Synagogues of the Jews. Hence they removed to Paphos, the residence of Sergius
Paulus the Proconsul of the Island, a Man of great wisdom and prudence, but
miserably seduced by the wicked Artifices of Barjesus a Jewish Impostor, who
called himself Elymas, or the Magician, vehemently opposed the Apostles, and
kept the Proconsul from embracing of the Faith. Nay, Dionys. (...). de (...).
c. 8. page 623.
one who pretends to be ancient enough to know it, seems to intimate, that he
not only spoke, but wrote against S. Paul's Doctrine, and the Faith of Christ.
However, the Proconsul calls for the Apostles, and S. Paul first takes Elymas
to task, and having severely checked him for his malicious opposing of the
truth, told him, that the Divine Vengeance was now ready to seize upon him.
Upon which he was immediately struck blind. The Vengeance of God observing
herein a kind of just proportion, that he should be punished with the loss of
his Bodily eyes, who had so wilfully and maliciously shut the eyes of his mind
against the light of the Gospel, and had endeavored to keep not only himself,
but others under so much blindness and darkness. This Miracle turned the Scale
with the Proconsul, and quickly brought him over a Convert to the Faith.

4. AFTER this success in Cyprus, he went to Perga in Pamphilia, where taking
Act. 13. 13, 14.
Titus along with him in the room of Mark, who was returned to Jerusalem, they
went to Antioch the Metropolis of Pisidia. Where entering into the Jewish
Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, after some Sections of the Law were read, they
were invited by the Rulers of the Synagogue to discourse a little to the
People. Which S. Paul did in a large and eloquent Sermon, wherein he put them
in mind of the many great and particular blessings which God had heaped upon
the Jews, from the first Originals of that Nation; that he had crowned them
all with the sending of his Son, to be the Messiah and the Savior, that though
the Jews had ignorantly crucified this just, innocent Person, yet that God
according to his own predictions had raised him up from the dead, that through
Him they preached forgiveness of sins, and that by Him alone it was that Men,
if ever, must be justified and acquitted from that Guilt and Condemnation,
which all the pompous Ceremonies, and Ministeries of the Mosaic Law could never
do away: That therefore they should do well to take heed lest by their opposing
this way of Salvation, they should bring upon themselves that prophetical
curse, which God had threatened to the Jews of old for their great contumacy and
neglect. This Sermon wanted not its due effects. The (...)-Jews desired the
Apostles to discourse again to them of this matter the next Sabbath Day, the
Apostles also persuading them to continue firm in the belief of these things.
The Day was no sooner come, but the whole City almost flocked to be their
Auditors, which when the Jews saw, acted by a spirit of envy, they began to
blaspheme, and to contradict the Apostles, who nothing daunted, told them that
our Lord had charged them first to preach the Gospel to the Jews, which since
they so obstinately rejected, they were now to address themselves to the
Gentiles, who hearing this exceedingly rejoiced at the good news, and magnified
the Word of God, and as many of them as were thus prepared and disposed toward
eternal life, heartily closed with it and embraced it; the Apostles preaching
not there only, but through the whole Country round about. The Jews more
exasperated than before, resolved to be rid of their company, and to that end
persuaded some of the more devout and honorable Women, to deal with their
Husbands, Persons of prime rank and quality in the City, by whose means they
were driven out of those parts. Whereat Paul and Barnabas shaking off the dust
of their Feet, as a Testimony against their ingratitude and infidelity,
departed from them.

5. THE next place they went to was Iconium, where at first they found kind
Act. 14. 1.
entertainment, and good success, God setting a Seal to their Doctrine by the
Testimony of his Miracles. But here the Jewish malice began again to ferment,
exciting the People to sedition and a mutiny against them. Insomuch that
hearing of a (...) to stone them, they seasonably withdrew to Lystra: where
they first made their way by a miraculous cure. For S. Paul seeing an impotent
Cripple that had been lame from his Mothers Womb, cured him with the speaking
of a word. The People who beheld the Miracle, had so much natural Logic, as to
infer, that there was a Divinity in the thing, though mistaking the Author,
they applied it to the Instruments, crying out, That the Gods in humane shape
were come down from Heaven; Paul as being chief Speaker, they termed Mercury,
the God of speech and eloquence; Barnabas by reason of his Age and gravity,
they called Jupiter, the Father of their Gods; accordingly the Syriac
Interpreter here renders Jupiter by (...) the Lord, or Sovereign of the Gods.
The fame of this being spread over the City, the Priest of Jupiter brought
Oxen, dressed up with Garlands after the Gentile Rites, to the House where the
Apostles were, to do Sacrifice to them. Which they no sooner understood, but in
detestation of those undue honors offered to them, they rent their clothes,
and told them that they were Men of the same make and temper, of the same
passions and infirmities with themselves, that the design of their Preaching
was to convert them from these vain Idolatries and superstitions, to the
worship of the true God, the great Parent of the World, who though heretofore
he had left Men to themselves, to go on in their own ways of Idolatrous
worship, yet had he given sufficient evidence of himself in the constant
returns of a gracious and benign providence in crowning the Year with fruitful
Seasons, and other acts of common kindness and bounty to Mankind.

6. A SHORT discourse, but very rational and convictive, which it may not be
amiss a little more particularly to consider, and the method which the Apostle
uses to convince these blind Idolaters. He proves Divine honors to be due to
God alone, as the Sovereign Being of the World, and that there is such a
Supreme infinite Being, he argues from his Works both of Creation and
Providence. Creation, He is the living God that made Heaven, and Earth, the
Sea, and all things that are (...). Arrian. (...). lib: 1. c. 16. p. 126.
therein. Providence, He left not himself without witness, in that he did good,
and gave rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food
and gladness. Than which no argument can be more apt and proper to work upon
the minds of men. That which may be known of God is manifest to the Gentiles,
for God has showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the world, even his eternal power and Godhead, are clearly seen and
understood by the things that are made: It being impossible impartially to
survey the several parts of the Creation, and not see in every place evident
footsteps of an infinite wisdom, power, and goodness. Who can look up unto the
Heavens, and not there discern and Almighty wisdom, beautifully garnishing
those upper Regions, distinguishing the circuits, and perpetuating the motions
of the Heavenly lights? placing the Sun in the middle of the Heavens, that he
might equally dispense and communicate his light and heat to all parts of the
World, and not burn the Earth with the too near approach of his seorching
beams: by which means the Creatures are refreshed and cheared, the Earth
impregnated with fruits and flowers by the benign influence of a vital heat,
and the vicissitudes and seasons of the year regularly distinguished by their
constant and orderly revolutions. Whence are the great Orbs of Heaven kept in
continual motion, always going in the same tract, but because there is a
Superior power that keeps these great wheels a going? Who is it that poises
the ballancings of the Clouds; that divides a watercourse for the overflowing
of waters, and a way for the lightning of the Thunder? Who can bind the sweet
influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? Or who can bring forth
Mazaroth in his season, or guide Arcturus with his sons? Do these come by
chance? or by the secret appointment of infinite wisdom? Who can consider the
admirable thinness and purity of the Air, its immediate subserviency to the
great ends of the Creation, its being the treasury of vital breath to all
living Creatures, without which the next moment must put a period to our days,
and not reflect upon that Divine wisdom that contrivedit? If we come down upon
the Earth, there we discover a Divine providence, supporting it with the
pillars of an invisible power, stretching the North over the empty space, and
hanging the Earth upon nothing; filling it with great variety of admirable and
useful Creatures, and maintaining them all according to their kinds at his own
cost and charges. It Is he that clothes the Grass with a delightful verdure,
that crowns the Year with his loving kindness, and makes the Valleys stand
thick with corn; that causes the Grass to grow for the Cattle, and Herb for the
service of Man, that he may bring forth food out of the Earth; and Wine that
makes glad the heart of man, and Oil to make his face to shine, and Bread
which strengthens man's heart; that beautifies the Lilies that neither toil
nor spin, and that with a glory that out-shines Solomon in all his pomp and
grandeur. From Land let us ship our observations to Sea, and there we may
descry the wise effects of infinite understanding: A wide Ocean fitly disposed
for the mutual commerce and correspondence of one part of mankind with another;
filled with great and admirable Fishes, and enriched with the treasures of
(...) deep. What but an Almighty arm can shut in the Sea with doors, bind it by
a (...) tual decree that it cannot pass, and tie up its wild raging waves with
no stronger (...) dage than ropes of Sand? Who but he commands the storm, and
stills the (...) and brings the Mariner, when at his wits-end, in the midst of
the greatest dangers, to his desired Haven? They that go down to the Sea in
ships, and do business in great waters; these see the works of the Lord, and
his wonders in the deep. So impossible is it for a man to stand in any part of
the Creation, wherein he may not discern evidences enough of an infinitely
wise, gracious and Omnipotent Being. Thus much I thought good to add, to
illustrate the Apostles argument; whence he strongly infers, that it is very
reasonable, that we should worship and adore this great Creator and Benefactor,
and not transfer the honors due to him alone upon men of frail and sinful
passions, and much less upon dumb Idols, unable either to make or to help
themselves. An argument, which though very plain and plausible, and adapted to
the meanest understandings, yet was all little enough to restrain the people
from offering Sacrifice to them. But how soon was the wind turned into another
corner? The old spirit of the Jews did still haunt and pursue them: Who coming
from Antioch and (...), exasperated and stirred up the multitude. And they who
just before accounted them as Gods, used them now worse, not only than ordinary
men, but slaves. For in a mighty rage they fall upon S. Paul, stone him, as
they thought, dead, and then drag him out of the City: Whither the Christians
of that place coming, probably to interr him, he suddenly revived, and rose up
amongst them, and the next day went thence to Derbe.

7. HERE they preached the Gospel, and then returned to Lystra, (...), and
Antioch of Pisidia, confirming the Christians of those places in the belief and
profession of Christianity, earnestly persuading them to persevere, and not be
discouraged with those troubles and persecutions which they must expect would
attend the profession of the Gospel. And that all this might succeed the
better, with fasting and prayer they ordained Governors and Pastors in every
Church, and having recommended them to the grace of God, departed from them.
From hence they passed through Pisidia and thence came to Pamphilia, and having
preached to the people at Perga, they went down to Attalia. And thus having at
this time finished the whole circuit of their Ministry, they returned back to
Antioch in Syria, the place whence they had first set out. Here they acquainted
the Church with the various transactions and successes of their travels, and
how great a door had hereby been opened to the conversion of the Gentile World.

8. WHILE S. Paul staid at Antioch there arose that famous controversy about
Acts 15. 1.
the observation of the Mosaic Rites, set on foot and brought in by some Jewish
Converts that came down thither, whereby great disturbances and distractions
were made in the minds of the people. For the composing whereof the Church of
Antioch resolved to send Paul and Barnabas to consult with the Apostles and
Church at Jerusalem. In their way thither, they declared to the Brethren, as
they went along, what success they had had in the conversion of the Gentiles.
Being come to Jerusalem, they first addressed themselves to Peter, James, and
John, the pillars and principal persons in that place: By whom they were kindly
entertained, and admitted to the right hand of fellowship. And perceiving by
the account which S. Paul gave them, that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was
committed to him, as that of the circumcision was to Peter; they ratified it by
compact and agreement, that Peter should preach to the Jews, and Paul unto the
Gentiles. Hereupon a Council was summoned, wherein Peter having declared his
sense of things, Paul and Barnabas acquainted them what great things God by
their Ministry had done among the Gentiles. A plain evidence, that though
uncircumcised, they were accepted by God as well as the Jews with all their
legal Rites and Privileges. The issue of the debate was, That the Gentiles
were not under the obligation of the Law of Moses, and that therefore some
persons of their own should be joined with Paul and Barnabas, to carry the
Canons and decrees of the Council down to Antioch, for their fuller
satisfaction in this matter. But of this affair we shall give the Reader a more
distinct and particular account in another place.

SECT. III. Of S. Paul, from the time of the Synod at Jerusalem, till his
departure from Athens.
S. Paul's carrying the Apostolic Decree to Antioch. His (...) with Peter. The
dissension between him and Barnabas. His Travels to confirm the new-planted
Churches. The conversion of Lydia at Philippi. The Jewish Proseuchae, what; the
frequency of them in all places. The dispossessing of a Pythonesse. S. Paul's
imprisonment and ill usage at Philippi. The great provision made by the Roman
Laws for the security of its Subjects. His preaching at Thessalonica and
Beraea. His going to Athens. The fame of that place. His doctrine opposed by
the Stoics and Epicureans, and why. The great (...) and Superstition of that
City. The Altar to the Unknown God. This Unknown God, who. The Superstition of
the Jews in concealing the name of God. This imitated by the Gentiles. Their
general Forms of (...) their Deities noted. The particular occasion of these
Altars at Athens, whence. S. Paul's discourse to the Philosophers in the
Areopagus concerning the Divine Being and Providence. The different
entertainment of his Doctrine. Dionysius the Areopagite, who. His Learning,
Conversion, and being made Bishop of Athens. The difference between him and S.
Denis of Paris. The Books published under his name.

1. SAINT Paul and his Companions having received the Decretal Epistle,
returned back to (...); where they had not been long before Peter came thither
to them. And according to the Decree of the Council freely and inoffensively
conversed with the Gentiles: Till some of the Jews coming down thither from
Jerusalem, he withdrew his converse, as if it were a thing unwarrantable and
unlawful. By which means the minds of many were dissatisfied, and their
Consciences very much ensnared. Whereat S. Paul being exceedingly troubled,
publicly rebuked him for it, and that as the case required, with great
sharpness and severity. It was not long after, that S. Paul and (...) resolved
upon visiting the Churches, which they had Acts 15. 35.
lately planted among the Gentiles. To which end Barnabas determined to take
his cousin Mark along with them. This, Paul would by no means agree to, he
having deserted them in their former journey: A little spark, which yet kindled
a great feud and dissension between these two good men, and arose to that
height, that in some discontent they parted from each other. So natural is it
for the best of men sometimes to indulge an unwarrantable passion, and so far
to espouse the interest of a private and particular humor, as rather to hazard
the great Law of Charity, and violate the bands of friendship, than to recede
from it. The effect was, Barnabas taking his Nephew, went for Cyprus, his
native Country, S. Paul made choice of Silas, and the success of his
undertaking being first recommended to the Divine care and goodness, they set
forwards on their journey.

2. THEIR first passage was into Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches as
they went along. And to that end (...) with them Copies of the Synodical
Decrees, lately ordained in the Council at Jerusalem. Hence we may suppose it
was that he set (...) for Crete, where he preached and propagated Christianity,
and constituted Titus to be the first Bishop and Pastor of that Island, whom he
left there, to settle and dispose those affairs, which the shortness of his own
stay in those parts would not suffer him to do. Hence he returned back unto
Cilicia, and came to Lystra, where he found Timothy, whose Father was a Greek,
his Mother a Jewish convert, by whom he had been brought up under all the
advantages of a pious and religious education, and especially an incomparable
skill and dexterity in the holy Scriptures. S. Paul designing him for the
companion of his travels, and a special instrument in the Ministry of the
Gospel, and knowing that his being uncircumcised would be a mighty prejudice in
the opinion and estimation of the Jews, caused him to be circumcised; being
willing in lawful and indifferent matters (such was Circumcision now become) to
accommodate himself to men's humors and apprehensions for the saving of their
Souls.

3. FROM hence with his company he passed through Phrygia, and the Country Acts
16. 6.
of Galatia, where he was entertained by them with as mighty a kindness and
veneration, as if he had been an Angel immediately sent from Heaven. And being
by Revelation forbidden to go into Asia, by a second Vision he was commanded to
direct his journey for Macedonia. And here it was that S. Luke joined himself
to his company, and became ever after his inseparable companion. Sailing from
Troas, they arrived at the Island Samothracia, and thence to (...), from whence
they went to Philippi, the chief City of that part of Macedonia, and a Roman
Colony: where he staid some considerable time to plant the Christian Faith, and
where his Ministry had more particular success on Lydia, a Purple-seller, born
at (...), baptized together with her whole Family; and with her the Apostle
sojourned during his residence in that place. A little without this City there
was a Proseucha, (...) as the Syriac renders it, an Oratory, or house of
Prayer, whereto the Apostle and his company used frequently to retire, for the
exercise of their Religion, and for preaching the Gospel to (...) that resorted
thither. The Jews had (...) sorts of places for their public worship: The
Temple at Jerusalem, which was like the Cathedral, or Mother Church, where all
Sacrifices and Oblations were (...), and where all Males were bound three times
a year personally to pay their devotions: Their Synagogues (many whereof they
had almost in every place, not unlike our Parochial Churches) where the
Scriptures were read and expounded, and the people taught their duty. Moses of
old time has in every Acts 15. 21.
City them that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath Day. And
then they had their (...) ((...), as Philo sometimes calls them) (...).
or (...), which were like Chapels of Ease to the Temple and the (...), lib.
3. (...). 685.
whither the people were wont to come solemnly to offer up their Prayers to
Heaven. They were built (as Alv. (...). LXXX. (...). 450.
(...) informs us) (...), without the City, in the open Air and uncovered,
(...), being large spacious places, after the manner of Fora, or Marketplaces,
and these they called (...). And that the Jews and Samaritans had such In
(...)? Juvenal. (...). 3. v. 296. P (...). Schol, ibid.
places of Devotion, he proves from this very place at Philippi, where S. Paul
preached. For they had them not in Judaea only, but even at Rome it self, where
Tiberius (as (...). ad (...), p. 1014
Philo tells (...) the Emperor) suffered the Jews to inhabit the Transtiberin
Region, and undisturbedly to (...) according to the Rites of their
Institutions, (...), and (...) to have their Proseucha's, and to meet in them,
especially upon their holy Sabbaths, that they might be familiarly instructed
in the Laws and Religion of their Country. Such they had also in other places,
especially where they had not, or were not suffered to have Synagogues for
their public worship. But to return.

4. AS they were going to this Oratory, they were often followed by a
Pythonesse, a Maidservant, acted by a spirit of Divination, who openly cried
out, That these men were the servants of the most high God, who came to show
the way of Salvation to the World. So easily can Heaven extort a Testimony from
the mouth of Hell. But S. Paul, to show how little he needed Satan to be his
witness, commanded the Demon to come out, which immediately left her. The evil
Spirit thus thrown out of possession, presently raised a storm against the
Apostles; for the Masters of the Damsel, who used by her Diabolical arts to
raise great advantages to themselves, being sensible that now their gainful
Trade was spoiled, resolved to be revenged on them that had spoiled it.
Accordingly they laid hold upon them, and dragged them before the Seat of
Judicature, insinuating to the Governors, that these men were Jews, and sought
to introduce different customs and ways of worship, contrary to the Laws of the
Roman Empire. The Magistrates and People were soon agreed, the one to give
Sentence, the other to set upon the Execution. In fine, they were stripped,
beaten, and then commanded to be thrown into Prison; and the Jailer charged to
keep them with all possible care and strictness. Who to make sure of his
charge, thrust them into the Inner-Dungeon, and made their feet fast in the
Stocks. But a good man can turn a Prison into a Chapel, and make a den of
Thieves to be an house of Prayer. Our feet cannot be bound so fast to the
Earth, but that still our hearts may mount up to Heaven. At midnight the
Apostles were overheard by their fellow prisoners, praying, and singing Hymns
to God. But after the still voice came the Tempest. An Earthquake suddenly
(...) the foundations of the Prison, the Doors (...) open, and their Chains
fell off. The Jailer awaking with this amazing accident, concluded with
himself, that the Prisoners were fled, and to prevent the Sentence of public
Justice, was going Milites si (...), ipsi in (...), l 12. (...). de (...). and
(...). hib. (...). T. 1. 3.
to lay violent hands upon himself, which S. Paul espying, called out to him to
hold his hand, and told him they were all there: Who thereupon came in to them
with a greater Earthquake in his own Conscience, and falling down before them,
asked them, What he should do to be saved? They told him there was no other way
of Salvation for him or his, than an hearty and sincere embracing of the Faith
of Christ. What a happy change does Christianity make in the minds of men! How
plain does it smooth the roughest tempers, and instill the sweetest principles
of civility and good nature! He who but a little before had tyrannized over the
Apostles with the most merciless and cruel usage, began now to treat them with
all the arts of kindness and charity, bringing them out of the Dungeon, and
washing their stripes and wounds, and being more fully instructed in the
principles of Christianity, was, together with his whole Family, immediately
baptized by them. Early in the morning the Magistrates sent Officers privately
to release them: Which the Apostles refused, telling them, That they were not
only innocent persons, but Romans; that they had been illegally condemned and
beaten, that therefore their delivery should be as public, as the injury, and
an open vindication of their innocence, and that they themselves, that had sent
them thither, should fetch them thence; for the Roman Government was very
tender of the lives and liberties of its own subjects, those especially that
Ista laus primum est majorum (...), qui (...) corpus omnium (...) Romanorum
(...) libertatis (...) Lex virgas ab omnium civium Romans (...). C. (...) de
(...) civium (...). pro C. Rabir. p. 314. Tom. 2.
were free Denizens of Rome, every injury offered to a Roman being looked upon
as an affront against the Majesty of the whole people of Rome. Such a one might
not be beaten; but to be (...), or bound, without being first legally heard and
tried, was not only against the Roman, but the Laws of all Nations: L. 7. ff.
de (...). lib. 49. T. (...). 10.
and the more public any injury was, the greater was its aggravation, and the
Laws required a more strict and solemn reparation. S. Paul who was a Roman, and
very well understood the Laws and privileges of Rome, insisted upon this, to
the great startling and affrighting of the Magistrates, who sensible of their
error, came to the Prison, and entreated them to depart. Whereupon going to
Lydia's house, and having saluted and encouraged the Brethren, they departed
from that place.

5. LEAVING Philippi, they came next to Thessalonica, the Metropolis of
Macedonia; where Paul, according to his custom, presently went to the Jewish
Synagogue, for three Sabbath Days, reasoning and disputing with them, proving
from the predictions of the Old Testament, that the (...) was to suffer, and to
rise again, and that the blessed Jesus was this Messiah. Great numbers,
especially of religious Proselytes, were converted by his preaching: while like
the Sun that melts wax, but hardens clay, it wrought a quite contrary effect in
the unbelieving Jews, who presently ser themselves to blow up the City into a
tumult and an uproar, and missing S. Paul (who had withdrawn himself) they fell
foul upon Jason, in whose house he lodged; representing to the Magistrates,
that they were enemies to Caesar, and sought to undermine the peace and
prosperity of the Roman Empire. At night Paul and Silas were conducted by the
Brethren to Beraea. Where going to the Synagogue, they found the people of a
more noble and generous, a more pliable and ingenuous temper, ready to
entertain the Christian doctrine, but yet not willing to take it merely upon
the Apostles word, till they had first compared his preaching with what the
Scriptures say of the Messiah and his Doctrine. And the success was answerable,
in those great numbers that came over to them. But the Jewish malice pursued
them still, for hearing at Thessalonica, what entertainment they had found in
this place, they presently came down, to exasperate and stir up the people. To
avoid which, S. Paul leaving Silas and Timothy behind him, thought good to
withdraw himself from that place.

6. FROM Beraea he went to Athens, one of the most renowned Cities in the Acts
17 15.
World, excelling all others (says an Ancient C. Nep. (...) vit. (...). c. 3:
p. 267.
Historian) in Antiquity, Humanity, and Learning: Indeed it was the great seat
of Arts and Learning, and as Orat. pro Flac. Tom. 2.
Cicero will have it, the fountain whence Civility, Learning, Religion, Arts
and Laws were derived into all other Nations. So universally flocked to by all
that had but the least kindness for the Muses, or good Manners, that he who had
not seen Athens, was accounted a Block; he who having seen (...). (...) Comic.
(...). de vit. Grac. a (...). edit. cap. 3. p. 18.
it, was not in love with it, a dull stupid Ass; and he who after he had seen
it, could be willing to leave it, fit for nothing but to be a Pack-Horse. Here
among the several Sects of Philosophers, he had more particular contests with
the (...) and Epicureans, who beyond all the rest seemed enemies to
Christianity. The Epicureans, because they found their pleasant and jovial
humor, and their loose and exorbitant course of life, so much checked and
controlled by the strict and severe precepts of Christ, and that Christianity
so plainly and positively asserted a Divine providence, that governs the World,
and that will adjudge to men suitable rewards and punishments in another World.
The Stoics on the other hand, though pretending to principles of great and
uncommon rigor and severity, and such as had nearest affinity to the doctrines
of the Christian Religion, yet found themselves aggrieved with it: That meek
and humble temper of mind, that modesty and self-denial, which the Gospel so
earnestly recommends to us, and so strictly requires of us, being so directly
contrary to the immoderate Tantum (...) sua, quantum (...) omnis (...). Est
aliquid, quo (...): ille naturae benesicio non timet, suo sapiens. Ecce res
magna, babere (...) hominis, (...). Sencc. Epist. 53. p. 131. (...) S. (...)
dicere, Jovem plus non (...), quam bonum virum. Plura Jupiter (...), quae
prastet hominibus: sed inter duos (...) est ni lior, qui locupletior. Jupiter
quo (...) virum bonum? (...) bonus est. (...) nihilo se minoris astimat, quod
virtutes (...) breviore claudumur. Id. Epist. 73. p. 203.
pride and ambition of that Sect, who beyond all proportions of reason were not
ashamed to make their wise man equal to, and in some things to exceed God
himself.

7. WHILE S. Paul staid at Athens in expectation of Silas and Timothy to come
to him, he went up and down to take a more curious view and survey of the City;
which he found miserably overgrown with Superstition and Idolatry. As indeed
Athens was noted by all their own writers (...). Pausen, lib. 1. p. 42. (...).
Id. (...). (...). in voc. (...) p. 438. -- (...). Nonn. Dionys lib. 38. p. 542.
for far greater numbers of Deities and Idols than all Greece besides. They
were (...), (...) (...). lib. 10. page 325.
Strabo notes: Not more sond of strangers and novelties in other things, than
forward to comply with novelties in Religion, ready to entertain any foreign
Deities and Rites of worship; no Divinity that was elsewhere adored, coming
amiss to them. Whence Athens is by Himer. Orat. in (...). CCXLIII, col. 1086.
one of their own Orators styled (...), the great Sum and Center of Piety and
Religion: And he there aggravates the impiety of Epicurus, in speaking
unworthily and irreverently of the Gods, from the place where he did it; at
Athens, a place so pious, so devoted to them. Indeed herein justly commendable,
that they could not brook the least dishonorable reflection upon any Deity, and
therefore Philostr. de vit. (...). lib. 6. cap. 2. p. 262 and ex to, Suid. in
vot. (...).
Apollonius Tyanaeus tells Timasion, that the safest way was to speak well of
all the Gods, and especially at Athens, where Altars were dedicated even to
Unknown Gods. And so S. Paul here found it, for among the several Shrines and
places of Worship and Devotion, he took more particular notice of one Altar
inscribd To the Unknown God. The entire Inscription, whereof the Apostle quotes
only part of the last words, is thought to have been this.

(...). Schol. in Act. 17. page 137.




TO the Gods of Asia, Europe, and Africa, to the strange and UNKNOWN GOD. Saint
Com. in Tit. cap. 1. ad Paul. and Eustoch. p. 248. Tom. 9.
Hierom represents it in the same manner, only makes it Gods in the plural
number, which because, says he, S. Paul needed not, he only cited it in the
singular. Which surely he affirms without any just ground and warrant: though
it cannot be denied, but that Heathen Writers make frequent mention of the
Altars of unknown Gods, that were at Athens, as there want not others who speak
of some erected there to an unknown God. This Notion the Athenians might
probably borrow from the Hebrews, who had the Name of God in great secrecy and
veneration. This being one of the Titles given him by the Prophet (...) a
hidden God, or a God that hides Isai; 45. 15.
himself. Sure I am that Paran. ad Graec. p. 37.
Justin Martyr tells us, that one of the principal names given to God by some
of the Heathens, was (...), one altogether hidden. Hence the Egyptians probably
derived (...). Plutarch. lib. de Isid. and Osir. p. 354.
their great God Ammon, or more truly Amun, which signifies occult, or hidden.
Accordingly in this passage of S. Paul the Syriac Interpreter renders it, the
Altar (...) of the hidden God. The Jews were infinitely superstitious in --
deditae (...) Incerti (...) Dei, (...). Pharsal. lib. 2. incertum (...) numon.
(...) Poll. in vit. Claud. c. 2. p. 800.
concealing the Name of God, not thinking it lawful ordinarily to pronounce it.
This made the Gentiles, strangers at best both to the Language and Religion of
the Jews, at a (...) mente sola, unumque (...) intelligunt; summum illud and
(...), neque mutabile, neque (...). Tacit. Histor. lib. (...) c. 5. p. 535.
great loss by what Name to call him, only stiling him in general an uncertain,
unspeakable, invisible Deity; whence Phil. de (...). ad Call. p. 1041.
Caligula in his ranting Oration to the Jews, told them, that wretches as they
were, though they refused to own him, whom all others had confessed to be a
Deity, yet they could worship (...), their own nameless God. And hence the
Gentiles derived their custom of keeping secret the name of their Gods; Thus
Quaest. Romans p. 279. vid. Serve. ad illud Virgil. Georgic. lib. 1. Dii patrii
indigites, etc.
Plutarch tells us of the Tutelar Deity of Rome, that it was not lawful to name
it, or so much as to enquire what Sex it was of, whether God or Goddess; and
that for once revealing it, Valerius Soranus; though Tribune of the People,
came to an untimely end, and was crucified, the vilest and most dishonorable
kind of death. Whereof among other reasons he assigns this, that by concealing
the Author of their public safety, (...), not he only, but all the other Gods
might have due honor and worship paid to them. Hence in their public
adorations, after the Invocation of particular Deities, they were wont to add
some more general and comprehensive form, as when Cicero had been making his
address to most of their particular Gods, he concludes with a In Verr. Actus.
7. p. 223. Pest (...), transit ad generalitatem, ne quod numen (...), more
(...), per quos ritu (...) in omnibus sacris, post speciales (...) ad ipsum
sactum, quod (...), necesse erat (...), generaliter omnia numina invocabantur.
Serve. in illud Virgil, (...). lib. 1. (...) Deaeque omnes.
Caeteros item Deos, Deasque omnes imploro atque obtestor. Usually the form
was, DII DEAEQUE OMNES. The reason whereof was this, that not being assured
many times what that peculiar Deity was, that was proper to their purpose, or
what numbers of Gods there were in the World, they would not (...) or offend
any, by seeming to neglect and pass them by. And this (...). 38. in Act. p. 705.
Chrysostom thinks to have been particularly designed in the erection of this
Athenian Altar, (...), they were afraid lest there might be some other Deity
(besides those whom they particularly worshipped) as yet unknown to them,
though honored and adored elsewhere, and therefore (...), for the more
security, they dedicated an Altar to the unknown God. As for the particular
occasion of erecting theso Altars at Athens (omitting that of Pans appearing to
Philippides, mentioned by Occumenius) the most probable seems to be this. When
a great Plague raged at (...). lib. 1. in vit. (...) p. 78.
Athens, and several means had been attempted for the removal of it, they were
advised by (...) the Philosopher, to build an Altar, and dedicate it (...), to
the proper and peculiar Deity, to whom it did appertain, be he what he would. A
course which proving successful, no doubt gave occasion to them by way of
gratitude to erect more shrines to this unknown God. And accordingly Laertius,
who lived long after S. Paul's time, tells us that there were such nameless
Altars (he means such as were not inscribed to any particular Deity) in and
about Athens in his days, as Monuments of that eminent deliverance.

7. BUT whatever the particular cause might be, hence it was that S. Paul took
occasion, to discourse of the true, but to them unknown God. For the
Philosophers had before treated him with a great deal of scorn and derision,
asking what that idle and prating fellow had to say to them? Others looking
upon him as a propagater of new and strange Gods, because he preached to them
Jesus and Anastasis or the Resurrection, which they looked upon as two upstart
Deities; lately come into the World. Hereupon they brought him to the place,
where stood the famous Senate House of the Areopagites, and according to the
Athenian humor, which altogether delighted in curious novelties, running up
and down the (...), and places of public concourse to see any strange
accident, or hear any new report (a vice which their own great (...), (...).
Philip. 4. page 53.
Orator long since taxed them with) they asked him, what that new and strange
Doctrine was, which he preached to them? Whereupon, in a neat and elegant
discourse he began to tell them, he had observed how much they were overrun
with superstition, that their zeal for Religion was indeed generous and
commendable, but which miserably over-shot its due measures and proportions;
that he had taken notice of an Altar among them Inscribed, To the unknown God,
and therefore in compassion to their blind and misguided zeal, he would declare
unto them the Deity which they ignorantly worshipped; and that this was no
other, than the great God, the Creator of all things, the Supreme Governor and
Ruler of the World, who was incapable of being confined within any Temple or
humane Fabric: That no Image could be made as a proper Instrument to represent
him; that he needed no Gifts or Sacrifices, being himself the Fountain, from
whence Life, Breath, and all other blessings were derived to particular Beings:
That from one common original he had made the whole Race of Mankind, and had
wisely fixed and determined the times and bounds of their habitation: And all
to this end, that Men might be the stronglier obliged to seek after him, and
sincerely to serve and worship him. A duty which they might easily attain to
(though otherwise sunk into the deepest degeneracy, and overspread with the
grossest darkness) he every where affording such palpable evidences of his own
being and providence, that he seemed to stand near, and touch us; It being
entirely from him, that we derive our life, motion, and subsistence. -- (...).
Schol. ibid.
A thing acknowledged even by their own Poct, that We also are his Offspring.
If therefore God was our Creator, it was highly unreasonable, to think that we
could make any Image or Representation of Him: That it was too long already,
that the Divine patience had born with the manners of Men, and suffered them to
go on in their blind Idolatries, that now he expected a general repentance and
reformation from the World, especially having by the publishing of his Gospel
put out of all dispute the case of a future judgment, and particularly
appointed the Holy Jesus to be the Person that should sentence and judge the
World: By whose Resurrection he had given sufficient evidence and assurance of
it. No sooner had he mentioned the Resurrection, but some of the Philosophers
(no doubt Epicureans, who were wont to laugh at the notion of a future state)
mocked and derided him, others more gravely answered, that they would hear him
again concerning this matter. But his discourse however scorned and slighted,
did not wholly want its desired effect, and that upon some of the greatest
quality and rank among them. In the number of whom was Dionysius one of the
grave Senators and Judges of the Areopagus, and Damaris whom the Ancients
Chrysoft. de Sacerdot. lib. 4. c. 7. p. 67. T. 4.
not improbably make his Wife.

8. THIS Dionysius was bred at Athens, in all the learned Arts and Sciences; at
sive and twenty Years of Age, he is said to have traveled into Egypt, to
perfect himself in the study of Astrology, for which that Nation had the credit
and renown. Here beholding Vid. inter alios Suid. in vic. (...).
the miraculous Eclipse that was at the time of our Savior's Passion, he
concluded that some great accident must needs be coming upon the World.
Returning to Athens, he became one of the Senators of the Arcopagus, disputed
with S. Paul, and was by him converted from his Errors and Idolatry; and being
thoroughly instructed, was by him (as the (...) Corinth. Episc. ap Eusebius. lib.
3. c. 4. p. 74. lib. 4. c. 22. p. 144.
Ancients inform us) made the first Bishop of Athens. As for Martyrium S.
Dionys. per S. Metaphr. ap. Sur. ad diem 9. October Epist. Hisduin. Abb. and H
uem. (...). item Passio ejus, altaque ib d. Niceph. lib. 2. c. 20. p. 167.
those that tell us, that he went afterward into France by the direction of
Clemens of Rome, planted Christianity at, and became Bishop of Paris, of his
suffering Martyrdom there under Domitian, his carrying his Head for the space
of two Miles in his Hand, after it had been cut off, and the rest of his
Miracles done before, and after his Death, I have as little leisure to enquire
into them, as I have faith to believe them. Indeed the foundation of all is
justly denied, viz. that ever he was there, a thing never heard of till the
times of Charles the Great, though since that, Volumes have been written of
this controversy both heretofore, and of later times, among which J. Sirmondus
the Jesuit, and Monsieur Launoy, one of the learned Doctors of the Sorbon, have
unanswerably proved the Athenian and Parisian Dionysius to be distinct Persons.
For the Books that go under his name, M. Daille has sufficiently evinced them
to (...) of a date many Hundred Years younger than S. Denis, though I doubt not
but they may claim a greater Antiquity, than what he allows them. But whoever
was their Author, I am sure Suidas has over-stretched the praise of them beyond
all proportion, when he gives them this character, (...), Vbi (...).
that whoever considers the elegancy of his discourses, and the profoundness of
his notions and speculations, must needs conclude that they are not the issue
of any humane understanding, but of some Divine and Immaterial Power. But to
return to our Apostle.

SECT. IV. Of S. Paul's Acts at Corinth and Ephesus.
S. Paul's arrival at Corinth. The opposition made by the Jews. The success of
his Preaching upon others. His first Epistle to the Thessalonians, when
written. His Arraignment before Gallio. The second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, and the design of it. S. Paul's voyage to Jerusalem. His coming
to Ephesus. Disciples baptized into John's Baptism. S. Paul's preaching at
Ephesus, and the Miracles wrought by him. Ephesus noted for the study of
Magic. Jews eminently versed in Charms and Enchantments. The Original of the
Mystery, whence pretended to have been derived. The ill attempt of the Sons of
Sceva to dipossess Demons in the name of Christ. S. Paul's doctrine greatly
successful upon this sort of men. Books of Magic forbidden by the Roman Laws.
S. Paul's Epistle to the Galatians, why, and when written. Diana's Temple at
Ephesus, and its great stateliness and magnificence. The mutiny against S. Paul
raised by Demetrius, and his party. S. Paul's first Fpistle to the Corinthians,
upon what occasion written. His Epistle to Titus. Apollonius Tyanaeus, whether
at Ephesus at the same time with S. Paul. His Miracles pretended to be done in
that City.

1. AFTER his departure from Athens, he went to Corinth, the Metropolis of
Greece, and the residence of the Proconsul of Achaia: where he found Aquila
Acts 18. 1.
and Priscilla lately come from Italy, banished out of Rome by the Decree of
Claudius: And they being of the same trade and profession, wherein he had been
educated in his youth, he wrought together with them, lest he should be
unnecessarily burdensome unto any, which for the same reason he did in some
other places. Hither, after some time, Silas and Timothy came to him. In the
Synagogue he frequently disputed with the Jews and Proselytes, reasoning and
proving, that Jesus was the true Messiah. They, according to the nature of the
men, made head and opposed him, and what they could not conquer by argument and
sorce of reason, they endeavored to carry by noise and clamor, mixed with
blasphemies and revilings, the last refuges of an impotent and baffled cause.
Whereat to testify his resentment, he shook his Garments, and told them, since
he saw them resolved to pull down vengeance and destruction upon their own
heads, he for his part was guiltless and innocent, and would henceforth address
himself unto the Gentiles. Accordingly he left them, and went into the house of
Justus, a religious Proselyte, where by his preaching and the many miracles
which he wrought, he converted great numbers to the Faith. Amongst which were
Crispus, the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, Gaius, and Stephanus, who together
with their Families embraced the doctrine of the Gospel, and were baptized into
the Christian Faith. But the constant returns of malice and ingratitude are
enough to tire the largest charity, and cool the most generous resolution:
therefore that the Apostle might not be discouraged by the restless attempts
and machinations of his enemies, our Lord appeared to him in a Vision, told him
that not withstanding the bad success he had hitherto met with, there was a
great harvest to be gathered in that place, that he should not be afraid of his
enemies, but go on to preach confidently and securely, for that he himself
would stand by him and preserve him.

2. ABOUT this time, as is most probable, he wrote his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, Silas and Timothy being lately returned from thence, and having
done the message for which he had sent them thither. The main design of the
Epistle, is to confirm them in the belief of the Christian Religion, and that
they would persevere in it, notwithstanding all the afflictions and
persecutions, which he had told them would ensue upon their profession of the
Gospel, and to instruct them in the main duties of a Christian and Religious
life. While the Apostle was thus employed, the malice of the Jews was no less
at work against him, and universally combining together, they brought him
before Gallio the Proconsul of the Province, elder Brother to the famous
Seneca: Before him they accused the Apostle as an Innovator in Religion, that
sought to introduce a new way of worship, contrary to what was established by
the Jewish Law, and permitted by the Roman Powers: The Apostle was ready to
have pleaded his own cause, but the Proconsul told them, that had it been a
matter of right or wrong, that had fallen under the cognizance of the Civil
Judicature, it had been very fit and reasonable that he should have heard and
determined the case, but since the controversy was only concerning the
punctilio's and niceties of their Religion, it was very improper for him to be
a Judge in such matters. And when they still clamoured about it, he threw out
their Indictment, and commanded his officers to drive them out of Court.
Whereupon some of the Towns men seized upon Sosthenes, one of the Rulers of the
Jewish Consistory, a man active and busy in this Insurrection, and beat him
even before the Court of Judicature, the Proconsul not at all concerning
himself about it. A year and an half S. Paul continued in this place, and
before his departure thence, wrote his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, to
supply the want of his coming to them, which in his former he had resolved on,
and for which, in a manner, he had engaged his promise. In this therefore he
endeavors again to confirm their minds in the truth of the Gospel, and that
they would not be shaken with those troubles which the wicked unbelieving Jews
would not cease to create them; a lost and undone race of men, and whom the
Divine vengeance was ready finally to overtake. And because some passages in
his (...) Letter, relating to this destruction, had been mis-understood, as if
this day of the Lord were just then at hand, he rectifies those mistakes, and
shows what must precede our Lord's coming unto Judgment.

3. S. (...) having thus fully planted and cultivated the Church at Corinth,
resolved Acts 18. 18.
now for Syria. And taking along with him Aquila and Priscilla, at Cenchrea,
the Port and Harbor of Corinth, Aquila (for of him it is certainly to be
understood) shaved his head, in performance of a Nazarite-Vow he had formerly
made, the time whereof was now run out. In his passage into Syria he came to
Ephesus, where he preached a while in the Synagogue of the Jews. And though
desired to stay with them, yet having resolved to be at Jerusalem at the
Passover (probably that he might have the fitter opportunity to meet his
friends, and preach the Gospel to those vast numbers that usually (...) to that
great solemnity) he promised, that in his return he would come again to them.
Sailing thence, he landed at Caesarca, and thence went up to Jerusalem, where
having visited the Church, and kept the Feast, he went down to Antioch. Here
having staid some time, he traversed the Countries of Galatia, and Phrygia,
confirming, as he went, the new-converted Christians, and so came to (...),
where finding certain Christian Disciples, he enquired of them, whether, Acts
19. 1.
since their conversion, they had received the miraculous gifts and powers of
the Holy Ghost. They told him, that the Doctrine which they had received had
nothing in it of that nature, nor had they ever heard that any such
extraordinary Spirit had of late been bestowed upon the Church. Hereupon he
further enquired, unto what they had been baptized (the Christian Baptism being
administered in the name of the Holy Ghost?) They answered, they had received no
more than John's Baptism; which though it (...) them to repentance, yet did
explicitly speak nothing of the Holy Ghost, or its gists and powers. To this
the Apostle replied, That though John's Baptism did openly oblige to nothing
but Repentance, yet that it did implicitly acknowledge the whole Doctrine
concerning Christ and the Holy Ghost. Whereto they assenting, were solemnly
initiated by Christian Baptism, and the Apostle laying his hands upon them,
they immediately received the Holy Ghost, in the gift of Tongues, Prophecy, and
other miraculous powers conferred upon them.

4. AFTER this he (...) into the Jewish Synagogues, where for the first three
months he contended and disputed with the Jews, endeavoring with great
earnestness and resolution to convince them of the truth of those things that
concerned the Christian Religion. But when instead of success, he met with
nothing but refractoriness and infidelity, he left the Synagogue, and taking
those with him whom he had converted, instructed them, and others that resorted
to him, in the School of one Tyrannus, a place where Scholars were wont to be
educated and instructed. In this manner he continued for two years together: In
which time the Jews and Proselytes of the whole (...) Asia had opportunity of
having the Gospel preached to them. And because Miracles are the clearest
evidence of a Divine commission, and the most immediate Credentials of Heaven,
those which do nearliest affect our senses, and consequently have the strongest
influence upon our minds, therefore God was pleased to ratify the doctrine
which S. Paul delivered by great and miraculous operations; and those of
somewhat a more peculiar and extraordinary nature. Insomuch that he did not
only heal those that came to him, but if Napkins or Handkerchiefs were but
touched by him, and applied unto the sick, their diseases immediately vanished,
and the Demons and evil Spirits departed out of those that were possessed by
them.

5. EPHESUS, above all other places in the World, was noted of old for the
(...) Suid. in (...).
study of Magic, and all secret and hidden Arts, whence the (...) so often
spoken of by the Ancients, which were certain obscure and mystical Spells and
Charms, by which they endeavored to heal Diseases, and drive away evil
Spirits, (...). (...). Strom, l, 1. p. 305, 306.
and do things beyond the reach and apprehensions of common people. Besides
other professors of this black Art, there were at this time at Ephesus certain
Jews, who dealt in the arts of (...) and Incantation; a craft and mystery which
(...). Jud. lib 8. (...). 2. p. 257.
Josephus affirms to have been derived from Solomon; who, he tells us, did not
only find it out, but composed forms of Exorcism and Enchantment, whereby to
cure diseases, and expel Demons, so as they should never return again; and
adds, (...), That this Art was still in force among the Jews: Instances
whereof, he tells us, he himself had seen, having beheld one Eleazar a Jew, in
the presence of (...), his Sons, and the great Officers of his Army, curing
Daemoniacks, by holding a ring to their nose, under whose Seal was hid the root
of a certain Plant, prescribed by Solomon, at the scent whereof the Demon
presently took leave and was gone, the Patient falling to the ground, while the
Exorcist, by mentioning Solomon, and reciting some Charms made by him, stood
over him, and charged the evil Spirit never to return. And to let them see that
he was really gone, he commanded the Demon as he went out to overturn a cup
full of water, which he had caused to be set in the room before them. In the
number of these Conjurers now at Ephesus, there were the seven Sons of (...),
one of the chief heads of the Families of the Priests, who seeing what great
things were done by calling over Daemoniacks the name of Christ, attempted
themselves to do the like, Conjuring the evil Spirit in the name of that Jesus,
whom Paul preached, to depart. But the stubborn Laemon would not obey the
warrant, telling them, he knew who Jesus and Paul were, but did not understand
what authority they had to use his name. And not content with this, forced the
Daemoniack violently to fall upon them, to tear their clothes, and wound their
bodies, scarce suffering them to escape with the safety of their lives. An
accident that begot great terror in the minds of men, and became the occasion
of converting many to the Faith, who came to the Apostle, and confessed the
former course and manner of their lives. Several also, who had traded in
curious Arts, and the mysterious methods of Spells and Charms, freely brought
their Books of Magic Rites (whose price, had they been to be sold, according
to the rates which men who dealt in those cursed mysteries put upon them, would
have amounted to the value of above One thousand Five hundred pounds) and
openly burnt them before (...). 19. 19. (...) (...) 7 d. ob. (...) (...)(...)
1562 (...). 10 s
the people, themselves adjudging them to those flames, to which they were
condemned by the Laws of the Empire. For so we find the Paul. (...). lib 5.
Sent. 21. Sect. 4 (...). 23. (...).
Roman Laws prohibiting any to keep Books of Magic Arts, and that where any
such were found, their Goods should be forfeited, the Books publicly burned,
the persons banished, and if of a meaner rank, beheaded. These Books the
penitent converts did of their own accord (...) to the fire, not tempted to
spare them either by their former love to them, or the present price and value
of them. With so mighty an efficacy did the Gospel prevail over the minds of
men.

6. ABOUT this time it was that the Apostle writ his Epistle to the Galatians.
For he had heard, that since his departure, corrupt opinions had got in amongst
them about the necessary observation of the legal Rites, and that several
Impostors were crept into that Church, who knew no better way to undermine the
Doctrine he had planted there, than by vilifying his person, slighting him as
an Apostle only at the second hand, not to be compared with Peter, James and
John, who had familiarly conversed with Christ in the days of his flesh, (...)
been immediately deputed by him. In this Epistle therefore he reproves them
with some necessary smartness and severity, that they had been so soon led out
of that right way, wherein he had set them, and had so easily suffered
themselves to be imposed upon by the crasty artifices of seducers. He
vindicates the honor of his Apostolate, and the immediate receiving his
Commission from Christ, wherein he shows, that he came not behind the very best
of those Apostles. He largely refutes those Judaical opinions, that had tainted
and infected them, and in the conclusion instructs them in the rules and duties
of an holy life. While the Apostle thus staid at Ephesus, he resolved with
himself to pass through (...) and Achaia, thence to Jerusalem, and so to Rome.
But for the present altered his resolution, and continued still at Ephesus.

7. DURING his stay in this place, an accident happened, that involved him in
great trouble and danger. (...) above all the Cities of the East was renowned
for the famous Temple of Diana, one of the stateliest Temples of the World. It
was (as H. Nature. lib. 36. c. 14. p. 716.
Pliny tells us) the very wonder of magnificence, built at the common charges
of all Asia properly (...) called, 220 Years (elsewhere Lib. 16. c. 40. p. 336.
he says 400) in building, (...).(...). in (...). Hymn. 2. p. 23.
which we are to understand of its successive rebuildings and reparations,
being often wasted and destroyed. It was 425 Foot long, 220 broad, supported by
127 Pillars, 60 Foot -- (...) (...). Perieg. (...). 829.
high; for its antiquity it was in some degree before the times of Bacchus,
equal to the Reign of the Amazons, (by whom it is generally said to have been
first built) as the (...). Annal. lib. 3. c. 61. p. 117.
Ephesian Ambassadors told Tiberius, till by degrees it grew up into that
greatness and splendour, that it was generally reckoned one of the seven wonders
of the World. But that which gave the greatest same and reputation to it, was
an Image of Diana kept there, made of no very costly materials, but which the
crasty Priests persuaded the People was beyond any humane artifice or
contrivement, and that it was immediately formed by Jupiter, and dropped down
from Heaven, having first killed, or banished the Artists that made it (as
Suid. in voc, (...)
Suidas informs us) that the cheat might not be discovered, by which means they
drew not Ephesus only, but the whole World into a mighty veneration of it.
Besides there were within this Temple multitudes of Silver Cabinets, or
Chappelets, little Shrines, made in fashion of the Temple, wherein was placed
the Image of Diana. For the making of these holy shrines, great numbers of
Silver-smiths were employed and maintained, among whom one Demetrius was a
Leading-man, who foreseeing that if the Christian Religion still got ground,
their gainful Trade would soon come to nothing, presently called together the
Men of his Profession, especially those whom he himself set on work, told them,
that now their welfare and livelihood were concerned, and that the fortunes of
their Wives and Children lay at stake, that it was plain that this Paul had
perverted City and Country, and persuaded the People that the Images, which
they made and worshipped, were no real Gods; by which means their Trade was not
only like to fall to the ground, but also the honor and magnificence of the
great Goddess Diana, whom not Asia only, but the whole Word did worship and
adore. Enraged with this discourse, they cried out with one voice, that Great
was Diana of the (...). The whole City was presently in an uproar, and seizing
upon two of S. Paul's Companions, hurried them into the Theater, probably with
a design to have cast them to the wild Beasts. S. Paul hearing of their danger,
would have ventured himself among them, had not the Christians, nay, some even
of the Gentile Priests, Governors of the popular Games and Sports, earnestly
dissuaded him from it; well knowing that the People were resolved, if they
could meet with him, to throw him to the wild Beasts, that were kept there for
the disport and pleasure of the People. And this doubtless he means, when
elsewhere he tells us, that he fought with Beasts at Ephesus, probably
intending what the People designed, though he did not actually suffer; though
the brutish rage, the savage and inhumane manners of this People did
sufficiently deserve that the censure and character should be fixed upon
themselves.

8. GREAT was the confusion of the Multitude, the major-part not knowing the
reason of the Concourse. In which distraction Alexander a Jewish Convert being
thrust forward by the Jews, to be questioned and examined about this matter,
he would accordingly have made his Apology to the People, intending no doubt
to clear himself by casting the whole blame upon S. Paul; This being very
probably that Alexander the Copper-smith, of whom our Apostle elsewhere
complains, that he did him much evil, 2 Timothy 4. 14.
and greatly withstood his (...), and whom he delivered over unto Satan for his
Apostasy, 1 (...). 1. 20.
for blaspheming Christ, and reproaching Christianity. But the Multitude
perceiving him to be a Jew, and thereby suspecting him to be one of S. Paul's
Associates, began to raise an outcry for near two Hours together, wherein
nothing could be heard, but Great is Diana of the Ephesians. The noise being a
little over, the Recorder, a discreet and prudent Man, came out and calmly told
them, That it was sufficiently known to all the World, what a mighty honor and
veneration the City of Ephesus had for the great Goddess Diana, and the famous
Image which fell from Heaven, that therefore there needed not this stir to
vindicate and assert it: That they had seized Persons, who were not guilty
either of Sacrilege, or Blasphemy toward their Goddess; that if Demetrius and
his Company had any just charge against them, the Courts were sitting, and they
might prefer their Indictment: or if the Controversy were about any other
matter, it might be referred to such a proper Judicature, as the Law appoints
for the determination of such cases: That therefore they should do well to be
quiet, having done more already than they could answer, if called in question,
(as it is like they would) there being no cause sufficient to justify that days
riotous Assembly. With which prudent discourse, he appeased and dismissed the
Multitude.

9. IT was about this time that S. Paul heard of some disturbance in the Church
at Corinth, hatched and fomented by a pack of false heretical Teachers, crept
in among them, who endeavored to draw them into Parties and Factions, by
persuading one Party to be for Peter, another for Paul, a third for Apollos, as
if the main of Religion consisted in being of this or that Denomination, or in
a warm active zeal to decry and oppose whoever is not of our narrow Sect. It Is
a very weak and slender claim, when a Man holds his Religion by no better a
title, than that he has joined himself to this Man's Church, or that Man's
Congregation, and is zealously earnest to maintain and promote it, to be
childishly and passionately clamorous for one Man's mode and way of
administration, or for some particular humor or opinion, as if Religion lay in
nice and curious disputes, or in separating from our Brethren, and not rather
in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. By this means Schisms and
Factions broke into the Corinthian Church, whereby many wild and extravagant
Opinions, and some of them such as undermined the fundamental Articles of
Christianity, were planted, and had taken root there. As the envious Man never
fishes more successfully than in troubled Waters. To cure these Distempers S.
Paul (who had received an Account of all this by Letters which Apollos, and
some others had brought to him from the Church of Corinth) writes his first
Epistle to them. Wherein he smartly reproves them for their Schisms and
Parties, conjures them to peace and unity, corrects those gross corruptions
that were introduced among them, and particularly resolves those many cases and
controversies, wherein they had requested his advice and counsel. Shortly after
Apollos designing to go for Crete, by him and Zenas S. Paul sends his Epistle
to Titus, whom he had made Bishop of that Island, and had left there for the
propagating of the Gospel. Herein he fully instructs him in the execution of
his Office, how to carry himself, and what directions he should give to others,
to all particular ranks and relations of men, especially those who were to be
advanced to places of Office and Authority in the Church.

10. A LITTLE before S. Paul's departure from Ephesus, we may not improbably
suppose, that Apollonius Tyaneus, the famous Philosopher and Magician of the
Heathen World (a Man remarkable for the strictness of his manners, and his
sober and regular course of life, but especially for the great Miracles said to
have been done by him; whom therefore the Heathens generally set up as the
great Corrival of our Savior; though some of his own party, and particularly
Eusebius. lib. 4. contra Hierocl. p. 530. ad calc. Demonstr, Evang.
Euphratus the Philosopher, who lived with him at the same time at Rome,
accused him for doing his strange feats by Magic) came to Ephesus. The enemy
of Mankind, probably designing to obstruct the propagation of Christianity, by
setting up one who by the Arts of Magic might, at least in the Vogue and
estimation of the People, equal, or eclipse the Miracles of S. Paul. Certain it
is, if we compare times and actions set down by the Philostr. de vit. Apollon,
Tyan. lib. 4. cap. 1. p. 159. etc. 12. p. 194. constr. lib. 5.
Writer of his Life, we shall find that he came hither about the beginning of
Nero's Reign, and he particularly sets down the strange things that were done
by him, especially his clearing the City of a grievous Plague, for which the
People of Ephesus had him in such veneration, that they erected a Statue to him
as to a particular Deity, and did divine honor to it. But whether this was
before S. Paul's going thence, I will not Ibid. lib. 4 c. 3. p. 164. vid.
Eusebius. in Hierocl. lib. 4. ap. Philostr, p. 457.
take upon me to determine; though it seems most probable to have been done
afterward.

SECT. V. S. Paul's Acts, from his departure from Ephesus, till his Arraignment
before Foelix.
S. Paul's journey into Macedonia. His preaching as far as Illyricum, and
return into Greece. His second (...) to the Corinthians, and what the design of
it. His first Epistle to Timothy. His Epistle to the Romans whence written, and
with what design. S. Paul's preaching at Troas, and raising Eutychus. His
summoning the Asian Bishops to Myletus, and pathetical discourse to them. His
stay at Caesarea with Philip the Deacon. The Churches passionate dissuading him
from going to Jerusalem. His coming to Jerusalem, and compliance with the
indifferent Rites of the Mosaic Law, and why. The tumults raised against him
by the Jews, and his rescue by the Roman Captain. His asserting his Roman
freedom. His carriage before the Sanhedrim. The difference between the
Pharisees and Sadducees about him. The Jews conspiracy against his life
discovered. His being sent unto Caesarea.

1. IT was not long after the tumult at Ephesus, when S. Paul having called the
Church together, and constituted Timothy Bishop of that place, took his leave,
and departed by (...) for Macedonia. And at this time it was, that, as he
himself Acts 20. 1.
tells us, he preached the Gospel round about unto Illyricum, since called
Sclavonia, some parts of Macedonia bordering on that Province. From Macedonia
he returned back unto Greece, where he abode three months, and met with Titus,
lately come with great contributions (...) the Church at Corinth. By whose
example he stirred up the liberality of the Macedonians, who very freely, and
somewhat beyond their ability contributed to the poor Christians at Jerusalem.
From Titus he had an account of the present state of the Church at Corinth; and
by him at his return, together with S. Luke, he sent his second Epistle to
them. Wherein he endeavors to set right what his former Epistle had not yet
effected, to vindicate his Apostleship from that contempt and scorn, and
himself from those slanders and aspersions, which the seducers, who had found
themselves lasht by his first Epistle, had cast upon him, together with some
other particular cases relating to them. Much about the same time he writ his
first Epistle to Timothy, whom he had left at Ephesus, wherein at large he
counsels him, how to carry himself in the discharge of that great place and
authority in the Church, which he had committed to him; instructs him in the
particular qualifications of those whom he should make choice of, to be Bishops
and Ministers in the Church. How to order the Deaconesses, and to instruct
Servants, warning him withal of that pestilent generation of heretics and
seducers, that would arise in the Church. During his three months stay in
Greece, he went to Corinth, whence he wrote his famous Epistle to the Romans,
which he sent by Phoebe, a Deaconess of the Church of Cenchrea, nigh Corinth:
wherein his main design is fully to state and determine the great controversy
between the Jews and Gentiles, about the obligation of the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Jewish Law, and those main and material Doctrines of Christianity, which
did depend upon it, such as of Christian liberty, the use of indifferent
things, etc. And which is the main end of all Religion, instructs them in, and
presses them to the duties of an holy and good life, such as the Christian
Doctrine does naturally tend to oblige men to.

2. S. PAUL being now resolved for Syria, to convey the contributions to the
Brethren at Jerusalem, was a while diverted from that resolution, by a design
he was told of which the Jews had to kill and rob him by the way. Whereupon he
went back into Macedonia, and so came to Philippi, and thence went to Troas,
where having staid a week, on the Lord's Day the Church met together to receive
the holy Sacrament. Here S. Paul preached to them, and continued his discourse
till midnight, the longer probably, being the next day to depart from them. The
length of his discourse, and the time of the night had caused some of his
Auditors to be overtaken with sleep and drowsiness, among whom a young man
called (...) being fast asleep, fell down from the third story, and was taken
up dead, but whom S. Paul presently restored to life and health. How
indefatigable was the industry of our Apostle! how close did he tread in his
Masters steps, who went about doing good! He compassed Sea and Land, preached
and wrought miracles wherever he came. In every place like a wise
Master Builder, he either laid a foundation, or raised the superstructure. He
was instant in season and out of season, and spared not his pains, either night
or day, that he might do good to the Souls of men. The night being thus spent
in holy exercises, S. Paul in the morning took his leave, and went on foot to
(...), a Seaport Town, whither he had sent his company by Sea. Thence they set
sail to (...), from thence to Samos, and having staid some little time at
Trogyllium, the next day came to Myletus, not so much as putting in at Ephesus,
because the Apostle was resolved, if possible, to be at Jerusalem at the Feast
of Pentecost.

3. AT Myletus he sent to Ephesus, to summon the Bishops and Governors of the
Church, who being come, he put them in mind with what uprightness and
integrity, Acts 20. 17.
with what affection and humility, with how great trouble and danger, with how
much faithfulness to their Souls he had been conversant among them, and had
preached the Gospel to them, ever since his first coming into those parts: That
he had not failed to acquaint them both publicly and privately with whatever
might be useful and profitable to them, urging both upon Jews and Gentiles
repentance and reformation of life, and an hearty entertainment of the Faith of
Christ: That now he was resolved to go to Jerusalem, where he did not know what
particular sufferings would befall him, more than this, That it had been
foretold him in every place by those who were endued with the Prophetical gifts
of the Holy Ghost, that afflictions and imprisonment would attend him there:
But that he was not troubled at this, no nor unwilling to lay down his life, so
he might but successfully preach the Gospel, and faithfully serve his Lord in
that place and station wherein he had set him: That he knew that henceforth
they should see his face no more, but that this was his encouragement and
satisfaction, that they themselves could bear him witness, that he had not by
concealing from them any parts of the Christian Doctrine, betrayed their Souls:
That as for themselves, whom God had made Bishops and Pastors of his Church,
they should be careful to feed, guide and direct those Christians under their
inspection, and be infinitely tender of the good of Souls, for whose redemption
Christ laid down his own life: That all the care they could use was no more
than necessary, it being certain, that after his departure, Heretical Teachers
would break in among them, and endanger the ruin of men's Souls; nay, that even
among themselves, there would some arise, who by subtle and crasty methods, by
corrupt and pernicious Doctrines would gain Proselytes to their party, and
thereby make Rents and Schisms in the Church: That therefore they should watch,
remembering with what tears and sorrow, he had (...) three years together warned
them of these things: That now he recommended them to the Divine care and
goodness, and to the rules and instructions of the Gospel, which if adhered to,
would certainly dispose and perfect them for that state of happiness, which God
had prepared for good men in Heaven. In short, that he had all a long dealt
faithfully and uprightly with them, they might know from hence, that in all his
preaching he had had no crafty or covetous designs upon any man's Estate or
Riches, having (as themselves could witness) industriously labored with his
own hands, and by his own work maintained both himself and his company: Herein
leaving them an example, what pains they ought to take to support the weak, and
relieve the poor, rather than to be themselves chargeable unto others;
according to that incomparable saying of our Savior (which surely S. Paul had
received from some of those that had conversed with him in the days of his
flesh) It is more blessed to give, than to receive. This Concio ad Clerum, or
(...)-Sermon being ended, the Apostle kneeled down, and concluded all with
Prayer. Which done, they all melted into tears, and with the greatest
expressions of sorrow attended him to the Ship, though that which made the
deepest impression upon their minds was, that he had told them, That they
should (...) his face no more.

4. DEPARTING from Myletus, they arrived at Coos, thence came to Rhodes, Acts
20. 1.
thence to Patara, thence to Tire; where meeting with some Christians, he was
advised by those among them, who had the gift of Prophecy, that he should not
go up to Jerusalem: with them he staid a week, and then going all together to
the shore, he kneeled down and prayed with them, and having mutually embraced
one another, he went on board, and came to (...), where only saluting the
Brethren, they came next day unto Caesarea. Here they lodged in the house of
Philip the Evangelist, one of the seven Deacons that were at first set apart by
the Apostles, who had four Virgindaughters, all endued with the gift of
prophecy. During their stay in this place, Agabus a Christian Prophet came down
hither from Judaea, who taking Paul's girdle, bound with it his own hands and
feet, telling them, that by this external Symbol the Holy Ghost did signify
and declare, that S. Paul should be thus served by the Jews at (...), and be by
them delivered over into the hands of the Gentiles. Whereupon they all
passionately besought him, that he would divert his course to some other place.
The Apostle asked them, what they meant, by these compassionate disswasives to
add more affliction to his sorrow; that he was willing and resolved not only to
be imprisoned, but, if need were, to die at Jerusalem for the sake of Christ
and his Religion. Finding his resolution fixed and immovable, they importuned
him no further, but left the event to the Divine will and pleasure. All things
being in readiness, they set forwards on their journey, and being come to
Jerusalem, were kindly and joyfully entertained by the Christians there.

5. THE next day after their arrival, S. Paul and his company went to the Acts
21. 18.
house of S. James the Apostle, where the rest of the Bishops and Governors of
the Church were met together; after mutual salutations, he gave them a
particular account with what success God had blessed him in propagating
Christianity among the Gentiles, for which they all heartily blessed God, but
withal told him, that he was now come to a place, where there were many
thousands of Jewish converts, who all retained a mighty zeal and veneration for
the Law of Moses, and who had been informed of him, that he taught the Jews,
whom he had converted, in every place, to renounce Circumcision, and the
Ceremonies of the Law: That as soon as the multitude heard of his arrival, they
would come together to see how he behaved himself in this matter; and therefore
to prevent so much disturbance, it was advisable, that there being four men
there at that time, who were to accomplish a Vow (probably not the (...)-vow,
but some other, which they had made for deliverance from sickness, or some
other eminent danger and distress; for so (...) B (...). Jud. lib. 2. c. 15.
Josephus tells us, they were wont to do in such cases, and before they came to
offer the accustomed Sacrifices, to abstain for some time from Wine, and to
shave their heads) he would join himself to them, perform the usual Rites and
Ceremonies with them, and provide such Sacrifices for them, as the Law required
in that case, and that in discharge of their Vow, they might shave their heads.
Whereby it would appear, that the reports which were spread concerning him were
false and groundless, and that he himself did still observe the Rites and
Orders of the Mosaical Institution: That as for the Gentile converts they
required no such observances at their hands, nor expected any thing more from
them in these indifferent matters, than what had been before determined by the
Apostolical Synod in that place. S. Paul (who in such things was willing to
become all things to all men, that he might gain the more) consented to the
counsel which they gave him, and taking the persons along with him to the
Temple, told the (...), that the time of a Vow which they had made being now
run out, and having purified themselves, as the nature of the case required,
they were come to make their offerings according to the Law.

6. THE seven days wherein those Sacrifices were to be offered being now almost
(...), some Jews that were come from (...) (where, probably, they had opposed
S. Paul) now finding him in the Temple, began to raise a tumult and uproar, and
laying hold of him, called out to the rest of the Jews for their assistance:
Telling them, that this was the fellow, that every where vented Doctrines (...)
to the prerogative of the Jewish Nation, destructive to the Institutions of the
Law, and to the purity of that place, which he had profaned by bringing in
uncircumcised Greeks into it: Positively concluding, that because they had seen
Trophimus a Gentile convert of Ephesus with him in the City, therefore he had
brought him also into the Temple. So apt is malice to make any premises, from
whence it may infer its own conclusion. Hereupon the whole City was presently
in an uproar, and seizing upon him, they dragged him out of the Temple, the
doors being presently shut against him. Nor had they failed there to have put a
period to all his troubles, had not (...) Lysias, Commander of the Roman
Garrison in the Tower of Antonia, come in with some Soldiers to his rescue and
deliverance, and supposing him to be a more than an ordinary Malefactor,
commanded a double chain to be put upon him, though as yet altogether ignorant,
either who he, or what his crime was, and wherein he could receive little
satisfaction from the clamorous multitude, who called for nothing but his
death, following the cry with such crowds and numbers, that the Soldiers were
forced to take him into their arms, to secure him from the present rage and
violence of the people. As they were going up into the Castle, S. Paul asked
the Governor, whether he might have the liberty to speak to him, who finding
him to speak Greek enquired of him, whether he was not that Egyptian, which a
few Years before had raised a Sedition in (...), and headed a party of Four
Thousand debauched and profligate wretches. The Apostle replied, that he was a
Jew of Tarsus, a Freeman of a rich and honorable City, and therefore begged
of him, that he might have leave to speak to the People. Which the Captain
readily granted, and standing near the Door of the Castle, and making signs
that they would hold their peace, he began to address himself to them in the
Hebrew Language: which when they heard, they became a little more calm and
quiet, while he discoursed to them to this effect.

7. HE gave them an account of himself from his Birth, of his education in his
Act. 22. 1.
youth, of the mighty zeal which he had for the Rites and Customs of their
Religion, and with what a passionate earnestness he persecuted and put to death
all the Christians that he met with, whereof the High Priest and the Sanhedrim
could be sufficient witnesses. He next gave them an entire and punctual
relation of the way and manner of his conversion, and how that he had received
an immediate command from God himself to depart Jerusalem, and preach unto the
Gentiles. At this word the patience of the Jews could hold no longer, but they
unanimously cried out, to have him put to death. it not being fit that such a
Villain should live upon the Earth. And the more to express their fury, they
threw off their Clothes, and cast dust into the Air, as if they immediately
designed to stone him. To avoid which, the Captain of the Guard commanded him
to be brought within the Castle, and that he should be examined by whipping,
till he confessed the reason of so much rage against him. While (...) virgis in
medio sero (...) Civis Romanut, cum interea nullus (...), nulla vox (...)
istius miseri (...), nisi hac, (...) Romanus sum. Hac (...) commemorationis
Civitatis omnia verbera depulsurum (...). -- O nomen dulce (...)! O jus (...)
civitatis! O lex Porcia, (...) Semproniae! Ciccr. in Virr. lib. 7. Tim. 2. p
218. (...) est vincire (...) Romanum, scelus, terberare. ld. ib. p. 220. vid.
supra Sict. Ill. Number. 4.
the Lictor was binding him in order to it, he asked the Centurion that stood
by, whether they could justify the scourging a Citizen of Rome, and that
before any sentence legally passed upon him. This the Centurion presently
intimated to the Governor of the Castle, bidding him have a care what he did,
for the Prisoner was a Roman. Whereat the Governor himself came, and asked him,
whether he was a free Denizon of Rome? and being told that he was, he replied,
that it was a great privilege, a privilege which he himself had purchased at
a considerable rate. To whom S. Paul answered, that it was his Birth right, and
the privilege of the place where he was born and bred. Hereupon they gave over
their design of whipping him, the Commander himself being a little startled,
that he had bound and chained a Denizon of Rome.

8. THE next Day the Governor commanded his Chains to be knocked off, and that
he might thoroughly satisfy himself in the matter, commanded the Sanhedrim to
meet, and brought down Paul before them: where being set before the Council, he
Act. 23. 1.
told them, that in all passages of his life he had been careful to act
according to the severest rules and conscience of his duty. Men and Brethren,
(...). M. Anton. (...). (...). 7. sect. 28. p. 63.
I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day. Behold here
the great security of a good man, and what invisible supports innocence affords
under the greatest danger. With Justum and tenatem (...) Virum, Non Civium
ardor prava jubemium, Non vultus inst (...) Tiranni M (...) quatit solida:
(...) Auster (...) inquieti turbidus (...) sulminantis magna Jovls manus. Si
fractus illabatur orbis, Impavidum (...). Horat, Carm. l. 3. Od. 3. p. 154.
how generous a confidence does virtue and honesty guard the breast of a good
man! as indeed nothing else can lay a firm basis and foundation for
satisfaction and tranquillity, when any misery or calamity does overtake us.
Religion and a good conscience beget peace and a Heaven in the Man's bosom
beyond the power of the little accidents of this World to ruffle and
discompose. Whence (...) ille est plenus gandio, (...), and placidus,
inconcussus, cum diis ex (...) vivit: per dies noctesque sar and aequalis animi
(...) erecti and placentis sibi est. --. Talis est (...) animus, qualis mundi
(...) super Lunam, semter illie serenum est: (...) sim gaudio est. Gaudium bot
non (...), nisiex virtutum conscientia. Senec. Epist. 59. p. 152.
Seneca compares the mind of a wise and a good man to the state of the upper
Region, which is always serene and calm. The High Priest Ananias being offended
at the holy and ingenuous freedom of our Apostle, as if by asserting his own
innocence, he had reproached the justice of their Tribunal, commanded those
that stood next him, to strike him in the Face; whereto the Apostle tartly
replied, That GOD would smite him, Hypocrite as he was, who under a pretense of
doing Justice had illegally commanded him to be punished, before the Law
condemned him for a Malefactor. Whereupon they that stood by asked him, how he
durst thus affront so sacred and venerable a Person as Gods High Priest? He
calmly returned, That he did not know [or own] Ananias to be an High Priest [of
God's appointment.] However being a Person in Authority, Hae Pauli verba
Ananias and Apparitores sic (...), quasi excusares Paulus quod sibi in istis
vialis (...) nois satis in mentem (...), quicum sibires esset. Verum latentior
sensus (...), non esse cum sacerdotem, aut principem (...), qui (...)
dignitates precio comparasset. Didicerat enim (...) Gamalitle Paulus: Judicem
qui honotis consequendi causa pecunias dederit, revera neque judicem este,
neque honorandum, sed asini habendum loco, ut ect in Tisulo Talmudico dt
Synedrio. Grot. in loc.
it was not lawful to revile him, God himself having commanded, that no man
should speak evil of the Ruler of the People. The Apostle, who as he never laid
aside the innocence of the Dove, so knew how, when occasion was, to make use of
the wisdom of the Serpent, perceiving the Council to consist partly of
Sadduces, and partly of Pharisees, openly told them, that he was a Pharisee,
and the Son of a Pharisee, and that the main thing he was questioned for, was
his belief of a future Resurrection. This quickly divided the Council, the
Pharisees being zealous Patrons of that Article, and the Sadducees as stiffly
denying, that there is either Angel (that is, of a spiritual and immortal
nature, really subsisting of it self, for otherwise they cannot be supposed to
have utterly denied all sorts of Angels, seeing they owned the Pentateuch,
wherein there is frequent mention of them) or Spirit, or that humane Souls do
exist in a separate state, and consequently that there is no Resurrection.
Presently the Doctors of the Law, who were Pharisees, stood up to acquit him,
affirming he had done nothing amiss, that it was possible he had received some
intimation from Heaven by an Angel, or the revelation of the H. Spirit, and if
so, then in opposing his Doctrine, they might fight against God himself.

9. GREAT were the dissentions in the Council about this matter, in so much
that the Governor fearing S. Paul would be torn in pieces, commanded the
Soldiers to take him from the Bar, and return him back into the Castle. That
night to comfort him after all his frights, and fears, God was pleased to
appear to him in a vision, encouraging him to constancy and resolution,
assuring him that as he had born witness to his cause at Jerusalem, so in
despite of all his enemies he should live to bear his testimony even at Rome it
self. The next Morning the Jews, who could as well cease to be, as to be
mischievous and malicious, finding that these dilatory proceedings were not
like to do the work, resolved upon a quicker dispatch. To which end above Forty
of them entered into a wicked confederacy, which they ratified by Oath and
Execration, never to eat or drink till they had killed him: and having
acquainted the Sanhedrim with their design, they entreated them to importune
the Governor, that he might again the next day be brought down before them,
under pretense of a more strict trial of his case, and that they themselves
would lie in ambush by the way, and not fail to dispatch him. But that Divine
providence that peculiarly superintends the safety of good men, disappoints the
devices of the crafty. The design was discovered to S. Paul by a Nephew of his,
and by him imparted to the Governor, who immediately commanded two Parties of
Foot and Horse, to be ready by Nine of the Clock that Night, and provision to
be made for S. Paul's carriage to Foelix the Roman Governor of that Province:
To whom also he wrote, signifying whom he had sent, how the Jews had used him,
and that his enemies also should appear before him to manage the charge and
accusation. Accordingly he was by Night conducted to Antipatris, and afterward
to Caesarea, where the Letters being delivered to Foelix, the Apostle was
presented to him: and finding that he belonged to the Province of Cilicia, he
told him, that as soon as his Accusers were arrived he should have an hearing,
commanding him in the mean time to be secured in the place called Herod's Hall.

SECT. VI. Of S. Paul, from his first Trial before Foelix, till his coming to
Rome.
S. Paul impleaded before Foelix by Tertullus the Jewish Advocate. His charge
of Sedition, Heresy, and Profanation of the Temple. S. Paul's reply to the
several parts of the charge. His second Hearing before Foelix and Drusilla. His
smart and impartial Reasonings. Foelix his great injustice and oppression: His
Luxury and Intemperance, Bribery and Covetousness. S. Paul's Arraignment before
Festus, Foelix his Successor, at Caesarea. His Appeal to Caesar. The nature and
manner of those Appeals. He is again brought before Festus and Agrippa. His
vindication of himself, and the goodness of his cause. His being acquitted by
his Judges of any Capital crime. His Voyage to Rome. The trouble and danger of
it. Their Shipwreck, and being cast upon the Island Melita. Their courteous
entertainment by the Barbarians, and their different censure of S. Paul. The
civil usage of the Governor, and his Conversion to Christianity. S. Paul met
and conducted by Christians to Rome.

1. NOT many days after down comes Ananias the High Priest, with some others
Acts 24. 1.
of the Sanhedrim to Caesarea, accompanied with Tertullus their Advocate, who
in a short but neat speech, set off with all the flattering and insinuating
arts of Eloquence, began to implead our Apostle, charging him with Sedition,
Heresy, and the Profanation of the Temple: That they would have saved him the
trouble of this Hearing, by judging him according to their own Law, had not
Lysias the Commander violently taken him from them, and sent both him and them
down thither. To all which the Jews that were with him gave in their Vote and
Testimony. S. Paul having leave from Foelix to defend himself, and having told
him, how much he was satisfied that he was to plead before one, who for so many
years had been Governor of that Nation, distinctly answered to the several
parts of the Charge.

2. AND first for Sedition, he point blank denied it, affirming that they found
him behaving himself quietly and peaceably in the Temple, not so much as
disputing there, nor stirring up the people either in the Synagogues, or any
other place of the City. And though this was plausibly pretended by them, yet
were they never able to make it good. As for the charge of Heresy, that he was
a ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarenes, he ingenuously acknowledged, that
after the way which they counted Heresy, so he worshipped God, the same way in
substance wherein all the Patriarchs of the Jewish Nation had worshipped God
before him, taking nothing into his Creed, but what the Authentic writings of
the Jems themselves did own and justify: That he firmly believed, what the
better part of themselves were ready to grant, another Life, and a future
Resurrection: In the hope and expectation whereof he was careful to live
unblameable, and conscientiously to do his duty both to God and men. As for the
third part of the Charge, his Profaning of the Temple, he shows how little
foundation there was for it, that the design of his coming to Jerusalem was to
bring charitable contributions to his distressed Brethren, that he was indeed
in the Temple, but not as some Asiatick Jews falsely suggested, either with
tumult or with multitude, but only purifying himself according to the rites and
customs of the Mosaic Law: And that if any would affirm the contrary, they
should come now into open Court, and make it good. Nay, that he appealed to
those of the Sanhedrim that were there present, whether he had not been
acquitted by their own great Council at Jerusalem, where nothing of moment had
been laid to his charge, except by them of the Sadducean party, who quarrelled
with him only for asserting the Doctrine of the Resurrection. Foelix having
thus heard both parties argue, refused to make any final determination in the
case, till he had more fully advised about it, and spoken with Lysias,
Commander of the Garrison, who was best able to give an account of the Sedition
and the Tumult; commanding in the mean time that S. Paul should be under guard,
but yet in so free a custody, that none of his friends should be hindered from
visiting him, or performing any office of kindness and friendship to him.

3. IT was not long after this before his Wife Drusilla (a Jewess, Daughter of
the elder Herod, and whom Tacitus, I fear by a mistake for his former Wife
Drusilla, Daughter to Juba King of Mauritania, makes Niece to Anthony and
Cleopatra) came to him to Caesarea. Who being present, he sent for S. Paul to
appear before them, and gave him leave to discourse concerning the doctrine of
Christianity. In his discourse he took occasion particularly to insist upon the
great obligation, which the Laws of Christ lay upon men to Justice and
Righteousness toward one another, to Sobriety and Chastity both toward
themselves and others, withal urging that severe and impartial account, that
must be given in the Judgment of the other World, wherein men shall be
arraigned for all the actions of their past life, and be eternally punished or
rewarded according to their works. A discourse wisely adapted by the Apostle to
Foelix his state and temper. But corrosives are very uneasy to a guilty mind:
Men naturally hate that which brings their sins to their remembrance, and
sharpens the sting of a violated conscience. The Prince was so netled with the
Apostles reasonings, that he fell a trembling, and caused the Apostle to break
off abruptly, telling him, he would hear the rest at some other season. And
good reason there was that Foelix his conscience should be sensibly alarmed
with these reflections, being a man notoriously infamous for rapine and
violence. Histor. lib. 5. c. 9. p. 538. vid. Annal. lib. 12. c. 54. p. 234.
Tacitus tells us of him, that he made his will the Law of his Government,
practicing all manner of cruelty and injustice. And then for incontinency, he
was given over to luxury and debauchery, for the compassing whereof he serupled
not to violate all Laws both of God and Man. Whereof this very Wife Drusilla
was a famous Joseph. Antiquit. Jud. lib. 20. c. 5. p. 693.
instance. For being married by her Brother to Azis King of the Emisenes,
Foelix, who had heard of her incomparable beauty, by the help of Simon the
Magician, a Jew of Cyprus, ravished her from her Husbands bed, and in defiance
of all law and right, kept her for his own Wife. To these qualities he had
added bribery and covetousness, and therefore frequently sent for S. Paul to
discourse with him, expecting that he should have given him a considerable sum
for his release; and the rather probably, because he had heard that S. Paul had
lately brought up great sums of money to Jerusalem. But finding no offers
made, either by the Apostle or his friends, he kept him prisoner for two years
together, so long as himself continued Procurator of that Nation, when being
displaced by Nero, he left S. Paul still in prison, on purpose to (...) the
Jews, and engage them to speak better of him after his departure from them.

4. TO him succeeded Portius Festus in the Procuratorship of the Province, at
Acts 25. 1.
whose first coming to Jerusalem, the High Priest and Sanhedrim presently began
to prefer to him an Indictment against S. Paul, desiring, that in order to his
Trial, he might be sent for up from Caesarea, designing under this pretense
that some Assassinates should lie in the way to murder him. Festus told them,
that he himself was going shortly for Caesarea, and that if they had any thing
against S. Paul, they should come down thither and accuse him. Accordingly
being come to Caesarea, and sitting in open Judicature, the Jews began to renew
the Charge which they had heretofore brought against S. Paul: Of all which he
cleared himself, they not being able to make any proof against him. However
Festus being willing to oblige the Jews in the entrance upon his Government,
asked him, whether he would go up and be tried before him at Jerusalem? The
Apostle well understanding the consequences of that proposal, told him that he
was a Roman, and therefore ought to be judged by their Laws, that he stood now
at Caesar's own Judgment Seat (as indeed what was done by the Emperor's
Procurator in any Province, the L. 1. ss. (...) Ofsic. Procur. (...). lib. 1.
(...). 19
Law reckoned as done by the Emperor himself) and though he should submit to
the Jewish Tribunal, yet he himself saw, that they had nothing which they could
prove against him; that if he had done any thing which really deserved capital
punishment, he was willing to undergo it; but if not, he ought not to be
delivered over to his enemies, who were beforehand resolved to take away his
life. However as the safest course, he solemnly made his appeal to the Roman
Emperor, who should judge between them. Whereupon Festus advising with the
Jewish Sanhedrim, received his appeal, and told him he should go to Caesar.
This way of appealing was frequent amongst the Romans, introduced to defend and
secure the lives and fortunes of the populacy from the unjust encroachments,
and over-rigorous severities of the Magistrates, whereby it was lawful in cases
of oppression to appeal to the people for redress and rescue, a thing more than
once and again settled by the Sanction of the Valerian Laws. These Leg. 1. Sect.
4. ss de Appellat. lib. 49 Tit. 1.
appeals were wont to be made in writing, by Appellatory Libels given in,
wherein was contained an account of the Appellant, the person against whom, and
from whose Sentence he did appeal. But where the case was done in open Court,
it was enough for the Criminal verbally to declare, that he did appeal: (...).
2 and 3. ibid.
In great and weighty cases appeals were made to the Prince himself, and that
not only at Rome, but in the Provinces of the Empire, all Proconsuls and
Governors of Provinces being strictly Ibid. (...). 25, and (...) 7. ff. ad
(...). Jul. (...) public. lib. 48. (...). 6.
forbidden to execute, scourge, bind, or put any badge of servility upon a
Citizen, or any that had the privilege of a Citizen of Rome, who had made his
appeal, or any ways to hinder him from going thither, to obtain justice at the
hands of the Emperor, who had as much regard to the liberty of his Subjects
(says the Law it self) as they could have of their good will and obedience to
him. And this was exactly S. Paul's case, who knowing that he should have no
fair and equitable dealing at the hands of the Governor, when once he came to
be swayed by the Jews, his sworn and inveterate enemies, appealed from him to
the Emperor, the reason why Festus durst not deny his demand, it being a
privilege so often, so plainly settled and confirmed by the Roman Laws.

5. SOME time after King Agrippa, who succeeded Herod in the Tetrarchate of
(...), and his Sister Bernice came to Caesarea, to make a visit to the new-come
Governor. To him Festus gave an account of S. Paul, and the great stir and
trouble that had been made about him, and how for his safety and vindication he
had immediately appealed to Caesar. Agrippa was very desirous to see and hear
him, and accordingly the next day the King and his Sister accompanied with
Festus the Governor, and other persons of quality, came into the Court with a
pompous and magnificent retinue, where the prisoner was brought forth before
him. Festus having acquainted the King and the Assembly, how much he had been
solicited by the Jews both at Caesarea and Jorusalem, concerning the prisoner
at the Bar, that as a notorious Malefactor he might be put to death, but that
having found him guilty of no capital crime, and the prisoner himself having
appealed to Caesar, he was resolved to send him to Rome, but yet was willing to
have his case again discussed before Agrippa, that so he might be furnished
with some material instructions to send along with him, since it was very
absurd to send a prisoner, without signifying what crimes were charged upon him.

6. HEREUPON Agrippa told the Apostle, he had liberty to make his own defense.
Acts 26. 1.
To whom, after silence made, he particularly addressed his speech; he tells
him in the first place what a happiness he had, that he was to plead before one
so exactly versed in all the rites and customs, the questions and the
controversies of the Jewish Law, that the Jews themselves knew what had been
the course and manner of his life, how he had been educated under the
Institutions of the Pharisces, the strictest Sect of the whole Jewish Religion,
and had been particularly disquieted and arraigned for what had been the
constant belief of all their Fathers, what was sufficiently credible in it
self, and plainly enough revealed in the Scripture, the Resurrection of the
dead. He next gave him an account with what a bitter and implacable zeal he had
formerly persecuted Christianity, told him the whole story and method of his
conversion, and that in compliance with a particular Vision from Heaven, he had
preached repentance and reformation of life first to the Jews, and then after
to the Gentiles: That it was for no other things than these that the Jews
apprehended him in the Temple, and designed to murder him; but being rescued
and upheld by a Divine power, he continued in this testimony to this day,
asserting nothing but what was perfectly agreeable to Moses and the Prophets,
who had plainly foretold that the Messiah should both be put to death, and rise
again, and by his doctrine enlighten both the Jewish and the Gentile World.
While he was thus discoursing, Festus openly cried out, that he talked like a
madman, that his overmuch study had put him besides himself. The Apostle
calmly replied, he was far from being transported with idle and distracted
humors, that he (...) nothing but what was most true and real in it self, and
what very well became that grave sober Auditory. And then again addressing
himself to Agrippa, told him, that these things having been open and public,
he could not but be acquainted with them, that he was confident that he
believed the Prophets, and must needs therefore know that those Prophecies were
fulfilled in Christ. Hereat Agrippa replied, That he had in some degree
persuaded him to embrace the Christian Faith. To which the Apostle returned,
that he heartily prayed, that not only he, but the whole Auditory were, not
only in some measure, but altogether, though not prisoners, yet as much
Christians as he himself was. This done, the King and the Governor, and the
rest of the Council withdrew awhile, to confer privately about this matter.
And finding by the accusations brought against him, that he was not guilty by
the Roman Laws of any (...) offense, no nor of any that deserved so much as
imprisonment, Agrippa told (...), that he might have been released, if he had
not appealed unto Caesar. for the Appeal being once made, the Judge had then no
power either to absolve or condemn, the cause being entirely reserved to the
cognizance of that Superior, to whom the Criminal had appealed.

7. IT was now finally resolved that S. Paul should be sent to Rome: in order
whereunto Act, 27. 1.
he was, with some other Prisoners of remarque, committed to the charge of
Julius, Commander of a Company belonging to the Legion of Augustus; accompanied
in this Voyage by S. Luke, Aristarchus, (...), and some others. In September,
Ann. Chr. LVI. or as others, LVII. they went on board a Ship of (...), and
sailed to Sidon, where the Captain civilly gave the Apostle leave to go a-shoar
to visit his Friends, and refresh himself: Hence to Cyprus, till they came to
the Fair-Havens, a place near Myra, a City of Lysia. Here, Winter growing on,
and S. Paul foreseeing it would be a dangerous Voyage, persuaded them to put
in, and winter. But the Captain preferring the judgment of the Master of the
Ship, and especially because of the incommodiousness of the Harbor, resolved,
if possible, to reach Phoenice, a Port of Crete, and to winter there. But it
was not long before they found themselves disappointed of their hopes: For the
calm southerly Gale that blew before, suddenly changed into a stormy and
blustering North-East Wind, which so bore down all before it, that they were
forced to let the ship drive at the pleasure of the Wind; but as much as might
be, to prevent splitting, or running a-ground, they threw out a great part of
their Lading, and the Tackle of the Ship. Fourteen Days they remained in this
desperate and uncomfortable condition, neither Sun nor Stars appearing for a
great part of the time; the Apostle putting them in mind how ill-advised they
were in not taking his counsel: Howbeit they should be of good cheer, for that
that God whom he served and worshipped, had the last Night purposely sent an
Angel from Heaven, to let him know, that notwithstanding the present danger
they were in, yet that he should be brought safe before Nero; that they should
be shipwrack'd indeed, and cast upon an Island, but that for his sake God had
spared all in the Ship, not one whereof should miscarry, and that he did not
doubt, but that it would accordingly come to pass. On the fourteenth Night upon
sounding they found themselves nigh some Coast; and therefore to avoid Rocks,
thought good to come to an Anchor, till the Morning might give them better
information. In the mean time the Seamen (who best understood the danger) were
preparing to get into the Skiff, to save themselves: which S. Paul espying,
told the Captain, that unless they all staid in the Ship, none could be safe:
whereupon the Soldiers cut the Ropes, and let the Skiff fall off into the Sea.
Between this and daybreak the Apostle advised them to eat and refresh
themselves, having all this time kept no ordinary and regular Meals, assuring
them they should all escape. Himself first taking Bread, and having blessed God
for it before them all, the rest followed his example, and cheerfully sell to
their Meat: which done, they lightened the Ship of what remained, and
endeavored to put into a Creek, which they discovered not far off. But falling
into a place where two Seas met, the forepart of the Ship ran a-ground, while
the hinder-part was beaten in pieces with the violence of the Waves. Awakened
with the danger they were in, the Soldiers cried out to kill the Prisoners, to
prevent their escape: which the Captain, desirous to save S. Paul, and probably
in confidence of what he had told them, refused to do; commanding, that every
one should shift for himself: the issue was, that part by swimming, part on
planks, part on pieces of the broken Ship, they all, to the number of two
hundred threescore and sixteen (the whole number in the Ship) got safe to shore.

8. THE Island upon which they were cast was Melita (now Malta) situate Act.
28. 1.
in the Libyan Sea between Syracuse and Africa. Here they found civility among
Barbarians, and the plain acknowledgments of a Divine justice written among the
naked and untutored notions of Men's minds. The People treated them with great
humanity, entertaining them with all necessary accommodations; but while S.
Paul was throwing sticks upon the Fire, a Viper dislodged by the heat, came out
of the wood, and fastened on his hand. This the People no sooner espied, but
presently concluded, that surely he was some notorious Murderer, whom though
the Divine vengeance had suffered to escape the Hue-and-cry of the Sea, yet had
it only reserved him for a more public and solemn execution. But when they saw
him shake it off into the Fire, and not presently swell, and drop down, they
changed their opinions, and concluded him to be some God. So easily are light
and credulous minds transported from one extreme to another. Not far off lived
Publius, a Man of great Estate and Authority, and (as we may probably guess
from an Inscription found there, and set down by Grotius, wherein the (...) is
reckoned amongst the Roman Offices) Annot. in loc.
Governor of the Island, by him they were courteously entertained three Days at
his own charge, and his Father lying at that time sick of a Fever and a
Dysentery, S. Paul went in, and having prayed, and laid his hands upon him,
healed him; as he did also many of the Inhabitants, who by this Miracle were
encouraged to bring their diseased to him: whereby great honors were heaped
upon him, and both he and his company furnished with provisions necessary for
the rest of their Voyage. Nay Publius himself is said by Bar. ad (...). LVIII.
(...). 173. (...). martyr. ad (...). (...). Feb. Martyr. Romans ad (...) 21. Jan.
Eusib. l. 4. c. 23. p. 143.
some to have been hereby converted to the Faith, and by S. Paul to have been
constituted Bishop of the Island, and that this was he that succeeded S. Denis
the Areopagite in the Sea of Athens, and was afterward crowned with Martyrdom.

9. AFTER three Months stay in this Island, they went a-board the Castor and
Pollux, a Ship of Alexandria, bound for Italy. At Syracuse they put in, and
staid three Days; thence sailed to Rhegium, and so to Puteoli, where they
landed, and finding some Christians there, staid a week with them, and then set
forward in their Journey to Rome. The Christians at Rome having heard of their
arrival, several of them came part of the way to meet them, some as far as the
Three Taverns, a place thirty three Miles from Rome, others as far as Appii
Forum, fifty one Miles distant thence. Great was their mutual salutation, and
the encouragement which the Apostle received by it, glad no doubt to see that
Christians found so much liberty at Rome. By them he was conducted in a kind of
triumph into the City, where when they were arrived, the rest of the Prisoners
were delivered over to the Captain of the Guard, and by him disposed in the
common Gaol, while S. Paul (probably at Julius his request and recommendation)
was permitted to stay in a private House, only with a Soldier to secure and
guard him.

SECT. VII. S. Paul's Acts, from his coming to Rome, till his Martyrdom.
S. Paul's summoning the chief of the Jews at Rome, and his discourse to them.
Their resractoriness and infidelity. His first hearing before Nero. The success
of his Preaching. Poppaea Sabina Nero's Concubine one of his Converts. Tacitus
his character of her. Onesimus converted by S. Paul at Rome, and sent back with
an Epistle to Philemon his Master. The great obligation which Christianity lays
upon Servants to diligence and sidelity in their duty. The rigorous and
arbitrary power of Masters over Servants by the Roman Laws. This mitigated by
the Laws of the Gospel. S. Paul's Epistle to the Philippians, upon what
occasion sent. His Epistle to the Ephesians, and another to the Colossians. His
second Epistle to Timothy written (probably) at his first being at Rome. The
Epistle to the Hebrews by whom written; and in what Language. The aim and
design of it. S. Paul's Preaching the Gospel in the West, and in what parts of
it. His return to Rome, when. His imprisonment under Nero, and why. His being
beheaded. Milk instead of blood said to flow from his body. Different Accounts
of the time of his suffering. His burial where, and the great Church erected to
his memory.

1. THE first thing S. Paul did after he came to Rome, was to summon the Heads
of the Jewish Consistory there, whom he acquainted with the cause and manner of
his coming, that though he had been guilty of no violation of the Law of their
Religion, yet had he been delivered by the Jews into the hands of the Roman
Governors, who would have acquitted him once and again as innocent of any
capital offense, but by the perverseness of the Jews he was forced, not with an
intention to charge his own Nation (already sufficiently odious to the Romans)
but only to vindicate and clear himself, to make his Appeal to Caesar; that
being come, he had sent for them, to let them know, that it was for his
constant asserting the Resurrection, the hope of all true (...), that he was
bound with that Chain which they saw upon him. The Jews replied, that they had
received no advice concerning him, nor had any of the Nation that came from
Judaea, brought any Charge against him: only for the Religion which he had
espoused, they desired to be a little better informed about it, it being every
where decried both by Jew and Gentile. Accordingly upon a day appointed he
discoursed to them from morning to night concerning the Religion and Doctrine
of the holy Jesus, proving from the promises and predictions of the Old
Testament, that he was the true Messiah. His discourse succeeded not with all
alike, some being convinced, others persisted in their infidelity: And as they
were departing in some discontent at each other, the Apostle told them, it was
now too plain, God had accomplished upon them the prophetical curse, of being
left to their own wilful hardness and impenitency, to be blind at noonday, and
to run themselves against all means and methods into irrecoverable ruin: That
since the case was thus with them, they must expect, that henceforth he should
turn his preaching to the Gentiles, who would be most ready to entertain, what
they had so scornfully rejected, the glad tidings of the Gospel.

2. IT was not, probably, long after this, that he was brought to his first
hearing before the Emperor, where those friends, whom he most expected should
stand by him, plainly deserted him, afraid it seems of appearing in so ticklish
a cause before so unreasonable a Judge, who governed himself by no other
measures, than the brutish and extravagant pleasure of his lust or humor. But
God stood by him, and encouraged him; as indeed Divine consolations are many
times then nearest to us, when humane assistances are farthest from us. This
cowardice of theirs the Apostle had a charity 1 Timothy 4. 16.
large enough to cover, heartily praying, that it might not be brought in
against them in the Accounts of the great Day. Two years he dwelt at Rome in an
house which he hired for his own use, wherein he constantly employed himself in
preaching and writing for the good of the Church. He preached daily, without
interruption, to all that came to him, and with good success, yea, even upon
some of the better rank and quality, and those belonging to the Court it self.
Among which the Roman (...) XVII. Maii p. 308.
Martyrologie reckons Torpes, an Officer of prime note in Nero's Palace, and
afterward a Martyr for the Faith; and Chrysostom (if Ad (...). 59. (...). 9.
vid. Chrysostom. adv. (...). lib. (...). c. 4. p. 361.
Baronius cite him right) tells us of Nero's Cup Bearer, and one of his
Concubines, supposed by some to have been Poppaea Sabina, of whom (...) l 13.
c. 45. p. 263.
Tacitus gives this character, that she wanted nothing to render her one of the
most accomplished Ladies in the World, but a chaste and a virtuous mind: And I
know not how far it may seem to countenance her conversion, at least
inclination to a better Religion than that of Paganism, that (...) Jud. lib.
20. cap. 7. p. 697.
Josephus styles her a pious woman, and tells us that she effectually solicited
the cause of the Jews with her Husband Nero; and what favors Josephus himself
received from her at Rome, he relates in his (...) vit. sua, p. 999.
own life.

3. AMONGST others of our Apostle's Converts at Rome was Onesimus, who had
formerly been servant to Philemon, a person of eminency in Colosse; but had run
away from his Master, and taken things of some value with him. Having rambled
as far as Rome, he was now converted by S. Paul, and by him returned with
recommendatory Letters to Philemon his Master, to beg his pardon, and that he
might be received into favor, being now of a much better temper, more faithful
and diligent, and useful to his Master than he had been before: As indeed
Christianity where it is heartily entertained, makes men good in all relations,
no Laws being so wisely contrived for the peace and happiness of the World, as
the Laws of the Gospel, as may appear by this particular case of servants; what
admirable rules, what severe Laws does it lay upon them for the discharge of
their duties! it commands them to honor their Masters as their Superiors, and
to take heed of making their authority light and cheap by familiar and
contemptible thoughts and carriages, to obey them in all honest and lawful
things, and that not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but in singleness of
heart as unto God; that they be faithful to the trust committed to them, and
manage their Masters interest with as much care and conscience as if it were
their own; that they entertain their reproofs, counsels, corrections with all
silence and sobriety, not returning any rude surly answers; and this carriage
to be observed, not only to Masters of a mild and gentle, but of a cross and
peevish disposition, that whatever they do, they do it heartily, not as to men
only, but to the Lord; knowing that of the Lord they shall receive the reward
of the inheritance, for that they serve the Lord Christ. Imbued with these
excellent principles, Onesimus is again returned unto his Master; for Christian
Religion, though it improve men's tempers, does not cancel their relations, it
teaches them to abide in their callings, and not to despise their Masters,
because they are Erethren, but rather do them service, because they are
faithful. And being thus improved, S. Paul the more confidently begged his
pardon. And indeed had not Philemon been a Christian, and by the principles of
his Religion both disposed and obliged to mildness and mercy, there had been
great reason why S. Paul should be thus importunate with him for Onesimus his
pardon, the case of servants in those days being very hard, for all Masters
were looked upon as having an unlimited power over their Servants, and that not
only by the L. 1. and 2. (...). de his, qui sui vel (...) juris sunt, lib. 1.
(...). 6. vid. (...). lib. 1. (...). 8.
Roman, but by the Laws of all Nations, whereby without asking the Magistrate's
leave, or any public and formal trial, they might adjudge and condemn them to
what work or punishment they pleased, even to the taking away of life it self.
But the severity and exorbitancy of this power was afterward somewhat curbed
by the Laws of succeeding Emperors, especially after the Empire submitted it
self to Christianity, which makes better provision for persons in that capacity
and relation, and in case of unjust and over-rigorous usage, enables them to
appeal to a more righteous and impartial Tribunal, where Master and Servant
shall both stand upon even ground, where he that does wrong shall receive for
the wrong which he has done; and there is no respect of persons.

4. THE Christians at Philippi having heard of S. Paul's imprisonment at Rome,
and not knowing what straits he might be reduced to, raised a contribution for
him, and sent it by Epaphroditus their Bishop, who was now come to Rome, where
he shortly after fell dangerously sick: But being recovered, and upon the point
to return, by him S. Paul sent his Epistle to the Philippians, wherein he gives
them some account of the state of affairs at Rome, gratefully acknowledges
their kindness to him, and warns them of those dangerous opinions, which the
Judaizing Teachers began to vent among them. The Apostle had heretofore for
some years lived at Ephesus, and perfectly understood the state and condition
of that place; and therefore now by Tychicus writes his Epistle to the
Ephesians, endeavoring to countermine the principles and practices both of
Jews and Gentiles, to confirm them in the belief and obedience of the Christian
doctrine, to represent the infinite riches of the Divine goodness in admitting
the Gentile world to the unsearchable treasures of Christianity, especially
pressing them to express the life and spirit of it in the general duties of
Religion, and in the duties of their particular relations. Much about the same
time, or a little after, he wrote his Epistle to the Colossians, where he had
never been, and sent it by Epaphras, who for some time had been his
fellow-prisoner at Rome. The design of it is for the greatest part the same
with that to the Ephesians, to settle and confirm them in the Faith of the
Gospel, against the errors both of Judaism, and the superstitious observances
of the Heathen World, some whereof had taken root amongst them.

5. IT is not improbable but that about this, or rather some considerable time
before, S. Paul wrote his second Epistle to Timothy. I know Eusebius, and the
Ancients, and most Moderns after them, will have it written a little before his
Martyrdom, induced thereunto by that passage in it, that he was then ready to
be offered, and that the time of his departure was at hand. But surely it is
most reasonable to think, that it was written at his first being at Rome, and
that at his first coming thither, presently after his Trial before Nero.
Accordingly the passage before mentioned may import no more, than that he was
in imminent danger of his life, and had received the sentence of death in
himself, not hoping to escape out of the paws of Nero: But that God had
delivered him out of the mouth of the Lion, i. e. the great danger he was in at
his coming thither: Which exactly agrees to his case at his first being at
Rome, but cannot be reconciled with his last coming thither; together with many
more circumstances in this Epistle, which render it next door to certain. In it
he appoints Timothy shortly to come to him, who accordingly came, whose name is
joined together with his in the front of several Epistles, to the Philippians,
Colossians, and to Philemon. The only thing that can be levelled against this
is, that in this Epistle to Timothy, he tells him, that he had sent Tychicus to
Ephesus, by whom it is plain that the Epistles to the Ephesians and Philippians
were dispatched, and that therefore this to Timothy must be written after them.
But I see no inconvenience to affirm, that Tychicus might come to Rome
presently after S. Paul's arrival there, be by him immediately sent back to
Ephesus upon some emergent affair of that Church; and after his return to Rome
be sent with those two Epistles. The design of the Epistle was to excite the
holy man to a mighty zeal and diligence, care and fidelity in his office, and
to antidote the people against those poisonous principles that in those parts
especially began to debauch the minds of men.

6. AS for the Epistle to the Hebrews, it is very uncertain when, or whence, and
(for some Ages doubted) by whom 'twas written. Lib. 3. c. 3 p. 72.
Eusebius tells us, 'twas not received by many, because rejected by the Church
of Rome, as none of S. Paul's genuine Epistles. (...). lib. 6. c. 25. p. 227.
Origin affirms the style and phrase of it to be more fine and elegant, and to
contain in it a richer vein of purer Greek, than is usually found in S. Paul's
Epistles; as every one that is able to judge of a style, must needs confess:
That the sentences indeed are grave and weighty, and such as breath the Spirit
and Majesty of an Apostle: That therefore 'twas his judgment, that the matter
contained in it had been dictated by some Apostle, but that it had been put
into phrase, form, and order by some other person that did attend upon him:
That if any Church owned it for S. Paul's, they were not to be condemned, it
not being without reason by the Ancients ascribed to him; though God only knew
who was the true Author of it. He further tells us, that report had handed it
down to his time, that it had been composed partly by Clemens of Rome, partly
by Luke the Evangelist. (...), c. 20. (...). 582. (...). Cl (...) Alex. in lib.
(...). apud (...). l. 6. (...) 14. p 215.
Tertullian adds, that it was writ by Barnabas. What seems most likely in such
variety of opinions is, that S. Paul originally wrote it in Hebrew, it being to
be sent to the Jews his Countrymen, and by some other person, probably S.
Luke, or Clemens Romanus translated into Greek: Especially since both Eusebius.
lib. 3. 38. p. 110.
Eusebius and (...). de (...). in Clem.
S. Hierom observed of old such a great affinity both in style and sense
between this and Clement's Epistle to the Corinthians, as thence positively to
conclude him to be the Translator of it. 'Twas written, as we may conjecture, a
little after he was restored to his liberty, and probably while he was yet in
some parts of Italy, whence he dates his salutations. The main design of it is
to magnify Cap. 13. 24.
Christ and the Religion of the Gospel, above Moses and the Jewish Economy and
Ministration, that by this means he might the better (...) and confirm the
convertJews in the firm belief and profession of Christianity, notwithstanding
those sufferings and persecutions that came upon them, endeavoring throughout
to arm and (...) them against Apostasy from that noble and excellent Religion,
wherein they had so happily engaged themselves. And great need there was for
the Apostle severely to urge them to it, heavy persecutions both from Jews and
Gentiles pressing in upon them on every side, besides those trains of specious
and plausible (...) that were laid to reduce them to their Ancient
Institutions. Hence the Apostle calls Apostasy the sin which did so easily
beset them, to which there were such frequent temptations, and into (...). 12.
1.
which they were so prone to be betrayed in those suffering times. And the more
to deter them from it, he once and again sets before them the dreadful state
and condition of Apostates, those who having been once enlightened, and baptized
into the Christian Cap. 6. v. 4. 5 6 C. 10. v. 26, 27, 28, 29.
Faith, tasted the promises of the Gospel, and been made partakers of the
miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, those powers which in the world to come, or
this new state of things were to be conferred upon the Church, if after all
this these men fall away, and renounce Christianity, it is very hard, and even
impossible to renew them again unto repentance. For by this means they trod
under foot, and crucified the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame,
profaned the blood of the Covenant, and did despite to the Spirit of Grace. So
that to sin thus wilfully after they had received the knowledge of the truth,
there could remain for them no more sacrifice for sins, nothing but a certain
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which should devour these
adversaries. And a searful thing it was in such circumstances to fall into the
hands of the living God, who had particularly said of this sort of sinners,
that if any man drew back, his soul should have no pleasure in him. Hence it
is, that every where in this Epistle he mixes exhortations to this purpose,
that they would give earnest heed to the things which they had heard, lest at
any time they should let them slip, that they would hold fast the confidence,
and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end, and beware lest by an evil
heart of unbelief they departed from the living God; that they would labor to
enter into his (...), lest any man fall after the example of unbelief; that
leaving the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, they would go on to
perfection, showing diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end, not
being slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit
the promises; that they would hold fast the profession of the faith without
wavering, not forsaking the assembling of themselves together ( as the manner
of some was) nor cast away their confidence, which had great recompense of
reward; that they had need of patience, that after they had done the will of
God, they might receive the promise; that they would not be of them who drew
back unto perdition, but of them that believed to the saving of the Soul; that
being encompassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, who with the most
unconquerable constancy and resolution had all holden on in the way to Heaven,
they would lay aside every weight, and the sin which did so easily beset them,
and run with patience the race that was set before them, especially looking
unto Jesus the author and finisher of their faith, who endured the cross, and
despised the shame, that therefore they should consider him that endured such
(...) of sinners against himself, lest they should be wearied and faint in
their minds, for that they had not yet resisted unto blood, striving against
sin; looking diligently lest any man should fail of the grace of God, lest any
root of bitterness springing up should trouble them, and thereby many be
defiled. By all which, and much more that might be observed to this purpose, it
is evident, what our Apostles great design was in this excellent Epistle.

7. OUR Apostle being now after two Years custody perfectly restored to
liberty, remembered that he was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and had therefore a
larger Diocese than Rome, and accordingly prepared himself for a greater
Circuit, though which way he directed his course, is not absolutely certain. By
some he is said to have returned back into Greece, and the parts of Asia, upon
no other ground that I know of, than a few intimations in some of his Epistles
that he intended to do so. By others he is thought to have preached both in the
Eastern and Western parts, which is not inconsistent with the time he had after
his departure from Rome. But of the latter we have better evidence. Sure I am
an Author beyond all exception, S. Paul's contemporary and Fellow Laborer, I
mean (...). Ep. ad Corinth. p. 8.
Clemens, in his famous Epistle to the Corinthians expressly tells us, that
being a Preacher both in the East and West, he taught righteousness to the
whole World, and went to the utmost bounds of the West. Which makes me the more
wonder at the confidence of L. Cappell. Append. ad Hist. App. p. 33.
one (otherwise a Man of great parts and learning) who so peremptorily denies
that ever our Apostle preached in the West, merely because there are no
Monuments left in Primitive Antiquity of any particular Churches there founded
by him. As if all the particular passages of his life, done at so vast a
distance must needs have been recorded, or those records have come down to us,
when it is so notoriously known, that almost all the Writings and Monuments of
those first Ages of Christianity are long since perished: or as if we were not
sufficiently assured of the thing in general, though not of what particularly
he did there. Probable it is, that he went into Spain, a thing which himself
tells us he had formerly once and again resolved on. Certain it is that the
Epiphan. Haeres. 27. p. 51. Chrysostom. de Laud. Paul. p. 536. T. 5. C^^ill.
Catech. 17. p. 457. Theod. in 2 Timothy 4. 16. and in Psalm, 116 id. de cur. Graec,
Affect. Sermon. 9. p. 125.
Ancients do generally assert it, without seeming in the least to doubt of it.
Theodoret Romans 15. 24-28.
and others tell us, that he preached not only in Spain, but that he went to
other Nations, and brought the Gospel into the Isles of the Sea, by which he
undoubtedly means Britain, and therefore elsewhere reckons the Gauls and
Britains among the Nations, which the Apostles, and particularly the Tent-maker
persuaded to embrace the Law of Christ. Nor is he the only Man that has said
it, Sopheon, Sermon. de natali. App. Transit and Ortanum, vel qua facit insula
porium Quasque Britannus habet terras atque ultima Thule. Venant. Fortun. de
vit. Martin. lib. 3. non procul a fin.
others having given in their testimony and suffrage in this case.

8. TO what other parts of the World S. Paul preached the Gospel, we find no
certain footsteps in Antiquity, nor any further mention of him, till his
return to Rome, which probably was about the Eighth or Ninth Year of Nero's
Reign. Here he met with Peter, and was together with him thrown into Prison, no
doubt in the general Persecution raised against the Christians, under the
pretense that they had fired the City. Besides the general, we may reasonably
suppose there were particular causes of his Imprisonment. Some of the Ancients
make him engaged with Peter in procuring the fall of Simon Magus, and that that
derived the Emperor's fury and rage upon him. Adv. vit. Monast. vituperat. lib.
1 c. 4. p. 361. Tom. 4.
S. Chrysostom gives us this account; that having converted one of Nero's
Concubines, a Woman of whom he was infinitely fond, and reduced her to a life
of great strictness and chastity, so that now she wholly refused to comply with
his wanton and impure embraces; the Emperor stormed hereat, calling the Apostle
a Villain and Impostor, a wretched perverter and debaucher of others, giving
order that he should be cast into Prison, and when he still persisted to
persuade the Lady to continue her chaste and pious resolutions, commanding him
to be put to death.

9. HOW long he remained in Prison is not certainly known; at last his
Execution was resolved on; what his preparatory treatment was, whether scourged
as Malefactors were wont to be in order to their death, we find not. As a Roman
Citizen by the Valerian and the Porcian Law he was exempted from it: Though by
the Law of the XII. Tables notorious Malefactors, condemned by the Centuriate
Assemblies, were first to be scourged, and then put to death: and Baronius
tells us that in the Church ad An. 69. n. 8.
of S. Mary beyond the Bridge in Rome, the Pillars are yet extant, to which
both Peter and Paul are said to have been bound and scourged. As he was led to
Execution, he is said to have converted three of the Soldiers that were sent
to conduct and guard him, who within few days after by the Emperors command
became Martyrs for the Faith. Being come to the place, which was the Aquae
Salviae, three Miles from Rome, after some solemn preparation, he cheerfully
gave his Neck to the fatal stroke. As a Roman he might not be put upon the
Cross, too infamous a Death for any but the worst of Slaves and Malefactors,
and therefore was beheaded, accounted a more noble kind of Death among the
Romans, fit for Persons of better Quality, and more ingenuous Education: And
from this Instrument of his Execution the custom, no doubt, first arose, that
in all Pictures and Images of this Apostle, he is constantly represented with a
Sword in his right hand. Tradition reports (justified herein by the suffrage of
many of the Ambr. de (...). and Pau., (...), 68. p. 294. T. 3.
Fathers) that when he was beheaded, a Liquor more like Milk than Blood flowed
from his Veins, and spirted upon the Clothes of his Executioner; and had I list
or leisure for such things, I might entertain the Reader (...) Petr. and Paul.
Tom. 6. p. 267.
with the little glosses that are made upon it. S. Chrysostom adds, that it
became a means of converting his Executioner, and many more to the Faith; and
that the Apostle suffered in the sixty eighth Year of his Age. Some question
there is whether he suffered at the same time with Peter, many of the (...).
ap, Eusebius. l. 2, c. 25. p. (...). Ambr. ib. (...). 66. p. 291. Max. (...). Hom.
5. (...). and Paul. p. 231.
Ancients positively affirm, that both suffered on the same Day, and Year: but
(...). in Pass. Petr. and Paul. Hymn, 12. p. (...) App. (...). 2, in sin. p.
700. Aug. de (...). 28. T. m. 10. col. 1225. (...). Turon. de glor. Martyr.
lib. 1. (...). p. 35.
others though allowing the same Day, tell us that S. Paul suffered not till
the Year after; nay some interpose the distance of several Years. A Manuscript
(...). Apud. P. (...). not. in (...). Fp. ad Cor. ad p. 8. (...) S. Metaphr.
(...) ap. (...), ad 29. Jun. n. 23. p. 357.
writer of the Lives and Travels of Peter and Paul, brought amongst other
venerable Monuments of Antiquity out of Greece, will have Paul to have suffered
no less than five Years after Peter, which he justifies by the authority of no
less than Justin Martyr, and Irenaeus. But what credit is to be given to this
nameless Author, I see not, and therefore lay no weight upon it, nor think it
fit to be put into the balance with the testimonies of the Ancients. Certainly
if he suffered not at the very same time with Peter, it could not be long
after, not above a Year at most. The best is, which of them soever started
first, they both came at last to the same end of the race, to those Palms and
Crowns, which are reserved for all good Men in Heaven, but most eminently for
the Martyrs of the Christian Faith.

10. HE was buried in the Via Ostiensis, about two Miles from Rome, over whose
Grave about the Year CCCXVIII. Damas. Pontif. in vit. Sylv. st. 1. vid. Onuphr.
de 7. Vrb. (...). 87.
Constantine the Great, at the instance of Pope Sylvester, built a stately
Church, within a Farm which Lucina a noble Christian Matron of Rome had long
before settled upon that Church. He adorned it with an hundred of the best
Marble columns, and beautified it with the most exquisit workmanship; the many
rich gifts and endowments which he bestowed upon it being particularly set down
in the Life of Sylvester. This Church as too narrow and little for the honor
of so great an Apostle, (...), or rather Theodosius the Emperor (the one but
finishing what the other began) by a Apud. Bar. ad An. 386. p. 527. (...) Cod.
Vatic.
Rescript directed to Sallustius Prefect of the City, caused to be taken down,
and a larger and more noble Church to be built in the room of it: Further
beautified (as appears from an ancient Ib. d. in Addend. ad Tom. 4. p. 12.
Inscription) by Placidia the Empress, at the persuasion of Leo, Bishop of
Rome. What other additions of Wealth, Honor, or stateliness it has received
since, concerns not me to enquire.

SECT. VIII. The Description of his Person and Temper, together with an Account
of his Writings.
The Person of S. Paul described. His infirm constitution. His natural
endowments. His ingenuous Education, and admirable skill in humane Learning and
Sciences. The Divine temper of his mind. His singular humility and
condescension. His temperance and sobriety, and contempt of the World. Whether
he lived a married or a single life. His great kindness and compassion. His
charity to men's Bodies and Souls. His mighty zeal for Religion. His admirable
industry and diligence in his Office. His unconquerable Patience: The many
great troubles he underwent. His constancy and fidelity in the profession of
Christianity. His Writings. His style and way of Writing, what. S. Hierom's
bold censure of it. The perplexedness and obscurity of his Discourses, whence.
The account given of it by the Ancients. The Order of his Epistles, what.
Placed not according to the time when, but the dignity of Persons or Places to
which they were written. The (...) at the end of them, of what value. The
writings fathered upon S. Paul. His (...) A third Epistle to the Corinthians.
The Epistle to the Laodiceans. His (...) His Acts. The Epistles between him and
Seneca.

1. THOUGH we have drawn S. Paul at large, in the account we have given of his
Life, yet may it be of use, to represent him in little, in a brief account of
his Person, Parts, and those Graces and Virtues, for which he was more
peculiarly eminent and remarkable. For his Person, we find it thus (...). H.
Eccl. (...). 2. (...). 37. p. 196.
described. He was low and little of stature, and somewhat stooping, his
complexion fair, his countenance grave, his head small, his eyes carrying a
kind of beauty and sweetness in them, his eyebrows a little hanging over, his
nose long, but gracefully bending, his beard thick, and like the hair on his
head, mixed with gray hairs. Somewhat of this description may be learnt from
(...). Tom. 2. p. 999.
Lucian, when in the person of Trypho, one of S. Paul's disciples, he calls him
by way of derision, the high-nosed bald-pated Galilean, that was caught up
through the Air unto the third Heaven, where he learnt great and excellent
things. That he was very low, himself plainly intimates, when he tells us, they
were wont to say of him, that his bodily presence was weak, and his speech
contemptible; 2 Cor. 10. 10.
in which respect he is styled by (...). and Paul. p. 265. Tom. 6.
Chrysostom, (...) a man three cubits [or a little more than four foot] high,
and yet tall enough to reach Heaven. He seems to have enjoyed no very firm and
athletick constitution, being often subject to distempers; Com. in Gal. 4. p.
182. Tom. 9
S. Hierom particularly reports, that he was frequently afflicted with the
headache, and that this was thought by many to have been the thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan sent to buffet him, and that probably he intended
some such thing by the temptation in his flesh, which he elsewhere speaks of:
Which however it may in (...). 4. 14.
general signify those afflictions that came upon him, yet does it primarily
denote those diseases and infirmities that he was obnoxious to.

2. BUT how mean soever the Cabinet was, there was a treasure within more
precious and valuable, as will appear, if we survey the accomplishments of his
mind. For his natural abilities and endowments, he seems to have had a clear
and solid judgment, quick invention, a prompt and ready memory; all which were
abundantly improved by Art, and the advantages of a more liberal Education. The
Schools of Tarsus had sharpened his discursive faculty by Logic, and the Arts
of reasoning, instructed him in the Institutions of Philosophy, and enriched
him with the furniture of all kinds of humane Learning. This gave him great
advantage above others, and ever raised him to a mighty reputation for Parts
and Learning; insomuch that (...) ad (...). c. (...). Hom. 3. p. 349.
S. Chrysostom tells us of a dispute between a Christian and a Heathen, wherein
the Christian endeavored to prove against the Gentile, that S. Paul was more
Learned and Eloquent than Plato himself. How well he was versed, not only in
the Law of Moses, and the writings of the Prophets, but even in Classick and
Foreign writers, he has left us sufficicient ground to conclude, from those
excellent sayings, which here and there (...) quotes out of Heathen Authors.
Which as at once it shows, that it is not unlawful to bring the spoils of Egypt
into the service of the Sanctuary, and to make use of the advantages (...).
(...). 1. p. 299.
of Foreign studies and humane literature to Divine and excellent purposes, so
does it argue his being greatly conversant in the paths of humane Learning,
which upon every occasion he could so readily command. Indeed he seemed to have
been furnished out on purpose to be the Doctor of the Gentiles, to contend
with, and (...) the grave and the wise, the acute and the subtle, the sage and
the learned of the Heathen World, and to wound them (as Julian's word was) with
arrows drawn out of their own Quiver. Though we do not find, that in his
disputes with the Gentiles he made much use of Learning and Philosophy; it
being more agreeable to the designs of the Gospel, to confound the wisdom and
learning of the World by the plain doctrine of the Cross.

3. THESE were great accomplishments, and yet but a shadow to that Divine
temper of mind that was in him, which discovered it self through the whole
course and method of his life. He was humble to the lowest step of abasure and
condescension, none ever thinking better of others, or more meanly of himself.
And though when he had to deal with envious and malicious adversaries, who by
vilifying his person, sought to obstruct his ministry, he knew how to magnify
his office, and to let them know, that he was no whit inferior to the very
chiefest Apostles; yet out of this case he constantly declared to all the
World, that he looked upon himself as an Abortive, and an untimely Birth, as
the least of the Apostles, not meet to be called an Apostle; and as if this
were not enough, he makes a word on purpose to express his humility, stiling
himself (...), less than the least of all Saints, yea, the very chief of
sinners. How freely, and that at every turn does he confess what he was before
his conversion, a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and Injurious both to God and Men?
Though honored with peculiar Acts of the highest grace and favor, taken up to
an immediate converse with God in Heaven, yet did not this swell him with a
supercilious lostiness over the rest of his brethren: Entrusted he was with
great power and authority in the Church, but never affected dominion over men's
Faith, nor any other place, than to be an helper of their joy, nor ever made
use of his power, but to the edification, not destruction of any. How
studiously did he decline all honors and commendations that were heaped upon
him? When some in the Church of Corinth cried him up beyond all measures, and
under the patronage of his name began to set up for a party, he severely
rebuked them, told them, that it was Christ, not he, that was crucified for
them, that they had not been baptized into his name, which he was so far from,
that he did not remember that he had baptized (...) three or four of them, and
was heartily glad he had baptized no more, (...) a foundation might have been
laid for that suspicion; that this Paul, whom they so much extolled, was no
more than a minister of Christ, whom our Lord had appointed to plant and build
up his Church.

4. GREAT was his temperance and sobriety, so far from going beyond the bounds
of regularity, that he abridged himself of the conveniences of lawful and
necessary accommodations; frequent his hungrings and thirstings, not
constrained only, but voluntary; it is probably thought that he very rarely
drank any Wine; certain, that by abstinence and mortification he kept under and
subdued his body, reducing the extravagancy of the sensual appetites to a
perfect subjection to the laws of Reason. By this means he easily got above the
World, and its charms and frowns, had his mind continually conversant in
Heaven, his thoughts were fixed there, his desires always ascending thither,
what he taught others, he practiced himself, his conversation was in Heaven,
and his desires were to depart, and to be with Christ; this World did neither
arrest his affections, nor disturb his fears, he was not taken with its
applause, nor frighted with its threatenings; he studied not to please men, nor
valued the censures and judgments which they passed upon him; he was not greedy
of a great estate, or titles of honor, or rich presents from men, not seeking
theirs, but them; food and raiment was his bill of fare, and more than this he
never cared for; accounting, that the less he was clogged with these things,
the lighter he should march to Heaven, especially traveling through a World
overrun with troubles and persecutions. Upon this account it is probable he
kept himself always within a single life, though there want not some of the
Ancients who expressly reckon him in the number of the married Apostles, as
(...). 3. p. 448.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Ignat. Ep. ad Philadelph. in Bibl. (...). Gr. L. T. 1.
p. 23. (...). l. 3. c. 30.
Ignatius, and some others. It Is true that passage is not to be found in the
genuine Epistle of Ignatius, but yet is extant in all those that are owned and
published by the Church of Rome, though they have not been wanting to banish it
out of the World, having expunged S. Paul's name out of some ancient
Manuscripts, as the learned Bishop (...). Not, in Ignat. Epist. ad Philadelph.
(...). James his corrupt, of the Fath, Part. II. (...). (...).
Usher has to their shame sufficiently discovered to the World. But for the
main of the question we can readily grant it, the Scripture seeming most to
favor it, that though he asserted his power and liberty to marry as well as
the rest, yet that he lived always a single life.

5. HIS kindness and charity was truly admirable, he had a compassionate
tenderness for the poor, and a quick sense of the wants of others: To what
Church soever he came, it was one of his first cares, to make provision for the
poor, and to stir up the bounty of the rich and the wealthy, nay, himself
worked often with his own hands, not only to maintain himself, but to help and
relieve them. But infinitely greater was his charity to the Souls of men,
fearing no dangers, refusing no labors, going through good and evil report,
that he might gain men over to the knowledge of the truth, reduce them out of
the crooked paths of vice and idolatry, and set them in the right way to
eternal life. Nay, so insatiable his thirst after the good of Souls, that he
affirms, that rather than his Countrymen the Jews should miscarry by not
believing and entertaining the Gospel, he could be content, nay wished, that
himself might be accursed from Christ for their sake, i. e. that he might be
anathematized and cut off from the Church of Christ, and not only lose the
honor of the Apostolate, but be reckoned in the number of the abject and
execrable persons, such as those are who are separated from the communion of
the Church. An instance of so large and passionate a charity, that lest it
might not find room in men's belief, he ushered it in with this solemn appeal,
and attestation, that he said the truth in Christ, and lied not, his conscience
bearing him witness in the Holy Ghost. And as he was infinitely solicitous to
gain men over to the best Religion in the World, so was he not less careful to
keep them from being seduced from it, ready to suspect every thing that might
corrupt their minds from the simplicity that is in Christ. I am jealous over
you 2 Cor. 11. 2.
with a godly jealousy, as he told the Church of Corinth: An (...) Chrysostom.
Homil. 23. in 2. ad (...). p. 899.
affection of all others the most active and vigilant, and which is wont to
inspire men with the most passionate care and concernment for the good of
those, for whom we have the highest measures of love and kindness. Nor was his
charity to men greater than his zeal for God, endeavoring with all his might
to promote the honor of his Master. Indeed zeal seems to have had a deep
foundation in the natural forwardness of his temper. How exceedingly zealous
was he, while in the Jews Religion, of the Traditions of his Fathers, how
earnest to vindicate and assert the Divinity of the Mosaic dispensation, and
to persecute all of a contrary way, even to rage and madness. And when
afterward turned into a right (...), it ran with as swift a current; carrying
him out against all opposition to ruin the kingdom and the powers of darkness,
to beat down idolatry, and to plant the World with right apprehensions of God,
and the true notions of Religion. When at Athens he saw them so much overgrown
with the grossest superstition and idolatry, giving the honor that was alone
due to God to Statues and Images, his zeal began to ferment, and to boil up
into (...) of indignation, and he could not but let them know the resentments
of his mind, and how much herein they dishonored God, the great Parent and
Maker of the World.

6. THIS zeal must needs put him upon a mighty diligence and industry in the
execution of his office, warning, reproving, entreating, persuading, preaching
in season, and out of season, by night, and by day, by Sea and Land; no pains
too much to be taken, no dangers too great to be overcome. For five and thirty
years after his Conversion, he (...) staid long in one place, from Jerusalem,
through Arabia, (...), Greece, round about to Illyricum, to Rome, and even to
the utmost bounds of the Western-world, fully preaching the Gospel of Christ:
Running (says S. Hierom) from Ocean to Ocean, like the Sun in the Heavens, of
which it is said, His going forth is from the end of the Heaven, and his circuit
unto the ends of it; sooner wanting ground to tread on, than a desire to
propagate the Faith of Christ. Lib. 3. c. 1. p. 223.
(...) compares him to a Bird in the Air, that in a few years flew round the
World: Isidore the (...) Lib. 3. Epist. 176. ad (...). Diac. p. 285.
Pelusiot to a winged husbandman, that flew from place to place to cultivate
the World with the most excellent rules and institutions of life. And while the
other Apostles did as 'twere choose this or that particular Province, as the
main sphere of their ministry, S. Paul overran the whole World to its utmost
bounds and corners, planting all places where he came with the Divine doctrines
of the Gospel. Nor in this course was he tired out with the dangers and
difficulties that he met with, the troubles and oppositions that were raised
against him. All which did but reflect the greater luster upon his patience,
whereof indeed (as Epist. ad Cor. p. 8.
Clement observes) he became (...), a most eminent pattern and exemplar,
enduring the biggest troubles and persecutions with a patience triumphant and
unconquerable. As will easily appear, if we take but a survey of what trials
and sufferings he underwent, some part whereof are briefly summed up by
himself: In labors abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons 2 Cor. 11.
23. and (...).
frequent, in deaths often; thrice beaten with rods, once stoned, thrice suffered
shipwreck, a night and a day in the deep: In journeyings often, in perils of
waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by his own Countrymen, in perils by
the Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils in
the Sea, in perils among false Brethren; in weariness, in painfulness, in
watchings often, in hunger and thirst; in fastings often, in cold and
nakedness: And besides these things that were without, that which daily came
upon him, the care of all the Churches. An account, though very great, yet far
short of what he endured, and wherein, as (...) (...). (...). 25. in 2 ad Cor.
p. 921.
(...) observes, he does (...), modestly keep himself within his measures; for
had he taken the liberty fully to have enlarged himself, he might have filled
hundreds of Martyrologies with his sufferings. A thousand times was his life at
stake, in every suffering he was a Martyr, and what fell but in parcels upon
others, came all upon him, while they skirmished only with single parties, he
had the whole Army of sufferings to contend with. All which he generously
underwent with a Soul as calm and serene as the morning-Sun, no spite or rage,
no fury or storms could ruffle and discompose his spirit: Nay, those
sufferings, which would have broken the back of an ordinary patience, did but
make him rise up with the greater eagerness and resolution for the doing of his
duty.

7. HIS patience will yet further appear from the consideration of another, the
last of those virtues we shall take notice of in him, his constancy and
fidelity in the discharge of his place, and in the profession of Religion.
Could the powers and policies of Men and Devils, spite and oppositions,
torments and threatenings have been able to baffle him out of that Religion
wherein he had engaged himself, he must have sunk under them, and left his
station. But his Soul was steeled with a courage and resolution that was
impenetrable, and which no temptation either from hopes or fears could make any
more impression upon, than an arrow can, that is shot against a wall of marble.
He wanted not solicitation on either hand, both from Jews and Gentiles, and
questionless might in some degree have made his own terms, would he have been
false to his trust, and have quitted that way, that was then everywhere spoken
against. But alas! these things weighed little with our Apostle, who counted
not (...) life to be dear unto him, so that he might finish his course with
joy, and the ministry which he had received of the Lord Jesus: And therefore
when under the sentence of death in his own apprehension, could triumphingly
say, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
Faith: and so indeed he did, kept it inviolably, undauntedly to the last minute
of his life. The sum is, He was a man, in whom the Divine life did eminently
manifest and display it self; he lived piously and devoutly, soberly and
temperately, justly and righteously, careful always to keep a conscience void
of offense both toward God and Men. This he tells us was his support under
suffering, this the foundation of his confidence toward God, and his firm
hopes of happiness in another World; This is our rejoicing, the testimony of
our conscience, that in simplicity and godly 2 Cor. 1. 12.
sincerity we have had our conversation in the World.

8. IT is not the least instance of his care and fidelity in his office, that
he did not only preach and plant Christianity in all places whither he came,
but what he could not personally do, he supplied by writing. XIV. Epistles he
(...) upon record, by which he was not only instrumental in propagating
Christian Religion at first, but has been useful to the World ever since in all
Ages of the Church. We have all along in the History of his life taken
particular notice of them in their due place and order: We shall here only make
some general observations and remarks upon them, and that as to the style and
way wherein they are written, their Order, and the Subscriptions that are added
to them. For the Apostle's style and manner of writing it is plain and simple,
and though not set off with the elaborate artifices, and affected additionals
of humane eloquence, yet grave and majestical, and that by the confession of
his very enemies, his Letters (say they) are weighty and powerful. Nor are
there wanting in them some 2 Cor. 10. 10.
strains of Rhetoric, which sufficiently testify his ability that way, had he
made it any part of his study and design. Indeed Ad Algas. (...). 11. p. 169 T.
2. (...). 11. ad H dib. p. 151. ibid. in Ephesians. 3. Tom. 9. p. 216. com. in Gal.
3. p. 170. ibid.
S. Hierom is sometimes too rude and bold in his censures of S. Paul's style
and character. He tells us, that being an Hebrew of the Hebrews, and admirably
skilled in the Language of his Nation, he was greatly defective in the Greek
Tongue, (though a late great Salmas de (...). Part. 1. (...). 6.
Critic is of another mind, affirming him to have been as well, or better
skilled in Greek, than in Hebrew, or in Syriac) wherein he could not
sufficiently express his conceptions in a way becoming the majesty of his sense
and the matter he delivered, nor transmit the elegancy of his Native Tongue
into another Language: that hence he became obscure and intricate in his
expressions, guilty many times of solecisms, and scarce tolerable syntax, and
that therefore 'twas not his humility, but the truth of the thing that made him
say, that he came not with the excellency of speech, but in the power of God. A
censure from any other than S. Hierom that would have been justly wondered at,
but we know the liberty that he takes to censure any, though the reverence due
to so great an Apostle might, one would think, have challenged a more modest
censure at his hands. However Apol. adv. Jovin. T. 2. p. 106.
elsewhere he cries him up as a great Master of composition, that as often as he
heard him, he seemed to hear not words, but thunder, that in all his citations
he made use of the most prudent artifices, using simple words, and which seemed
to carry nothing but plainness along with them, but which way soever a Man
turned, breathed force and thunder: He seems entangled in his cause, but
catches all that comes near him; turns his back, as if intending to fly, when
it is only that he may overcome.

9. SAINT Peter long since observed, that in Paul's Epistles there were (...),
some things hard to be understood: which surely is not altogether owing to the
profoundness 2 Pet. 3. 16.
of his sense, and the mysteriousness of the subject that he treats of, but in
some degree to his manner of expression; his frequent Hebraisms, (common to him
with all the Holy Writers of the New Testament) his peculiar forms and ways of
speech, his often inserting Jewish Opinions, and yet but tacitly touching them,
his using (...) words in a new and uncommon sense; but above all, his frequent
and abrupt transitions, suddenly starting aside from one thing to another,
whereby his Reader is left at a loss, not knowing which way to follow him, not
a little contributing to the perplexed obscurity os his discourses. Adv. Haer.
lib. 3. (...). 7. p. 248.
Irenaeus took notice of old, that S. Paul makes frequent use of these
Hyperbata, by reason of the swiftness of his arguings, and the great fervor
and impetus that was in him, leaving many times the designed srame and texture
of his discourse, not bringing in what should have immediately connected the
sense and order, till some distance after: which indeed to Men of a more nice
and delicate temper, and who will not give themselves leave patiently to trace
out his reasonings, must needs create some obscurity. Origin and S. Hierom
sometimes observe, that besides this he uses many of his Native phrases of the
Cilician dialect, which being in a great measure foreign and exotic to the
ordinary Greek, introduces a kind of strangeness into his discourse, and
renders it less intelligible. (...). 64. p. 239.
Epiphanius tells us, that by these methods he acted like a skilful Archer,
hitting the mark, before his adversaries were aware of it; by words misplaced
making the frame of his discourse seem obscure and entangled, while in it self
it was not only most true; but elaborate, and not difficult to be understood;
that to careless and trifling Readers it might sometimes seem dissonant and
incoherent, but to them that are diligent, and will take their reason along
with them, it would appear full of truth, and to be disposed with great care
and order.

10. AS for the order of these Epistles, we have already given a particular
account of the times when, and the places whence they were written. That which
is here considerable, is the Order according to which they are disposed in the
sacred Canon. Certain it is that they are not placed according to the just
order of time, wherein they were written, the two Epistles to the Thessalonians
being on all hands agreed to have been first written, though set almost last in
order. Most probable therefore it is, that they were placed according to the
dignity of those to whom they were sent: the reason, why those to whole
Churches have the precedence of those to particular persons: and among those to
Churches, that to the Romans had the first place and rank assigned to it,
because of the majesty of the Imperial City, and the eminency and honorable
respect which that Church derived thence: and whether the same reason do not
hold in others, though I will not positively assert, yet I think none will
over-confidently deny. The last enquiry concerns the subscriptions added to the
end of these Epistles; which, were they authentic, would determine some doubts
concerning the time and place of their writing. But alas, they are of no just
value and authority, not the same in all Copies, different in the Syriac and
Arabic Versions, nay wholly wanting in some ancient Greek Copies of the New
Testament; and were doubtless at first added at best upon probable conjectures.
When at any time they truly represent the place whence, or the Person by whom
the Epistle was sent, it is not that they are to be relied upon in it, but
because the thing is either intimated or expressed in the body of the Epistle.
I shall add no more but this observation, that S. Paul was wont to subscribe
every Epistle with his own hand, which is my token in every Epistle; so I
write. Which was done (says 2 (...). 3. 17.
Ambr. in (...). T. 5. p. 397.
one of the Ancients) to prevent impostures, that his Epistles might not be
interpolated and corrupted, and that if any vented Epistles under his name, the
cheat might be discovered by the Apostles own hand not being to them: And this
brings me to the last consideration that shall conclude this Chapter.

11. THAT there were some even in the most early Ages of Christianity, who took
upon them (for what ends I stand not now to enquire) to write Books, and
publish them under the name of some Apostle, is notoriously known to any,
though but never so little conversant in Church-Antiquities. Herein S. Paul had
his part and share, several supposititious Writings being fathered and thrust
upon him. We find a Gospel ascribed by some of the Ancients to him, which
surely arose from no other cause, than that in some of his Epistles he makes
mention of my Gospel. Which as De Script. (...). in Luc.
S. Hierom observes, can be meant of no other than the Gospel of S. Luke, his
constant Attendant, and from whom he chiefly derived his intelligence. If he
wrote another Epistle to the Corinthians, precedent to those two extant at this
Day, as he seems to imply in a passage in his first Epistle, I have wrote unto
you in an Epistle, not to keep company, etc. 1 Cor. 5. 9.
a passage not conveniently appliable to any part either in that or the other
Epistle, nay a Verse or two after the first Epistle is directly opposed to it;
all that can be said in the V. 11.
case is, that it long since perished, the Divine providence not seeing it
necessary to be preserved for the service of the Church. Frequent mention there
is also of an Epistle of his to the Laodiceans, grounded upon a mistaken
passage in the Epistle to the Colossians: Col: 4. 16.
but besides that the Apostle does not there speak of an Epistle written to the
Laodiceans, but of one from them, Adv. (...). 5. (...). 11. p. 476. ib. c. 17.
p. 481
Tertullian tells us that by the Epistle to the Laodiceans is meant that to the
Ephesians, and that Marcion the Heretic was the first that changed the title,
and therefore in his enumeration of S. Paul's Epistles he omits that to the
(...), for no other reason doubtless but that according to Marcion's opinion he
had reckoned it up under the title of that to the Laodiceans. Which yet is more
clear, if we consider that (...). 42. adv. (...). p. 142.
Epiphanius citing a place quoted by Marcion out of the Epistle to the
Laodiceans, it is in the very same words found in that to the Ephesians at this
Day. This Epistle is still extant, forged no doubt (...) S. Hierem's time, De
Script. Eccl. in Paulo.
who tells us, that it was read by some, but yet exploded and rejected by all.
Besides these there was his Epiph. Haeres. 38. p. 124. August. in Joan. Tract.
98. col. 488.
Revelation, called also (...) or his Ascension, grounded on his ecstasie or
rapture into Heaven, first forged by the Cainian Heretics, and in great use
and estimation among the Gnostics. H. Eccl. l. 7. c. 19. p. 735.
Sozomen tells us that this Apocalypse was owned by none of the Ancients,
though much commended by some Monks in his time: and he further adds, that in
the time of the Emperor Theodosius, it was said to have been found in an
underground Chest of Marble in S. Paul's house at Tarsus, and that by a
particular revelation. A story which upon enquiry he found to be as false, as
the Book it self was forged and spurious. The Acts of S. Paul are mentioned
both by Orig. (...). l. 1. c. 2. fol. 114. p. 2.
Origin and (...). lib. 3. c. 3. p. 72.
Eusebius, but not as Writings of approved and unquestionable credit and
authority. The Epistles that are said to have passed between S. Paul and
Seneca, how early soever they started in the Church, yet the falsehood and
fabulousness of them is now too notoriously known, to need any further account
or description of them.

SECT. IX. The principal Controversies that exercised the Church in his time.
Simon Magus the Father of Heretics. The wretched principles and practices of
him and his followers. Their asserting Angel-worship; and how countermin'd by
S. Paul. Their holding it lawful to sacrifice to Idols, and abjure the Faith in
times of persecution, discovered and opposed by S. Paul. Their maintaining an
universal license to sin. Their manners and opinions herein described by S.
Paul in his Epistles. The great controversy of those times about the
obligation of the Law of Mofes upon the Gentile Converts. The Original of it,
whence. The mighty veneration which the Jews had for the Law of Moses. The true
state of the Controversy, what. The Determination made in it by the Apostolic
Synod at Jerusalem. Meats offered to Idols, what. Abstinence from Blood, why
enjoined of old. Things strangled, why forbidden. Fornication commonly
practiced and accounted lawful among the Gentiles. The hire of the Harlot,
what. How dedicated to their Deities among the Heathens. The main passages in
S. Paul's Epistles concerning Justification and Salvation showed to have
respect to this Controversy. What meant by Law, and what by Faith in S. Paul's
Epistles. The Persons whom he has to deal with in this Controversy, who. The
Jew's strange doting upon Circumcision. The way and manner of the Apostles
Reasoning in this Controversy considered. His chief Arguments showed
immediately to respect the case of the Jewish and Gentile Converts. No other
controversy in those times, which his discourses could refer to. Two
Consectaries (...) this Discourse. I. That works of Evangelical Obedience are
not opposed to Faith in Justification. What meant by works of Evangelical
Obedience. This method of Justification excludes boasting, and entirely gives
the glory to God. II. That the doctrines of S. Paul and S. James about
Justification are fairly consistent with each other. These two Apostles showed
to pursue the same design. S. James his excellent Reasonings to that purpose.

1. THOUGH our Lord and his Apostles delivered the Christian Religion,
especially as to the main and essential parts of it, in words as plain as words
could express it, yet were there men of perverse and corrupt minds, and
reprobate concerning the Faith, who from different causes, some ignorantly or
wilfully mistaking the doctrines of Christianity, others to serve ill purposes
and designs, began to introduce errors and unsound opinions into the Church,
and to debauch the minds of men from the simplicity of the Gospel, hereby
disquieting the thoughts, and alienating the affections of men, and disturbing
the peace and order of the Church. The first Ringleader of this Heretical crew
was Simon Magus, who not being able to attain his ends of the Apostles, by
getting a power to confer miraculous gifts, whereby he designed to greaten and
enrich himself, resolved to be revenged of them, scattering the most poisonous
tares among the good wheat that they had sown, bringing in the most pernicious
principles, and as the natural consequent of that, patronizing the most
debauched villainous practices, and this under a pretense of still being
Christians. To enumerate the several Dogmata and damnable Heresies, first
broached by Simon, and then vented and propagated by his disciples and
followers, who though passing under different Titles, yet all centred at last
in the name of Gnostics, (a term which we shall sometimes use for convenience,
though it took not place till after S. Paul's time) were as endless, as it is
alien to my purpose. I shall only take notice of a few of more signal remark,
and such as S. Paul in his Epistles does eminently reflect upon.

2. AMONGST the opinions and principles of Simon and his followers this was
(...). l. 1. (...) 20. Epiph. (...). 21. (...). di (...). c. 33. p. 214, etc.
46. p. 219. Aug. di (...). XXXIX, Col. 2. 18.
one, That God did not create the World, that it was made by Angels, that
Divine honors were due to them, and they to be adored as subordinate mediators
between God and us. This our Apostle saw growing up apace, and struck betimes
at the root, in that early caution he gave to the Colossians, to let no man
beguile them in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into
those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind; and
not holding the head, i. e. hereby disclaiming Christ, the head of the Church.
But notwithstanding this warning, this error still continued and spread it self
in those parts for several Ages, till expressly condemned by the Can. 35.
(...) Council. Nay, Theod. in (...). 2.
Theodoret tells us, that in his time there were still Oratories erected to the
Archangel Michael in those places, wherein they were wont to meet and pray to
Angels. Another Gnostick principle was, Orig adv. (...). lib 6. p. 282. Eusebius.
l. 4. c. 7. p. 120.
that men might freely and indifferently eat what had been offered in sacrifice
to Idols, yea, sacrifice to the Idol it self, it being lawful confidently to
abjure the Faith in time of persecution. The first part whereof S. Paul does
largely and frequently discuss up and down his Epistles; the latter, wherein
the sting and poison was more immediately couched, was craftily adapted to
those times of suffering, and greedily swallowed by many, hereby drawn into
Apostasy. Against this our Apostle antidotes the Christians, especially the
Jewish Converts, among whom the Gnostics had mixed themselves, that they would
not suffer themselves to be drawn aside by an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God: That notwithstanding Heb. 3. 12.
sufferings and persecutions they would hold fast the profession of the Faith
without Heb. 10. 23. 25, 31, 38.
wavering, not forsaking the assembling of themselves together, as the manner
of some is (the Gnostick Heretics) remembering how severely God has threatened
Apostates, that if any man draw back, his Soul shall have no pleasure in him,
and what a fearful thing it is thus to fall into the hands of the living God.

3. BUT besides this, Simon and his followers made the gate yet wider,
maintaining an universal license to sin, (...). adv. H. (...). lib. (...). c.
20 p. 116.
that men were free to do whatever they had a mind to, that to press the
observance of good works was a bondage inconsistent with the liberty of the
Gospel; that so men did but believe in him, and his dear Helen, they had no
reason to regard Law or Prophets, but might do what they pleased, they should
be saved by his grace, and not according to good works. Irenaeus adds (what a
man would easily have inferred, had he never been told it) that they lived in
all lust and filthiness; as indeed whoever will take the pains to peruse the
account that is given of them, will find that they wallowed in the most
horrible and unheard of bestialities. These persons S. Paul does as
particularly describe, as if he had named them, having once and again with
tears warned the Philippians of them, that they were enemies of the Phil. 3.
17, 18.
Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose
glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things. And elsewhere to the same
effect, that they would Romans 16. 17, 18.
mark them that caused divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which
they had learned, and avoid them; for they that were such, served not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own belly, by good words and fair speeches deceiving
the hearts of the simple. This I doubt not he had in his eye, when he gave
those Caveats to the Ephesians, that fornication, and all Ephesians. 5. 3. 4. etc.
uncleanness, and inordinate desires should not be once named amongst them, as
became Saints, nor filthiness, nor unclean talking; being assured by the
Christian doctrine, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, etc. could be
saved: that therefore they should let no man deceive them with vain words;
these being the very things for which the wrath of God came upon the children
of disobedience, and accordingly it concerned them not to be partakers with
them. Plainly intimating, that this impure Gnostick-crue (whose doctrines and
practices he does here no less truly than lively represent) had begun by crafty
and insinuative arts to screw it self into the Church of Ephesus, cheating the
people with subtle and flattering insinuations, probably persuading them that
these things were but indifferent, and a part of that Christian liberty,
wherein the Gospel had instated them. By these and such like principles and
practices (many whereof might be reckoned up) they corrupted the Faith of
Christians, distracted the peace of the Church, stained and defiled the honor
and purity of the best Religion in the World.

4. BUT the greatest and most famous Controversy that of all others in those
times exercised the Christian Church, was concerning the obligation that
Christians were under to observe the Law of Moses as necessary to their
Justification and Salvation. Which because a matter of so much importance, and
which takes up so great a part of S. Paul's Epistles, and the clearing whereof
will reflect a great light upon them, we shall consider more at large: In order
whereunto three things especially are to be enquired after, the true (...) of
the Controversy, what the Apostles determined in this matter, and what respect
the most material passages in S. Paul's Epistles about Justification and
Salvation bear to this Controversy. First we shall enquire into the true state
and nature of the Controversy; and for this we are to know, that when
Christianity was published to the World, it mainly prevailed among the Jews,
they being generally the first Converts to the Faith. But having been brought
up in a mighty reverence and veneration for the Mosaic Institutions, and
looking upon that Economy as immediately contrived by God himself, delivered
by Angels, settled by their great Master Moses, received with the most solemn
and sensible (...) of Divine power and majesty, ratified by miracles, and
entertained by all their forefathers as the peculiar prerogative of that Nation
for so many Ages and Generations, they could not easily be brought off from it,
or behold the Gospel but with an evil eye, as an enemy that came to supplant
and undermine this ancient and excellent Institution. Nay, those of them that
were prevailed upon by the convictive power and evidence of the Gospel, to
embrace the Christian Religion, yet could not get over the prejudice of
education, but must still continue their observance of those legal rites and
customs, wherein they had been brought up. And not content with this, they
began magisterially to impose them upon others, even all the Gentile Converts,
as that without which they could never be accepted by God in this, or rewarded
by him in another World. This controversy was first started at Antioch, a
place not more remarkable for its own greatness, than the vast numbers of Jews
that dwelt there, enjoying great immunities (...) de (...). l. 7. c. 21. p. 973.
granted them by the Kings of Syria. For after that Antiochus Epiphanes had
destroyed (...), and laid waste the Temple, the Jews generally flocked hither,
where they were courteously entertained by his successors, the spoils of the
Temple restored to them for the enriching and adorning of their Synagogue, and
they made equally with the Greeks freemen of that City. By which means their
numbers increased daily, partly by the resort of others from Judaea, partly by
a numerous conversion of Proselytes, whom they gained over to their Religion.
Accordingly Christianity at its first setting out found a very successful
entertainment in this place. And hither it was that Acts 15. 1.
some of the Jewish Converts being come down from Jerusalem, taught the
Christians, that unless they observed Circumcision, and the whole Law of Moses,
they could not be saved. Paul and Barnabas then at Antioch, observing the ill
influence that this had upon the minds of men (disturbing many at present, and
causing the Apostasy of some afterward) began vigorously to oppose this
growing error; but not able to conjure down this Spirit, that had been raised
up, they were dispatched by the Church at Antioch to consult the Apostles and
Governors at Jerusalem about this matter: Whither being come, they found the
quarrel espoused among others by some Converts of the Sect of the Pharisees (of
all others the most zealous assertors of the Mosaic rites) stiffly maintaining,
that besides the Gospel or the Christian Religion, it was necessary for all
Converts, whether Jews or Gentiles, to keep to Circumcision, and the Law of
Moses. So that the state of the controversy between the Orthodox, and these
JudaiZing Christians was plainly this, Whether Circumcision and the observation
of the Mosaic Law, or, only the belief and practice of Christianity be
necessary to Salvation? The latter part of the question was maintained by the
Apostles, the former asserted by the Judaizing Zelots, making the Law of Moses
equally necessary with the Law of Christ; and no doubt pretending that whatever
these men might preach at Antioch, yet the Apostles were of another mind; whose
sentence and resolution it was therefore thought necessary should be
immediately known.

5. WE are then next to consider what determination the Apostostolick Synod at
Jerusalem made of this matter. For a Council of the Apostles and Rulers being
immediately convened, and the question by Paul and Barnabas brought before
them, the case was canvassed and debated on all hands, and at last it was
resolved upon by their unanimous sentence and suffrage, that the Gentile
Converts were under no obligation to the Jewish Law, that God had abundantly
declared his acceptance of them, though strangers to the Mosaical Economy,
that they were sufficiently secured of their happiness and salvation by the
grace of the Gospel, wherein they might be justified and saved without
Circumcision or legal Ceremonies, a yoke from which Christ had now set us free.
But because the Apostles did not think it prudent in these circumstances, too
much to stir the exasperated humor of the Jews (lest by straining the string
too high at first, they should endanger their revolting from the Faith)
theresore they thought of some indulgence in the case, S. James then Bishop of
Jerusalem, and probably President of the Council, propounding this expedient,
that for the present the Gentile Converts should so far only comply with the
humor of the Jews, as to abstain from meats offered to Idols, from blood, from
things strangled, and from fornication. Let us a little more distinctly survey
the ingredients of this imposition. Meats offered to Idols, or as S. James in
his discourse styles them (...), the pollutions of Idols, the word (...)
properly denoting the meats that were polluted by being consecrated to the
Idol. Thus we read of (...) (as the LXX render it) Mat. 1. 7.
polluted bread upon God's Altar, i. e. such probably as had been before
offered to Idols. So that these meats offered to the Idols were parts of those
Sacrifices which the Heathens offered to their Gods, of the remaining portions
whereof they usually made a Feast in the Idol-Temple, inviting their friends
thither, and sometimes their Christian friends to come along with them. This
God had particularly forbidden the Jews by the Law of Moses, Thou shall worship
no other God: lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants Exodus 34. 14. 15.
of the land, and go a whoring after their Gods, and do sacrifice unto their
Gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice. And the not observing
this prohibition cost the Jews dear, when invited by the Moabites to the
Sacrifices of their Gods, they (...) 25. 2. 4
did eat with them, and bowed down to their Gods. Sometimes these remaining
portions were sold for common use in the Shambles, and bought by Christians.
Both which gave great offense to the zealous Jews, who looked upon it as a
participation in the Idolatries of the Heathen: Of both which our Apostle
discourses elsewhere at large, pressing Christians to abstain from Idolatry,
both as to the Idol-feasts, and the remainders of (...) Sacrifice: From the
former as more immediately unlawful, from the latter, the Sacrificial meats
sold in the Shambles, as giving offense to weak and undiscerning Christians.
For though in it self an Idol was nothing in the world, and consequently no
honor could be done it by eating what was offered to it, yet was it more
prudent and reasonable to abstain, partly because flesh-meats have no peculiar
excellency in them to commend us to God; partly because all men were not alike
instructed in the knowledge of their liberty, their minds easily puzzled, and
their consciences entangled, the Gentiles by this means hardened in their
idolatrous practices, weak brethren offended; besides, though these things were
in their own nature indifferent, and in a man's own power to do, or to let
alone, yet was it not convenient to make our liberty a snare to others, and to
venture upon what was lawful, when it was plainly unedifying and inexpedient.
From blood: This God forbad of old, and that some time before the giving of the
Law by Moses, that they should not eat the flesh with the blood, which Genesis 9.
4.
was the life thereof. The mystery of which prohibition was, to instruct men in
the duties of mercy and tenderness even to brute beasts, but (as appears from
what sollows after) primarily designed by God as a solemn fence and bar against
murder, and the effusion of humane blood. A Law afterward renewed upon the
Jews, and inserted into the body of the Mosaic precepts. From things
strangled: that is, that they should abstain from eating of those Beasts that
died without letting blood, where the blood (...) not thoroughly drained from
them; a prohibition grounded upon the reason of the Lev. 17. 10, 11, 12, etc.
former, and indeed was greatly abominable to the Jews, being so expressly
sorbidden in their Law. But it was not more offensive to the Jews, than
acceptable to the Athen. D ipnos lib. 2 c. 24. p. 65. (...) vid. Casaub. in
(...).
Gentiles, who were wont with great art and care to strangle living Creatures,
that they might stew or dress them with their blood in them, as a point of
curious and exquisite delicacy. This and the foregoing prohibition, abstinence
from blood, died not with the Apostles, nor were buried with other Jewish
rites, but were inviolably observed for several Ages in the Christian Church,
as we have elsewhere observed from the (...). Christ. Part. 3. (...). 1. p. 230.
Writers of those times. Lastly, From Fornication: This was a thing commonly
practiced in the Heathen World, who generally beheld simple Fornication as no
Vid. (...). pro Coelio Orat. 34. p. 503. (...). 2, Terent. Adelph. Ac. 1. Sc.
2. p. 166. (...). etc. (...). Comic. in (...). ap. Athen. (...). 13. (...). 3.
p. 569. Vid. Leg. (...). 1. 6. (...). 5. p. 41. and (...). Comment. p. 474.
sin, and that it was lawful for persons, not engaged in wedlock, to make use
of women that exposed themselves. A custom justly offensive to the Jews, and
therefore to cure two evils at once, the Apostles here solemnly declare against
it. Not that they thought it a thing indifferent, as the rest of the prohibited
rites were, (...) it is forbidden by the natural Law (as contrary to that
chastness and modesty, that order and comeliness which God has planted in the
minds of men) but they joined it in the same Class with them, because the
Gentiles looked upon it as a thing lawful and indifferent. It had been expressly
forbidden by the Mosaic Law, There shall be no Whore of the daughters of
Israel; and because the Heathens had generally (...). 23. 17.
thrown down this fence and bar set by the Law of nature, it was here again
repaired by the first planters of Christianity, as by S. Paul elsewhere, Ye
know what commandments 1 (...), 4. 2, 3, 4, 5.
we gave you by the Lord Jesus; for this is the will of God, even your
Sanctification, that you should abstain from fornication: That every one of you
should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor, not in the
lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God. Though after
all I must confess my self inclinable to embrace (...) his ingenious
conjecture, that by (...), fornication, we are here to understand (...) (...),
the harlots hire, or the (...), the offering which those persons were wont to
make. For among the Gentiles nothing was more usual, than for the common women,
that prostituted themselves to lewd embraces (those especially that attended at
the Temples of Venus) to dedicate some part of their gain, and present it to
the Gods. (...). adv. (...). page 27. Tom. 1.
Athanasius has a passage very express to this purpose. (...). The women of old
were wont to sit in the Idol-Temples of Phoenicia, and to dedicate the gain
which they got by the prostitution of their bodies as a kind of first fruits to
the Deities of the place; supposing that by fornication they should pacify
their Goddess, and by this means render her favorable and propitious to them.
Where it is plain he uses (...), or fornication, in this very sense, for that
gain or reward of it, which they consecrated to their Gods. Some such thing
Solomon had in his eye, when he brings in the Prove. 7. 14.
Harlot thus courting the young man, I have peace offerings with me, this day
have I paid my Vows. These presents were either made in specie, the very money
thus unrighteously gotten, or in (...) bought with it, and offered at the
Temple, the remainders whereof were taken and sold among the ordinary
sacrificial portions. This as it holds the nearest correspondence with the rest
of the rites here sorbidden, so could it not choose but be a mighty scandal to
the Jews, it being so particularly prohibited in their Law, Thou shall not
bring the hire of an Whore into the house of the Lord thy God for any (...).
23. (...).
Vow, for it is an abomination to the Lord.

6. THESE prohibitions here laid upon the Gentiles, were by the Apostles
intended only for a temporary compliance with the Jewish Converts, till they
could by degrees be brought off from their stiffness and obstinacy, and then
the reason of the thing ceasing, the obligation to it must needs cease and
fail. Nay, we may observe that even while the Apostolical decree lasted in its
greatest force and power, in those places where there were few or no Jewish
Converts, the Apostle did not stick to give leave, that except in case of
scandal, any kind of meats, even the portions of the Idol-(...) might be
indifferently bought and taken by Christians as well as Heathens. These were
all which in order to the satisfaction of the Jews, and for the present peace
of the Church the Apostles thought necessary to require of the Converted
Gentiles, but that for all the rest they were perfectly free from legal
observances, obliged only to the commands of Christianity. So that the
Apostolical decision that was made of this matter was this, That (besides the
temporary observation of those few indifferent rites before mentioned) the
belief and practice of the Christian Religion was perfectly sufficient to
Salvation, without Circumcision, and the observation of the Mosaic Law. This
Synodical determination allayed the controversy for a while, being joyfully
received by the Gentile Christians. But alas, the Jewish zeal began again to
ferment and spread it self, they could not with any patience endure to see
their beloved Moses deserted, and those venerable Institutions trodden down,
and therefore labored to keep up their credit, and still to assert them as
necessary to Salvation. Than which nothing created S. Paul greater trouble at
every turn, being forced to contend against these Judaizing teachers almost in
every Church where he came, as appears by that great part that they bear in all
his Epistles, especially that to the Romans, and Galatians, where this leaven
had most diffused it self, whom the better to undeceive, he discourses at large
of the nature and institution, the end and design, the antiquating and
abolishing of that Mosaic Covenant, which these men laid so much stress and
weight upon.

7. HENCE then we pass to the third thing considerable for the clearing of this
matter, which is to show, that the main passages in S. Paul's Epistles,
concerning Justification and Salvation, have an immediate reference to this
controversy. But before we enter upon that, something must necessarily be
premised for the explicating some terms and phrases frequently used by our
Apostle in this question, these two especially, what he means by Law, and what
by Faith. By Law then it is plain he usually understands the Jewish Law, which
was a complex body of Laws, containing moral, ceremonial and judicial precepts,
each of which had its use and office as a great instrument of duty: The
Judicial Laws being peculiar Statutes accommodated to the state of the Jew's
Commonwealth, as all civil constitutions restrained men from the external acts
of sin: The Ceremonial Laws came somewhat nearer, and besides their Typical
relation to the Evangelical state, by external and symbolical representments
signified and exhibited that spiritual impurity, from which men were to
abstain: The Moral Laws, founded in the natural notions of men's minds
concerning good and evil, directly urged men to duty, and prohibited their
prevarications. These three made up the entire Code and Pandects of the Jewish
Statutes; all which our Apostle comprehends under the general notion of the
Law, and not the moral Law singly and separately considered, in which sense it
never appears that the Jews expected justification and salvation by it, nay
rather, that they looked for it merely from the observance of the ritual and
ceremonial Law: so that the moral Law is no further considered by him in this
question, than as it made up a part of the Mosaical constitution, of that
National and Political Covenant, which God made with the Jews at Mount Sinai.
Hence the Apostle all along in his discourses constantly opposes the Law and
the Gospel, and the observation of the one to the belief and practice of the
other, which surely he would not have done, had he simply intended the moral
Law, it being more expressly incorporated into the Gospel, than ever it was into
the Law of Moses. And that the Apostle does thus oppose the Law and Gospel,
might be made evident from the continued series of his discourses; but a few
places shall suffice. By what Law (says the Apostle) is boasting excluded? Romans
3. 27.
by the Law of works: i. e. by the Mosaic Law, in whose peculiar privileges
and prerogatives the Jews did strangely flatter and pride themselves? Nay, but
by the Law of Faith: i. e. by the Gospel, or the Evangelical way of God's
dealing with us. And elsewhere giving an account of this very controversy
between the Jewish and Gentile (...). 2. 15, 16.
Converts, he first opposes their Persons, Jews by nature, and sinners of the
Gentiles, and then infers, that a man is not justified by the works of the Law,
by those legal observances, whereby the Jews expected to be justified, but by
the faith of Christ, by a hearty belief of, and (...) with that way, which
Christ has introduced, for by the works of the Law, by legal obedience, no
flesh, neither Jew, nor Gentile, shall now be justified. Fain would I learn,
whether you received the spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of
Gal. 3. 2. 5.
Faith, that is, whether you became partakers of the miraculous powers of the
Holy Ghost, while you continued under the legal dispensation, or since you
embraced the Gospel, and the faith of Christ: and speaking afterward of the
state of the Jews (...) the revelation of the Gospel, says he, before says
came, we were kept under the Law, i. e. before V. 23.
the Gospel came, we were kept under the Discipline of the legal Economy, shut
up unto the faith, reserved for the discovery of the Evangelical dispensation,
which should afterward [in its due time] be revealed to the World. This in the
following Chapter he discourses more at large. Tell me ye that desire to be
under the Law, i. e. Ye Jews that Gal. 4. 21. and (...).
so fondly dote upon the legal state, Do ye not hear the Law? i. e. Understand
what your own Law does so clearly intimate? and then goes on to unriddle what
was wrapped up in the famous Allegory of Abraham's two Sons by his two Wives. The
one, Ishmael, born of Hagar, the Bondwoman, who denoted the Jewish Covenant
made at Mount Sinai, which according to the representation of her condition was
a servile state: The other Isaac, born of Sarah, the Freewoman, was the Son of
the promise, denoting Jerusalem that is above, and is free, the mother of us
all; i. e. The state and covenant of the Gospel, whereby all Christians, as the
spiritual children of Abraham, are set free from the bondage of the Mosaic
dispensation. By all which it is evident, that by Law and the works of the Law,
in this controversy, the Apostle understands the Law of Moses, and that
obedience which the legal dispensation required at their hands.

8. WE are secondly to enquire, what the Apostle means by Faith; and he
commonly uses it two ways. 1. More generally for the Gospel, or that
Evangelical way of justification and salvation, which Christ has brought in, in
opposition to Circumcision, and the observation of those Rites, by which the
Jews expected to be justified: and this is plain from the preceding opposition,
where Faith, as denoting the Gospel, is frequently opposed to the Law of Moses.
2. Faith is taken more particularly for a practical belief, or such an assent
to the Evangelical revelation as produces a sincere obedience to the Laws of
it, and indeed as concerned in this matter is usually taken not for this or
that single virtue, but for the entire condition of the New Covenant, as
comprehending all that duty that it requires of us: than which nothing can be
more plain and evident; In Christ Jesus, i. e. under the Gospel, neither
Circumcision avails any Gal. 5. 6.
thing, nor Uncircumcision; it is all one to Justification whether a Man be
circumcised or no; What then? but Faith, which works by love; which
afterward he explains thus, In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, Gal. 6. 15.
a renewed and divine temper of mind, and a new course and state of life. And
lest all this (...) not be thought plain enough, he elsewhere tells us, that
circumcision 1 Cor. 7. 19.
is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping the Commandments of
God. From which places there needs no skill to infer, that that Faith whereby
we are justified, contains in it a new disposition and state both of heart and
life, and an observation of the Laws of Christ; in which respect the Apostle
does in the very same Verse expound Romans 10. 16.
believing, by obeying of the Gospel. Such he assures us was that very Faith by
which Abraham was justified, who against all probabilities of reason believed
in God's promise, he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but
was strong, etc. that is, he so firmly believed what God had promised, that he
gave him the glory of his truth and faithfulness, his infinite power and
ability to do all things. And how did he that? by acting suitably in a way of
entire resignation, and sincere obedience to the divine will and pleasure: so
the Apostle elsewhere more expressly, by Faith he obeyed, and went out, Heb. 11.
8.
not knowing whither he went. This Faith (he tells us) was imputed to Abraham
for righteousness, Romans 4. 22.
that is, God by virtue of the New Covenant made in Christ was graciously
pleased to look upon this obedience (though in it self imperfect) as that for
which he accounted him, and would deal with him as a just and a righteous Man.
And upon this account we find Abraham's faith opposed to a perfect and
unsinning obedience, for thus the Apostle tells us, that Abraham was justified
by faith, in opposition to his being Romans 4. (...), 3, etc.
justified by such an absolute and complete obedience, as might have enabled
him to challenge the reward by the strict Laws of Justice: whereas now his
being pardoned and accepted by God in the way of a mean and imperfect
obedience, it could not claim impunity, much less a reward, but must be
entirely owing to the Divine grace and favor.

9. HAVING thus cleared our way, by restoring these words to their genuine and
native sense, we come to show, how the Apostle in his discourses does all along
refer to the Original controversy between the Jewish and Gentile-Converts,
whether Justification was by the observation of the Mosaic Law, or by the
belief and practice of the Gospel: and this will appear, if we consider the
persons that he has to deal with, the way and manner of his arguing, and that
there was then no other controversy on foot, to which these passages could
refer. The Persons whom he had to deal with, were chiefly of two sorts, pure
Jews, and Jewish Converts. Pure Jews were those that kept themselves wholly to
the Legal Economy, and expected to be justified and saved in no other way,
than the observation of the Law of Moses. Indeed they laid a more peculiar
stress upon Circumcision, because this having been added as the Seal of that
Covenant which God made with Abraham, and the discriminating badge whereby they
were to be distinguished from all other Nations, they looked upon it as having
a special efficacy in it to recommend them to the divine acceptance.
Accordingly we find in their Writings that they make this the main Basis and
Foundation of their hope and confidence toward God. For they tell us, that the
Precept of Circumcision is greater than all the rest, and equivalent to the
whole Law, that the reason why God hears the Prayers of the Israelites, but not
(...) of the Gentiles or Christians, is (...) for the virtue and merit of
Circumcision; yea that so great is the power and efficacy of the Law of
Circumcision, that no man that is circumcised shall go to (...) Cad Hakkem. ap.
Buxtorf. F. praef. ad Syn. Jud.
Hell. Nay according to the idle and (...) humor of these Syna^. Jud, c. 4. p.
87.
Men, they fetch down Abraham from the Seat of the Blessed, and place him as
Porter at the Gates of Hell, upon no other errand than to keep circumcised
Persons from entering into that miserable place. However nothing is more
evident, than that Circumcision was the Fort and Sanctuary wherein they
ordinarily placed their security, and accordingly we find S. Paul frequently
disputing against circumcision, as virtually comprizing, in their notion, the
keeping of the whole Jewish Law. Besides, to these literal impositions of the
Law of Moses, the Pharisees had added many vain Traditions and several
superstitious usages of their own contrivance, in the observance whereof the
People placed not a little confidence, as to that righteousness upon which they
hoped to stand clear with Heaven. Against all these our Apostle argues, and
sometimes by arguments peculiar to them alone. Jewish Converts were those, who
having embraced the Christian Religion, did yet out of a veneration to their
ancient Rites, make the observance of them equally necessary with the belief
and practice of Christianity both to themselves and others. These last were the
Persons, who as they first started the controversy, so were those against whom
the Apostle mainly opposed himself, endeavoring to dismount their pretenses,
and to beat down their Opinions level with the ground.

10. THIS will yet further appear from the way and manner of the Apostles
arguing, which plainly respects this controversy, and will be best seen in
some particular instances of his reasonings. And first, he argues, that this
way of justification urged by Jews and Jewish Converts was inconsistent with
the goodness of God, and his universal kindness to Mankind, being so narrow and
limited, that it excluded the far greatest part of the World: Thus in the three
first Chapters of his Epistle to the Romans having proved at large that the
whole World, both Jew and Gentile were under a state of guilt, and consequently
liable to the divine sentence and condemnation, he comes next to enquire by
what means they may be delivered from this state of vengeance, and shows that
it could not be by legal observances, but that now there was a way of
righteousness Romans 3. 20, 21, etc.
or justification declared by Christ in the Gospel (intimated also in the Old
Testament) extending to all, both Jews and Gentiles, whereby God with respect
to the satisfaction and expiation of Christ is ready freely to pardon and
justify, all penitent believers: That therefore there was a way revealed in
the Gospel, whereby a man might be justified, without being beholden to the
rites of the Jewish Law, otherwise it would argue that God had very little care
of the greatest part of men. Is he God of the Jews only? is he not also of the
Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also: Seeing it is one God, which shall (...)
the Circumcision by Faith, and the uncircumcision through Faith, Jew and
Gentile in the same Evangelical way. The force of which argument lies in this,
That that cannot be necessary to our Justification, which excludes the greatest
part of mankind from all possibility of being justified (and this justification
by the Mosaic Law plainly does) a thing by no means consistent with God's
universal love and kindness to his Creatures. Hence the Apostle magnifies the
grace of the Gospel, that it has broken down the partition wall, and made way
for all Nations to come in, that now there Ga. 3. 28. Col. 3. 11.
is neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian nor
(...), no difference in this respect, but all one in Christ Jesus, all equally
admitted to terms of pardon and justification, in every Nation he that fears
God, and works righteousness being accepted with him.

11. SECONDLY, He argues, that this Jewish way of Justification could not be
indispensably necessary, in that it had not been the constant way whereby good
men in all Ages had been justified and accepted with Heaven. This he eminently
proves from the instance of Abraham, whom the Scripture sets forth as the
Father of the faithful, and the great Exemplar of that way, wherein all his
spiritual seed, all true Believers were to be justified: Now of him it is
evident, that he was justified and accepted with God upon his practical belief
of God's power and promise, before ever Circumcision, and much more before the
rest of the Mosaic Institution was in being. Comes Romans 4 9, 10, 11, etc.
this blessedness then upon the Circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision
also? For we say that Faith was reckoned unto Abraham for righteousness. How
was it then reckoned, when he was in Circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in
Circumcision, but in uncircumcision. And he received the sign of Circumcision,
a seal of the righteousness of the faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised,
etc. The meaning whereof is plainly this, That pardon of sin cannot be entailed
upon the way of the Mosaic Law, it being evident, that Abraham was justified
and approved of God, before he was Circumcised, which was only added as a seal
of the Covenant between God and him, and a testimony of that acceptance with
God, which he had obtained before. And this way of God's dealing with Abraham,
and in him with all his spiritual children, the legal Institution could not
make void, it being impossible that that dispensation which came so long after
should disannul the Covenant which God had made with Abraham and his spiritual
seed CCCCXXX. Gal. 3. 17.
years before. Upon this account, as the Apostle observes, the Scripture sets
forth Abraham as the great type and pattern of Justification, as the Father of
all them that believe, Romans 4. 11, 12.
though they be not Circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them
also, and the father of Circumcision, to them who are not of the Circumcision
only, but also walk in the steps of the Faith of our Father Abraham, which he
had being yet uncircumcised. They (...). 3. 7. 8. 9.
therefore that are of Faith, the same are the children of Abraham: And the
Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through Faith,
preached before the Gospel (this Evangelical way of justifying) unto Abraham,
saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed, So then they which be of Faith,
who believe and obey, as Abraham did, shall be blessed, pardoned and saved,
with faithful Abraham. It might further be demonstrated that this has ever been
God's method of dealing with mankind, our Apostle in the eleventh Chapter to
the Hebrews, proving all along by particular instances, that it was by such a
Faith as this, without any relation to the Law of Moses, that good men were
justified and accepted with God in all Ages of the World.

12. THIRDLY, He argues against this Jewish way of Justification from the
deficiency and imperfection of the Mosaic Economy, not able to justify and
save sinners. (...), as not able to assist those that were under it with
sufficient aids to perform Romans 8. 3, 4.
what it required of them, This the Law could not do, for that it was weak
through the flesh, till God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful (...),
to enable us, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. And indeed could the Law have
given life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law: But alas! the
Scripture having concluded all mankind, Jew and Gentile, under sin, and
consequently incapable of being justified upon terms of perfect and entire
obedience, there is now no other way but this, That the promise by the Faith of
Christ be given to all them that believe, i. e. this Evangelical method of
justifying sincere believers. Besides, the Jewish Economy was deficient in
pardoning sin, and procuring the grace and favor of God, it could only awaken
the knowledge of sin, not remove the guilt of it: It was not possible that the
blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin; all the (...) of Heb. 10. 4.
the Mosaic Law were no further available for the pardon of sin, than merely
as they were founded in, and had respect to that great sacrifice and expiation,
which was to be made for the sins of mankind by the death of the Son of God.
The Priests, though they daily ministered, and oftentimes offered the same
sacrifices, yet could they never (...). 11, 12.
take away sins: No, that was reserved for a better and a higher sacrifice,
even that of our Lord himself, who after he had offered one sacrifice for sins,
for ever sat down on the right hand of God, having completed that, which the
repeated sacrifices of the Law could never effect. So that all men being under
guilt, and no justification, where there was no remission, the Jewish Economy
being in it self unable to pardon, was incapable to justify. This S. Paul
elsewhere declared in an open Assembly before Jews and Gentiles; Be it known
unto you, men and brethren, that through this man [Christ Jesus] is preached
unto you forgiveness of sins: And by him all that believe are justified from
all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses.

13. FOURTHLY, He proves that Justification by the Mosaic Law could not stand
with the death of Christ, the necessity of whose death and sufferings it did
plainly evacuate and take away. For if righteousness come by the Law, then
Christ is dead in vain: If the Mosaical performances be still necessary to our
Justification, then certainly Gal. 2. 21.
it was to very little purpose, and altogether unbecoming the wisdom and
goodness of God, to send his own Son into the World, to do so much for us, and
to suffer such exquisite pains and tortures. Nay, he tells them, that while
they persisted in this fond obstinate opinion, all that Christ had done and
suffered could be of no advantage to them. Stand fast in the liberty, wherewith
Christ has made us free, and be not again entangled in the yoke of bondage, the
bondage and servitude of the Mosaic rites; Gal. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Behold (...) Paul solemnly say unto you, That if you be Circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing: For I testify again to every man that is
Circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole Law; Christ is become of none
effect to you; whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from
grace. The sum of which argument is, That whoever lay the stress of their
Justification upon Circumcision, and the observances of the Law, do thereby
declare themselves to be under an obligation of perfect obedience to all that
the Law requires of them, and accordingly supersede the virtue and efficacy of
Christ's death, and disclaim all right and title to the grace and favor of the
Gospel. For since Christ's death is abundantly sufficient to attain its ends,
whoever takes in another, plainly renounces that, and rests upon that of his
own choosing. By these ways of reasoning it is evident what the Apostle drives at
in all his discourses about this matter: More might have been observed, had I
not thought, that these are sufficient to render his design, especially to the
unprejudiced and impartial, obvious and plain enough.

14. LASTLY, That S. Paul's discourses about Justification and Salvation do
immediately refer to the controversy between the Orthodox and Judaizing
Christians, appears hence, that there was no other controversy then on foot,
but concerning the way of Justification, whether it was by the observation of
the Law of Moses, or only of the Gospel and the Law of Christ. For we must
needs suppose, that the Apostle wrote with a primary respect to the present
state of things, and so as they whom he had to deal with might, and could not
but understand him: Which yet would have been impossible for them to have done,
had he intended them for the controversies which have since been bandied with
so much zeal and fierceness, and to give countenance to those many nice and
subtle propositions, those curious and elaborate schemes which some men in
these later Ages have drawn of these matters.

15. FROM the whole discourse two Consectaries especially plainly follow. I.
Consect. That works of Evangelical obedience are not opposed to Faith in
Justification. By works of Evangelical obedience I mean such Christian duties,
as are the fruits, not of our own power and strength, but God's Spirit, done by
the assistance of his grace. And that these are not opposed to Faith, is
undeniably evident, in that (as we observed before) Faith as including the new
nature, and the keeping God's commands, is made the usual condition of
Justification. Nor can it be otherwise, when other graces and virtues of the
Christian life are made the terms of pardon and acceptance with Heaven, and of
our title to the merits of Christ's death, and the great promise of eternal
life. Thus Repentance, which is not so much a single Act, as a complex body of
Christian duties, Repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of Acts 2. 38.
sins, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost; Repent and be converted, that your
sins may be Acts 3. 17. Mark 11. 25, 26.
blotted out. So Charity and forgiveness of others, Forgive, if ye have ought
against any, that your Father also which is in Heaven may forgive you your
trespasses: For if ye forgive Matthew. 6. 14, 15.
men their trespasses, your heavenly Father also will forgive you: But if ye
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive yours.
Sometimes Evangelical obedience in general; God is no respecter of persons, but
in every Nation, he that fears him, Acts 10. 34, 35.
and works righteousness is accepted with him. If we walk in the light, as
God is in the 1 John 1. 7.
light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all sin. What privilege then has Faith above other graces
in this matter? are we justified by Faith? We are pardoned and accepted with
God upon our repentance, charity, and other acts of Evangelical obedience. Is
Faith opposed to the works of the Mosaic Law in Justification? so are works of
Evangelical obedience; Circumcision 1 Cor. 7. (...).
is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments
of God. Does Faith give glory to God, and set the crown upon his head? Works of
Evangelical obedience are equally the effects of Divine grace, both preventing
and assisting of us, and indeed are not so much our works, as his: So that the
glory of all must needs be entirely resolved into the grace of God, nor can any
man in such circumstances with the least pretense of reason lay claim to merit,
or boast of his own archievements. Hence the Apostle magnifies the Evangelical
method of Justification above that of (...) Law, that it wholly excludes all
proud (...) upon our selves; Where is (...) then? it is excluded. By what Law?
of works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith. The Romans 3. 27.
Mosaical Economy fostered men up in proud and high thoughts of themselves,
they looked upon themselves as a peculiar people, honored above all other
Nations of the World, the seed of Abraham, invested with mighty privileges,
and c. whereas the Gospel proceeding upon other principles, takes away all
foundations of pride, by acknowledging our acceptance with God, and the power
whereby we are enabled to make good the terms and conditions of it, to be the
mere result of the Divine grace and mercy, and that the whole scheme of our
Salvation, as it was the contrivance of the Divine wisdom, so is the purchase
of the merit and satisfaction of our crucified Savior. Nor is Faith it self
less than other graces an act of Evangelical obedience, and if separated from
them, is of no moment or value in the accounts of Heaven: Though I have all 1
Cor. 13. 2.
Faith, and have no Charity, I am nothing. All Faith, be it of what kind
soever. To this may be added, that no tolerable account can be given, why that
which is on all hands granted to be the condition of our Salvation (such is
Evangelical obedience) should not be the condition of our Justification: And at
the great day Christians shall be acquitted or condemned according as in this
World they have fulfilled or neglected the conditions of the Gospel: The
decretory sentence of absolution that shall then be passed upon good men, shall
be nothing but a public and solemn declaration of that private sentence of
Justification that was passed upon them in this World; so that upon the same
terms that they are justified now, they shall be justified and acquitted then,
and upon the same terms that they shall then be judged and acquitted, they are
justified now, viz. an hearty belief, and a sincere obedience to the Gospel.
From all which, I hope, it is evident, that when S. Paul denies men to be
justified by the works of the Law; by works he either means works done before
conversion, and by the strength of men's natural powers, such as enabled them to
pride and boast themselves, or (which mostwhat includes the other) the works of
the Mosaic Law. And indeed though the controversies on foot in those times did
not plainly determine his reasonings that way, yet the considerations which we
have now suggested, sufficiently show that they could not be meant in any other
sense.

16. CONSECT. II. That the doctrines of S. Paul and S. James about
Justification are fairly consistent with each other. For seeing S. Paul's
design in excluding works from Justification, was only to deny the works of the
Jewish Law, or those that were wrought by our own strength, and in asserting
that in opposition to such works we are justified by Faith, he meant no more
than that either we are justified in an Evangelical way, or more particularly
by Faith intended a practical belief, including Evangelical obedience: And
seeing on the other hand S. James in affirming that we are justified by works,
and not by Faith only; by works means no more than Evangelical obedience, in
opposition to a naked and an empty Faith; these two are so far from
quarrelling, that they mutually embrace each other, and both in the main pursue
the same design. And indeed if any disagreement seem between them, it is most
reasonable that S. Paul should be expounded by S. James, not only because his
propositions are so express and positive, and not justly liable to ambiguity,
but because he wrote some competent time after the other, and consequently as
he perfectly understood his meaning, so he was capable to countermine those ill
principles, which some men had built upon S. Paul's assertions. For it is
evident from several passages in S. Paul's Epistles, that even then many began
to mistake his doctrine, and from his assertions about Justification by Faith,
and not by works, to infer propositions that might serve the purposes of a bad
life; They slanderously reported him to say, that we might do evil, that good
might come; that we might Romans 3. 8.
continue in sin, that the grace of the Gospel might the more abound: They
thought that so Romans 6. 1.
long as they did but believe the Gospel in the naked notion and speculation of
it, it was enough to recommend them to the favor of God, and to serve all the
purposes of Justification and Salvation, however they shaped and steered their
lives. Against these men it is beyond all question plain, that S. James levels
his Epistle, to batter down the growing doctrines of Libertinism and
Profaneness, to show the insufficiency of a naked Faith, and an empty
profession of Religion, that it is not enough to recommend us to the Divine
acceptance, and to justify us in the sight of Heaven, barely to believe Vid.
Chap. 2. v. 14, 15. and (...).
the Gospel, unless we really obey and practice it; that a Faith destitute of
this Evangelical obedience is fruitless and unprofitable to Salvation; that
it is by these works that Faith must appear to be vital and sincere; that not
only Rahab, but Abraham the Father of the faithful, was justified not by a bare
belief of God's promise, but an (...) obedience to God's command, in the ready
offer of his Son, whereby it appears that his Faith and Obedience did cooperate
and conspire together, to render him capable of God's favor and approbation,
and that herein the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, That Abraham believed
God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, (whence by the way nothing
can be clearer, than that both these Apostles intend the same thing by Faith in
the case of Abraham's Justification, and its being imputed to him for (...),
viz. a practical belief and obedience to the commands of God) that it follows
hence, that Faith is not of it self sufficient to justify and make us
acceptable to God, unless a proportionable Obedience be joined with it; without
which Faith serves no more to these ends and purposes, than a Body destitute of
the Soul to animate and enliven it, is capable to exercise the functions and
offices of the natural life. His meaning in short being nothing else, than that
good works, or Evangelical obedience is, according to the Divine appointment,
the condition of the Gospel Covenant, without which it is in vain for any to
hope for that pardon which Christ has purchased, and the favor of God, which
is necessary to Eternal Life.

The End of S. Paul's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. ANDREW.
St. ANDREW.
He was fastened to a Cross since distinguished by his name by ye Proconsul at
Patrae a City of Achaia, from which he preached several days to ye
Spectators. S. Hierom. Baron. Nov: 29.

St. Andrew's Crucifixion.
Matthew. 23. 34. Behold I send unto you prophets and wisemen and scribes, and
some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye scurge in
your synagogues, and persecute them from Cyty to City.




The Sacred History sparing in the Acts of the succeeding Apostles, and why. S.
Andrew's Birthplace, Kindred, and way of Life. John the Baptist's Ministry and
Discipline, S. Andrew educated under his Institution. His coming to Christ, and
(...) to be a Disciple. His Election to the Apostolate. The Province assigned
for his Ministry. In what places he chiesly preached. His barbarous usage at
Sinope. His planting Christianity at Byzantium, and ordaining Stachys Bishop
there. His travails in Greece, and preaching at Patrae in Achaia. His
arraignment before the Proconsul, and resolute defense of the Christian
Religion. The Proconsul's displeasure against him, whence. An account of his
Martyrdom. His preparatory sufferings, and crucifixion. On what kind of Cross
he suffered. The Miracles reported to be done by his Body. Its translation to
Constantinople. The great Encomium given of him by one of the Ancients.

1. THE Sacred Story, which has hitherto been very large and copious in
describing the Acts of the two first Apostles, is henceforward very sparing in
its accounts, giving us only now and then a few oblique and accidental
remarques concerning the rest, and some of them no further mentioned, than the
mere recording of their Names. For what reasons it pleased the Divine wisdom
and providence, that no more of their Acts should be consigned to Writing by
the Penmen of the Holy story, is to us unknown. Probably, it might be thought
convenient, that no more account should be given of the first plantations of
Christianity in the World, than what concerned Judaea, and the
Neighbour-countries, at least the most eminent places of the Roman Empire, that
so the truth of the Prophetical Predictions might appear, which had foretold,
that the Law of the Messiah should come forth from Sion, and the Word of the
Lord from Jerusalem. Besides, that a particular relation of the Acts of so many
(...), done in so many several Countries, might have swelled the Holy Volumes
into too great a bulk, and rendered them less serviceable and accommodate to the
ordinary use of Christians. Among the Apostles that succeed we first take
notice of S. Andrew. He was born at Bethsaida, a City of Galilee, standing upon
the banks of the Lake of Gennesareth, Son to John or Jonas a Fisherman of that
Town; Brother he was to Simon Peter, but whether Elder or Younger, the Ancients
do not clearly decide, though the major part intimate him to have been the
younger Brother, there being only the single authorlty of Epiphanius on the
other side, as we have formerly noted. He was brought up to his Father's Trade,
whereat he labored, till our Lord called him from catching Fish, to be a
Fisher of men, for which he was fitted by some preparatory Institutions, even
before his coming unto Christ.

2. JOHN the Baptist was lately risen in the Jewish Church, a Person whom for
the efficacy and impartiality of his Doctrine, and the extraordinary strictness
and austerities of his Life, the Jews generally had in great veneration. He
trained up his Proselytes under the Discipline of Repentance, and by urging
upon them a severe change and reformation of life, prepared them to entertain
the Doctrine of the Messiah, whose approach, he told them, was now near at
hand, representing to them the greatness of his Person, and the importance of
the design that he was come upon. Besides the multitudes that promiscuously
flocked to the Baptists discourses, he had according to the manner of the
Jewish Masters some peculiar and select Disciples, who more constantly attended
upon his Lectures, and for the most part waited upon his Person. In the number
of these was our Apostle, who was then with him about Jordan, when our Savior,
who some time since had been baptized, came that way: upon whose approach the
Baptist told them, that this was the (...), the great Person whom he had so
(...) spoken of, to usher in whose appearing his whole Ministry was but
subservient, that this was the Lamb of God, the true Sacrifice that was to
expiate the sins of Mankind. Upon this testimony Andrew and another Disciple
(probably S. John) follow our Savior to the place of his abode. Upon which
account he is generally by the Fathers and ancient Writers styled (...), or the
(...). (...). (...) sub lit. (...).
first called Disciple; though in a strict sense he was not so; for though he
was the first of the Disciples that came to Christ, yet was he not called till
afterward. After some converse with him, Andrew goes to acquaint his Brother
Simon, and both together came to Christ. Long they stayed not with him, but
returned to their own home, and to the exercise of their calling, wherein they
were employed, when somewhat more than a Year after our Lord passing through
Galilee, found them (...) upon the Sea of Tiberias, where he fully satisfied
them of the Greatness and Divinity of his Person by the convictive evidence of
that miraculous draught of Fishes, which they took at his command. And now he
told them he had other work for them to do, that they should no longer deal in
Fish, but with Men, whom they should catch with the efficacy and influence of
that Doctrine, that he was come to deliver to the World; commanding them to
follow him, as his immediate Disciples and Attendants, who accordingly left all
and followed him. Shortly after S. Andrew together with the rest was called to
the Office and Honor of the Apostolate, made choice of to be one of those that
were to be Christ's immediate Vicegerents for planting and propagating the
Christian Church. Little else is particularly recorded of him in the Sacred
story, being comprehended in the general account of the rest of the Apostles.

3. AFTER our Lord's Ascension into Heaven, and that the Holy (...) had in its
miraculous powers been plentifully shed upon the Apostles, to fit them for the
great errand they were to go upon, to root out profaneness and idolatry, and
to subdue the World to the Doctrine of the Gospel, it is generally affirmed by
the Ancients, that the Apostles agreed among themselves (by lot, say Socr. H.
Eccl. l. 1. c. 19. p. 50.
some) probably not without the special guidance and direction of the Holy
Ghost, what parts of the World they should severally take. In this division S.
Andrew had Scythia, and the Neighboring Countries primarily allotted him for
his Orig. in (...). l. 3. ap. (...). l. 3. (...). 1. p. 71. (...). H. (...). l.
2. c. 39. p. 199.
Province. First then he traveled through Cappadocia, Galatia, and Bithynia,
and instructed them in the Faith of Christ, pasling all along the Euxin Sea
(formerly called (...). Geogr. l. 7. p. 206.
Axenus, from the barbarous and inhospitable temper of the People thereabouts,
who were wont to sacrifice strangers, and of their skulls to make Cups to drink
in in their Feasts and Banquets) and so into the solitudes of Scythia. An
ancient (...) S. Andr. Apost. and (...). (...). in (...) (...) sub lit. (...).
Author (though whence deriving his intelligence I know not) gives us a more
particular account of his travails and transactions in these parts. He tells
us, that he first came to (...), where being entertained by a Jew, he went into
the Synagogue; discoursed to them concerning Christ, and from the prophecies of
the Old Testament proved him to be the Messiah, and the Savior of the World.
Having here converted and baptized many, ordered their public Meeting, and
ordained them Priests, he went next to (...), a maritime City upon the (...)
Sea, whence after many other places he came to Nice, where he staid two Years,
Preaching and working Miracles with great success: thence to Nicomedia, and so
to (...), whence sailing through the Propontis he came by the Euxin Sea to
Heraclea, and from thence to Amastris: in all which places he met with great
difficulties and discouragements, but overcame all with an invincible patience
and resolution. He next came to Sinope, a City situate upon the same Sea, a
place famous both for the birth and burial of the great King Mithridates; here,
as my Author reports from the Ancients ((...)) he met with his Brother Peter,
with whom he staid a considerable time at this place: as a Monument whereof he
tells us, that the Chairs made of white stone wherein they were wont to sit
while they taught the People, were still extant, and commonly showed in his
time. The Inhabitants of this City were most Jews, who partly through zeal for
their Religion, partly through the barbarousness of their manners, were quickly
exasperated against the Apostle, and contriving together attempted to burn the
House, wherein he sojourned: however they treated him with all the instances of
savage cruelty, throwing him to the ground, stamping upon him with their (...),
pulling and dragging him from place to place, some beating him with Clubs,
others pelting him with stones, and some the better to satisfy their revenge,
biting off his Flesh with their Teeth; till apprehending they had fully
dispatched him, they cast him out of the City. But he miraculously recovered,
and publicly returned into the City, whereby and by some other Miracles, which
he wrought amongst them, he reduced many to a better mind, converting them to
the Faith. Departing hence, he went again to Amynsus, and then to Trapezus,
thence to (...); and to Samosata (the birthplace of the witty but impious
Lucian) where having baffled the acute and wise Philosophers, he purposed to
return to Jerusalem. Whence after some time he betook himself to his former
Provinces, travailing to the Country of the Abasgi, where at Sebastople, (...)
upon the Eastern shore of the Euxin Sea, between the (...) of the Rivers Phasis
and Apsarus, he successfully Preached the Gospel to the Inhabitants of that
City. Hence he removed into the Country of the Zecchi, and the Bosphorani, part
of the (...) Scythia or Sarmatia, but finding the Inhabitants very barbarous
and intractable, he staid not long among them, only at Cherson, or Chersonesus,
a great and populous City within the Bosphorus, he continued some time,
instructing and confirming them in the Faith. Hence taking Ship he sailed cross
the Sea to (...), to encourage and confirm the Churches which he had lately
planted in those parts, and here he ordained Philologus, formerly one of S.
Paul's Disciples, Bishop of that City.

4. HENCE he came to Byzantium (since called Constantinople) where he
instructed them in the knowledge of the Christian Religion, founded a Church
for Divine worship, and ordained Stachys (whom S. Paul calls his beloved
Stachys) first Bishop of that place. (...) An. 44. N. 31. vid. ad An. 314. n.
94, 95, etc.
Baronius indeed is unwilling to believe this, desirous to engross the honor
of it to S. Peter, whom he will have to have been the first Planter of
Christianity in these parts. But besides that Baronius his authority is very
slight and insignificant in this case (as we have before noted in S. Peter's
life) this matter is expressly asserted not only by Nicephorus (...). l. 2. c.
39. l. 5. c. 6. p. 540.
Callistus, but by another (...). (...), C. P. in (...), a (...). edit, p. 309.
(...) Man. Grac. (...) supr.
Nicephorus Patriarch of Constantinople, and who therefore may be presumed
(...) in his Predecessors in that See. Banished out of the City by him, who at
that time usurped the Government, he fled to (...), a place near at hand, where
he preached the Gospel for two Years together with good success, converting
great Numbers to the Faith. After this he traveled over Thrace, Macedonia,
Thessaly, Achaia: (...). 25. p. 438.
Nazianzen adds Epyrus, in all which places for many Years he preached and
propagated Christianity, and confirmed the Doctrine that he taught with great
signs and miracles: at last he came to Patrae a City of Achaia, where he gave
his last and great testimony to it, I mean, laid down his own Life to ratify
and ensure it: in describing whose Martyrdom, we shall for the main follow the
account that is given us in the Acts of his Extant apud Sur. ad ditm 30. (...).
p. 653.
Passion, pretended to have been written by the Presbyters and Deacons of
Achaia, present at his Martyrdom; which, though I dare not with some assert to
be the genuine work of those persons, yet can it not be denied to be of
considerable antiquity, being mentioned by De (...). c. 89.
Philastrius, who flourished Ann. 380. and were no doubt written long before
his time. The sum of it is this.

5. AEGEAS, Proconsul of Achaia, came at this time to Patrae, where observing
that multitudes were fallen off from Paganism, and had embraced Christianity,
he endeavored by all arts both of favor and cruelty to reduce the people to
their old Idolatries. To him the Apostle resolutely makes his address, calmly
puts him in mind, that he being but a judge of men should own and revere him,
who was the supreme and impartial Judge of all, that he should give him that
Divine honor that was due to him, and leave off the impieties of his false
Heathen-worship. The Proconsul derided him as an Innovator in Religion, a
propagator of that superstition, whose Author the Jews had infamously put to
death upon a Cross. Hereat the Apostle took occasion to discourse to him of the
infinite love and kindness of our Lord, who came into the World to purchase the
Salvation of mankind, and for that end did not disdain to die upon the Cross.
To whom the Proconsul answered, that he might persuade them so, that would
believe him; for his part, if he did not comply with him in doing sacrifice to
the Gods, he would cause him to suffer upon that Cross, which he had so much
extolled and magnified. S. Andrew replied, That he did sacrifice every day to
God, the only true and omnipotent Being, not with fumes and bloody offerings,
but in the sacrifice of the immaculate Lamb of God. The issue was, the Apostle
was committed to prison, whereat the people were so enraged, that it had broken
out into a mutiny, had not the Apostle restrained them, persuading them to
imitate the mildness and patience of our meek humble Savior, and not to hinder
him from that crown of Martyrdom that now waited for him.

6. THE next day he was again brought before the Proconsul, who persuaded him
that he would not foolishly destroy himself, but live and enjoy with him the
pleasures of this life. The Apostle told him, that he should have with him
eternal joys, if renouncing his execrable idolatries, he would heartily
entertain Christianity, which he had hitherto so successfully preached amongst
them. That, answered the Proconsul, is the very reason, why I am so earnest
with you to sacrifice to the Gods, that those whom you have every where
seduced, may by your example be brought to return back to that ancient
Religion, which they have forsaken: Otherwise I Will cause you with exquisites
tortures to be crucified. The Apostle replied, That now he saw it was in vain
any longer to deal with him, a person incapable of sober counsels, and hardened
in his own blindness and folly; that as for himself, he might do his worst, and
if he had one torment greater than another, he might heap that upon him: The
greater constancy he showed in his sufferings for Christ, the more acceptable
he should be to his Lord and Master. AEgeas could now hold no longer, but
passed the sentence of death upon him; and Lib. 2. (...). 39. p. 200. vid.
(...). ad (...) 30. November. ubi (...) babent.
Nicephorus gives us some more particular account of the Proconsul's
displeasure and rage against him, which was, that amongst others he had
converted his wife Maximilla, and his brother Stratocles to the Christian
Faith, having cured them of desperate distempers that had seized upon them.

7. THE Proconsul first commanded him to be scourged, seven Lictors
successively whipping his naked body; and seeing his invincible patience and
constancy, commanded him to be crucified, but not to be fastened to the Cross
with Nails, but Cords, that so his death might be more lingering and tedious. As
he was led to execution, to which he went with a cheerful and composed mind,
the people cried out, that he was an innocent and good man, and unjustly
condemned to die. Being come within sight (...), 2. (...) S. Andr. (...). 327.
of the Cross, he saluted it with this kind of address, That he had long
desired and expected this happy hour, that the Cross had been consecrated by
the body of Christ hanging on it, and adorned with his members as with so many
inestimable Jewels, that he came joyful and triumphing to it, that it might
receive him as a disciple and follower of him, who once hung upon it, and be
the means to carry him safe unto his Master, having been the instrument upon
which his Master had redeemed him. Having prayed, and exhorted the people to
constancy and perseverance in that Religion which he had delivered to them, he
was fastened to the Cross, whereon he hung two days, teaching and instructing
the people all the time, and when great importunities in the mean while were
used to the Proconsul to spare his life, he earnestly begged of our Lord, that
he might at this time depart and seal the truth of his Religion with his blood.
God heard his prayer, and he immediately expired on the last of November,
though in what year no certain account can be recovered.

8. THERE seems to have been something peculiar in that Cross that was the
instrument of his martyrdom, commonly affirmed to have been a Cross decussate,
two pieces of Timber crossing each other in the middle, in the form of the
letter X, hence usually known by the name of S. Andrew's Cross; though there
want not (...). in S And. (...). 133. p. 120. (...) Comment. MS. Gr. ap. Bar.
Not. in Martyr. ad 30. November.
those, who affirm him to have been crucified upon an Olive Tree. His body
being taken down and embalmed, was decently and honorably interred by
Maximilla, a Lady of great quality and estate, and whom Nicephorus, I know not
upon what ground, makes wise to the Proconsul. As for that report of Di Glor.
Martyr. hb. 1. 6. 31. page 37.
Gregory Bishop of Tours, that on the Anniversary day of his Martyrdom, there
was wont to flow from S. Andrew's Tomb a most fragrant and precious oil, which
according to its quantity denoted the scarceness or plenty of the following
year; and that the sick being anointed with this oil, were restored to their
former health, I leave to the Readers discretion, to believe what he please of
it. For my part, if any ground of truth in the story, I believe it no more,
than that it was an exhalation and sweating sorth at some times of those rich
costly perfumes and ointments, wherewith his Body was embalmed after his
crucisixion. Though I must confess this conjecture to be impossible, if it be
true what my Author adds, that some years the oil burst out in such plenty,
that the stream arose to the middle of the Church. His Body was afterward, by
Constantine the (...). adv. (...). p. 122. T. 2.
Great, solemnly removed to Constantinople, and buried in the great Church,
which he had built to the honor of the Apostles: Which being taken down some
hundred years after by (...). de (...). Justin. lib. 1.
Justinian the Emperor in order to its reparation, the Body was found in a
woodenCoffin, and again reposed in its proper place.

9. I SHALL conclude the History of this Apostle with that Encomiastick
Character, which one of the (...). CCIXIX. Col. 1488.
Ancients gives of him. S. Andrew was the firstborn of the Apostolic Quire,
the main and prime pillar of the Church, a rock before the rock ((...)) the
foundation of that foundation, the first fruits of the beginning, a caller of
others before he was called himself; he preached that Gospel that was not yet
believed or entertained, revealed and made known that life to his brother,
which he had not yet perfectly learned himself. So great treasures did that one
question bring him, Master where dwell thou? which he soon perceived by the
answer given him, and which he deeply pondered in his mind, come and see. How
art thou become a Prophet? whence thus Divinely skilful? what is it that thou
thus soundest in Peter's ears? [ We have found him, etc.] why do thou attempt
to compass him, whom thou can not comprehend? how can he be found, who is
Omnipresent? But he knew well what he said: We have found him, whom Adam lost,
whom Eve injured, whom the clouds of sin have hidden from us, and whom our
transgressions had hitherto made a stranger to us, etc. So that of all our
Lord's Apostles S. Andrew had thus far the honor to be the first Preacher of
the Gospel.

The End of S. Andrew's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. JAMES the Great.
St. James Major
He being the Son of Zebedee was at the Command of Herod beheaded at
Jerusalem. Ad. 122

St. James the Great his Martyrdom.
Act. 12. 1, 2. About that time Herod the King streched forth his hands to vex
certain of the Church. And he killed James the brother of John with ye sword.




S. James, why surnamed the Great. His Country and kindred. His alliance to
Christ. His Trade and way of Life. Our Lord brought up to a Manual Trade. The
quick repartee of a Christian Schoolmaster to Libanius. His being called to be
a Disciple, and great readiness to follow Christ. His election to the
Apostolic Office, and peculiar favors from Christ. Why our Lord chose some
few of the Apostles to be witnesses of the more private passages of his life.
The imposition of a new name at his election to the Apostleship. He and his
Brother styled Boanerges, and why. The Zeal and activity of their temper. Their
ambition to sit on Christ's right and left hand in his Kingdom, and confident
promise of suffering. This ill resented by the rest. Our Lord's discourse
concerning the nature of the Evangelical state. Where he preached after
Christ's Ascension. The story of his going into Spain exploded. Herod Agrippa
in favor with the Roman Emperors. The character of his temper. His zeal for
the Law of Moses. His condemning S. James to death. The sudden conversion of
his Accuser, as he was led to Martyrdom. Their being beheaded. The Divine
Justice that pursued Herod. His grandeur and arrogance at Caesarea. His
miserable death. The story of the Translation of S. James his Corpse to
Compostella in Spain, and the Miracles said to be done there.

1. SAINT James surnamed the Great, either because of his Age, being much elder
than the other, or for some peculiar honors and favors which our Lord
conferred upon him, was by Country a Galilean, born, probably, either at
Gapernaum, or Bethsaida, being one of Simon Peter's Partners in the Trade of
Fishing. He was the Son of Zebdai, or Zebedee, (and probably the same whom the
Jews mention in their Talmud, (...) Rabbi James or Jacob the Son of Zebedee) a
Fisherman, and the many servants which he kept for that employment (a
circumstance Mark 1. 20.
not taken notice of in any other) speak him a man of some more considerable
note in that Trade and way of life; (...), as H. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 3. p. 135.
Nicephorus notes. His Mother's name was Mary, surnamed Salome, called first
Taviphilja, says an ancient Arabic Apud Kirsten. de vit. Quat. Evangel. p. 47.
writer; the Daughter, as is most probable, not Wife of Cleopas, Sister to Mary
the Mother of our Lord; not her own Sister properly so called (the Blessed
Virgin being in all likelihood an only Daughter) but Cousingerman, styled her
Sister, according to the mode and custom of the Jews, who were John 19. 25.
wont to call all such near relations by the names of Brothers and Sisters; and
in this respect he had the honor of a near relation to our Lord himself. His
education was in the Trade of Fishing; no employment is base, that is honest and
industrious, nor can it be thought mean and dishonorable to him, when it is
remembered, that our Lord himself, the Son of God, stooped so low, as not only
to become the [reputed] Son of a Carpenter, but during the retirements of his
private life, to work himself at his Father's Trade, not devoting himself
merely to contemplations, nor withdrawing from all useful society with the
World, and hiding himself in the solitudes of an Anchoret, but busying himself
in an active course of life, working at the Trade of a Carpenter, and
particularly (as one of the (...). J. Mart. dial. cum Tryph. p. 316.
Ancients tells us) making Ploughs and Yokes. And Mark 6. 3.
this the sacred History does not only plainly intimate, but it is generally
asserted by the Matthew 13. 55.
Ancient writers of the (...). Bas. Constit. Monast. c. 4. p. 764. Tom. 2. vid.
Hilar. in Matthew. Can. 14.
Church: A thing so notorious, that the Heathens used to object it as a
reproach to Christianity. Thence that smart and acute Theod. H. Eccl. l. 3. c.
18. p. 105.
repartee which a Christian Schoolmaster made to Libanius the famous Orator at
Antioch, when upon Julian's expedition into Persia (where he was killed) he
asked in scorn, what the Carpenters Son was now a doing. The Christian replied
with salt enough, That the great Artificer of the World, whom he scoffingly
called the Carpenter's Son, was making a coffin for his Master Julian; the news
of whose death was brought soon after. But this only by the way.

2. S. JAMES applied himself to his Father's Trade, not discouraged with the
meanness, not sinking under the difficulties of it; and, as usually the
blessings of Heaven meet men in the way of an honest and industrious diligence,
it was in the exercise of this calling, when our Savior passing by the Sea of
Galilee, saw him and his brother in the Ship, and called them to be his
Disciples. A Divine power went along with the word, which they no sooner heard,
but cheerfully complied with it, immediately leaving all to follow him. They
did not stay to dispute his commands, to argue the probability of his promise,
solicitously to enquire into the minute consequences of the undertaking, what
troubles and hazards might attend this new employment, but readily delivered up
themselves to whatever services he should appoint them. And the cheerfulness of
their obedience is yet further considerable, that they left their aged Father
in the Ship behind them. For elsewhere we find others excusing themselves Luke
9. 59. 61.
from an immediate attendance upon Christ, upon pretense that they must go bury
their Father, or take their leave of their kindred at home. No such slight and
trivial pretenses could stop the resolution of our Apostles, who broke through
these considerations, and quitted their present interests and relations. Say
not it was unnaturally done of them to desert their Father, an aged person, and
in some measure unable to help himself. For, besides that they left servants
with him to attend him, it is not cruelty to our Earthly, but obedience to our
Heavenly Father, to leave the one, that we may comply with the call and summons
of the other. It was the triumph of Abraham's Faith, when God called him to
leave his kindred and his Father's house, to go out, and sojourn in a foreign
Country, not knowing whither he went. Nor can we doubt but that Zebedee himself
would have gone along with them, had not his Age given him a Supersedeas from
such an active and ambulatory course of life. But though they left him at this
time, it is very reasonable to suppose, that they took care to instruct him in
the doctrine of the Messiah, and to acquaint him with the glad tidings of
Salvation, especially since we find their Mother Salome so hearty a friend to,
so constant a follower of our Savior: But this (if we may believe the account
which one gives of it) was after her Husbands Zachar. Chrysopol. Comm. in
Concord.
decease, who probably lived not long after, dying before the time of our
Savior's Evang. p. 111.
Passion.

3. IT was not long after this, that he was called from the station of an
ordinary Disciple, to the Apostolical Office, and not only so, but honored
with some peculiar acts of favor beyond most of the Apostles, being one of the
three, whom our Lord usually made choice of to admit to the more intimate
transactions of his life, from which the others were excluded. Thus with Peter
and his Brother John he was taken to the miraculous raising of Jairus his
Daughter; admitted to Christ's glorious transfiguration upon the Mount, and the
discourses that there passed between him and the two great Ministers of Heaven;
taken along with him into the Garden, to be a Spectator of those bitter
Agonies, which the Holy Jesus was to undergo as the preparatory sufferings to
his Passion. What were the reasons of our Lord's admitting these three Apostles
to these more special acts of favor than the rest, is not easy to determine:
though surely our Lord, who governed all his actions by Principles of the
highest prudence and reason, did it for wise and proper ends; whether it was
that he designed these three to be more solemn and peculiar witnesses of some
particular passages of his life, than the other Apostles, or that they would be
more eminently useful and serviceable in some parts of the Apostolic Office,
or that hereby he would the better prepare and encourage them against
suffering, as intending them for some more eminent kinds of Martyrdom or
suffering, than the rest were to undergo.

4. NOR was it the least instance of that particular honor which our Lord
conferred upon these three Apostles, that at his calling them to the Apostolat
he gave them the addition of a new Name and Title. A thing not unusual of old,
for God to impose a new Name upon Persons, when designing them for some great
and peculiar services and employments; thus he did to Abraham and Jacob. Nay
the thing was customary among the Gentiles, as had we no other instances, might
appear from those which the Scripture gives us, of Pharaoh's giving a new name
to Joseph, when advancing him to be Viceroy of Egypt. (...) to Daniel; etc.
Thus did our Lord in the Election of these three Apostles, Simon he surnamed
Peter, James the Son of Zebedee, and Mark 3. 16, 17. (...). Ccmm. in Marc. c.
3. p. 92. T. 9. Gaudent, (...). Tract 1. de Lect. Evang. seu, in ordine, 8.
John his Brother he surnamed Boanerges, which is, the Sons of Thunder. What
our Lord particularly intended in this Title, is easier to conjecture, than
certainly to determine; some think it was given them upon the account of their
being present in the Mount, when a voice came out of the Cloud, and said, This
is my beloved Son, etc. The like whereto when the People heard at another time,
they cried out, that it Thundered. But Matthew. 17. 5.
besides that this account is in it self very slender and inconsiderable, if
so, then the title Joh. 12. 29.
must equally have belonged to Peter, who was then present with them. Others
think it was upon the account of their loud, bold and resolute preaching Filios
Zebedaei Boanerges, hcc est, (...) tonitrui vccat, (...) divina little
praedicatio magnum (...) and illustrem sonitum per terrarum Orbem datura crat.
Vict. Anticch, comment. in Marc. cap. 2.
Christianity to the World, fearing no threatenings, daunted with no
oppositions, but going on to thunder in the Ears of the secure sleepy World,
rouzing and awakening the consciences of Men with the earnestness and vehemence
of their Preaching, as Thunder, which is called God's Voice, powerfully shakes
the natural World, and breaks in pieces the (...) of Lebanon: Or, if it relate
to the Doctrines they delivered, it may signify their teaching the great
mysteries and speculations of the Gospel in a profounder strain than the rest;
(...), Comment, in Marc. 3. p. 205.
as Theophylact notes; which how true it might be of our S. James, the
Scripture is wholly silent; but was certainly verified of his Brother John,
whose Gospel is so full of the more sublime notions and mysteries of the
Gospel, concerning Christ's Deity, eternal prae-existence, etc. that he is
generally affirmed by the Ancients, not so much to speak, as thunder. Probably
the expression may denote no more, than that in general Heb. 12. 26.
Hagg. 2. 7. (...) (...) tremere faciam. (...) (...) seu (...).
they were to be prime and eminent Ministers in this new scene and state of
things, the introducing of the Gospel or Evangelical dispensation, being called
a Voice shaking the Heavens and the Earth, and so is exactly correspondent to
the native importance of the Word, signifying an Earthquake, or a vehement
commotion that makes a noise like to Thunder.

5. HOWEVER it was, our Lord, I doubt not, herein had respect to the furious
and resolute disposition of those two Brothers, who seem to have been of a more
fierce and fiery temper than the rest of the Apostles: whereof we have this
memorable instance. Our Lord being resolved upon his Journey to Jerusalem, sent
some of his Disciples as Harbingers to prepare his way, who coming to a Village
of Samaria, were uncivilly rejected, and refused entertainment; probably,
because of that old and inveterate quarrel that was between the Samaritans and
the Jews, and more especially at this time, because our Savior seemed to
slight Mount Gerizim (where was their staple and solemn place of worship) by
passing it by, to go worship at Jerusalem; the reason in all likelihood why
they denied him those common courtesies and conveniences due to all Travelers.
This piece of rudeness and inhumanity was presently so deeply resented by S.
James, and his Brother, that they came to their Master to know, whether as
Elias did of old, they might not pray down Fire from Heaven to consume these
barbarous and Luke 9. 54.
inhospitable People. So apt are Men for every trifle to call upon Heaven, to
Minister to the extravagancies of their own impotent and unreasonable passions.
But our Lord rebukes their zeal, tells them they quite mistook the case, that
this was not the frame and temper of his Disciples and Followers, the nature
and design of that Evangelical dispensation, that he was come to set on foot in
the World, which was a more pure and perfect, a more mild and gentle
Institution, than what was under the Old Testament in the times of Moses and
Elias, The Son of Man being come not to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

6. THE Holy Jesus not long after set forwards in his Journey to Jerusalem in
order to his crucifixion, and the better to prepare the minds of his Apostles
for his death and departure from them, he told them what he was to suffer, and
yet that after all he should rise again. They, whose minds were yet big with
expectations of a temporal power and monarchy, understood not well the meaning
of his discourses to them. However S. James and his Brother supposing the
Resurrection that he spoke of, would be the time, when his Power and Greatness
would commence, prompted their Mother Salome to put (...). 20. 20.
up a Petition for them. She, presuming probably on her relation to Christ, and
knowing that our Savior had promised his Apostles, that when he was come into
his Kingdom, they should sit upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel; and that he had already honored her two Sons with an intimate
familiarity, after leave modestly asked for her address, begged of him, that
when he took possession of his Kingdom, her two Sons James and John might have
the principal places of honor and dignity next his own Person, the one sitting
on his right hand, and the other on his left, as the Heads of Judah and Joseph
had the first places among the Rulers of the Tribes in the Jewish Nation. Our
Lord directing his discourse to the two Apostles, at whose suggestion he knew
their Mother had made this address, told them, they quite mistook the nature of
his Kingdom, which consisted not in external grandeur and sovereignty, but in
an inward life and power, wherein the highest place would be to take the
greatest pains, and to undergo the heaviest troubles and sufferings; that they
should do well to consider, whether they were able to endure, what he was to
undergo, to drink of that bitter Cup which he was to drink of, and to go
through that Baptism, wherein he was shortly to be baptized in his own blood.
Our Apostles were not yet cured of their ambitious humor, but either not
understanding the force of our Savior's reasonings, or too confidently
presuming upon their own strength, answered, that they could do all this. But
he, the goodness of whose nature ever made him put the best and most candid
interpretation upon men's words and actions, yea even those of his greatest
enemies, did not take the advantage of their hasty and inconsiderate reply, to
treat them with sharp and quick reproofs, but mildly owning their forwardness
to suffer, told them, that as for sufferings, they should indeed suffer as well
as he (and so we accordingly find they did, S. James after all dying a violent
death, S. John enduring great miseries and torments, and might we believe
Chrysostom and Theophylact, Martyrdom it self, though others nearer to those
times assure us, he died a natural death) but for any peculiar honor or
dignity he would not by an absolute and peremptory favor of his own dispose it
any otherwise, than according to those rules and instructions which he had
received of his Father. The rest of the Apostles were offended with this
ambitious request of the Sons of Zebedee; but our Lord to calm their passions,
discoursed to them of the nature of the Evangelick state, that it was not here,
as in the Kingdoms and seignteuries of this World, where the great ones receive
homage and fealty from those that are under them, but that in his service
humility was the way to honor, that who ever took most pains, and did most
good, would be the greatest Person, pre-eminence being here to be measured by
industry and diligence, and a ready condescension to the meanest offices that
might be subservient to the Souls of Men, and that this was no more than what
he sufficiently taught them by his own Example, being come into the World, not
to be served himself with any pompous circumstances of state and splendour, but
to serve others, and to lay down his life for the redemption of Mankind. With
which discourse the storm blew over, and their exorbitant passions began on all
hands to be allayed and pacified.

7. WHAT became of S. James after our Savior's Ascension, we have no certain
account either from Sacred, or Ecclesiastic stories. (...). Hitron. de Script.
(...) Jacob.
Sophronius tells us, that he preached to the dispersed Jews, which surely he
means of that dispersion that was made of the Jewish Converts after the death
of Stephen. The Spanish writers generally contend, that having preached the
Gospel up and down (...) and Samaria, after the death of Stephen he came to
these Western parts, and particularly into Spain (some add Britain and Pseudo.
(...). Chronic. (...). H (...). 8. c. 7.
Ircland) where he planted Christianity, and appointed some select Disciples to
perfect what he had begun, and then returned back to Jerusalem. Of this are no
footsteps in any Ancient writers, earlier than the middle Ages of the Church,
when it is mentioned by (...) vit. and obit, S S. (...) Test. c. 72.
Isidore, the Breviary of Brev. Tol. (...). S. (...). ri.
Toledo, an Arabic Book of Apud (...). de adv. Jac. in Hispan. c. 7. p. 11.
sid ex side (...).
Anastasius, Patriarch of Antioch, concerning the Passions of the (...), and
some others after them. Nay, In Not. ad Martyrol. ad 25. Jul p. 452. vid. Orat.
Roder. A. (...). Tol. in (...). G. (...). ad decret. Gund. Tom. 4. Council. p.
548, 549.
Baronius himself, though endeavoring to render the account as smooth and
plausible as he could, and to remove what objections lay against it; yet after
all confesses, he did it only to show, that the thing was not impossible, nor
to be accounted such a monstrous and extravagant Fable, as some men made it to
be, as indeed elsewhere he plainly and peremptorily both denies and disproves
it. He could not but Ad Ann. DCCCXVI. Number. 69, 70. Tom. 9.
see, that the shortness of this Apostle's Life, the Apostles continuing all in
one entire body at Jerusalem, even after the dispersing of the other
Christians, probably not going out of the bounds of (...) for many years after
our Lord's Ascension, could not comport with so tedious and difficult a voyage,
and the time which he must necessarily spend in those parts: And therefore it is
(...) to confine his ministry to Judaea, and the parts thereabouts, and to seek
for him at Jerusalem, where we are sure to find him.

8. HEROD Agrippa, son of Aristobulus, and Grandchild of Herod the Great (under
whom Christ was born) had been in great favor with the late Emperor Caligula,
but much more with his successor Claudius, who confirmed his predecessors
grant, with the addition of Judaea, Samaria, and Abylene, the remaining
portions of his Grandfathers dominions. Claudius being settled in the Empire,
over comes Herod from Rome to take possession, and to manage the affairs of his
new acquired Kingdom. A Prince noble and generous, prudent and politic,
thoroughly versed in all the arts of Courtship, able to oblige enemies, and to
(...) or decline the displeasure of the Emperor, (witness his subtle and
cunning insinuations to Caligula, when he commanded the Jews to account him a
Vid. Epist. (...) ad (...) Imp. ap. Phil. de Legate. ad (...). p. 1031. and seqq.
God) he was one that knew, let the wind blow which way it would, how to gain
the point he aimed at, of a courteous and affable demeanor, but withal (...);
Joseph. Antiquit. Jud. (...). 19. c. 7. p. 677.
(...), a mighty zealot for the Jewish Religion, and a most accurate observer
of the Mosaic Law, keeping himself free from all legal impurities, and
suffering no day to pass over his head, in which he himself was not present at
sacrifice. Being desirous in the entrance upon his sovereignty to insinuate
himself into the favor of the populacy, and led no less by his own zealous
inclination, he saw no better way, than to fall heavy upon the Christians, a
sort of men, whom he knew the Jews infinitely hated, as a novel and an upstart
Sect, whose Religion proclaimed open desiance to the Mosaic Institutions.
Hereupon he began to raise a persecution, but alas, the commonalty were too
mean a sacrifice to fall as the only victim to his zeal and popular designs, he
must have a fatter and more honorable sacrifice. It was not long before S.
James his stirring and active temper, his bold reproving of the Jews, and
vigorous contending for the truth and excellency of the Christian Religion,
rendered him a sit object for his turn. Him he commands to be apprehended, cast
into prison, and sentence of death to be passed upon him. As he was led forth
to the place of Clem. Alex. Hypotyp. lib. 7. apud Eusebius. (...). 2. c. 9. p. 46.
Martyrdom, the Soldier or Officer that had guarded him to the Tribunal, or
rather his Accuser (and so Said. in voc. (...).
Suidas expressly tells us it was) having been convinced by that mighty courage
and constancy which S. James showed at the time of his trial, repented of what
he done, came and fell down at the Apostle's feet, and heartily begged pardon
for what he said against him. The holy man, after a little surprise at the
thing, raised him up, embraced and kissed him, Peace (said he) my son, peace be
to thee, and the pardon of thy faults. Whereupon before them all he publicly
professed himself to be a Christian, and so both were beheaded at the same
time. Thus fell S. James, the Apostolic Proto-Martyr, the first of that number
that gained the Crown, cheerfully taking that cup, which he had long since told
his Lord he was most ready to drink of.

9. BUT the Divine vengeance, that never sleeps, suffered not the death of this
innocent and righteous man to pass long unrevenged; of which, though S. Luke
gives us but a short account, yet (...). Jud. lib. 19. cap. 7. p. 679.
Josephus, who might himself remember it, being a youth at that time of seven
or eight years of age, sets down the story with its particular circumstances,
agreeing almost exactly with the Sacred Historian. Shortly after S. James his
Martyrdom, Herod removed to Caesarea, being resolved to make war upon the
neighboring Tyrians and Sidonians: While he was here, he proclaimed solemn
sights and Festival entertainments to be held in honor of Caesar, to which
there flocked a great confluence of all the Nobility thereabouts. Early in the
morning on the second day he came with great state into the Theater, to make an
Oration to the people, being clothed in a Robe all over curiously wrought with
silver, which encountering with the beams of the rising Sun, reflected such a
luster upon the eyes of the people (who make sensible appearances the only true
measures of greatness) as begot an equal wonder and veneration in them, crying
out (prompted no doubt by flatterers, who began the cry) that it was some Deity
which they beheld, and that he who spoke to them must be something above the
ordinary standard of humanity. This impious applause Herod received without any
token of dislike, or sense of that injury that was hereby done to the supreme
Being of the World. But a sudden accident changed the scene, and turned the
Gomick part into a black fatal Tragedy. Hunc Josephi locum laudans (...), totam
bubonis mentionem (...), jusque loco (...) substituit: (...) quidem (...) mala
side.
Looking up, he espied an Owl sitting upon a rope over his head (as probably
also he did an Angel, for so S. Luke mentions it) which he presently beheld as
the fatal messenger of his death, as heretofore it had been of his prosperity
and success. An incurable melancholy immediately seized upon his mind, as
exquisite torments did upon his bowels, caused without question by those (...)
S. Luke speaks of, which immediately fed and (...)
preyed upon him. Behold, said he, turning to those about him, the Deity you
admired, and your selves evidently convinced of flattery and falsehood; see me
here by the Laws of Fate condemned to die, whom just now you styled immortal.
Being removed into the Palace, his pains still increased upon him, and though
the people mourned and wept, fasted and prayed for his life and health, yet his
acute torments got the upper hand, and after five days put a period to his
life. But to return to S. James.

10. BEING put to death, his Body is said to have taken a second voyage into
Spain, where we are with confidence enough told it rests at this day. Indeed I
meet with a very formal account of its translation thither, written (says the
Publisher) above DC. years since, by a Monk of the Abbey of La-Fleury in
Comment. dt (...). S. Jacob. Apost. ap. Joan. a (...). Biblioth. Floriac. Part.
2 p. 183, etc.
France: The sum whereof is this: The Apostles at Jerusalem designing
Ctesiphon for Spain, ordained him Bishop, and others being joined to his
assistance, they took the Body of S. James, and went on board a Ship without
Oars, without a Pilot, or any to steer and conduct their voyage, trusting only
to the merits of that Apostle, whose remains they carried along with them. In
seven days they arrived at a Port in Spain, where landing, the Corpse was
suddenly taken from them, and with great appearances of an extraordinary light
from Heaven, conveyed they knew not whither, to the place of its interment. The
men you may imagine were exceedingly troubled, that so great a treasure should
be ravished from them; but upon their prayers and tears they were conducted by
an Angel to the place where the Apostle was buried, twelve miles from the Sea.
Here they addressed themselves to a rich Noble Matron, called Luparia, who had
a great Estate in those parts, but a severe Idolatress, begging of her, that
they might have leave to intomb the bones of the holy Apostle within her
jurisdiction. She entertained them with contempt and scorn, with curses and
execrations, bidding them go and ask leave of the King of the Country. They did
so, but were by him treated with all the instances of rage and fury, and
pursued by him, till himself perished in the attempt. They returned back to
their Gallaecian Matron, whom by many miracles, and especially the destroying a
Dragon that miserably infested those parts, they at last made Convert to the
Faith, who thereupon commanded her Images to be broken, the Altars to be
demolished, and her own Idol-Temple, being cleansed and purged, to be dedicated
to the honor of S. James, by which means Christianity mightily prevailed, and
triumphed over Idolatry in all those Countries. This is the sum of the
Account, call it Romance or History, which I do not desire to impose any
further upon the Readers faith, than he shall find himself disposed to believe
it. I add no more, than that his Body was afterward translated from Iria
Flavia (the place of its first repose) to Compostella: Though a Learned Is.
(...). Observat. in (...). Mel. lib. 3. (...). 1. p. 231.
person will have it to have been but one and the same place, and that after
the story of S. James had gotten some footing in the belief of men, it began to
be called ad Jacobum Apostolum, thence in aftertimes Giacomo (...), which was
at last jumbled into Compostella; where it were to tire both the Reader and my
self, to tell him with what solemn veneration, and incredible miracles reported
to be done here, this Apostle's relics are worshipped at this day: Whence
(...) Number. 72.
Baronius calls it the great storehouse of Miracles lying open to the whole
World, and wisely confesses it one of the best arguments to prove, that his
Body was translated thither. And I should not scruple to be of his mind, could
I be assured that such Miracles were truly done there.

The End of the Life of S. James the Great.
THE LIFE OF S. JOHN.
S. JOHN Evangelist.
Having lived to a great age, he died at Ephesus 68 years after our Lords
Passion, and was Buried near that City. Baron.

St John put into a Cauldron of boiling oil.
Joh. 21. 21, 32. Peter sait, Lord, what shall this man do? Jesus says unto
hun. if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?

1 Pet. 4. 12. Think it not strange concerning I fiery trial that is to try
you, as though some strange thing happened to you.




His kindred and relations; whether eminent for Nobility. The peculiar favors
conferred upon him by our Savior. His lying in our Lord's Bosom. His attending
at the crucifixion. Our Lord's committing the Blessed Virgin to his care. The
great intimacy between him and Peter. How long he resided at Jerusalem. Asia
his Apostolical Province. His planting Christianity there, and in other parts
of the East. His being sent prisoner to Rome, and being put into a Caldron of
boiling Oil by the command of Domitian. His banishment into Patmos.
Transportation, what kind of punishment. Capitis Diminutio what. His writing
the Apocalypse there. The tradition of his hand wherewith he wrote it, being
still kept there. His return to Ephesus, and governing the affairs of that
Province. His great Age, and Death. The fancy of his being still alive, whence
derived by the Ancients. The Tradition of his going alive into his Grave, and
sleeping there. Several counterfeits pretending themselves to be S. John. His
Celibacy; whether he was ever married. His humility. His admirable love and
charity, and hearty recommending it to the last. His charity to men's Souls. His
endangering himself to reclaim (...) debauched young man. His singular
vigilance against Heretics and Seducers. His public disowning Cerinthus his
company, Cerinthus, who, and what his principles. The Heresy of Ebion, what.
Nicolaitans, who; whence their Original. An account of Nicolas the Deacon's
separating from his Wife. The vile principles and practices of his pretended
followers. S. John's writings. His Revelation. Dionysius Alexandrinus his
judgment concerning it, and its Author. Asserted and proved to be S. John's.
The ground of doubting, what. His Gospel when and where written. The solemn
(...), and causes moving him to undertake it. The subject of it sublime and
mysterious. Admired and cited by Heathen Philosophers. Its Translation into
Hebrew. His first Epistle, and the design of it. His two other Epistles to whom
written, and why not admitted of old. His (...) and way of writing considered.
The great Encomium given of his writings by the ancient Fathers.

1. SAINT John was a Galilean, the Son of Zebedee and Salome, younger Brother
to S. James, together with whom he was brought up in the Trade of Fishing.
(...) notus er at (...), and (...) insidias non (...), in tantum (...) in
(...), and staret solus Apostolorum (...) salvatoris in sua (...). Epitaph.
Marcell. p. 119. T. 1.
S. (...) makes him remarkable upon the account of his Nobility, whereby he
became acquainted with the High Priest, and resolutely ventured himself amongst
the Jews at our Savior's Trial, prevailed to introduce Peter into the Hall,
was the only Apostle that attended our Lord at his Crucifixion, and afterward
durst own his Mother, and keep her at his own house. But the nobility of his
Family, and especially that it should be such as to procure him so much respect
from persons of the highest rank and quality, seems not reconcilable with the
meanness of his Father's Trade, and the privacy of his fortunes. And for his
acquaintance with the High Priest, I should rather put it upon some other
account, especially if it be true what H. Eccl. lib. 1. (...). 28. p. 104. vid.
lib. 2. c. 3. p. 135. ubi (...) Caipha (...) dicit.
Nicephorus relates, That he had lately sold his Estate left him by his Father
in Galilee to Annas the HighPriest, and had therewith purchased a fair house at
Jerusalem, about Mount Sion, whence he became acquainted with him. Before his
coming to Christ, he seems for some time to have been Disciple to John the
Baptist, being probably that other disciple that was with Andrew, when they
left the Baptist to follow our Savior, so particularly does he relate all
circumstances of that transaction, though modestly, as in other parts of his
Gospel, concealing his own name. He was at the same time with his Brother
called by our Lord both to the Discipleship and Apostolate, by far the youngest
of all the Apostles, as the Ancients generally affirm, and his great Age seems
to evince, living near LXX. years after our Savior's suffering.

2. THERE is not much said concerning him in the (...) story, more than what is
recorded of him in conjunction with his Brother James, which we have already
remarked in his life. He was peculiarly dear to his Lord and Master, being the
Disciple whom Jesus loved, that is, treated with more freedom and familiarity
than the rest. And indeed he was not only one of the Three, whom our Savior
made partakers of the private passages of his life, but had some instances of a
more particular kindness and favor conferred upon him. Witness his lying in
our Savior's bosom at the Paschal Supper, it being the custom of those times
to lie along at meals upon Couches, so that the second lay with his head in the
bosom of him that was before him; this honorable place was not given to any of
the Aged, but reserved for our Apostle: Nay, when Peter was desirous to know,
which of them our Savior meant, when he told them that one of them should
betray him, and durst not himself propound the question, he made use of S. John
(whose familiarity with him might best warrant such an enquiry) to ask our
Lord; who thereupon made them understand, 'twas Judas whom he designed by the
Traitor. This favor our Apostle endeavored in some measure to answer by
returns of particular kindness and constancy to our Savior, staying with him,
when the rest deserted him. Indeed upon our Lord's first apprehension he fled
after the other Apostles, it not being without some probabilities of reason,
that the Ancients conceive him to have been that young man that followed after
Christ; having a Mark 14. 51.
linen cloth cast about his naked body, whom when the Officers laid hold upon,
he left the linen cloth, and fled naked from them. This in all likelihood was
that garment that he had cast about him at Supper (for they had peculiar
Vestments for that purpose) and being extremely affected with the Treason, and
our Lord's approaching Passion, had forgot to put on his other garments, but
followed him into the Garden in the same habit wherewith he arose from the
Table, it being then night, and so less liable to be taken notice of either by
himself or others. But though he (...) at present to avoid that sudden violence
that was offered to him, yet he soon recovered himself, and returned back to
seek his Master, confidently entered into the Highpriests Hall, and followed
our Lord through the several passages of his Trial, and at last waited upon him
(and for any thing we know, was the only Apostle that did so) at his Execution,
owning him, as well as being owned by him, in the midst of arms and guards, and
in the thickest crowds of his most inveterate enemies. Here it was that our
Lord by his last Will and Testament made upon the Cross, appointed him Guardian
of his own Mother, the Blessed Virgin; When he saw his Mother, and the Disciple
standing by whom he Joh. 19. 26, 27.
loved, he said unto his Mother, Woman, behold thy Son, see, here is one that
shall supply my place, and be to thee instead of a Son, to love and honor
thee, to provide and take care for thee: and to the Disciple he said, Behold
thy Mother; Her, whom thou shall henceforth deal with, treat and observe with
that duty and honorable regard, which the relation of an indulgent Mother
challenges from a pious and obedient Son: whereupon he took her into his own
House, her Husband Joseph being some time since dead, and made her a principal
part of his charge and care. And certainly the Holy Jesus could not have given
a more honorable testimony of his particular respect and kindness to S. John,
than to commit his own Mother, whom of all earthly Relations he held most dear
and valuable, to his trust and care, and to substitute him to supply that duty
which he himself paid her while he was here below.

3. AT the first news of our Lord's return from the dead, he, accompanied with
Peter, presently hasted to the Sepulcher. Indeed there seems to have been a
mutual intimacy between these two Apostles more than the rest. 'Twas to Peter
that S. John gave the notice of Christ's appearing, when he came to them at the
Sea of (...) in the habit of a stranger; and it was for John that Peter was so
sollicitously inquisitive to know what should become of him. After Christ's
Ascension, we find these two going up to the Temple at the Hour of Prayer, and
miraculously healing the poor impotent Cripple; both Preaching to the People,
and both apprehended together by the Priests and (...), and thrown into Prison,
and the next Day brought forth to plead their cause before the (...). These
were the two chosen by the Apostles to send down to Samaria, to settle and
confirm the Plantations which Philip had made in those Parts, where they
confounded and baffled Simon the Magician, and set him in an hopeful way to
repentance. To these S. Paul addressed himself, as those that seemed to be
Pillars among the rest, who accordingly gave him the right hand of fellowship;
and confirmed his mission to the Gentiles.

4. IN the division of Provinces which the Apostles made among themselves,
(...). l. 3. c. 1. p. 71.
Asia fell to his share, though he did not presently enter upon his charge,
otherwise we must needs have heard of him in the account which S. Luke gives of
S. Paul's several Journies into, and residence in those parts. Probable
therefore it is, that he dwelt still in his own House at Jerusalem, at least
till the death of the Blessed Virgin (and this is plainly asserted by H. Eccl.
lib. 2. c. 42. p. 206.
Nicephorus from the account of those Historians that were before him) whose
death (says In Chron. (...). B (...). ad An. 48. N. 4.
(...)) happened Ann. Chr. XLVIII. about Fifteen Years after our Lord's
Ascension. Some time (probably Years) after her death he took his Journey into
Asia, and industriously applied himself to the propagating Christianity,
Preaching where the Gospel had not yet taken place, and confirming it where it
was already planted. Many Churches of note and eminency were of his foundation,
Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea, and others; but his
chief place of residence was at Ephesus, where S. Paul had many Years before
settled a Church, and constituted Timothy Bishop of it. Nor can we suppose that
he confined his Ministry merely to Asia Minor, but that he Preached in other
Parts of the East; probably in Parthia, his first Epistle being anciently
entitled to them; and the (...). Jesuit, Ann. 1555.
Jesuits in the relation of their success in those Parts, assure us that the
Bassorae (a People of India) constantly affirm from a Tradition received from
their Ancestors, that S. John Planted the Christian Faith there.

5. HAVING spent many Years in this employment, he was at length accused to
Domitian, who had begun a Persecution against the Christians, as an eminent
assertor of Atheism and impiety, and a public subverter of the Religion of the
Empire. By his command the Proconsul of Asia sent him bound to (...)
Apostolicas, apud quas (...) Apostolorum, etc. habes Romam, etc. ubi (...) in
Oleum (...) demersus, nibil (...) est, in Insulam relegatur. (...). de
Praescript. (...). c. 36. p. 215.
Rome, where his treatment was, what might be expected from so bloody and
barbarous a Prince; he was cast into a Cauldron of boiling Oil, or rather Oil
set on Fire. But that Divine Providence that secured the three Hebrew Captives
in the flames of a burning Furnace, brought this (...) Man safe out of this,
one would have thought, unavoidable destruction. An instance of so signal
preservation, as had been enough to persuade a considering Man, that there must
be a Divinity in that Religion that had such mighty and solemn attestations.
But Miracles themselves will not convince him, that is fallen under an hard
heart, and an injudicious mind. The cruel Emperor was not satisfied with this,
but presently orders him to be banished and transported into an Island. This
was accounted a kind of capital punishment, (...) (...), says (...) p. 444.
Pachymer, speaking of this very instance, where (...) is not to be understood
as extending to life, but loss of privilege. Therefore this punishment in the
1. (...). lib. (...). 16. (...). 2. l. 2. and 4. ff, de (...). lib. 48. Tu. 19.
L. 3 ad (...). Jul (...). ib. (...). 13. vid. L. 6. and 7. de (...). and Rel.
ib. (...). 22.
Roman Laws is called Capitis (...) (and it was the second sort of it) because
the Person thus banished was disfranchised, and the City thereby lost an head.
It succeeded in the room of that ancient punishment, Aqua and igni interdicere,
to interdict a Person the use of Fire and Water, the two great and necessary
conveniences of Man's life, whereby was tacitly implied, that he must for his
own defense betake himself into banishment; it being unlawful for any to
accommodate him with Lodging or Diet, or any thing necessary to the support of
life. This banishing into Islands was properly called Deportatio, and was the
worst and severest kind of exile, whereby the criminal forfeited his Estate,
and being bound and put on Shipboard was by public Officers transported into
some certain Island (which none but the Emperor himself might assign) there to
be confined to perpetual banishment. The place of our S. John's banishment was
not Ephesus, as Argum. E pist. ad (...). p. 1032.
Chrysostom by a great mistake makes it, but Patmos, a disconsolate Island in
the Archipelago, where he remained several Years, instructing the Inhabitants
in the Faith of Christ. Here it was about the latter end of Domitian's Reign,
(as (...) tells Adv. (...). lib. 5. c. 30. p. 485.
us) that he wrote his Apocalypse or Book of Revelations, wherein by frequent
Visions and Prophetical representments, he had a clear Scheme and Prospect of
the state and condition of Christianity in the future Periods and Ages of the
Church. Which certainly was not the least instance of that kindness and favor
which our Lord particularly showed to this Apostle; and it seemed very suitable
at this time, that the goodness of God should overpower the malice of Men, and
that he should be entertained with the more (...) converses of Heaven, who was
now cut off from all ordinary conversation and society with Men. In a Monastery
of Caloires, or Greek Monks in this Island, they show a dead Man's hand at this
(...). lib. 2. c. 11. p. 205.
day, the Nails of whose Fingers grow again as often as they are paired; which
the Turks will have to be the hand of one of their Prophets, while the Greeks
constantly affirm it to have been the hand of S. John, wherewith he wrote the
Revelations.

6. DOMITIAN, whose prodigious wickednesses had rendered him infamous and
burdensome to the World, being taken out of the way, Cocceius Nerva succeeded
in the Empire, a prudent Man, and of a milder and more sober temper. He
rescinded the odious Acts of his Predecessor, and by public Edict recalled
those from banishment, whom the fury of Domitian had sent thither. S. John
taking the advantage of this general Oros. lib. 7. c. 11. p. 303. (...). 2.
Indulgence, left Patmos, and returned into Asia, his ancient charge, but
chiefly fixed his Seat at (...), the care and presidency whereof ( Timothy
their Bishop having been lately martyred by the People for persuading them
against their Heathen-Feasts and Sports, especially one called (...), wherein
was a mixture of debauchery and (...). Timoth. apud (...). Cod. 254. Col. 1401.
1404.
idolatry) he took upon him, and by the assistance of seven Bishops governed
that large spacious Diocese; Lib. 2. c. 42. p. 206.
Nicephorus adds, that he not only managed the affairs of the Church, ordered
and disposed the Clergy, but erected Churches, which surely must be meant of
Oratories, and little places for their solemn conventions, building Churches in
the modern notion, not being consistent with the poverty and persecution of
Christians in those early times. Here at the request of the Bishops of Asia he
wrote his Gospel (they are Authors of no credit and value, that make it written
during his confinement in the Isle of Patmos) with very solemn preparation,
whereof more when we come to consider the Writings which he left behind him.

7. HE lived till the time of Trajan, about the beginning of whose Reign he
departed this Life, very Aged, about the Ninety-eighth or Ninety-ninth Year of
his Life, as is generally thought. (...). Chrysostom. Sum. de S. Joan. Ap. p.
505. T. 6.
Chrysostom is very positive, that he was an Hundred Years old when he wrote
his Gospel, and that he lived full Twenty Years after. The same is affirmed by
Synops. de Vit. and (...). App. Bibl. Pp. Tom. 3. p. 147.
Dorotheus, that he lived CXX. Years: which to me seems altogether improbable,
seeing by this account he must be Fifty Years of Age when called to be an
Apostle, a thing directly contrary to the whole consent and testimony of
Antiquity, which makes him very young at the time of his calling to the
Apostolic Office. He died (says the Apud (...) Vit. Quat. Evang. p. 52.
Arabian) in the expectation of his blessedness, by which he means his quiet
and peaceable departure, in opposition to a violent and bloody death. Indeed
Theophylact, and others before him conceive him to have died a Martyr, upon no
other ground, than what our Savior told him and his Brother, that they should
drink of the Cup, and be baptized with the Baptism wherewith he was baptized,
which Hom. 66. in (...). c. 20. p. 575.
Chrysostom strictly understands of Martyrdom and a bloody death. It was indeed
literally verified in his brother James; and for him, though, as Comm. in
Matthew. 20. p. 59. Tom. 9.
S. Hierom observes, he was not put to death, yet may he be truly styled a
Martyr, his being put into a vessel of boiling Oil, his many years banishment,
and other sufferings in the cause of Christ, justly challenging that honorable
title, though he did not actually lay down his life for the testimony of the
Gospel, it being not want of good will either in him or his enemies, but the
Divine Providence immediately overruling the powers of nature, that kept the
malice of his enemies from its full execution.

8. OTHERS on the contrary are so far from admitting him to die a Martyr, that
they question, nay, peremptorily deny that he ever died at all. The first
Assertor, and that but obliquely, that I find of this opinion, was Hippolytus
Bishop of Porto, and Scholar to Clemens of Alexandria, who ranks him in the
same capacity with Enoch and Elias; for speaking of the twofold coming of
Christ, he tells (...) sum. Mund. and Antichr. in Auctuar. Bibl. Pp. Gr. Lat.
T. 2. p. 351.
us, that his first coming in the flesh had John the Baptist for its
forerunner, and his second to Judgment shall have Enoch, Elias, and S. John.
Apud (...). Cod. CCXXIX. Col. 797.
Ephrem Patriarch of Antioch is more express, he tells us, there are three
persons, answerable to the three dispensations of the word, yet in the body,
Enoch, Elias, and S. John, Enoch before the Law, Elias under the Law, and S.
John under the Gospel; concerning which last, that he never died, he confirms
both from Scripture and Tradition, and quotes S. Cyrill (I suppose he means him
of Alexandria) as of the same opinion. The whole foundation upon which this
Error is built, was that discourse that passed between our Lord and Peter
concerning this Apostle: John 21. 21, 22, 23.
For Christ having told Peter what was to be his own fate, Peter enquires what
should become of S. John, knowing him to be the Disciple whom Jesus loved? Our
Lord rebukes his curiosity, by asking him, what that concerned him, If I will
that he (...) till I come, what is that to thee? This the Apostles
misunderstood, and a report presently went out amongst them, That that Disciple
should not die: Though S. John, who himself records the passage, inserts a
caution, That Jesus did not say, he should not die, but only what if I will
that he tarry till I come? Which doubtless our Lord meant of his coming (so
often mentioned in the New Testament) in Judgment upon the Jews, at the (...)
overthrow of Jerusalem, which S. John outlived many years; and which our Lord
particularly intended when elsewhere he told them, Verily I say unto you, there
Matthew. 16. 28.
be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son
of man coming in his Kingdom.

9. FROM the same Original sprang the report, that he only lay sleeping in his
Grave. The story was current in S. Augustines days, from whom we receive this
account, though possibly the Reader will smile at the conceit. He tells Tract.
124. in Joan. Col. 569 Tom. 9.
us, 'twas commonly reported and believed that S. John was not dead, but that
he rested like a man asleep in his Grave at Ephesus, as plainly appeared from
the dust sensibly boiling and bubling up, which they accounted to be nothing
else but the continual motion of his breath. This report S. Augustine seems
inclinable to believe, having received it, as he tells us, from very credible
hands. He further adds out of some Apocryphal writings, what was generally
known and reported, that when S. John, then in health, had caused his Grave to
be dug and prepared, he laid himself down in it as in a Bed, and as they
thought, only fell asleep. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 42. p. 208.
Nicephorus relates the story more at large, from whom (if it may be any
pleasure to entertain the Reader with these things) we shall give this account.
S. John foreseeing his translation into Heaven, took the Presbyters and
Ministers of the Church of Ephesus, and several of the Faithful, along with him
out of the City, carried them unto a Cemetery near at hand, whither he himself
was wont to retire to prayer, and very earnestly recommended the state of the
Churches to God in prayer. Which being done, he commanded a Grave to be
immediately dug, and having instructed them in the more recondite mysteries of
Theology, the most excellent precepts of a good life, concerning Faith, Hope,
and especially Charity, confirmed them in the (...) of Religion, commended them
to the care and blessing of our Savior, and solemnly taking his leave of them,
he signed himself with the sign of the Cross, and before them all went down
into the Grave; strictly charging them, to put on the Gravestone, and to make
it fast, and the next day to come and open it, and take a view of it. They did
so, and having opened the Sepulcher, found nothing there but the Grave clothes
which he had left behind him. To all which let me add, while my hand is in
these things, what Apud Phot. ubi (...). p. 800
Ephrem relates, that from this Grave, wherein he rested so short a time, a
kind of Sacred Oil or Unguent was wont to be gathered. Gregory of (...) Glor.
(...). lib. 1. cap. 30. page 36
Tours says 'twas Manna, which even in his time like flour was cast up from the
Sepulohre, and was carried up and down the World for the curing of diseases.
This report of our Apostles being yet alive, some men made use of to wild and
fantastic purposes. (...), in (...). c. 21.
Beza tells us of an Impostor in his time (whom Postellus, who vainly boasted
that he had the Soul of Adam, was wont to call his Brother) who publicly
prosessed himself to be our S. John, and was afterward burnt at Tholose in
France. Nor was this any more than what was done in the more early Ages of
Christianity. For In vit. (...). 25 p. 213
Sulpitius Severus giving us an account of a young Spaniard that first
professed himself to be Elias, and then Christ himself; adds, That there was
one at the same time in the East, who gave out himself to be S. John. So fast
will Error, like circles in the water, multiply it self, and one mistaken place
of Scripture give countenance to an hundred stories, that shall be built upon
it. I have no more to add, but what we meet with in the Apud (...). de vit.
(...). Evangel. p. 52.
Arabic writer of his life, (though it little agrees with the preceding
passages) who reports, that there were none present at his burial but his
disciple Phogsir (probably Proghor, or Prochorus, one of the seven Deacons, and
generally said to have been S. John's companion and assistent) whom he strictly
charged never to discover his Sepulcher to any; it may be for the same reason
for which it is thought God concealed the body of Moses, to prevent the
Idolatrous worshipping of his Relics: And accordingly the Turks, who conceit
him to be buried in the confines of Lydia, pay great honor and veneration to
his Tomb.

10. S. JO H N seems always to have led a single life, and so the Epiph. (...).
78 p. 4 40. (...). adv. (...). p. 35. T. 2.
Ancients tell us, nay, S. Ambrose positively (...). Comm. in 2 Cor. 11. T. 5.
affirms, that all the Apostles were married, except S. John and S. Paul. There
want not indeed some, and especially the middle Writers of the (...). in Joan.
(...). Comm. in Joan. lib. 2. in sin. (...). in (...). 2. (...).
Church, who will have our Apostle to have been married, and that it was his
marriage which our Lord was at in Cana of Galilee, invited thither upon the
account of his consanguinity and alliance: But that being convinced by the
Miracle of the Water turned into Wine, he immediately quitted his conjugal
relation, and became one of our Lord's Disciples. But this, as (...) himself
confesses, is trifling, and the issue of fabulous invention, a thing wholly
unknown to the Fathers and best Writers of the Church, and which not only has
no just authority to support it, but arguments enough to beat it down. As for
his natural temper, he seems (as we have observed in his Brother's Life) to
have been of a more eager and resolute disposition, easily apt to be inflamed
and provoked, which his reduced Age brought to a more staid and a calmer
temper. He was polished by no study or arts of Learning, but what was wanting
in that, was abundantly made up in the excellent temper and constitution of his
mind, and that furniture of Divine graces, which he was adorned withal. His
humility was admirable, studiously concealing his own worth and honor, in all
his Epistles (as (...). 3. p. 120.
Eusebius long since observed) he never puts down the honorable Titles of
Apostle or Evangelist, but only styles himself, and that too but sometimes,
Presbyter, or Elder, alluding probably to his Age, as much as Office; in his
Gospel, when he speaks of the Disciple whom Jesus loved, he constantly conceals
his own name, leaving the Reader to conjecture who was meant. Love and Charity
he practiced himself, and affectionately pressed upon others, our Lord's great
love to him seems to have inspired his Soul with a bigger and more generous
charity than the rest: It Is the great vein that runs through his writings, and
especially his Epistles, where he urges it as the great and peculiar Law of
Christianity, and without which all other pretenses to Christian Religion are
vain and frivolous, useless and insignificant. And this was his constant
practice to his dying day. When Age and weakness grew upon him at (...). Comm.
in (...). 6; ad Galat. (...). 9. p. 200.
Ephesus, that he was no longer able to preach to them, he used at every
public meeting to be led to the Church, and say no more to them, than, Little
children, love one another. And when his Auditors wearied with the constant
repetition of the same thing, asked him why he always spoke the same, he
answered, Because it was the command of our Lord, and that if they did nothing
else, this alone was enough.

11. BUT the largest measures of his Charity he expressed in the mighty care
that he showed to the Souls of men, unweariedly spending himself in the service
of the Gospel, traveling from East to West to leaven the World with the
principles of that holy Religion which he was sent to propagate, patiently
enduring all torments, breaking through all difficulties and discouragements,
shunning no dangers, that he might do good to Souls, redeem men's minds from
error and idolatry, and reduce them from the snares of a debauched and a
vicious life. Witness one famous (...). H. (...). 3. c. 23. p. 92.
instance. In his visitation of the Churches, near to Ephesus, he made choice
of a young man, whom with a special charge for his instruction and education he
committed to the Bishop of that place. The (...) man undertook the charge,
instructed his Pupil, and baptized him: And then thinking he might a little
remit the reins of discipline, the youth made an ill use of his liberty, and
was quickly debauched by bad companions, making himself Captain to a company of
Highway men, the most loose, cruel, and profligate wretches of the Country. S.
John at his return understanding this, and sharply reproving the negligence and
unfaithfulness of his Tutor, resolved to find him out: And without any
consideration of what danger he entered upon, in venturing himself upon persons
of desperate fortunes, and forfeited consciences, he went to the mountains,
where their usual haunt was; and being here taken by the Sentinel, he desired
to be brought before their Commander, who no sooner espied him coming toward
him, but immediately fled. The aged Apostle followed after, but not able to
overtake him, passionately entreated him to stay, promising him to undertake
with God for his peace and pardon. He did so, and both melted into tears, and
the Apostle having prayed with, and for him, returned him a true Penitent and
Convert to the Church. This story Prim. Christ. Part. 3. chapter 2. p. 248.
we have elsewhere related more at large out of (...), as he does from Clemens
Alexandrinus, since which that Tract it self of Orat. (...). in Auctuar. (...).
Pp. Gr. L. a Er. (...). 1672. Part. 1. p. 185. (...). 42.
Clemens is made public to the World.

12. NOR was it the least instance of his care of the Church, and charity to
the Souls of men, that he was so infinitely vigilant against Heretics and
Seducers, countermining their artifices, antidoting against the poison of their
errors, and shunning all communion and conversation with their persons. (...).
adv. (...). 3. c. 3. p. 233. (...). 3. (...). 28 p. 100 Epiph. Haeres. 30. p.
69.
Going along with some of his friends at Ephesus to the Bath (whither he used
frequently to resort, and the ruins whereof of Porphyry not far from the place
where stood the famous Temple of Diana, as a late Th. Smith. (...). de VII.
Asia (...). p. 159.
eyewitness informs us, are still showed at this day) he enquired of the
servant that waited there, who was within; the servant told him, Cerinthus (
Epiphanius says it was Ebion, and it is not improbable that they might be both
there;) which the Apostle no sooner understood, but in great abhorrency he
turned back, Let Us be gone my brethren (said he) and make haste from this place,
lest the Bath wherein there is such an Heretic as Cerinthus, the great enemy
of the truth, fall upon our heads. This account Irenaeus delivers from
Polycarp, S. John's own Scholar and Disciple. This Cerinthus was a man of loose
and pernicious principles, endeavoring to corrupt Christianity with many
damnable Epiphan. Hares. 28. p. 53. (...) apud (...). 3. (...). 28 p. 100.
Errors. To make himself more considerable, he struck in with the Jewish
Converts, and made a bustle in that great controversy at Jerusalem, about
Circumcision and the observation of the Law of Moses. But his usual haunt was
Asia, where amongst other things he openly denied Christ's Resurrection,
affirmed the World to have been made by Angels, broaching unheard of Dogmata,
and pretending them to have been communicated to him by Angels, venting
Revelations composed by himself, as a great Apostle, affirming that after the
Resurrection the reign of Christ would commence here upon Earth, and that men
living again at Jerusalem, should for the space of a thousand years enjoy all
manner of sensual pleasures and delights: hoping by this fools Paradise that he
should tempt men of loose and brutish minds over to his party. Much of the same
stamp was (...). ib. p. 99.
Ebion (though in some principles differing from him, as error agrees with it
self as little as with truth) who held that the holy Jesus was a mere, and a
mean man, begotten by Joseph of Mary his Wife, and that the observance of the
Mosaic Rites and Laws was necessary to Salvation: And because they saw S. Paul
stand so full in their way, they reproached him as an Apostate from his
Religion, and rejected his Epistles, owning none but S. Matthew's Gospel in
Hebrew, having little or no value for the rest; the Sabbath and Jewish Rites
they observed with the Jews, and on the Lord's day celebrated the memory of our
Lord's Resurrection, (...) cording to the custom and practice of the Christians.

13. BESIDES these, there was another sort of Heretics that infested the
Church in S. John's time, the Nicolaitans, mentioned by him in his Revelation,
and whose doctrine Rev. 2 15.
our Lord is with a particular Emphasis there said to hate; indeed a most
wretched and brutish Sect, generally supposed to derive their original from
Nicolas, one of the seven Deacons, whom we read of (...) the Acts, whereof
Glemens of Alexandria gives this probable (...). lib. 3. p. 436. (...) 3 seb.
(...). 3. (...). 29. p. 101.
account. This Nicolas having a beautiful Wife, and being reproved by the
Apostles for being jealous of her, to show how far he was from it, brought her
forth, and gave any that would leave to marry her, affirming this to be
suitable to that saying, (...) That we ought to abuse the flesh. This speech,
he tell us, was ascribed to S. Matthias, who taught, That we must fight with
the flesh and abuse it, and not allowing it any thing for pleasure, increase
the Soul by faith and knowledge. These words and actions of his, his disciples
and followers misunderstanding, and perverting things to the worst sense
imaginable, began to let loose the reins, and henceforwards to give themselves
over to the greatest filthiness, the most shameless and impudent uncleanness,
throwing down all enclosures, making the most promiscuous mixtures lawful, and
pleasure the ultimate end and happiness of Man. Such were their principles,
such their practices; whereas Nicolas, their pretended Patron and Founder, was
(says Clemens) a sober and a temperate Man, never making use of any but his own
Wife, by whom he had one Son, and several Daughters, who all lived in perpetual
Virginity.

14. THE last instance that we shall remark of our Apostles care for the good
of the Church, is the Writings which he left to Posterity. Whereof the first in
time, though placed last, is his Apocalypse or Book of Revelations, written
while consined in Patmos. It was of old not only rejected by Heretics, but
controverted by many of the Fathers themselves. (...) Bishop of (...). H.
(...). lib. 7. c. 25. p. 272. etc.
Alexandria has a very large discourse concerning it; he tells us, that many
plainly disowned this Book, not only for the matter, but the Author of it, as
being neither Apostle, no nor any Holy or Ecclesiastical Person; that Cerinthus
prefixed S. John's name to it, to give the more plausible title to his Dream of
Christ's Reign upon Earth, and that sensual and carnal state that should attend
it: that for his part he durst not reject it, looking upon it as containing
wise and admirable mysteries, though he could not fathom and (...) them, that
he did not measure them by his own line, nor condemn, but rather admire what he
could not understand; that he owned the Author to have been an holy, and
divinely-inspired Person, but could not believe it to be S. John the Apostle
and Evangelist, neither style, matter, nor method agreeing with his other
Writings; that in this he frequently names himself, which he never does in any
other; that there were several John's at that time, and two buried at Fphesus,
the Apostle, and another, one of the Disciples that dwelt in Asia, but which
the Author of his Book, he leaves uncertain. But though doubted of by some, it
was entertained by the far greater part of the Ancients as the genuine work of
our S. John. Nor could the setting down his Name be any reasonable exception,
for whatever he might do in his other Writings, especially his Gospel, where it
was less necessary, Historical matters depending not so much upon his
authority, yet it was otherwise in Prophetic Revelations, where the Person of
the Revealer adds great weight and moment, the reason why some of the Prophets
under the Old Testament did so frequently set down their own Names. The
diversity of the style is of no considerable value in this case, it being no
wonder, if in arguments so vastly different the same Person do not always
observe the same tenor and way of writing; whereof there want not instances in
some others of the Apostolic Order. The truth is, all circumstances concur to
entitle our Apostle to be the Author of it, his name frequently expressed, its
being written in the Island Patmos (a circumstance not competible to any but S.
John) his stiling himself their Brother and Companion in Tribulation, and in
the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, his writing particular Epistles to
the seven Churches of Asia, all planted, or at least cultivated by him, the
doctrine in it suitable to the Apostolic spirit and temper, evidently bearing
witness in this case. That which seems to have given ground to doubt concerning
both its Author and authority, was its being long before it was usually joined
with the other Books of the holy Canon: for containing in it some passages
directly levelled at Rome, the Seat of the Roman Empire, others which might be
thought to symbolize with some Jewish dreams and (...), it might possibly seem
fit to the prudence of those Times for a while to suppress it. Nor is the
conjecture of a learned (...). in Cap. 1. Joan.
Man to be despised, who thinks that it might be entrusted in the keeping of
John the Presbyter, Scholar to our Apostle, whence probably the report might
arise, that he, who was only the Keeper, was the Author of it.

15. HIS Gospel succeeds, written (say (...). de vit. App. in (...). Pp. T. 3.
p. 147.
some) in Patmos, and published at Ephesus, but as Iren. adv. (...). lib. 3.
(...). 1. (...). in Math. Tom. 9. and de script. (...). in Joan.
Irenaeus, and others more truly, written by him after his return to Ephesus;
composed at the earnest entreaty and solicitation of the Asian Bishops, and
Ambassadors from several Churches, in order whereunto he first caused them to
proclaim a general Fast, to seek the blessing of Heaven on so great and solemn
an undertaking, which being done, he set about it. And if we may believe the
report of Gregory Bishop of De glor. (...). lib. l. cap. 30. page 37.
Tours, he tells us, that upon a Hill near Ephesus there was a Proseucha, or
uncovered Oratory, whither our Apostle used often to retire for Prayer and
Contemplation, and where he obtained of God, that it might not Rain in that
Place, till he had finished his Gospel. Nay he adds, that even in his time, no
shower or storm ever came upon it. Two causes especially contributed to the
writing of it; the one, that he might obviate the early heresies of those
times, especially of Ebion, Cerinthus, and the rest of that crew, who began
openly to deny Christ's Divinity, and that he had any existence before his
Incarnation; the reason why our Evangelist is so express and copious in that
subject. (...). Eccl. lib. 3. c. 24. p. 95.
The other was, that he might supply those passages of the Evangelical History,
which the rest of the Sacred Writers had omitted. Collecting therefore the
other three Evangelists, he first set to his Seal, ratifying the truth of them
with his approbation and consent, and then added his own Gospel to the rest,
principally insisting upon the Acts of Christ from the first commencing of his
Ministry to the Death of John the Baptist, wherein the others are most
defective, giving (...) any account of the first Year of our Savior's
Ministry, which therefore he made up in very large and particular Narrations.
He largely records (as Nazianzen (...) Naz. (...). 41. p. 102.
observes) our Savior's discourses, but takes little notice of his Miracles,
probably because so fully and particularly related by the rest. The subject of
his writing is very sublime and mysterious, mainly designing to prove Christ's
Divinity, eternal pre-existence, creating of the World, etc. Upon which account
Comm. in (...), c. 47.
Theodoret styles his Gospel (...), a Theology which humane understandings can
never fully penetrate and find out. Thence generally by the Ancients, he is
resembled to an Eagle (...) sublimitate (...) dei vidit, and (...) proprio
(...) reseravit. Transeendit (...) virtutes (...) angelos, and verbum in (...),
and (...) vidit. Ambr. praef. (...). in (...). 5. p. 5.
, soaring aloft within the Clouds, whither the weak eye of Man was unable to
follow him; hence peculiarly honored with the title of The Divine, as if due
to none but him, at least to him in a more eminent and extraordinary manner.
Nay the very Gentile-Philosophers themselves could not but admire his Writings:
Witness (...) Amel. (...). lib. 11. p. 540. vid. Theodor. (...) Cxr. Graec.
(...). Sermon. 2. p. 33.
Amelius the famous Platonist, and Regent of Porphyries School at Alexandria;
who quoting a passage out of the beginning of S. John's Gospel, swear by
Jupiter, that this Barbarian (so the proud Greeks counted and called all that
differed from them) had hit upon the right notion, when he affirmed, that the
Word that made all things was in the beginning, and in place of prime dignity
and authority with God, and was that God that created all things, in whom every
thing that was made had according to its nature its life and being; that he was
incarnate, and clothed with a body, wherein he manifested the glory and
magnificence of his nature; that after his death, he returned to the
repossession of Divinity, and became the same God, which he was before his
assuming a body, and taking the humane nature and flesh upon him. I have no
more to observe, but that his Gospel was afterward translated into Epiph. adv.
Ebinn. (...). XXX. p. 60.
Hebrew, and kept by the Jews, (...) among their secret Archives and Records in
their Treasury at Tiberias; where a Copy of it was found by one Joseph a Jew,
afterward converted, and whom (...) the Great advanced to the honor of a
Count of the ibid. page 61.
Empire, who breaking open the Treasury, though he missed of money, found (...),
Books beyond all Treasure, S. Matthew, and S. John's Gospels, and the Acts of
the Apostles in Hebrew, the reading whereof greatly contributed toward his
Conversion.

16. BESIDES these, our Apostle wrote three Epistles; the first whereof is
Catholic, calculated for all times and places, containing most excellent rules
for the conduct of the Christian life, pressing to (...) and purity of manners,
and not to rest in a naked and empty profession of Religion, not to be led away
with the crafty insinuations of Seducers, antidoting Men against the poison of
the Gnostick-principles and practices, to whom it is not to be doubted, but
that the Apostle had a more particular respect in this Epistle. According to
his wonted modesty he conceals his name, it being of more concernment with
(...) Men, what it is that is said, than who it is that says it. And this
Epistle Eusebius tells Lib. 7. c. 25. p. 276.
us, was universally received, and never questioned by any; anciently, as
appears (...) Quest. Evang. lib. 2. c. 39. Col. 353. vid. Possid. Indic. Oper.
August.
S. Augustine, inscribed to the Parthians, though for what reason I am yet to
learn, unless (as we hinted before) it was, because he himself had heretofore
Preached in those Parts of the World. The other two Epistles are but short, and
directed to particular Persons, the one a Lady of honorable Quality, the other
the charitable and hospitable Gaius, so kind a friend, so courteous an
entertainer of all indigent Christians. (...) supr. etc. 26. Huron. de (...).
Ecel. in Joan.
These Epistles indeed were not of old admitted into the Canon, nor are owned
by the Church in Syria at this Day, ascribed by many to the younger John,
Disciple to our Apostle. But there is no just cause to question who was their
Father, seeing both the Doctrine, phrase, and design of them do sufficiently
challenge our Apostle for their Author. These are all the Books, wherein it
pleased the Holy Spirit to make use of S. John for its Pen man and Secretary,
in the composure whereof though his style and character be not florid and
elegant, yet is it grave and simple, short, and perspicuous. Dionysius of
Alexandria tells us, that in his Gospel and first Epistle his phrase is more
neat and elegant, there being an accuracy in the contexture both of words and
matter, that runs through all the reasonings of his discourses; but that in the
Apocalypse the style is nothing so pure and clear, being frequently mixed with
more barbarous and improper phrases. Indeed his Greek generally abounds with
Syriasms, his discourses many times abrupt, set off with frequent antitheses,
connected with copulatives, passages often repeated, things at first more
obscurely propounded, and which he is forced to enlighten with subsequent
explications, words peculiar to himself, and phrases used in an uncommon sense.
All which concur to render his way of writing less grateful, possibly, to the
Masters of eloquence, and an elaborate curiosity. Comm. in cap. 12. Zathar.
(...). 178. Tom. 6.
S. Hierom observes, that in citing places out of the Old Testament, he more
immediately translates from the Hebrew Original, studying to render things word
for word; for being an Hebrew of the Hebrews, admirably skilled in the Language
of his Country, it probably made him less exact in his Greek composures,
wherein he had very little advantage, besides what was immediately communicated
from above. But whatever was wanting in the politeness of his style, was
abundantly made up in the zeal of his temper, and the excellency and sublimity
of his matter; he truly answered his Name, Boanerges, spoke and writ like a Son
of Thunder. Whence it is that his Writings, but especially his Gospel, have
such great and honorable things spoken of them by the Ancients. The
Evangelical writings (says Homil. 16. p. 502. Tom. 1.
S. Basil) transcend the other parts of the Holy Volumes, in other parts God
speaks to us by Servants, the Prophets; but in the Gospels our Lord himself
speaks to us, (...), but among all the Evangelical Preachers none like S. John
the Son of Thunder for the sublimeness of his speech, and the height of his
discourses beyond any Man's capacity duly to reach and comprehend. S. John as a
true Son of Thunder (says (...). 73. adv. (...). p. 363.
Epiphanius) (...), by a certain greatness of speech peculiar to himself, does
as it were out of the Clouds and the dark recesses of wisdom acquaint us with
Divine Doctrines concerning the Son of God. To which let me add, what S. Cyril
of (...). in Joan p. 8.
Alexandria among other things says concerning him, that whoever looks (...),
to the sublimity of his incomprehensible notions, the acumen and sharpness of
his reason, and the quick inferences of his discourses constantly succeeding
and following upon one another, must needs confess, that his Gospel perfectly
exceeds all admiration.

The End of S. John's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. PHILIP.
St Philip
After he had converted all Scythia he was at Hierapolis a City of Asia first
crucified and then stoned to death Baron. May. 1o.

St. Philip's Martyrdom.
Act. 5. 30. Whom ye slew, and hanged on a tree. Matthew. 10. 24, 25. The
disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord. It is enough
for the disciple, that he be as his master, and the servant as his Lord.




Galilee generally despised by the Jews, and why. The honor which our Lord put
upon it. S. Andrew's birthplace. His being first called to be a Disciple, and
the manner of it. An account of his ready obedience to Christ's call. What the
(...) relate concerning him considered. The discourse between our Lord and him
concerning the knowledge of the Father. His preaching the Gospel in the upper
Asia, and the happy effects of his Ministry. His coming to Hierapolis in
Phrygia, and successful confutation of their Idolatries. The rage and fury of
the Magistrates against him. His Martyrdom, Crucifixion, and Burial. His
married condition. The confounding him with Philip the Deacon. The Gospel
forged by the Gnostics under his name.

1. OF all parts of Palestine Galilee seem to have passed under the greatest
character of ignominy and reproach. The Country it self, because bordering upon
the Idolatrous (...) Nations, called Galilee of the Gentiles; the people
generally beheld as more rude and boisterous, more unpolished and barbarous
than the rest, not remarkable either for Civility or Religion. The Galileans
received him, having seen all the things that he did at Jerusalem at the Feast,
for they also John 4. 45.
went up unto the Feast; as if it had been a wonder, and a matter of very
strange remark, to (...) so much devotion in them as to attend the solemnity of
the Passover. Indeed both Jew and Gentile conspired in this, that they thought
they could not fix a greater title of reproach upon our Savior and his
followers, than that of Galilean. Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? a
City in this Province, said Nathanael concerning (...) 1. 46.
Christ. Search and look (say the Pharisees) for out of Galilee arises no
Prophet; John 7. 52.
as if nothing but briers and thorns could grow in that soil. But there needs
no more to confute this ill-natured opinion, than that our Lord not only made
choice of it as the seat of his ordinary (...) and retreat, but that hencehe
chose those excellent persons, whom he made his Apostles, the great instruments
to convert the World. Some of these we have already given an account of, and
more are yet behind.

2. OF this number was S. Philip, born at Bethsaida, a Town near the Sea of
Tiberias, the City of Andrew and Peter. Of his Parents and way of life the
History of the (...) no notice, though (...) he was a Fisherman, the Trade
general of that (...). He had the (...), (...) honor of being first called to
the Discipleship, (...) thus came to pass. Our Lord soon after his return from
the wilderness having met with Andrew and his brother Peter, after some short
discourse parted from them: And the very next day, as he was passing through
Galilee, he found Philip, whom he John 1. 44.
presently commanded to follow him, the constant form which he used in making
choice of his Disciples, and those that did inseparably attend upon him. So
that the (...), or prerogative of being first called, evidently belongs to
Philip, he being the first fruits of our Lord's Disciples. For though Andrew
and Peter were the first that came to, and conversed with Christ, yet did they
immediately return to their Trade again, and were not called to the
Discipleship till above a whole year after, when John was cast into prison.
(...). 3. p. 436.
Clemens (...) tells us, that it was Philip, to whom our Lord said (when he
would have excused himself at present, that he must go bury his Father) Let the
dead bury their dead, but follow (...) me. But besides that he gives no
account, whence he derived this intelligence, it is plainly inconsistent with
the time of our Apostle's call, who was called to be a Disciple a long time
before that speech and passage of our Savior. It may seem justly strange that
Philip should at first sight so readily comply with our Lord's command, and
turn himself over into his service, having not yet seen any miracle, that might
evince his (...)-ship, and Divine Commission, nor probably so much as heard any
tidings of his appearance; and especially being a Galilean, and so of a more
rustic and unyielding temper. But it cannot be doubted but that he was
admirably versed in the writings of Moses and the Prophets. Apud Sur. ad (...)
1. (...) Tom. 4.
Metaphrastes assures us (though how he came to know it otherwise than by
conjecture, I cannot imagine) that from his childhood he had excellent
education, that he frequently read over Moses his Books, and considered the
Prophecies that related to our Savior: And was no question awakened with the
general expectations that were then on foot among the Jews (the date of the
Prophetic Scriptures concerning the time of Christ's coming being now run out)
that the (...) would immediately appear. Add to this, that the Divine grace did
more immediately accompany the command of Christ, to incline and dispose him to
believe, that this person was that very (...) that was to come.

3. NO sooner had Religion taken possession of his mind, but like an active
principle it began to (...), and diffuse it self. A way he goes, and (...)
Nathanael, a person of note and eminency, acquaints him with the tidings of the
newfound Messiah, and conducts him to him. So forward is a good man to draw
and direct others in the same way to happiness with himself. After his call to
the Apostleship much is not recorded of him in the Holy story: 'Twas to him
that our Savior propounded the question, What they should do for so much bread
in the wilderness, as would feed so (...) 6. 5.
vast a multitude, to which he answered, That so much was not easily to be had;
not considering, that to feed two or twenty thousand are equally (...) to
Almighty Power, when pleased to exert it self. 'Twas to him that the Gentile
Proselytes that came up to the Passover addressed themselves, when desirous to
see our Savior, a person John 12. 22.
of whom they had heard so loud a fame. 'Twas with him that our Lord had that
discourse concerning himself a little before the last Paschal Supper. The holy
and compassionate Jesus had been fortifying their minds with fit considerations
against his departure from them, had told them, that he was going to prepare
room for them in the Mansions of the Blessed, that he himself was the way, the
truth, and the life, and that no man could come to the Father but by him, and
that knowing him, they both knew and John 14. 8.
had seen the Father. Philip not duly understanding the force of our Savior's
reasonings, begged of him, that he would show them the Father, and then this
would abundantly convince and satisfy them. We can hardly suppose he should
have such gross conceptions of the Deity, as to imagine the Father vested with
a corporeal and visible nature; but Christ having told them that they had seen
him, and he knowing that God of old was wont frequently to appear in a visible
shape, he only desired that he would (...) himself to them by some such
appearance. Our Lord gently reproved his ignorance, that aster so long
attendance upon his instructions, he should not know, that he was the Image of
his Father, the express characters of his infinite wisdom, power and goodness
appearing in him, that he said and did nothing but by his Father's appointment,
which if they did not believe, his miracles were a sufficient evidence: That
therefore such demands were unnecessary and impertinent, and that it argued
great weakness after more than three years education under his discipline and
Institution to be so unskilful in those matters. God expects improvement
according to men's opportunities, to be old (...) ignorant in the School of
Christ, deserves both reproach and punishment, it is the character of very bad
persons, that they are ever learning, but 2 Timothy 3. (...).
never come to the knowledge of the truth.

4. IN the distribution of the several Regions of the World made by the
Apostles, though no mention be made by Origin or (...), what part fell to our
Apostle, yet we are told by S. (...), Comm. de S. Philip. (...). ad 1. (...),
H. (...). 2, c. 39. p. 200.
others, that the Upper Asia was his Province (the reason doubtless why he is
said by many to have preached and planted Christianity in (...)) where he
applied himself with an indefatigable diligence and industry to recover men out
of the snare of the Devil, to the embracing and acknowledgment of the truth. By
the constancy of his preaching, and the efficacy of his Miracles he gained
numerous Converts, whom he baptized into the Christian Faith, at once curing
both Souls and Bodies, their Souls of Error and Idolatry, their Bodies of
infirmities and distempers, healing diseases, dispossessing Demons, settling
Churches, and appointing them Guides and Ministers of Religion.

5. HAVING for many years successfully managed his Apostolical Office in all
those parts, he came in the last periods of his life to Hierapolis in Phrygia,
a City rich (...). and (...). ibid.
and populous, but answering its name in its Idolatrous Devotions. Amongst the
many vain and trifling Deities, to whom they paid religious adoration, was a
Serpent or Dragon (in memory no doubt of that infamous Act of Jupiter, who in
the shape of a Dragon insinuated himself into the embraces of Proserpina, his
own Daughter begot of Ceres, and whom these phrygians chiefly worshipped, as
(...). ad Gent. p. 11.
Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, so little reason had Ad (...). 3.
Baronius to say that they worshipped no such God) of a more prodigious bigness
than the rest, which they worshipped with great and solemn veneration. S.
Philip was troubled to see the people so wretchedly enslaved to error, and
therefore continually solicited Heaven, till by prayer and calling upon the
name of Christ, he had procured the death, or at least vanishing of this famed
and beloved Serpent: Which done, he told them, how unbecoming it was to give
Divine honors to such odious creatures, that God alone was to be worshipped as
the great Parent of the World, who had made man at first after his own glorious
Image, and when fallen from that innocent and happy state, had sent his own Son
into the World to redeem him, who died, and rose from the dead, and shall come
again at the last day, to raise men out of their Graves, and to sentence and
reward them according to their works. The success was, that the people were
ashamed of their fond Idolatry, and many broke loose from their chains of
darkness, and ran over to Christianity. Whereupon the great enemy of mankind
betook himself to his old methods, cruelty and persecution. The Magistrates of
the City seize the Apostle, and having put him into prison, caused him to be
severely whipped and scourged. This preparatory cruelty passed, he was led to
execution, and being bound, was hanged up by the neck against a pillar, though
others tell us, that he was crucified. We are further told, that at his
execution the Earth began suddenly to quake, and the ground whereon the people
stood, to sink under them, which when they apprehended and bewailed as an
evident act of Divine vengeance pursuing them for their sins, it as suddenly
stopped, and went no further. The Apostle being dead, his body was taken down by
S. Bartholomew, his fellow-sufferer, though not finally executed, and Mariamne,
S. Philip's Sister, who is said to have been the constant companion of his
travels, and decently buried, after which having confirmed the people in the
Faith of Christ, they departed from them.

6. THAT S. Philip was married, is generally affirmed by the Ancients; (...).
lib. 3. p. 448.
Clemens of Alexandria reckons him one of the married Apostles, and that he had
Daughters, whom he disposed in marriage: Ap. (...). H. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 31. p.
102. vid. Doroth. (...). de vit. and mort. App. B. Pp. Tom. 3. p. 148.
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus tell us, that Philip, one of the Twelve Apostles,
died at (...), with two of his Daughters, who persevered in their Virginity,
and that he had a third which died at (...). The truth is, the not careful
distinguishing between Philip the Deacon (who lived at Caesarea, and of whose
four Virgin-daughters we read in the History of the Apostles Acts) and our
Apostle, has bred some confusion among the Ancients in this matter. Acts 21. 8,
9.
But the account concerning them is greatly different; sor as they differed in
their Persons and Offices, the one a Deacon, the other an Apostle, so also in
the number of their Children, four Daughters being ascribed to the one, while
three only are attributed to the other. He was one of the Apostles who left no
Sacred writings behind him, the greater part of the Apostles (as Lib. 3. cap.
24. p. 94.
Ensebius observes) having little leisure to write Books, being employed in
ministeries more immediately useful and subservient to the happiness of
mankind: Though Adv. Gnost. Haris. 26. p. 46
Epiphanius tells us, that the Gnostics were wont to produce a Gospel forged
under S. Philip's name, which they abused to the patronage of their horrible
principles, and more brutish practices.

The End of S. Philip's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. BARTHOLOMEW.
S. BARTHOLOMEW
He was flayed alive by the command of a Barbarous King. Place this to the
Collect for St. Bartholomews day.

St. Bartholomew's Martyrdom.
Romans 8. 36, 37. For thy sake we are killed all the daylong, we are accounted
as sheep for the slaughter: But in all these things we are more then.
Conquerours.




The silence concerning this Apostle in the History of the Gospel. That he is
the same with Nathanael, proved by many probable arguments. His title of
Bar-Tholmai, whence. The School of the Tholmaeans. An objection against his
being Nathanael answered. His descent and way of life. His first coming to
Christ, and converse with him. In what parts of the world he planted the
Christian Faith. His preaching in India, and leaving S. Matthew's Gospel there.
His return to Hierapolis, and deliverance there from Crucifixion. His removal
to Albanopolis in Armenia, and suffering Martyrdom there for the Faith of
Christ. His being first flead alive, and then crucified. The fabulous Gospel
attributed to him.

1. THAT S. Bartholomew was one of the Twelve Apostles, the Evangelical History
is most express and clear, though it seems to take no further notice of him,
than the bare mention of his name. Which doubtless gave the first occasion to
many, both anciently and of later time, not without reason to suppose, that he
lies concealed under some other name, and that this can be no other than
Nathanael, one of the first Disciples that came to Christ. Accordingly we may
observe, that as S. John never mentions Bartholomew in the number of the
Apostles, so the other Evangelists never take notice of Nathanael, probably
because the same person under two several names: And as in John, Philip and
Nathanael are joined together in their coming to Christ, so in the rest of the
Evangelists Philip and Bartholomew are constantly put together without the
least variation; for no other reason, I conceive, than because as they were
jointly called to the Discipleship, so they are jointly referred in the
Apostolic Catalogue; as afterward we find them joynt-companions in the
writings of the Church. But that which renders the thing most specious and
probable is, that we find Nathanael particularly reckoned up with the other
Apostles, to whom our Lord appeared at the Sea of Tiberias after his
Resurrection, where there were together Simon Peter, and Thomas, and Nathanael
of Gana in Galilee, and the John 21. 1, 2.
two sons of Zebedee, and two other of his Disciples, who probably were Andrew
and Philip. That by Disciples is here meant Apostles; is evident, partly from
the names of those that are reckoned up, partly because it is said, that this
was the third time that Jesus appeared to his Disciples, it being plain that
the two foregoing appearances were Ib. v. 14.
made to none but the Apostles.

2. HAD he been no more than an ordinary Disciple, I think no tolerable reason
can be given, why in filling up the vacancy made by the death of Judas, he
being so eminently qualified for the place, should not have been propounded as
well as either Barsabas or Matthias, but that he was one of the Twelve already.
Nor indeed is it reasonable to suppose, that Bartholomew should be his proper
name, any more than BarJona the proper name of Peter, importing no more than
his relative capacity, either as a Son, or a Scholar. As a Son, it notes no
more than his being (...) the son of Tholmai, a name not uncommon amongst the
Jews, it being customary among them for the son thus to derive his name, so
Bar-Jona, Bartimeus, the son of Timeus, etc. and to be usually called rather by
this relative, than his own proper name, thus Joseph was called Barsabas, thus
Barnabas constantly so styled, though his right name was Joses. Or else it may
relate to him as a Disciple of some particular Sect and Institution among the
Jews, it being a custom for Scholars out of a great reverence for their
Masters, or first Institutors of that way, to adopt their names, as Ben-Ezra,
Benuziel, etc. And this will be much more evident, if the observation which
Boldut. de Eccles. post Leg. c. 7, p. 45. vid. de Eccl, a^^ Leg. lib. 2. c. 8.
one makes be true (which yet I will not contend for) that as several Sects in
the Jewish Church denominated themselves from some famous person of that
Nation, the Essenes from Enosh, the Sadduces from Sadock, so there were others
that called themselves Tholmaeans, from Thalmai, Scholar to Heber the ancient
Master of the Hebrews, who was of the race or institution of the Enakim, who
flourished in Debir and Hebron, with whom Abraham was confederate, that is,
joined himself to their society. And of this Order and Institution, he tells
us, Nathanael seems to have been, hence called Bartholomew, the Son or Scholar
of the Tholmaeans; hence said to be an Israelite indeed, that is, one of the
ancient race of the Schools and Societies of Israel. This, if so, would give us
an account of his skill and ability in the Jewish Law, wherein he is generally
supposed to have been a Doctor or Teacher. But which soever of these two
accounts of his denomination shall find most favor with the Reader, either of
them will serve my purpose, and reconcile the difference that seems to be
between S. John and the other Evangelists about his name, the one stiling him
by his proper name, the other by his relative and paternal title. To all this,
if necessary, I might add the consent of Learned men, who have given in their
suffrages in this matter, that it is but the same person under several Rupert.
Tuit. Comm. in Joan. 1. ^anser. Concord. c. 17. Onuphr. in Fa^. Salmer. Trast.
18. Tom. 4. Moniac. Orig-Sacr. Part. 2. p. 18. Dr. H. Annot. in Job. 1. aliique.
names. But hints of this may suffice. These arguments, I confess, are not so
forcible and convictive as to command assent, but with all their circumstances
considered, are suffioient to incline and sway any man's belief. The great and
indeed only reason brought against it, is what Tract. VII. in Joau. Col. 68.
Tom. 9. and in Psalm. LXV. Col. 671. Tom. 8
S. Augustine objected of old, that it is not probable that our Lord would
choose Nathanael, a Doctor of the Law, to be one of his Apostles, as designing
to confound the wisdom of the World by the preaching of the Idiot and the
unlearned. But this is no reason to him that considers, that this objection
equally lies against S. Philip, for whose skill in the Law and Prophets there
is as much evidence in the History of the Gospel, as for Nathanael's; and much
stronglier against S. Paul, than whom (besides his abilities in all humane
Learning) there were few greater Masters in the Jewish Law.

3. THIS difficulty being cleared, we proceed to a more particular account of
our Apostle. By some he is thought to have been a Syrian, of a noble extract,
and to have derived his pedigree from the Ptolomies of Egypt, upon no other
ground, I believe, than the more analogy and sound of the name. It Is plain,
that he, as the rest of the Apostles, was a Galilean, and of Nathanael we know
it is particularly said, that he was of Gana in Galilee. The Scripture takes no
notice of his Trade or way of life, though some circumstances might seem to
intimate that he was a Fisherman, which Theoderet affirms of the Apostles in
general, and another particularly reports of our Apostle. At his first coming
to Christ (supposing him still the same with Nathanael) he was conducted by
Philip, who told him that now they had found the long-look'd (...) 1, 45.
for Messiah, so often foretold by Moses and the Prophets, Jesus of Nazareth, the
son of Joseph: And when he objected that the Messiah could not be born at
Nazareth, Philip bids him come and satisfy himself. At his first approach our
Lord entertains him with this honorable character, that he was an Israelite
indeed, a man of true simplicity and integrity; as indeed his simplicity
particularly appears in this, that when told of Jesus, he did not object
against the meanness of his Original, the low condition of his Parents, the
narrowness of their fortunes, but only against the place of his birth, which
could not be Nazareth, the Prophets having peremptorily foretold, that the
Messiah should be born at Bethlehem. By this therefore he appeared to be a true
Israelite, one that waited for redemption in Israel, which from the date of the
Scripture-predictions he was assured did now draw nigh. Surprised he was at our
Lord's salutation, wondering how he should know him so well at first sight,
whose face he had never seen before. But he was answered, that he had seen him
while he was yet under the Fig Tree, before Philip called him. Convinced with
this instance of our Lord's Divinity, he presently made this confession, That
now he was sure, that Jesus was the promised Messiah, the Son of God, whom he
had appointed to be the King and Governor of his Church. Our Savior told him,
that if upon this inducement he could believe him to be the Messiah, he should
have far greater arguments to confirm his faith, yea, that ere long he should
behold the Heavens opened to receive him thither, and the Angels visibly
appearing to wait and attend upon him.

4. CONCERNING our Apostles travels up and down the World to propagate the
Christian Faith, we shall present the Reader with a brief account, though we
cannot warrant the exact order of them. That he went as far as India, is owned
by all, which surely is meant of the hither India, or the part of it lying next
to Asia; H. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 19. p. 50.
Socrates tells us, 'twas the India bordering upon AEthiopia, meaning no doubt
the Asian AEthiopia (whereof we shall speak in the life of S. Thomas) Apud
Hier. de Script. Eccl. in Barthol.
Sophronius calls it the Fortunate India, and tells us, that here he left
behind him S. Matthew's Gospel, whereof H. (...). lib. 5. c. 10. p. 175.
Ensebius gives a more particular relation: That when Pantaenus, a man famous
for his skill in Philosophy, and especially the Institutions of the Stoics,
but much more for his hearty affection to Christianity, in a devout and zealous
imitation of the Apostles, was inflamed with a desire to propagate the
Christian Religion unto the Eastern Countries, he came as far as India it self.
Here amongst some that yet retained the knowledge of Christ, he found S.
Matthew's Gospel, written in Hebrew, left here (as the tradition was) by S.
Bartholomew, one of the twelve Apostles, when he preached the Gospel to these
Nations.

5. AFTER his labors in these parts of the World, he returned to the more
Western and Northern parts of Asia. At Hieropolis in Phrygia we find him in
company with S. Philip, instructing that place in the principles of
Christianity, and convincing them of the folly of their blind Idolatries. Here
by the enraged Magistrates he was at the same time with Philip designed for
Martyrdom; in order whereunto he was fastened upon the Cross, with an intent to
dispatch him; but upon a sudden conviction that the Divine Justice would
revenge their death, he was taken down again and dismissed. Hence probably he
went into Lycaonia, the people whereof (...), in SS, XII. App. p. 269. T. 6.
Chrysostom assures us, he instructed and trained up in the Christian
discipline. His last remove was to Albanople in Armenia the Sophron. ap.
Hieron. in Barth.
Great (the same no doubt which Lib. 2. c 39. p. 201. vid. Metaphr, ad Aug. 24.
Nicephorus calls Urbanople, a City of Cilicia) a place miserably overgrown
with Idolatry; from which while he sought to reclaim the people, he was by the
Governor of the place commanded to be crucified, which he cheerfully
underwent, comforting and confirming the Convert Gentiles to the last minute of
his life. Hippol, de App. ap. Bar. in Not. ad Martyr, ad Aug. 25.
Some add, that he was crucified with his head downwards, others that he was
flead, and his skin first taken off, which might consist well Isid. de SS.
(...) T. c. 77.
enough with his Crucifixion, excoriation being a punishment in use, not only
in Egypt, but amongst the Persians, next neighbors to these Armenians (as Am.
Mar. lib. 23.
Ammianus Marcellinus assures us, and In vit. (...), p. 1019
Plutarch records a particular instance of Mesabates the Persian Eunuch first
flead alive, and then crucified) from whom they might easily borrow this piece
of barbarous and inhumane cruelty. As for the several stages to which his Body
removed after his death, first to Daras, a City in the borders Vid. (...).
Turon, de glor. Martyr. lib. 1. (...). 34. p. 46.
of Persia, then to Liparis, one of the AEolian Islands, thence to Beneventum
in Italy, and last of all to Rome, they that are fond of those things, and have
better leisure, may enquire. Heretics persecuted his memory after his death,
no less than Heathens did his person while alive, by forging and fathering a
fabulous Gospel upon his name, which, together with others of like stamp,
Decret. Part. 1. Distinct. 15. (...). 3. Sect. Caterum.
Gelasius Bishop of Rome justly branded as Apocryphal, altogether unworthy the
name and patronage of an Apostle.

The End of S. Bartholomew's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. MATTHEW.
S. MATTHEW.
S. Matthew the Apostle and Evangelist. preached the Gospel in AEthiopia and was
there slain with an Holbert Bed el Baron Sept. 21

St Matthew his Martyrdom.
1 Pet. 3. 14. If ye suffer for righteousness sake happy are ye, and be not
afraid of their terror, neither be ye troubled:




His Birthplace and Kindred. His Trade, the Office of a Publican. The great
dignity of this Office among the Romans. The honors done to Vespasian's Father
for the faithful. discharge of it. This Office infamous among the Greeks, but
especially the Jews. What things concurred to render it odious and grievous to
them. Their bitter abhorrency of this sort of men. S. Matthew's employment
wherein it particularly consisted. The Publican's Ticket what. S. Matthew's
call, and his ready obedience. His inviting our Lord to Dinner. The Pharisees
cavil, and our Savior's answer. His Preaching in Judaea. His travails into
Parthia, AEthiopia, etc. to propagate Christianity. The success of his
Ministry. His Death. His singular contempt of the World. Gensured herein by
Julian and Porphyry. His exemplary temperance and sobriety. His humility and
modesty. Unreasonable to reproach Penitents with the vices of their former
Life. His Gospel when and why written. Composed by him in Hebrew. The general
consent of Antiquity herein. Its translation into Greek, when and by whom. The
Hebrew Copy by whom owned and interpolated. Those now extant not the same with
those mentioned in Antiquity.

1. SAINT Matthew, called also Levi, was, though a Roman Officer, an Hebrew of
the Hebrews, (both his Names speaking him purely of Jewish extract and
Original) and probably a Galilean, and whom I should have concluded born at, or
near Capernaum, but that the Arabic (...) Kirsten. Vit. 4. Evangel. p, 22.
Writer of his life tells us, he was born at Nazareth, a City in the Tribe of
Zebulun, famous for the habitation of Joseph and Mary, but especially the
education and residence of our Blessed savior, who though born at Bethlehem,
was both conceived and bred up here, where he lived the whole time of his
private life, whence he derived the Title of Jesus of Nazareth. S. Matthew was
the Son of Alpheus and Mary, Sister or Kinswoman to the Blessed Virgin; in the
same Arabic Author his Father is called (...), and his Mother Karutias, both
originally descended of the Tribe of Issachar, nothing being more common among
the Jews, than for the same Person to have several names, these latter probably
expressed in Arabic according to their Jewtsh signification. His Trade or way
of life was that of a Publican or Toll-gatherer to the (...) (which probably
had been his Father's Trade, his Name denoting a Broker or Mony-changer) an
Office of bad report amongst the Jews. Indeed among the Romans it was accounted
a place of power and credit, and honorable reputation, not ordinarily
conferred upon any but Roman Knights; insomuch that T. Fl. Sabinus, Father to
the Emperor Vespasian, was the Publican of the Asian Provinces, an Office which
he discharged so much to the content and satisfaction of the People, that they
erected Statues to him with this Inscription, (...) (...). in vit. Vespas.
(...). 1. p. 722.
, To him that has well managed the Publican-Office. These Officers being sent
into the Provinces to gather the Tributes, were wont to employ the Natives
under them, as Persons best skilled in the affairs and customs of their own
Country. Two things especially concurred to render this Office odious to the
Jews. First, that the Persons that managed it were usually covetous, and great
Exactors; for having themselves farmed the Customs of the Romans, they must
gripe and scrape by all methods of Extortion, that they might be able both to
pay their Rent, and to raise gain and advantage to themselves: which doubtless
(...), the Chief of these Farmers, was sensible of, when after his Conversion,
he offered fourfold restitution to any Man, Luke 19. 8.
from whom he had taken any thing by fraud and evil arts. (...). (...) Comic.
apud (...) vit. (...). cap. 4. p. 29.
And upon this account they became insamous, even among the Gentiles
themselves, who commonly speak of them as Cheats, and Thieves, and public
Robbers, and worse members (...). (...). apud Stob. (...). 2 (...). p. 31.
(...). (...). in (...).
of a community, more voracious and destructive in a City, than wild Beasts in
the Forest. The other thing that made the Jews so much detest them was, that
this Tribute was not only a grievance to their Purses, but an affront to the
liberty and freedom of their Nation; for they looked upon themselves as a
Freeborn People, and that they had been immediately invested in this
privilege by God himself, and accordingly beheld this as a daily and standing
instance of their slavery, which of all other things they could least endure,
and which therefore betrayed them into so many unfortunate Rebellions against
the Romans. Add to this, that these Publicans were not only obliged by the
necessity of their Trade to have frequent dealing and converse with the
Gentiles (which the Jews held unlawful and abominable) but that being Jews
themselves they rigorously exacted these things of their Brethren, and thereby
seemed to conspire with the Romans to entail perpetual slavery upon their own
Nation. For though (...). 7. p. 561.
Tertullian thought that none but Gentiles were employed in this sordid office,
yet the contrary is too evident to need any argument to prove it.

2. BY these means Publicans became so universally abhorred by the Jewish
Nation, that it was accounted unlawful to do them any office of common kindness
and courtesy, nay they held it no sin to cousen and overreach a Publican, and
that with the solemnity of an Oath; they might not eat or drink, walk or travel
with them; they were looked upon as common Thieves and Robbers and Money
received of them might not be put to the rest of a Man's Estate, it being
presumed to have been gained by rapine and violence; they were not admitted as
Persons fit to give testimony and evidence in any cause: so infamous were they,
as not only to be banished all communion in the matters of Divine Worship, but
to be shunned in all affairs of civil society and commerce, as the Pests of
their Country, Persons of an infectious converse, of as vile a Class as
Heathens themselves. Hence the common Proverb among them, Take not (...)
a Wife out of that Family, wherein there is a Publican, for they are all
Publicans, that is, Thieves, Robbers, and wicked sinners. To this Proverbial
usage our Lord alludes, when speaking of a contumacious sinner, whom neither
private reproofs, nor the public censures and admonitions of the Church can
prevail upon, Let him be unto (...) (says he) as an Heathen and a Publican; as
elsewhere Publicans and sinners are yoked Matthew. 18. 17.
together, as Persons of equal esteem and reputation. Of this Trade and Office
was our S. Matthew, and it seems more particularly to have consisted in
gathering the Customs of Commodities that came by the Sea of Galilee, and the
Tribute which Passengers were to pay that went by Water; a thing frequently
mentioned in the Jewish writings, where we are also told of the (...) or
Ticket, consisting of two greater Letters (...). Lex in (...). (...)
written in Paper, or some such matter, called (...) the Ticket or signature of
the Publicans, which the Passenger had with him to certify them on the other
side the Water, that he had already paid the Toll or Custom: upon which account
the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew published by Munster, renders Publican by (...)
the Lord of the Passage. For this purpose they kept their Office or
Custom-house by the Seaside, that they might be always near at hand; and here
it was (as S. Mark intimates) that Matthew had his Toll-booth, where He sat at
the Receipt of Custom.

3. OUR Lord having lately cured a famous Paralytick, retired out of Capernaum
to Matthew. 9. 9.
walk by the Seaside, where he taught the People that flocked after him. Here
he espied Mark 2. 13. 14.
Matthew sitting in his Custom-office, whom he called to come and follow Him.
Luke 5. 27, 28, 29.
The Man was rich, had a wealthy and a gainful Trade, a wise and prudent Person
(no fools being put into that Office) and understood no doubt what it would
cost him to comply with this new employment, that he must exchange Wealth for
Poverty, a Custom-house for a Prison, gainful Masters for a naked and despised
Savior. But he overlooked all these considerations, left all his Interests and
Relations, to become our Lord's Disciple, and to embrace (...) (as Homil. 11.
(...) 1. ad (...). p. 419.
Chrysostom observes) a more spiritual way of commerce and traffic. We cannot
suppose that he was before wholly unacquainted with our Savior's Person or
Doctrine, especially living at Capernaum, the place of Christ's usual
residence, where his Sermons and Miracles were so frequent, by which he could
not but in some measure be prepared to receive the impressions, which our
Savior's call now made upon him. And to show that he was not discontented at
his change, nor apprehended himself a loser by this bargain, he entertained our
Lord and his Disciples at a great Dinner in his House, whither he invited his
Friends, especially those of his own Profession, piously hoping that they also
might be caught by our Savior's converse and company. The Pharisees, whose Eye
was constantly evil, where another Man's was good, and who would (...) find or
make occasions to snarle at him, began to suggest to his Disciples, that it was
unbecoming so pure and holy a Person as their Master pretended himself to be,
thus familiarly to converse with the worst of men, Publicans and sinners,
Persons infamous to a Proverb. But he presently replied upon them, that they
were the sick that needed the Physician, not the sound and healthy, that his
company was most suitable, where the necessities of Souls did most require it,
that God himself preferred acts of Mercy and Charity, especially in reclaiming
sinners, and doing good to Souls, infinitely before all ritual observances, and
the nice rules of Persons conversing with one another, and that the main design
of his coming into the World was not to bring the righteous, or those who like
themselves proudly conceited themselves to be so, and in a vain Opinion of
their own strictness loftily scorned all Mankind besides, but sinners, modest,
humble, self-convinced offenders, to repentance, and to reduce them to a better
state and course of life.

4. AFTER his election to the Apostolate, he continued with the rest till our
Lord's Ascension, and then for the first eight Years at least Preached up and
down (...). After which being to betake himself to the Conversion of the
Gentile-world, he was entreated by the Convert Jews to commit to Writing the
History of our Savior's Life and Actions, and to leave it among them as the
standing Record of what he had Preached to them; which he did accordingly, and
so composed his Gospel, whereof more in due place. Little certainty can be had
what Travails he underwent for the advancement of the Christian Faith, so
irrecoverably is truth lost in a crowd of Legendary stories. Sur. l. (...). c.
19. p. 50.
AEthiopia is generally assigned as the Province of his Apostolical Ministry:
Apud Sur. ad (...). 21. (...). Vol. 3. p 217.
Metaphrastes tells us, that he (...) first into Parthia, and having
successfully planted Christianity in those Parts, thence travailed into
AEthiopia, that is, the Asiatick AEthiopia, lying near to India: here by
Preaching and Miracles he mightily triumphed over error and Idolatry, convinced
and converted Multitudes, ordained spiritual Guides and Pastors to confirm and
build them up, and bring over others to the Faith, and then finished his own
course. As for what is related by H. Eecl. lib, 2. c. 41. p. 203.
Nicephorus of his going into the Country of the Cannibals, constituting Plato,
one of his followers, Bishop of Myrmena, of Christ's appearing to him in the
form of a beautiful Youth, and giving him a Wand, which he pitching into the
ground, immediately it grew up into a Tree, of his strange converting the
Prince of that Country, of his numerous Miracles, peaceable Death, and
sumptuous Funerals, with abundance more of the same stamp and coin, they are
justly to be reckoned amongst those fabulous reports, that have no Pillar nor
ground either of truth or probability to support them. Most probable it is
(what an Ancient (...) India (...): (...) Naddaber a'ta (...). Ven. Fortun. de
Senate. Cur. (...). lib. 7. p. (...).
Writer affirms) that he suffered Martyrdom at Naddaber a City in AEthiopia,
but by what kind of Death, is altogether uncertain. Whether this Naddaber be
the same with Beschberi, where the Arabic Vbi supr. p. 30. (...). p. 31.
Writer of his Life affirms him to have suffered Martyrdom, let others enquire:
he also adds, that he was buried Arthaganetu (...), but where that is, is to me
unknown. Synops. de vit. and mort. App. in Bibl. Pp. Tom. 3. p. 148.
Dorotheus makes him honorably buried at Hierapolis in Parthia, one of the
first places to which he Preached the Gospel.

5. HE was a great instance of the power of Religion, how much a Man may be
brought off to a better temper. If we reflect upon his circumstances while yet
a stranger to Christ, we shall find that the World had very great advantages
upon him. He was become Master of a plentiful Estate, engaged in a rich and a
gainful Trade, supported by the power and favor of the Romans, prompted by
covetous inclinations, and these confirmed by long habits and customs. And yet
notwithstanding all this, no sooner did Christ call, but without the least
scruple or dissatisfaction, he flung up all at once, and not only renounced (as
S. Basil Reg. (...) disput. Interrog. VIII. page 545. (...). 2.
observes) his gainful incomes, but ran an immediate hazard of the displeasure
of his Masters that employed him, for quitting their service, and leaving his
accounts entangled and confused behind him. Had our Savior been a mighty
Prince, it had been no wonder, that he should run over to his service: but when
he appeared under all the circumstances of meanness and disgrace, when he
seemed to promise his followers nothing but misery and suffering in this life,
and to propound no other rewards but the invisible encouragements of another
World, his change in this case was the more strange and admirable. Indeed so
admirable, that Porphyry and Ap. (...). in Matthew. 9. p. 26. (...). 9.
Julian (two subtle and acute adversaries of the Christian Religion) hence took
occasion to charge him either with falsehood, or with folly; either that he gave
not a true account of the thing; or, that it was very weakly done of him, so
hastily to follow any one that called him. But the Holy Jesus was no common
Person, in all his commands there was somewhat more than ordinary. Indeed S.
Hierom conceives that besides the Divinity that manifested it self in his
Miracles, there was a Divine brightness and a kind of Majesty in our Savior's
looks, that at first sight was attractive enough to draw Persons after him.
However his miraculous powers, that reflected a luster from every quarter, and
the efficacy of his Doctrine accompanied with the grace of God, made way for
the summons that were sent our Apostle, and enabled him to conquer all
oppositions that stood in the way to hinder him.

6. HIS contempt of the World further appeared in his exemplary temperance and
abstemiousness from all the delights and pleasures, yea the ordinary
conveniences and accommodations of it; so far from indulging his appetite with
nice and delicate curiosities, that he refused to gratify it with lawful and
ordinary provisions, eating no flesh, his usual Diet being nothing but Herbs,
Roots, Seeds and (...). lib. 2. c. 1. p. 148.
Berries. But what appeared most remarkable in him, and which though the least
virtue in it self, is the greatest in a wise Man's esteem and value, was his
humility, mean and modest in his own conceit, in honor preferring others
before Cateri (...) in conjunctione nominum, (...), and postea Thomom: (...)
vero and post (...) se (...), and (...) abundavit (...) and (...). Hieron.
(...) Matthew. c. 10. p. 29. T. 9.
himself. Whereas the other Evangelists in describing the Apostles by pairs,
constantly place him before Thomas, he modestly places him before himself. The
rest of the Evangelists openly mention the honor of his Apostleship, but speak
of his former sordid, dishonest, and disgraceful course of life, only under the
name of Levi, while he himself sets it down, with all its circumstances, under
his own proper and common name. Which as at once it commends his own candor and
ingenuity, so it administers to us this not unuseful consideration, That the
greatest sinners are not excluded the lines of Divine grace; nor can any, if
penitent, have just reason to despair, when Publicans and sinners are taken in.
And as S. Matthew himself does (...) nec (...) nomen (...): ne (...). ibid.
freely and impartially record his own vile and dishonorable course of life,
so the two other Evangelists though setting down the story, take notice of him
only under another name; to teach us to treat a penitent Brother with all
modesty and tenderness. If a man repent (say the Jews) (...) Let no man say to
him, remember thy former works; which they explain not only concerning
Israelites, but even strangers and Proselytes. It being against the rules of
civility, as well as the Laws of Religion, when a Man has repented, to upbraid
and reproach him with the errors and follies Bava (...) fol. 58. 2.
of his past life.

7. THE last thing that calls for any remarks in the life of this Apostle is
his Gospel, written at the entreaty of the Jewish Converts, and as Epiphanius
tells (...). p. 185.
us, at the command of the Apostles, while he was yet in Palestine, about Eight
Years after the death of Christ: though H. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 45. p. 213.
Nicephorus will have it to be written Fifteen Years after our Lord's
Ascension, and Adv. (...). lib. 3. c. 1. p. 229.
(...) yet much wider, who seems to imply that it was written, while Peter and
Paul Preached at Rome, which was not till near Thirty Years after. But most
plain it is, that it must be written before the dispersion of the Apostles,
seeing S. Bartholomew (as we have noted in his Life) took it along with him
into India, and left it there. He wrote it in Hebrew, as primarily designing it
for the use of his Countrymen, and strange it is, that any should question its
being originally written in that Language, when the thing is so universally and
uncontroulably asserted (...) ap. (...). l. 3. c. 39. p. 113. (...). l. 3. c.
1. p. 229. Origin, Exposit. in (...). l. 5. ap. Enseb. (...). 6. c. 25. p. 226.
(...). Synops. S. Script. p. 493. Cyrill. (...). 14. p. 341. Epiphan. (...).
29. p. 59. (...). 51. p. 185. (...). Homil. 1. in Matthew. p. 4. (...). de
Script. Eccl. in Math. (...). in 4. (...). ad Dam. Tom. 3. p. 30. and (...).
August. de (...). Evang. lib. 1. c. 2. col. 372. (...). Synops. de vit. App. p.
148. (...). lib. 8. Arabs quidam in vit. MS. (...) apud (...). de vit. Quat,
Evangel. (...). 10. p. 29. (...) ad (...). Evangel. S. (...) Arabs, and (...).
ad id. Evangel.
by all Antiquity, not one that I know of, after the strictest enquiry I could
make, dissenting in this matter, and who certainly had far greater
opportunities of being satisfied in these things, than we can have at so great
a distance. It was no doubt soon after translated into Greek, though by whom S.
Hierom professes he could not tell; (...). Comment. in (...). page 2.
Theophylact says it was reported to have been done by S. John, but Synops. S.
Script. p. 493.
Athanasius more expressly attributes the Translation to S. James the less. The
best is, it matters not much whether it was translated by an Apostle, or some
Disciple, so long as the Apostles approved the Version, and that the Church has
ever received the Greek Copy for (...), and reposed it in the Sacred Canon.

8. AFTER the Greek Translation was entertained, the Hebrew Copy was chiefly
owned and used by the Epiph. (...). 29. p. 59.
(...), a middle Sect of Men between Jews and Christians; with the Christians
they believed in Christ, and embraced his Religion, with the Jews they adhered
to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Mosaic Law, and hence this Gospel came to
be styled the Gospel according to the Hebrews, and the Gospel of the Nazarens.
By them it was by degrees interpolated, several Passages of the Evangelical
History, which they had heard either from the Apostles, or those who had
familiarly conversed with them, being inserted, which the ancient Fathers
frequently refer to in their Writings; as by the Epiph. (...). 40. p. 64.
(...). 27. p. 54.
Ebionites it was mutilated, and many things cut off, for the same reason for
which the followers of Cerinthus, though making use of the greatest part of it,
rejected the rest, because it made so much against them. This Hebrew Copy
(though whether exactly the same as it was written by S. Matthew, I will not
say) was found among other Books in the Treasury of the Jews at (...). ib.
(...). XXX. p. 61. vid. p. 60.
Tiberias, by Joseph a Jew, and after his Conversion a Man of great honor and
esteem in the time of Constantine; another (...) Script. Eccl. in (...).
S. Hierom assures us was kept in the Library at Caesarea in his time, and
another by the Nazarens at Beroea, from whom he had the liberty to transcribe
it, and which he afterward translated both into Greek and Latin, with this
particular observation, that in quoting the Texts of the Old Testament, the
Evangelist immediately follows the Hebrew, without taking notice of the
Translation of the Septuagint. A Copy also of this Gospel was Ann. CCCCLXXXV.
dug up and found in the Grave of Barnabas in Cyprus, transcribed with his own
Theodor. Lect. Collect an. lib. 2. non long ab init. p. 184.
hand. But these Copies are long since perished, and for those that have been
since published to the World, both by Tile and Munster, were there no other
argument, they too openly betray themselves by their barbarous and improper
style, not to be the genuine issue of that less corrupt and better Age.

The End of S. Matthew's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. THOMAS.
St. Thomas.
By the command of an Indian King he was thrust through with lances. Baron.
Martyrolog. Dec. 21

St. Thomas his Martyrdom
Joh. 11. 16. Thomas which is called Didunus said unto his fellow-desciples,
Let us also go, that we may die with him.




The custom of the Jews to have both an Hebrew and a Roman name. S. Thomas his
name the same in Syriack and Greek. His Country and Trade. His call to the
Apostleship. His great affection to our Savior. Christ's discourse with him
concerning the way to Eternal life. His obstinate refusal to believe our Lord's
Resurrection, and the unreasonableness of his Infidelity. Our Lord's convincing
him by sensible demonstrations. S. Thomas his deputing Thaddaeus to Abgarus of
Edessa. His Travels into Parthia, Media, Persia, etc. AEthiopia, what, and
where situate. His coming into India, and the success of his Preaching there.
An account of his Acts in India from the relation of the Portugals at their
first coming thither. His converting the King of Malipur. The manner of his
Martyrdom by the Brachmans. The Miracles said to be done at his Tomb. His Bones
dug up by the Portugals. A Cross, and several Brass Tables with Inscriptions
found there. An account of the Indian or S. Thomas Christians, their Number,
State, Rites, and way of life.

1. IT was customary with the Jews, when traveling into foreign Countries, or
familiarly conversing with the Greeks and Romans, to assume to themselves a
Greek or a Latin name, of great affinity; and sometimes of the very same
signification with that of their own Country. Thus our Lord was called Christ,
answering to his Hebrew title Mashiach, or the (...); Simon styled Peter
according to that of Cephas, which our Lord put upon him: Tabitha called (...)
both signifying a Goat: Thus our S. Thomas according to the Syriack importance
of his name, had the title of Didymus, which signifies a Twin. Thomas which is
called Didymus. Accordingly the Syriack Version renders it, (...), which is
called (...) Thama, that is, a Twin: The not understanding whereof imposed upon
Nonnus the Greek Paraphrast, who makes him (...), to have had two distinct
names, -- (...), Nonn. Panop. in Joan. c. 11.

(...)
it being but the same name expressed in different Languages. The History of
the Gospel takes no particular notice either of the Country or Kindred of this
Apostle. That he was a Jew is certain, and in all probability a Galilean: He
was born (if we may believe Apud Sur. ad diem 21. December. n. 2.
Symeon Metaphrastes) of very mean Parents, who brought him up to the trade of
Fishing, but withal took care to give him a more useful education, instructing
him in the knowledge of the Scriptures, whereby he learnt wisely to govern his
life and manners. He was together with the rest called to the Apostleship, and
not long after gave an eminent instance of his hearty willingness to undergo
the saddest fate that might attend them. For when the rest of the Apostles
dissuaded our Savior from going into Judaea (whither he was now resolved for
the raising his dear Lazarus lately dead) left the Jews should stone him, as
but a little before they had attempted it, S. Thomas desires them not to hinder
Christ's journey thither, though it might cost their lives, Let us also go that
we may die with him, probably concluding, that instead of raising John 11. 16.
Lazarus from the dead, they themselves should be sent with him to their own
Graves. So that he made up in pious affections, what he seemed to want in the
quickness and acumen of his understanding, not readily apprehending some of our
Lord's discourses, nor over-forward to believe more than himself had seen. When
the holy Jesus a little before his fatal sufferings had been speaking to them
of the joys of Heaven, and had told them that he was going to prepare, that
they might follow him, that they knew both the place whither he was going, and
the way thither: Our Apostle John 14. 5.
replied, that they knew not whither he went, and much less the way that led to
it. To which our Lord returns this short but satisfactory answer, That he was
the true living way, the person whom the Father had sent into the World to show
men the paths of Eternal life, and that they could not miss of Heaven, if they
did but keep to that way, which he had prescribed and chalked out before them.

2. OUR Lord being dead, it is evident how much the Apostles were distracted
between hopes and fears concerning his Resurrection, not yet fully satisfied
about it: Which engaged him the sooner to hasten his appearance, that by the
sensible manifestations of himself he might put the case beyond all
possibilities of dispute. The very day John 20. 19.
whereon he arose he came into the house where they were, while for fear of the
Jews the doors were yet fast shut about them, and gave them sufficient
assurance that he was really risen from the dead. At this meeting S. Thomas was
absent, having probably never recovered their company, since their last
dispersion in the Garden, when every ones fears prompted him to consult his own
safety. At his return they told him that their Lord had appeared to them; but
he obstinately refused to give credit to what they said, or to believe that it
was he, presuming it rather a phantasm or mere apparition, unless he might see
the very prints of the Nails, and feel the wounds in his hands and sides. A
strange piece of infidelity! Was this any more than what Moses and the Prophets
had long since foretold? had not our Lord frequently told them in plain terms
that he must rise again the third day? could he question the possibility of it,
who had so often seen him do the greatest miracles? was it reasonable to reject
the testimony of so many eyewitnesses, ten to one against himself, and of
whose fidelity he was assured? or could he think that either themselves should
be deceived, or that they would jest and trifle with him in so solemn and
serious a matter? A stubbornness that might have betrayed him into an eternal
infidelity. But our compassionate Savior would not take the advantage of the
man's refractory unbelief, but on that day sevennight again came to them, as
they were solemnly met at their devotions, and calling to Thomas, bad him look
upon his hands, put his fingers into the prints of the Nails, and thrust his
hand into the hole of his side, and satisfy his faith by a demonstration from
sense. The man was quickly convinced of his error and obstinacy, confessing
that he now acknowledged him to be his very Lord and Master, a God omnipotent,
that was thus able to rescue himself from the powers of death. Our Lord replied
no more, than that it was well he believed his own senses, but that it was a
more noble and commendable act of Faith to acquiesce in a rational evidence,
and to entertain the doctrines and relations of the Gospel upon such
testimonies and assurances of the truth of things, as will satisfy a wise and
sober man, though he did not see them with his own eyes.

3. THE Blessed Jesus being gone to Heaven, and having eminently given gifts
and miraculous powers to the Apostles, S. Thomas moved thereto by some Divine
intimation, is (...). lib. (...). c. 13. p. 32. and lib. 2. c. 1. p. 39.
said to have dispatched (...), one of the Seventy Disciples to Abgarus Toparch
of Edessa, (between whom and our Savior the letters commonly said to have
passed are still extant in (...)) whom he first cured of an inveterate
distemper, and after converted him and his subjects to the Faith. The
Apostolical Province assigned to S. Thomas (as Lib. 3. in Genesis ap. Eusebius. lib.
3. c. 1. p. 71. (...). lib. 1. c. 19. (...). lib. 9 p. 101. fac. 2.
Origin tells us) was Parthia, after which (...). de Script. in (...). 9.
Sophronius and others inform us, that he preached the Gospel to the Medes,
Persians, Carmans, Hyrcani, Bactrians, and the neighbor Nations. In Persia,
one of the Auth. (...). in (...). ap. (...). Hom. 2 p. 776.
Ancients (upon what ground I know not) acquaints us, that he met with the Magi
or Wise men, who came that long journey from the East to bring presents to our
newborn Savior, whom he baptized, and took along with him as his companions
and assistents in the propagation of the Gospel. Hence he preached in and
passed through (...). Sermon. in XII. App. T. 6. p. 269
AEthiopia, that is, (that we may a little clear this by the way) the Asian
AEthiopia, conterminous to, if not the same with Chaldaea, whence (...). lib.
5. c. 2 p. 534.
Tacitus does not only make the Jews descendents from the AEthiopians, as whose
Ancestors came from Ur of the Chaldeans; but (...). in (...). (...).
Hesychius makes the inhabitants of Zagrus, a mountain beyond Tygris, (...), a
people of the AEthiopians; this is the (...) mentioned by Benjamin the Jew in
his (...). D. (...). Tud. p. 98.
(...), the land of (...) or AEthiopia, the inhabitants whereof are styled by
Lib. 7. c 69. 70. p. 408.
Herodotus, (...), the oriental AEthiopians, by way of distinction from those
(...), who lived South of Egypt, and were under the same military Prefecture
with the Arabians, under the command of Arsames, as the other were joined with
the Indians, and in the same place are called (...), the Asian AEthiopians.
Having traveled through these Countries, he at last came to India. We are told
by H. (...). l. 2. c. 40. p. 201.
Nicephorus, that he was at first unwilling to venture himself into those
Countries, fearing he should find their manners as rude and intractable as
their faces were black and deformed, till encouraged by a Vision, that assured
him of the Divine Presence to assist him. He traveled a great way into those
Eastern Nations, as far as the Island Taprobane, since called Sumatra, and the
Country of the Brachmans, preaching every where with all the arts of gentleness
and mild S. Metaphr. ad 21. (...) 8, 9.
perswasives, not flying out into tart invectives, and surious heats against
their idolatrous practices, but calmly instructing them in the principles of
Christianity, by degrees persuading them to renounce their follies, knowing
that confirmed habits must be cured by patience and long forbearing, by slow
and gentle methods; and by these means he wrought upon the people, and brought
them over from the grossest errors and superstition to the hearty belief and
entertainment of Religion.

4. IN want of better evidence from Antiquity, it may not be amiss to enquire,
what account the Portugals in their first discoveries of these Countries,
received of these matters, partly from ancient Monuments and Writings, partly
from constant and uncontrolled Traditions, which the Christians whom they found
in those parts, preserved amongst them. They tell Mass. H (...). lib. 2. p. 85.
us, that S. Thomas came first to Socotora, an Island in the Arabian Sea,
thence to Cranganor, where having converted many, he traveled further into the
East, and having successfully preached the Gospel, returned back into the
Kingdom of Cormandel, where at Malipur, the Metropolis of the Kingdom, not far
from the influx of Ganges into the Gulf of Bengala, he began to erect a place
for Divine worship, till prohibited by the Priests, and Sagamo, Prince of that
Country. But upon the conviction of several (...) the work went on, and the
Sagamo himself embraced the Christian Faith, whose example was soon followed by
great numbers of his friends and subjects. The Brachmans, who plainly perceived
that this would certainly spoil their Trade, and in time extirpate the Religion
of their Country, thought it high time to put a stop to this growing Novelism,
and resolved in Council, that some way or other the Apostle must be put to
death. There was a Tomb not far from the City, whither the Apostle was wont to
retire to his solitudes and private devotions; hither the Brachmans and their
armed followers pursue the Apostle, and while he was intent at prayer, they
first load him with darts and stones, till one of them coming nearer, ran him
through with a Lance. His Body was taken up by his Disciples, and buried in the
Church which he had lately built, and which was afterward improved into a
(...) of great stateliness and magnificence. Gregory of (...). Martyr. lib. 1.
cap. 32. p. 41.
Tours relates many miracles done upon the annual solemnities of his Martyrdom,
and one standing miracle, an account whereof, he tells us, he received from one
Theodorus, who had himself been in that place, viz. that in the Temple where
the Apostle was buried there hung a Lamp before his Tomb, which burnt
perpetually, without Oil or any Fuel to feed and nourish it, the light whereof
was never diminished, nor by wind or any other accident could be extinguished.
But whether Travelers might not herein be imposed upon by the crafty (...) of
the Priests, or those who did attend the Church; or if true, whether it might
not be performed by art, I leave to others to enquire. Some will have his Body
to have been afterward translated to Edessa, a City in Mesopotamia, but the
Christians in the East constantly affirm it to have remained in the place of
his Martyrdom, where (if we may believe (...). ib. lib. 8. p. 363.
relations) it was after dug up with great cost and care at the command of Don
Emmanuel Frea, Governor of the Coast of Cormandel, and together with it was
found the Bones of the Sagamo, whom he had converted to the Faith.

5. WHILE Don Alsonso (...), one of the first Viceroys in India under John the
(...). de reb. (...). lib. 3. p. 120.
Third, King of Portugal, resided in these parts, certain Brass Tables were
brought to him, whose ancient Inscriptions could scarce be read, till at last
by the help of a Jew, an excellent Antiquary, they were found to contain
nothing but a donation made to S. Thomas, whereby the King, who then reigned,
granted to him a piece of ground for the building of a Church. They tell us
also of a famous Cross found in S. Thomas his Chapel at Malipur, wherein was
an unintelligible Inscription, which by a Learned Bramin (whom they compelled
to read and expound it) gave an account to this effect, That Thomas a Divine
person was sent into those Countries by the Son of God in the time of King
Sagamo, to instruct them in the knowledge of the true God, that he built a
Church, and performed admirable miracles, but at last while upon his knees at
prayer was by a Brachman thrust through with a Spear; and that that Cross
stained with his blood had been left as a memorial of these matters. An
interpretation that was afterward confirmed by another grave and learned
Bramin, who expounded the Inscription to the very same effect. The judicious
Reader will measure his belief of these things by the credit of the Reporters,
and the rational probability of the things themselves, which for my part as I
cannot certainly affirm to be true, so I will not utterly conclude them to be
false.

6. FROM these first plantations of Christianity in the Eastern India's by our
Apostle, there is said to have been a continued series and succession of
Christians (hence called S. Thomas-Christians) in those parts unto this day.
The Portugals at their first arrival here found them in great numbers in
several places, no less, as some tell us, than fifteen or sixteen thousand
Families. They are very poor, and their Churches generally mean and sordid,
(...). ibid. p. 119. and (...). 2. p. 88. (...). Navig. (...) Relat. Nov.
(...), 134.
wherein they had no Images of Saints, nor any representations but that of the
Cross; they are governed in Spirituals by an High Priest (whom some make an
Armenian Patriarch, of the Sect of Nestorius, but in truth is no other than the
Patriarch of Muzal, the remainder, as is probable, of the ancient (...), and by
some, though erroneously, styled Babylon) residing Northward in the Mountains,
who, together with twelve Cardinals, two Patriarchs, and several Bishops,
disposes of all affairs referring to Religion; and to him all the Christians of
the East yield subjection. They promiscuously admit all to the Holy Communion,
which they receive under both kinds of Bread and Wine, though instead of Wine,
which their Country affords not, making use of the juice of Raisons, steeped
one night in water, and then pressed forth. Children, unless in case of
sickness, are not baptized till the fortieth day. At the death of Friends,
their kindred and relations keep an eight days feast in memory of the departed.
Every Lord's Day they have their public Assemblies for prayer and preaching,
their devotions being managed with great reverence and solemnity. Their Bible,
at least the New Testament, is in the Syriack Language, to the study whereof
the Preachers earnestly exhort the people. They observe the times of Advent and
Lent, the Festivals of our Lord, and many of the Saints, those especially that
relate to S. Thomas, the Dominica in Albis, or Sunday after Easter, in memory
of the famous confession which S. Thomas on that day made of Christ, after he
had been sensibly cured of his unbelief; another on the first of July,
celebrated not only by Christians, but by Moors and Pagans, the people who come
to his Sepulcher on Pilgrimage carrying away a little of the red Earth of the
place where he was interred, which they keep as an inestimable treasure, and
(...) it sovereign against diseases. They have a kind of Monasteries of the
Religious, who live in great abstinence and chastity. Their Priests are shaven
in fashion of a Cross, have leave to marry once, but denied a second time: No
marriages to be dissolved but by death. These rites and customs they solemnly
pretend to have derived from the very time of S. Thomas, and with the greatest
care and diligence do observe them at this day.

The End of S. Thomas's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. JAMES the Less.
S. JAMES. Minor.
This Apostle being a Kinsman of our Lord and having Sale first Bishop of
Jerusalem was cast down from the top of the Temple and after killed with a
Fu^^ers club Baron. ^^^ 1o

The Martyrdom of St. James ye less.
Mauh. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets and
stonest them which are sent unto thee.




S. James the Less proved to be the same with him that was Bishop of Jerusalem.
His Kindred and Relations. The Son of Joseph by a former Wife. The Brethren of
our Lord, who. His Country what. Our Lord's appearance to him after his
Resurrection. Invested in the Sea of Jerusalem by whom and why. His authority
in the Synod at Jerusalem. His great diligence and fidelity in his Ministry.
The conspiracy of his Enemies to take away his Life. His Discourse with the
Scribes and Pharisees about the Messiah. His Martyrdom, and the manner of it.
His Burial where. His Death resented by the Jews. His strictness in Religion.
His Priesthood whence. His singular delight in Prayer, and efficacy in it. His
great love and charity to Men. His admirable Humility. His Temperance according
to the rules of the Nazarite- Order. The Love and respect of the People toward
him. His Death an inlet to the destruction of the Jewish Nation. His Epistle
when written. What the design and purpose of it. The Proto-evangelium ascribed
to him.

1. BEFORE we can enter upon the Life of this Apostle, some difficulty must be
cleared, relating to his Person. Doubted it has been by some, whether this was
the same with that S. James that was Bishop of Jerusalem, three of this Name
being presented to us, S. James the Great, this S. James the Less (both
Apostles) and a third surnamed the Just, distinct (say they) from the former
and Bishop of Jerusalem. But this (however pretending to some little
countenance from antiquity) is a very great mistake, and built upon a sandy
bottom. For besides that the Scripture mentions no more than two of this Name,
and both Apostles, nothing can be plainer, than that that S. James the Apostle,
whom S. Paul calls our Lord's Brother, and reckons with Peter and John one of
the Pillars of the Church, was the same that presided among the Apostles (no
doubt by virtue of his place, it being his Episcopal Chair) and determined in
the Synod at Jerusalem. Nor do either Clemens (...). Clem. Al. (...). lib. 7.
ap. (...). lib. 2. c. 1. p. 38.
Alexandrinus or (...) out of him mention any more than two, S. James put to
death by Herod, and S. James the Just, Bishop of Jerusalem, whom they expressly
affirm to be the same with him whom S. Paul calls the Brother of our Lord. Once
indeed H. (...). lib. 1. c. 12. p. 31.
(...) makes our S. James one of the Seventy, though Lib. 2. (...). 1. p. 38.
elsewere quoting a place of Clemens of Alexandria, he numbers him with the
Chief of the Apostles, and expressly distinguishes him from the Seventy
Disciples. Nay S. (...). in Isai. cap. 17. p. 60. T. 5.
Hierom, though when representing the Opinion of others he styles him the
Thirteenth Apostle, yet (...). Helvid. T. 2. p. 10.
elsewhere when speaking his own sense, sufficiently proves that there were but
two, James the Son of (...), and the other the Son of Alphaeus, the one
surnamed the Greater, the other the Less. Besides that the main support of the
other Opinion is built upon the authority of Clemens his Recognitions, a Book
in doubtful cases of no esteem and value.

2. This doubt being removed, we proceed to the History of his Life. He was the
Son (as we may probably conjecture) of Joseph (afterward Husband to the
Blessed Virgin) and his first Wife, whom S. (...). in Math. 12. p. 38. T. 9.
Hierom from Tradition styles Escha, Hippolytus Bishop of Porto calls Salome;
and further adds, Ap. (...). lib. 2. (...). 3. p. 135.
that she was the Daughter of Aggi, Brother to Zacharias, Father to John the
Baptist. Hence reputed our Lord's Brother, in the same sense that he was
reputed the Son of Joseph. Indeed we find several spoken of in the History of
the Gospel, who were Christ's Brethren; but in what sense, was controverted of
old. S. Hierom, Chrysostom, and some others will have them so called, because
the Sons of Mary, Cousin-german, or according to the custom of the Hebrew
Language, Sister to the Virgin Mary. But H. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 1. p. 38.
Eusebius, Contr. Cerinth. (...). XXVIII. p. 55.
Epiphanius, and the far greater part of the Ancients (from whom especially in
matters of fact, we are not rashly to depart) make them the Children of Joseph,
by a former Wife. And this seems most genuine and natural, the Evangelists
seeming very express and accurate in the account Contr. Naz. (...) XXIX. p. 56.
and contr.
which they give of them: Is not this the Carpenter's Son? Is not his Mother
called Mary? and his Brethren James, and Joses, and Simon, and Jude? and his
Sisters (whose Names, (...). lxxviii. p. 438, 439.
says the foresaid Hippolytus, were Esther and Thamar) are they not all with
us, whence then has this man these things? By which it is plain, that the Jews
understood these Persons Greg. (...). Christ. (...). II. p. 844. Tom. 2. Math
13. 55, 56
not to be Christ's Kinsmen only, but his Brothers, the same Carpenter's Sons,
having the same relation to him that Christ himself had: though indeed they had
more, Christ being but his reputed, they his natural Sons. Upon this account
the Blessed Virgin is sometimes called the Mother of James and Joses; for so
amongst the Women that attended at our Lord's Crucifixion, we find three
eminently taken notice of, Mary Magdalen, Mary the Mother of (...). 27. 56.
(...) 14. 40.
James and Joses, and the Mother of Zebedees Children. Where (...). Gregor.
(...). loc. supr. laud.
by Mary the Mother of James and Joses, no other can be meant than the Virgin
Mary: it not being reasonable to suppose that the Evangelists should omit the
Blessed Virgin, who was certainly there; and therefore S. John reckoning up the
same Joh. 19. 25.
Persons, expressly styles her the Mother of Jesus. And though it is true she
was but S. James his Mother-in-law, yet the Evangelists might choose so to style
her, because commonly so called after Joseph's death; and probably (as Gregory
of Nyssa thinks) known by that Name all along, choosing that Title, that the Son
of God, Vbi supr.
whom as a Virgin she had brought forth, might be better concealed, and less
exposed to the malice of the envious Jews: nor is it any more wonder, that she
should be esteemed and called the Mother of James, than that Joseph should be
styled and accounted the Father of Jesus. To which add, that (...), Jud. l. 20.
c. 8. p. 698.
Josephus eminently skilful in matters of Genealogy and descent, expressly says
that our S. James was the Brother of Jesus Christ. One thing there is that may
seem to lie against it, that he is called the Son of Alphaeus: But this Matthew.
10. 3.
may probably mean no more, than either that Joseph was so called by another
Name (it being frequent, yea almost constant among the Jews for the same Person
to have two Names) Quis unquam prohibuerit duobus vel tribus nominibus, hominem
(...) vocari? as S. (...) Consens. (...). lib. (...). c. 28. col. 432.
Augustine speaks in a parallel case; or (as a learned Bolduc. de (...). c. 7.
p. 47.
Man conjectures) it may relate to his being a Disciple of some particular Sect
or Synagogue among the Jews, called Alphaeans, from (...) denoting a Family or
Society of devout and learned Men of somewhat more eminency than the rest,
there being, as he tells us, many such at this time among the Jews; and in this
probably S. James had entered himself, the great reputation of his Piety and
strictness; his Wisdom, Parts, and Learning rendering the conjecture above the
censure of being trifling and contemptible.

3. OF the place of his Birth the Sacred story makes no mention. The Jews in
their (...). and Abod. (...) cap. 2. and (...) En (...). vid. Chr. (...). Hist.
(...). p. 394.
Talmud (for doubtless they intend the same Person) style him more than once
(...) a man of the Town of Sechania; though where that was, I am not able to
conjecture. What was his particular way and course of life before his being
called to the Discipleship and Apostolate, we find no intimations of in the
History of the Gospel, nor any distinct account concerning him during our
Savior's life. After the Resurrection he was honored with a particular
Appearance of our Lord to him, which though silently passed over by the
Evangelists, is recorded by S. Paul, next to the manifesting himself to the
Five Hundred Brethren at once, he was seen of James, 1 Cor. 15. 7.
which is by all understood of our Apostle. S. (...) Script. Eccles. in Jacob.
min.
Hierom out of the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazarens (wherein many passages are set
down, omitted by the Evangelical Historians) gives us a fuller relation of it,
viz. that S. James had solemnly sworn that from the time that he had drank of
the Cup at the Institution of the Supper, he would eat Bread no more, till he
saw the Lord risen from the dead. Our Lord therefore being returned from the
Grave, came and appeared to him, commanded Bread to be set before him, which he
took, blessed, and brake, and gave to S. James, saying, Eat thy Bread, my
Brother, for the Son of Man is truly risen from among them that sleep. After
Christ's Ascension (though I will not venture to determine the precise time) he
was chosen Bishop of Jerusalem, preferred before all the rest, for his near
relation unto Christ, for this we find to have been the reason why they chose
(...). apud Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 22. p. 142.
Symeon to be his immediate Successor in that See, because he was after him our
Lord's next Kinsman. A consideration that made Peter and the two Sons of
Zebedee, though they had been peculiarly honored by our Savior, not to
contend for this high and honorable (...). Al. (...). l. 6. ap. (...). l. 2.
c. 1. p. 38.
Place, but freely choose James the Just to be Bishop of it. This dignity is by
some of the Phot. Epist. 117. ad Theodos. Monach p. 158. Theophyl. in 1. ad
Cor. 15. 7. vid. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 19. p. 265.
Ancients said to have been conferred on him by Christ himself, constituting
him Bishop at the time of his appearing to him. But it is safest with others to
understand it of its being done by the Apostles, or possibly by some particular
intimation concerning it, which our Lord might leave behind him.

4. TO him we find S. Paul making his Address after his Conversion, by whom he
Gal. 1. 19. 2 9.
was honored with the right hand of fellowship: to him Peter sent the news of
his miraculous deliverance out of Prison, Go show these things unto James, and
to the Brethren, Act. 12. 17.
that is, to the whole Church, and especially S. James the Bishop and Pastor of
it. But he was principally active in the Synod at Jerusalem in the great
controversy about the Mosaic Rites: for the case being opened by Peter, and
further debated by Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15. 13.
at last stood up S. James to pass the final and decretory sentence, that the
GentileConverts were not to be troubled with the bondage of the Jewish Yoke,
only that for a present accommodation some few indifferent Rites should be
observed; ushering in the expedient with this positive conclusion, (...), I
thus judge or decide the matter, this is my sentence and determination. A
circumstance the more considerable, because spoken at the same time when Peter
was in Council, who produced no such intimation (...). (...). 33. in Act. p.
676. (...) (...). Presb. (...). in Jac. apud Phot. Ced. CLXXV. col. 1525.
of his Authority. Had the Champions of the Church of Rome but such a passage
for Peter's judiciary Authority and Power, it would no doubt have made a louder
noise in the World, than, Thou art Peter, or, Feed my sheep.

5. HE administered his Province with all possible care and industry, omitting
no part of a diligent and faithful Guide of Souls; strengthening the weak,
informing the ignorant, reducing the erroneous, reproving the obstinate, and by
the constancy of his Preaching conquering the stubbornness of that perverse and
refractory Generation that he had to deal with, many of the nobler and the
better sort being brought over to a compliance with the Christian Faith. So
careful, so successful in his charge, that he awakened Eusib. lib. 2. c. 23. p.
64.
the spite and malice of his Enemies to conspire his ruin: a sort of Men, of
whom the Apostle has given too true a character, that they please not God, and
are contrary to all men. Vexed they were to see that S. Paul by appealing to
Caesar had escaped their ld. ib. p. 63.
hands: Malice is as greedy and insatiable as Hell it self, and therefore now
turn their revenge upon S. James, which not being able to effect under Festus
his Government, they more effectually attempted under the Procuratorship of
Albinus his Successor, Ananus the Younger, then High Priest, and of the Sect of
the Sadducees, ((...), says Josephus Antiquit. Jud. lib. 20. c. 8. p. 698.
Josephus, speaking of this very passage, of all others the most merciless and
implacable Justicers) resolving to dispatch him before the new Governor could
arrive. To this end a Council is hastily summoned, and the Apostle with some
others arraigned and condemned as Violators of the Law. But that the thing
might be carried in a more plausible and popular way, they set the Scribes and
Pharisees (Crafts-masters in the arts of dissimulation) at work to ensnare him:
who coming to him, began by flattering insinuatious to set upon him. They tell
him, that (...). Comment. lib. 5. (...) Eusebius. lib. 2. (...). 23. p. 64
they all had a mighty confidence in him, and that the whole Nation as well as
they gave him the testimony of a most just man, and one that was no respecter
of Persons; that therefore they desired he would correct the error and false
Opinion which the People had of Jesus, whom they looked upon as the Messiah,
and would take this opportunity of the universal confluence to the Paschal
solemnity, to set them right in their notions about these things, and would to
that end go up with them to the top of the Temple; where he might be seen and
heard by all. Being advantageously placed upon a Pinnacle or Wing of the
Temple, they made this address to him. Tell us, O Justus, whom we have all the
reason in the World to believe, that seeing the People are thus generally led
away with the Doctrine of Jesus that was crucified, tell us, What is this
Institution of the crucified Jesus? To which the Apostle answered with an
audible Voice; Why do ye enquire of Jesus the Son of man? he sits in Heaven on
the right hand of the Majesty on high, and will come again in the Clouds of
Heaven. The People below hearing it, glorified the blessed Jesus, and openly
proclaimed Hosanna to the Son of David. The Scribes and Pharisees perceived now
that they had over-shot themselves, and that instead of reclaiming, they had
confirmed the People in their Error; that there was no way left, but presently
to dispatch him, that by his sad fate others might be warned not to believe
him. Whereupon suddenly crying out, that Justus himself was seduced and become
an Impostor, they threw him down from the Place where he stood. Though bruised,
he was not killed by the fall, but recovered so much strength, as to get upon
his Knees, and Pray to Heaven for them. Malice is of too bad a nature either to
be pacified with kindness, or satisfied with cruelty: Jealousy is not more the
rage of a Man, than Malice is the rage of the Devil, the very soul and spirit
of the Apostate nature. Little portions of revenge do but inflame it, and serve
to flesh it up into a fiercer violence. Vexed that they had not done his work,
they fall afresh upon the poor remainders of his life; and while he was yet at
Prayer, and that a Rechabite who stood by (which, says (...). 78. p. 441.
Epiphanius, was Symeon, his Kinsman and Successor) stepped in and entreated them
to spare him, a just and a righteous Man, and who was then praying for them,
they began to load him with a shower of stones, till one more mercifully cruel
than the rest with a Fullers Club beat out his Brains. Thus died this good Man
in the XCVI. Year of his Age, and about Epiph. ibid.
XXIV. Years after Christ's Ascension into Heaven, (as Epiphanius tells us;)
being taken away to the great grief and regret of all good Men, yea of all
sober and just Persons even amongst the Jews themselves; (...), as Antiquit.
Jud. lib. 20. c. 8. p. 698.
Josephus himself confesses, speaking of this matter. He was buried (says De
glor. (...). lib. 1. c. 27. page 33.
Gregory Bishop of Tours) upon Mount Olivet, in a Tomb which he had built for
himself, and wherein he had buried Zacharias, and old Simeon: which I am rather
inclinable to believe, than what Ap. Eusib. lib. 2. c. 23. p. 65
Hegesippus reports, that he was buried near the Temple in the place of his
Martyrdom, and that a Monument was there erected for him, which remained a long
time after. For the Jews were not ordinarily wont to bury within the City, much
less so near the Temple, and least of all would they suffer him, whom as a
Blasphemer and Impostor they had so lately put to death.

6. HE was a Man of exemplary and extraordinary Piety and Devotion, educated
under the strictest Rules and Institutions of Religion, a Priest (as we may
probably guess) of the ancient Order of the Rechabites, or rather, as Contr.
Nazar. Haeres. XXIX. p. 56.
Epiphanius conjectures, (...), according to the most ancient order and form of
Priesthood, when the Sacerdotal Office was the Prerogative of the firstborn:
and such was S. James the Eldest Son of Joseph, and thereby sanctified and set
apart for it. Though whether this way of Priesthood at any time held under the
Mosaic dispensation, we have no intimations in the holy story. But however he
came by it, upon some such account it must be, that he had a privilege (which
the (...). apud (...). c. laudat. p. 63. Epiph. ibid.
Ancicnts say was peculiar to him, probably, because more frequently made use
of by him than by any others) to enter (...) not into the Sancta Sanstorum, or
most holy of all, but the Sanctuary, or holy place, whither the Priests of the
Aaronical Order might come. Prayer was his constant business and delight, he
seemed to live upon it, and to trade in nothing but the frequent returns of
converse with Heayen: and was therefore wont to retire alone into the Temple to
pray, which he always performed kneeling and with the greatest reverence, till
by his daily Devotions his knees were become as hard and brawny as a Camels.
And he who has told us, that the effectual servent prayer of a righteous man
avails much, himself (...). 5. 17.
found it true by his own experience, Heaven lending a more immediate Ear to
his Petitions, Epiph. Haeres. 78. p. 441.
so that when in a time of great drought he prayed for Rain, the Heavens
presently melted into fruitful showers. Nor was his Charity toward Men less
than his Piety toward God, he did good to all, watched over Men's souls, and
studied to advance thelr eternal interests; his daily errand into the Temple
was to pray for the happiness of the People, and that God would not severely
reckon with them: he could forgive his fiercest enemies, and overcome evil with
good: when thrown from the top of the Temple, he made use of all the breath he
had left in him, only to send up this Petition to Heaven for the pardon of his
Murderers, I beseech thee, O Lord God, Heavenly Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do.

7. HE was of a most meek humble temper, honoring what was excellent in
others, concealing what was valuable in himself: the eminency of his relation,
and the dignity of his place did not exalt him in lofty thoughts above the
measures of his Brethren, industriously hiding whatever might set him up above
the rest. Though he was our Lora's Brother, yet in the Inscription of his
Epistle he styles himself but the Servant of the Lord Jesus, not so much as
giving himself the Title of an Apostle. His temperance was admirable, he wholly
abstained from Flesh, and drank neither Wine nor strong Drink, nor ever used
the Bath. His holy and mortified mind was content with the meanest
accommodations, he went barefoot, and never wore other than Linnen-garments.
Indeed he lived after the strictest rules of the Nazarite-Order, and as the
Miter, or Sacerdotal Plate ((...) the Epiph. Haeres. 29. p. 56. ex Clem. Al.
and Eusebius. and haeres. 78. p. 441.
Ancients call it) which he wore upon his Head, evinced his Priesthood, which
was rather after Melchisedeck's, or the Priesthood of the firstborn, than the
Aaronical Order, so his never shaving his Head, nor using Unguents, his Habit
and Diet, and the great severity of his Life, showed him to appertain to the
NaZarite-Institution, to which he was holy (says Hegesippus) or consecrated
from his Mother's Womb. A Man of that Divine temper, that he was the love and
wonder of his Age, and for the reputation of his holy and religious Life was
universally styled, (...) the (...). Indced the safety and (...) (...) and
(...) N. Fullerus (...). (...). Miscellan. (...). lib. 3 c. 1.
happiness of the Nation was reckoned to depend upon his Prayers and interest
in Heaven, which gained him the honorable Title of Oblias or (...), the
defense and fortress of the People; as if when he was gone, their Garrisons
would be dismantled, and their strength laid level with the ground. And so we
find it was, when some few Years after his Death the Roman Army broke in upon
them, and turned all into blood and ruin. As what wonder if the judgments of
God like a Flood come rolling in upon a Nation, when the Sluices are plucked up,
and the Moses taken away that before stood in the Gap to keep them 2 King. 13.
20.
out? Elisha died, and a Band of the Moabites invaded the Land. In short, he
was the delight of all good Men, in so much favor and estimation with the
People, that they used to flock after (...). Com. in c. 1. ad Gal, p. 165. T. 9.
him, and strive who should touch, though it were but the hem of his Garment;
his very Episcopal Chair, wherein he used to sit, being (as H. Eccl. lib. 7. c.
19. p. 265.
Eusebius informs us) carefully preserved, and having a kind of veneration paid
to it, even unto his time: loved and honored not by his friends only, but by
his enemies, the Vid. supr. number. 3.
Jews in their Talmud mentioning James as a worker of Miracles in the Name of
Jesus his Master; yea the Eusebius. l. 2. c. 23. p. 65.
wisest of them looked upon his Martyrdom as the inlet to all those miseries
and calamities that soon after flowed in upon them. Sure I am that Verba (...).
Eusebius. loc, laudat.
Josephus particularly reckons the Death of this S. James, as that which more
immediately alarmed the Divine vengeance, and hastened the universal ruin and
destruction of that Nation.

8. HE wrote only one Epistle, probably not long before his Martyrdom, as
appears by some passages in it relating to the near approaching ruin of the
Jewish Nation. He directed it to the Jewish Converts, dispersed up and down
those Eastern Countries, to comfort them under sufferings, and confirm them
against Error. He saw a great degeneracy and declension of manners coming on,
and that the purity of the Christian Faith began to be undermined by the loose
doctrines and practices of the Gnostics, who under a pretense of zeal for the
legal rites generally mixed themselves with the Jews: he beheld Libertinism
marching on a-pace, and the way to Heaven made soft and easy, Men declaiming
against good works as useless and unnecessary, and asserted a naked belief of
the Christian doctrine to be sufficient to salvation. Against these the Apostle
opposes himself, presses Purity, Patience, and Charity, and all the Virtues of
a good Life, and by undeniable Arguments evinces that that faith only that
carries along with it obedience and an holy life can justify us before God,
and entitle us to eternal Life. Besides this Epistle, there is a kind of
preparatory Gospel ascribed to him, published under the Name of (...), (still
extant at this Day) containing the descent, birth and first Originals of
Christ, and the Virgin Mary; at the end whereof the Author pretends to have
written it at a time, when Herod having raised a great tumult in Jerusalem, he
was forced to retire into the Wilderness. But though in many things consistent
enough with the History of the Gospels, yet has it ever been rejected as
spurious and Apochryphal, forged in that licentious Age, when Men took the
boldness to stamp any Writing with the Name of an Apostle.

The End of the Life of S. James the Less.
THE LIFE OF S. SIMON the Zealot.
S SIMON
S. Simon Zelotes preached in Egypt Africa and Britain and at length was
crucified. Nic^ph. l. 2. c. 40. Baron. Oct. 28.

St. Simon's Martyrdom.
Mauh. 10. 16. Behold I send you forth as sheep in ye midst of wol^es 1. Cor.
4. 9. God has set forth US ye Apostles last, as it were men appointed to
death, For we are made a spectacle to the world, and to Angels, and to men.




His kindred. Whence styled the Cananite, and the Zealot. An enquiry into the
nature and temper, and original of the Sect of the Zealots among the Jews. An
account of their wild and licentious practices. This no reflection upon our
Apostle. In what parts of the World he Preached the Gospel. His planting
Christianity in Africa. His removal into the West, and Preaching in Britain.
His Martyrdom there. By whom said to have preached and suffered in Persia. The
difference between him and Symeon Bishop of Jerusalem.

1. SAINT Simon the Apostle was, as some think, one of the four Brothers of our
Savior, Sons of Joseph by his former marriage, though no other evidence Matthew.
10. 4, Mark 3. 18.
appear for it, but that there was a Simon one of the number; too infirm a
foundation to build any thing more upon than a mere conjecture. In the
Catalogue of the Apostles he is styled Simon the Cananite; whence some, led by
no other reason that I know of, than the bare sound of the name, have concluded
him born at Cana in Galilee; as for the same reason Niceph. H. Eccl. lib. 8.
(...). 30 p. 596.
others have made him the Bridegroom, at whose marriage our Lord was there
present, when he honored the solemnity with his first Miracle, turning Water
into Wine. But this word has no relation to his Country, or the place from
whence he borrowed his Original, as plainly descending from (...) or (...)
which signify Zeal, and denote a hot and sprightly temper: Therefore what some
of the Evangelists call Cananite, others rendering the Hebrew by the Greek word
style, Simon Zelotes, or the Zealot: So called, not (as (...) H, Eccl. lib. 2.
c. 40. p. 202.
Nicephorus Luke 6. 15.
Acts 1. 13.
thinks) from his burning zeal, and ardent affection to his Master, and his
eager desire to advance his Religion in the World, but from his warm active
temper, and zealous forwardness in some particular way and profession of
Religion before his coming to our Savior.

2. FOR the better understanding of this we are to know, that as there were
several Sects and Parties among the Jews, so was there one, either a distinct
Sect, or at least a branch of the Pharisees, called the Sect of the Zealots:
They were mighty assertors (...)
of the honor of the Law, and the strictness and purity of Religion, assuming
a liberty to themselves to question notorious offenders, without staying for
the ordinary formalities of Law, nay, when they thought good, and as the case
required, executing capital vengeance upon them: Thus when a blasphemer cursed
God by the name of any Idol (says (...) Idolol. cap. 2. Sect. 12. page 19.
Maimonides) the (...) or Zealots that next met him might immediately kill him,
without ever bringing him (...) before the Sanhedrim. They looked upon
themselves as the successors of Phineas, who in a mighty passion for the honor
of God, did immediate execution upon Zimri and (...). An act which was counted
unto him for righteousness unto all posterities for evermore, and God so well
pleased Psalm 106. 30 Numb. 25. 11. 13.
with it, that he made with him and his seed after him the covenant of an
everlasting Priesthood, because he was zealous for his God, and made an
atonement for Israel. In imitation whereof these men took upon them to execute
judgment in extraordinary cases, and that not only by the connivance, but with
the leave both of the Rulers and the People, till in aftertimes under a
pretense of this, their zeal degenerated into all manner of licentiousness and
wild extravagance, and they not only became the Pests of the Commonwealth at
home, but opened the door for the Romans to break in upon them, to their final
and irrecoverable ruin; they were continually prompting the people to throw
off the Roman yoke, and vindicate themselves into their native liberty, and
when they had turned all things into hurry and confusion, themselves in the
mean while fished in these troubled waters. Josephus gives a large account of
them, and every where bewails them as the great plague of the Nation. He tells
us of (...) Bell Jnd. lib. 4. (...) p. 871. and (...).
them, that they scrupled not to rob any, to kill many of the prime Nobility,
under pretense of holding correspondence with the Romans, and betraying the
liberty of their Country, openly glorying that herein they were the benefactors
and Saviors of the people. They abrogated the succession of ancient Families,
thrusting obscure and ignoble persons into the Highpriests office, that so
they might oblige the most infamous villains to their party; and as if not
content to injure men, they affronted Heaven, and proclaimed defiance to the
Divinity it self, breaking into and profaning the most holy place. Stiling
themselves Zealots (says he) as if their undertakings were good and honorable,
while they were greedy and emulous of the greatest wickednesses, and out-did
the worst of men. Many attempts were made, especially by Annas the High Priest,
to reduce them to order and sobriety. But neither force of arms, nor fair and
gentle methods could do any good upon them; they held out, and went on in their
violent proceedings, and joining with the Idumeans, committed all manner of
outrage, slaying the Highpriests themselves. Nay, when Jerusalem was straightly
besieged by the Roman Army, they ceased not to create tumults and factions
within, and were indeed the main cause of the Jew's ill success in that fatal
war. It Is probable, that all that went under the notion of this Sect were not
of this wretched and ungovernable temper, but that some of them were of a
better make, of a more sober and peaceable disposition: And as it is not to be
doubted, but that our Simon was of this Sect in general, so there is reason to
believe he was of the better sort. However this makes no more reflection upon
his being called to the Apostleship, than it did for S. Matthew, who was before
a Publican, or S. Paul's being a Pharisee, and so zealously persecuting the
Church of God.

3. BEING invested in the Apostolical office, no further mention appears of him
in the History of the Gospel. Continuing with the Apostles till their
dispersion up and down the World, he then applied himself to the execution of
his charge. He is (...). supra laudat.
said to have directed his journey toward Egypt, thence to Cyrene, and Asrick
(this indeed Ad Ann. 44. n. 38.
Baronius is not willing to believe, being desirous that S. Peter should have
the honor to be the first that planted Christianity in Africa) and throughout
Mauritania and all Libya, preaching the Gospel to those remote and barbarous
Countries. Nor could the coldness of the Climate benumb his zeal, or hinder him
from shipping himself and the Christian doctrine over to the Western Islands,
yea, even to Britain it self. Here he preached, and wrought many miracles, and
after infinite troubles and difficulties Vbi supra.
which he underwent (if we may believe our Authors, whom, though Baronius in
this case makes no great account of, yet never scruples freely to use their
verdict and suffrage when they give in evidence to his purpose) suffered
Martyrdom for the Faith of Christ, as is not only affirmed by (...). ib.
Nicephorus and Doroth, in Synops. de vit. App. p. 148.
Dorotheus, but expressly owned in the Greek (...) (...). ad diem X. Maii.
Menologies, where we are told, that he went at last into Britain, and having
enlightened the minds of many with the doctrine of the Gospel, was crucified by
the Infidels, and buried there.

4. I KNOW indeed that there want not those who tell Vid. Breviar. Roman. ad
diem 28. Octobr. and Martyrol. Romans ad eund. diem and (...). Not. ibid. vid.
illum ad Ann. 68. (...). 7.
us, that after his preaching the Gospel in Egypt, he went into Mesopotamia,
where he met with S. Jude the Apostle, and together with him took his journey
into Persia, where having gained a considerable harvest to the Christian Faith,
they were both crowned with Martyrdom; which Baronius himself confesses to be
founded upon no better authority, than the Passions of the Apostles, a Book
which at every turn he rejects as trifling and impertinent, as false and
fabulous. But however, wide is the mistake of (...). de Script. Eccl. in
Simone. Isidor. de (...). and (...). SS. (...) T. cap. 83.
those who confound our Apostle with Symeon the son of Cleophas, successor to
S. James the Just in the Sea of Jerusalem, who was crucified in the hundred and
twentieth year of his Age, in the persecution under Trajan: The different
character of their persons, and the account both of their Acts and Martyrdoms
being sufficiently distinguished in the writings of the Church.

The End of S. Simon's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. JUDE.
St Jude.
Maith. 15. 55. Is not this the Carpenter's son? are not his brethren James,
and Joses, and Simon, and JUDAS? Luke 6. 16. Judas the Brother of James.

His Martyrdom.
Having preached ye Gospel in Mesopotamia, he went into Persia, where after he
had gained great numbers to Christianity, he suffered martyrdom. Martyrol. Romans
Oct. 28.




The several names attributed to him in the Gospel. Thaddaeus, whence. The
custom of the Jews to alter their names, when bearing affinity with the great
name Jehova. The name Judas why distasteful to the Apostles. Lebbaeus, whence
derived. His Parentage, and Relation to our Lord. The Question put by him to
Christ. Whether the same with Thaddaeus sent to Edessa. In what places he
preached. His death. His married condition. The story of his Grandchildren
brought before Domitian. His Epistle, and why questioned of old. Its
Canonicalness vindicated. The Book of Enoch, and what its authority. The
contention between Michael and the Devil about Moses his Body, whence borrowed.
S. Jude proved to be the Author of this Epistle. Grotius his conceit of its
being written by a younger Jude, rejected. Its affinity with the second Epistle
of S. Peter. The design of it.

1. THERE are three several names by which this Apostle is described in the
History of the Gospel, Jude, Thaddaeus and Lebbaeus, it being usual in the holy
Volumes for the same person to have more proper names than one. For the first,
it was a name common amongst the Jews, recommended to them as being the name of
one of the great Patriarchs of their Nation. This name he seems to have changed
afterward for Thaddaeus, a word springing from the same root, and of the very
same import and signification, which might arise from a double cause: Partly
from the superstitious veneration, which the Jews had for the name Jehova (the
Nomen (...), or name consisting of four letters) which they held unlawful to be
pronounced by any but the High Priest, and not by him neither, but at the most
solemn times. Hence it was, that when any man had a name, wherein there was the
major part of the letters of this ineffable title (and such was Jehudah or
Juda) they would not rashly pronounce it in common usage, but chose rather to
mould it into another like it, and of the same importance, or that which had a
near affinity and resemblance with it: Partly from a particular dislike of the
name of Judas among the Apostles, the bloody and treasonable practices of Judas
Iscariot having rendered that name very odious and detestable to them. To
prevent therefore all possibility of mistake, and that they might not confound
the righteous with the wicked, S. Matthew and Mark never call him by this, but
by some other name; as no question for the same reason he both styles himself,
and is frequently called by others, Judas the brother of James; and that this
was one great design of it, the Evangelist plainly intimates, John 14. 22.
when speaking of him, he says, Judas, not Iscariot. For his name Lebbaeus, it
seems to have been derived either from (...) an heart, whence S. Hierom renders
it Corculum, probably to denote his wisdom and prudence, or else from (...) a
Lion, and therein to have respect to old Jacob's prophecy concerning Judah,
That he should be as a Lion, an old Lion, and as a Lions whelp, which probably
might have a main stroke in fastening this name upon S. Jude. From this
Patriarchal prophecy, we are Boldur. (...) Eccl. post leg. cap. 7. p. 47. 48.
told, that one of the Schools or Synagogues of Learned men among the Jews (who
to avoid confusion were wont to distinguish themselves by different
appellations) took occasion to denominate themselves Labii, as accounting
themselves the Scholars and descendents of this Lion-like son of Jacob; and
that S. Jude was of this society, and because of his eminency among them
retained the title of Labius, or as it was corruptly pronounced, Lebbaeus. I
confess I should have thought the conjecture of a Learned (...). H. (...). in
(...). p. 147.
man very probable, that he might have derived this name from the place of his
nativity, as being born at Lebba, a Town which, he tells us, Hist. Not. lib. 5.
(...). 19.
Pliny speaks of in the Province of Galilee, not far from Carmel, but that it
is not Lebba, but Jebba in all copies of Pliny that I have seen. But let the
Reader please himself in which conjecture he likes best.

2. FOR his Descent and Parentage, he was of our Lord's kindred, H. (...). lib.
2. (...). 40. p. 202.
Nicephorus truly making him the son of Joseph, and brother to James Bishop of
Jerusalem; that there was a Jude one of the number is very evident, Are not his
brethren James, and Matthew. 13. 55. Animadv. in Eusebius. (...). ad Number. MMCXII. p.
205.
Joses, and Simon, and Judas? which makes me the more to wonder at Scaliger,
who so confidently denies that any of the Evangelists ever mention a Jude the
brother of our Lord. S. Hierom seems often to confound him with Simon the
Zealot, whose title he ascribes to him, though second thoughts set him right,
as indeed common advertency could do no less, so plain is the account which the
Evangelists give of this matter. When called to the Discipleship we find not,
as not meeting with him, till we find him enumerated in the Catalogue of
Apostles; nor is any thing particularly recorded of him afterward, more than
one question that he propounded to our Savior, who having told them what great
things he and his Father would do, and what particular manifestations after his
Resurrection he would make of himself to his sincere disciples and followers,
S. Jude (whose thoughts as well as the rest were taken up with the expectations
of a temporal Kingdom of the Messiah) not knowing how this could consist with
the public solemnity of that glorious state they looked for, asked him, what
was the reason that he would manifest himself to them, and not to the World.
Our Lord replied, that the World was not capable of these Divine
manifestations, as being a stranger, and an enemy to what should fit them for
fellowship with Heaven; that they were only good men, persons of a Divine
temper of mind, and religious observers of his Laws and Will, whom God would
honor with these familiar converses, and admit to such particular acts of
grace and favor.

3. H. (...). lib. 1. (...). 13.p. 32
EUSEBIUS relates that soon after our Lord's Ascension S. Thomas dispatched
Thaddaeus the Apostle to Abgarus Governor of Edessa, where he healed diseases,
wrought miracles, expounded the doctrines of Christianity, and converted
Abgarus and his people to the Faith: For all which pains when the Toparch
offered him vast gifts and presents, he refused them with a noble scorn,
telling him, they had little reason to receive from others, what they had
freely relinquished and left themselves. A large account of this whole affair
is extant in Eusebius, translated by him out of Syriack from the Records of the
City of Edessa. This Thaddaeus Commint. in Matthew. (...). 10.
S. Hierom expressly makes to be our S. Jude, though his bare authority is not
in this case sufficient evidence; especially since (...) makes him no more than
one of the seventy Disciples, which he would scarce have done, had he been one
of the Twelve. He calls him indeed an Apostle, but that may imply no more than
according to the large acception of the word, that he was a Disciple, a
Companion, and an Assistent to them, as we know the Seventy eminently were. Nor
is any thing more common in ancient Ecclesiastic Writers, than for the first
planters and propagaters of Christian Religion in any Country to be honored
with the name and title of Apostles. But however this be, at his first setting
out to preach the Gospel, he went up and down Judaea and (...), then through
Samaria into Idumea, and to the Cities of Arabia, and the neighbor Countries,
yea, to Syria and Mesopotamia. (...). H. Eccl. l. 2. (...). 40. p. 202.
Nicephorus adds, that he came at last to Edessa, where Abgarus was Governor,
and where the other Thaddeus, one of the Seventy had been before him. Here he
perfected what the other had begun, and having by his Sermons and Miracles
established the Religion of our Savior, died a peaceable and a quiet death;
though Synops. de (...). and (...). App. in Bibl. Pp. (...). 3. p. 148.
Dorotheus makes him slain at Berytus, and honorably buried there. By the
almost general consent of the Writers of the Latin Church he is said to have
traveled into Persia, where after great success in his Apostolical Ministry
for many years, he was at last for his free and open reproving the
superstitious rites and usages of the Magi cruelly put to death.

4. THAT he was one of the married Apostles sufficiently appears from his
(...), or Grandsons mentioned by Apud. Eusebius. lib. 3.c. 20.p. 89.
(...), of whom Hegesippus gives this account. Domitian the Emperor, whose
enormous wickednesses had awakened in him the quickest jealousies, and made him
suspect every one that might look like a corrival in the Empire, had heard that
there were some of the line of David, and Christ's kindred that did yet remain.
Two Grandchildren of S. Jude the Brother of our Lord were brought before him:
Having confessed that they were of the Race and posterity of David, he asked
what possessions and estate they had: they told him that they had but a very
few acres of land, out of the improvement whereof they both paid him Tribute,
and maintained themselves with their own hard labor, as by the hardness and
callousness of their hands (which they then showed him) did appear. He then
enquired of them concerning Christ, and the state of his Kingdom, what kind of
Empire it was, and when and where it would commence. To which they replied,
That his Kingdom was not of this World, nor of the Seigniories and Dominions of
it, but Heavenly and Angelical, and would finally take place in the end of the
World, when coming with great glory, he would judge the quick and the dead, and
award all men recompenses according to their works. The issue was, that looking
upon the meanness and simplicity of the men as below his jealousies and fears,
he dismissed them without any severity used against them; who being now beheld
not only as kinsmen, but as Martyrs of our Lord, were honored by all,
preferred to places of authority and government in the Church, and lived till
the times of Trajan.

5. S. Jude left only one Epistle, of Catholic and universal concernment,
inscribed at large to all Christians. It was some time before it met with
general reception in the (...). lib. 2. c 23.p. 66. and lib. 3.c. 25.
Church, or was taken notice of. The Author indeed styles not himself an
Apostle, but no more does S. James, S. John, nor in some Epistles S. Paul
himself. And why should he fare the worse for his humility, only for calling
himself the servant of Christ, when he might have added not only Apostle, but
the Brother of our Lord? The best is, he has added what was equivalent, Jude
the Brother of James, a character that can belong to none but our Apostle;
beside, that the Title of the Epistle, which is of great antiquity, runs thus,
The general Epistle of Jude the Apostle. One great argument, as (...) Script.
Eccl. in (...).
S. (...) informs us, against the authority of this Epistle of old, was its
quoting a passage out of an Apocryphal Book of Enoch. This Book called the
Apocalypse of Enoch was very early extant in the Church, frequently mentioned,
and passages cited out of it by (...), Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Origin, and others, some of whom accounted it little less Scio (...) Enoch,
quae hune (...) dedit, non recipi (...), quia (...) in Armarium Judaicum (...).
Opinor non (...) illam (...) Cataclysmum (...), post (...) casum (...), salvam
(...). Si ista ratio (...), etc. Sid cum Enoch (...) Scriptura (...) de Domino
(...) nobis quidem nihil (...) est, quod (...) ad nos. A Judais (...) videri
(...) and (...) qua (...) sonant. Eo (...) quod (...) apud Judam Apostolum
(...). de Cult. (...). lib. 1.c. 3.p. 151.
than Canonical. But what if our Apostle had it not out of this Apocryphal
Book, but from some prophecy current from age to age, handed to him by common
tradition, or immediately revealed to him by the Spirit of God? But suppose it
taken out of that Book going under Enoch's name, this makes nothing against the
authority of the Epistle; every thing, I hope, is not presently false, that is
contained in an Apocryphal and Uncanonical writing, nor does the taking a
single testimony out of it any more infer the Apostles approbation of all Vid.
(...). Comment. in Tit. c. 1. p. 249. T. 9.
the rest, than S. Paul's quoting a good sentence or two out of Menander,
Aratus, and Epimenides, imply that he approved all the rest of the writings of
those Heathen Poets. And indeed nothing could be more fit and proper than this
way, if we consider that the Apostle in this Epistle chiesly argues against the
Gnostics, who mainly traded in such Traditionary and Apocryphal writings, and
probably in this very Book of Enoch. The same account may be given of that
other passage in this Epistle concerning the contention between Michael the
Archangel and the Devil about the burial of Moses his Body, no where extant in
the holy Records, supposed to have been taken out of a Jewish writing called
(...) or the Dismission of Moses, mentioned by some of the Greek (...) (cujus
(...) meminu in Epistola Apostolus Judas) (...) cum Diabolo disputans de (...),
ait Diabolo, (...) causam (...) and (...). Origin (...) 3. (...). 2. sol. 142.
p. 2.
Fathers under the title of (...), or the Ascension of Moses, in which this
passage was upon record. Nor is it any more a wonder that S. Jude should do
this, than that S. Paul should put down Jannes and Jambres for the two
Magicians of Pharaoh that opposed Moses, which he must either derive from
Tradition, or fetch out of some Uncanonical Author of those times, there being
no mention of their names in Moses his relation of that matter. But be these
passages whence they will, it is enough to us, that the Spirit of God has made
them Authentic, and consecrated them part of the holy Canon.

6. BEING thus satisfied in the Canonicalness of this Epistle, none but S. Jude
could be the Author of it; for who but he was the Brother of S. James? a
character by which he is described in the Evangelical story more than once.
(...). in (...). Epist. Jud.
Grotius indeed will needs have it written by a younger Jude, the fifteenth
Bishop of Jerusalem, in the reign of Adrian; and because he saw that that
passage [ the Brother of James] stood full in his way, he concludes without any
shadow of reason, that it was added by some Transcriber. But is not this to
make too bold with Sacred things? is not this to indulge too great a liberty?
this once allowed, 'twill soon open a door to the wildest and most extravagant
conjectures, and no man shall know where to find sure-sooting for his Faith.
But the Reader may remember what we have elsewhere observed concerning the
Posthume Annotations of that learned man. Not to say that there are many things
in this Epistle that evidently refer to the time of this Apostle, and imply it
to have been written upon the same occasion, and about the same time with the
second Epistle of Peter, between which and this there is a very great affinity
both in words and matter, nay, there want not (...) Epist. Jud. p. 106. ad
(...) lib. (...) Eccl. post leg.
some that endeavor to prove this Epistle to have been written no less than
twenty seven years before that of Peter, and that hence it was that Peter
borrowed those passages that are so near akin to those in this Epistle. The
design of the Epistle is to preserve Christians from the infection of
Gnosticism, the loose and debauched principles vented by Simon Magus and his
followers, whose wretched doctrines and practices he briefly and elegantly
represents, persuading Christians heartily to contend for the Faith that had
been delivered to them, and to avoid these pernicious Seducers as pests and
firebrarnds, not to communicate with them in their sins, lest they perished
with them in that terrible vengeance that was ready to overtake them.

The End of S. Jude's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. MATTHIAS.
S. MATHIAS.
He preached the Gospel in Ethiopia, suffered Martyrdom and was buried there.
S. Hierom.

St. Matthias his Martyrdom.
Hebr.11. 37. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were tempted, were
slain with the sword.




S. Matthias one of the Seventy. Judas Iscariot, whence. A bad Minister nulls
not the ends of his ministration. His worldly and covetous temper. His
monstrous ingratitude. His betraying his Master, and the aggravations of the
sin. The distraction and horror of his mind. The miserable state of an evil and
guilty Conscience. His violent death. The election of a new Apostle: The
Candidates, who. The Lot cast upon Matthias. His preaching the Gospel, and in
what parts of the World. His Martyrdom when, where, and how. His Body whither
translated. The Gospel and Traditions vented under his name.

1. SAINT Matthias not being an Apostle of the first Election, immediately
called and chosen by our Savior, particular remarks concerning him are not to
be expected in the History of the Gospel. He was one of our Lord's Disciples
(and probably one of the Seventy) that had attended on him the whole time of
his public Ministry, and after his death was elected into the Apostleship upon
this occasion. Judas Iscariot (so called, probably, from the place of his
nativity, (...) a man of Kerioth, a City anciently situate in the Tribe of
Judah) had been one of the Twelve, immediately called by Christ to be one of
his intimate Disciples, equally empowered and commissioned with the rest to
Preach and work Miracles, was numbered with them, and had obtained part of their
Ministry: And yet all this while was a man of vile and corrupt designs, branded
with no meaner a character, than Thief and Murderer. To let us see that there
may be bad servants in Christ's own family, and that the wickedness of a
Minister does not evacuate his Commission, nor render his Office useless and
ineffectual. The unworthiness of the instrument hinders not the ends of the
ministration: Seeing the efficacy of an ordinance depends not upon the quality
of the person, but the Divine institution, and the blessing which God has
entailed upon it. Judas preached Christ no doubt with zeal and fervency, and
for any thing we know, with as much success as the rest of the Apostles; and
yet he was a bad man, a man acted by (...) and mean designs, one that had
prostituted Religion and the honor of his place to covetousness and evil arts.
The love of money had so entirely possessed his thoughts, that his resolutions
were bound for nothing but interest and advantage. But they that will be rich
fall into temptation and a snare. This covetous temper betrayed him, as in the
issue to the most fatal end, so to the most desperate attempt, (...), as Origin
calls the putting Christ to death, the most prodigious Contr. Cells. lib. 4. p.
175.
impiety that the Sun ever shone on, the betraying his innocent Lord into the
hands of those, who he knew would treat him with all the circumstances of
insolent scorn and cruelty. How little does kindness work upon a disingenuous
mind! It was not the honor of the place, to which when thousands of others
were passed by, our Lord had called him, the admitting him into a free and
intimate fellowship with his person, the taking him to be one of his peculiar
domestics and attendants, that could divert the wretch from his wicked
purpose. He knew how desirous the great men of the Nation were to get Christ
into their hands, especially at the time of the Passover, that he might with
the more public disgrace (...) sacrificed before all the people, and therefore
bargains with them, and for no greater a sum than under four pounds, to betray
the Lamb of God into the paws of these Wolves and Lions: In short, he heads the
party, conducts the Officers, and sees him delivered into their hands.

2. BUT there is an active principle in man's breast, that seldom suffers daring
sinners to pass in quiet to their Graves: Awakened with the horror of the fact,
conscience began to rouse and follow close, and the man was unable to bear up
under the furious revenges of his own mind: As indeed all wilful and deliberate
sins, and especially the guilt of blood, are wont more sensibly to alarm the
natural notions of our minds, and to excite in us the fears of some present
vengeance that will seize upon us. And how intolerable are those scourges that
lash us in this vital and tender part: The spirit of the man sinks under him,
and all supports snap asunder: As what case or comfort can he enjoy, that
carries a Vultur in his bosom, always gnawing and preying upon his heart? Which
made (...). (...). de (...). p. 476. (...) Pythag. in aur. carm. in quem (...)
inter alia Hierecles, optima prorsus and (...). (...) (...). in Aur. Carm. p.
165.
Plutarch compare an evil Conscience to a Cancer in the breast, that
perpetually gripes and stings the Soul with the pains of an intolerable
repentance. Guilt is naturally troublesome and uneasy, it disturbs the peace
and serenity of the mind, and fills the Soul with storms and thunder. Job 9, 4.
Did ever any harden himself against God, and prosper? And indeed how should
he, when God has such a powerful and invisible executioner in his own bosom?
Whoever rebels against the Laws of his duty, and plainly affronts the dictates
of his Conscience, does that moment bid adieu to all true repose and quiet, and
expose himself to the severe resentments of a self-tormenting mind. And though
by secret arts of wickedness he may be able possibly to drown and stifle the
voice of it for a while, yet every little affliction or petty accident will be
apt to awaken it into horror, and to let in terror like an armed man upon him.
A torment infinitely beyond what the most ingenious Tyrants could ever
contrive. Nothing so effectually invades our ease, as the reproaches of our own
minds. The wrath of man may be endured, but the irruptions of Conscience are
irresistible; it is (...) (as Chrysostom very elegantly styles it) to be
choked or strangled with an evil Conscience, which often reduces the man to such
distresses, as to make him choose death rather than life. A sad instance of all
which we have in this unhappy man: who being wearied with furious and
melancholy reflections upon what was past, threw back the wages of iniquity in
open Court, and dispatched himself by a violent death: Vainly hoping to take
sanctuary in the Grave, and that he should meet with that ease in another World
which he could not find in this. He departed, and went and hanged himself, and
falling down burst asunder, and his bowels gushed out: Leaving a memorable
warning to all treacherous and ungrateful, to all greedy and covetous persons,
not to let the World insinuate it self too far into them; and indeed to all to
watch and pray that they enter not into temptation. Our present state is
slippery and insecure; Let him that thinks he (...), take heed lest he fall.
What privileges can be a sufficient fence, a foundation firm enough to rely
upon, when the Miracles, Sermons, favors, and familiar converses of Christ
himself could not secure one of the Apostles from so fatal an Apostasy?

3. A VACANCY being thus made in the College of Apostles, the first thing they
did after their return from Mount Olivet, where our Lord took his leave of
them, to S. John's house in Mount Sion (the place, if we may believe H. Ecd. l.
2. c. 1. p. 131.
Nicephorus, where the Church met together) was to fill up their number with a
fit proper person. To which purpose Peter acqualnted them, that Judas,
according to the prophetical prediction, being fallen from his ministry, it was
necessary that another should be substituted in his room, one that had been a
constant companion and disciple of the holy Jesus, and consequently capable of
bearing witness to his life, death, and resurrection. Two were propounded in
order to the choice, Joseph called Barsabas, and Justus (whom some make the
same with Joses one of the brothers of our Lord) and Matthias, both duly
qualified for the place. The way of election was by Lots, a way frequently used
both among Jews and Gentiles for the determination of doubtful and difficult
cases, and especially the choosing Judges and Magistrates: And this course the
Apostles the rather took, because the Holy Ghost was not yet given, by whose
immediate dictates and inspirations they were chiefly guided afterward. And
that the business might proceed with the greater regularity and success, they
first solemnly make their address to Heaven, that the Omniscient Being that
governed the World, and perfectly understood the tempers and dispositions of
men, would immediately guide and direct the choice, and show which of these two
he would appoint to take that part of the Apostolic charge, from which Judas
was so lately fallen. The Lots being put into the Urn, Matthias his name was
drawn out, and thereby the Apostolate devolved upon him.

4. NOT long after the promised powers of the Holy Ghost were conferred upon
the Apostles, to fit them for that great and difficult employment, upon which
they were sent: And among the rest S. Matthias betook himself to his Charge and
Province. The first fruits of his Ministry he spent in (...), where having
reaped a considerable harvest, he betook himself to other Provinces. An (...).
Sanct. lib. 3. c. 149.
Author, I confess, of no great credit in these matters, tells us, that he
preached the Gospel in Macedonia, where the Gentiles to make an experiment of
his Faith and Integrity, gave him a poisonous and intoxicating potion, which he
cheerfully drunk off, in the name of Christ, without the least prejudice to
himself; and that when the same potion had deprived above two hundred and fifty
of their sight, he laying his hands upon them, restored them to their sight:
with a great deal more of the same stamp, which I have neither faith enough to
believe, nor leisure enough to relate. The Greeks with more probability report
him to have traveled Eastward, he came (says H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 40. p. 203.
Nicephorus) into the first, (says Ap. (...), de Script. Eccl. in (...).
Sophronius) into the second AEthiopia, and in both, I believe, it is a
mistake, either of the Authors or Transcribers, for Cappadocia, his residence
being principally near the irruption of the River Apsarus, and the Haven
Hyssus, both places in Cappadocia. Nor is there any AEthiopia nearer those
places than that conterminous to Chaldaea, whereof before. And as for those
that tell us, that he might well enough preach both in the Asian and African
AEthiopia, and that both might be comprehended under that general name, as the
Eastern and Western parts of the World were heretofore contained under the
general title of the India's, it is a fancy without any other ground to stand
on, (...) their own bare conjecture. The place whither he came was very
barbarous, and his usage was accordingly. For here meeting with a people of a
fierce and intractable temper, he was treated by them with great rudeness and
inhumanity, from whom after all his labors and sufferings, and a numerous
conversion of men to Christianity, he obtained at last the crown of Martyrdom,
Ann. Chr. LXI. or as others, LXIV. Little certainty can be retrieved concerning
the manner of his death. Synops. de vit. App. in Bibl. Pp. Tom. 3. p. 148.
Dorotheus will have him to die at Sebastople, and to be buried there near the
Temple of the Sun. An ancient Colon. Impress. 1490. ad Febr. 24.
Martyrologic reports him to have been seized by the Jews, and as a blasphemer
to have been first stoned, and then beheaded. But the (...) (...) Grator. ad
(...) IX. August. apud Bolland. de vit. SS. ad Febr. XXIV. Tom. 3. p. 433.
Greek Offices, seconded herein by several ancient Breviaries, tell us that he
was crucified, and that as Judas was hanged upon a Tree, so Matthias suffered
upon a Cross. His Body is said to have been kept a long time at Jerusalem,
thence thought by Helen the Mother of the Great Constantine to have been
translated to Rome, where some parts of it are showed with great veneration at
this day. Though Vid. Cbr. (...). Annal, (...). lib. 2. p. 658. and (...). cit.
p. 435.
others with as great eagerness, and probably as much truth, contend that his
Relics were brought to, and are still preserved at Triers in Germany, a
controversy wherein I shall not concern my self. His memory is celebrated in
the Greek Church August the IX. as appears not only from their Menologies, but
from a Novel (...) in (...). Gr. Romans lib. 2. p. 161.
constitution of Manuel Comuenus, appointing what holy days should be kept in
the Church, while the Western Churches keep February XXIV. sacred to his
memory. Among many other Apocryphal writings attributed to the Apostles, there
was a Gospel published under his name, mentioned by H. (...). l. 3 c. 25 p. 97.
Orig. in Luc. Homil. 10. Ambr. praf. in Luc. Tom. 5. p. 7.
Eusebius and the Ancients, and condemned with the rest by (...). Part. 1.
Did. 15. cap. (...). Romans Sect. (...).
Gelasius Bishop of Rome, as it had been rejected by others before him: Under
his name also there were extant Traditions, cited by (...). lib. 2. p. 380.
ibid. lib. 3. p. 436.
Clemens of Alexandria, from whence no question it was that the Nicolaitans
borrowed that saying of his, which they abused to so vile and beastly purposes,
as under the pretended patronage of his name and doctrines the Marcionites and
(...). lib. 7. p. 765.
Valentinians defended some of their most absurd and impious opinions.

The End of S. Matthias's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. MARK the Evangelist.
The Evangelist St. Mark.
He having been the Coadiutor of St. Paul and St. Peter severally, at
Alexandria planted and governd a Church and there by the violence of the Pagan
multitude suffered Martyrdom. AD. 64. Baron: and Centur

St. Mark's Martyrdom.
Hebr. 11. 35. Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
obtain a better resurrection.

Of whom the world was not worthy.




His Kindred, and distinction from others of the same Name. Whether one of the
Seventy. His Conversion. His attendance upon Peter, and Preaching the Gospel in
Italy, and at Rome. His planting Christianity at Alexandria, and great success
there. An account of the Therapeutae (mentioned by Philo) and their excellent
manners, rules, and way of Life. These proved not to have been Christians by
several arguments. The Original of the mistake whence. S. Mark's Preaching in
the Parts of Africa. His return to Alexandria, and diligence in his Ministry.
The manner of his Martyrdom. The time of it enquired into. The description of
his Person. His Gospel when and where written, and why said to be Peter's. His
great impartiality in his Relations. In what Language written. The Original
whether extant at this Day.

1. SAINT Mark, though carrying something of Roman in his Name, probably
assumed by him upon some great change, or accident of his Life, or which was
not unusual among the Jews, when going into the European Provinces of the Roman
Empire, taken up at his going for Italy and Rome, was doubtless born of Jewish
Parents, originally descended of the Tribe of (...). in Marc Tom. 9. p. 87.
Levi, and the Line of the Priesthood, and (if H. Eccl. l. 2: c. 43. p. 209.
Nicephorus say true) Sister's Son to Peter, though by others against all
reason confounded with John surnamed Mark the Son of Mary, and Mark Sisters Son
to Barnabas. By the Ancients he is generally thought to have been one of the
Seventy Disciples, and (...). p. 186.
Epiphanius expressly tells us, that he was one of those who taking exception at
our Lord's discourse of cating his Flesh and drinking his Blood, went back and
walked no more with him, but was seasonably reduced and reclaimed by Peter. But
no foundation appears either for the one or for the other, nay Apud (...). l.
3. c. 39. p. 113.
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, who lived near those times, positively affirms
that he was no hearer nor follower of our Savior. He was converted by some of
the Apostles, and probably by S. Peter, who is said to have been his undertaker
at his Baptism. (if I understand (...). (...) discipulus, and in (...). Isid.
de (...). and (...). S S. c. 84. p. 542.
aright) for no other reason I suppose, than because he calls him his Son.
Indeed he was his constant attendant in his Travails, supplying the place of an
Amanuensis and Interpreter; for though the Apostles were divinely inspired, and
among other miraculous powers had the gift of Languages conferred upon them,
yet was the interpretation of Tongues a gift more peculiar to some than others.
This might probably be S. Mark's Talent, in expounding S. Peter's Discourses,
whether by word or writing, to those who understood not the Language wherein
they were delivered. He accompanied him in his Apostolical progress, Preached
the Gospel in Naz. (...). 25. p. 438.
Italy, and at Rome, where at the request of the Christians of those Parts he
composed and wrote his Gospel.

2. BY Peter he was sent into Egypt to plant Christianity in those Parts,
fixing his main residence at Alexandria, and the places thereabouts: where so
great (says H. (...). lib. 2. c. 16. p. 53.
Eusebius) was the success of his Ministry, that he converted Multitudes both
of Men and Women, not only to the embracing of the Christian Religion, but to a
more than ordinarily strict profession of it, insomuch that Philo wrote a Book
of their peculiar Rites and way of Life, the only reason why S. (...) Script.
(...). in (...).
Hierom reckons him among the Writers of the Church. Indeed Philo the Jew wrote
a Book (...), extant at this day, wherein he speaks of a sort of Persons called
(...), who in many parts of the World, but especially in a pleasant place near
the Maraeotick Lake in Egypt had formed themselves into Religious Societies,
and gives a large account of their Rites and Customs, their strict,
philosophical, and contemplative course of life. He tells Phil. lib. de (...).
p. 891, 892, and (...).
us of them, that when they first enter upon this way, they renounce all
secular interests and employments, and leaving their Estates to their
Relations, retire into Groves and Gardens, and Places devoted to solitude and
contemplation; that they had their Houses or Colleges, not contiguous, that so
being free from noise and tumult, they might the better minister to the designs
of a contemplative life; nor yet removed at too great a distance, that they
might maintain mutual society, and be conveniently capable of helping and
assisting one another. In each of these Houses there was an Oratory, called
(...), wherein they discharged the more secret and solemn Rites of their
Religion; divided in the middle with a Partition wall three or four Cubits
high, the one apartment being for the Men, and the other for the Women: here
they publicly met every Seventh day, where being set according to their
seniority, and having composed themselves with great decency and reverence, the
most aged Person among them, and best skilled in the Dogmata and Principles of
their Institution came forth into the midst, gravely and soberly discoursing
what might make the deepest impression upon their minds; the rest attending
with a profound silence, and only testifying their assent with the motion of
their Eyes or Head. Their discourses were usually my stical and allegorical,
seeking hidden senses under plain words, and of such an allegorical Philosophy
consisted the Books of their Religion, left them by their Ancestors: The Law
they compared to an Animal, the Letter of it resembling the Body, while the
Soul of it lay in those abstruse and recondite notions, which the external veil
and surface of the words concealed from vulgar understandings. He tells us
also, that they took very little care of the Body, perfecting their minds by
Precepts of Wisdom and Religion; the day they entirely spent in Pious and
Divine Meditations, in reading and expounding the Law and the Prophets, and the
Holy Volumes of the ancient Founders of their Sect, and in singing Hymns to the
honor of their Maker; absolutely temperate and abstemious, neither eating nor
drinking till Night, the only time they thought fit to refresh and regard the
body, some of them out of an insatiable desire of growing in knowledge and
virtue, fasting many days together. What Diet they had was very plain and
simple, sufficient only to provide against hunger and thirst, a little Bread,
Salt and Water being their constant bill of fare: their clothes were as mean as
their food, designed only as a present security against cold and nakedness. And
this not only the case of men, but of pious and devout Women that lived (though
separately) among them; that they religiously observed every Seventh Day, and
especially the preparatory Week to the great solemnity, which they kept with
all expressions of a more severe abstinence and devotion. This and much more he
has in that Tract concerning them.

3. THESE excellent Persons (...) peremptorily affirms to have been Christians,
converted and brought under these admirable Rules and Institutions of Life by
S. Mark at his coming hither, accommodating all passages to the Manners and
Discipline of Christians: followed herein by (...). XXIX. p. 57.
Epiphanius, De Script. in (...).
Hierom, and others of old, as by Ad Ann. 64. (...). 11.
Baronius, and some others of later time: and this so far taken for granted,
that (...). H. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 12. p. 419. (...). Monach. lib. 2. c. 5. p. 12.
many have hence fetched the rise of Monasteries and Religious Orders among
Christians. But whoever seriously and impartially considers Philo's account,
will plainly find that he intends it of Jews and Professors of the Mosaic
Religion, though whether Essenes, or of some other particular Sect among them,
I stand not to determine. That they were not Christians, is evident, besides
that Philo gives not the least intimation of it, partly because it is
improbable that Philo being a Jew should give so great a character and
commendation of Christians, so hateful to the Jews at that time in all places
of the World; partly, in that Philo speaks of them as an Institution of some
considerable standing, whereas Christians had but lately appeared in the World,
and were later come into Egypt; partly, because many parts of Philo's account
does no way suit with the state and manners of Christians at that time; as that
they withdrew themselves from public converse, and all affairs of civil life,
which Christians never did, but when forced by violent Persecutions, for
ordinarily, as Justin Martyr and Tertullian tell us, they promiscuously dwelt
in Towns and Cities, plowed their Lands, and followed their Trades, ate and
drank, and were clothed and habited like other men. So when he says that
besides the Books of Moses and the Prophets, they had the Writings of the
Ancient Authors of their Sect and Institution; this cannot be meant of
Christians: for though Eusebius would understand it of the Writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, yet, besides that there were few of them published
when Philo wrote this discourse, they were however of too late an edition to
come under the character of ancient Authors. Not to say that some of their
Rites and Customs were such, as the Christians of those days were mere
strangers to, not taken up by the Christian Church till many Years, and some of
them not till some Ages after. Nay some of them never used by any of the
Primitive Christians; such were, their religious dances, which they had at
their Festival Phil. ibid. p. 901. 902.
Solemnities, especially that great one which they held at the end of every
Seven Weeks; when their entertainment being ended, they all rose up, the Men in
one Company, and the Women in another, dancing with various measures and
motions, each Company singing Divine Hymns and Songs, and having a Precentor
going before them, now one singing, and anon another, till in the conclusion
they joined in one common chorus, in imitation of the triumphant Song sung by
Moses and the Israelites after their deliverance at the Red Sea. To all which
let me add, what a Learned N. (...). lib. 1. cap 3.
Man has observed, that the Essenes (if Philo means them) were great Physicians
(thence probably called (...), Healers, though Lib. supr. (...). p. 889.
Philo, who is apt to turn all things into Allegory, refers it only to their
curing, (...), the Souls of Men infected and overrun with difficult and
desperate distempers, created by pleasures and extravagant appetites, and a
long train of other lusts and passions) De Bill. (...). lib. 2. (...). p. 786.
Josephus reporting of them, that they accurately study the Writings of the
Ancients, excerping thence whatever is conducive either to Soul or Body; and
that for the curing of Diseases, they diligently enquired into the Virtues of
Roots and Stones, that were most proper to drive away Distempers. An Account no
ways agreeing with the Christians of those times, who miraculously cured
Diseases without the Arts of Physic, or any other Preparations, than calling
the Name of Christ over the afflicted Person. Doubtless that which led Euscbius
into the mistake, was the conformity that he observed between the Christian
(...), in and before his time, who entered upon a more strict and severe course
of life, and these Therapeutae described by Philo, an ordinary fancy being able
to draw a fair parallel between them, and so it was but removing them some Ages
higher, and imagining them to have been converted and founded by S. Mark, and
the work was done. Indeed it is not to be doubted, but that Persons educated
under these excellent rules and methods of life, were more than ordinarily
prepared for the reception of Christianity (between which and their Principles
and Rules of Life, there was so great an affinity and agreement) which must
needs render our Evangelists success great in those Parts, and open the way for
men to come flocking over to the Faith.

4. S. MARK did not confine his Preaching to Alexandria, and the Oriental Parts
of Egypt, but removed S. Martyr. S. (...). apud Sur. ad (...) 25. Apr. (...).
Diac. Laudat. S. Marc. ib. (...). 8. (...). H. (...). l. 2. c. 43. p. 209.
Westmard to the Parts of Libya, going thorough the Countries of Marmarica,
Pentapolis, and others thereabouts, where though the People were both barbarous
in their manners, and idolatrous in their worship, yet by his Preaching and
Miracles he made way for the entertainment of the Gospel, and left them not,
till he had not only gained them to, but confirmed them in, the profession of
it. Returning Id. ibid.
to Alexandria he preached freely, and ordered and disposed the affairs of the
Church, and wisely provided for succession by constituting Governors and
Pastors of it. But the restless enemy of the souls of Men would not long suffer
him to be quiet: it was the time of Easter, at what time the great Solemnities
of Scrapis happened to be celebrated, when the minds of the People being excited
to a passionate vindication of the honor of their Idol, broke in upon S. Mark,
then engaged in the solemn celebration of Divine worship, and binding his Feet
with Cords, dragged him through the streets and the most craggy Vid. vit. (...)
MS. (...) script. ap. (...). p. 37.
places to the Bucelus, a Precipice near the Sea, and for that Night thrust him
into Prison, where his Soul was by a Divine Vision erected and encouraged under
the ruins of his shattered Body. Early the next Morning the Tragedy began
again, dragging him about in the same manner, till his Flesh being raked off,
and his Blood run out, his spirits failed, and he expired. But their malice
died not with him, Metaphrastes adds that they burnt his Body, whose Bones and
Ashes the Christians there decently intombed near the place where he was wont
to Preach. His Body, at least the remains of it were afterward with great pomp
removed from Alexandria to Venice, where they are religiously honored, and he
adopted as the Tutelar Saint and Patron of that State, and one of the richest
and stateliest Churches erected to his Memory, that the World can boast of at
this Day. He suffered in the Month Pharmuthi, on the XXV. of April, though the
certain Year of his Martyrdom is not precisely determined by the Ancients. Vbi
(...).
Kirstenius out of the Arabic Memoires of his Life says, it was in the
Fourteenth or the last Year of Claudius; S. De Script. Eccles. in (...)
Hierom places it in the Eighth of Nero. But extravagantly wide is Synops. de
vit. and morl. App. in Bibl. Pp. Tom. 3. p. 148. col. 2.
Dorotheus his computation, who makes him to suffer in the time of Trajan, with
as much truth as Lib. 2. c. 43. p. 209.
Nicephorus on the other hand affirms him to have come into Egypt in the Reign
of Tiberius. If in so great variety of Opinions I may interpose my conjecture,
I should reckon him to have suffered about the end of Nero's Reign: For
supposing him to have come with S. Peter to Rome about the Fifth or Sixth Year
of Nero, he might thence be dispatched to Alexandria, and spend the residue of
his Life and of that Emperor's Reign in planting Christianity in those parts of
the World. Sure I am that Adv. (...). lib. 3. c. 1. page 229. (...) ap. Eusebius.
lib. 5. c. 8. p. 172.
Irenaeus reports S. Mark to have outlived Peter and Paul, and that after
their decease he composed his Gospel out of those things which he had heard
Peter preach. But whatever becomes of that, it is evident that Irenaeus
supposed (whose supposition certainly was not founded upon mere fancy and
conjecture) that S. Mark for some considerable time survived the Martyrdom of
those two great Apostles. A passage that so troubled Christophorson (one of
those who in these later Ages first translated Eusebius into Latin) because
crossing the accounts of their Writers in this matter, that he chose rather to
expunge the word, decease, and substitute another of a quite different sense,
expressly contrary to the faith of all ancient Copies, and to the most ancient
Version of Irenaeus it self. But to return. S. Mark as to his (...). ibid. n.
10. (...). ib. p. 210.
Person was of a middle size and stature, his Nose long, his Eye brows turning
back, his Eyes graceful and amiable, his Head bald, his Beard prolix and gray,
his Gate quick, the constitution of his Body strong and healthful.

5. HIS Gospel, the only Book he left behind him, was, as before we observed,
written at the entreaty of the Converts at (...). Al. Hypotyp. lib. 6. ap.
Eusebius. l. 2. c. 15. p. 53. Papias ib. l. 3. c. 39. p. 113.
Rome, who not content to have heard Peter preach, pressed S. Mark his
Disciple, that he would commit to Writing an Historical account of what he had
delivered to them: which he performed with no less faithfulness than brevity,
all which S. Peter perused, ratified with his Authority, and commanded to be
publicly read in their Religious Assemblies. And though, as we noted but now,
Irenaeus seems to intimate that it was written after Peter's death: yet all
that can be inferred hence will be, what in it self is a matter of no great
moment and importance, that the Ancients were not agreed in assigning the exact
time when the several Gospels were published to the World. It was frequently
styled S. Peter's Gospel, not so much because dictated by him to S. Mark, as
because he principally composed it out of that account Vid. Pap. (...). supr.
citat.
which S. Peter usually delivered in his Discourses to the People. Which
probably is the reason of what Homil. 3. in (...). p. 30.
Chrysostom observes, that in his style and manner of expression he delights
to imitate S. Peter, representing much in a few words. Though he commonly
reduces the story of our Savior's Acts into a narrower compass than S.
Matthew, yet want there not passages, which he relates more largely than he.
The last Chapter of his Gospel, at least part of it, was (as Ad Hedib. (...).
3. p. 143. (...) 3.
Hierom informs us) wanting in all ancient Greek Copies, rejected upon pretense
of some disagreement with the other Gospels, though, as he there shows, they
are fairly consistent with each other. His great impartiality in his Relations
appears from hence, that he is so far from concealing the shameful lapse and
denial of Peter, his (...) (...). Homil. 86. (...) Matthew. p. 719.
dear Tutor and Master, that he sets it down with some particular circumstances
and aggravations, which the other Evangelists take no notice of. Some dispute
has been made in what Language it was written, whether in Greek or Latin; That
which seems to give most countenance to the Latin Original, is the note that we
find at the end of the Syriac Version of this Gospel, where it is said that
Mark preached and declared his Holy Gospel at Rome (...); in the Roman, or the
Latin Tongue. An evidence that with me would almost carry the force of a
demonstration, were I assured that this note is of equal value and authority
with that Ancient Version, generally supposed to come very few Centuries short
of the Apostolic Age. But we know how usual it is for such additions to be
made by some later hand. And what credit is to be given to the subscriptions at
the end of S. Paul's Epistles, we have showed elsewhere. Besides, that it is
not here said that he wrote, but that he Preached his Gospel at Rome in that
Language. The Advocates of the Romish Church plead, that it is very congruous
and suitable, that it should at first be consigned to Writing in that Language,
being principally designed for the use of the Christians at Rome. An objection
that will easily vanish, when we consider, that as the Convert Jews there
understood very little Latin, so there were very few Romans that understood not
Greek, it being (as appears from the Writers of that Age) the gentile and
fashionable Language of those Times. Nor can any good reason be assigned, why
it should be more inconvenient for S. Mark to write his Gospel in Greek for the
use of the Romans, than that S. Paul should in the same Language write his
Epistle to that Church. The Original Greek Copy, written (...). a (...). in
Marc. (...). 562.
with S. Mark's own hand, is said to be extant at Venice at this Day. Written
(they tell us) by him at Aquileia, and thence after many Hundreds of Years
translated to Venice, where it is still preserved, though the Letters so worn
out with length of time, that they are not capable of being read. A story which
as I cannot absolutely disprove, so am I not very forward to believe, and that
for more reasons, than I think worth while to insist on in this place.

The End of S. Mark's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. LUKE the Evangelist.
S. LUKE
2. COR. 8. 8. 19. The Brother, whose praise is in ye Gospel throughout all ye
Churches: And not that only, but who was also chosen of ye Churches to travel
with us.

St. Luke his Martyrdom.
Col. 4. 14. Luke the beloved Physician. The brother whose Praise is in the
Gospel.

2 Cor. 4. 11. We are delivered unto death for Jesus sake. Bearing in the body
the dying of the Lord Jesus.




Antioch S. Luke's birthplace. The fame and dignity of it. His learned and
liberal education. His (...) of Physic. His skill in Painting. S. Luke none of
the Seventy, Converted, where, and by whom. His constant attendance upon S.
Paul. In what parts he principally exercised his Ministry. The place, and
manner of his Death. The translation of his Body to Constantinople. His
Writings. Theophilus, who. His Gospel, where written, and upon what occasion.
How fitted for it. The Acts of the Apostles written at Rome, and when. Why
principally containing the Acts of S. Paul. This Book why publicly read just
after Easter in the Primitive Church. S. Luke's polite and exact (...) and way
of writing above the rest.

1. SAINT Luke was born at Antioch, the Metropolis of Syria, a City celebrated
for its extraordinary blessings and eminences, the pleasantness of its
situation, the fertility of its soil, the riches of its Traffic, the wisdom of
its Senate, the learning of its Professors, the civility and politeness of its
Inhabitants, by the Pens of some of the greatest Dion. (...). 47. de (...).
Liban. Orat. (...). (...) Encom. (...). (...) (...). 17. (...) Pop, (...). 198.
(...). 1.
Orators of their times: And yet above all these renowned for this one peculiar
honor, that here it was that the Disciples were first called Christians. It
was an University, replenished with Schools of learning, wherein were
Professors of all Arts and Sciences. So that being born in the very lap of the
Muses, he could not well miss of an ingenuous and liberal education, his
natural parts meeting with the (...) great improvements. Nay, we are S. (...)
Sur. ad (...) 18. (...). p. 289.
told, that he studied not only at (...), (...) in all the Schools both of
Greece and Egypt, whereby he became accomplished in all parts of Learning and
humane Sciences. Being thus furnished out with skill in all the preparatory
Institutions of Philosophy, he more particularly applied himself to the study
of Physic, for which the (...) Academies weremost famous; though they that
hence infer the (...) of his Birth and Fortunes, forget to (...), that this
noble Art was in those times generally managed by persons of no better rank
than servants: Upon which account a Learned Grot. (...). in Luc. 1.
man conceives S. Luke, though a Syrian by birth, to have been a servant at
Rome, where he sometimes practiced Physic, and whence being manumitted, he
returned into his own Country, and probably continued his profession all his
life, it being so fairly consistent with, and in many cases so subservient to
the Ministry of the Gospel, and the care of Souls. Besides his abilities in
Physic, he is said to have been very skilful in (...). 2. (...). 43.
Painting, and there are no less than three or four several pieces still in
being, pretended to have been drawn with his own hand; a tradition which (...).
non manus. and a S. Luca (...). c. 18. and 19. p. 354.
Gretser the Jesuit sets himself with a great deal of pains, and to very little
purpose to defend, though his Authors, either in respect of credit or
antiquity, deserve very little esteem and value. Of more authority with me
would be an ancient Inscription found in a Vault near the Church of S. Mary in
Romans (...). Part. 2. c. 46. (...). 10. p. 188.
Via lata at Rome, supposed to have been the place where S. Paul dwelt, wherein
mention is made of a Picture of the B. Virgin, U NA EX VII. A B. LUCA DEPICTIS,
being one of the seven painted by S. Luke.

2. HE was a Jewish Proselyte, (...) abounding with men of that Nation, who had
here their Synagogues and Schools of Education, so that we need not with (...).
in Luc. p. 293.
Theophylact send him to Jerusalem to be instructed in the study of the Law. As
for that opinion of (...). 51. p. 188.
(...) and others, that he was one of the Seventy Disciples, one of those that
deserted our Lord for the unwelcome discourse he made to them, but recalled
afterward by S. Paul, I behold it as a story of the same coin and stamp with
that of S. Mark's leaving Christ upon the same occasion, and being reduced by
Peter, and that the one was made to answer the other; as upon no better ground
it is (...) prius, (...). p. 39.
said that he was one of those two Disciples that were going to Emaus. For
besides the silence of Scripture in the case, he himself plainly confesses,
that he was not from the beginning an Eyewitness and minister of the Word.
Most probable it is, that he was converted by S. Paul (...) 1. 2.
during his abode at Antioch, when as the Apostles of catchers of Fish were
become fishers of men, so he of a Physician of the Body became a Physician of
the Soul. This, Nicephorus (...).
will have to have been done at Thebes, the chief City of (...), about forty
miles from Athens, though it appears not to me by any credible Author that ever
S. Paul was there. He became ever after his inseparable companion and
fellow laborer in the ministry of the Gospel, especially after his going into
Macedonia, from which time in recording the History of S. Paul's travels, he
always speaks of himself in his Acts 16. 10.
own person. He followed him in all his dangers, was with him at his several
arraignments at Jerusalem, accompanied him in his desperate voyage to Rome,
where he still attended on him to serve his necessities, and supply those
ministerial Offices, which the Apostle's (...) would not (...) him to undergo,
and especially in carrying messages to those Churches where he had planted
Christianity. This infinitely endeared him to S. Paul, who owned him for his
fellow laborer, called him the beloved Physician, and the Brother whose praise
is in the Gospel, throughout all the Churches, which the Ancients, and
especially (...). p. 44.
Ignatius, apply to our Evangelist.

3. PROBABLE it is that he did not wholly leave S. Paul till he had finished
his course, and crowned all with Martyrdom, though there are that tell (...)
ubi (...) n. 11.
us, that he left S. Paul at Rome, and returned back into the East, traveled
into Egypt and the parts of Libya, preached the Gospel, wrought Miracles,
converted multitudes, constituted Guides and Ministers of Religion, yea, that
he himself took upon him the Episcopal charge of the City of Thebais.
Epiphanius gives us this account, that he first preached (...) supra.
in Dalmatia, and Galatia (he reads it (...), in Gaul, or France, and
peremptorily affirms, that they are all mistaken that say that it was Galatia
where Crescens preached, though some think that himself in the mean while is
under the most confident mistake) then in Italy and Macedonia, where he spared
no pains, declined no dangers that he might faithfully discharge the trust
committed to him. The Ancients are not very well agreed, either about the time
or manner of his death, some affirming him to die in Egypt, others in Greece,
the (...) xviii. (...) p. 645.
Roman Martyrologie in Bithynia, (...) vit. and (...) in Bibl. Pp. Tom. 3. p.
148.
(...) at Ephesus; some make him die a natural, others a violent death. Indeed
neither Eusebius nor S. Hierom take any notice of it: But (...) 1. in Julian.
p. 76.
Nazianzen, Epist. 12. (...) p. 138.
Paulinus Bishop of Nola, and several other expressly assert his Martyrdom,
whereof Lib. 2. c. 43. p. 210.
Nicephorus gives this particular account, that coming into Greece he
successfully preached, and baptized many Converts into the Christian Faith,
till a party of Infidels making head against him, drew him to execution, and in
want of a Cross whereon to dispatch him presently, hanged him upon an
Olive Tree, in the eightieth (the eighty fourth says (...) Script. (...) in
(...).
S. Hierom) year of his age. (...) Quat. Evangel. p. 45.
Kirstenius from an ancient Arabic writer, makes him to have suffered
Martyrdom at Rome, which he thinks might probably be after S. Paul's first
imprisonment there, and departure thence, when S. Luke being left behind as his
deputy to supply his place, was shortly after put to death, the reason (says
he) why he no longer continued his History of the Apostles Acts, which surely
he would have done, had he lived any considerable time after S. Paul's
departure. His Body afterward, by the command of Constantine, or his Son
Constantius, was solemnly removed to Constantinople, and buried in the great
Church built to the memory of the Apostles.

4. TWO Books he wrote for the use of the Church, his Gospel, and the History
of the Apostles Acts, both dedicated to Theophilus, which many of the Drig
(...) 1. in Lus. fol. 94. Ambros. in (...) 1. p. 9. T. 5. (...). Epiph. (...)
p. 186.
Ancients suppose to be but a feigned name, denoting no more than a lover of
God, a title common to every Christian. While others with better reason
conclude it the proper name of a particular person, especially since the style
of most excellent is attributed to him, the usual title and form of address in
those times to Princes and great men. (...) in Luc. p. 293.
Theophylact styles him (...), a man of Consular dignity, and probably a
Prince; the Lib. 10. (...) fin. (...). 120.
Author of the Recognitions makes him a Nobleman of Antioch, converted by
Peter, and who upon his conversion gave his house to the Church for the place
of their public and solemn meetings. We may probably suppose him to have been
some Magistrate, whom S. Luke had converted and baptized, to whom he now
dedicated these Books, not only as a testimony of honorable respect, but as a
means of giving him further certainty and assurance of those things, wherein he
had been instructed by him. For his Gospel, (...), in (...). Tom. 9.
S. Hierom supposes it to have been written in Achaia during his travels with
S. Paul in those parts, whose help he is generally said to have made use of in
the composing of it, and that this the Apostle primarily intends when he so
often speaks of his Gospel. But whatever assistance S. Paul might contribute
toward it, we are sure the Evangelist himself tells us, that he derived his
intelligence in these matters from those, who from the beginning had been
eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word. Nor does it in the least detract from
the authority of his relations, that he himself was not present at the doing of
them; for if we consider who they were from whom he derived his accounts of
things, Habuit utique authenticam paraturam, as Adv. Matt. lib. 4. c. (...). 414
Tertullian speaks, he had a stock both of credit and intelligence sufficiently
authentic to proceed upon, delivering nothing in his whole History but what he
had immediately received from persons present at, and concerned in the things
which he has lest upon record. The occasion of his writing it, is thought to
have been partly to prevent those false and fabulous relations which even then
began to be obtruded upon the World, partly, to supply what seemed wanting in
those two Evangelists that wrote before him; and the additions or larger
explications of things are particularly enumerated by Adv. (...). lib. 3. c.
14, p. 272.
Irenaeus. He mainly insists upon what relates to Christ's Priestly Office, and
though recording other parts of the Evangelical story, yet it ever is with a
peculiar respect to his Priesthood. Upon which account the Ancients in
accommodating the four Symbolical representments in the Prophets Vision to the
four Evangelists, assigned the Ox or (...) to S. Luke.

5. His History of the Apostolic Acts was written no doubt at Rome, at the end
of S. Paul's two years imprisonment there, with which he concludes his story;
it contains the Actions, and sometimes the sufferings of some principal
Apostles, especially S. Paul; for, besides that his activity in the cause of
Christ made him bear a greater part both in doing and suffering, S. Luke was
his constant attendant, an eyewitness of the whole carriage of his life, and
privy to his most intimate transactions, and therefore capable of giving a more
full and satisfactory account and relation of them; seeing no evidence or
testimony in matters of fact can be more rational and convictive, than his who
reports nothing but what he has heard and seen. Among other things he gives us
a particular account of those great miracles which the Apostles did for the
confirmation of their doctrine. And this (as Sum. 73. Cur. Act. App. (...) in
(...). Tom. (...)
Chrysostom informs us) was the reason why in the Primitive times the Book of
the Acts, though containing those Actions of the Apostles that were done (...)
Pentecost were yet usually read in the Church before it, in the space between
that and Easter, when as at all other times those parts of the Gospel were read
which were proper to the season, it was ( says he) because the Apostles
miracles being the grand confirmation of the truth of Christ's Resurrection,
and those Miracles recorded in that Book, it was therefore thought most proper
to be read next to the feast of the Resurrection. In both these Books his way
and manner of writing is exact and accurate, his style polite and elegant,
sublime and lofty, and yet clear and perspicuous, flowing with an easy and
natural grace and sweetness, admirably accommodate to an historical design, all
along expressing himself in a vein of purer Greek, than is to be found in the
other writers of the holy Story. Indeed being born and bred at Antioch (than
which no place more famous for Oratory and Eloquence) he could not but carry
away a great share of the native genius of that place, though his style is
sometimes allayed with a tang of the Syriack and Hebrew dialect. It was
observed of old (as Comm. in c. 6. Esai. p. 30. T. 5. ibid. in c. 28. p. 118.
S. Hierom tells us) that his skill was greater in Greek than Hebrew, that
therefore he always makes use of the Septuagint Translation, and refuses
sometimes to render words, when the propriety of the Greek tongue will not bear
it. In short, as Epist. ad Damas. p. 124. T. 3.
an Historian, he was faithful in his relations, elegant in his writings; as a
Minister, careful and diligent for the good of Souls; as a Christian, devout
and pious: and who crowned all the rest with the laying down his life for the
testimony of that Gospel, which he had both Preached and Published to the World.

The End of S. Luke's Life.
DIPTYCHA APOSTOLICA: OR, A Brief Enumeration and Account of the APOSTLES and
their SUCCESSORS, FOR THE First Three Hundred Years in the Five great Churches,
said to have been Founded by them, thence called by the Ancients, APOSTOLICAL
CHURCHES, VIZ. Antioch, Rome, Jerusalem, Byzantium or Constantinople, and
Alexandria.
ANTIOCH.
THIS I place first, partly because it is generally acknowledged even by the
Romish Writers, that a Church was founded here by S. Peter some considerable
time before that at Rome; partly because here it was that the Venerable name of
Christians did first commence. In which respect the Ap. Theod. H. Eccles. lib.
5. c. 9. p. 151.
Fathers in the Council at Constantinople under Nectarius in their Synodicon to
them at Rome style the Church of Antioch, (...), The most Ancient, and truly
Apostolical; and Homil. 3. ad Pop. Am. Tom. 1. p. 40.
S. Chrysostom, The head of the whole World. The Succession of its Bishops till
the time of Constantine (which shall be the Boundary of this Catalogue) was as
follows.

I. S. Peter the Apostole; who governed this Church at least 7. years.
Nicephorus of Constantinople says Eleven. II. Euodius, who sat 23. years. In
his time the Disciples were first called Christians at Antioch. III. Ignatius.
After near 40. years Presidency over this Church he was carried out of Syria to
Rome, and there thrown to wild Beasts in the Theater, Ann. Chr. 110. Trajan 11.
IV. Heron, he was Bishop 20. years: To him succeeded V. Cornelius, who kept the
place 13. years, dying Ann. Chr. 142. VI. Eros, 26, or as Eusebius, 24. years.
VII. Theophilus, 13. a man of great Parts and Learning, many of his Works were
extant in Eusebius his time, and some of them we still have at this day. VIII.
Maximinus, 13. he dying, the next that was chosen was IX. Serapio, 25. many of
his Works are mentioned by Eusebius and S. Hierom. To him succeeded X.
Asclepiades, a man of great worth and eminency, and invincible constancy in the
time of persecution; he continued in this See 9. years. XI. Philetus, 8. XII.
Zebinus, or Zebennus, he sat 6. years. XIII. Babylas, 13. after many conflicts
and sufferings for the Faith, he received the crown of Martyrdom under Decius;
and commanded his Chains to be buried with him. XIV. Fabius, or as the
Patriarch Nicephorus calls him, Flavius, possessed tho Chair 9. years. He was a
little inclining toward Novatianism. XV. Demetrianus, he sat Bishop, says
Nicephorus 4, says Eusebius, 8. years. XVI. Paulus Samosatenus sat in the chair
8. years, when for his Unepiscopal manners and practices, his unsound Dogmata
and principles, and especially his mean and unworthy opinions concerning our
Savior, he was condemned and deposed by a Synod at Antioch, whose Synodical
determination is at large extant in (...). XVII. Domnus succeeded in the place
of the deposed. He was son to Demetrian, Paulus his predecessor in that See;
constituted and ordained to the place by the Fathers of that Synod, who farther
give him this honorable character, that he was a man endued with all Episcopal
virtues and ornaments. Eusebius makes him to have sitten 6, Nicephorus but 2.
years. XVIII. Timaeus, he sat in the chair 10. years. XIX. Cyrillus, who
presided over that Church in the account of Nicephorus 15, of Eusebius 24.
years. XX. Tyrannus, he sat 13. years; in his time began the tenth Persecution
under Dioclesian, which raged with great severity. XXI. Vitalis, 6. XXII.
Philogonius, 5. succeeded by XXIII. Paulinus, or as Nicephorus calls him,
Paulus, who after five years was deposed and driven out by the prevalency of
the Arrian faction. XXIV. Eustathius, formerly Bishop of Beroea, a learned man,
and of great note and eminency in the Council of Nice, the first general
Council, summoned by the Great Constantine, after he had restored peace and
prosperity to the Church.
ROME.
THE foundation of this Church is with just probabilities of reason by many of
the Fathers equally attributed to Peter and Paul, the one as Apostle of the
Circumcision preaching to the Jews, while the other probably as the Apostle of
the Uncircumcision preached to the Gentiles. Its Bishops succeeded in this
order.

I. S. Peter and S. Paul, who both suffered Martyrdom under Nero. II. Linus,
the son of Herculaneus, a Tuscan; he is mentioned by S. Paul, he sat between
11. and 12. years. III. Cletus, or Anacletus, or Anencletus, supposed by many
to be the same person, (though others who reckon (...) a Greek, born at Athens,
make them distinct, whom yet we have left out, not being mentioned by (...)) a
Roman, the son of AEmilianus, sat 9, though others say but 2. years. IV.
Clemens, a Roman, born in Mount Caelius, the son of Faustinus, near a kin, say
some, to the Emperor: He was condemned to dig in the Marble-Quarries near the
Euxin Sea, and by the command of Trajan with an Anchor about his neck thrown
into the Sea. He was Bishop of Rome 9. years, and 4. months. V. Euarestus, by
birth a Greek, but his Father a Jew of Bethlehem. He is said to have been
crowned with Martyrdom the last year of Trajan, in the ninth of his Bishopric,
or as others, the thirteenth. VI. Alexander, a Roman, though young in years,
was grave in his manners and conversation. He sat 10. years and 7. months, and
died a Martyr. VII. Xystus, or Sixtus, a Roman, he was Martyred in the tenth
year of his Bishopric, and buried in the Vatican. VIII. Telesphorus, a Greek,
succeeded; Just in the Martyr flourished in his time. He died a Martyr, having
sat 11. years, and 3. months; 10. years, 8. months say others: and lies buried
near S. Peter in the Vatican. IX. Hyginus, the son of an Athenian Philosopher
was advanced to the Chair under Antoninus Pius: He sat 4. years; Eusebius says
8. X. Pius, an Italian, born at Aquilcia, he died having been Bishop 11. years,
and 4. months; according to Eusebius, 15. years. XI. Anicetus, born in Syria:
He is said after 9, or as others, 11. years to have suffered Martydom, and was
buried in the Via Appia in the Cemetery of Callistus. In his time Polycarp came
to Rome. XII. (...), or as Nicephorus calls him, Soterichus, was a Campanian,
the son of Concordius. There was an intercourse of Letters between him and
Dionysius Bishop of Corinth. He died after he had sat 9. years, or as Eusebius
reckons, 7. XIII. Eleutherius, born at Nicopolis in Greece. To him Lucius King
of Britain sent a Letter and an Embassy. He sat 15. years, died Ann. Chr. 186.
and lies buried in the Vatican. XIV. Victor, an African, the son of Felix, a
man of a furious and intemperate spirit, as appeared in his passionate
proceedings in the controversy about the observation of Easter. He was Bishop
10. years. Onuphrius assigns him 12. years, and one month. XV. Zephyrinus, a
Roman, succeeded, and possessed the chair 8, but as others, 18. years; 20. says
Onuphrius. A pious and learned man, but a little warping toward the Errors of
Montanus. XVI. Callistus, or Calixtus, the son of Domitius, a Roman; a prudent
and modest man. He suffered much in the persecution under Alexander Severus,
under whom he became a Martyr, being thrown into a Well by the procurement of
Ulpian the great Lawyer, but severe enemy of Christians. He sat 6. years, or 5.
as others, and one month; and though he made a Cemetery, called after his own
name, yet was he buried in that of Calepodius in the Appian way. XVII. Urbanus,
the son of Pontianus, a Roman, after 4, or as some, 6. years, he suffered
martyrdom for the Faith: Eusebius has 5, S. Hierom in his translation 9. He was
buried in Pretextatus his Cemetery in the Appian way. XVIII. Pontianus, the son
of Calphurnius, a Roman; for his bold reproving the Roman Idolatry he was
banished into the Island Sardinia, where he died; he was Bishop about 3. or 4,
or as Eusebius, 5. years. XIX. Anteros, a Greek, the son of Romulus. He died by
that he had kept his place one month, though others without reason make him to
have lived in it many years, and was buried in the Cemetery of Callistus. XX.
Fabianus, a Roman, he was unexpectedly chosen Bishop, while several others
being in competition, a Pigeon suddenly descended, and sat upon his head, the
great emblem of the Holy Spirit. He died a martyr after 14. years; buried in
the same place with his predecessor. XXI. Cornelius, a Roman, he opposed and
condemned Novatian: frequent Letters passed between him and Cyprian. After
somewhat more than two years he was first cruelly whipped, and then beheaded:
buried in a Vault within the Grange of Lucina, near the Appian way. XXII.
Lucius, a Roman, sat 2, or as others, 3. years. He suffered martyrdom by the
command of Valerian, and was buried in Callistus his Cemetery. XXIII.
Stephanus, a Roman, the son of Julius: Great contests were between him and
Cyprian about rebaptizing those who had been baptized by Heretics. He was
beheaded after he had sat about 2. or 3. years, though others say 7; and buried
with his predecessor. XXIV. Xystus, a Greek, formerly a Philosopher of Athens.
After 1, or as other compute, 2. years, and 10. months he suffered martyrdom,
Eusebius reckons it 8. years. XXV. Dionysius, of a Monk (...) Bishop, (...), in
the judgment of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, a truly learned and admirable
person. The time of his Presidency is uncertainly assigned, 6, 9, 10, 11.
Eusebius extends it to 12. years. XXVI. Felix, a Roman: In his time arose the
Manichaean Heresy. He suffered about the fourth or fifth year of his
Episcopacy, and lies buried in the Aurelian way, in a Cemetery of his own, two
miles from Rome. XXVII. Eutychianus, a Tuscan, a man exceedingly careful of the
burial of martyrs, after one years space was himself crowned with martyrdom:
Eusebius allows him but 8. months, Onuphrius 8. years and 6. months. XXVIII.
Caius, or as Eusebius calls him, Gaianus, a Dalmatian, kinsman to the Emperor
Dioclesian, and in the persecution under him became a martyr. He sat 11. years,
some say longer. (...), 15. years: He was beheaded and buried in Callistus his
Cemetery. XXIX. Marcellinus, a Roman: Through fear of torment he did sacrifice
to the gods; but recovering himself, died a martyr, after he had sat 8, or 9.
years. He was beheaded, and buried in the Cemetery of Priscilla in the Salarian
way. To him succeeded XXX. Marcellus, a Roman; he was condemned by Maxentius
the Tyrant to keep Beasts in a stable, which yet he performed with his prayers
and exercises of devotion. He died after 5. years, and 6. months, and was
buried in the Cemetery of Priscilla. XXXI. Eusebius, a Greek, the son of a
Physician. He suffered much under the Tyranny of Maxentius. He sat 6. years say
some, 4. say others, though Eusebius allows him but 7. months, Onuphrius 1.
year, and 7. months; he was buried in the Appian way near Callistus his
Cemetery. XXXII. Miltiades, an African. He might be a Confessor under
Maxentius, but could not be a martyr under Maximinus, as some report him. He
sat 3. or 4, though others assign him but 2. years: and was buried in the
Cemetery of Callistus. XXXIII. Silvester, a Roman. He was elected into the
place Ann. Chr. CCCXIV. fetched from the mountain Soracte, whither he had fled
for fear of persecution. He was highly in favor with Constantine the Great. He
sat 23, Nicephorus says 28. years.
JERUSALEM.
THE Church of Jerusalem may in some sense be said to have been founded by our
Lord himself, as it was for some time cultivated and improved by the Ministry
of the whole College of Apostles. The Bishops of it were as follows.

I. S. James the Less, the Brother of our Lord, by him, say some, immediately
constituted Bishop, but as others more probably by the Apostles: He was thrown
off the Temple, and knocked on the head with a Fullers club. II. Symeon, the
son of Cleopas, brother to Joseph, our Lord's reputed Father. He sat in this
chair 23. years, and suffered martyrdom in the reign of Trajan, in the one
hundred and twentieth year of his Age. III. Justus succeeded in his room, and
sat 6. years. IV. Zachaeus, or as Nicephorus the Patriarch calls him,
Zacharias, 4. V. Tobias; to him after 4. years succeeded VI. Benjamin: who sat
2. years. VII. John: who continued the same space. VIII. Matthias, or
Matthaeus, 2. years. IX. Philippus, one year: next came X. Seneca, who sat 4.
years. XI. Justus, 4. XII. Levi, or Lebes, 2. XIII. Ephrem, or Ephres, or as
Epiphanius styles him, Vaphres, 2. XIV. Joseph, 2. XV. Judas, 2. Most of these
Bishops we may observe to have sat but a short time, following one another with
a very quick succession. Which doubtless was in a great measure owing to the
turbulent and unquiet humor of the Jewish Nation, frequently rebelling against
the Roman powers, whereby they provoked them to fall heavy upon them, and cut
off all that came in their way, making no distinction between Jews and
Christians: as indeed they were all Jews, though differing in the Rites of
their Religion. For hitherto the Bishops of Jerusalem had successively been of
the Circumcision, the Church there having been entirely made up of Jewish
converts. But Jerusalem being now utterly laid waste, and the Jews dispersed
into all other Countries, the Gentiles were admitted not only into the body of
that Church, but even into the Episcopal chair. The first whereof was XVI.
Marcus, who sat 8. years. XVII. Cassianus, 8. XVIII. Publius, 5. XIX. Maximus,
4. XX. Julianus, 2. XXI. Caianus, 3. XXII. Symmachus, 2. XXIII. Caius, 3. XXIV.
Julianus, 4. XXV. Elias, 2. I find not this Bishop mentioned by Eusebius; but
he is recorded by Nicephorus of Constantinople. XXVI. Capito, 4. XXVII.
Maximus, 4. XXVIII. Antoninus, 5. XXIX. Valens, 3. XXX. Dulichianus, 2. XXXI.
Narcissus, 4. He was a man of eminent piety, famous for the great miracles
which he wrought: but not being able to bear the aspersions which some unjustly
cast upon him (though God signally and miraculously vindicated his innocence)
he left his Church, and retired into deserts and solitudes. In his absence was
chosen XXXII. Dius, who sat 8. years. After him XXXIII. Germanio, 4. XXXIV.
Gordius, 5. In his time Narcissus, as one from the dead, returned from his
solitudes, and was importuned by the people again to take the government of the
Church upon him; being highly revercuced by them, both for his strict and
Philosophical course of life, and the signal vengeance which God took of his
accusers. And in this second administration he continued 10. years, suffering
martyrdom when he was near 120. years old. To relieve the infirmities of his
great Age, they took in to be his Colleague XXXV. Alexander, formerly Bishop in
Cappadocia, who at that time had out of devotion taken a pilgrimage to
Jerusalem; the choice being extraordinarily designed by a particular revelation
from Heaven. He was an eminent Confessor, and after having sat 15. years, died
in prison under the Decian persecution. By him Origin was ordained Presbyter.
He was a great Patron of Learning as well as Religion, a studious preserver of
the Records of the Church. He erected a Library at Jerusalem, which he
especially furnished with the Writings and Epistles of Ecclesiastical persons.
And out of this treasury it was that Eusebius borrowed a great part of his
materials for the composing of his History. XXXVI. Mazabanes, 9. years. XXXVII.
Hymenaeus, 23. XXXVIII. Zabdas, 10. XXXIX. Hermon, 9. he was, as Eusebius tells
us, the last Bishop of this See before that fatal persecution that raged even
in his time. XL. Macarius, ordained Ann. Christ. CCCXV. He was present in the
great Nicene Council. He sat, says Nicephorus of Constantinople, 20. years, but
S. Hierom allows him a much longer time.
BYZANTIUM, afterward called CONSTANTINOPLE.
THAT this Church was first founded by S. Andrew, we have showed in his Life.
The succession of its Bishops was as follows.

I. S. Andrew the Apostle. He was crucified at Patrae in (...). II. Stachys,
whom S. Paul calls, his beloved Stachys, ordained Bishop by S. Andrew; he sat
16. (...). III. Onesimus, 14. IV. Polycarpus, 17. V. Plutarchus, 16. VI.
Sedecio, 9. VII. Diogenes, 15. Of the last three no mention is made in
Nicephorus of Constantinople, but they are delivered by Nicephorus Callistus,
lib. 8. c. 6. p. 540. VIII. Eleutherius, 7. IX. Felix, 5. X. Polycarpus, 17.
XI. Athenodorus, 4. he erected a Church called Elea, afterward much beautified
and enlarged by Constantine the Great. XII. Euzoius, 16. though Nicephorus
Callistus allow but 6. XIII. Laurentius, 11. years and 6. months. XIV. Alypius,
13. XV. Pertinax, a man of Consular dignity, he built another Church near the
Seaside, which he called, Peace. He sat 19. years, which Nicephorus Callistus
reduces to 9. XVI. Olympianus, 11. XVII. Marcus, 13. XVIII. Cyriacus, or
Cyrillianus, 16. XIX. Constantinus, 7. In the first year of his Bishopric he
built a Church in the North part of the City, which he dedicated to the honor
of Euphemia the Martyr, who had suffered in that place. In this Oratory he
spent the remainder of his life, quitting his Episcopal Chair to XX. Titus, who
sat 35. years and 6. months, though Nicephorus Callistus makes it 37. years.
After him came XXI. Dometius, brother (as they tell us) to the Emperor Probus,
he was Bishop 21. years 6. months. XXII. Probus succeeded his Father Dometius,
and sat 12. years. As after him XXIII. Metrophanes his brother, who governed
that Church 10. years. And in his time it was that Constantine translated the
Imperial Court hither, enlarged and adorned it, called it after his own name,
and made it the seat of the Empire. XXIV. Alexander succeeded, a man of great
piety and integrity, zealous and constant in maintaining the truth against the
blasphemies of Arrius. He sat 23. years.
ALEXANDRIA.
THE foundations of this Church were laid, and a great part of its
superstructure raised by S. Mark, who though (...) strictly and properly an
Apostle, yet being an Apostle at large, and immediately commissionated by S.
Peter; it justly obtained the honor of an Apostolical Church. Its Bishops and
Governors are thus recorded.

I. S. Mark the Evangelist, of whose travels and martyrdom we have spoken in
his Life. Nicephorus of Constantinople makes him to sit two years. II. Anianus,
charactered by Eusebius, (...), a man beloved of God, and admirable in all
things. He ruled in that Throne 22. years. III. Avilius, 12, or as Eusebius,
13. IV. (...), succeeded about the first year of Trajan; he sat 10. years,
according to Eusebius, 11. V. Primus, 12. VI. (...), or Justinus, 10. VII.
Eumenes, 10, or as Eusebius, 13. S. Hierom in his translation calls him
Hymenaeus. VIII. Marcus or Marcianus, 13, or as Eusebius, 10. IX. Celadion, 10,
but in Eusebius his computation, 14. X. Agrippinus, 14, according to Eusebius,
12. XI. Julianus, 15, though Eusebius allows but 10. XII. Demetrius, 21, but
Eusebius more truly makes him to have governed that Church no less than 43.
years. He was a man of great zeal and piety, and underwent many troubles in the
persecution at Alexandria. He was at first a great friend to Origin, but
afterward became his enemy, laying some irregularities to his charge: partly
out of emulation at the great reputation which Origin had gained in the world;
partly, in that Origin had suffered (...) to be ordained Presbyter by two other
Bishops, Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus of Caesarea. XIII.
Heraclas, a man of a Philosophical genius, and way of life. He was educated
under the institution of Origin, and by him taken to be his Assistant in the
School of the Catechumens, the whole government whereof he afterward resigned
to him; and upon the death of Demetrius he was advanced to the government of
that Church, the care whereof he took for 16. years; though Nicephorus of
Constantinople by a mistake, I suppose, for his predecessor, makes it 43. XIV.
(...), 17. He was one of the most eminent Bishops of his time. He was one of
Origen's Scholars, then preferred first Master of the Catechetical School at
Alexandria, and afterward Bishop of that See. In the persecution under Decius
he was banished first to Taposiris, a little Town between Alexandria and
Canopus; then to Cephro, and other places in the Deserts of Libya. But a large
account of his own and others sufferings, with many other transactions of those
times, we have out of his own Letters, yet extant in Eusebius. He died in the
Twelfth year of the Emperor Gallienus. XV. Maximus; of a Presbyter he was made
Bishop of Alexandria; he sat in that Chair 18. years according to Eusebius his
computation, though Nicephorus of Constantinople assign but 8. XVI. Theonas,
17, or according to S. Hierom's Version of Eusebius, 19. To him succeeded XVII.
Petrus, 12. He began his office three years before the last persecution. A man
of infinite strictness and accuracy, and of indefatigable industry for the good
of the Church. He suffered in the ninth year of the persecution, with the loss
of his head, gaining the crown of Martyrdom. After whose death came in the
prosperous and happy days of the Church, Constantine the Great turning the
black and dismal scene of things into a state of calmness and serenity. XVIII.
Achillas, 9, though Nicephorus of Constantinople allows him but one year. By
him Arius upon his submission was ordained Presbyter. XIX. Alexander, 23, under
him Arius began more openly to broach his Heresy at Alexandria, who was
thereupon excommunicated and thrust out by Alexander, and shortly after
condemned by the Fathers of the Council of Nice.
ERRATA.
(...). Page 15. line 17. read (...). p. 22. l. 6. for silent, r. (...). p. 31.
l. 24. r. (...). p. 47. l. 51. for were, r. (...).

Lives of the Apostles.

Introduct. p. 7. l. 20. r. (...). Book, p. 2. l. 27. r. (...). p. 9. l. 12.
dele (...). p. 11. l. 17. for lawful, r. careful. p. 32. l. 45. r. (...). p.
33. l. 15. for of, r. (...). p. 36. marg. over against l. 32. r. (...). p. 43.
l. 54. r. Man. p. 84. l. 17. after, the, add (...), p. 87. l. 33. for This, add
(...). p. 109. l. 52. after, he, add had. Some other literal mistakes the
Reader, I hope, will amend. In the (...) words these two letters, Daleth and
Resh, are not sufficiently distinguished.

FINIS.
A Brief Catalogue of Books newly Printed and Reprinted for R. Royston,
Bookseller to his Most Sacred Majesty.
THE Works of the Reverend and Learned Henry Hammond, D. D. containing a
Collection of Discourses chiefly Practical, with many Additions and Corrections
from the Author's own hand; together with the Life of the Author, enlarged by
the Reverend Dr. Fell, Dean of Christ-Church in Oxford. In large Folio.

A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament, Briefly
explaining all the difficult Places thereof. The Fourth Edition corrected. By
H. Hammond, D. D. In Folio.

(...), Or, a Collection of Polemical Discourses addressed against the enemies
of the Church of England, both Papists and Fanatics, in large Folio, by Jer.
Tailor, Chaplain in Ordinary to K. Charles the First of Blessed Memory, and
late Lord Bishop of Down and Conner.

The Second Part of the Practical Christian, consisting of Meditations and
Psalms, illustrated with Notes, or Paraphrased; relating to the Hours of
Prayer, the ordinary Actions of Day and Night, and several Dispositions of Men.
By R. Sherlock, D. D. Rector of Winwick.

An Answer to a Book, Entitled, A Rational Compendious way to Convince without
dispute all persons whatsoever dissenting from the true Religion; by J. K. By
Gilbert Burnet. In Octavo new.

The Royal Martyr, and the Dutiful Subject, in two Sermons: By Gilbert Burnet.
New.

The Christian Sacrifice, a Treatise showing the Necessity, End and Manner of
Receiving the Holy Communion, etc.

The Devout Christian instructed how to Pray and give Thanks to: or, a Book of
Devotions for Families, etc. Both written by the Reverend S. Patrick, D. D. in
12.

A Serious and Compassionate Enquiry into the Causes of the present Neglect and
Contempt of the Protestant Religion and Church of England, etc.

Considerations concerning Comprehension, Toleration, and the Renouncing the
Covenant. In Octavo, new.

Animadversions upon a Book, Entitled, Fanaticism Fanatically imputed to the
Catholic Church: by Dr. Stillingfleet, and the Imputation Refuted and Retorted
by S. C. The Second Edition. By a Person of Honor. In Octavo.

Reflections upon the Devotions of the Roman Church. With the Prayers, Hymns
and Lessons themselves, taken out of their Authentic Authors. In Three Parts.
In Octavo.

Go in Peace. Containing some brief Directions for young Ministers, in their
Visitation of the Sick. Useful for the People, in their state both of Health
and Sickness. In 12. New.

Conformity according to Canon Justified; and the new way of Moderation
Reproved: A Sermon Preached at Exon, in the Cathedral of S. Peter, at the
Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God, Anthony by Divine permission
Lord Bishop of Exon. By William Gould. In Quarto. New.

A Visitation Sermon preached in the Cathedral at Exon. By John Prince,
Minister of the Gospel at S. Martins, Exon.

A Sermon preached at the OxfordshireFeast, November. 25. 1674. In the Church of
S. Michael's Cornhill, London. By John Woolley, M. A.


