A True RELATION OF Colonel Cromwels PROCEEDINGS against the CAVALIERS.

Wherein is set forth the Number of those that were Taken, Killed, and Maimed,
at his late Victories obtained over them.

Sent in a Letter from a Gentleman in his Army (Dated July, 24. 1643.) to a
Friend in LONDON.

Published according to Order.

LONDON Printed for Bejamin Allen, 1643.

A TRVE RELATION OF Colonel CROMVVELS PROCEEDINGS Against the Cavaliers.
Wherein is set forth the Number of those that were Taken, Killed, and Maimed,
in his late Victories obtained against them.
Good Captain,
I Received yours last week, etc. for which I thank you, and which did much
moderate the anxiety of our souls, wherein we were in the apprehension of the
utter rou^ing, and infinite loss of Sir William Walter, as it was before
related and represented to us, the best I confess is bad, but as it pleases
the L^^^, so things come to pass, and (...) times to receive evil at his
hand (...) yet laying aside our confidence in him, (...) down to the Grave,
and raises up (...) to do his work intended by small (...) by great, and
has (...), (...) strength of flesh) and he will bring it to p(...); (...) is
faithful, he has promised and he will do ^^. I should be glad to hear some
good news of the Kentish business, etc. in the mean time, I shall now tell you
our own great danger, and therefore great deliverance, (the Lords name be
praised for it.)

About Tuesday last the Cavaliers came from Bever Castle, and Newark^, to
^^^^ord, about 1000. of them, as was informed us; they set also that day
(...)member) upon Peterborough, but were repelled by Colonel Palgrave and his
Company, who lay about Whittlesey and Peterborough, and sallyed out to them
with some Ordnance, they retired to Stamford, whither they (...)d in the
Country, and began to fortify apace, but it pleased God to interrupt them, by
sending Colonel Cromwell to them from Northampton side, or Buckingham, with 6.
or 7. Troops, and some few Foot.

On Wednesday they had some Skirmishes, first at a great house called Wothrop
House, (...) whence driving them, they retired to (...) stately house, by
Stamford also called (...) and getting within the Park Walls, ((...) round
with a stone Wall) they made that (...); so for that time the W^^^^ seized, for
the Colonel had few Foot, and no Ordnance. We lost not a man, or but a man at
most, he slew of theirs a Captain, a Lieutenant, and a Cornet, and some 10. or
12. more, and took one Color, and some 20. men, so there was a True^, at least
no more fighting till this morning: though the Colonel was within a mile and
half of the Town, intending to set down against it on Saturday morning last
betimes, but the sad rain forbad him. Yesterday God sent also to his
assistance, Colonel Hobard, (and some say also, Sir Samuel Luke,) Colonel
Palgrave also came to him with his men and Ordnance, so together they made a
considerable strength, of 3. or 4000. and they say 12. or 14. Pieces of
Ordnance. They stay not, but presently that night advance all to Burghly House
(whither the Enemy was again gone for sanctuary) sit down before it, shot
with their Ordnance 2 or 3. hours, (beginning at 3. of clock this morning) but
could do no good that way, the house was so strong; they sound a Parley, offer
quarter for the men only to have life and Liberty to depart without their
weapons etc. The Enemy refuses, answers, they would neither take nor give
quarter: They fall then upon them with their Muskets, a difficult task, and
full of danger, the fight was very hot and well performed (they say) on both
sides, the Enemy being very confident, active, and tryumphing, till about one
of clock this afternoon; But then their Spirits began to fail them; And they
sounded a Parley, the Colonel most Christianly commanded presently that none of
his should dare to shoot or kill any man during the parley, upon pain of death,
(forgetting their former cruel answer) presently they concluded upon quarter
for their lives; for they took them all (being two Colonells, six or seven
Captains, three or 400. Foot* 150. or 200. Horse) with all their Arms, etc.
And the pillage of the House and how they will deal with Stanford now also at
their mercy) we know not; but if the report be true which we have, that they
rung the Bells backward on Wednesday, when the first Skirmish was, to call in
the Country to assist the Cavaliers, against the Colonel, his mercy will be
admirable it they escape: for the Providence of God has been in this
business, that in all this hot fight for nine or elven hours, we are credibly
informed by one that was a Spectator all the while, that not above six or
seven men were slain, (though many hurt) in the Battle; only about two miles
beyond Stamford, toward Grantham, some 400. Club-men coming in to the aid of
the Cavaliers, and having killed some of the Colonells (...) he sent three or
four Troops to meet them they almost killed one of the Captains; upon which
being enraged, they presently slew some 50. of them, the rest fled (they say)
into the Woods; This is the effect of what we yet hear: Thus it pleases God
yet to preserve us; blessed be his name: I should be glad to hear some good
news of Sir William Waller: you hear (I question not) of the taking of
Gains-berry; and the rich price there 15000. (they say) in the Earl of
Ki^^^toneshouse with himself, and abundance of other Knights, and Gentlemen
and of brave Horses, etc. It was since besieged again by the Earl of
New Castle; and the Siege raised again (we hear this day) by my Lord
Fairefax; If it be true, It Is good news to hear also that Noble Lord is in
the field again. The Stage of war (you see) is now become on our side, the Lord
be merciful unto us; what hear you yet of the Scots? Are the Commissioners
gone? Here is a muttering about the Lieutenant of the Tower; how goes on your
business for your new Army? What does my Lord Generals Army? etc.

We have had terrible Alarms last week, but I was at Cambridge almost all the
week with my Wife: The Lord be with us and for us, preserve, fit, and use us
for his Glory.

My love to you both.
FINIS.

