TRVE NEVVES FROM YORK. Consisting of several Matters of Note, and High
Concernment, since the 13. of June, concerning these several heads, viz.
CONCERNING 1. Sir John Meldrun. 2. L. Marq. Hamilton. 3. Earl of Newcastle. 4.
Earl of Warwick. 5. Lord Willoughbie. 6. Duke of Richmond. 7. L. Marq.
Hertford. 8. Earl of Bristoll. 9. Lord Paget.

Whereunto is added News from Ireland. viz. CONCERNING 1. E. of Antrime. 2. E.
of Castlehaven. 3. Lord Conway. 4. Lord Digby.

With a Catalogue of the Names of the Lords that Subscribed to Levy Horse to
Assist his Majesty in defense of of His Royal person, the two Houses of
Parliament, and the Protestant Religion.

London Printed for M. T. 1642.

TRVE NEVVES FROM YORK. Since Monday the thirteenth of June. 1642.
SIR John Meldrun has sent a Letter to the King, to advise Him to submit to
the Parliament, and His Majesty has given Meldruns place to Master Hilliard a
Yorkshire Gentleman that took Sir John Hothams Ensign.

The Lord Marquess Hammiltoun has made a speech to the King to vindicate
himself of the Iealousies that are and have been upon him, wherein he
protests, not only his own loyalty and fidelity to His Majesty, but
undertakes with the engagement of his person and Fortunes for all his Country
men the Scots, that they are His Majesty's undoubted faithful Subjects and
Servants, and are and will be ready to lay down their lives and fortunes for
his Majesty whenever he shall be pleased to command them, and they have sent
an Admonition to the Parliament to agree and submit to their good King.

The Earl of Newcastle is made Governor of Newcastle, and is now there in the
Town with a Troop of Horse, and a Regiment of Foot, consisting of 1200. The
Earl of Warwick had a design with three Ships to have surp^ized Newcastle and
held it for the Par^iament

The Lord Willoughby of Parham has committed a M^ssenger of the Kings, that
was ^ent with the Kings proclamat^on to the Mayor of Linc^lne, and has sent
him with a Guard to the Parliament, and commanded the Mayor to attend at York.

The King and the Lords declare together the Lords having unanimiously resolved
to defend the Kings person, and have thereunto all of them set their hands, and
are ready to raise a great Army, the Duke of Richmond an hundred Horse, the
Lord Marquess Hertford an hundred Horse, and the rest of the Lords each of
them forty or fifty Horse, being present above forty Lords attending His
Majesty. The Earl of Bristoll is come to York, and the Lord Paget is come
and has begged His pardon, and is now all for the King, and will set forth a
Declaration how much he has been abused. The King has set forth a Narration,
and has sent Articles of Accommodation of his own to the parliament,
absolutely refusing theirs, he has offered a general pardon to all but nine,
which are the five Members formerly impeached, and Hotham, Martin, Ludlowe, and
^^^^^worth.

NEWS FROM IRELAND.
THat the Earl of Antrim is taken prisoner by the Scots, the Earl of
Castlehaven committed at Dublin and charged with high Treason, The Lord Conway
being Martial of Ireland is reported to be so poor a spirited man, that he
has joined with the Scots, and put himself under the command of Colonel
Munroe, and it is much feared the English and Scots will fall together by the
Ears, for the Scots grow so insolent they are not to be endured.

The Lord Digby of Ireland is dead, and honest Francis Palms of a disease in
Ireland that they fear is the plague, and our English are in all kind of wants
that can be imagined.

The Duchess of Buckingham is landed at Chester, and is coming to settle her
self at a House of hers in Nottinghamshire.

The KING in His propositions of Accommadations does declare that he will have
the last Remonstarance taken out of the Parliament Rolls and disavowed to be
the Act of both, or either, House of Parliament; That he will have the
Parliament forthwith adjourned either to one of the Universities, or the Cities
of York, Bristoll, Winchester, Salisbury, or Coventry; and then he will sit
with them. And that there be a time limited for the dispatch of all Business
and a concluding of this Parliament. And His Majesty does further declare in
another Declaration assented unto by the Lords here, that whosoever shall
furnish the Parliament with Horse, Arms, or Money, they shall be proceeded
against with all legal severity, and that whosoever on the contrary shall
fu^nish His Majesty with any of them for the performing of the Peace of the
Kingdom; His Majesty will protect them, and repay them what they shall
disburse by assurance out of His Parkes Houses, Lands, etc.

A Catalogue of the Names of the Lords that Subscrib^d to L^vie Horse to as^ist
His Ma^estie in defense of His Royal Person, the two Houses of Parliament, and
the Protestant Religion.
York the 22. of June. 1642.
Whereas it may be collected by several Declarations printed in the name of
both Houses of Parliament: That the Kings sacred person, the Houses of
Parliament, the Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, the L^berty and
propriety of the Subject, and the privileges of Parliament are all in danger.

We whose names are underwritten do voluntarily offer and severally engage
our selves, according to the following Subscriptions, to assist his Majesty in
defense of his Royal Person, the two Houses of Parliament, the Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty and propriety of the Subject, and
privileges of Parliament, when his Majesty shall have given commission under
the Great Seal, for levying of Forces for those purposes against all power,
levies and forces whatsoever, or to be raised, upon any pretense whatsoever:

To pay Horses for three Months, thirty days to the Month, at two shillings
six pence per diem, still advanceing a Months pay, the first payment to begin
so soon as the King shall call for it, after the Commissions shall be issued
under the Great Seal. In this number are not to be reckoned the Horses of the
Subscribers, or those that shall attend them.

Horse THe Prince 200 The Duke of York 120 Lord Keeper 40 Duke of Richmond 100
Lo. Marquess Hartford 60 Lo. ^reat Chamberline 30 Earl of Cumberland 50 Earl
of H^^ington 20 Earl of Bath 50 Earl of Southampton 60 Earl of Dorset 60
Ear^e of Northampton 40 Earl of Deavonshire 60 Earl of Dover 25 Earl of
Cambridge 60 Earl of Bristoll 60 Earl of Westmerland 20 E. of Barkshire and
L. Andover 30 Earl of Monmouth 30 Earl Rivers 30 Earl of Carnarvon 20 Earl
of Newport 50 Lord Mowbray 50 Lord Willoughby 30 Lord Gray of Ruthin 10 Lord
Lovelace 40 Lord Paget 30 Lo. Faulconbridge to come Lord Rich 30 Lord Pawlet 40
Lord Newark 30 Lord Mauntague 30 Lord Coventrey 100 Lord Savill 50 Lord Mohun
20 Lord Dunsmor 40 Lord Seymor 20 Lord Capell 100 Lord Faulkland 20 Master
Comptroller 20 Master Secretary Nicholas 20 Lo. chief Justice Banks. 20
The Lord Thanet is not here, but one has undertaken a hundred for him.

Sum. total. 1695.

FINIS.

