THE COPY OF TWO LETTERS; Written by two friends, one to another, Concerning
a pretended Dispute had betwixt Doctor Tailor with a young Batchelour of
Divinity attending him, and Master Alexander Henderson, Commissioner for the
Kirk of Scotland at Oxford.

London, Printed April the 11. 1643.

SIR,
A Few days ago there came to my hands a Pamphlet entitled, Mercurius
Aulicus, the week thereof; wherein I found mention made of a certain dispute
made betwixt one Doctor Tailor with a Bachelor of Divinity, and our good
friend Mr. Alexander Henderson. In reading over of which part of the paper, I
find the expression and discourse of the business a little to Mr. Henderson
his disadvantage, nor lacks there diverse who really think so, and make great
brags thereof: the man his worth I well know, and shall ever honor; being of
the mind that he may be wronged in that Printed relation. And because you are
daily conversant with him, and cannot be ignorant of what have passed in that
kind, I shall esteem it as none of the least of the obligements I owe to you,
if by the first sure bearer you send me a true account how that business went
for satisfying the judgment of diverse, and the curiosity of

Your very loving friend.
London, 15. March. 1642.
The Answer to the said Letter.
SIr, the 15. of March, there lately came to my hands, and I shall be glad to
resolve your doubts, by showing the true progress so far as I can remember
unpartially.

April the first.
IN this confused and miserable time of war, while truth suffers exile with
peace, and all sinews of humane society are dissolved, you are more wise then
to judge of your old acquaintance by the report of Mercurius. I have inquired
from those that were present, what did pass betwixt Master Henderson, and the
Doctor, And have learned that the Doctor did begin indeed with much civility,
saluting him, presenting him with a book, and speaking more of his reputation
then he could willingly hear; But without the smallest provocation, did
suddenly grow to such procacitie, that as he boasted of his new arguments in
his book, which had not been heard of before, so spared he not to say, that
our best Arguments were swords and gunnes; that Master Henderson had given
proof at Aberdene, how much might be said in an evil cause. To which nothing
was answered but that it beseemed him who was a young man to speak more
modestly of a national Kirk, and a national Cause; He replied, that he was a
Presbyter, as he told before, that he was a Doctor of Divinity, which could
not be known by his book, although printed in the year 1642. The other who
is called a Batchelour of Divinity added, Let no man despise thy youth; which
speech had it been directed to the Doctor, had not been nonsense.

It is true, he came to Master Henderson on the 19 of Feb. in the morning, but
Mercurius tells not that this 19. of Feb. was the Lords day, a circumstance
so considerable, that it made those who were present for the time, thinking it
no Iudaisme to keep the Sabbath, and preparing themselves after a long Journey
for the Kirk, weary of his discourse, in so much, that at last it was told the
Doctor, that it was the Sabbath. But the Doctor was so pregnant and confident,
that he was ready to argue, that he was about a work of the Sabbath: it may
be, because it is not unlawful to fight on the Sabbath day.

Had the Doctor come in the terms of Mercurius, desiring Master Henderson to
give a reason either of his faith, or hope, or demands; or had an amica
collatio been his desire, he might have obtained all that he desired, and
possibly more. But coming with faenum in cornu, and no word in his mouth, but
Dispute, dispute, concertation, concertation, such a way as was more suitable
for schoole-boyes, then great Divines. And wherewith Mr. Henderson, although
the most part of his life conversant with University men, had never been
acquainted. It was told him, that in the Synod which was expected, he and
others might have disputing their fill, or if that failed, there were many
learned men in England to answer his Book, or if it pleased him to send to
Scotland, it would find an answer there. But that Master Henderson was come to
supplicate the Kings Majesty, not to answer Books, nor to dispute
Propositions in the University. Whether this humor in the Doctor proceeds
from the condition of the times or some individual cause, I dispute not. This
I know, that a Scripturient Engine, may find matter enough for exercise in
Gerson, Bucerus, Altar Damascenum, the learned Salmasius, and other modern
Authors, which yet lie unanswered, but I confess it is a more easy work
ferram contentionis reciprocare, by writing a new book.

Had the Doctor perused the paper exhibited in the late Treaty, or the
Declaration of the National Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, for unity of
Religion, and uniformitie of Kirk government, with the reformed Kirks, he would
not have challenged us of any obtrusion or anrichristian usurpation, nor would
he have compared our Christian way of charity, not of authority, of
supplication, not of usurpation, with the obtruding of the Service-Booke, so
full of Popery upon the Kirk of Scotland, but this he and his fellow did
retractate.

Not only Master Henderson and many better then he, but the Kirk of Scotland,
and all the reformed Kirks at their first reformation, were resolved upon the
Question, that Antichristian doctrine, worship, and government, should all
down together. And we wish that the Kirk and Kingdom of England were resolved
also. But beside the will of God that scandalls must be; and beside the
judgment of God upon people for the abuse of the Gospel; the avarice and
ambition of the corrupt Clergy is a maine hinderance of the resolution which
could it be as easily satisfied, as their Arguments answered, it would be
quickly resolved upon the Question; It is right that Episcopacie go down,
because it stands not by divine right.

FINIS.

