CLERUS DOMINI: OR, A DISCOURSE OF THE DIVINE INSTITUTION, Necessity,
Sacredness, and Separation OF THE Office Ministerial.

TOGETHER WITH THE NATURE AND MANNER of its Power and Operation.

WRITTEN By the special Command of King Charles the First.

By IER. TAILOR, Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles the First, and late Lord
Bishop of Down and Connor.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most Excellent
Majesty. 1672.

THE Divine Institution and Necessity OF THE OFFICE MINISTERIAL.
SECT. I.
WHen several Nations and differing Religions have without any famous mutual
intercourse agreed upon some common rites and forms of Religion; because one
common effect cannot descend from chance, it is certain they come to them by
reason, or tradition from their common Parents, or by imitation; something that
has a common influence. If Reason be the principle, then it is more regular
and lasting, and admits of no other variety, than as some men grow
unreasonable, or that the reason ceases. If Tradition be the Law of Nature, it
is either a custom of all the world, derived from Noah or Adam; or else it is
therefore done, because natural reason teaches us to do it in the order to the
preservation of our selves and the public.

But imitation of the customs of a wise Nation, is something less, and yet it
has produced great consent in external rites and offices of Religion. Custom
or a Law, according as they are capable. For if a wise Prince, or Governor, or
a Nation, or a famous family, has chosen rites of common Religion, such as
were consonant to the Analogy of his duty, expressive of his sense, decent in
the expression, grave in the form, or full of ornament in their representment;
such a thing is capable of no greater reason, and needs no greater authority,
but has been, and may reasonably enough be imitated upon the reputation of
their wisdom, and disinterested choice, who being known wise persons, or
nations, took them first into their religious offices.

Thus the Jews and the Gentiles used Valor. Maxim. l. 1. c. 1.
white garments in their holy Dion. hist. l. 54.
Gentile-Priests were forbid to touch a dead body, to A. G^ll. l. 10 c. 15.
eat leavened bread, to Ibid.
mingle with secular employments during their attendance in holy offices; these
they took up from the pattern of the Jews, and professed it reasonable to
imitate a wise people in the rituals of their Religion. The Gentile-Priests
used Ring and Staff and Mitre (says Philostratus:) the Primitive Bishops did
so too; and in the highest Lib. 3.
detestation of their follies thought they might wisely enough imitate their
innocent customs and Priestly ornaments, and hoped they might better reconcile
their minds to the Christian Religion by compliance in ceremonials, than
exasperate them by rejecting their ancient and innocent Ceremonies: for so the
Apostles invited and enticed Judaism into Christianity.

And Tertullian complains of the Devils craft, who by imitating the Christian
rites reconciled men's minds with that compliance to a more charitable opinion
of the Gentile superstition. The Devil intending to draw the professors of
truth to his own portion, or to preserve his own in De praescript. c. 40. Hujus
sunt parts invertendi veritatem, qui ipsas quoque res sacramen^crum divin^rum
in idclorum mysteriis aemulatur. Tingit and ipse quosdam, ^ique credentes and
fideles suos: expiationem delictorum de la^acro re-promittit, and sic ad^
initiat Mithrae: signat illic in frontibus milites suos, celebrat and panis
oblationem, and imaginem resurrectionis inducit, and subgladio redimit corouam.
Quid, quod and summum Pontificem in unis nuptiis statuit? habet and virginos,
bab^ and continentes. Qui ergo ipsas res de quibus sacramenta Christi
administrantur tam aemulanter affectavit exprimere in negotiss idololatria,
utique and idem and eodem ingenio gestiit, and potuit instrumenta quoque
divinarum rerum and sanctorum Christianorum sensum de sensibus, verba de
verbis, parabolas de parabolis, profana and amulae fidei attemperare.
the same fetters he first put upon them, imitates the rites of our Religion,
adopting them into his superstition. He baptizes some of his disciples, and
when he initiates them to the worship of Mithra, promises them pardon of sins,
by that rite; he signs his soldiers in their foreheads, he represents the
oblation of bread, and introduces representments of the resurrection, and
laboriously gets Martyrs to his cause. His Priests marry but once; he has his
virgins, and his abstemious and continent followers: that what Christians love
and the world commends in them, being adopted into the rituals of Idolatry, may
allure some with the beauty and fair imagery, and abuse others with color and
fantastic faces.

And thus also all wise men that intended to persuade others to their

Censor. de die (...) l. c. 1.
The Gentiles offered first fruits to their gods, and their tithes to Hercules,
Sueton. in Vespas. L^^. decad. 1. lib. 10.
kept vigils and anniversaries, forbad marriages without the

But when all wise people, nay when absolutely all the world have consented
upon a Rite, it cannot derive from a fountain lower than the current, Socrates
in Xenophon, Quod ab omnibus gentibus observatum est, Lib. 4. de factis and
dict. Socr.
id non nisi a Deo sancitum esse dicendum est) or a tradition, or a law
descending from our common parents, or a reason derived from the nature of
things; there cannot in the world be any thing great enough to take away such a
rite, except an express divine commandment: and a man by the same reason may
marry his nearest relative, as he may deny to worship God by the recitation of
his praises and excellencies; because reason and a very common tradition have
made almost all the world consent in these two things, that we must abstain
from the mixtures of our nearest kindred, and that we must worship God by
recounting and declaring excellent things concerning him.

I have instanced in two things in which I am sure to find the fewest
adversaries, (I said, the fewest; for there are some men which have lost Magi
among the Persians: (...), says Tatianus in Clemens Alexandrinus, and
Bardisanes Syrus in Eusebius. And the Greeks worshipped Hercules by railing,
and Mercury by Stromat. 3. Lib. 4. praepar. Evangel.
throwing stones at him. But there was never any people but had their Priests
and Presidents of religious rites, and kept holy things within a mure, that the
people might not approach to handle the mysteries: and therefore besides that
it is a recession from the customs of mankind, and charges us with the
dis-respect of all the world (which is an incuriousness next to infinite) it is
also a doing against that which all the reason of all the wise men of the world
have chosen antecedently, or ex post facto, and he must have a strange
understanding, who is not persuaded by that which has determined all the world.

For religion cannot be at all in communities of men without some to guide, to
minister, to preserve and to prescribe the offices and ministeries: what can
profane holy things but that which makes them common? and what can make them
common more than when common persons handle them, when there is no distinction
of Persons in their ministration? For, although places are good accessories to
religion, yet in all religions they were so accidental to it, that a sacrifice
might hallow the place, but the place (unless it were naturally impure) could
not desecrate the sacrifice: and therefore Jacob worshipped upon a stone,
offered upon a turf; and the Ark rested in Obed-Edom's house, and was holy in
Dagon's Temple; and hills and groves, fields and orchards, according to the
several customs of the Nations, were the places of address: But a common person
ministering, was so near a circumstance, and was so mingled with the action,
that since that material part and exterior actions of Religion could be acted
and personated by any man, there was scarce any thing left to make it
religious, but the attrectation of the rites by a holy person; A Holy place is
something, a separate time is something, a prescript form of words is more, and
separate and solemn actions are more yet; but all these are made common by a
common person, and therefore without a distinction of persons have not a
natural and reasonable distinction of solemnity and exterior religion.

And indeed it were a great disreputation to religion, that all great and
handsome that every man should take the taper in his hand; and religion is no
more to be handled by all men, than the laws are to be dispensed by all, by
whom they are to be obeyed; though both in religion and the laws, all men have
a common interest.

For since all means must have some equality or proportion toward

But the very natural design of Religion forces us to a distinction of sordes,
and adherent indispositions; an assignment in reason must be made of certain
persons, whose calling must be holy, and their persons taught to be holy, by
such a solemn and religious assignment; that those persons being made higher
than the people by their Calling and Religion, and yet our brethren in Nature,
may be intermedial between God and the people, and present to God the peoples
needs, and be instrumental to the reconveying Gods blessing upon those whose
fiduciaries they are. This last depends upon Gods own act and designation, and
therefore must afterward be proved by testimonies of his own, that he has
accepted such persons to such purposes; but the former part we our selves are
taught by natural reason, by the rules of proportion, by the honor we owe unto
Religion, by the hopes of our own advantages, and by the distance between God
and us toward which we should thrust up persons as high as they are capable.
And that all the world has done prudently in this, we are confirmed by Gods
own act, who knowing it was most agreeable, not only to the constitution of
Religion, and of our addresses to God, but to our mere necessities also, did in
his glorious wisdom send his Son, and made him apt to become a mediator between
himself and us, by clothing him with our nature, and decking him with great
participation of his own excellencies, that He might do our work, the work of
his own humane nature, and by his great sanctity and wisdom approach near to
Gods mercy-seat, whither our imperfections and sins could not have near access.

And this consideration is not only good Reason but true Divinity, Greek
Church, and affixed to the head of a prayer as the reason of their addresses to
God in designing ministers in Religion. O Lord God, who (...). In ordinat.
Episc. (...), etc.
because man's nature cannot of it self approach to thy glorious Deity, have
appointed Masters and Teachers of the same passions with our selves, whom thou
have placed in thy throne, viz. in the ministry of the kingdom, to bring
sacrifices and oblations in behalf of thy people, etc. And indeed if the
greatness of an employment separates persons from the vulgus, either we must
think the immediate offices of Religion and the intercourse with God to be the
meanest of employments, or the persons so officiating to receive their estimate
according to the excellency of their offices.

And thus it was amongst the Jews and Gentiles before Christ's time, Levi to
marry with the Kingly Tribe of Judah, that they also might have the honor and
portion of the Messias's most glorious generation; and for the Priesthood of
Aaron it was (...), says Philo, a Celestial honor, not an earthly, a heavenly
possession, and it grew so high and was so naturalized into that Nation to
honor their Priests and mystic persons, that they made it the pretense of
their Wars and mutinies against their Conquerors. Honor sacerdotii firmamentum
potentiae assumebatur, says Tacitus, speaking of their wars against Antiochus;
The honor of their Priesthood was the strength of their cause, and the
pretense of their arms; and all the greatest honor they could do to their
Priesthood they fairly derived from a Divine precept, that the Prince, and the
People, and the Elders, and the Synagogue, should go in and out, that is,
should commence and finish their greatest and most solemn actions at the voice
and command of the Priest; And therefore King Agrippa did himself honor in his
Epistle to Caius Caesar: (...).
I had Kings that were my ancestors, and some of them were High Priests, which
dignity they esteemed higher than their Royal purple, believing that Priesthood
to be greater than the Kingdom, as God is greater than men.

And this great estimate of the Ministers of their Religion derived it
Philistines, that dwelt upon their skirts; insomuch that in the hill of God
where there was a garrison of the Philistines, there was also a college of the
Prophets newly instituted 1 Samuel 10. 5. and 10. Acts 3. 24.
by Samuel (from whom because he was their founder S. Peter reckoned the
ordinary descent from Samuel) unharmed and undisturbed, though they were
enemies to the Nation; and when David fled from Saul, he came to Naioth where
the prophets dwelt, and thought to take sanctuary there, knowing it was a
privileged place; there it was 1 Samuel 19. 18.
where Saul's messengers, and Saul himself turned Prophets, that they might
estimate the place and preserve its privilege, himself becoming one of their
society.

For this was observed amongst all Nations, that besides the band Cretians did
to their Priests and to the (...), the persons who were appointed for burial of
the dead, the same with (...), or fossarii in the Primitive Church, no
soldiers durst touch them; they had the privilege of Religion, the immunity
of Priests, Hos quae necabant non erant purae manus; and therefore it grew up
into a proverb, when they intended to express a most destructive and unnatural
war, (...), not so much as the Priests that carried fire before the Army did
escape; the same with that in Homer in the case of messengers, (...)
(...) -- Iliad. (...). vide 1. li. Eustath.

Not so much as a messenger returned into the City: These were sacred and
therefore exempt persons; and so were the Elei among the Grecians, as being
sacred to Jupiter, safe from the hostility of a professed enemy; the same which
was observed amongst the Romans, Quis homo est tanta confidentia,
Qui sacerdotem audeat violare!
At magno cum malo suo fecit Hercule. Pla^tus in Ruden^.



But this is but one instance of advantage.

The Gentiles having once separated their Priests, and affixed them to Cicero,
in the case of the Roman Augures, Maximum autem and praestantissimum in Rep.
jus est Cicero lib. 2. de leg.
Augurum, cum est authoritati conjunctum; neque vero hoc quia sum ipse Augur
ita sentio, sed quia sic existimare nos necesse est. Quid enim majus est, si de
jure quaerimus, quam posse a summis imperiis and summis potestatibus comitia
tollere? concilia vel instituta dimittere, vel habita rescindere? Quid
magnificentius quam posse decernere, ut migistratu se abdicent consules? quid
religiosius quam cum populo, cum plebe agendi jus aut dare aut non dare? It was
a vast power these men had, to be in proportion to their greatest honor: they
had power of bidding and dissolving public meetings, of indicting solemnities
of religion; just as the Christian Bishops had in the beginning of
Christianity; they commanded public fasts, at their indiction only they were
celebrated; Been autem quod and Episcopi universae plebi mandare jejunia
assolent; non dico industria stipium Tertul. adv. Psychicos c. 13. Ibid.
conferendarum, ut vestrae capturae est, sed interdum, and aliqua
sollicitudinis Ecclesiasticae causa. The Bishops also called public
conventions Ecclesiastical. Agantur praecepta per Graecias illas certis in
locis Concilia ex universis Ecclesiis, per quae and altiora quaeque in commune
tractantur, and ipsa repraesentatio totius nominis Christiani magna veneratione
celebratur. It was so in all Religions; the Antistites, the presidents of
rites, and guides of Consciences had great immissions and influences into the
Republic, and Communities of men, and they verified the saying of Tacitus,
Deum munere summum pontificem, etiam summum hominem esse, Lib. 3. Annal.
non aemulatione, non odio, aut privatis affectionibus obnoxium. The chief
Priest was ever the chief man, and free from the envies, and scorns and
troubles of popular peevishness and contumacy; and that I may use the
expression of Tacitus, Utque glisceret dignatio sacerdotum, (for all the great
traverses of the Republic were in their disposing) atque ipsis promptior
animus foret ad capessendas ceremonias, the very lower institutions of their
Religion were set up with the marks of special laws and privileges; insomuch
that the seat of the Empress in the Theater was among the Vestal Virgins. Lib.
(...). Annal.


But the highest had all that could be heaped upon them, till their honors
Strab. Ge^g. lib. 17.
Amongst the Ethiopians the Priests gave laws to their Princes, and they used
their power sometimes to the ruin of their Kings, till they were justly
removed; Aelian. var. hist. l. 14. c. 34. Joseph. Antiq. l. 14. c. 16. Caesar.
com. de bello Gal. l. 6.
Among the Egyptians the Priests were their Judges; so they were in Athens, for
the Areopagites were Priests; and the Druids among the Gauls were Judges of
murder, of titles of land, of bounds and inheritances, magno apud eos sunt
honor, nam fere de omnibus controversiis publicis privatisque constituunt; and
for the Magi of Persia and India, Strabo reports, (...), they conversed with
Kings, meaning they were their Counselors and Guides of their consciences. And
Herodotus in Eustathius tells us of the (...), the divine Eustath. in ^^iad.
(...).
order of Prophets or Priests in Delphos: (...), they did eat of the public
provisions together with Kings. By these honors they gave testimony of their
Religion, not only separating certain persons for the service of their Temples,
but also separating their condition from the impurities and the contempt of the
world; as knowing, that they who were to converse with their Gods, were to be
elevated from the common condition of men and vulgar miseries. (...)
(...),
(...). P^rphyr. citat. ex Eurip. 4. (...).

As soon as I was made a Priest of Idaean Jupiter, all my garments were white,
and I declined to converse with mortals. Novae sortis oportet illum esse qui
jubente Deo canat, said Seneca. He had need be of a distinct and separate
condition that sings to the honor, and at the command of God: thus it was
among the Jews and Heathens.

SECT. II.
NOW if Christian Religion should do otherwise than all the world The first, is
dishonorable to Christianity, and false as its greatest enemy: The second, is
shame to us: and both so unreasonable and unnatural, that if we separate not
certain persons for the ministeries of Christianity, we must consess we have
the worst Religion, or that we are the worst of men.

But let us consider it upon its proper grounds. When Christ had chosen That he
would be with them to the end of the world; they might personally be with him
until the end of the world, but he could not be here with them, who after a
short course run, was to go hence, and be no more seen: and therefore for the
verification of the promise, it is necessary that since the promise was made
for the benefit of the Church, and to them as the ministers of the benefit, so
long as the benefit was to be dispensed, so long they were to be succeeded to,
and therefore assisted by the Holy Jesus according to the glorious promise:
(...). Not only to the Apostles, but absolutely and indefinitely to all Christ's
disciples, their successors, he promised to abide for ever, even to the
consummation of the world, to the whole succession of the Clergy: so
Theophylact upon this place.

And if we consider what were the power and graces Jesus committed to the
dispensation of the Apostles, such as were not temporary, but binding and
loosing, remitting and retaining sins, which Christ gave them together with his
breathing on them the holy Spirit, and a legation, and a special Commission, as
appears in S. John; which power, what sense soever it admits John 20. 21.
of, could not expire with the persons of the Apostles, unless the succeeding
ages of the Church had no discipline, or government, no scandals to be removed,
no weak persons offended, no corrupt members to be cut off, no heretics
rejected, no sins, or no pardon; and that were a more heresy, than that of the
Novatians; for they only denied this ministry in some cases; not in all:
saying, Priestly absolution was not fit to be dispensed to them, who in time of
persecution had sacrificed to Idols. (...). [(...), To these] only, pardon is
to be dispensed without the ministry of the Priest, To these] who were (...)
Vide Socrat. li. 1. c. 7. Sozom. l. 1. c. 20.
(...), sacrificers, and mingled the table of the Lord with the table of
devils. Against other sinners they were not so severe. But however, so long as
that distinction remains, of sins unto death, and sins not unto death; there
are a certain sort of sins which are remediable, and cognoscible, and
judicable, and a power was dispensed to a distinct sort of persons, to remit or
retain those sins; which therefore must remain with the Apostles for ever, that
is, with their persons first, and then with the (...), with their successors;
because the Church needs it for ever; and there was nothing in the power, that
by relating to the present and temporary occasion did insinuate its short life
and speedy expiration.

In execution of this power and pursuance of this commission, for which the
power was given; the Apostles went forth, and all they upon the sword of their
proper ministry; and S. Paul does almost exhibit his Commission and reads the
words, when he puts it in execution, and does highly verify the parts and the
consequence of this argument; God has reconciled us to himself by Christ
Jesus, and has given to us the ministry of James 5.
reconciliation; and it follows, now then we are Ambassadors for Christ. The
ministry of reconciliation, is an appropriate ministry; It is committed to
us; we are Ambassadors, it is appropriate by virtue of Christ's mission, and
legation. He has given to us, he has made and deputed certain Ambassadors
whom he has sent upon the message, and ministry of reconcilement; which is a
plain exposition of the words of his Commission, before recorded, John 20. 21.

And that this also descended lower, we have the testimony of S. James, who
advises the sick person to send for the Elders of the Church, that they may
pray over him; that they may anoint him, that in that society there may be
confession of sins by the clinick or sick person, and that after these
preparatives, and in this ministry, his sins may be forgiven him. Now that
this power fell into succession, this instance proves; for the Elders were such
who had not the commission immediately from Christ, but were (...), they were
fathers of the people, but sons of the Apostles, and therefore it is certain
the power was not personal, and merely Apostolical, but derived upon others by
such a communication, as gives evidence the power was to be succeeded in; And
when went it out? when the anointing and miraculous healing ceased? There is no
reason for that. For forgiveness of sins was not a thing visible, and therefore
could not be of the nature of miracles to confirm the faith and christianity
first, and after its work was done return to God that gave it; neither could it
be only of present use to the Church, but as eternal and lasting as sin is: and
therefore there could be nothing in the nature of the thing to make it so much
as suspicious, it was presently to expire.

To which also I add this consideration, that the Holy Ghost which was to
enable the Apostles in the precise office Apostolical, as it was an office
extraordinary, circumstantionate, definite, and to expire, all that, was
promised should descend upon them after Christ's ascension, and was verified in
Pentecost; for to that purpose to bring all things to their mind, all of
Christ's Doctrine and all that was necessary of his life and miracles, and a
power from above to enable them to speak boldly and learnedly, and with
tongues, all that, besides the other parts of ordinary power, was given them
ten days after the Ascension. And therefore the breathing the Holy Ghost upon
the Apostles in the octaves of the Resurrection, and this mission with such a
power, was their ordinary mission, a sending them as ordinary Pastors and
Curates of Souls, with a power to govern (binding and loosing can mean no less:
and they were the words of the promise) with a power to minister
reconciliation: (for so Saint Paul expounds remitting and retaining) which two
were the great hinges of the Gospel, the one to invite and collect a Church,
the other to govern it; the one to dispense the greatest blessing in the world,
the other to keep them in capacities of enjoying it. For since the holy Ghost
was now actually given to these purposes here expressed, and yet in order to
all their extraordinaries and temporary needs was promised to descend after
this, there is no collection from hence more reasonable, than to conclude all
this to be part of their commission of ordinary Apostleship, to which the
ministers of religion were in all Ages to succeed. In attestation of all which,
who please may see the united testimony of In Ioh. 20.
S. Cyril, Ibid.
S. Chrysostom, In 1 Zim. 4.
S. Ambrose, Homil. 26. in Evang.
S. Gregory and the Quaest. 39.
Author of the questions of the old and new Testament, who unless by their
calling shall rather be called persons interess'd, than by reason of their
famous piety and integrity, shall be accepted as competent, are a very credible
and fair representment of this truth, and that it was a doctrine of
Christianity, that Christ gave this power to the Apostles for themselves, and
their successors for ever, and that therefore as Christ in the first donation,
so also some Churches in the tradition of that power used the same form of
words, intending the collation of the same power, and separating persons for
that work of that ministry. I end this with the counsel S. Augustine gives to
all public penitents, Veniat ad Antistites, per quos illis in Ecclesia claves
ministrantur, and a praepositis sacrorum accipiant satisfactionis suae modum,
let them come to the Presidents of Religion by whom the Keys are ministered, and
from the Governors of holy things let them receive those injunctions, which
shall exercise and signify their repentance.

SECT. III.
THe second power I instance in, is preaching the Gospel: for which work he not
only at first designed Apostles, but others also were All power is given to me
in Heaven and in Earth, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
you, and lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. First,
Christ declared his own commission, [all power is given him into his hand] he
was now made King of all the Creatures, and Prince of the Catholic Church; and
therefore as it concerned his care and providence to look to his cure, and
flock, so he had power to make deputations accordingly [Go ye therefore,]
implying that the sending them to this purpose was an issue of his power,
either because the authorizing certain persons was an act of power, or else
because the making them Doctors of the Church and teachers of the Nations, was
a placing them in an eminency above their scholars, and converts, and so also
was an emanation of that power, which, derived upon Christ from his Father,
from him descended upon the Apostles. And the wiser persons of the world have
always understood, that a power of teaching was a Presidency and Authority; for
since all dominion is naturally founded in the understanding; although civil
government accidentally, and by inevitable public necessity relies upon other
titles, yet where the greatest understanding and power of teaching is, there is
a natural pre-eminence and superiority eatenus, that is, according to the
proportion of the excellency; and therefore in the instance of S. Paul we are
taught the style of the Court, and Disciples sit at the feet of their Masters,
as he did at the feet of his Tutor Gamaliel, which implies duty, submission,
and subordination; and indeed it is the highest of any kind, not only because
it is founded upon nature, but because it is a submission of the most imperious
faculty we have, even of that faculty which when we are removed from our
Tutors, is submitted to none but God; for no man has power over the
understanding faculty; and therefore so long as we are under Tutors and
Instructors, we give to them that duty, in the succession of which claim, none
can succeed but God himself, because none else can satisfy the understanding
but he.

Now then because the Apostles were created Doctors of all the hoc ipso they
had power given them over the understandings of their disciples, and they were
therefore fitted with an infallible spirit, and grew to be so authentic that
their determination was the last address of all inquiries in questions of
Christianity: and although they were not absolute Lords of their faith and
understandings, as their Lord was, yet they had, under God, a supreme care, and
presidency, to order, to guide, to instruct, and to satisfy their
understandings; and those whom they sent out upon the same errand, according to
the proportion and excellency of their spirit, had also a degree of superiority
and eminency; and therefore they who were (...), Laborers in the word and
doctrine, were also (...), Presbyters that were Presidents and Rulers of the
Church; and this eminency is for ever to be retained according as the
unskilfulness of the Disciple retains him in the form of Catechumens; or as the
excellency of the instructor still keeps the distance; or else, as the office
of teaching being orderly and regularly assigned makes a legal, political, and
positive authority, to which all those persons are for orders sake to submit,
who possibly in respect of their personal abilities might be exempt from that
authority.

Upon this ground it is, that learning amongst wise persons is esteemed a title
of nobility and secular eminency: Ego enim quid aliud munificentiae adhibere
potui, ut studia, ut sic dixerim, in umbra educata e quibus claritudo venit,
said Seneca to Nero. And Aristotle, and A. Gellius affirm, Apud Tacitum lib. 8.
Arist. lib. 4. Polit. c. 4. A. Gellius, lib. 19. c. 10.
that not only excellency of extraction, or great fortunes, but learning also
makes noble; circum undique sedentibus multis doctrina, aut genere, aut fortuna
nobilibus viris: and therefore the Lawyers say, that if a legacy be given
pauperi nobili, the executors* if they please, may give it to a Doctor. I only
make this use of it, that they who are by public Barthol. in. l. Iudices. Cod.
de dignit. l. 12. Bald^^ in l. nemini. C. de adv. advers. judi^.
designation appointed to teach, are also appointed in some sense to govern
them: and if learning it self be a fair title to secular opinion, and
advantages of honor, then they who are professors of learning, and appointed
to be public teachers, are also set above their disciples as far as the Chair
is above the Area or floor, that is, in that very relation of teachers and
scholars: and therefore among the Heathen the Priests who were to answer de
mysteriis, sometimes bore a scepter. (...).
Upon which verse of Homer, Eustathius observes, (...), The scepter was not
only an ensign of a All power is given me, go ye therefore and teach; and it
concludes, that the authority of Preaching is more than the faculty, that it
includes power and presidency, that therefore a separation of persons is ex
abundanti inferred, unless order and authority be also casual, and that all men
also may be Governors as well as Preachers.

Now that here was a plain separation of some persons for this ministry, I
shall not need to prove by any other argument besides the words of the
Commission; save only that this may be added, that here was more necessary,
than a commission; great abilities, special assistances, extraordinary and
divine knowledge, and understanding the mysteries of the kingdom; so that these
abilities were separations enough of the persons, and designation of the
officers; But this may possibly become the difficulty of the question; For,
when the Apostles had filled the world with the Sermons of the Gospel, and that
the holy Ghost descended in a plentiful manner, then was the prophecy of Joel
fulfilled, old men dreamed dreams, and young men saw visions, and sons and
daughters did prophecy: Now the case was altered; and the disciples themselves
start up Doctors, and women prayed and prophesied, and Priscilla sat in the
Chair with her husband Aquila, and Apollos sat at their feet; and now all was
common again: and therefore although the commission went out first to the
Apostles; yet, when by miracle God dispensed great gifts to the Laity, and to
women, he gave probation that he intended that all should prophecy and preach,
lest those gifts should be to no purpose. This must be considered.

1. These gifts were miraculous verifications of the great Promise of ex
abundanti proved by those extraregular dispensations: so that here is purpose
enough signified, although they be not used to infer an indistinction of
Officers in this ministry.

2. These gifts were given extra-regularly: but yet with some difference of
persons: for all did not prophecy, nor all interpret, nor all Priscilla, among
all the nations of the Jews that ever did prophecy, of the women: and of
Laymen I remember not one, but Aquila and Agabus: and these will be but too
straight an argument to blend a whole Order of men in a popular and vulgar
indiscrimination.

3. These extraordinary gifts were no authority to those who had them, and no
other commission, to speak in public. And therefore Paul forbids the women to
speak in the Church, and yet it was not denied but some of them might have the
spirit of prophecy. Speaking in the Church was part of an ordinary power, to
which not only ability but authority also and commission are required. That was
clearly one separation; women were not capable of a clerical employment, no not
so much as of this ministry of preaching. And by this we may take speedier
account concerning Deaconesses in the Primitive Church; de Diaconissa ego
Bartholomaeus dispono; O Episcope, impones ei manus praesentibus Presbyteris,
Diaconis and Diaconissis, and dices, Respice super Lib. 8. c. 26.
hanc famulam tuam; so it is in the constitutions Apostolical under the name of
S. Clement: By which it should seem they were ordained for some Ecclesiastical
ministry; which is also more credible by those words of Tertullian, Quantae
igitur and quae in Eccles^is ordinari solent, In exhort. ad castitatem. Lib. 4.
c. 9.
quae Deo nubere maluerunt? And Sozomen tells of Olympias, Hanc enim, cum
genere esset nobilissimo, quamvis juvenculam, ex quo vidua facta erat, quia ex
praescripto Ecclesiae egregie philosophatur, in Ministram Nectarius ordinat:
and such a one it was, whom Saint Basil called impollutam sacerdotem.
Whatsoever these Deaconesses could be, they could not Lib. de virg.
speak in public, unless they did prevaricate the Apostolical rule, given to
the Corinthian and Ephesian Churches: And therefore though Olympias was an
excellent person, yet she was no preacher; she was a Philosopher, not in her
discourse, but in her manner of living and believing: Philosophata ex Ecclesiae
praescripto, and that could not be by preaching: but these Deaconesses after
the Apostolical age, were the same with the (...), the good women, that did
domestic offices and minister to the temporal necessity of the Churches in the
days of the Apostles; Such a one was Phebe of Cenchrea: but they were not
admitted to any holy or spiritual Office: So we have certain testimony from
Antiquity, whence the objection comes. For so the Nicene Council expressly:
(...), etc. (...). Deaconesses are to be reckoned C. 19.
in the Laity, because they have no imposition of hands, viz. for any spiritual
office. For they had imposition of hands in some places to temporal
administrations about the Church, and a solemn benediction, but nothing of the
(...); the same were the (...), Haeres. 79.
the Presbyteresses, who were the (...), or the Governesses of women, in order
to manners and religion; but these, though (as Tertullian affirms, and Zonaras,
and Balsamo confess) they were solemnly ordained and set over the women in such
offices, yet pretended to nothing (...). In 1 Timothy 3.
of the clerical power or the right of speaking in public. So Epiphanius:
There is an order of deaconesses in the Church, but not to meddle, or to
attempt any of the holy Offices. And in this sense it was, that S. Ambrose
reckons it amongst the Heresies of the Cataphrygians, that they ordained their
Deaconesses, viz. to spiritual ministeries; but those women that desire to be
meddling, are not moved with such discourses; they care for none of all these
things; therefore I remit them to the precept of the Apostle. But I suffer not
a woman to teach, but to be in silence. 1 Timothy 2. 12.


And as for the men who had gifts extraordinary of the Spirit, although
Corinthian Church (before there was a Bishop, or a fixed College of Clergy) to
utter the inspired dictates of the Spirit, yet whether they were Lay or Clergy
is not there expressed; and it is more agreeable to the usual dispensation that
the prophets of ordinary ministry, though now extraordinarily assisted, should
prophecy in public; but however, when these extraordinaries did cease, if
they were common persons, they had no pretense to invade the Chair (nor, that
we find, ever did:) for an ordinary ability to speak was never any warrant to
disturb an order; unless they can say the words of S. Paul [Whereunto I am
ordained a Preacher,] they might not invade the office. To be able to perform
an office, though it may be a fair disposition to make the person capable to
receive it orderly, yet it does not actually invest him; every wise man is not
a Counselor of State, nor every good Lawyer a Judge. And I doubt not but in
the Jewish religion there were many persons as able to pray as their Priests,
who yet were wiser than to refuse the Priests advocation apud Deum, and
reciting offices in behalf of the people: Orabit pro eo sacerdos was the order
of Gods appointing, though himself were a devout person and of an excellent
spirit. And it had need be something extraordinary that must warrant an
ordinary person to rise higher than his own evenness; and ability or skill is
but a possibility; and must be reduced to act by something that transmits
authority, or does establish order, or distinguish persons, and separate
professions. And it is very remarkable, that when Judas had miscarried and lost
his Apostolate, it was said, that it was necessary for some body to be chosen
to be a witness of Christ's Resurrection. Two were named, of ability sufficient,
but that was not all: they must choose one, to make up the number of the twelve,
a distinct separate person; which shows that it was not only a work (for that,
any of them might have done) but an office of ordinary ministry. The ability
of doing which work although all they that lived with Jesus, might either have
had, or received at Pentecost, yet the authority and grace was more: the first
they had upon experience, but this only by divine election: which is a
demonstration that every person that can do offices clerical is not permitted
to do them; and that, besides the knowledge and natural or artificial
abilities, a divine qualification is necessary.

And therefore God complains by the Prophet, I have not sent them, and yet they
run; and the Apostle leaves it as an established rule, How shall they preach
except they be sent? Which two places, I shall grant to be meant concerning a
distinct and a new message; Prophets must not offer any doctrine to the people,
or pretend a doctrine for which they had not a commission from God. But which
way soever they be expounded, they will conclude right in this particular. For
if they signify an ordinary mission, then there is an ordinary mission of
preachers, which no man must usurp unless he can prove his title certainly and
clearly, derivative from God; which when any man of the Laity can do, we must
give him the right hand of fellowship, and wish him good speed. But if these
words signify an extraordinary case, and that no message must be pretended by
Prophets, but what they have commission for, then must not ordinary persons
pretend an extraordinary mission to an ordinary purpose: for, besides, that God
does never do things unreasonable, nor will endure that order be interrupted to
no purpose, he will never give an extraordinary Commission unless it be to a
proportionable end; whosoever pretends to a license of preaching by reason of
an extraordinary calling, must look that he be furnished with an extraordinary
message, lest his Commission be ridiculous; and when he comes, he must be sure
to show his authority by an argument proportionable; that is, by such a
probation without which no wise man can reasonably believe him; which cannot be
less than miraculous and divine. In all other cases he comes under the curse of
the non missi, those whom God sent not; they go on their own errand, and must
pay themselves their wages.

But, besides that the Apostles were therefore to have an immediate into the
lot of this ministry, and they were the Seventy-two whom Christ had sent (as
probationers of their future preaching) upon a short errand into the Cities of
Judah: But by this assignation of more persons than those to whom he gave
immediate Commission, he did declare that the office of preaching was to be
dispensed by a separate and peculiar sort of men, distinct from the people, and
yet by others than those who had the commission extraordinary; that is, by such
who were to be called to it by an ordinary vocation.

As Christ constituted the office and named the persons, both extraordinary
when he ascended up on high gave gifts to men, to this very purpose; and these
gifts coming from the same Spirit made separation of distinct ministeries under
the same Lord. So S. Paul testifies expressly; Now there are diversities of
gifts, but the same Spirit, (...), there are different administrations
[differences 1 Cor. 12. 4.
of ministeries;] it is the proper word for Church-offices; the ministry
distinguished by the gift; It is not a gift of the ministry, but the ministry
it self is the gift, and distinguished accordingly. An extraordinary Ministry
needs an extraordinary and a miraculous gift; that is a miraculous calling and
vocation and designation by the holy Ghost; but an ordinary gift cannot sublime
an ordinary person to a supernatural employment; and from this discourse of the
differing gifts of the Spirit, Saint Paul without any further artifice,
concludes that the Spirit intended a distinction of Church Officers for the
work of the ministry; for the conclusion of the discourse is, that God has
set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers;
and, lest all God's people should usurp these offices, which Verse 28.
God by his Spirit has made separate and distinguished, he adds, Are all
Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? If so, then were all the body one
member, quite contrary to nature, and to God's Economy.

And that this designation of distinct Church Officers is for ever, S. Paul
also affirms as expressly as this question shall need; He gave some Apostles,
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, (...)
Ephesians. 4. 11.
(...), for the work of the ministry, till we all arrive at the unity of
faith, which as soon as it shall happen, then comes the end. Till the end be,
the (...), the work of the Ministry must go forwards, and is incumbent upon
the Pastors and Teachers; this is their work, and they are the ministers, whom
the holy Ghost designed.

1. For, I consider that either to preach requires but an ordinary or an
extraordinary ability; if it requires an extraordinary, they who are illiterate
ordinary sufficiency will discharge it, why cannot they suppose the Clergy of a
competency, and strength sufficient to do that which an ordinary understanding,
and faculties can perform? what need they entermeddle with that, to which no
extraordinary assistance is required? or else why do they set their shoulder to
such a work, with which no strength but extraordinary, is commensurate? in the
first case it is needless; in the second it is useless; in both vain and
impertinent. For either no man needs their help; or, if they did, they are very
unable to help. I am sure they are, if they be unlearned persons; and if they
be learned, they well enough know, that to teach the people, is not a power of
speaking, but is also an act of jurisdiction and authority, and in which, order
is, at least, concerned in an eminent degree: Learned men are not so forward;
and those are most confident who have least reason.

2. Although as Homilies to the people are now used according to the smallest
rate, many men more preach than should, yet besides that to prudently, gravely,
piously, and with truth, requires more abilities than are discernable by the
people, such as make even a plain work reasonable to wise men, and useful to
their hearers, and acceptable to God; besides this, I say, the office of
teaching is of larger extent than making Homilies, or speaking prettily enough
to please the common and undiscerning auditors. They that are appointed to
teach the people must Respondere de jure, Give account of their faith in
defiance of the numerous armies of Heretics; they must watch for their flock,
and use excellent arts to arm them against all their weaknesses from within,
and hostilities from without; they must strengthen the weak, confirm the
strong, compose the scrupulous, satisfy the doubtful, and be ready to answer
cases of Conscience; and I believe there are not so little as 5000 cases
already started up among the Casuists; and for ought I know; there may be 5000
times 5000. And there are some cases of Conscience that concern Kings and
kingdoms in the highest mysteriousness, both of State and Religion, and they
also belong to Pastors for the interests of Religion, and Teachers to determine
or advise in. (...) ^ustat^. in Iliad. (...).
(...). The Preachers were always Messengers between God and men, being
Mediators by their sacrifices, and they were interested in their counsels, and
greater causes; And if religion can have influences into counsels of Princes,
and public interest of kingdoms, and that there can be any difficulty, latent
senses, intricacy of question, or mysteriousness in Divinity, it will be found
that there are other parts of the Preachers office, besides making Homilies:
and that when so great skill is required, it will not be easy to make
pretenses to invade it; unless a man cannot be an excellent Lawyer without
twenty years skill and practice, besides excellency of natural indowments, and
yet can be an excellent Teacher and Guide in all cases of Conscience, merely
with opening his mouth, and rubbing his forehead hard. But God has taken order
that those whom he has appointed teachers of the people, should make it the
work and business of their lives, that they should diligently attend to
reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine, that they may watch over their flock,
over whom the holy Ghost has made them overseers. The inconvenience that this
discourse is like to meet withal is, that it concerns those men who are sure
not to understand it: for they that have not the wisdom of Prophets and wise
men, cannot easily be brought to know the degrees of distance between the
others wisdom and their own ignorance. To know that there is great learning
beyond us, is a great part of learning: but they that have the confidence in
the midst of their deepest ignorance to teach others, want both modesty and
understanding too, either to perceive or to confess their own wants: they never
kissed the lips of the wife, and therefore think all the world breathes a
breath as fenny and moorish as themselves.

3. Besides, the consideration of the ability that a separate number of
prudence and duty too. Of Prudence, because there can be no security against
all the evil doctrines of the world in a promiscuous unchosen company of
Preachers. For if he be allowed the pretense of an extraordinary, he shall
belie the holy Spirit, to cousen you, when he has a mind to it: If you allow
him nothing but an ordinary spirit, that is, abilities of art and nature; there
cannot in such discourses be any compensation for the disorder, or the danger,
or the schisms, and innumerable Churches, when one head and two members shall
make a distinct body, and all shall pretend to Christ, without any other common
term of union. And this which is disorder in the thing, is also dishonorable
to this part of religion; and the divine messages shall be conveyed to the
people by common Curriers or rather messengers by chance, and as they go by;
whereas God sent at first Ambassadors extraordinary, and then left his Leigers
in his Church for ever. But there is also a duty too to be secured; for they
that have the guiding of souls must remember that they must be (...), must
render an account; and that cannot be done with joy, when it shall be
indifferent to any man to superseminate what he please: and (by the way) I
suppose, they who are apt to enter into the Chair of Doctors and Teachers,
would be unwilling to be charged with a cure of souls. If they knew what that
means, they would article more strictly before they would stand charged with
it; and yet it is harder to say that there is no such thing as the cure of
souls; that Christ left his flock to wander and to guide themselves, or to find
shepherds at the charges of accident and chance. Christ has made a better
provision, and after he had with the greatest earnestness committed to S. Peter
the care of feeding his lambs and sheep, S. Peter did it carefully, and though
it part of the same duty to provide other shepherds, who should also feed the
flocks by a continual provision and attendance; The Presbyters which are among
you, I who also am a Presbyter exhort, feed the flock of God which is among
you, (...) 1 Pet. 5. 1. 2.
(...), doing the office of Bishops over them, taking supravision or oversight
of them willingly and of a ready mind. The Presbyters and Bishops, they are to
feed the flock, there was (...) a flock to be distinguished from the (...), the
shepherds, the elders, (...), and the flock among you, distinguished by a
regular office of teaching, and a relation of shepherds and sheep.

But this discourse would be unnecessary long, unless I should omit many
arguments, and contract the rest. I only shall desire it be considered, Let the
Elders that rule well have a double honor, 1 Timothy 5.
an elder brother's portion at least, both of honor and maintenance,
especially if they labor in the word and doctrine; and the reason is taken out
of Moses Law, but derived from the natural, Bovi trituranti non ligabis os. For
God has ordained that those that labor in the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. This argument will force us to distinguish persons, or else our purses
will; and if all will have a right to preach the Gospel that think themselves
able, then also they have a right to be maintained too.

I shall add no more, 1. God has designed persons to teach the people, 2.
charged them with the cure of souls, 3. given them commission to go into all
the world, 4. given them gifts accordingly. 5. charged the people to attend and
to obey, 6. has provided them maintenance and support, and 7. separated them
to reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine, from the affairs of this world,
that they may attend to these, by the care of the whole man. If any man in
charity or duty will do any ghostly offices to his erring or weak brother, he
may have a reward of charity: for in this sense it is that Tertullian says,
that in remote and barbarous countries the Laity do Sacerdotio aliquatenus
fungi. But if he invades the public chair, he may meet with the curse of
Corah, if he intends maliciously; or if he have fairer, but mistaken purposes,
the gentler sentence passed upon Uzzah may be the worst of his evil portion.

SECT. IV.
I Instance next in the case of Baptism, which indeed has some difficulty and
prejudice passed upon it; and although it be put in the separate nature,
requires the solemnity of a distinct order of persons for its ministration: yet
if the laity may be admitted to the dispensation of so sacred and solemn rites,
there is nothing in the calling of the Clergy that can distinguish them from
the rest of Gods people, but they shall be holy enough, to dispense holy
offices without the charges of paying honor and maintenance to others to do
what they can do themselves.

In opposition to which, I first consider, that the ordinary minister of Epist.
ad Hieron.
Ignatius, Lib. de Bapt.
Tertullian, Epist. 1. c. 9
S. Gelasius, Haeres. 79.
S. Epiphanius, and Dial. adv. Lucifer.
S. Hierom; who affirm in variety of senses, that Bishops, Priests and Deacons
only are to baptize; some by ordinary right, some by deputation; of which I
shall afterward give account; But all the Ius ordinarium they intend to fix
upon the Clergy according to divine institution and commandment. So that in
case lay-persons might baptize (...), and (...), upon urgent necessity, yet
this cannot upon just pretense invade the ordinary ministry, because God had
dispensed the affairs of his Church, so that cases of necessity do not often
occur to the prejudice and dissolution of public order, and ministeries; and
if permissions being made to supply necessities, be brought further than the
case of exception gives leave, the permission is turned into a crime, and does
greater violence to the rule, by how much it was fortified by that very
exception, as to other cases not excepted. And although in case of extreme
necessity every man may preach the Gospel, as to dying Heathens, or unbelieving
persons, yet if they do this without such, or the like necessity, what at first
was charity, in the other case is schism and pride, the two greatest enemies to
charity in the world.

But now for the thing it self, whether indeed any case of necessity can
transmit to lay persons a right of baptizing, it must be distinctly Ananias
baptized Paul, who yet (as it is said) was not in holy Orders; and that the
3000 Converts at the first Sermon of S. Peter were all baptized by the
Apostles, is not easily credible, it being too numerous a body for so few
persons to baptize; and when Peter had preached to Cornelius and his family, he
caused the brethren that came along with him to baptize them; and whether Hands
had been imposed on them or no, is not certain: And in pursuance of the
instance of Ananias, and the other probabilities, the Doctors of the Church
have declared their opinions (...), In cases of necessity, a lay-person may
baptize. So Tertullian in his book of Baptism, Alioqui and Laicis jus est
baptizandi. Quod enim ex aequo accipitur, Dial. adv. Lucifer.
ex aequo dari potest. The reason is also urged by S. Hierom to the same
purpose, only requiring that the Baptizer be a Christian, supposing whatsoever
they have received they may also give; but because the reason concludes not,
because (as themselves believe) a Presbyter cannot collate his Presbyterate, it
must therefore rest only upon their bare authority; if it shall be thought
strong enough to bear the weight Can. 30.
of the contrary reasons. And the Fathers in the Council of Eliberis
determined, Peregre navigantes, aut si Ecclesia in proximo non fuerit, posse
Ruffin. lib. 10. c. 14.
fidelem, qui lavacrum suum integrum habet, nec sit bigamus, baptizare in
necessitate infirmitatis positum Catechumenum; it a ut si supervixerit, ad
Episcopum eum producat, ut per manus impositionem proficere possit. The Synod,
held at Alexandria under Alexander their Bishop, approved the baptism of the
children by Athanasius, being but a boy; and the Nicene Fathers ratifying the
baptism made by heretics (amongst whom they could not but know in some cases,
there was no true Priesthood or legitimate ordination) must by necessary
consequence suppose baptism to be dispensed effectually by lay-persons. And S.
Hierome is plain, Baptizare, si necessitas cogat, scimus etiam licere Laicis;
the same almost with the Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage, Mulier
baptizare non praesumat Can. mulier de consecr. did. li. 4. sent. did. 6.
nisi necessitate cogente: though, by the way, these words of [cogente
necessitate] are not in the Canon, but thrust in by Gratian and Peter Lombard.
And of the same opinion is S. Ambrose, or he who under his name wrote the
Commentaries upon the fourth to the Ephesians, Epist. 1.
P. Gelasius, Lib. 2. Contr. Epist. Parmen. c. 13.
S. August. and Lib. 2. de divin ^ffic. 4.
Isidor, and generally all the Scholars after their master.

But against this doctrine were all the African Bishops for about 150 Basils
Canonical Epistle to Amphilochius, where he relates their reason, and refutes
it not. And however Firmilian and S. Cyprian might be deceived in the thinking
heretics quite lost their orders; yet in this they were untouched, that
although their supposition was questionable, yet their superstructure was not
meddled with, viz. That if they had been Lay persons, their Baptizations were
null and invalid.

I confess, the opinion has been very generally taken up in these last ages of
the Church, and almost with a Nemine contradicente; the first Nicephorus of C.
P. If the own father baptizes the child, or any other Christian man, it is no
sin. Lib. 2. Contr. Epist. Parmen. c. 13.
S. Augustine is almost of another mind, and si Laicus necessitate (...).
compulsus baptismum dederit, nescio an pie quisquam dixerit, Baptismum esse
repetendum: Nulla enim cogente necessitate si fiat, alieni muneris usurpatio
est; si autem necessitas urgeat, aut nullum, aut veniale delictum est. And of
this mind are all they, who by frequent using of that saying have made it
almost proverbial, Factum valet, fieri non debet. If they do not sin, then
women and Laymen have as much right from Christ to baptize as Deacons or
Presbyters; then they may upon the same stock and right do it as Deacons do,
for if a Bishop was present it was not lawful for Deacons, as is expressly
affirmed by S. Ignatius in his Epistle to Hare. 19.
Heron the Deacon; and S. Epiphanius with the same words denies a jus
baptizandi, to women and to Deacons, and both of them affirm it to be proper to
Bishops. Further yet, Tertullian and S. Hierom deny a power to De bapt. adv.
Lucifer.
Presbyters to do it without Episcopal dispensation. Now if Presbyters and
Deacons have this power only by leave and in certain cases, then it is more
than the women have: only that they are fitter persons to be entrusted with the
deputation; a less necessity will devolve it upon Presbyters than upon Deacons,
and upon Deacons than Laymen; and a less yet will cast it upon Laymen than
women: and this difference is in respect of humane order and positive
constitution, but in the nature of the thing according to this doctrine all
persons are equally receptive of it: And therefore to baptize is no part of the
Grace of Orders, no fruit of the holy Ghost, but a work which may be done by
all, and at some times must: and if baptism may, then it will be hard to keep
all the other rites from the common inrodes, and then the whole office will
perish.

But if Lay-persons baptizing, though in case of necessity, do sin, as S.
Augustine seems to say they do, then it is certain, Christ never gave

3. And indeed the pretense of cases of necessity may do much toward Eurip.
persons having the use of reason God has provided a remedy that no lay-person
should have need to baptize a Catechumen; for his votum or desire of baptism
shall serve his turn. And it will be unimaginable that God has made no
provision for infants, and yet put it upon them in many cases with equal
necessity, which without breach of a divine institution cannot be supplied.

4. If a Lay-person shall baptize, whether or no shall the person baptized rem
Sacramenti, or be the minister of sacramental grace, is no where revealed in
Scripture, and is against the De captivit. Babyl. c. de ordine, and in l. de
instituendis ministris ad Senatum Pragensem, in l. de missa abrogand^, in l. de
notis Ecclesia.
Analogy of the Gospel; for the verbum reconciliationis, all the whole
ministry of reconciliation is entrusted to the Priest, Nobis, (says S. Paul)
to us who are Ambassadors. And what difference is there, if cases of necessity
be pretended in the defect of other ministeries, but that they also may be
invaded? and cases of necessity may by other men also be numbered in the other
sacrament: and they have done so; and I know, who said that no man must
consecrate the Sacrament of the Lords Supper but he that is lawfully called,
except there be a case of necessity; and that there may be a case of necessity
for the blessed Sacrament, there needs no other testimony than the Nicene
Council; which calls the Sacrament in the article of death, (...), viaticum,
the most necessary provision for our journey: and if a Lay-person Absolves,
there is as much promise of the validity of the one as the other, unless it be
said, that there may be absolute necessity of Baptism, but not so of
Absolution; which the maintainers of the other opinion are not apt to profess.
And therefore S. Augustine did not know whether baptism administered by a
lay-person be to be repeated or no; Nescio anpie quisquam dixerit, he knew not;
neither do I. But Simon of Thessalonica is confident, (...), No man baptizes
but he that is in holy orders. The baptism is null: I cannot say so; nor can I
say, (...); Let it be received. Only I offer this to consideration; if a Deacon
can do no ministerial act with effect, but a lay-person may do the same with
effect upon the person suscipient, What is that supernatural grace and inherent
and indelible character which a Deacon has received in his ordination? If a
Deacon can do no supernatural act which were void and null, if done by him that
is not a Deacon, he has no character, no spiritual inherent power: and that he
is made the ordinary minister of it, is for order sake: but he that can do the
same thing, has the same power and ability. By this ground a Lay-person and a
Deacon are not distinguished by any inherent character, and therefore they who
understand the spiritual powers and effects of ordination in the sense and
expression of an inherent and indelible character, will find some difficulty in
allowing the effect of a lay-baptism.

But I consider that the instances of Scripture brought for the lawfulness of
lay-administration, if they had no particular exceptation, yet are Peter's
deputing the brethren who came with him to Cornelius to baptize his family, is
nothing to our purpose, and best answers it self: for either they were of the
Clergy, who came with them; or else lay-persons may baptize by the right of an
ordinary deputation, without a case of necessity; for here was none: Saint
Peter might have done it himself.

And as for Ananias, he was one of the Seventy two: and if that be nothing, yet
he was called to that ministration about Paul, as Paul himself Ananias tells
him, he was sent to him that he might lay his hands on him that he might
receive the holy Ghost: and to do that, was more than Philip could do; though
he was a Deacon, and in as great a necessity, as this was: And yet besides all
this, this was not a case of necessity, unless there was never a Presbyter or
Deacon in all Damascus, or that God durst not trust any of them with Paul, but
only Ananias, or that Paul could not stay longer without baptism, as many
thousand converts did in descending ages.

And for the other conjecture it is not considerable at all: for the Apostles
might take three or four days time to baptize the three thousand: The same day
about three thousand were added to the Church; then they were added to the
Church, that is, by virtue and efficacy of that Sermon, who it may be,
considered some-while of S. Peter's discourse, and gave up their names upon
mature deliberation and positive conviction. But it is not said, they were
baptized the same day; and yet it was not impossible for the twelve Apostles to
do it in one day, if they had thought it reasonable.

For my own particular, I wish we would make no more necessities than God made,
but that we leave the administration of the Sacraments

The Church of England has determined nothing in this particular, Edward the
Sixth, a Rubric was inserted permitting Midwives to baptize in cases of
extreme danger, it was left out in the second Liturgies, which is at least an
argument she intended to leave the question undetermined; if at least that
omission of the clause, was not also a rejection of the Article: Only this
Epiphanius objects against the Marcionites, and Tertullian against the
Gnostics, that they did permit women to baptize: I cannot say De praescript.
har^s. 42.
but they made it an ordinary employment, and a thing besides the case of
necessity: I know not whether they did or no. But if they be permitted, it is
considerable whither the example may drive: Petulans mulier quae usurpavit
docere, an non utique and tingendi jus sibi pariet? Tertullian de baptismo.
that I may turn Tertullians Thesis into an Interrogative. The women usurp the
office of teaching, if also they may be permitted to baptize, they may in time
arrogate and invade other ministeries; or if they do not, by reason of the
natural and political incapacity of their persons, yet others may upon the same
stock: for necessity consists not in a Mathematical point, but has latitude
which may be expounded to inconvenience; and that I say truth and fear
reasonably, I need no other testimony than the Greek Church, for amongst them a
[(...)] the absence of the Priest is necessity enough for a woman to baptize;
for so says Tractat. de sacramento cap. de baptismo, (...).
Gabriel Philadelphiensis. In the absence of a Priest, a Christian Laick may
baptize, whether it be man or woman, either may do it; and whether that be not
only of danger in the sequel, but in it self a very dissolution of all
discipline, I leave it to the Church of England to determine as for her own
particular, that at least the Sacrament be left entirely to Clerical
dispensation according to divine commandment.

Onething I offer to consideration; that since the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven be most notoriously and signally used in Baptism, in in reconciling
penitents, and admitting them to the communion of the faithful; it may be of
ill consequence, to let them be usurped by hands to whom they were not
consigned. Certain it is, S. Peter used his Keys, and opened the Kingdom of
Heaven first, when he said, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, Acts 2. 38.
and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. However as to the main
question, we have not only the universal Doctrine of Christendom, but also
express authority and commission in Scripture, sending out Apostles and
Apostolical men, persons of choice and special designation to baptize all
Nations, and to entertain them into the services and institution of the holy
Jesus.

SECT. V.
I Shall instance but once more, but it is in the most solemn, sacred and
divinest mystery in our Religion; that in which the Clergy in their stand
between God and the people, and do fulfill a special, and incomprehensible
ministry, which the Angels themselves do look into with admiration, to which
the people if they come without fear, cannot come without sin; and this of so
sacred and reserved mysteriousness, that but few have dared to offer at with
unconsecrated hands: some have. But the Eucharist is the fullness of all the
mysteriousness of our Religion; and the Clergy, when they officiate here, are
most truly in the phrase of Saint Paul, Dispensatores mysteriorum Dei,
dispensers of the great mysteries of the Kingdom. For (to use the 1 Cor. 4. 1.
words of Saint Cyprian) Jesus Christ is our high Priest, and himself become
our Sacrifice which he finished upon the Cross in a real performance, and now
Ad Caecil. Ep. 63. St Jesus Christus dominus and Deus (...) ipse est (...)
sacerdos Dei Patris, and sacrificium Patri s^ipsum primus obtulis, and hoc
fieri in sui commemorationem praecepit; utique ille sacerdos vice Christi vere
fungitur, qui id quod Christus fecit, imitatur: and sacrificium verum and
plenum tunc offert in Ecclesia Deo Patri, si incipat (...) secund^m quod ipsum
Christum vid^at obtul^^se.
in his office of Mediatorship makes intercession for us by a perpetual
exhibition of himself, of his own person in Heaven, which is a continual
actually represented argument to move God to mercy to all that believe in, and
obey the Holy Jesus.

Now Christ did also establish a number of select persons, to be Ministers of
this great Sacrifice, finished upon the Cross; that they also should the action
and suffering of the great Priest; and by way of prayers and impetration,
offering up that action in behalf of the people, (...), ^rat. 11.
(as Gregory Nazianzen expresses it) sending up Sacrifices to be laid upon the
Altar in Heaven, that the Church might be truly united unto Christ their Head,
and, in the way of their ministry, may do what he does in Heaven; for he
exhibits the sacrifice, that is, himself, actually and presentially in Heaven:
the Priest on earth commemorates the same, and by his prayers represents it to
God in behalf of the whole Catholic Church; presentially too, by another and
more mysterious way of presence; but both Christ in Heaven, and his Ministers
on Earth do actuate that Sacrifice, and apply it to its purposed design by
praying to God in the virtue and merit of that Sacrifice; Christ himself, in a
high and glorious manner; the Ministers of his Priesthood (as it becomes
Ministers) humbly, sacramentally, and according to the energy of humane
advocation and intercession; This is the sum and great mysteriousness of
Christianity, and is now to be proved.

This is expressly described in Scripture; that part concerning Christ is the
Doctrine of S. Paul, who disputes largely concerning Christ's Priesthood; that
Christ is a Priest for ever; he has therefore an unchangeable Priesthood,
because he continues for ever, and he lives for ever to make intercession for
us; this he does as Priest, and therefore it must be by offering a Sacrifice,
[for every high Priest is ordained to offer Gifts and Heb. 7. 23, etc. And 8.
ver. 2, 3, etc.
Sacrifices] and therefore it is necessary he also have something to offer, as
long as he is a Priest, that is, for ever, till the consummation of all things;
since therefore he has nothing new to offer, and something he must continually
offer, it is evident, he offers himself as the medium of advocation, and the
instance and argument of a prevailing intercession; and this he calls a more
excellent Ministery] and by it, Jesus is a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of
the true Tabernacle, that is, He, as our high Priest officiates in Heaven, in
the great office of a Mediator, in the merit and power of his Death and
Resurrection. Now what Christ does always in a proper and most glorious
manner, the Ministers of the Gospel also do in theirs: commemorating the
Sacrifice upon the Cross, giving thanks, and celebrating a perpetual Eucharist
for it, and by declaring the death of Christ, and praying to God in the virtue
of it, for all the Members of the Church, and all persons capable; it is in
genere orationis a Sacrifice, and an instrument of propitiation, as all holy
prayers are in their several proportions.

And this was by a precept of Christ; Hoc facite, Do this in remembrance of me.
Now this precept is but twice reported of in the new Paul thus represents it;
[Take eat -- This do in remembrance of me] plainly referring this precept to
all that are to eat and drink the Symbols: for they also do in their manner
enunciate, declare, or represent the Lords death till he come. And Saint Paul
prosecutes it with instructions particular to the (...) to them that do
communicate, as appears in the succeeding cautions against unworthy
manducation, and for due preparation to its reception. But S. Luke reports it
plainly to another purpose, [and he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it,
and gave it unto them, saying: This is my body which is given for you; Hoc
facite, This] do in remembrance of me: [This] cannot but relate to accepit,
gratias egit, fregit, distribuit: Hoc facite. Here was no manducation
expressed, and therefore Hoc facite concerns the Apostles in the capacity of
Ministers; not as receivers, but as Consecrators and givers; and if the
institution had been represented in one scheme without this mysterious
distinction, and provident separation of employment, we had been eternally in a
cloud, and have needed a new light to guide us; but now the Spirit of God has
done it in the very first fountains of Scripture.

And this being the great mystery of Christianity, and the only remanent
Express of Christ's Sacrifice on earth, it is most consonant to the from and
above the other parts of our Religion.

Thus also the Church of God has for ever understood it without any variety of
sense or doubtfulness of distinguishing opinions. It was the great Justin
Martyr giving the account of it to Antoninus Pius in his Oration to him; and it
will serve in stead of many; for it tells the Religion of the Christians in
this mystery, and gives a full account of all the Ceremony. (...) Vide etia^
Justin. i^ Apol. 2.
(...), etc. When the prayers are done, then is brought to the President of the
Brethren [the Priest] the Bread, and the Chalice of Wine mingled with Water;
which being received, he gives praise and glory to the Father of all things,
and presents them in the name of the Son and the Holy Spirit, and largely gives
thanks, that he has been pleased to give us these gifts: and when he has
finished the prayers and thanksgiving, all the people that is present, with a
joyful acclamation, say Amen. Which when it is done by the Presidents and
people, those which amongst us are called Deacons and Ministers, distribute to
every one that is present, that they may partake of him, in whom the thanks
were presented, the Eucharist, Bread, Wine, and Water; and may bear it to the
absent. Moreover this nourishment is by us called the Eucharist, which it is
lawful for none to partake, but to him who believes our Doctrine true, and is
washed in the Laver for the remission of sins, and regeneration, and that lives
so as Christ delivered. For we do not take it as common bread and common drink;
but as by the Word of God Jesus Christ the Savior of the world was made flesh,
and for our salvation sake, had flesh and blood: after the same manner also we
are taught that this nourishment, in which by the prayers of his word, which is
from him the food in which thanks are given, or the consecrated food by which
our flesh and blood by mutation or change are nourished, is the flesh and blood
of the incarnate Jesus. For the Apostles in their Commentaries which they
wrote, which are called the Gospels, so delivered, as Jesus commanded. For when
he had given thanks and taken Bread, he said, Do this in remembrance of me;
This is my body; And likewise taking the Chalice, and having given thanks, he
said, [This is my blood,] and that he gave it to them alone.] This one
Testimony I reckon as sufficient: who please to see more, may observe the
tradition full, testified and entire, in Epist. ad (...).
Ignatius, Lib. 1. c. 31. and lib. 8. c. ult.
Clemens Romanus, or whoever wrote the Apostolical Constitutions in his name,
De. praescript.
Tertullian, Lib. 1. Ep 2. and 9. and l. 3. Epist. 15.
S. Cyprian, Apol. 2. cum de Ischria rationem reddit eum ^^lice sacro uti non
potuisse. and 83. in Matthew. and Hom. 6. ad pop. Antioch. 150. 9. 2.
S. Athanasius, Haeres. 79.
Epiphanius, Lib. 2. de bapt. c. 8.
S. Basil, Lib. 3. and 6. de sac^rd. Homil. 51. and 85. ad Evagrium and ad
Hedito.
S. Chrysostom (almost every where,) Con^r. Lucifer. and Ep. 1. ad (...).
S. Hierom, Lib. 20. de Civ. c. 10.
S. Augustine; and indeed we cannot look in vain, into any of the old Writers:
The sum of whose Doctrine in this particular, I shall represent in the words of
the most ancient of them, S. Ignatius, saying, that he is worse than an Infidel
that offers to officiate about the holy Altar, unless he be a Bishop or a
Priest.

And certainly, he could upon no pretense have challenged the Appellative of
Christian, who had dared either himself to invade the holy blasphemous, they
count the blood of the Lord (...), (as S. Paul calls it, in imitation of the
words of institution) the blood of the Covenant, or New Testament, a profane
or common thing; they discern not the Lord's Heb. 10. 20.
body; they know not that the Bread that is broken is the communication of
Christ's body: But if it be a holy, separate, or divine and mysterious thing,
who can make it (ministerially, I mean) and consecrate or sublime it from
common and ordinary Bread, but a consecrate, separate, and sublimed person? It
is to be done either by a natural power, or by a supernatural. A natural cannot
hallow a thing in order to God; and they only have a supernatural, who have
derived it from God, in order to this ministration; who can show that they are
taken up into the lot of that Deaconship, which is the type and representment
of that excellent ministry of the true Tabernacle where Jesus himself does the
same thing, in a higher and more excellent manner.

This is the great Secret of the Kingdom, to which in the Primitive Church,
many who yet had given up their names to Christ by designation, Catechumeni,
the Audientes, the Poenitentes, Neophytes, and Children: and the ministry of
it was not only reserved for sacred persons, but also performed with so much
mysterious secrecy, that many were not permitted so much as to see. This is
that Rite, in which the Priest intercedes for, and blesses the people; offering
in their behalf, not only their prayers, but applying the Sacrifice of Christ
to their prayers, and representing them with glorious advantages, and titles of
acceptance, which because it was so excellent, celestial, sacred, mystical and
supernatural, it raised up the persons too; that the ministeriael Priesthood in
the Church, might, according to the nature of all great employments, pass an
excellency and a value upon the Ministers.

And therefore according to the natural Reason of Religion, and the devotion of
all the world, the Christians, because they had the regale Sacerdotium, a royal
Priesthood, so S. Peter; which although it be spoken in general 1 Pet. 2. 9.
of the Christian Church, and, in an improper large sense, is verified of the
people; yet it is so to be expounded, as that parallel place of the Books of
Moses, from whence the expression is borrowed, Ye shall be a Exodus 19. 3.
Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation; which plainly by the sense and Analogy
of the Mosaic Law, signifies a Nation blessed by God with Rites and Ceremonies
of a separate Religion; a Kingdom, in which Priests are appointed by God, a
Kingdom, in which nothing is more honorable than the Priesthood; for it is
certain, the Nation was famous in all the world, for an honorable Priesthood;
and yet the people were not Priests in any sense, but of a violent Metaphor.
And therefore the Christian Ministry having greater privileges, and being
honored with attrectation of the body and blood of Christ, and offices serving
to a better Covenant, may with greater argument be accounted excellent,
honorable and royal; and all the Church be called a royal Priesthood, the
denomination being given to the whole, from the most excellent part; because
they altogether make one body under Christ the head, the medium of the union
being the Priests, the collectors of the Church, and instrument of adunation;
and reddendo singula singulis, dividing to each his portion of the expression;
the people is a peculiar people, the Clergy a holy Priesthood: and all in
conjunction, and for several excellencies a chosen Nation: so that (...) is the
same with (...), the Priesthood of the Kingdom, that is, the ministry of the
Gospel: for in the new Testament, the Kingdom] signifies the Gospel: and (...)
is the same with (...) Kingly, is of, or belonging to the Gospel: for therefore
it is observable, it is not (...) but (...), not well rendered by the vulgar
Latin regale sacerdotium; as if Kingly were the Appellative or Epithete of
this Priesthood; it is regium, a Priesthood appertaining to the Kingdom of the
Gospel; and the Priest being enumerated distinctly from the people, the Priests
of the Kingdom, and the people of the Kingdom, are all holy and chosen; but in
their several manner: the Priests of the Kingdom, those, the people of the
Kingdom, these; to bring or design a spiritual Sacrifice, the Priest to offer
it; or all together to sacrifice; the Priest by his proper Ministry, the
people by their assent, conjunction and assistance, chosen to serve God, not
only in their own forms, but under the ministration of an honorable Priesthood.

And in all the descent of Christian Religion it was indeed honorable, (...),
says Chrysostom, the Christian Priesthood does its ministry and is perfected
Lib. 3. de sacer: Apud. Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. c. 25. De script. in Jacob.
Haeres. 78.
on earth, but has the beauty, order, and excellency of the heavenly hosts: so
that I shall not need to take notice of the Lamina aurea which Polycrates
reports S. John to have worn in token of his royal Priesthood, a Wreath of
Gold; (so also did Saint James Bishop of Jerusalem, as Saint Hierom and
Epiphanius report) nor the exemption of the Clergy from Tribute, their
authority with the people, their great donatives and titles of secular
advantage, these were accidental to the Ministry* and relied upon the favor
of Princes, and devotion of the people; and if they had been more, yet are less
than the honors God had bestowed upon it; for certainly, there is not a
greater degree of power in the world, than to remit and retain sins, and to
consecrate the Sacramental Symbols into the mysteriousness of Christ's body and
blood; nor a greater honor, than that God in Heaven should ratify what the
Priest does on earth; and should admit him to handle the Sacrifice of the
world, and to present the same which in Heaven is presented by the eternal
Jesus. (...),
(...)
(...).


So Gregory Nazianzen describes the honor and mysteriousness of the Priest's
power: They minister the spiritual and unbloody sacrifice, they are honorable
Guardians of souls, they bear the work of God in their hands. And S. Hierom
speaking of these words of S. Paul, I am ordained a Preacher and an Apostle:
Quod Paulus ait, [Apostolus Jesus Christi] tale mihi videtur ^m. 1. 3.
quasi dixisset, Praefectus praetorio Augusti Caesaris, Magister exercitus
Tiberii Imperatoris. And a little after, Grandem inter Christianos sibi
vindicans dignitatem, Apostolorum se Christi titulo praenotavit, ut ex ipsa
lecturos nominis authoritate deterreret, indicans omnes qui Christo crederent,
debere esse sibi subjectos. And therefore S. Chrysostom says, it is the trick
of Heretics, not to give to Bishops titles of their eminency and honor, which
God has vouchsafed them: Ut Diabolus, ita etiam quilibet facit haereticus
vehementissimus in tempore persecutionis, loquens cum Pontifice, nec eum vocat
Pontificem, nec Archiepiscopum, nec Religiosissimum, nec sanctum, sed quid?
Reverentia tua etc. nomina illi adducit communia, ejus negans authoritatem:
Diabolus hoc tunc, fecit in Deo: It is (...) and (...), A separating and
purifying order of men, so Dionysius calls it: but Nazianzen speaks greater and
more glorious words yet, and yet what is no more than a sober truth: for he
calls the Priest (...) Orat. 1.
(...) He stands with Angels, and is magnified with Archangels; he sends
Sacrifices to a celestial Altar, and is consecrated in the Priesthood of
Christ, a divine person, and an instrument of making others so too. I shall add
no more as to this particular. The express precepts of 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 13.
17. 2 Cor. 2. 9. 1 These. 5. 12. Gal. 6. 1.
God in Scripture are written in great characters, there is a double honor to
be given to the Ecclesiastical Rulers. Rulers that also labor in the word and
doctrine: There is obedience due to them, obedience in all things, and
estimation, and love, (...), very abundantly; esteem such very highly for their
works sake; a communicating to them in all (...).
good things; and their offices are described to be great, separate, busy,
eminent and profitable, they are Rulers, Presidents, set over us in the Lord,
taking care for us, laboring in doctrine, spiritual persons, restorers of them
that were overtaken in a fault, curates of souls, such as must give an account
for them, the salt, the light of the world, shepherds; and much more,
signifying work, and rule, and care, honor. But next to the words of
Scripture, there can no more be said concerning the honor of the Sacred Order
of the Clergy, than is said by Saint Chrysostom in his books De sacerdotio,
and Saint Ambrose, De dignitate sacerdotali; and no greater thing can be
supposed communicated to men than to be the Ministers of God, in the great
conveyances of grace, and instruments of God in the pardon of sins, in the
consecration of Christ's Body and (...).
Blood, in the guidance and conduct of souls. And this was the style of the
Church, calling Bishops and Priests according to their respective capacity,
Stewards of the grace of God, leaders of the blind, a light of them that sit in
darkness, instructors of the ignorant, teachers of babes, stars in the world,
amongst whom ye shine as lights in the world, and that is Scripture too; stars
in Christ's right hand, lights set upon the Candlesticks: And now supposing
these premises, if Christendom had not paid proportionable esteem to them,
they had neither known how to value Religion, or the mysteries of Christianity.
But that all Christendom Can. 14. (...).
ever did pay the greatest reverence to the Clergy and Religious veneration, is
a certain argument that in Christian Religion the distinction of the Clergy
from the Laity, is supposed as a praecognitum, a principle of the institution.
I end this with the words of the seventh General Council: It is manifest to all
the world, that in the Priesthood, there is order and distinction; and to
observe the Ordinations and Elections of the Priesthood with strictness and
severity, is well pleasing to God.

SECT. VI.
AS soon as God began to constitute a Church, and fix the Priesthood, which
before was very ambulatory, and dispensed into all Families, but ever
officiated by the Major domo, God gives the power, and designs the person. And
therefore Moses consecrated Aaron, agitatus a Deo consecrationis Principe,
says Dionysius, Moses performed the external rites Eccles. Hierarch.
of designation, but God was the Consecrator, (...). Moses appointed Aaron to
the Dionys. ibid.
Priesthood, and gave him the Order, but it was only as the Minister and Deputy
of God, under God the chief consecrator. And no man takes upon him this
honor, but he that was called of God, as was Aaron, says S. Paul. For in
every Priesthood, God designed and appointed the Ministry, and collates a
power, or makes the person gracious: either gives him a spiritual ability of
doing something which others have not, or if he be only employed in praying and
presenting Sacrifices of Beasts for the people; yet that such a person should
be admitted to a nearer address, and in behalf of the people, must depend upon
God's acceptance, and therefore upon divine constitution: for there can be no
reason given in the nature of the thing, why God will accept the intermediation
of one man for many, or why this man, more than another, who possibly has no
natural or acquired excellency beyond many of the people, except what God
himself makes, after the constitution of the person. If a spiritual power be
necessary to the ministration, it is certain, none can give it but the fountain
and the principle of the Spirits emanation. Or if the graciousness and aptness
of the person be required, that also being arbitrary, preternatural and chosen,
must derive from the Divine election: For God cannot be prescribed unto by us,
whom he shall hear, and whom he shall entertain in a more immediate address,
and freer intercourse.

And this is divinely taught us by the example of the high Priest himself: who,
because he derived all power from his Father, and all his Priest and Mediator,
was also personally chosen and sent, and took not the honor but as it
descended on him from God, that the honor and the power, the ability, and the
ministry, might derive from the same fountain. Christ did not glorify Heb. 5.
5.
himself to become high Priest. Honor may be deserved by our selves, but
always comes from others: and because no greater honor than to be ordained
for men in things pertaining to God, every man must say as our blessed High
Priest said of himself: If I honor my self, my honor is nothing: it is God
that honors me: For Christ being the Fountain of Evangelical Ministry, is
the measure of our dispensations, and the Rule of Ecclesiastical Economy: and
therefore we must not arrogate any power from our selves, or from a less
authority than our Lord and Master did: and this is true and necessary in the
Gospel, rather than in any Ministry or Priesthood that ever was, because of
the collation of so many excellent and supernatural abilities which derive from
Christ upon his Ministers, in order to the work of the Gospel.

And the Apostles understood their duty in this particular, as in all things
else; for when they had received all this power from above, they a divine grace
in a humane ministry, and that although (...) (...).
(...) yet (...), that is, He that is ordained by men, yet receives his power
from God; not at all by himself; and Heb. 5.
from no man as from the fountain of his power: And this, I say, the Apostles
were careful to consign in the first instance of Ordination in the case of
Matthias, Thou Lord, show which of these two, thou have chosen: God Acts 1. 24.
was the Elector, and they the Ministers; and this being at the first beginning
of Christianity, in the very first designation of an Ecclesiastical person, was
of sufficient influence into the Religion for ever after; and taught us to
derive all clerical power from God; and therefore by such means and Ministeries
which himself has appointed, but in no hand to be invaded, or surprised in the
entrance, or polluted in the execution.

This descended in the succession of the Churches Doctrine for ever. Receive
the Holy Ghost, said Christ to his Apostles, when he enabled them Priestly
power; and S. Paul to the Bishops of Asia said, The Holy Ghost has made you
Bishops or Overseers; because no mortal man, no Angel, or Chrysostom. lib. 3. de
sacerdot. Quippe non mortalis quispiam non Angelus non Archangelus, non alia
quaevis creata potentia, sed ipse Paracletus ordinem ejusmodi disposuit.
Archangel, nor any other created power, but the Holy Ghost alone has
constituted this Order, says S. Chrysostom. And this very thing, besides the
matter of fact, and the plain donation of the power by our blessed Savior, is
intimated by the words of Christ other-where; Pray ye therefore the Lord of the
Vineyard, that he will send Laborers into his Harvest. Now his mission is not
only a designing of the persons, but enabling them with power; because he never
commands a work, but he gives abilities to its performance: and therefore still
in every designation of the person, by whatsoever ministry it be done, either
that ministry is by God constituted to be the ordinary means of conveying the
abilities, or else God himself ministers the grace immediately. It must of
necessity come from him some way or other. (...)
(...) --


Saint James has adopted it into the Family of Evangelical truths; (...), and
therefore (...), Every perfect James 1. 17.
gift, and therefore every perfecting gift, which in the style of the Church is
the gift of Ordination, is from above, the gifts of perfecting the persons of
the Hierarchy, and ministry Evangelical; which thing is further intimated by
Saint Paul. Now he which stablisheth us with you [(...)] in order 2 Cor. 1. 21.
to Christ [and Christian Religion] is God, and that his meaning be understood
concerning the (...) of establishing him in the ministry, he adds (...) and he
which anointeth us is Verse. 22.
God, and has sealed us with an earnest of his Spirit [unction] and
consignation] and [establishing by the holy Spirit:] the very style of the
Church for Ordination (...), it was said of Christ, Him has the Father sealed,
that is, ordained him, the Priest and Prophet of the John 6. 27.
world, and this he plainly spoke as their Apostle and President in Religion,
(...), etc.
Not as Lords over your faith, but fellow-workers; he spoke of himself and
Timothy, concerning whose Ministry in order to them, he now gives account:
(...), God anoints the Priest, and God consigns him with the holy Ghost; that
is the principale quaesitum, that is the main question.

And therefore the Author of the Books of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, giving the
rationale of the Rites of Ordination, says that the Priest is That the holy
man that consecrates, is but the proclaimer of the divine election, but not by
any humane power or proper grace does he give the perfect gift and consecrate
the person. And N="*" (...). In Orat. in laudem sui patris. (...).
Nazianzen, speaking of the rites of Ordination has this expression, with
which the Divine grace is proclaimed: (And Billius renders it ill by
superinvocatur.) He makes the power of consecration to be declarative; which
indeed is a lesser expression of a fuller power, but it signifies as much as
the whole comes to; for it must mean, God does transmit the grace [at] or [by]
or [in] the exterior ministry, and the Minister is [(...) a declarer] not by
the word of his mouth, distinct from the work of his hand: But by the
ministry, he declares the work of God, then wrought in the person suscipient.
And thus in absolution the Priest declares the act of God pardoning, not that
he is a Preacher only of the pardon upon certain conditions, but that he is not
the principal agent; but by his ministry declares and ministers the effect and
work of God. And this interpretation is clear in the instance of the blessed
Sacrament, where not only the Priest but the people do (...) declare the Lords
death, not by a Homily, but by virtue of the mystery which they participate.
And in the instance of this present question, the consecrator does declare
power to descend from God upon the person to be ordained.

But thus the whole action being but a ministry, is a declaration of the
effect and grace of Gods vouch safing; and because God does it not immediately,
declares, that is, he does not do it by collation of his own grace or power,
but the grace of God and power from above.

And this Doctrine we read also in S. Cyprian toward the end of his Epistle to
Cornelius; ut Dominus qui Sacerdotes sibi in Ecclesia sua eligere Epist. 45.
and constituere dignatur, electos quoque and constitutos sua voluntate atque
opitulatione tueatur: It is a good prayer of Ordination, [that the Lord who
vouchsafes to choose and consecrate Priests in his Church, would also be pleased
by his aid and grace to defend them whom he has so chosen and appointed] Homo
manum imponit, and Deus largitur gratiam: Sacerdos imponit supplicem dextram,
Deus benedicit potenti dextra, Dedignit. Sacer. c. 5. and in comment. in 1.
Tom. c. 2. and in 1 Cor. 12. in illud [Divisiones gratiarum.]
says Saint Ambrose, Man imposes his hand but God give the grace: the Bishop
lays on his hand of prayer, and God blesses with his hand of power. The effect
of this discourse is plain; the grace and power that enables men to minister in
the mysteries of the Gospel is so wholly from God, that whosoever assumes it
without Gods warrant, and besides his way, ministers with a vain, sacrilegious,
and ineffective hand, save only that he disturbs the appointed order, and does
himself a mischief.

SECT. VII.
BY this ordination the persons ordained are made Ministers of the Gospel,
Stewards of all its mysteries, the Light, the Salt of the sanctification of the
person in both senses; that is, 1. A separation of him to do certain mysterious
actions of religion: which is that sanctification by which Jeremy, and S. John
the Baptist were sanctified from their mothers wombs. 2. It is also a
sanctification of the person, by the increasing or giving respectively to the
capacity of the suscipient, such graces as make the person meet to speak to
God, to pray for the people, to handle the mysteries, and to have influence
upon the cure.

The first sanctification of a designation of the person; which must of God:
because it is a nearer approach to him, a ministry of his graces, which
without his appointment, a man must not, cannot any more do, than a messenger
can carry pardon to a condemned person, which his Prince never sent. But this
separation of the person, is not only a naming of the man, (for so far the
separation of the person may be previous to the ordination: for so it was in
the ordinations of Matthias, and the seven Deacons; The Apostles (...) they
appointed two, before God chose by lot; and the whole Church chose the seven
Deacons before the Apostles imposed hands;) but the separation, or this first
sanctification of the person, is a giving him a power to do such offices, which
God has appointed to be done to him and for the people, which we may clearly
see and understand in the Job 42. 8.
instance of Job and his friends: For when God would be entreated in behalf of
Eliphaz and his companions, he gave order that Job should make the address; Go
to my servant, he shall pray for you, and him will I accept; this separation of
a person for the offices of advocation, is the same thing which I mean by this
first sanctification; God did it, and gave him a power and authority to go to
him, and put him into a place of trust and favor about him, and made him a
Minister of the Sacrifice, which is a power and eminency above the persons for
whom he was to sacrifice, and a power or grace from God to be in nearness to
him. This I suppose to be the great argument for the necessity of separating a
certain order of men for Ecclesiastical ministeries: And it relies upon these
propositions. 1. All power of ordination descends from God, and he it is who
sanctifies and separates the person. 2. The Priest by God is separate to be the
gracious person to stand between him and the people. 3. He speaks the word of
God, and returns the prayers and duty of the people, and conveys the blessings
of God, by his prayer, and by his ministry. So that although every Christian
must pray and may be heard, yet there is a solemn person appointed to pray in
public: and though Gods Spirit is given to all that ask it, and the promises
of the Gospel are verified to all that obey the Gospel of Jesus, yet God has
appointed Sacraments and Solemnities, by which the promises and blessings are
ministered more solemnly, and to greater effects. All the ordinary devotions the
people may do alone; the solemn, ritual and public, the appointed Minister
only must do. And if any man shall say, because the Priest's ministry is by
prayer, every man can do it, and so, no need of him; by the same reason he may
say also that the Sacraments are unnecessary, because the same effect which
they produce, is also in some degree the reward of a private piety and
devotion. But the particulars are to be further proved and explicated as they
need.

Now what for illustration of this Article I have brought from the instance of
Job, is true in the Ministers of the Gospel, with the superaddition in the same
kind, for the power God has given is indeed mystical; but it is not like a
power operating by way of natural or proper operation; it is not vis but
facullas, not an inherent quality that issues out actions by way of direct
emanation, like natural or acquired habits, but it is a grace or favor done to
the person, and a qualification of him in genere politico, he receives a
politic, public, and solemn capacity, to intervene between God and the
people; and although it were granted that the people could do the external
work, or the action of Church ministeries, yet they are actions to no purpose;
they want the life and all the excellency, unless they be done by such persons
whom God has called to it, and by some means of his own has expressed his
purpose to accept them in such ministrations.

And this explication will easily be verified in all the particulars of the
Priests Power, because all the ministeries of the Gospel are in genere
orationis preaching, in which God speaks by his servants to the people) the
Minister by his office is an Intercessor with God, and the word used in
Scripture for the Priests officiating signifies his praying [(...)] as they
were ministering or doing their Liturgy, the work of their supplications and
intercession; and therefore the Apostles positively included all their whole
ministry in these two: [but we will give our selves to the word of God, and to
prayer;] the prayer of consecration, the prayer of absolution, the prayer of
imposition of hands: they had nothing else to do but pray and preach. And for
this reason it was, that the Apostles in a sense nearest to the letter, did
verify the precept of our Blessed Savior; Pray continually, that is, in all
the offices, acts, parts and ministeries of a daily Liturgy.

This is not to lessen the power, but to understand it: for the Priests
ministry is certainly the instrument of conveying all the blessings of the
intercession for us, and himself makes the sacrifice of the Cross, effectual to
the salvation and graces of his Church, by his prayer, since we are Ministers
of the same Priesthood, can there be a greater glory than to have our ministry
like to that of Jesus? not operating by virtue of a certain number of
syllables, but by a holy, solemn, determined and religious prayer, in the
several manners and instances of intercession: according to the analogy of all
the religions in the world, whose most solemn mystery, was their most solemn
prayer: I mean it in the matter of sacrificing; which also is true in the most
mysterious solemnity of Christianity in the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
which is hallowed and lifted up from the Cap. ult. de Eccles. Hier. (...).
common bread and wine by mystical prayers and solemn invocations of God. And
therefore S. Dionysius calls the forms of Consecration (...), prayers of
Consecration, and S. Cyril in his third mystagogique Catechism says the same.
The Eucharistical bread [after the invocation of the holy Ghost] is not any
longer common bread, but the body of Christ.

For although it be necessary that the words which in the Latin Church have
been for a long time called the words of Consecration Cabasil. mistakes;) so
also Im Eposit. Liturg.
in the most ancient Liturgies, they were not only read (...), or as a mere
narrative, but also with the form of an address, or invocation: Fiat hic panis
corpus Christi, and fiat hoc vinum sanguis Christi, Let this bread be made the
body of Christ, etc. So it is in S. James his Liturgy, S. Clements, S. Marks,
and the Greek Doctors: And in the very recitation of the words of institution,
the people ever used to answer [Amen] which intimates it to have been a
consecration in genere orationis, called by S. Paul benediction, or the bread
of blessing, and therefore S. Austin expounding those words of S. Paul [Let
prayers and supplications and intercessions and giving of thanks be made]
says, Eligo in his verbis hoc intelligere, Epist. 59. q. 5.
quod omnis vel paene omnis frequentat ecclesia, ut [precationes] accipiamus
dictas quas fecimus in celebratione sacramentorum antequam illud quod est in
Donini mensa accipiat benedici: [orationes] cum benedicitur, and ad
distribuendum comminuitur quam totam orationem paene omnis ecclesia Dominica
oratione concludit. The words and form of consecration he calls by the name of
[orationes] supplications; the prayers before the consecration [preces], and
all the whole action [oratio:] and this is according to the style and practice,
and sense of the whole Church or very near the whole. And S. Basil says, that
there is more necessary to consecration than the words recited by the Apostles
and by the Evangelists. Cap. 27. de Spi. S. (...).
The words of Invocation in the showing the bread of the Eucharist, and the cup
of blessing, Who of all the Saints have left to us? For we are not content with
those which the Apostle and the Evangelists mention: but before and after, we
say other words having great power toward the mystery, (...) which we have
received by tradition. These words set down in Scripture they retained as a
part of the mystery cooperating to the solemnity, manifesting the
signification of the rite, the glory of the change, the operation of the
Spirit, the death of Christ, and the memory of the sacrifice: but this great
work which all Christians knew to be done by the Holy Ghost, the Priest did
obtain by prayer and solemn invocation: according to the saying of Proclus of
C. P. speaking of the tradition of certain prayers used in the mysteries, and
indicted by the Apostles (as it was said,) but especially in S. James his
Liturgy: By these prayers (says he) they expected the coming of the holy
Ghost, that his divine presence might make the bread and the wine mixed with
water to become the body and blood of our blessed Savior.

And S. Justin Martyr very often calls the Eucharist, food made Sacramental and
Eucharistical by prayer: and Origin, Apol. 2. pro Christianis li. 8. contra
Cells. (...). Matthew. 15.
We eat the bread holy, (...).
and made the body of Christ by prayer: Verbo Dei and per obsecrationem
sanctificatus, bread sanctified by the word of God, and by prayer, viz. the
prayer of consecration: Prece mystica is S. Austins expression of it: Lib. 3.
de Tri. cap. 4.
Corpus Christi and sanguinem dicimus illud tantum, quod ex fructibus terrae
acceptum, and prece mystica consecratum rite sumimus. That only we call the
body and blood of Christ which we receive of the fruits of the earth, and being
consecrated by the mystical prayer, we take according to the rite. And S.
Hierom chides the insolency of some Deacons toward Priests upon this ground.
Quis patiatur ut m^^sarum and viduarum minister supra ^os si tumidius efferat,
ad quorum preces, Christi corpus sanguisque conficitur?
Who can suffer that the ministers of widows and tables should advance
themselves above those [at whose prayers] the body and blood of Christ are
exhibited or made presential? I add only the words of Damascen. Lib. 4. de
fide, cap. 14. (...). Vide Optat. Milevit. lib. 6. contra Parmenian.
The bread and wine are changed into the body and blood of Christ
supernaturally by invocation, and coming of the Holy Ghost.

Now whether this consecration by prayer, did mean to reduce the S. Cyprian
lib. st. c. ^^lt. Eusebi^^ Emissen. Sermon. 5. de Pascat.
they mean, the consecration was made by the other prayers annexed to the
narrative of the institution according to the several senses of the Greek and
Latin Church, yet still the ministry of the Priest, whether in the words of
consecration, or in the annexed prayers, is still by way of prayer. Nay further
yet, the whole mystery it self is operative in the way of prayer, says
Cassander, in behalf of the School and of all the Roman Church; and indeed S.
Ambrose, and others of the Fathers, in behalf of the De Iteration^ in consultat.
Church Catholic. Nunc Christus offertur, sed offertur quasi homo, quasi
recipiens passionem, and offert seipsum quasi Sacerdos ut peccata nostra
dimittat hic in imagine [ibi in veritate, ubi apud Patrem quasi advocatus
intervenit.] So that what the Priest does here, being an imitation of what
Christ does in Heaven, is by the sacrifice of a solemn prayer, and by the
representing the action and passion of Christ, which is effectual in the way of
prayer, and by the exhibiting it to God by a solemn prayer, and advocation, in
imitation of, and union with Christ. All the whole office is an office of
intercession, as it passes from the Priest to God, and from the people to God;
And then for that great mysteriousness, which is the sacramental change, which
is that which passes from God unto the people by the Priest, that also is
obtained and effected by way of prayer.

For since the holy Ghost is the consecrator, either he is called down by the
force of a certain number of syllables, which that he will verify, himself to
express the sense of the mystery, but yet of so much difference and variety, as
will show, this great change is not wrought by such certain and determined
words, [The blood of the New Testament] so it is in Saint Matthew and S. Mark,
[The new Testament in my blood] so S. Paul and S. Luke, My body which is
broken, My body which is given, etc. and to think otherwise, is so near the
Gentile Rites, and the mysteries of Zoroastes, and the secret operations of the
Enthei, and Heathen Priests, that unless God had declared expressly such a power
to be affixed to the recitation of such certain words, it is not with too much
forwardness to be supposed true in the spirituality of the Gospel.

But if the spirit descends not by the force of syllables, it follows He is
called down by the prayers of the Church, presented by the Priests,

For what can be more apt and reasonable to bring any great blessing from God
than prayer, which acknowledges him the fountain of blessing, bless God* and
bless the symbols, and ask that God may bless us, and by which every thing is
sanctified, viz. by the word of God and Prayer, that is, by God's benediction
and our impetration; according to the use of the word in the saying of our
blessed Savior, Man lives [by every word] that proceeds out of the mouth of
God: that is, by God's blessing; to which, prayer is to be joined, that we may
cooperate with God in a way most likely to prevail with him; and they are
excellent words which De iteratione, Atque hinc adeo credo Apostolicas ipsas
jam inde ab initio Ecclesias aliquas, hujusmodi preces ad mysteriorum
celebrationem ad bibuisse; i^o Christum ipsum non sola verborum recitatione,
sed etiam eulogia ante ipsam mysteriorum confectionem, and (...) hymno usum
fuisse manifestum est.
Cassander has said to the purpose; Some Apostolical Churches from the
beginning used such solemn prayers to the celebration of the mysteries; and
Christ himself, beside that he recited the words (of Institution) he blessed
the Symbols before and after, sung an Ecclesiastical hymn. And therefore the
Greek Churches which have with more severity kept the first and most ancient
forms of consecration, than the Latin Church; affirm that the Consecration is
made by solemn invocation alone, and the very recitation of the words spoken in
the body of a prayer are used for argument to move God to hallow the gifts, and
as an expression and determination of the desire. And this, (...).
Gabriel of Philadelphia observes out of an Apostolical Liturgy, The words of
our Lord [(...)] antecedently, and by way of institution, and incentive are the
form, together with the words which the Priest afterward recites according as
it is set down in the divine Liturgy. It is supposed he means the Liturgy
reported to be made by S. James, which is of the most ancient use in the Greek
Church, and all Liturgies in the world in their several Canons of communion, do
now, and did for ever, mingle solemn prayers together with recitation of
Christ's words; The Church of England does most religiously observe it
according to the custom and sense of the primitive Liturgies; who always did
believe the consecration not to be a natural effect, and change, finished in
any one instant, but a divine alteration consequent to the whole ministry:
that is, the solemn prayer and invocation.

Now if this great ministry be by way of solemn prayer, it will easier be Lib.
3. de bapt. coner. Donat. cap. 16.
I need say no more, but the question of S. Austin, Quid est aliud Manus
Impositio, quam oration super hominem? And the Priestly absolution is called by
S. Leo, Sacerdotum supplicationes, The prayers of Epist. 92.
Priests; and in the old Ordo Romanus, and in the Pontifical, the forms of
reconciliation were [Deus te absolvat] the Lord pardon thee, etc. But
whatsoever the forms were (for they may be optative, or indicative, or
declarative,) the case is not altered as to this question: for whatever the act
of the Priest be, whether it be the act of a Judge, or of an Ambassador, or a
Counselor, or a Physician, or all this; the blessing which he ministers, is by
way of a solemn prayer, according to the exigence of the present Rite: and the
form of words does not alter the case; for Ego benedico, and Deus benedicat] is
the same, and was no more when God commanded the Priest in express terms to
bless the people; only the Church of late, chooses the indicative form, to
signify, that such a person is by authority and proper designation appointed
the ordinary minister of benediction. For in the sense of the Church and
Scripture, none can give blessing but a Superior, and yet every person may say
in charity, God bless you; He may not be properly said to bless, for the
greater is not blessed of the lesser by Saint Paul's Rule; the Priest may
bless, or the Father may, and yet their benediction, (save that it signifies
the authority, and solemn deputation of the person to such an ordinary
Ministry) signifies but the same thing; that is, it operates by way of prayer;
but is therefore prevalent and more effectual, because it is by persons
appointed by God. And so it is in Absolution, for he that ministers the pardon,
being the person that passes the act of God to the penitent, and the act of the
penitent to God; all that manner that the Priest interposes for the penitent to
God is by way of prayer, and by the mediation of intercession; for there is
none else in this imaginable; and the other of passing God's act upon the
penitent is by way of interpretation and enunciation, as an Ambassador, and by
the word of his ministry; In persona Christi condonavi, I pardon in the person
of Christ, says S. Paul: in the first, he is (...); in the second he is (...);
in both, a minister of divine benediction to the people, the anointing from
above descends upon Aaron's beard, and so by degrees to the skirts of the
people; and yet in those things which the Priest or the Prophet does but
signify by divine appointment he is said to do the thing, which he only
signifies and makes public as a Minister of God: thus God sent Jeremy, He set
him over the Nations to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, to throw
down, and to build, and to plant; Jer. 1. 10.
and yet in all this, his ministry was nothing but Prophetical: and he that
converts a sinner is said to save him, and to hide a multitude of sins; that
is, he is instrumental to it and ministers in the employment; so that here
also, Verbum est oration, the word of God and prayer do transact both the parts
of this office. And I understand, though not the degree and excellency, yet the
truth of this manner of operation in the instance of Isaac blessing Jacob,
which in the several parts was expressed in all forms, indicative, optative,
enunciative; and yet there is no question but it was intended to do Jacob
benefit by way of impetration; so that although the Church may express the acts
of her ministry in what form she please, and with design to make signification
of another Article, yet the manner of procuring blessings and graces for the
people is by a ministry of interpellation and prayer, we having no other way
of address or return to God but by Petition and Eucharist.

17. I shall not need to instance any more. S. Austin sums up all Si ergo ad
hoc valet quod dictum est in Evangelio, Deis peccatorem non audit, Lib. 31. de
bapt. con. Donat. c. 20.
aut, Per peccatorem sacramenta non celebrentur, Quomodo exaudit -- deprecantem
vel super aquam baptismi, vel super oleum, vel super Eucharistiam, vel super
capita eorum super quibus manus imponitur? with S. Austin, praying over the
Symbols of every Sacrament, and Sacramental, is all one with celebrating the
mystery. And therefore in the office of Consecration in the Greek Church, this
power passes upon the person ordained, That he may be worthy to ask things of
thee for the salvation of the people, that is, to celebrate the Sacraments, and
Rites, and that thou (...). in consecra. Episc. (...).
wilt hear him: which fully expresses the sense of the present discourse, that
the first part of that grace of the holy Spirit which consecrates the Priest,
the first part of his sanctification, is a separation of the person to the
power of intercession for the people, and a ministerial mediation, by the
ministration of such rites and solemn invocations which God has appointed or
designed.

And now this sanctification which is so evident in Scripture, tradition and
reason, taken from proportion and analogy to Religion, is so far nisi qui
vocatur sicut Aaron, unless he be sanctified as is the Priest, who is (...), as
Nazianzen calls him, a Minister cooperating with Christ, he does without leave
call himself a man of God, a Mediator between God and the people under Christ,
he boldly thrusts himself into the participation of that glorious mediation
which Christ officiates in Heaven; all which things as they are great honors
to the person, rightly called to such vicinity and endearments with God, so
they depend wholly upon divine dignation of the grace and vocation of the
person.

2. Now for the other part of spiritual emanation or descent of graces in
sanctification of the Clergy, that is in order to the performance of that God
who is the lover of souls may grant a pure and unblameable Priesthood; and
certainly they who are honored with so great a grace as to be called to
officiate in holy and useful Ministeries have need also of other graces to make
them persons holy in habit and disposition, as well as holy in Calling, and
therefore God has sent his Spirit to furnish his Emissaries with excellencies
proportionable to their need and the usefulness of the Church. At the beginning
of Christianity, God gave gifts extraordinary, as boldness of spirit, fearless
courage, freedom of discourse, excellent understanding, discerning of spirits,
deep judgment, innocence and prudence of deportment, the gift of tongues; these
were so necessary at the institution of the Christian Church, that if we had
not had testimony of the matter of fact, the reasonableness of the thing would
prove the actual dispensation of the Spirit; because God never fails in
necessaries: But afterward, when all the extraordinary needs were served, the
extraordinary stock was spent, and God retracted those issues into their
fountains, and then the graces that were necessary for the well discharging the
(...), the Priestly function, were such as make the person of more benefit to
the people, not only by being exemplary to them, but gracious and loved by God:
and those are spiritual graces of sanctification.

And therefore Ordination is a collation of holy graces of sanctification; of a
more excellent Faith, of fervent Charity, of Providence and the Apostles, are
to be acquired by humane industry, by study and good letters, and therefore are
presupposed in the person to be ordained: to which purpose the Church now
examines the abilities of the man, before she lays on hands: and therefore the
Church does not suppose that the Spirit in Ordination descends in gifts, and in
the infusion of habits, and perfect abilities, though then also, it is
reasonable to believe that God will assist the pious and careful endeavors of
holy Priests, and bless them with special aids and cooperation: because a more
extraordinary ability is needful for persons so designed. But the proper and
great aid which the Spirit of Ordination gives, is such instances of assistance
which make the person more holy.

And this is so certainly true, that even when the Apostle had ordained Timothy
to be Bishop of Ephesus, he calls upon him to stir up the gift of God, which
was in him by the putting on of his hands, and that gift is a Rosary of graces;
what graces they are, he enumerates in the following words: God has not given
us the spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love, (...), and of a modest and sober
mind (and these words are made part of the form of collating the Episcopal
order in the Church of England.) Here is all that descends from the Spirit in
Ordination, (...), Power, that is, to officiate and intercede with God in the
parts of ministry: and the rest are such as imply duty, such as make him fit
to be a Ruler in paternal and sweet government, Modesty, Sobriety, Love; And
therefore in the forms of Ordination of the Greek Church (which are therefore
highly to be valued, because they are most ancient, have suffered the least
change, and been polluted with fewer interests) the mystical prayer of
Ordination names graces in order to holiness. We pray thee that the grace of
the ever holy Spirit may descend upon him, (...).
Fill him full of all faith and love and power and sanctification by the
illumination of thy holy and lifegiving Spirit: and the reason why these things
are desired, and given, is in order to the right performing his holy offices,
(...).
That he may be worthy to stand without blame at thy Altar, to preach the
Gospel of thy Kingdom, to minister the words of thy truth, to bring to Thee
gifts, and spiritual Sacrifices, to renew the people with the Laver of
Regeneration.

And therefore Gratiam Apostolis a Christo collatam, qua sanctificarentur: ut
per spiritum Sanctum a propriis peccatis absolverentur. Lib. 12. in Io. cap. 56.
S. Cyril says that Christ's saying, Receive ye the Holy Homil. in 8va. Paschae.
Haymo; and Lib. 2. cap. ult. de adulter. conjug.
S. Austin says, that many persons that were snatched violently to be made
Priests or Bishops, who had in their former purposes determined to marry and
live a secular life, have in their Ordination received the gift of continency.
And therefore there was reason for the greatness of the solemnities used in all
ages in separation of Priests from the world, insomuch that whatsoever was used
in any sort of sanctification of solemn benediction by Moses law, all that was
used in Consecration of the Priest, who was to receive the greatest measure of
sanctification. Eadem item vis etiam Sacerdotem, augustum and honorandum facit,
novitate benedictionis a communitate vulgi segregatum. Cum enim heri unus e
plebe esset, repent redditur praeceptor, praeses, Doctor pietatis, mysteriorum
latentium Praesul etc. Invisibili quadam vi, ac gratia invisibilem animam in
melius transformatam gerens, that is, improved in all spiritual graces; which
is highly expressed by Soz. lib. 7. cap. 10.
Martyrius who said to Nectarius; Tu, o beat, recens baptizatus and
purificatus, and mox insuper sacerdotio auctus es; utraque autem haec
peccatorum expiatoria esse Deus constituit: which are not to be expounded as if
Ordination did confer the first grace, which in the Schools is understood only
to be expiatorious; but the increment of grace, and sanctification; and that
also is remissive of sins, which are taken off by parts as the habit decreases;
and we grow in God's favor, as our graces multiply or grow.

Now that these graces being given in Ordination, are immediate emanations of
the holy Spirit, and therefore not to be usurped or pretended

SECT. VIII.
THe Holy Ghost was the first Consecrator, that is made evident; and the
persons first consecrated were the Apostles, who received Easter; the power of
baptizing and preaching, together with universal jurisdiction, immediately
before the Ascension, when they were commanded to go into all the world
preaching and baptizing. This is the whole office of the Priesthood; and
nothing of this was given in Pentecost when the holy Spirit descended and
rested upon all of them; the Apostles, the brethren, the women: for then they
received those great assistances which enabled them who had been designed for
Ambassadors to the world, to do their great work: and others of a lower
capacity had their proportion, as the effect of the promise of the Father, and
a mighty verification of the truth of Christianity.

Now all these powers which Christ has given to his Apostles, were by some
means or other to be transmitted to succeeding persons, because

The extraordinary calling was first, that is, the immediate; for the first
beginning of a lasting necessity, is extraordinary, and made ordinary God to
create man. The species or kind shall never fail, but be preserved in an
ordinary way: And so it is in the designation of the Ministers of Evangelical
Priesthood; God breathed into the Apostles (...), the breath of the life-giving
spirit; and that breath was to be continued in a perpetual, univocal
production; they who had received, they were also to give: and they only could.

Grace cannot be conveyed to any man, but either by the fountain, or by the
channel: by the Author, or by the Minister. God only is the the Author, or an
Usurper, either the fountain, or a dry cloud, which in effect calls him either
blasphemous, or sacrilegious.

But the first and immediate derivation from the fountain, that only I affirm
to be miraculous, and extraordinary: as all beginnings of essences Adam was; it
is to suppose God will multiply beings and operations without necessity. God
called at first, and if he had not called, man could not have come to him in
this nearness of a holy Ministry; he sent persons abroad, and if he had not
sent, they could not have gone; but after that he had appointed by his own
designation persons who should be Fathers in Christ, he called no more, but
left them to call others: He first immediately gives the (...), the grace, and
leaves this as a Depositum to the Church, faithfully to be kept till Christ's
second coming; and this Depositum is the doctrine and discipline of Jesus: he
opens the door, and then left it open, commanding all to come in that way, into
the Ministry and tuition of the flock, calling all that came in by windows,
and posterns, and oblique ways, thieves and robbers. And it is observable, that
the word vocation or calling in Scripture, when it is referred to a designation
of persons to the Ministry, Acts 13. 2. 16. 10.
it always signifies that which we term, calling extraordinary; it always
signifies, an immediate act of God; which also ceased when the great necessity
expired, that is, when the fountain had streamed forth abundantly, and made a
current to descend without interruption. The purpose of this discourse is, that
now no man should in these days of ordinary Hob. 5. 4. 5, 10.
Ministry, look for an extraordinary calling, nor pretend in order to vainer
purposes any new necessities.

They are fancies of a too confident opinion, and over-valuing of our selves,
when we think the very being of a Church is concerned in our a call from God,
as he did at first his own vain opinion for a necessary truth; and then he is
called extraordinarily, and so ventures into the secrets of the Sanctuary.
First, he made a necessity more than ever God made, and then himself finds a
remedy that God never appointed. He that thinks every shaking of the Ark is
absolute ruin to it, when peradventure it was but the weakness of his own eyes
that made him fancy what was not, may also think he hears a call from above to
support it, which indeed was nothing but a noise in his own head: And there is
no cure for this, but to cure the man, and set his head right. For he that will
pretend any thing that is beyond ordinary, as he that will say he has two
reasonable Souls within him, or three Wills, is not to be confuted but by
Physic, or by the tying him to abjure his folly till he were able to prove it.

But God by promising that his Church should abide for ever, and that the gates
of Hell should not prevail against it, but that himself would be with her to
the end of the world; has sufficiently confuted the vanity of those men, who
that they might thrust themselves into an office, pretend the dissolution of
the very being of the Church: For if the Church remains in her being, let her
corruptions be what they will, the ordinary Prophets have power to reform them;
and if they do not, every man has power to complain, so he does it with peace,
and modesty, and truth, and necessity.

2. And there is no need of an extraordinary calling to amend such Heresies
must needs be, yet made no provisions extraordinary, but left the Church
sufficiently instructed by her Rule, and guided by her Pastors.

3. When Christ means to give us a new Law, then he will give us a Moses and
the Prophets, if one should come from the dead, or an Angel come from Heaven,
it is certain they will not be entertained, but till the wonder be over, and
the curiosity of news be satisfied.

Against this, it is pretended that Christ promised to be with his Church for
ever, upon condition the Church would do their duty; but they Volkell. lib. 6.
cap. 18.
being but a company of men, have power to choose, and they may choose amiss; and
if all should do so, Christ's promises may fail us, though not fail of their
intentions; and then in this case the Church failing, either there must be an
extraordinary calling of single persons, or else any man may enter into the
ordinary way, which is all one with an extraordinary: for it is extraordinary
that common persons should by necessity be drawn into an employment, which by
ordinary vocation, they are not to meddle with.

Against this we can (thanks be to God for it) pretend the experience

And how shall the Church be supposed to fail, since God has made no
provisions for its restitution? For by what means should the Church be Ibid.
cap. 19.
no certainty that the Scriptures which we have this day, are the same which
the Apostles delivered, and shall remain so for ever; but only 1. The
reputation and testimony of all Christian Churches, (which also must transmit
the same by a continual successive testimony to the following, or else they
will be of an uncertain faith,) and 2. The confidence of the divine providence
and goodness, who will not let us want what is fit for us, that without which
we cannot attain the end to which in mercy he has designed us. Now the same
Arguments which we have for the continuation of Scripture, we have for the
perpetuity of a Christian Clergy, that is, besides the so long actual
succession and continuance, we have he goodness and unalterable sweetness of
the Divine mercies, who will continue such Ministeries which himself has made
the ordinary means of salvation; he would not have made them the way to Heaven
and of ordinary necessity, if he did not mean to preserve them. Indeed, if the
ordinary way should fail, God will supply another way to them that do their
duty; but then Scripture may as well fail as the ordinary succession of the
Clergy: they both were intended but as the ordinary ministeries of salvation,
and if Scripture be kept for the use of the Church, it is more likely the
Church will be preserved in its necessary constituent parts than the Scripture;
because Scripture is preserved for the Church, it is kept that the Church might
not fail. For as for the fancy, that all men being free agents may choose amiss:
suppose that; but then, may they not all consent to the corruption or
destroying of Scripture? yea, but God will preserve them from that, or will
overruled the event: yea, but how do they know that? what revelation have they?
yet grant that too, but why then will he not also overruled the event of the
matter of universal Apostasy? for both of them are matter of choice.

But then that all the Clergy should consent to corrupt Scripture, or to lose
their Faith, is a most unreasonable supposition; for supposing Antistites, the
Teachers, Doctors, and public Ministers of Religion should. And when all men
turn Mariners, or Apothecaries, or that all men will live single lives, and
turn Monks, and so endanger the species of mankind to perish, (for there is a
great fear of that too;) that is, when all the world choose one thing (for if
two men do, two thousand may do it if they will, and so may all upon this
ground:) then also we may fear that all the Governors of the Church may fail,
because some do, and more have, and all may; till then, there will be no need
of an extraordinary Commission; but the Church shall go on upon the stock of
the first calling, and designation, which was extraordinary. The Spirit issued
out at first miraculously, and has continued running still in the first
channels by ordinary conduct, and in the same conveyances it must run still, or
it cannot without a miracle derive upon us, who stand at infinite distance from
the fountain. Since then, there is now no more expectation of an extraordinary
calling (and to do so were an extraordinary vanity) it remains that the
derivation of the ministerial power be by an ordinary conveyance.

The Spirit of God in Scripture has drawn a line, and chalked out the path
that himself meant to tread, in giving the graces of Evangelical ministrations.

But when the Holy Ghost descended, then the work was to begin; the Apostles
wanted no power necessary for the main work of the Gospel; office in
themselves, but it was not communicable to others, till the Spirit, the
Anointing from above, ran over the Fringes of the Priest's garments; they had
it but in imperfection and unactive faculties; so says Theophylact: He
breathed, not now giving to them the perfect gift of the Holy Ghost, for
Theophylact. in 20. Johan. (...).
that he intended to give at Pentecost: but he prepared them for the fuller
reception of it. They had the gift before, but not the perfect consummation of
it, that was reserved for the great day; and because the power of Consecration
is the (...), or perfection of Priestly order, it was the proper emanation of
this days glory; then was the (...), the perfection of what power Christ had
formerly consigned. For of all faculties, that is not perfect which produces
perfect and excellent actions in a direct line, actions of a particular sort;
but that which produces the actions, and enables others to do so too; for then
the perfection is inherent, not only formally, but virtually and eminently; and
that is the crown of habits and natural faculties. Now besides the
reasonableness of the thing, this is also verified by a certainty that will not
easily fail us; by Experience, and ex post facto: For as we do not find the
Apostles had, before Pentecost, a productive power, which made them call for a
Miracle, or a special providence by Lots; so we are sure that immediately after
Pentecost they had it: for they speedily began to put it in execution; and it
is remarkable, that the Apostles did not lay hands upon Matthias: he being made
Apostle before the descent of the Holy Ghost, they had no power to do it, they
were not yet made Ministers of the Spirit; which because afterward presently
they did, concludes fairly, that at Pentecost they were amongst other graces
made the ordinary Ministers of Ordination.

This I say is certain, that the Holy Ghost descending at Pentecost, they
instantly did officiate in their ministerial offices, they preached, and took
persons into the Lot of their Ministry, doing of it by an external rite and
solemn invocation: and now the extraordinary way did cease; God was the
fountain of the power, but man conveyed it by an external rite: and of this
Saint Paul, who was the only exception from the common way, takes notice;
calling himself an Apostle, not of man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ;
implying that he had a special honor done, to be chosen an Apostle in an
extraordinary way; therefore others might be Apostles, and yet not so as he
was; for else his expression had been all one, as if one should say, Titus the
son of a man, not begotten of an Angel, or Spirit, nor produced by the Sun or
Stars, but begotten by a Man of a Woman: the discourse had been ridiculous, for
no man is born otherwise; and yet also he had something of the ordinary too;
for in an extraordinary manner he was sent to be ordained in an ordinary
Ministry. And yet because the ordinary Ministry was settled, S. Paul was
called to an account for so much of it as was extraordiry; and was tied to do
that which every man now is bound to do, that shall pretend a calling
extraordinary, viz. to give an extraordinary proof of his extraordinary
calling: which when he had done in the College of Jerusalem, the Apostles gave
him the right hand of fellowship, and approved his vocation; which also shows,
that now the way of Ordination was fixed and declared to be by humane
ministry; of which I need no other proof but the instances of Ordinations
recorded in Scripture, and the no instances to the contrary, but of S. Paul,
whose designation was as immediate as that of the 11. Apostles, though his
Ordination was not. I end this with the saying of Job the Monk: Concerning the
order of Priesthood, it is supernatural and unspeakable. He that yesterday, and
Tract. de Sacrament. (...)
the day before, was in the form of Idiots, and private persons, to day by the
power of the Holy Ghost, and the voice of the chief Priest, and laying on of
hands, receives so great an improvement and alteration, that he handles, and
can consecrate the divine mysteries of the holy Church, and becomes (under
Christ) a Mediator [Ministerial] between God and man, and exalted to hallow
himself and sanctify others: The same almost with the words of Gregory Nyssen,
in his book De sancto baptismate.

This is the sum of the preceding discourses. God is the Consecrator;

This great change was in nothing expressed greater, than that Saul upon
Chrysostom observing, Homil. 28. in Acta 18.
affirms the same of Saint Peter. I conclude, Differentiam inter ordinem and
plebem constituit Ecclesiae authoritas and honor per ordinis concessunt Exhort.
ad c^stitat.
sanctificatus a Deo, says Tertullian. The authority of the whole Church of
God has made distinction between the person ordained and the people, but the
honor and power of it is derived from the sanctification of God: It is derived
from him, but conveyed by an ordinary Ministry of his appointing: Whosoever
therefore with unsanctified, that is, with unconsecrated hands, shall dare to
officiate in the ministerial office, separate by God, by gifts, by graces, by
public order, by an established rite, by the institution of Jesus, by the
descent of the Holy Ghost, by the word of God, by the practice of the Apostles,
by the practice of sixteen Ages of the Catholic Church, by the necessity of
the thing, by Reason, by Analogy to the discourse of all the wise men that ever
were in the world; that man, like his predecessor Corah, brings an unhallowed
Censer, which shall never send up a right cloud of Incense to God, but yet that
unpermitted, and disallowed smoke shall kindle a fire, even the wrath of God
which shall at least destroy the Sacrifice: his work shall be consumed, and
when upon his repentance himself escapes, yet it shall be so as by fire, that
is, with danger, and loss, and shame, and trouble. For our God is a consuming
fire.

Remember Corah and all his company.

(...).

FINIS.
RULES AND ADVICES TO THE CLERGY OF THE DIOCESE OF DOWN and CONNOR, For their
Deportment in their Personal and Public Capacities.

GIVEN BY IER. TAILOR, Bishop of that Diocese, at the Visitation at LISNEGARVEY.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most Excellent
Majesty. 1672.

RULES AND ADVICES TO THE CLERGY.
I. Personal Duty.
REmember that it is your great Duty, and tied on you by many Obligations, that
you be exemplar in your lives, and Why take thou my Law into thy mouth,
seeing thou hate to be reformed thereby? He that lives anidle life may preach
with Truth and Reason, or as did the Pharisees; but not as Christ, or as one
having Authority.

Every Minister in taking accounts of his life, must judge of his Duty by more
strict and severer measures, than he does of his People; and he

Let every Minister endeavor to be learned in all spiritual wisdom,

Every Minister, above all things, must be careful that he be not a servant

Let no Minister be litigious in any thing; not greedy or covetous; Be not
over-righteous, (says Solomon) that is, not severe in demanding, or foroing
every thing, though it be indeed his due.

Let not the name of the Church be made a pretense for personal are not to do
prejudice to succession, yet many things may be forgiven upon just occasions,
from which the Church shall receive no incommodity; but be sure that there are
but few things which thou art bound to do in thy personal capacity, but the
same also, and more, thou art obliged to perform, as thou art a public person.

Never exact the offerings, or customary wages, and such as are allowed

Avoid all Pride, as you would flee from the most frightful Apparition, or the
most cruel Enemy; and remember that you can never truly

Take no measures of Humility, but such as are material and tangible; such
which consist not in humble words, and lowly gestures; but what

Let every Curate of Souls strive to understand himself best; and then

Let every Minister be careful to live a life as abstracted from the Affairs of
the world, as his necessity will permit him; but at no hand to be In the world
ye shall have trouble; but in me ye shall have peace: and consider this also,
which is a great Truth; That every degree of love to the world, is so much
taken from the Love of God.

Be no otherwise solicitous of your Fame and Reputation, but by doing your Duty
well and wisely; in other things refer your self to God:

Remember that no Minister can govern his people well, and prosperously,

Be sure in all your Words and Actions to preserve Christian simplicity and
ingenuity; to do to others, as you would be done unto your self;

Pray much and very servently, for all your Parishioners, and all men

Every Minister must learn and practice Patience, that by bearing all

He that is holy, let him be holy still, and still more holy, and never

II. Of Prudence required in Ministers.
REmember that Discretion is the Mistress of all Graces; and Humility is the
greatest of all Miracles: and without this, all Graces

Let no Minister be governed by the opinion of his People, and destroy Granata
told the Governors of Leria and Patti, like silly Animals they take burdens
upon their backs at the pleasure of the multitude, which they neither can
retain with Prudence, nor shake off with Safety.

Let not the Reverence of any man cause you to sin against God; but

When you teach your people any part of their duty, as in paying their debts,
their tithes and offerings, in giving due reverence and religious

In taking accounts of the good Lives of your selves or others, take

Be not satisfied when you have done a good work, unless you have also done it
well; and when you have, then be careful that vainglory,

Be careful so to order your self, that you fall not into temptation and
Person, that Person is likely to be lost from all possibility of receiving much
good from your Ministry.

III. The Rules and Measures of Government to be used by Ministers in their
respective Cures.
USe no violence to any man, to bring him to your opinion; but by the word of
your proper Ministry, by Demonstrations of the Spirit,

Suffer no quarrel in your Parish, and speedily suppress it when it is begun;
and though all wise men will abstain from interposing in other

Suffer no houses of Debauchery, of Drunkenness or Lust in your Parishes; but
implore the assistance of Authority for the suppressing of all

If there be any Papists or Sectaries in your Parishes, neglect not frequently

Receive not the people to doubtful Disputations: and let no names

Think no man considerable upon the point or pretense of a tender Conscience,
unless he live a good life, and in all things endeavor to

Mark them that cause Divisions among you, and avoid them: for such Scandals in
the abstract; they are (...). Vide Romans 16. 17. (...).
Offenders and Offenses too. But if any man have an Opinion, let him have it to
himself, till he can be cured of his disease by time, and counsel, and gentle
usages. But if he separates from the Church, or gathers a Congregation, he is
proud, and is fallen from the Communion of Saints, and the Unity of the
Catholic Church.

He that observes any of his people to be zealous, let him be careful to
conduct that zeal into such channels where there is least danger of
inconveniency; let him employ it in something that is good; let it be pressed
to fight against sin. For Zeal is like a Cancer in the Breast; feed it with
good flesh, or it will devour the Heart.

Strive to get the love of the Congregation; but let it not degenerate Woe be to
you when all men speak well of you.

Suffer not the common people to prattle about Religion and Questions;

Let every Minister take care that he call upon his Charge, that they

Fear no man's person in the doing of your Duty wisely, and according to the
Laws: Remembering always, that a servant of God can no

Entertain no Persons into your Assemblies from other Parishes, unless upon
great occasion, or in the destitution of a Minister, or by contingency

Never appeal to the judgment of the people in matters of controversy;

Let no Minister of a Parish introduce any Ceremony, Rites or Gestures,

IV. Rules and Advices concerning Preaching.
LEt every Minister be diligent in preaching the Word of God, according

Let every Minister be careful that what he delivers be indeed the

Do not spend your Sermons in general and indefinite things, as in Exhortations

Let not the humors and inclinations of the people be the measures of your
Doctrines, but let your Doctrines be the measure of their persuasions.

Every Minister in reproofs of sin and sinners, ought to concern himself

As it looks like flattery and design to preach nothing before Magistrates but
the duty of their people and their own eminency; so it is the John the Baptist
told the Soldiers what the Soldiers should do, but troubled not their heads
with what was the duty of the Scribes and Pharisees.

In the reproof of sins be as particular as you please, and spare no

Let the business of your Sermons be to preach holy Life, Obedience, Peace,
Love among neighbors, hearty love, to live as the old Christians

Press those Graces most that do most good, and make the least noise; such as
giving privately and forgiving publicly; and prescribe the grace of Charity by
all the measures of it which are given by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. For this
grace is not finished by good words, nor yet by good works, but it is a great
building, and many materials go to the structure of it. It is worth your study,
for it is the fulfilling of the Commandments.

Because it is impossible that Charity should live, unless the lust of the
[After a good dinner let us sit down and backbite our neighbors.]

Let every Minister be careful to observe, and vehement in reproving those
faults of his Parishioners, of which the Laws cannot or do not

In your Sermons to the people, often speak of the four last things, To fear
God and keep his Commandments. Speak but very little of the secret and high
things of God, but as much as you can of the lowness and humility of Christ.

Be not hasty in pronouncing damnation against any man or party in a matter of
disputation. It is enough that you reprove an Error; but

Let your Sermons teach the duty of all states of men to whom you

In your Sermons and Discourses of Religion, use primitive, known nature; and
that they are ready to disturb the Church, if they could find occasion.

Let every Minister in his charge, as much as he can, endeavor to destroy all
popular errors and evil principles taken up by his people, viz. Peace and
Righteousness, Holiness and Mortification.

Every Minister ought to be careful that he never expound Scriptures in public
contrary to the known sense of the Catholic Church, and England and Ireland,
nor introduce any Doctrine against any of the four first General Councils; for
these, as they are measures of truth, so also of necessity; that is, as they
are safe, so they are sufficient; and besides what is taught by these, no
matter of belief is necessary to salvation.

Let no Preacher bring before the people in his Sermons or Discourses, the
Arguments of great and dangerous Heresies, though with a purpose

Let not the Preacher make an Article of Faith to be a matter of dispute;

Let the Preacher be careful that in his Sermons he use no light, immodest or
ridiculous expressions, but what is wise, grave, useful and

Let no Preacher envy any man that has a greater audience, or more fame in
Preaching than himself; let him not detract from him or lessen

Let every Preacher in his Parish take care to explicate to the people the
Mysteries of the great Festivals, as of Christmas, Easter, Ascensionday, Mary;
because these Feasts containing in them the great Fundamentals of our Faith,
will with most advantage convey the mysteries to the people, and fix them in
their memories, by the solemnity and circumstances of the day.

In all your Sermons and Discourses speak nothing of God but what is God cannot
be tempted, neither tempts he any man. God is true, and every man a liar.

Let no Preacher compare one Ordinance with another; as Prayer

Let no man preach for the praise of men; but if you meet it, instantly watch
and stand upon your guard, and pray against your own vanity; Herod was for the
omission of this smitten by an Angel; and do thou tremble, fearing lest the
judgment of God be otherwise than the sentence of the people.

V. Rules and Advices concerning Catechism.
EVery Minister is bound upon every Lords day before Evening Prayer, to
instruct all young people in the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the

Let a Bell be tolled when the Catechizing is to begin, that all who

Let every Minister teach his people the use, practice, methods and benefits of
meditation or mental prayer. Let them draw out for them

Let every Minister exhort his people to a frequent confession of their

Let the people be exhorted to keep Fasting days, and the Feasts of the Church;
according to their respective capacities; so it be done without

Let every Minister be diligent in exhorting all Parents and Masters to send
their Children and Servants to the Bishop at the Visitation, or

VI. Rules and Advices concerning the Visitation of the Sick.
EVery Minister ought to be careful in visiting all the Sick and Afflicted
persons of his Parish: ever remembering, that as the Priests lips

A Minister must not stay till he be sent for; but of his own accord and

When you comfort the afflicted, endeavor to bring them to the true love of
God; for he that serves God for Gods sake, it is almost impossible

In answering the cases of conscience of the sick or afflicted people, consider
not who asks, but what he asks; and consult in your answers

If the sick person enquires concerning the final estate of his soul, he

In order to these and many other good purposes, every Minister ought
frequently to converse with his Parishioners; to go to their houses, but

VII. Of ministering the Sacraments, public Prayers, and other duties of
Ministers.
EVery Minister is obliged publicly or privately to read the Common Prayers
every day in the week, at Morning and Evening; and in great Towns and populous
places conveniently inhabited, it must be read in Churches, that the daily
sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving may never cease.

The Minister is to instruct the people, that the Baptism of their children
Adam.

Let every Minister exhort and press the people to a devout and periodical

Every Minister ought to be well skilled and studied in saying his Office,

Let not a Curate of Souls trouble himself with any studies but such

Be careful in all the public administrations of your Parish, that the poor

Let every Minister be sure to lay up a treasure of comforts and advices,

In these and all things else that concern the Ministers duty, if there be
difficulty you are to repair to your Bishop for further advice, assistance and
information.

FINIS.
A Funeral Sermon, Preached at the OBSEQUIES OF THE Right Reverend Father in
God JEREMY Lord Bishop of DOWN: Who deceased at LISBURNE August 13th. 1667.

BY GEORGE RUST, Lord Bishop of DROMORE.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most Excellent
Majesty. 1672.

A Funeral Sermon.
1 JOHN 3. 2. It does not yet appear what we shall be
GLorious things are spoken in Scripture concerning the future Reward of the
Righteous; and all the words that are wont to signify what is of greatest
Price and Value, or can represent the most enravishing Objects of our desires
are made use of, by the Holy Ghost, to recommend unto us this transcendent
State of Blessedness: Such are these; Rivers of Pleasures, A fountain of living
water, A treasure that can never be wasted, nor never taken from us; An
inheritance in light, An incorruptible Crown, A Kingdom, the Kingdom of God,
and the Kingdom of Christ; The Kingdom of Glory, a Crown of Glory and Life; and
Righteousness, and Immortality; The Vision of God; Being filled with all the
fullness of God, An exceeding eternal weight of Glory, (...), Words strangely
Emphatical, that cannot be put into English; and if they could, they would not
be able to convey to our minds the Notion that they design: for it is too big
for any Expressions; and, after all that can be said, we must resolve with our
Apostle, It does not yet appear what we shall be.

At this Distance we cannot make any likely guesses or conjectures at the glory
of that future state. Men make very imperfect Descriptions of Countries or
Cities, that never were there themselves, nor saw the Places with their own
eyes. It is not for any mortal Creature to make a Map of that Canaan that lies
above: It is to all us that live here on the hither-side of Death, an unknown
Country, and an undiscovered Land. It may be, some Heavenly Pilgrim, that with
his holy thoughts and ardent desires, is continually traveling thitherward,
arrives sometimes near the Borders of the promised Land, and the Suburbs of the
new Jerusalem, and gets upon the top of Pisgah, and there he has an imperfect
Prospect of a brave Country, that lies afar way off; but he cannot tell how to
describe it, and all that he has to say, to satisfy the curious Enquirer, is
only this, If he would know the glories of it, he must go and see it. It was
believed of old, that those places that lie under the Line, were burnt up by
the continual heat of the Sun, and were not habitable, either by man or beast:
But later Discoveries tell us, that there are the most pleasant Countries that
the Earth can show; insomuch that some have placed Paradise it self in that
Climate. Sure I am, of all the Regions of the Intellectual World, and the
several Lands that are peopled either with Men or Angels, the most pleasant
Countries they lie under the Line, under the direct beams of the Sun of
Righteousness, where there is an eternal Day, and an eternal Spring; where is
that Tree of Life, that bears twelve manner of Fruits, and yields her Fruit
every Month: Thus we may use Figures, and Metaphors, and Allegories, and tell
you of fruitful Meads, and spacious Fields, and winding Rivers, and purling
Brooks, and chanting Birds, and shady Groves, and pleasant Gardens, and lovely
Bowers, and noble Seats, and stately Palaces, and goodly People, and excellent
Laws, and sweet Societies; but, this is but to frame little comparisons to
please our childish fancies: and, just such discourses as a blind man would
make concerning Colors; so do we talk of those things we never saw, and
disparage the state whilst we would recommend it. Indeed it requires some Saint
or Angel from Heaven to discourse upon the Subject; and yet that would not do
neither: For though they might be able to speak something of it, yet we should
want ears to hear it. Neither can those things be declared but in the language
of Heaven, which would be little understood by us, the poor inhabitants of this
lower World; they are indeed things too great to be brought within the compass
of words. Saint Paul, when he had been rapt up into the third Heaven, he saw
(...), things unlawful, or unpossible, to be uttered; and, Eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive, what God
has prepared for them that love him; and, It does not yet appear what we shall
be, said that beloved Disciple, that lay in the bosom of our Savior.

You will not now expect, that I should give you a relation of that which
cannot be uttered, nor so much as conceived; or declare unto you what our
Eagle-sighted Evangelist tells us does not yet appear. But, that you may
understand, that that which sets this state of Happiness so beyond the reach of
all imagination, is only its transcendent excellency; I shall tell you
something of what does already appear of it, and may be known concerning it.

First of all we are assured that we shall then be freed from all the evils and
miseries that we now labor under: Vanity and Misery, they are

We are sure we shall be freed from this earthly, and clothed with (...)
heavenly and glorified Body. These bodies of ours they are the graves and
though we deck and adorn them, and pride our selves in their beauty and
comeliness; yet, when all is done, they are but sinks of corruption and
defilement: they expose us to many pains and diseases, and incline us to many
lusts and passions, and the more we pamper them, the greater burden they are
unto our minds; they impose upon our reasons, and by their steams and vapors
cast a mist before our understandings; they clog our affections, and like a
heavy weight depress us unto this earth, and keep us from soaring aloft among
the winged Inhabitants of the upper Regions: But those Robes of light and
glory, which we shall be clothed withal at the Resurrection of the Just, and
those Heavenly Bodies which the Gospel has then assured untous, they are not
subject to any of these mischiefs and inconveniences, but are fit and
accommodate instruments for the Soul in its highest Exaltations. And this is an
argument that the Gospel does dwell much upon, viz. the Redemption of our
Bodies, that He shall change our vile bodies, that they may be like unto his
glorious Body; and we are taught to look upon it as one great piece of our
Reward, that we shall be clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven;
that this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality:
that, as we have born the image of the earthly, so we must bear the image of
the heavenly Adam: who was (...), of heaven heavenly; as the first man was,
(...), of the earth earthy. And therefore, I think, the Schools put too mean a
rate upon this great Promise of the Gospel, The Resurrection of our Bodies;
and, I believe, it might be demonstrated from the principles of sound
Philosophy, That this Article of our Christian Faith, which the Atheist makes
so much sport withal, is so far from being chargeable with any absurdity, that
it is founded upon the Highest Reason: for, seeing we find by too great an
experience, that the Soul has so close and necessary a dependence upon this
gross and earthy Mass that we now carry about with us; it may be disputed with
some probability, whether it be ever able to act independently of all matter
whatsoever: at least, we are assured, that the state of conjunction is most
connatural to her; and that, Intellectual pleasure it self is not only
multiplied, but the better felt, by its redundancy upon the body and spirits:
and if it be so, then the purer and more defecate the Body is, the better will
the Soul be appointed for the exercise of its noblest Operations; and it will
be no mean piece of our reward hereafter, that that which is sown (...), an
animal, shall be raised a heavenly body.

We are sure, that we shall then be free from sin, and all those foolish lusts
and passions that we are now enslaved unto. The life of a Christian, Meshech,
and to have my habitation in the Tents of Kedar; that there should be so many
Goliah's within me, that defy the Host of Israel; so many sons of Anak that
hinder my entrance into the Land of Promise, and the Rest of God; that I should
toil and labor among the bricks, and live in bondage unto these worse than
Egyptian Taskmasters. Thus does he sit down by the Rivers of Babylon, and weep
over those ruins and desolations that these worse than Assyrian Armies have
made in the City, and House of his God. And many a time does he cry out in the
bitterness of his Soul, Wretched creature that I am! Who shall deliver me from
this body of death? And though, through his faith, and courage, and constancy,
he be daily getting ground of his Spiritual enemies; yet it is but by inches,
and every step he takes, he must fight for it; and living as he does in an
Enemies Country, he is forced always to be upon his Guard; and if he slumber
never so little, presently he is surpised by a watchful Adversary. This is our
portion here, and our lot is this; but when we arrive unto those Regions of
bliss and glory that are above, we shall then stand safely upon the shore, and
and see all our enemies, Pharaoh and all his Host, drowned and destroyed in the
Rea-Sea, and being delivered from the World, and the Flesh, and the Devil,
Death, and Sin, and Hell, we shall sing the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, an
Epinicion, and Song of eternal Triumph, unto the God of our Salvation.

We shall be sure to meet with the best company that Earth or Heaven affords:
Good Company it is the great pleasure of the life of to the innumerable company
of Angels, and the general Assembly of the Church of the Firstborn, and to the
Spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant. The Oracle tells Amelius, enquiring what was become of Polinus's
soul, that he was gone to Pythagoras, and Socrates, and Plato, and as many as
had born a part in the Quire of heavenly love. And I may say to every good man,
that he shall go to the Company of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; Moses, David, and
Samuel; all the Prophets and Apostles, and all the holy men of God that have
been in all the Ages of the World. All those brave and excellent persons that
have been scattered at the greatest distance of time and place, and in their
several generations have been the salt of the earth to preserve mankind from
utter degeneracy and corruption; These shall be all gathered together, and meet
in one Constellation in that Firmament of Glory. O Praeclarum diem, cum ad
illud divinorum animorum concilium coetumque proficiscar, atque ex hac turba ac
colluvione discedam! O that blessed day, when we shall make our escape from
this medly and confused riot, and shall arrive to that great Council and
general Randevouz, of divine and god-like Spirits! But, which is more than all,
we shall then meet our Lord Jesus Christ, the Head of our Recovery, whose story
is now so delightful unto us, as reporting nothing of him, but the greatest
sweetness and innocence, and meekness and patience, and mercy and tenderness,
and benignity and goodness, and whatever can render any person lovely or
amiable; and who, out of his dear love and deep compassion unto mankind, gave
up himself unto the death for us men, and for our salvation. And if Saint
Augustine made it one of his Wishes, to have seen Jesus Christ in the flesh;
how much more desirable is it, to see him out of his terrestrial weeds, in his
robes of Glory, with all his redeemed Ones about him! And this I cannot but
look upon, as a great Advantage and privilege of that future State; for I am
not apt to swallow down that Conceit of the Schools, that we shall spend
Eternity in gazing upon the naked Deity; for certainly the happiness of man
consists in having all his faculties, in their due subordinations, gratified
with their proper objects; and I cannot but believe, a great part of Heaven to
be the blessed Society that is there; Their enravishing beauty, that is to say,
their inward life and perfection, flowring forth and raying it self through
their glorified bodies; The rare discourses wherewith they entertain one
another; The pure and chaste and spotless, and yet most ardent Love, wherewith
they embrace each other; The ecstatick Devotions wherein they join together:
and certainly every pious and devout soul will readily acknowledge with me,
that it must needs be matter of unspeakable pleasure, to be taken into the
Quire of Angels and Seraphims, and the glorious Company of the Apostles, and
the goodly Fellowship of the Prophets, and the noble Army of Martyrs; and to
join with them in singing Praises, and Hallelujahs, and Songs of joy, and
Triumph unto our great Creator and Redeemer, the Father of Spirits, and the
Lover of Souls, unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever
and ever.

We are sure we shall then have our capacities filled, and all our desires
answered, They hunger no more, neither thirst any more; for, the Lamb which is
in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living
fountains of waters. What vast degrees of perfection and happiness the nature
of man is capable of, we may best understand, by viewing it in the person of
Christ, taken into the nearest union with Divinity, and made God's Vicegerent
in the World, and the Head and Governor of the whole Creation. In this our
narrow and contracted state we are apt to think too meanly of our selves, and
do not understand the dignity of our own Natures, what we were made for, and
what we are capable of: but, as Plotinus somewhere observes, We are like
Children, from our birth brought up in ignorance of, and at a great distance
from, our Parents and Relations; and have forgot the Nobleness of our
Extraction, and rank our selves and our fortunes among the lot of Beggars, and
mean and ordinary persons; though we are the offspring of a great Prince, and
were born to a Kingdom. It does indeed become creatures to think modestly of
themselves; yet, if we consider it aright, it will be found very hard, to set
any bounds or limits to our own happiness, and say, Hitherto it shall arise,
and no further. For that wherein the happiness of Man consists, viz. Truth and
Goodness, the Communication of the Divine Nature, and the Illapses of Divine
Love, it does not cloy, or glut, or satiate; but every participation of them
does widen and enlarge our Souls, and fits us for further and further
Receptions: the more we have, the more we are capable of; the more we are
filled, the more room is made in our Spirits; and thus it is still and still,
even till we arrive unto such degrees as we can assign no measures unto.

We shall then be made like unto God, (...); said the Areopagite, Salvation can
no otherwise be accomplished, but by becoming God-like; It does not yet appear
what we shall be, but when he shall appear we shall be like him; says our
Evangelist; for we shall see him as he is. There is no seeing God as he is, but
by becoming like unto him; nor is there any enjoying of him, but by being
transformed into his Image and Similitude. Men usually have very strange
Notions concerning God, and the enjoyment of him; or rather, these are words,
to which there is no correspondent conception in their minds: but if we would
understand God aright, we must look upon him as Infinite Wisdom, Righteousness,
Love, Goodness, and whatever speaks any thing of Beauty and Persection; and if
we pretend to worship him, it must be by loving and adoring his transcendent
Excellencies; and if we hope to enjoy him, it must be by conformity unto him,
and participation of his Nature. The frame and constitution of things is such,
that it is impossible that Man should arrive to happiness any other way. And,
if the Sovereignty of God should dispense with our obedience, the Nature of the
thing would not permit us to be happy without it: If we live only the Animal
Life, we may indeed be happy, as Beasts are happy; but the Happiness that
belongs to a Rational and Intellectual Being, can never be attained but in a
way of holiness and conformity unto the Divine Will: for, such a temper and
disposition of mind is necessary unto Happiness, not by virtue of any
arbitrarious constitution of Heaven, but, the eternal Laws of Righteousness,
and immutable respects of things, do require and exact it: Yea, I may truly
say, That God and Christ, without us, cannot make us happy: for we are not
conscious to our selves of any thing, but only the operations of our own minds;
and it is not the person of God and Christ, but their Life and Nature, wherein
consists our formal Happiness: For, What is the happiness of God himself, but
only that pleasure and satisfaction that results from a sense of his Infinite
perfections? And how is it possible for a Creature to be more happy, than by
partaking of that, in its measure and proportion, which is the happiness of God
himself.

The Soul, being thus prepared, shall live in the Presence of God, and lie
under the influences and illapses of Divine Love and Goodness; Father, I will
that they whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold
my glory. They that fight manfully under the Banners of Heaven, and overcome
their spiritual Enemies, They shall eat of the hidden Manna, and become Pillars
in the Temple of God, and shall go no more out: They shall stand before the
Throne of God continually, and serve him Day and Night in his Temple, and he
that sits on the Throne shall dwell amongst them. God shall put under them
his everlasting Arms, and carry them in his Bosom, and they shall suck the full
Breasts of eternal Goodness: For now there is nothing can hinder the most near
and intimate conjunction of the Soul with God; for, things that are alike, do
easily mingle with one another: but the mixture that is betwixt Bodies, be they
never so homogeneal, comes but to an External Touch; for their parts can never
run up into one another. But there is no such (...), or resistance, amongst
spiritual Beings; and we are estranged from God ((...)) not by distance of
Place, but by difference and diversity of Nature, and when that is removed, He
becomes present to us, and we to him: (...), etc. like the Magnitudines
congruae in the Mathematics, Quando prima primis, media mediis, extrema
extremis, parts denique partibus usquequaque respondent, Each of whose parts
do exactly answer one to the other. This therefore is the Soul's progress from
that state of Purgation to Illumination, and so to Union. There are several
faculties in the Soul of Man, that are conformed to several kinds of objects;
and, according to that Life a man is awaked into, so these faculties do exert
themselves: and though whilst we live barely an Animal Life, we converse with
little more than this outward World, and the objects of our Senses; yet there
are faculties within us that are receptive of God, and when we arrive once unto
a due measure of Purity of Spirit, the Rays of Heavenly Light will as
certainly shine into our Minds, as the beams of the Sun, when it arises above
the Horison, do illuminate the clear and pellucid air: And from this sight and
illumination, the Soul proceeds to an intimate union with God, and to a taste
and touch of him. This is that (...), that silent touch with God, that fills
the Soul with unexpressible joy and triumph: For, if the objects of this ouward
world that strike upon our senses do so hugely please and delight us; What
infinite pleasure then must there needs be in those Touches and Impresses, that
the Divine Love and Goodness shall make upon our Souls? But these are things
that we may talk of, as we would do of a sixth Sense, or something we have no
distinct Notion or Idaea of; but the perfect understanding of them belongs only
to the future state of Comprehension.

Lastly, we shall have our Knowledge, and our Love, which are the most perfect
and beatifying Acts of our Minds, employed about their noblest objects in their
most exalted Measures; For a Man to resolve himself in some knotty Question, or
answer some stubborn Argument, or find out some noble Conclusion, or solve some
hard Problem, what ineffable pleasure does it create many times to a
contemplative mind? We know, who sacrificed a Hecatomb for one Mathematical
Demonstration; and another that upon the like occasion cried out, (...), in a
kind of Rapture. To have the secrets of Nature disclosed, and the mysteries of
Art revealed; but above all, the Riddles of Providence unfolded, are such
Jewels as I know many searching and inquisitive Spirits would be willing to
purchase at any rate. When we come to Heaven (I will not say, we shall see all
things in the mirror of Divinity, for that it may be is an Extravagancy of the
Schools; nor, that any one true Proposition through the concatenation of Truth,
will then multiply it self into the explicit knowledge of all Conclusions
whatsoever, for I belive that a Fancy too, but) our Knowledge shall be
strangely enlarged, and, for ought I can determine, be for ever receiving new
Additions, and fresh Accruements; The Clew of Divine Providence will then be
unravelled, and all those Difficulties which now perplex us, will be easily
assoyl'd, and we shall then perceive that the Wisdom and Goodness of God, is a
vast and comprehensive Thing, and moves in a far larger Sphere than we are
aware of in this state of narrowness and imperfection: But there is something
greater and beyond all this; and Saint John has a strange Expression, That we
shall then see God even as he is; and God, we know, is the wellspring of
Perfection and Happiness, the Fountain and Original of all Beauty; he is
infinitely glorious, and lovely, and excellent; and if we see him as he is, all
this Glory must descend into us and become ours: for we can no otherwise see
God (as I said before) but by becoming Deiform, by being changed into the same
Glory. But love, that is it, which makes us most happy, and by that we are most
intimately conjoined unto God, For he that dwells in Love, dwells in God,
and God in him: And how pleasant beyond all imagination must it needs be, to
have the Soul melted into a flame of Love, and that Fire fed and nourished by
the enjoyment of its Beloved; To be transported into Ecstasies, and Raptures of
Love; to be swallowed up in the embraces of eternal Sweetness; to be lost in
the Source and Fountain of Happiness and Bliss, like a spark in the Fire, or a
beam in the Sun, or drop in the Ocean.

It may be you will tell me, I have been all this while confuting my Text, and
giving you a Relation of that which Saint John tells us, does not yet appear
what it is; But my design has been the same with the Holy Evangelist's; and
that is, to represent unto you how transcendently great that State of Happiness
must needs be; when as, by what way we are able to apprehend of it, it is
infinitely the object of our desires; and yet we are assured by those that are
best able to tell, That the best and greatest part of the Country is yet
undiscovered, and that we cannot so much as guess at the pleasure of it, till
we come to enjoy it: And indeed it is impossible it should be otherwise; for,
Happiness being a matter of Sense, all the words in the World cannot convey the
Notion of it unto our Minds, and it is only to be understood by them that feel
it; (...).

But though it does not yet appear what we shall be; yet so much already
appears of it, that it cannot but seem the most worthy Object of our Endeavors
and Desires; and by some few Clusters that have been shown us of this good
Land, we may guess what pleasant and delightful Fruit it bears: And if we have
but any reverence of our selves, and will but consider the dignity of our
Natures, and the vastness of that Happiness we are capable of; me thinks we
should be always traveling toward that Heavenly Country, though our way
lies through a Wilderness: and be striving for this great Prize and immortal
Crown; and be clearing our eyes, and purging our sight, that we may come to
this Vision of God; shaking off all fond passions, and dirty desires, and
breathing forth our Souls in such Aspirations as these:

My Soul thirsts for thee, O Lord, in a dry and barren Land, where no Water
is; O that thou would stistil, and drop down the Dew of thy Heavenly Grace
into all its secret Chinks and Pores; One thing have I desired of the Lord,
that will I seek after, That I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days
of my Life, and behold his Glory: for a day in thy Courts is better than a
thousand, and I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of the Lord, than
dwell in the Tents of Wickedness. All the Kings of the Earth, they are thy
Tributaries; the Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles, bring Presents unto thee;
the Kings of Sheba and Seba offer Gifts. O that we could but pay thee, that
which is so due unto thee, the tribute of our Hearts! The Heathen are come into
thine Inheritance; thy holy Temple have they defiled: Help us, O God of our
Salvation, and deliver us, and purge away our sins from us, for thy Name's
sake! O that the Lord whom we seek, would come to his own House, and give Peace
there, and fill it with his Glory! Come and cleanse thine own Temple, for we
have made it a Den of Thieves, which should have been a House of Prayer! O that
we might never give sleep to our eyes, nor slumber to our eyelids, till we
have prepared a House for the Lord, and a Tabernacle for the God of Jacob! The
Curse of Cain it is fallen upon us, and we are as Vagabonds in the Earth; and
wander from one Creature to another. O that our Souls might come at last to
dwell in God, our fixed and eternal Habitation! We, like silly Doves, fly up
and down the Earth, but can find no rest for the Sole of our feet; O that,
after all our weariness and our wanderings, we might return into the Ark; and
that God would put forth his hand and take us, and pull us in unto Himself! We
have too long lived upon Vanity and Emptiness, the wind and the whirlwind; O
that we may now begin to feed upon Substance, and delight our selves in Marrow
and Fatness! O that God would strike our rocky Hearts, that there might spring
up a Fountain in the Wilderness, and Pools in the Desert; that we might drink
of that Water, whereof whosoever drinks, shall never thirst more; that God
would give us that Portion of Goods that falls to us, not to waste it with
riotous living, but therewith to feed our languishing Souls, left they be weary
and faint by the way! We ask not the Childrens Bread, but the Crumbs that fall
from thy Table; that our Baskets may be fill d with thy Fragments: for they
will be better than Wine, and sweeter than the Honey, and the Honeycomb, and
more pleasant to us than a Feast of fat things. We have wandered too long in a
barren, and howling Desert, where wild Beasts, and doleful Creatures, Owls and
Bats, Satyrs and Dragons, keep their haunts; O that we might be fed in green
Pastures; and led by the still Waters, that the Winter might be past, and the
Rain over and gone, that the Flowers may appear on the Earth, and the time of
the singing of Birds may come, and the Voice of the Turtle may be heard in our
Land! We have lived too long in Sodom, which is the place that God at last will
destroy: O that we might arise and be gone; and, while we are lingering, that
the Angels of God would lay hold upon our hands (and be merciful unto us) and
bring us forth, and set us without the City; and that we may never look back
any more, but may escape unto the Mountain, and dwell safe in the Rock of Ages!
Wisdom has killed her Beasts, she has mingled her Wine, and furnished her
Table; O that we might eat of her Meat, and drink of her Wine which she has
mingled! God knocks at the doors of our Hearts; O let us open unto him those
everlasting Gates, that he may Sup with us, and we with him; for he will bring
his Cheer along with him, and will feast us with Manna, and Angels food! O that
the Sun of Righteousness might arise and melt the Iciness of our Hearts! That
God would send forth his Spirit, and with his warmth and heat dissolve our
frozen Souls; that God would breath into our minds, those still and gentle
Gales of Divine Inspirations, that may blow up* and increase in us the flames
of heavenly Love! That we may be a whole burnt-Offering, and all the substance
of our Souls be consumed by fire from Heaven, and ascend up in Clouds of
Incense? That, as so many sparks, we might be always mounting upward, till we
return again into our proper Elements! That, like so many particular Rivulets,
we may be continually making toward the Sea, and never rest till we lose our
selves in that Ocean of Goodness, from whence we first came! That we may open
our Mouths wide, that God may satisfy them! That we may so perfectly discharge
our selves of all strange Desires and Passions, that our Souls may be nothing
else but a deep Emptiness and vast Capacity to be filled with all the fullness
of God! Let but these be the breathings of our Spirits, and this Divine
Magnetism will most certainly draw down God into our Souls, and we shall have
some Praelibations of that Happiness; some small glimpses, and little
discoveries whereof, is all that belongs to this state of Mortality.

I Have as yet done but the half of my Text: and I have another Text yet to
preach upon, and a very large and copious one, The great Person, whose
Obsequies we here come to celebrate: His fame is so great throughout the World,
that he stands in no need of an Encomium; and yet his worth is much greater
than his fame; It is impossible not to speak great things of him, and yet it is
impossible to speak what he deserves; and the meanness of an Oration will but
fully the brightness of his Excellencies: But Custom requires that something
should be said, and it is a Duty and a Debt that we owe only unto his Memory:
and I hope, his great Soul, if it has any knowledge of what is done here
below, will not be offended at the smallness of our Offering.

He was born at Cambridge, and brought up in the Free School there, and was
ripe for the University, before Custom would allow of his Admittance; but by
that time he was Thirteen years old, he was entered into Caius-Colledge; and as
soon as he was Graduate, he was chosen fellow. Had he lived amongst the ancient
Pagans he had been ushered into the World with a Miracle, and Swans must have
danced and sung at his Birth; and he must have been a great Hero, and no less
than the Son of Apollo, the God of Wisdom and Eloquence.

He was a Man long before he was of Age; and knew little more of the state of
Childhood, than its Innocence and Pleasantness. From the University, by that
time he was Master of Arts, he removed to London, and became public Lecturer
in the Church of Saint Paul's; where he preached to the admiration and
astonishment of his Auditory; and by his florid and youthful beauty, and sweet
and pleasant air, and sublime and raised discourses, he made his hearers take
him for some young Angel, newly descended from the Visions of Glory; The fame
of this new Star, that out-shone all the rest of the Firmament, quickly came to
the notice of the great Archbishop of Canterbury, who would needs have him
preach before him; which he performed not less to his wonder than satisfaction;
His discourse was beyond exception, and beyond imitation: yet the wise Prelate
thought him too young; but the great Youth humbly begged his Grace to pardon
that fault, and promised, If he lived, he would mend it. However the grand
Patron of Learning and Ingenuity, thought it for the advantage of the World,
that such mighty Parts should be afforded better opportunities of study and
Improvement, than a course of constant preaching would allow of; and to that
purpose he placed him in his own College of All Souls in Oxford; where Love
and Admiration still waited upon him: which so long as there is any spark of
ingenuity in the breasts of men, must needs be the inseparable Attendants of so
extraordinary a worth and sweetness. He had not been long here, before my Lord
of Canterbury bestowed upon him the Rectory of Uphingham in Rutland-shire, and
soon after preferred him to be Chaplain to King Charles the Martyr of blessed
and immortal Memory. Thus were preferments heaped upon him, but still less than
his deserts; and that not through the fault of his great Masters, but because
the amplest Honors and Rewards were poor and inconsiderable, compared with the
greatness of his Worth and Merit.

This Great Man had no sooner launched into the World, but a fearful Tempest
arose, and a barbarous and unnatural War disturbed a long and uninterrupted
Peace and Tranquillity, and brought all things into disorder and confusion; but
his Religion taught him to be Loyal, and engaged him on his Prince's side,
whose Cause and Quarrel he always owned and maintained with a great courage
and constancy; till at last, he and his little Fortune were shipwrackt in that
great Hurricane, that overturned both Church and State: This fatal Storm cast
him ashore in a private corner of the World, and a tender Providence shrouded
him under her Wings, and the Prophet was fed in the Wilderness; and his great
worthiness procured him friends, that supplied him with bread and necessaries.
In this Solitude he began to write those excellent Discourses, which are enough
of themselves to furnish a Library, and will be famous to all succeeding
Generations, for their greatness of Wit, and profoundness of Judgment, and
richness of Fancy, and clearness of Expression, and copiousness of Invention,
and general usefulness to all the purposes of a Christian: And by these he soon
got a great Reputation among all persons of Judgment and Indifferency, and his
Name will grow greater still, as the World grows better and wiser.

When he had spent some Years in this Retirement, it pleased God to visit his
Family with Sickness, and to take to himself the dear Pledges of his Favor,
three Sons of great hopes and expectations, within the space of two or three
Months: And though he had learned a quiet Submission unto the Divine Will; yet
the Affliction touched him so sensibly, that it made him desirous to leave the
Country; And going to London, he there met my Lord Conway, a Person of great
Honor and Generosity; who making him a kind Proffer, the good man embraced it,
and that brought him over into Ireland, and settled him at Portmore, a place
made for Study and Contemplation, which he therefore dearly loved; and here he
wrote his Cases of Conscience: A Book that is able alone to give its Author
Immortality.

By this time the Wheel of Providence brought about the King's happy
Restoration, and there began a new World, and the Spirit of God moved upon the
face of the Waters, and out of a confused Chaos brought forth Beauty and Order,
and all the Three Nations were inspired with a new Life, and became drunk with
an excess of Joy: Among the rest, this Loyal Subject went over to congratulate
the Prince and Peoples Happiness, and bear a part in the Universal Triumph.

It was not long ere his Sacred Majesty began the settlement of the Church, and
the great Doctor Jeremy Tailor was resolved upon for the Bishopric of Down and
Conor; and not long after, Dromore was added to it: and it was but reasonable
that the King and Church should consider their Champion, and reward the pains
and sufferings he under-went in the Defense of their Cause and Honor. With
what care and faithfulness he discharged his Office, we are all his Witnesses;
what good Rules and Directions he gave his Clergy, and how he taught us the
practice of them by his own Example. Upon his coming over Bishop, he was made a
Privy-Councellor; and the University of Dublin gave him their Testimony, by
recommending him for their Vice Chancellor: which honorable Office he kept to
his dying day.

During his being in this See, he wrote several excellent Discourses,
particularly his Disswasive from Popery (which was received by a general
approbation;) and a Vindication of it (now in the Press) from some impertinent
Cavillers, that pretend to answer Books, when there is nothing toward it, more
than the very Title Page. This great Prelate improved his Talent with a mighty
Industry, and managed his Stewardship rarely well; and his Master, when he
called for his Accounts, found him busy and at his Work, and employed upon an
excellent Subject, A Discourse upon the Beatitudes; which, if finished, would
have been of great use to the World, and solved most of the Cases of Conscience
that occur to a Christian, in all the varieties of states and conditions. But
the All-wise God has ordained it otherwise, and has called home his good
Servant, to give him a portion in that Blessedness that Jesus Christ has
promised to all his faithful Disciples and Followers.

Thus having given you a brief Account of his Life, I know you will now expect
a character of his Person; but I foresee, it will befall him, as it does all
Glorious Subjects, that are but disparaged by a commendation; One thing I am
secure of, that I shall not be thought to speak Hyperbole's; for the Subject
can hardly be reached, by any expressions: For he was none of God's ordinary
works, but his Endowments were so many, and so great, as really made him a
Miracle.

Nature had befriended him much in his Constitution; for he was a person of a
most sweet and obliging Humor, of great Candor and Ingenuity; and there was
so much of Salt and fineness of Wit, and prettiness of Address in his familiar
Discourses, as made his Conversation have all the pleasantness of a Comedy, and
all the usefulness of a Sermon: His Soul was made up of Harmony, and he never
spoke, but he charmed his Hearer, not only with the clearness of his Reason;
but all his Words, and his very Tone, and Cadencies were strangely Musical.

But, That which did most of all captivate and enravish, was, The gaiety and
richness of his Fancy; for he had much in him of that natural Enthusiasm, that
inspires all great Poets and Orators; and there was a generous ferment in his
Blood and Spirits, that set his Fancy bravely a work, and made it swell, and
teem, and become pregnant to such degrees of Luxuriancy, as nothing but the
greatness of his Wit and judgment, could have kept it within due bounds and
measures.

And indeed it was a rare Mixture, and a single Instance, hardly to be found in
an Age: for the great Tryer of Wits has told us, That there is a peculiar and
several Complexion, required for Wit, and Judgment, and Fancy; and yet you
might have found all these, in this great Personage, in their Eminency and
Perfection. But that which made his Wit and Judgment so considerable, was the
largeness and freedom of his Spirit, for truth is plain and easy to a mind
dis-intangled from Superstition and Prejudice; He was one of the (...), a sort
of brave Philosophers that Laertius speaks of, that did not addict themselves
to any particular Sect, but ingeniously sought for Truth among all the
wrangling Schools; and they found her miserably torn and rent to pieces, and
parcell'd into Rags, by the several contending Parties, and so disfigured and
misshapen, that it was hard to know her; but they made a shift to gather up her
scattered Limbs, which as soon as they came together, by a strange sympathy and
connaturalness, presently united into a lovely and beautiful body. This was the
Spirit of this Great Man; he weighed men's Reasons, and not their Names, and was
not scared with the ugly Vizars men usually put upon Persons they hate, and
Opinions they dislike; nor affrighted with the Anathema's and Execrations of an
infallible Chair, which he looked upon only as Bug-bears to terrify weak, and
childish minds. He considered that it is not likely any one Party should wholly
engross Truth to themselves; that Obedience is the only way to true Knowledge;
(which is an argument that he has managed rarely well, in that excellent Sermon
of his, which he calls, Via Intelligentiae;) that God always, and only teaches
docible and ingenuous minds, that are willing to hear, and ready to obey
according to their Light; that it is impossible, a pure, humble, resigned,
God-like Soul, should be kept out of Heaven, whatever mistakes it might be
subject to in this state of Mortality; that the design of Heaven is not to fill
men's heads, and feed their Curiosities, but to better their Hearts, and mend
their Lives. Such Considerations as these, made him impartial in his
Disquisitions, and give a due allowance to the Reasons of his Adversary, and
contend for Truth, and not for Victory.

And now you will easily believe that an ordinary Diligence would be able to
make great Improvements upon such a Stock of Parts and Endowments; but to these
advantages of Nature, and excellency of his Spirit, be added an indefatigable
Industry, and God gave a plentiful Benediction: for, there were very few Kinds
of Learning, but he was a Mystes, and a great Master in them: He was a rare
Humanist, and hugely versed in all the polite parts of Learning; and had
thoroughly concocted all the ancient Moralists, Greek and Roman, Poets and
Orators; and was not unacquainted with the refined Wits of the later Ages,
whether French, or Italian.

But he had not only the Accomplishments of a Gentleman, but so universal were
his Parts, that they were proportioned to every thing; and though his Spirit
and Humor were made up of Smoothness and Gentleness, yet he could bear with
the Harshness and Roughness of the Schools; and was not unseen in their
Subtilties and Spinosities; and upon occasion could make them serve his
purpose; and yet, I believe, he thought many of them very near a kin to the
famous Knight of the Mancha, and would make sport sometimes with the Romantic
Sophistry, and fantastic Adventures of School-Errantry. His Skill was great,
both in the Civil and Canon Law, and Casuistical Divinity; and he was a rare
Conductor of Souls, and knew how to Counsel, and to Advise; to solve
Difficulties, and determine Cases, and quiet Consciences. And he was no Novice
in Mr. I. S. new Science of Controversy; but could manage an Argument, and
Reparties with a strange dexterity; He understood what the several Parties in
Christendom have to say for themselves, and could plead their Cause to better
advantage than any Advocate of their Tribe: and when he had done, he could
confute them too; and show, That better Arguments than ever they could produce
for themselves, would afford no sufficient ground for their fond Opinions.

It would be too great a Task to pursue his Accomplishments through the various
Kinds of Literature: I shall content my self to add only his great Acquaintance
with the Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers, and the Doctors of the first and
purest Ages both of the Greek and Latin Church; which he has made use of
against the Romanists, to vindicate the Church of England from the Challenge of
Innovation, and prove her to be truly Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolical.

But Religion and Virtue is the Crown of all other Accomplishments; and it was
the Glory of this great man, to be thought a Christian, and whatever you added
to it, he looked upon as a term of diminution: and yet he was a Zealous Son of
the Church of England; but that was because he judged her (and with great
reason) a Church the most purely Christian of any in the World. In his younger
years he met with some Assaults from Popery; and the high pretensions of their
Religious Orders were very accommodate to his Devotional Temper: but he was
always so much Master of himself, that he would never be governed by any thing
but Reason, and the evidence of Truth, which engaged him in the study of those
Controversies; and to how good purpose, the World is by this time a sufficient
Witness: But the longer, and the more he considered, the worse he liked the
Roman Cause, and became at last to censure them with some severity; But I
confess I have so great an opinion of his Judgment, and the charitableness of
his Spirit, that I am afraid he did not think worse of them than they deserve.

But Religion is not a matter of Theory and Orthodox Notions; and it is not
enough to believe aright, but we must practice accordingly; and to master our
passions, and to make a right use of that (...), and power that God has given
us over our own actions, is a greater glory than all other Accomplishments that
can adorn the mind of Man; and therefore I shall close my Character of this
great Personage with a touch upon some of those Virtues, for which his Memory
will be precious to all Posterity. He was a Person of great Humility; and,
notwithstanding his stupendous Parts, and Learning, and Eminency of Place, he
had nothing in him of Pride and Humor, but was Courteous and Affable, and of
easy Access, and would lend a ready Ear to the complaints, yea to the
impertinencies, of the meanest persons. His Humility was coupled with an
Extraordinary Piety; and, I believe, he spent the greatest part of his time in
Heaven; his solemn hours of Prayer took up a considerable portion of his Life;
and we are not to doubt, but he had learned of S. Paul to pray continually; and
that occasional Ejaculations, and frequent Aspirations and Emigrations of his
Soul after God, made up the best part of his Devotions. But he was not only a
Good Man Godward, but he was come to the top of S. Peter's gradation, and to
all his other Virtues added a large and diffusive Charity: And, whoever
compares his plentiful Incomes, with the inconsiderable Estate he left at his
Death, will be easily convinced that Charity was Steward for a great proportion
of his Revenue. But the Hungry that he fed, and the Naked that he clothed, and
the Distressed that he supplied, and the Fatherless that he provided for; the
poor Children that he put to Apprentice, and brought up at School, and
maintained at the University, will now sound a Trumpet to that Charity which he
dispersed with his right hand, but would not suffer his left hand to have any
knowledge of it.

To sum up all in a few words; This Great Prelate he had the good Humor of a
Gentleman, the Eloquence of an Orator, the Fancy of a Poet, the Acuteness of a
School-man, the Profoundness of a Philosopher, the Wisdom of a Counselor, the
Sagacity of a Prophet, the Reason of an Angel, and the Piety of a Saint: He had
Devotion enough for a Cloister, Learning enough for an University, and Wit
enough for a College of Virtuosi; and, had his Parts and Endowments been
parcell'd out among his poor Clergy that he left behind him, it would perhaps
have made one of the best Dioceses in the World. But alas! Our Father, our
Father! the Horses of our Israel, and the Chariot thereof; he is gone, and has
carried his Mantle and his Spirit along with him up to Heaven; and the Sons of
the Prophets have lost all their beauty and luster which they enjoyed only from
the reflection of his Excellencies, which were bright and radiant enough to cast
a glory upon a whole Order of Men. But the Sun of this our world after many
attempts to break through the Crust of an earthly Body, is at last swallowed up
in the great Vortex of Eternity, and there all his Maculae are scattered and
dissolved, and he is fixed in an Orb of Glory, and shines among his
Brethren-stars, that in their several Ages gave light to the World, and turned
many Souls unto Righteousness; and we that are left behind, though we can never
reach his Perfections, must study to imitate his Virtues, that we may at last
come to sit at his feet in the Mansions of Glory; which God grant for his
infinite mercies in Jesus Christ: To whom, with the Father, through the Eternal
Spirit, be ascribed all Honor and Glory, Worship and Thanksgiving, Love and
Obedience, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

