A DISCOVRSE OF Baptism, ITS INSTITUTION, and Efficacy upon all Believers.

Together with A CONSIDERATION of the Practice of the CHURCH IN BAPTIZING
INFANTS of BELIEVING PARENTS: And the Practice justified.

By JER: TAILOR D. D.

(...).

Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, etc.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-Lane.
MDCLIII.

To the Reader.
Be pleased to take notice, That this Discourse was not intended by the Author
to have been sent abroad thus by it self, but was fitted by him to the air and
mode of other Discourses, wherewith he had designed it to be joined. But some
persons of judgment, to whose perusal it was committed, supposing that if this
should be kept in till those other could be finished, some disadvantage might
arise to the cause which it asserts, wished and advised it might be published
by it self. To whose desires the Author (against his first design) has
condescended, upon this persuasion, That though it appears thus without some
formalities and complements requisite to an entire Treatise, yet, as to the
thing it self, there is nothing wanting to it which he believed material to the
Question, or useful to the Church. And as for those Arguments which in The
Liberty of Prophesying, Sect. 18. are alleged against Paedobaptism, and in the
opinion of some, do seem to stand in need of answering, he had it once in
thought to have answered them: but upon these considerations he forbore, 1.
Because those Arguments are not good in themselves, or to the Question
precisely considered: but only by relation to the preceding Arguments there
brought for Paedobaptim, they may seem good one against another, but these in
the Plea for the Anababaptists, have no strength, but what is accidental (as he
conceives.) 2. Because in this Discourse he has really laid-such grounds, and
proved them, that upon their supposition all those Arguments in The Liberty of
Prophesying, and all other which he ever heard of, will fall of themselves. 3.
Because those Arguments, to his sense, are so weak, and so relying upon failing
and deceitful Principles, that he was loath to do them so much reputation, as
to account them worthy the answering. 4. But because there may he some
necessities which he knows not of, and are better observed by them who live in
the midst of them, then by himself, who is thrust into a Retirement in Wales,
therefore he accounts himself at rest in this particular, because he has
understood that his very worthy friend Dr. H. Hammond has in his charity and
humility descended to answer that Collection; and hopes, that both their hands
being so fast clasped in a mutual complication, will do some help and
assistance to this Question, by which the Ark of the Church is so violently
shaken.

A DISCOURSE Of BAPTISM.
WHen the holy Jesus was to begin his Prophetical Office, and to lay the
foundation. 1.
of his Church on the Cornerstone, he first tempered the Cement with water,
and then with blood, and afterward built it up by the hands of the Spirit;
Himself entered at that door by which his disciples for ever after were to
follow him; for therefore he went in at the door of Baptism, that he might
hallow the entrance which himself made to the House he was no building.

As it was in the old, so it is in the new Creation; out of the waters God
produced every living creature: and when at first. 2.
the Spirit moved upon the waters, and gave life, it was the type of what was
designed in the Renovation. Every thing that lives now, is born of Water and
the Spirit; and Christ, who is our Creator and Redeemer in the new birth,
opened the fountains and hallowed the stream: Christ who is our life went down
into the waters of Baptism, and we who descend thither find the effects of
life; it is living water, of which who so drinks, needs not to drink of it
again, for it shall be in him a Well of water springing John 4. 14.
up to life eternal.

But because everything is resolved into the same principles. 3.
from whence they are taken, the old world which by the power of God came from
the waters, by their own sin fell into the waters again, and were all-drowned,
and only eight persons were saved by an Ark: and the world renewed upon the
stock and reserves of that mercy, consigned the Sacrament of Baptism in another
figure; for then God gave his sign from Heaven, that by water the world should
never again perish: but he meant that they should be saved by water: for
Baptism, which is a figure like to this does also now save us by the
resurrection 1 Pet. 3. 21.
of Jesus Christ.

After this, the Jews report that the world took up the doctrine of Baptisms,
in remembrance that the iniquity of the old. 4.
world was purged by water; and they washed all that came to the service of the
true God, and by that Baptism bound them to the observation of the Precepts
which God gave to Noah.

But when God separated a family for his own especial service, he gave them a
Sacrament of initiation, but it was a Sacrament. 5.
of blood, the Covenant of Circumcision: and this was the forerunner of
Baptism, but not a type; when that was abrogated, this came into the place of
it, and that consigned the same faith which this professes: but it could not
properly be a type, whose nature is by a likeness of matter or ceremony to
represent the same mystery. Neither is a Ceremony, as Baptism truly is,
properly capable of having a type, it self is but a type of a Umbra in lege,
imago in Evangelio, veritas in coelo. S. Ambr.
greater mysteriousness: and the nature of types is, in shadow to describe by
dark lines a future substance; so that although Circumcision might be a type of
the effects and graces bestowed in Baptism, yet of the Baptism or absolution it
self, it cannot be properly; because of the unlikeness of the symboles and
configurations, and because they are both equally distant from substances,
which types are to consign and represent. The first Bishops of Jerusalem, and
all the Christian Jews for many years retained Circumcision together with
Baptism; and Christ himself, who was circumcised, was also baptized; and
therefore it is not so proper to call Circumcision a type of Baptism: it was
rather a seal and sign of the same Covenant to Abraham and the Fathers, and to
all Israel, as Baptism is to all ages of the Christian Church.

And because this Rite could not be administered to all persons, and was not at
all times after its institution, God was. 6.
pleased by a proper and specific type to consign this Rite of Baptism, which
he intended to all, and that for ever: and God, when the family of his Church
grew separate, notorious, numerous and distinct, he sent them into their own
Country by a Baptism through which the whole Nation passed: for all the
fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all
baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea; so by a double figure
foretelling, That as they were initiated to Moses Law by the Cloud above and
the Sea beneath: so 1 Cor. 10. 2.
should all the persons of the Church, Men, Women and Children, be initiated
unto Christ by the Spirit from above and the Water below: for it was the design
of the Apostle in that discourse, to represent that the Fathers and we were
equal as to the privileges of the Covenant; he proved that we do not exceed
them, and it ought therefore to be certain that they do not exceed us, nor
their children ours.

But after this, something was to remain which might not only consign the
Covenant which God made with Abraham, but be. 7.
as a passage from the Fathers through the Synagogue to the Church; from
Abraham by Moses to Christ: and that was Circumcision, which was a Rite which
God chose to be a mark to the posterity of Abraham, to distinguish them from
the Nations which were not within the Covenant of Grace, and to be a seal of
the righteousness of faith, which God made to be the spirit and life of the
Covenant.

But because Circumcision although it was ministered to all the males, yet it
was not to the females; and although they and. 8.
all the Nation was baptized and initiated into Moses in the Cloud and the Sea,
therefore the Children of Israel by imitation of the Patriarchs the posterity
of Noah, used also Ceremonial Baptisms to their women and to their Proselytes,
and to all that were circumcised; and the Jews deliver, that Sarah and Rebecca
when the were adopted into the family of the Church, that is, of Abraham and
Isaac, were baptized: and so were all strangers that were married to the sons
of Israel. And that we may think this to be typical of Christian Baptism, the
Doctors of the Jews had a Tradition, that when the Messiah would come, there
should be so many Proselytes that they could not be circumcised, but should be
baptized. The Tradition proved true, but not for their reason.

But that this Rite of admitting into mysteries, and institutions, and offices
of religion by Baptisms, was used by the posterity of Noah, or at least very
early among the Jews, besides the testimonies of their own Doctors, I am the
rather induced to believe, because the Heathen had the same Rite in many places
and in several Religions: so they initiated disciples into the secrets of
Tertui. de praescrip. c. 40.
Mithra; and the Priests of Cotyttus were called Scholiast. in Ju. Sat. 2. l. 1.
Baptae, because by Baptism they were admitted into the Religion; and they O
nimium faciles qui tristia crimina caedis Tolli fluminea posse put at is aqua.
thought Murder, Incest, Rapes, and the worst or Crimes, were purged by
dipping in the Sea, or fresh Springs; and a Proselyte is called in Arrianus,
(...), intinctus, a baptized person.

But this Ceremony of baptizing was so certain and usual among the Jews, in
their admitting Proselytes and adopting into. 9.
institutions, that to baptize and to make disciples are all one; and when John
the Baptist by an order from Heaven Joh. 4. 14.
went to prepare the way to the Coming of our blessed Lord he preached
Repentance, and baptized all that professed they did repent. He taught the Jews
to live good lives, and baptized with the Baptism of a Prophet, such as was not
unusually done by extraordinary and holy persons in the change or renewing of
Discipline or Religion. Whether John's Baptism was from heaven, or of men,
Christ asked the Pharisees. That it was from Heaven, the people therefore
believed, because he was a Prophet, and a holy person: but it implies also,
That such Baptisms are sometimes from men, that is, used by persons of an
eminent Religion, or extraordinary fame for the gathering of Disciples and
admitting Proselytes: and the Disciples of Christ did so too, even before
Christ had instituted the Sacrament for the Christian Church, the Disciples
that came to Christ were baptized by his Apostles.

And now we are come to the gates of Baptism. All these till John were but
types and preparatory Baptisms,. 10.
and John's Baptism was but the prologue to the Baptism of Christ. The Jewish
Baptisms admitted Proselytes to Moses and to the Law of Ceremonies; John's
Baptism called them to believe in the Messiah now appearing, and to repent of
their sins, to enter into the Kingdom which was now at hand, and preached that
Repentance which should be for the remission of sins. His Baptism remitted no
sins, but preached and consigned Repentance, which, in the belief of the Audi
quid Scripturae doceant: Johannis Baptisma non tam peccata dimisit, quam
Baptisma poenitentiae fuit in peccatorum remissionem, idque in futuram
remissionem quae esset postea per sanctificationem Christi subsequutura.
Hieronym. adv. Luciterian.
Messiah whom he pointed to, should pardon sins. But because he was taken from
his office before the work was completed, the Disciples of Christ finished it:
They went forth preaching the same Sermon of Repentance, and the approach of
the Kingdom, and baptized or made Proselytes or Disciples, as John did; only
they (as it is probable) baptized in the Name of Jesus, which it is not so
likely John did. Vide supra. Sect. 9. n. 1.
And this very thing might be the cause of the different forms of Acts 8. 16.
Acts 2. 38.
Baptism recorded in the Acts, of baptizing In the Name of Jesus, and at other
times In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; the former being the
manner of doing it in pursuance of the design of John's Baptism; and the latter
the form of institution by Christ for the whole Christian Church, appointed
after his resurrection: the Disciples at first using promiscuously what was
used by the same authority, though with some difference of Mystery.

The Holy Jesus having found his way ready prepared by the. 11.
preaching of John, and by his Baptism, and the Jewish manner of adopting
Proselytes and Disciples into the Religion, a way chalked out for him to
initiate Disciples into his Religion, took what was so prepared, and changed it
into a perpetual Sacrament. He kept the Ceremony, that they who were led only
by outward things, might be the better called in, and easier enticed into the
Religion, when they entered by a Ceremony which their Nation always used in the
like cases: and therefore without change of the outward act, he put into it a
new spirit, and gave it a new grace and a proper efficacy: He sublimed it to
higher ends, and adorned it with stars of Heaven: He made it to signify
greater mysteries, to convey greater blessings, to consign the bigger Promises,
to cleanse deeper then the skin, and to carry Proselytes further then the gates
of the institution. For so he was pleased to do in the other Sacrament; he took
the Ceremony which he found ready in the custom of the Jews, where the Major
domo after the Paschal Supper gave Bread and Wine to every person of his
family; he changed nothing of it without, but transferred the Rite to greater
mysteries, and put his own Spirit to their Sign, and it became a Sacrament
Evangelical. It was so also in the matter of Excommunication, where the Jewish
practice was made to pass into Christian discipline: without violence and
noise old things became new, while he fulfilled the Law, making it up in full
measures of the Spirit.

By these steps Baptism passed on to a divine Evangelical institution,. 12.
which we find to be consigned by three Evangelists. Go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Mat. 28. 19.
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. It was one of the
last Commandments the Holy Jesus gave upon the earth, when he taught his
Apostles the things which concerned his kingdom. For he that believes and is
baptized, shall Mark 16. 16. John 3. 5.
be saved: but, Unless a man be born of Water and the holy Spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of Heaven; agreeable to the decretory words of God by
Abraham in the Circumcision, to which Baptism does succeed in the consignation
of the same Covenant, and the same Spiritual Promises; The uncircumcised Genesis
17. 14.
child whose flesh is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his
people; he has broken my Covenant. The Manichees, Seleucus, Hermias, and their
followers, people of a days abode S. August. haeres. 46. 59.
and small Interest, but of malicious doctrine, taught Baptism not to be
necessary, not to be used; upon this ground, because they supposed that it was
proper to John to baptize with water, and reserved for Christ as his peculiar,
to baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire. Indeed Christ baptized none
otherwise. He sent his Spirit upon the Church in Pentecost and baptized them
with fire, the Spirit appearing like a flame: but he appointed his Apostles to
baptize with water, and they did so, and their successors after them, every
where and for ever, not expounding, but obeying the praeceptive words of their
Lord, which were almost the last that he spoke upon earth. And I cannot think
it necessary to prove this to be necessary by any more Arguments. For the words
are so plain, that they need no exposition; and yet if they had been obscure,
the universal practice of the Apostles and the Church for ever, is a sufficient
declaration of the Commandment: No Tradition is more universal, no not of
Scripture it self; no words are plainer, no not the Ten Commandments: and if
any suspicion can be superinduced by any zealous or less discerning person, it
will need no other refutation, but to turn his eyes to those lights by which
himself sees Scripture to be the Word of God, and the Commandments to be the
declaration of his Will.

But that which will be of greatest concernment in this affair, is to consider
the great benefits are conveyed to us in this Sacramnet;. 13.
for this will highly conclude, That the Precept was for ever, which God so
seconds with his grace and mighty blessings; and the susception of it
necessary, because we cannot be without those excellent things which are the
graces of the Sacrament.

1. The first fruit is, That in Baptism we are admitted to the Kingdom of
Christ, presented unto him, consigned with his. 14.
Sacrament, enter into his Militia, give up our understandings and our choice
to the obedience of Christ, and in all senses that we can, become his
Disciples, witnessing a good confession, and undertaking a holy life: and
therefore in Scripture (...) and (...), are conjoined in the significations, as
they are in the mystery: it is a giving up our names to Christ, and it is part
of the foundation of the first Principles of the Religion, as appears in S.
Paul's Catechism; it is so the first thing, that it is Heb. 6. 1.
for babes, and Neophytes, in which they are matriculated and adopted into the
house of their Father, and taken into the hands of their Mother. Upon this
account Baptism is called in antiquity, Ecclesiae janua, Porta gratiae, and
primus introitus sanctorum ad aeternam Dei and Ecclesiae consuetudinem. The
gates of the S. August. l. 2. c. 1. de Cate. rudib.
Church, the door of Grace, the first entrance of the Saints to an eternal
conversation with God and the Church. Sacramentum initiationis, and intrantium
Christianismum investituram, S, Bernard calls it: The Sacrament of initiation,
and the investiture of them that enter into the Religion; and the person so
entering is called (...) and (...), one of the Religion, Just. Martyr. Apol. 2.
or a Proselyte and Convert, and one added to the number of the Church, in
imitation of that of S. Luke, (...), God added to the Church those that should
be saved; just as the Church does to this day and for Acts 2. 47.
ever, baptizing Infants and Catechumens: (...), they are added to the Church,
that they may be added to the Lord, and the number of the inhabitants of Heaven.

2. The next step beyond this, is Adoption into the Covenant,. 15.
which is an immediate consequent of the first presentation, this (...). Cyril.
Hierosol. Catec. 2. 1 Cor. 12. 13.
being the first act of man, that the first act of God. And this is called by
S. Paul, a being baptized in one spirit into one body, that is, we are made
capable of the Communion of Saints, the blessings of the faithful, the
privileges of the Church: by this we are, as S. Luke calls it, (...),
ordained, Acts 13. 48.
or disposed, put into the order of eternal life, being made members of the
mystical body under Christ our Head.

3. And therefore Baptism is a new birth, by which we enter. 16.
into the new world, the new creation, the blessings and spiritualties of the
Kingdom; and this is the expression which our Savior himself used to
Nicodemus, Unless a man be born of John 3. 5.
Water and the Spirit: and it is by S. Paul called (...), Titus 3. 5.
the laver of Regeneration; for now we begin to be reckoned in a new Census or
account, God is become our Father, Christ our elder Brother, the Spirit the
earnest of our inheritance, the Church our Mother, our food is the body and
blood of our Lord; Faith is our learning, (...). Damasc. l. 4. orth. fid. c. 10.
Religion our employment, and our whole life is spiritual, and Heaven the
object of our Hopes, and the mighty price of our high Calling. And from this
time forward we have a new principle put into us, the Spirit of Grace, which
besides our soul and body is a principle of action, of one nature, and shall
with them enter into the portion of our inherirance. And therefore the
Primitive Christians, who consigned all their affairs and goods and writings
with some marks of their Lord, usually writing (...), Jesus Christ the Son of
God our Savior; they made an abbreviature by writing only the Capitals, thus:
(...). which the Heathens in mockery and derision made (...), which signifies a
Fish, and they used it for Christ as a name of reproach: but the Christians
owned the name, and turned it into a pious Metaphor, and were content that they
should enjoy their pleasure in the Acostrich; but upon that occasion Tertullian
speaks pertinently to this Article, Nos pisciculi Lib. de Baptis. c. 1.
secundum (...) nostrum Iesum Christum, in aqua nascimur, Christ whom you call
a fish, we knowledge to be our Lord and Savior; and we, if you please, are the
little fishes, for we are born in water; thence we derive our spiritual life.
And because from henceforward we are a new creation, the Church uses to assign
new relations to the Catechumens, Spiritual Fathers and Susceptors; and at
their entrance into Baptism, the Christians and Jewish Proselytes did use to
cancel all secular affections to their temporal relatives, Nec quicquam prius
imbuuntur quam Lib. 5. Hist.
contemnere Deos, exuere patriam, parents, liberos, fratres vilia habere, said
Tacitus of the Christians: which was true in the sense only as Christ said, He
that death not hate father or mother for my sake, is not worthy of me; that is,
he that does not hate them prae me, rather then forsake me, forsake them, is
unworthy of me.

4. In Baptism all our sins are pardoned, according to the. 17.
words of a Prophet: I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and Ezekiel. 36. 25.
(...). Symb. Nicen. lib. 1. c. 3. in Johan.
ye shall be clean from all your filthiness. The Catechumen descends into the
font a sinner, he arises purified; he goes down the son of death, he comes up
the son of the resurrection; he enters in the son of folly and praevarication,
he returns the son of reconciliation; he stoops down the child of wrath, and
ascends the heir of mercy; he was the child of the Devil, and now he is the
servant and the son of God. They are the words of Ven. Bid concerning this
Mystery. And this was ingeniously signified by that Greek inscription upon a
Font, which is so prettily contrived, that the words may be read after the
Greek or after the Hebrew manner, and be exactly the same, (...), Lord wash my
sin, and not my face, only. And so it is intended and promised, Arise and be
Acts 22. 16.
baptized, and wash away thy sins, and call on the Name of the Lord, said
Ananias to Saul; for, Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it, (...), with the washing of water in the word,
that is, Baptism in the Christian Religion: and therefore Ephesians. 5. 26. Lib. 4.
adv. Marc. c. 9. (...). Gr. pro.
Tertullian calls Baptism lavacrum compendiatum, a compendious laver; that is,
an entire cleansing the soul in that one action justly and rightly performed:
In the rehearsal of which doctrine, it was not an unpleasant Etymology that
Anastasius Sinaita gave of Baptism; (...) Annon ita credimur quia omne genus
peccati cum ad salutare lavacrum venimus aufertur? Origin. homil. 15. in Jesu.

Ecce quicquid iniquitatum sempiternus ignis excoqucre and expiare vix posset,
subito sacro font submersum est, and de aeternis debitis brevissimo lavacri
compendio cum indulgentissimo creditore transactum est. Ambros. l. 1. c. 7. de
poen.

Qui dicit peccata in Baptismo non funditus dimitti, dicat in mari rubro
AEgyptios non veraciter mortuos. S. Greg. M. l. 9. ep. 39.


quasi (...), in which our sins are thrown off; and they fall like leeches when
they are full of blood and water, or like the chains from S. Peter's hands at
the presence of the Angel. Baptism is (...), an intirefull forgiveness of
sins, so that they shall never be called again to scrutiny.

-- -- -- Omnia Daemonis arma Phavorin. l. 2.
His merguntur aquis, quibus ille renascitur Infans Qui captivus erat -- the
captivity of the soul is Arator. l. 2. Hist. Apostal.
taken away by the blood of Redemption, and the fiery darts of the Devil are
quenched by these salutary waters; and what the flames of hell are expiating or
punishing to eternal ages, that is washed off quickly in the Holy Font, and an
eternal debt paid in an instant: for so sure as the Egyptians were drowned in
the Red sea, so sure are our sins washed in this holy flood: for this is a Red
sea too; these waters signify the blood of Christ, these are they that have
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, (...). Rev.
7. 14. 1 John 1. 7. Acts 22. 16. Tit. 3. 5. Heb. 9. 14.
The blood of Christ cleanses us, the water cleanses us, the Spirit purifies
us; the Blood by the Spirit, the Spirit by the Water, all in Baptism, and in
pursuance of that baptismal state. These three are they that bear record in 1 John 5. 8.
earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the blood, (...), these three agree in one,
or are to one purpose; they agree in Baptism, and in the whole pursuance of the
assistances, which a Christian needs all days of his life: And therefore S.
Cyril calls Baptism (...), the Antitype of the Passions of Christ: it does
preconsign the death of Christ; and does the infancy of the work of grace, but
not weakly; it brings from death to life; and though it brings us but to the
birth in the new life, yet that is a greater change then is in all the periods
of our growth to manhood, to a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

5. Baptism does not only pardon our sins, but puts us into a state of pardon
for the time to come. Eor Baptism is the beginning. 18.
of the New life, and an admission of us into the Evangelical Covenant, which
on our parts consists in a sincere and timely endeavor to glorify God by Faith
and Obedience: and on Gods part, he will pardon what is past, assist us for the
future, and not measure us by grains and scruples, or exact our duties by the
measure of an Angel, but by the span of a man's hand. So that by Baptism we are
consigned to the mercies of God and the graces of the Gospel; that is, that our
pardon be continued and our piety be a state of Repentance. And therefore that
Baptism which in the Nicene Creed we profess to be for the remission of sins,
is called in the Jerusalem Creed, The Baptism of Repentance; that is, it is the
entrance of a new life, the gate to a perpetual change and reformation, all the
way continuing our title to, and hopes of forgiveness of sins. And this
excellency is clearly recorded by S. Paul, The kindeness and love of God our
Savior toward man has appeared; not by Titus 3. 4, 5.
works in righteousness which we have done: that is the formality of the
Gospel Covenant, not to be exacted by the strict measures of the Law, but
according to his mercy he saved us, that is, by gentleness and remissions, by
pitying and pardoning us, by relieving and supporting us, because he remembers
that we are but dust; and all this mercy we are admitted to, and is conveyed to
us, (...), by the laver of regeneration, and the renewing of the holy Ghost.
And this plain evident doctrine was observed, explicated and urged against the
Messalians, who said that Baptism was like a razor, that cut away all the sins
that were past, or presently adhering, but not the sins of our future life;
(...). Theodoret. Ep. de divin. Decret, cap. de Baptis.
This Sacrament promises more and greater things, It is the earnest of future
good things, the type of the Resurrection, the communication of the Lords
Passion, the partaking of his Resurrection, the robe of Righteousness, the
garment of gladness, the vestment of Light, or rather Light it self. And for
this reason it is, that Baptism is not to be repeated, because it does at once
all that it can do at a hundred times: for it admits us to the condition of
Repentance and Evangelical Mercy, to a state of pardon for our infirmities and
sins, which we timely and effectually leave: and this is a thing that can be
done but once, as a man can begin but once; he that has once entered in at this
gate of life is always in possibility of pardon, if he be in a possibility of
working and doing after the manner of a man, that which he has promised to the
Son of God. And this was expressly delivered and observed by S. Austin. That
which the Lib. de Nuptiis. cap. 23. and Tract. 124. in Johan.
Apostle says, Cleansing him with the washing of water in the word, is to be
understood, that in the same laver of regeneration, and word of sanctification,
all the evils of the regenerate are cleansed and healed: not only the sins
that are past, which all are now remitted in Baptism; but also those that are
contracted afterward by humane ignorance and infirmity: Not that Baptism be
repeated as often as we sin, but because by this which is once administered, is
brought to pass that pardon Vide Salmeron. tom. 13. p. 487.
of all sins, not only of those that are past, but also those which will be
committed afterward, is obtained. The Messalians denied this, and it was part
of their Heresy in the undervaluing of Baptism; and for it they are most
excellently confuted by Isidore Pelusiot, in his third Book, 195 Epistle to the
Count Hermin: whither I refer the Reader.

In proportion to this Doctrine it is, that the holy Scripture. 19.
calls upon us to live a holy life, in pursuance of this grace of Baptism. And
S. Paul recalls the lapsed Galatians to their Covenant, and the grace God
stipulated in Baptism: Ye are all children of God by faith in Jesus Christ;
that is, heirs of Gil. 3. 26.
the promise. and Abraham's seed: that promise which cannot be disannulled,
increased or diminished, but is the same to us as Verse 29.
it was to Abraham; the same before the Law and after. Therefore do not you
hope to be justified by the Law, for you are entered into the Covenant of Faith,
and are to be justified thereby. This is all your hope, by this you must stand
for ever, or you cannot stand at all; but by this you may: for you are Gods
children by faith; that is, not by the Law, or the Covenant of Works: And that
you may remember whence you are going, and return again, he proves, that they
are the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ, because they have been
baptized into Christ, and so put on Christ. This makes you children, and such
as are to be saved by faith, that is, a Covenant, not of Works, but of Pardon
in Jesus Christ, the Author and Establisher of this Covenant. For this is the
Covenant made in Baptism, That being justified by his grace, we shall be heirs
of life eternal: for by grace, that is, by favor, remission and forgiveness in
Jesus Christ, ye are saved. This is the only way that we have of being
justified, and this must remain as long as we are in hopes of heaven: for
besides this we have no hopes, and all this is stipulated and consigned in
Baptism, and is of force after our fallings into sin and risings again. In
pursuance of this, the same Apostle declares, That the several states of sin,
are so many recessions from the state of baptismal grace; and if we arrive to
the direct Apostasy and renouncing of, or a contradiction to, the state of
Baptism, we are then unpardonable, because we are fallen from our state of
pardon. This S. Paul conditions most strictly, in his Epistle to the Hebrews;
This is the Covenant I will make in those days, I will put my laws Heb. 10. 16.
etc.
in their hearts, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more, Now
where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin; that is, our
sins are so pardoned, that we need no more oblation, we are then made
partakers of the death of Christ; which we afterward renew in memory and
Eucharist, and representment. But the great work is done in Baptism: for so it
follows; Having boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a
new and living way, that is, by the vail of his flesh, his incarnation. But how
do we enter into this? Baptism is the door, and the ground of this confidence
for ever: for so he adds; Let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
our bodies washed with pure water. This is the consignation of this blessed
state, and the gate to all this mercy: Let us therefore hold fast the
profession of our faith; that is, the Religion of a Christian; the faith into
which we were baptized: for that is the faith that justifies and saves us; Let
us therefore hold fast this profession of this faith, and do all the
intermedial works, in order to the conservation of it, such as are assembling
(...), scil. ad fururum respiciens (...).
in the Communion of Saints, (the use of the word and Sacrament is included in
the precept) mutual exhortation, good Example, and the like: For if we sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, that is, if we sin
against the profession of this faith, and hold it not fast, but let the faith
and the profession go wilfully, (which afterward he calls a treading under
foot the Son of God, a counting the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing, and a doing despite to the Spirit of Grace; viz.
which moved upon these waters, and did illuminate him in Baptism) if we do
this, there is no more sacrifice for sins, no more deaths of Christ, into which
you may be baptized; that is, you are fallen from the state of pardon and
repentance, into which you were admitted in Baptism, and in which you continue,
so long as you have not quitted your baptismal Rights, and the whole Covenant.
Contrary to this, is that which S. Peter calls making our calling and election
sure, that is, a doing all that which may continue us in our state of Baptism,
and the grace of the Covenant. And between these two states, of absolute
Apostasy from, and entirely adhering to, and securing this state of Calling
and Election, are all the intermedial sins, and being overtaken in single
faults, or declining toward vicious habits; which in their several
proportions, are degrees of danger and insecurity; which S. Peter calls, (...),
a forgetting our Baptism, or purification from our sins. And in this sense are
those words, The just shall live by faith; that is, by that profession which 2
Pet. 1. 9. Vide part. 2. dis 6. 9. of Repentance, number. 9. ad 31.
they made in Baptism: from which, if they swerve not, they shall be supported
in their spiritual life. It is a grace, which by virtue of the Covenant
consigned in Baptism does like a Center, transmit effluxes to all the periods
and portion of our life: our whole life, all the periods of our succeeding
hopes are kept alive by this. This consideration is of great use, besides many
other things, to reprove the folly of those who in the Primitive Church
deferred their Baptism till their deathbed: Because Baptism is a laver of
sanctification, and drowns all our sins, and buries them in the grave of our
Lord, they thought they might sin securely upon the stock of an after-Baptism;
for unless they were strangely prevented by a sudden accident, a deathbed
Baptism they thought would secure their condition: but early some of them durst
not take it, much less in the beginning of their years, that they might at
least gain impunity for their follies and heats of their youth. Baptism has
influence into the pardon of all our sins committed in all the days of our
folly and infirmity; and so long as we have not been baptized, so long we are
out of the state of pardon, and therefore an early Baptism is not to be
avoided, upon this mistaken fancy and plot upon Heaven: it is the greater
security toward the pardon of our sins, if we have taken it in the beginning
of our days.

5. The next benefit of Baptism, which is also a verification. 20.
of this, is a sanctification of the baptized person by the Spirit of Grace:
Sanctus in hunc coelo descendit spiritus amnem, Paulin. Ep. 12. ad Serenum.

Coelestique sacras font maritat aquas:
Concipit unda Deum, sanctamque liquoribus almis
Edit ab aeterno semine progeniem.


The holy Ghost descends upon the waters of Baptism, and makes them
prolificall, apt to produce children unto God: and therefore Saint Leo compares
the Font of Baptism, to the Womb of the blessed Virgin, when it was replenished
with the holy Spirit. And this is the Baptism of our dearest Lord: his
ministers baptize with water; our Lord at the same time verifies their
Ministry, with giving the holy Spirit: They are joined together by S. Paul, We
are by one Spirit baptized into one body; 1 Cor. 12. 13.
that is, admitted into the Church by Baptism of Water and the Spirit. This is
that which our blessed Lord calls a being born John 3. 5. S. Basil. de Spir. S.
cap. 15.
of Water and of the Spirit; by Water we are sacramentally dead and buried, by
the Spirit we are made alive. But because these are mysterious expressions, and
according to the style of Scriture, high and secret in spiritual
significations, therefore that we may understand what these things signify, we
must consider it by its real effects, and what it produces upon the Soul of a
man.

1. It is the suppletory of original Righteousness, by which. 21.
Adam was at first gracious with God, and which he lost by his prevarication.
It was in him a principle of wisdom and obedience, a relation between God and
himself, a title to the extraordinary mercies of God and a state of friendship:
when he fell, he was discomposed in all, the links of the golden chain and
blessed relation were broken; and it so continued in the whole life of man,
which was stained with the evils of this folly, and the consequent mischiefs:
and therefore when we began the world again, entering into the Articles of a new
life, God gave us his Spirit, to be an instrument of our becoming gracious
persons, and of being in a condition of obtaining that supernatural end, which
God at first designed to us. And therefore as our Baptism is a separation of us
from unbelieving people: so the descent of the holy Spirit upon us in our
Baptism, is a consigning or marking us for God, as the sheep of his pasture, as
the soldiers of his Army, as the servants of his household: we are so separated
from the world, that we are appropriated to God, so that God expects of us duty
and obedience; and all sins are acts of rebellion and undutifulnesse: Of this
nature was the sanctification of Jeremy and John the Baptist from their mothers
womb; that is, God took them to his own service by an early designation, and
his Spirit marked them to a holy Ministry. To this also relates that of S.
Paul, whom God by a decree separated from his mothers womb to the Ministry of
the Gospel: the decree did antedate the act of the Spirit, which did not
descend upon him until the day of his Baptism. What these persons were in
order to exterior Ministeries, that all the faithful are in order to faith and
obedience, consigned in Baptism by the Spirit of God, to a perpetual relation
to God, in a continual service and title to his Promises. And in this sense the
Spirit of God is called (...), 2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 13. 4. 30. John 6. 27. S.
Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 3.
a seal, in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy
Spirit of Promise. (...). The Water washes the body, and the Spirit seals the
soul; viz. to a participation of those Promises which he has made, and to
which we receive a title to our Baptism.

2. The second effect of the Spirit, is Light, or Illuminations;. 22.
that is, the holy Spirit becomes unto us the Author of holy thoughts and firm
persuasions, and sets to his seal that the Word of God is true; into the
belief of which we are then baptized, and makes Faith to be a grace, and the
Understanding resigned, and the Will confident, and the Assent stronger then
the promises, and the propositions to be believed, because they are beloved,
and we are taught the ways of godliness after a new manner, that is, we are
made to perceive the secrets of the Kingdom, and to love Religion, and to long
for heaven and heavenly things, and to despise the world, and to have new
resolutions, and new preceptions, and new delicacies, in order to the
establishment of Faith, and its increment and perseverance, (...). S. Basil. in
Psalm. 28.
God sits in the soul when it is illuminated in Baptism, as if he sat in his
Throne; that is, he rules by a firm persuasion, and entire principles of
obedience. And therefore Baptism is called in Scripture, (...), and the
baptized, (...) illuminated: Call to mind the former Heb. 10. 32.
days, in which ye were illuminated: and the same phrase is in the 6 to the
Hebrews, where the parallel places expound each other. For that which S. Paul
calls, (...), once illuminated; he calls after, (...), a receiving the
knowledge of the truth: and that you may perceive this to be wholly meant of
Baptism, the Apostle expresses it Heb. 6. 4.
still by its Synonymas, Tasting of the heavenly gift, and made partakers of
the holy Ghost, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in
our bodies with pure water: All which also are a syllabus or collection of the
several effects of the graces bestowed in Baptism. But we are now instancing
in that which relates most properly to the understanding, in which respect the
holy Spirit also is called anointing or unction; and the mystery is explicated
by S. John, The anointing which ye 1 John 2. 20. 27.
have received of him abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you;
but as the same anointing teaches you of all things.

3. The holy Spirit descends upon us in Baptism, to become the principle of a
new life; to become a holy seed, springing. 23.
up to holiness, and is called by S. John, (...), the seed of God: and the
purpose of it we are taught by him, Whosoever is 1 John 3. 3.
born of God (that is, he that is regenerated and entered into this new birth)
does not commit sin; for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because
he is born of God. The Spirit of God, is the Spirit of life; and now that he by
the Spirit is born anew, he has in him that principle, which, if it be
cherished, will grow up to life, to life eternal. And this is the Spirit of
Sanctification, the victory of the world, the deletery of concupiscence, the
life of the soul, and the perpetual principle of grace sown in our spirits in
the day of our adoption to be the sons of God, and members of Christ's body. But
take this mystery in the words of S. Basil; There are two ends proposed in
Baptism, Lib. de Spir. S. c. 13.
to wit, to abolish the body of sin, that we may no more bring forth fruit unto
death; and to live in the Spirit, and to have our fruit to Sanctification. The
water represents the image of death, receiving the body in its bosom, as in a
sepulcher. But the quickening Spirit sends upon us a vigorous (...), power or
efficacy, even from the beginning renewing our souls from the death of sin unto
life. For as our mortification is perfected in the water, so the Spirit works
life in us. To this purpose is the discourse of S. Paul; having largely
discoursed of our being baptized into the death of Christ, he adds this as
Romans 6. 7. ver. 5. 6.
the Corollary of all, He that is dead, is freed from sin (...). Plutar. vide
Disc. 9. of Repentance n. 46.
; that is, being mortified, and buried in the waters of Baptism, we have a new
life of righteousness put into us; we are quitted from the dominion of sin,
and are planted together in the likeness of Christ's Resurrection, that
henceforth we should not serve sin.

4. But all these intermediall blessings tend to a glorious Conclusion,. 24.
for Baptism does also consign us to a holy Resurrection. it takes the sting of
death from us, by burying us together with Christ; and takes off sin, which is
the sting of death, and then we shall be partakers of a blessed Resurrection.
This we are taught by Saul, Know ye not that so many of us as are baptized Romans
6. 3. 5.
into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? For if we have been planted
together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of
his resurrection. That declares the real event in its due season. But because
Baptism consigns it, and admits us to a title to it, we are said with S. Paul,
to be risen with Christ Col. 2. 12.
in Baptism; buried with him in Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him,
through the faith of the operation of God, which has raised him from the dead:
which expression I desire to be remembered, that by it we may better understand
those other sayings of the Apostle, of putting on Christ in Baptism, putting on
the new man, etc. for these only signify (...), or the design on Gods part,
and the endeavor and duty on man's: we are then consigned to our duty, and to
our reward; we undertake one, and have a title to the other: and though men of
ripeness and reason enter instantly into their portion of work, and have
present use of the assistances, and something of their reward in hand; yet we
cannot conclude, that those that cannot do it presently, are not baptized
rightly, because they are not in capacity to put on the new man in
righteousness, that is, in an actual holy life: for they may put on the new
man in Baptism, just as they are risen with Christ: which because it may be
done by faith, before it is done in real event, and it may be done by Sacrament
and design, before it be done by a proper faith; so also may our putting on the
new man be. It is done sacramentally, and that part which is wholly the work of
God, does only antedate the work of man, which is to succeed in its due time,
and is after the manner of preventing grace: but this is by the by: In order to
the present article, Baptism is by Theodoret called (...), a participation of
the Lords Resurrection.

5. And lastly, by Baptism we are saved; that is, we are brought from death to
life here, and that is the first Resurrection,. 25.
and we are bought from death to life hereafter, by virtue of the Covenant of
the state of Grace, into which in Baptism we enter, and are preserved from the
second death, and receive a glorious and an eternal life: He that believes and
is baptized, Mark 16. 16. Tit. 3. 5.
shall be saved, said our blessed Savior; and, according to his mercy he saved
us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost.

After these great blessings so plainly testified in Scripture, and the
Doctrine of the Primitive Church, which are regularly consigned add bestowed in
Baptism, I shall less need to descend to temporal blessings, or rare
contingencies, or miraculous events, or probable notices of things less
certain: of this nature are those stories recorded in the writings of the
Church, that Constantine was cured of a Leprosy in Baptism, Theodosius
recovered Niceph. l. 7. c. 35. Socr. l. 5. c. 6. Idem lib. 7. c. 7.
of his disease, being baptized by the Bishop of Thessalonica; and a paralytick
Jew was cured as soon as he became a Christian, and was baptized by Atticus of
C. P. and Bishop Arnulph baptizing a Leper, also cured him, said Vincentius
Bellovacensis. It is more considerable, which is generally and piously believed
by very many eminent persons in the Church, That at our Baptism God assigns an
Angel Guardian: for then the Catechumen being made a Servant and a Brother to
the Lord of Angels, is sure not to want the aids of them who pitch their tents
round Psalm. 34. 7.
about them that fear the Lord: and that this guard and mininistery is then
appointed, when themselves are admitted into the inheritance of the Promises,
and their title to Salvation is hugely agreeable to the words of S. Paul, Are
they not all ministering Heb. 1. 14.
spirits, sent forth to minister to them who shall be heirs of salvation? where
it appears, that the title to the inheritance is the title to this ministry,
and therefore must begin and end together. But I insist not on this, though it
seeems to me hugely probable. All these blessings put into one syllabus, have
given to Baptism many honorable appellatives in Scripture, and other divine
Writers, calling it (...), Basil. Theodor. Epiphan. N azianz. Col. 2. 2. Cyril.
Heroes. Dionys. Arcop. Aug. l. 2. c. 13. Contra Crescon. Gram.
Sacramentum vitae and aeternae salutis. A new birth, a regeneration, a
renovation, a charret carrying us to God, the great Circumcision, a
Circumcision made without hands, the Key of the Kingdom, the paranymph of the
Kingdom, the earnest of our inheritance, the answer of a good Conscience, the
robe of light, the Sacrament of a new life, and of eternal salvation. (...).
This is celestial water, springing from the sides of the Rock, upon the which
the Church was built when the Rock was smitten with the Rod of God.

It remains now, that we enquire what concerns our duty, and in what persons,
or in what dispositions Baptism produces all. 27.
these glorious effects? For, the Sacraments of the Church work in the virtue
of Christ, but yet only upon such as are servants of Christ, and hinder not
the work of the Spirit of grace. For the water of the Font, and the Spirit of
the Sacrament, are indeed to wash away our sins, and to purify our souls: but
not unless we have a mind to be purified. The Sacrament works pardon for them
that hate their sin, and procures grace for them, that love it. They that are
guilty of sins, must repent of them, and renounce them, and they must make a
profession of the faith of Christ, and give, or be given up to the obedience of
Christ, and then they are rightly disposed. He that believes, and is baptized,
Mark 16. 16.
shall be saved; says Christ; and S. Peter called out to the whole assembly,
Repent, and be baptized every one of you. Concerning Acts 2. 28.
this, Justin Martyr gives the same account of the faith and practice of the
Church. (...), etc. Apol. ad Anton. Caes.
Whosoever are persuaded, and believe those things to be true, which are
delivered and spoken by us, and undertake to live accordingly, they are
commanded to fast and pray, and to ask of God remission of their former sins,
we also praying together with them, and fasting. Then they are brought to us
where water is, and are regenerated in the same manner of regeneration, by
which we our selves are regenerated. For in Baptism, S. Peter observes there
are two parts, the body, and the spirit; that is, (...), the putting away the
filth of the flesh, that is, the material washing: and this is Baptism, no
otherwise then a dead corpse is a man: the other is, (...), 1 Pet. 3. 21.
the answer of a good conscience toward God; that is, the conversion of the
soul to God, that is the effective disposition in which Baptism does save us.
And in the same sense are those sayings of the Primitive Doctors to be
understood, Anima non lavatione sed responsione sancitur. The soul is not
Tertull. de resur. Carn.
healed by washing, viz. alone, but by the answer, the (...) in S. Peter, the
correspondent of our part of the Covenant: for that is the perfect sense of this
unusual expression. And the effect is attributed to this, and denied to the
other, when they are distinguished: So Justin Martyr affirms; the only Baptism
that can heal us, is Repentance, and the knowledge of God. For what Ad Tryphon.
Jud.
need is there of that Baptism that can only cleanse the flesh and the body?
Be washed in your flesh from wrath and covetousness, from envy and hatred, and
behold the body is pure. And Clemens Alex andrinus upon the Proverbial saying,
(...), be not pure in the laver, but in the mind; adds, I suppose that an
exact and a firm repentance, is a sufficient purification to a man; if judging
and considering our selves for the facts we have done before, we proceed to
that which is before us, considering that which follows, and cleansing or
washing our mind from sensual affections, and from former sins. Just as we use
to deny the effect to the instrumental cause, and attribute it to the principal
in the manner of speaking, when our purpose is to affirm this to be the
principal, and of chief influence. So we say, It is not the good Lute, but the
skilful hand that makes the music: It is not the body, but the soul that is
the man; and yet he is not the man without both. For Baptism is but the
material part in the Sacrament, it is the Spirit that gives life; whose work
is faith and repentance begun by himself, without the Sacrament, and consigned
in the Sacrament, and actuated and increased in the cooperation of our whole
life: and therefore Baptism is called in the Jerusalem Creed, (...), Dial. eum
Tryph.
one Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; and by Justin Martyr,
(...). The Baptism of Repentance and the knowledge of God, which was made for
the sins of the people of God. He explains himself a little after, (...).
Baptism that can only cleanse them that are penitent. In Sacramentis Trinitati
occurrit Fides credentium and professio quae apud acta conficitur Angelorum,
ubi miscentur coelestia and spiritualia semina, ut sancto germine nova possit
renascentium indoles procreari, ut dum Trinitas cum side concordat, qui natus
fuerit saeculo, renascatur spiritualiter Deo. Sic fit hominum pater Deus,
sancta fit matter Ecclesia, said Optatus. The faith and profession of the
Believers, meets with the ever-blessed Lib. 2. adv. Parm.
Trinity, and is recorded in the Register of Angels, where heavenly and
spiritual seeds are mingled; that from so holy a Spring, may be produced a new
nature of the regeneration, that while the Trinity (viz. that is invocated upon
the baptized) meets with the faith of the Catechumen, he that was born to to
the world, may be born spiritually to God. So God is made a Father to the man,
and the holy Church a Mother. Faith and Repentance strip the old man naked, and
make him fit for Baptism; and then the holy Spirit moving upon the waters,
cleanses the soul, and makes it to put on the new man, who grows up to
perfection and a spiritual life, to a life of glory, by our verification of the
undertaking in Baptism on our part, and the graces of the Spirit on the other.
For the waters pierce no further then the skin, till the person puts off his
affection to the sin that he has contracted; and then he may say, Aquae
intraverunt usque ad animam meam, The waters are entered even unto my soul, to
purify and cleanse it, by the washing of water, and the renewing by the holy
Spirit: The sum is this, (...), Clem. Alex. lib. 1. paedag. c. 6.
being baptized, we are illuminated; being illuminated, we are adopted to the
inheritance of sons; being adopted, we are promoted toward perfection; and
being perfected, we are made immortal. Quisquis in hos fontes vir venerit,
exeat inde
Semideus, tactis cito nobilitetur in undis.


This is the whole Doctrine of Baptism, as it is in it self considered,. 28.
without relation to rare circumstances, or accidental cases: and it will also
serve to the right understanding of the reasons why the Church of God has in
all ages baptized all persons, that were within her power, for whom the Church
could stipulate that they were or might be relatives of Christ, sons of God,
heirs of the Promises, and partners of the Covenant, and such as did not hinder
the work of Baptism upon their souls. And such were not only persons of age
and choice, but the Infants of Christian Parents. For the understanding and
verifying of which truth, I shall only need to apply the parts of the former
discourse to their particular case; premising first these Propositions.

PART. II. Of Baptizing INFANTS.
BAPTISM is the Key in Christ's hand, and therefore. 1.
opens as he opens, and shuts by his rule: and as Christ himself did not do all
his blessings and effects unto every one, but gave to every one as they had
need, so does Baptism. Christ did not cure all men's eyes, but them only that
were blind: Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance;
that is, they that lived in the fear of God, according to the Covenant in which
they were debtors, were indeed improved and promoted higher by Christ, but not
called to that repentance to which he called the vicious Gentiles, and the
adulterous persons among the Jews, and the hypocritical Pharisees. There are
some so innocent, that they need no repentance (says the Scripture) meaning,
That though they do need contrition for their single acts of sin, yet they are
within the state of grace, and need not repentance, as it is a conversion of
the whole man: and so it is in Baptism, which does all its effects upon them
that need them all; and some upon them that need but some: and therefore as it
pardons sins to them that have committed them, and do repent and believe; so
to the others who have not committed them, it does all the work which is done
to the others, above, or besides that pardon.

2. When the ordinary effect of a Sacrament is done already. 2.
by some other efficiency or instrument, yet the Sacrament is still as
obligatory as before, not for so many reasons or necessities, but for the same
Commandment. Baptism is the first ordinary Current, in which the Spirit moves
and descends upon us; and where Gods Spirit is, they are the sons of God: for
Christ's Spirit descends upon none, but them that are his; and yet Cornelius,
who had received the holy Spirit, and was heard by Acts 1047.
God, and visited by an Angel, and accepted in his alms, and fastings, and
prayers, yet was tied to the susception of Baptism. To which may be added, That
the receiving the effects of Baptism beforehand, was used as an argument the
rather to minister to Baptism. The effect of which consideration is this, That
Baptism and its effect may be separated, and do not always go in conjunction;
the effect may be before, and therefore much rather may it be after its
susception; the Sacrament operating in the virtue of Christ, even as the Spirit
shall move, according to that saying of S. Austin. Sacrosancto lavacro inchoata
innovatio novi hominis perficiendo perficitur, in aliis citius, in aliis Aug.
de mor b. Eccles. Cath. l. 1. c. 35. Bern. Sermon. de coena Dom.
tardius. And S: Bernard, Lavari quidem cito possumus, sed ad sanandum multa
curatione opus est. The work of regeneration that is begun in the Ministry of
Baptism, is perfected in some sooner, and in some later: we may soon be
washed, but to be healed, is a work of a long cure.

3. The dispositions which are required to the ordinary susception of Baptism,
are not necessary to the efficacy, or required. 3.
to the nature of the Sacrament; but accidentally, and because of the
superinduced necessities of some men. And therefore the conditions are not
regularly to be required, but in those accidents. It was necessary for a
Gentile Proselyte to repent of his sins, and to believe in Moses Law, before he
could be circumcised; but Abraham was not tied to the same conditions, but
only to faith in God; but Isaac was not tied to so much: and Circumcision was
not of Moses, but of the Fathers: and yet after the sanction of Moses Law, men
were tied to Conditions, which were then made necessary to them that entered
into the Covenant, but not necessary to the nature of the Covenant it self.
And so it is in the susception of Baptism: if a sinner enters into the Font, it
is necessary he be stripped of those appendages which himself sewed upon his
Nature, and then Repentance is a necessary disposition. If his understanding
has been a stranger to Religion, polluted with evil Principles, and a false
Religion, it is necessary he have an actual faith, that he be given in his
understanding up to the obedience of Christ: and the reason of these is plain,
Because in these persons there is a disposition contrary to the state and
effects of Baptism; and therefore they must be taken off by their contraries,
Faith and Repentance, that they may be reduced to the state of pure receptives.
And this is the sense of those words of our blessed Savior. Unless ye become
like one of these little ones, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven;
that is, ye cannot be admitted into the Gospel Covenant, unless all your
contrarieties and impediments be taken from you, and you be as apt as children
to receive the new immissions from heaven. And this Proposition relies upon a
great Example, and a certain Reason. The Example is our blessed Savior, who
was Nullius poenitentiae debtor, he had committed no sin, and needed no
repentance; he needed not to be saved by faith, for of faith he was the Author
and Finisher, and the great object, and its perfection and reward, and yet he
was baptized by the Baptism of John, the Baptism of Repentance. And therefore
it is certain, that Repentance and Faith are not necessary to the susception of
Baptism, but necessary to some persons that are baptized. For it is necessary
we should much consider the difference. If the Sacrament in any person may be
justly received, in whom such dispositions are not to be found, then the
dispositions are not necessary or intrinsecal to the susception of the
Sacrament; and yet some persons coming to this Sacrament, may have such
necessities of their own, as will make the Sacrament ineffectual without such
dispositions: These I call necessary to the person, but not to the Sacrament;
that is, necessary to all such, but not necessary to all absolutely. And faith
is necessary sometimes where Repentance is not, and sometimes Repentance and
Faith together, and sometimes otherwise. When Philip baptized the Eunuch, he
only required of him to believe, Acts 8. 37. Acts 2. 38.
not to repent. But S. Peter, when he preached to the Jews, and converted them,
only required Repentance: which although in their case employed faith, yet
there was no explicit stipulation for it: they had crucified the Lord of life,
and if Act. 3. 15.
they would come to God by Baptism, they must renounce their sin: that was all
was then stood upon. It is as the case is, or as the persons have superinduced
necessities upon themselves. In children the case is evident, as to the one
part, which is equally required; I mean, Repentance: The not doing of which,
cannot prejudice them as to the susception of Baptism; because they having done
no evil, are not bound to repent; and to repent, is as necessary to the
susception of Baptism, as Faith is: but this shows, that they are accidentally
necessary, that is, not absolutely, not to all, not to Infants: and if they may
be excused from one duty, which is indispensably necessary to Baptism, why they
may not from the other, is a secret which will not be found out by these whom
it concerns to believe it.

And therefore when our blessed Lord made a stipulation and. 4.
express Commandment for faith, with the greatest annexed penalty to them
that had it not, He that believes not shall be damned; the proposition is not
to be verified or understood as relative to every period of time: for then no
man could be converted from infidelity to the Christian faith, and from the
power of the Devil to the Kingdom of Christ, but his present infidelity shall
be his final ruin. It is not therefore (...), but (...), not a sentence, but a
use, a praediction and intermination. It is not like that saying [God is true,
and every man a lyar] [Every good, and every perfect gift is from above:] for
these are true in every instant, without reference to circumstances: but He
that believes not shall be damned, is a prediction, or that which in Rhetoric
is called (...) or a use, because this is the affirmation of that which usually
or frequently comes to pass: such as this. He that strikes with the sword,
shall perish by the sword; He that robs a Church, shall be like a wheel, of a
vertiginous and unstable estate; He that loves wine and oil, shall not be
rich: and therefore it is a declaration of that which is universally or
commonly true; but not so, that in what instance soever a man is not a
believer, in that instant it is true to say he is damned; for some are called
the third, some the sixth, some the ninth hour, and they that come in, being
first called, at the eleventh hour, shall have their reward: so that this
sentence stands true at the day and the Judgment of the Lord, not at the
judgment or day of man. And in the same necessity as faith stands to
salvation, in the same it stands to Baptism; that is, to be measured by the
whole latitude of its extent. Our Baptism shall no more do all its intention,
unless faith supervene, then a man is in possibility of being saved without
faith; it must come in its due time, but is not indispensably necessary in all
instants and periods, Baptism is the seal of our Election and Adoption; and as
Election is brought to effect by faith, and its consequents; so is Baptism: but
to neither is faith necessary, as to its beginning and first entrance. To which
also I add this Consideration, That actual faith is necessary, not to the
susception, but to the consequent effects of Baptism, appears, Because the
Church, and particularly the Apostles, did baptize some persons who had not
faith, but were hypocrites, such as were Simon Magus, Alexander the
Coper-smith, Demas and Diotrephes; and such was Judas when he was baptized, and
such were the Gnostick Teachers. For the effect depends upon God, who knows the
heart, but the outward susception depends upon them who do not know it; which
is a certain argument, That the same faith that is necessary to the effect of
the Sacrament, is not necessary to its susception; and if it can be administered
to hypocrites, much more to Infants; if to those who really hinder the effect,
much rather to them that hinder not. And if it be objected, That the Church
does not know but the pretenders have faith, but she knows Infants have not. I
reply, That the Church does not know but the pretenders hinder the effect, and
are contrary to the grace of the Sacrament; but she knows that Infants do not.
The first possibly may receive the grace, the other cannot hinder it.

But beside these things, it is considerable, That when it is required S. 5.
persons have faith: it is true, they that require Baptism, should give a
reason why they do: so it was in the case of the Eunuch baptized by Philip.
But this is not to be required of others that do not ask it, and yet they be
of the Church, and of the Faith: for by Faith is also understood the Christian
Religion, and the Christian Faith is the Christian Religion; and of this a man
may be, though he make no confession of his faith; as a man may be of the
Church, and yet not be of the number of Gods secret ones: and to this more is
required then to that; to the first it is sufficient that he be admitted by a
Sacrament or a Ceromony: which is infallibly certain, because hypocrites and
wicked people are in the visible Communion of the Church, and are reckoned as
members of it, and yet to them there was nothing done but the Ceremony
administered; and therefore when that is done to Infants, they also are to be
reckoned in the Church Communion. And indeed in the examples in Scripture, we
find more inserted into the number of Gods family by outward Ceremony, then by
the inward grace: of this number were all those who were circumcised the eighth
day, who were admitted thither, as the woman's daughter was cured in the Gospel,
by the faith of their mother, their natural parents, or their spiritual: To
whose faith it is as certain God will take heed, as to their faith who brought
one to Christ who could not come himself, the poor Paralytick; for when Christ
saw their faith, he cured their friend: and yet it is to be observed, That
Christ did use to exact faith, actual faith, of them that came to him to be
cured [According to your faith be it unto you.] The Mat. 9. 28.
case is equal in its whole kind. And it is considerable what Christ says to
the poor man that came in behalf of his son, All things are possible to him
that believes, it is possible for a son to receive the blessing and benefit of
his fathers faith: and it was Mark 9. 23.
so in his case, and is possible to any; for to faith all things are possible.
And as to the event of things, it is evident in the story of the Gospel, That
the faith of their relatives was equally effective to children, and friends, or
servants, absent or sick, as the faith of the interested person was to
himself: As appears beyond all exception in the case of the friends of the
Paralytick, let down with cords through the tyles; of the Centurion in behalf
Mat. 8. 13.
of his servant; of the nobleman, for his son sick at Capernaum; John 4. 50.
of the Syrophoenician, for her daughter: and Christ required faith of no sick
man, but of him that presented himself to him Mat. 9. 28.
and desired for himself that he might be cured, as it was in the cure of the
blind men. Though they could believe, yet Christ required belief of them that
came to him on their behalf. And why then it may not be so, or is not so in
the case of Infants Baptism, I confess it is past my skill to conjecture. The
Reason on which this further relies, is contained in the next Proposition.

4. No disposition or act of man can deserve the first grace, or. 6.
the grace of pardon: for so long as a man is unpardoned, he is an enemy to
God, and as a dead person: and unless he be prevented by the grace of God,
cannot do a single act in order to his pardon and restitution: so that the
first work which God does upon a man, is so wholly his own, that the man has
nothing in it, but to entertain it, that is, not to hinder the work of God upon
him: and this is done in them that have in them nothing that can hinder the
work of grace, or in them who remove the hindrances; of the latter sort are
all sinners, who have lived in a state contrary to God; of the first are they
who are prevented by the grace of God, before they can choose, that is, little
children, and those that become like unto little children. So that Faith and
Repentance are not necessary at first to the reception of the first grace, but
by accident. If sin have drawn curtains, and put bars and coverings to the
windows, these must be taken away; and that is done by faith and repentance:
but if the windows be not shut, so that the light can pass through them, the
eye of heaven will pass in and dwell there. No man can come unto me, unless my
Father draw him; that is, the first access to Christ is nothing of our own,
but wholly of God; and John 6. 44.
it is as in our creation, in which we have an obediential capacity, but
cooperate not; only if we be contrary to the work of grace, that contrariety
must be taken off, else there is no necessity: and if all men, according to
Christ's saying, must receive the Kingdom Mark 10. 15.
of God as little children, it is certain, little children do receive it, they
receive it as all men ought, that is, without any impediment or obstruction,
without any thing within that is contrary to that state.

5. Baptism is not to be estimated as one act, transient and effective to
single purposes, but it is an entrance to a conjugation 7.
and a state of blessings. All our life is to be transacted by the measures of
the Gospel Covenant, and that Covenant is consigned by Baptism; there we have
our title and adoption to it, and the grace that is then given to us is like a
piece of leaven put into a lump of dow: and faith and repentance do in all the
periods of our life, put it into fermentation and activity. Then the seed of
God is put into the ground of our hearts, and repentance waters it, and faith
makes it subactum solum, the ground and surrows apt to produce fruits: and
therefore faith and repentance are necessary to the effect of Baptism, not to
its susception; that is, necessary to all those parts of life in which Baptism
does operate, not to the first sanction or entering into the Covenant. The seed
may lie long in the ground, and produce fruits in its due season, if it be
refreshed with the former and the latter rain, that is, the repentance that
first changes the state, and converts the man, and afterward returns him to
his title, and recalls him from his wanderings, and keeps him in the state of
grace, and within the limits of the Covenant: and all the way faith gives
efficacy and acceptance to this repentance, that is, continues our title to
the Promise, of not having righteousness exacted by the measures of the Law,
but by the Covenant and Promise of grace, into which we entered in Baptism, aad
walk in the same all the days of our life.

6. The holy Spirit which descends upon the waters of Baptism,. 8.
does not instantly produce its effects in the soul of the baptized; and when
he does, it is irregularly, and as he please: The Spirit blows where it
lists, and no man knows whence it comes, nor whither it goes; and the
Catechumen is admitted into the Kingdom, yet the Kingdom of God comes not
with observation: and this saying of our blessed Savior was spoken of the
Kingdom of God that is within us, that is, Luke 17. 20, 21
the Spirit of Grace, the power of the Gospel put into our hearts, concerning
which, he affirmed, that it operates so secretly, that it comes not wiih
outward show, neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there: which thing I
desire the rather be observed, because in the same discourse which our blessed
Savior continued to that assembly, he affirms this Kingdom Luke 18. 16.
of God to belong unto little children, this Kingdom that comes not with
outward significations, or present expresses; this Kingdom that is within us.
For the present, the use I make of it is this, That no man can conclude that
this Kingdom of Power, that is, the Spirit of Sanctification, is not come upon
Infants, because there is no sign or expression of it. It is within us,
therefore it has no signification. It is the seed of God; and it is no good
Argument to say, Here is no seed in the bowels of the earth, because there is
nothing green upon the face of it. For the Church gives the Sacrament, God
gives the grace of the Sacrament. But because he does not always give it at
the instant in which the Church gives the Sacrament, (as if there be a secret
impediment in the suscipient) and yet afterward does give it, when the
impediment is removed (as to them that repent of that impediment) it follows,
that the Church may administer rightly, even before God gives the real grace of
the Sacrament; and if God gives this grace afterward by parts, and yet all of
it is the effect of that Covenant which was consigned in Baptism: he that
defers some, may defer all, and verify every part as well as any part. For it
is certain, that in the instance now made, all the grace is deferred; in
Infants it is not certain but that some is collated, or infused: however, be it
so or no, yet upon this account the administration of the Sacrament is not
hindered.

7. When the Scripture speaks of the effects of, or dispositions. 9.
to Baptism, it speaks in general expressions, as being most apt to signify a
common duty, or a general effect, or a more universal event, or the proper
order of things: but those general expressions do not supponere universaliter,
that is, are not to be understood exclusively to all that are not so qualified,
or universally of all suscipients, or of all the subjects of the proposition.
When the Prophets complain of the Jews, that they are fallen from God, and turned
to Idols, and walk not in the way of their Fathers; and at other times, the
Scripture speaks the same thing of their Fathers, that they walked perversely
toward God, starting aside like a broken bow: In these and the like expressions
the holy Scripture uses a Synecdoche, or signifies many only, under the notion
of a more large and indefinite expression; for neither were all the Fathers
good, neither did all the sons prevaricate: but among the Fathers there were
enough to recommend to posterity by way of example; and among the Children
there were enough to stain the reputation of the age: but neither the one part
nor the other was true of every single person. S. John the Baptist spoke to the
whole audience, saying, O generation of vipers! and yet he did nor mean that
all Jerusalem and Iudaea that went out to be baptized of him, were such; but he
under an indeterminate reproof, intended those that were such, that is,
especially the Priests and the Pharisees. And it is more considerable yet, in
the story of the event of Christ's Sermon in the Synagogue, upon his Text taken
out of Isaiah, all wondered at his gracious words, Iuke 4. 22. 28.
and bare him witness. And a little after, All they in the Synagogues were
filled with wrath, that is, it was generally so; but hardly to be supposed true
of every single person, in both the contrary humors and usages. Thus Christ
said to the Apostles, Ye have abidden with me in my temptations; and yet Judas
was all the way a follower of Interest and the Bag, rather then Christ: and
afterward none of them all did abide with Christ in his greatest Temptations.
Thus also to come nearer the present Question, the secret effects of Election
and of the Spirit, are in Scripture attributed to all that are of the outward
communion. So S. Peter calls all the Christian strangers of the Eastern
dispersion, Elect, according to the foreknowledge of 1 Pet. 1. 2.
God the Father: and S. Paul says of all the Roman Christians, and the same of
the Thessalonians, that their faith was spoken of in all the world; and yet
amongst them it is not to be supposed, that all the professors had an
unreproveable faith, or that every one of the Church of Thessalonica was an
excellent and a charitable person: and yet the Apostle uses this expression,
Your faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all toward
each other, abounds. These are usually 2 Thessalonians. 1. 2.
significant of a general custom or order of things, or duty of men, or
design, and natural or proper expectation of events; such are these also in
this very Question. As many of you as are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ; that is, so it is regularly, and so it will be in its due time, and
that is the order of things, and the designed event: but from hence we cannot
conclude of every person, and in every period of time; This man has been
baptized, therefore now he is clothed with Christ, he has put on Christ: nor
thus, This person cannot in a spiritual sense as yet put on Christ, therefore
he has not been baptized, that is, he has not put him on in a sacramental
sense. Such is the saying of S. Paul, Whom he has predestined, them Romans 8.
30.
he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified: this also declares the regular event, or at
least the order of things, and the design of God, but not the actual
verification of it to all persons. These sayings concerning Baptism, in the
like manner are to be understood, that they cannot exclude all persons from the
Sacrament, that have not all those real effects of the Sacrament at all times,
which some men have at some times, and all men must have at some time or other,
viz. when the Sacrament obtains its last intention. But he that shall argue
from hence, that Children are not rightly baptized, because they cannot in a
spiritual sense put on Christ, concludes nothing, unless these propositions did
signify universally, and at all times, and in every person, and in every
manner: which can no more pretend to truth, then that all Christians are Gods
Elect; and all that are baptized, are Saints; and all that are called, are
justified; and all that are once justified, shall be saved finally. These
things declare only the event of things, and their order, and the usual
effect, and the proper design, in their proper season, in their limited
proportions.

8. A Negative Argument for matters of fact in Scripture, cannot conclude a
Law, or a necessary, or a regular event. And therefore supposing that it be not
intimated, that the Apostles did baptize Infants, it follows not that they did
not: and if they did not, it does not follow that they might not, or that the
Church may not. For it is unreasonable to argue: The Scripture speaks nothing
of the Baptism of the holy Virgin Mother, therefore she was not baptized. The
words and deeds of Christ are infinite which are not recorded; and of the acts
of the Apostles we may suppose the same in their proportion: and therefore what
they did not, is no rule to us, unless they did it not because they were
forbidden. So that it can be no good argument to say, The Apostles are not read
to have baptized Infants, therefore Infants are not to be baptized: but thus;
We do not find that Infants are excluded from the common Sacraments and
Ceremonies of Christian Institution, therefore we may not presume to exclude
them. For although the Negative of a Fact is no good Argument, yet the Negative
of a Law is a very good one. We may not say, the Apostles did not, therefore we
may not: but thus, they were not forbidden to do it, there is no Law against
it, therefore it may be done. No man's deeds can prejudicate a Divine Law
expressed in general terms, much less can it be prejudiced by those things
that were not done. That which is wanting Eccles. 1.
cannot be numbered, cannot be effectual; therefore, Baptize all nations, must
signify all that it can signify, all that are reckoned in the Capitations and
accounts of a Nation. Now since all contradiction to this Question depends
wholly upon these two grounds; The Negative Argument in matter of Fact, and the
Pretenses that Faith and Repentance are required to Baptism: since the first is
wholly nothing, and infirm upon an infinite account, and the second may
conclude, that Infants can no more be saved then be baptized; because Faith is
more necessary to Salvation then to Baptism; it being said, He that believes
not shall be damned; and it is not said, He that believes not shall be
excluded from Baptism: it follows, that the doctrine of those that refuse to
baptize their Infants is upon both its legs weak and broken, and insufficient.

Upon the suppositions of these grounds, the Baptism of Infants,. 11.
according to the perpetual practice of the Church of God, will stand firm and
unshaken upon its own base. For, as the Eunuch said to Philip, What hinders
them to be baptized? If they can receive benefit by it, it is infallibly
certain, that it belongs to them also to receive it, and to their Parents to
procure it: for nothing can deprive us of so great a grace, but an unworthiness
or a disability. They are not disabled to receive it, if they need it, and if
it does them good; and they have neither done good nor evil, and therefore
they have not forfeited their right to it. This therefore shall be the first
great argument or combination of inducements; Infants receive many benefits by
the susception of Baptism, and therefore in charity and in duty we are to bring
them to Baptism.

1. The first effect of Baptism is, That in it we are admitted. 12.
to the Kingdom of Christ, offered and presented unto him. In which certainly
there is the same act of worship to God, and the same blessing to the children
of Christians, as there was in presenting the firstborn among the Jews. For
our children can be Gods own portion, as well as theirs; and as they presented
the firstborn to God, and so acknowledged that God might have taken his life
in Sacrifice, as well as the Sacrifice of the Lamb, or the Oblation of a beast:
yet when the right was confessed, God gave him back again, and took a Lamb in
exchange, or a pair of Doves. So are our children presented to God as forfeit,
and God might take the forfeiture, and not admit the babe to the Promises of
Grace: but when the presentation of the child, and our acknowledgement is made
to God, God takes the Lamb of the World in exchange, and he has paid our
forfeiture, and the children are holy unto the Lord. And what hinders here?
cannot a creeple receive an alms at the Beautiful gate of the Temple, unless
he go thither himself? Or cannot a gift be presented to God by the hands of
the owners, and the gift become holy and pleasing to God without its own
consent? The Parents have a portion of the possession: Children are blessings,
and Gods gifts, and the Fathers greatest wealth, and therefore are to be given
again to him. In other things we give something to God of all that he gives us;
all we do not, because our needs force us to retain the greater part, and the
less sanctifies the whole: but our children must all be returned to God; for we
may love them, and so may God too, and they are the better our own, by being
made holy in their presentation: whatsoever is given to God is holy, every
thing in its proportion and capacity; a Lamb is holy, when it becomes a
Sacrifice; and a Table is holy, when it becomes an Altar; and a House is holy,
when it becomes a Church; and a man is holy, when he is consecrated to be a
Priest; and so is every one that is dedicated to Religion: these are holy
persons, the others are holy things; and Infants are between both: they have
the sanctification that belongs to them, the holiness that can be of a
reasonable nature, offered and destined to Gods service; but not in that degree
that is in an understanding, choosing person. Certain it is, that Infants may
be given to God; and if they may be, they must be: for it is not here as in
goods, where we are permitted to use all or some, and give what portion we
please out of them; but we cannot do our duty toward our children, unless we
give them wholly to God, and offer them to his service and to his grace. The
first does honor to God, the second does charity to the children, The effects
and real advantages will appear in the sequel: in the mean time this Argument
extends thus far, that Children may be presented to God acceptably, in order to
his service. And it was highly praeceptive, when our blessed Savior commanded,
that we should suffer little children to come to him: and when they came, they
carried away a blessing along with them. He was desirous they should partake of
his merits: he is not willing, neither is it his Fathers will, that any of
these little ones should perish. And therefore he dyed for them, and loves, and
blessed them: and so he will now, if they be brought to him, and presented as
Candidates of the Religion and of the Resurrection. Christ has a blessing for
our children, but let them come to him, that is, be presented at the doors of
the Church, to the Sacrament of Adoption and Initiation; for I know no other
way for them to come.

Children may be adopted into the Covenant of the Gospel,. 13.
that is, made partakers of the Communion of Saints, which is the second effect
of Baptism; parts of the Church, members of Christ's Mystical body, and put into
the order of eternal life. Now concerning this it is certain the Church clearly
has power to do her offices in order to it. The faithful can pray for all
men, they can do their piety to some persons with more regard and greater
earnestness: they can admit whom they please in their proper dispositions, to
a participation of all their holy prayers, and communions, and preachings, and
exhortations: and if all this be a blessing, and all this be the actions of our
own charity, who can hinder the Church of God from admitting Infants to the
communion of all their pious offices, which can do them benefit in their
present capacity? How this does necessarily infer Baptism, I shall afterward
discourse. 25. etc.
. But for the present I enumerate, That the blessings of Baptism are
communicable to them; they may be admitted into a fellowship of all the Prayers
and Privileges of the Church, and the Communion of Saints, in blessings, and
prayers, and holy offices. But that which is of greatest persuasion and
convincing efficacy in this particular, is, That the children of the Church are
as capable of the same Covenant, as the children of the Jews: But it was the
same Covenant that Circumcision did consign, a spiritual Covenant under a veil,
and now it is the same spiritual Covenant without the veil, which is evident to
him that considers it; thus:

The words of the Covenant are these [I am the Almighty. 14.
God, walk before me, and be thou perfect; I will multiply thee Genesis 17. 2, etc.
exceedingly. Thou shall be a father of many Nations: Thy name shall not be
Abram, but Abraham. Nations and Kings shall be out of thee. I will be a God
unto thee, and unto thy seed after thee; and I will give all the Land of Canaan
to thy seed, and all the Males shall be circumcised, and it shall be a token of
the Covenant between me and thee: and he that is not circumcised; shall be cut
off from his people. The Covenant which was on Abraham's part was, To walk
before God, and to be perfect: on Gods part, To bless him with a numerous
issue, and them with the Land of Canaan; and the sign was Circumcision, the
token of the Covenant. Now in all this, here was no duty to which the posterity
was obliged, nor any blessing which Abraham could perceive or feel, because
neither he nor his posterity did enjoy the Promise for many hundred years after
the Covenant: and therefore as there was a duty for the posterity which is not
here expressed; so there was a blessing for Abraham, which was concealed under
the leaves of a temporal Promise, and which we shall better understand from
them whom the Spirit of God has taught the mysteriousnesse of this
transaction. The Argument indeed, and the observation is wholly S. Paul's,
Abraham and the Patriarchs died in faith, not having Heb. 11. 13.
received the Promises, viz. of a possession in Canaan. They saw the Promises
afar off, they embraced them, and looked through 14.
the Cloud, and the temporal veil, this was not it; they might have returned to
Canaan, if that had been the object of their desires, and the design of the
Promise: but they desired and did seek a Country, but it was a better, and
that a heavenly. This 15.
was the object of their desire; and the end of their search, and the reward of
their faith, and the secret of their Promise. And therefore Circumcision was a
seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11.
which he had before his Circumcision, before the making this Covenant; and
therefore it must principally relate to an effect and a blessing, greater then
was afterward expressed in the temporal Promise: which effect was
forgiveness of sins, a not imputing 7.
to us our infirmities, Justification by faith, accounting that for
righteousness: and these effects or graces were promised to Abraham, not only
for his posterity after the flesh, but his 12.
children after the spirit, even to all that shall believe and walk in the
steps of our father Abraham, which he walked in, being yet uncircumcised.

This was no other but the Covenant of the Gospel, though. 15.
afterward otherwise consigned: for so the Apostle expressly affirms, that
Abraham was the father of Circumcision (viz. by virtue of this Covenant) not
only to them that are circumcised, Romans 4. 11, 12
but to all that believe: for this promise was not through the law of works, or
of circumcision, but of faith. And therefore as S. Paul observes, God promised
that Abraham should be a V. 17.
father (not of that Nation only, but) of many Nations, and the heir of the
world; that the blessing of Abraham might come on V. 13.
the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the
Spirit through faith. And, if ye be Christ's, then Gal. 3. 14. 29.
ye are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the Promise. Since then the
Covenant of the Gospel, is the Covenant of Faith, and not of Works; and the
Promises are spiritual, not secular; and Abraham the father of the faithful
Gentiles, as well as the circumcised Jews; and the heir of the world, not by
himself, but by his seed, or the Son of Man, our Lord Jesus: it follows, that
the Promises which Circumcision did seal, were the same Promises which are
consigned in Baptism; the Covenant is the same, only that Gods people are not
impaled in Palestine, and the veil is taken away, and the temporal is passed
into spiritual, and the result (...), Epiphan l. 1. haeres. 8. scil. Epicuraeor.
will be this, That to as many persons, and in as many capacities, and in the
same dispositions as the Promises were applied, and did relate in Circumcision,
to the same they do belong, and may be applied in Baptism. And let it be
remembered, That the Covenant which Circumcision did sign, was a Covenant of
Grace and Faith; the Promises were of the Spirit, or spiritual, it was made
before the Law, and could not be rescinded by the Legal Covenant. Nothing could
be added to it, or taken from it; and we that are partakers of this grace, are
therefore partakers of it being Christ's servants, united to Christ, and so are
become Abraham's seed (as the Apostle at large and professedly proves in diverse
places, but especially in the 4. of the Romans, and the 3. to the Galatians.)
and therefore if Infants were then admitted to it, and consigned to it by a
Sacrament which they understood not any more then ours do, there is not any
reason why ours should not enter in at the ordinary gate and door of Grace as
well as they. Their children were circumcised the Eighth day, but were
instructed afterward, when they could enquire what these things meant. Indeed
their Proselytes were first taught, then circumcised; so are ours, baptized:
but their Infants were consigned first, and so must ours.

3. In Baptism we are born again; and this Infants need in. 16.
the present circumstances, and for the same great reason, that men of age and
reason do. For our natural birth is either of it self insufficient, or is
made so by the fall of Adam, and the consequent evils, that nature alone, or
our first birth, cannot bring us to heaven, which is a supernatural end, that
is, an end above all the power of our nature as now it is. So that if nature
cannot bring us to heaven, grace must, or we can never get thither; if the
first birth cannot, a second must: but the second birth spoken of in Scripture,
is Baptism; A man must be born of water and the spirit. And therefore Baptism
is (...), Tit. 3. 5.
the laver of a new birth. Either then Infants cannot go to heaven any way that
we know of, or they must be baptized. To say they are to be left to God, is an
excuse, and no answer: for when God has opened the door, and calls that the
entrance into heaven, we do not leave them to God, when we will not carry them
to him in the way which he has described, and at the door which himself has
opened: we leave them indeed, but it is but helpless and destitute: and though
God is better then Man, yet that is no warrant to us, what it will be to the
children, that we cannot warrant, or conjecture. And if it be objected, That to
the new birth is required dispositions of our own, which are to be wrought by
and in them that have the use of reason: besides that this is wholly against
the Analogy of a new birth, in which the person to be born is wholly a passive,
and has put into him the principle that in time will produce its proper
actions: It is certain, that they that can receive the new birth, are capable
of it; the effect of it is a possibility of being saved, and arriving to a
supernatural felicity. If Infants can receive this effect, then also the new
birth, without which they cannot receive the effect. And if they can receive
salvation, the effect of the new birth, what hinders them, but they may receive
that that is in order to that effect, and ordained only for it; and which is
nothing of it self, but in its institution and relation, and which may be
received by the same capacity in which one may be created, that is, a
passivity, or a capacity obediential?

4. Concerning pardon of sins, which is one great effect of. 17.
Baptism, it is certain, that Infants have not that benefit which men of sin
and age may receive. He that has a sickly stomach drinks wine, and it not
only refreshes his spirits, but cures his stomach. He that drinks wine and
has not that disease, receives good by his wine, though it does not minister
to so many needs; it refreshes him, though it does not cure him: and when oil
is poured upon a man's head, it does not always heal a wound, but sometimes
makes him a cheerful countenance, sometimes it consigns him to be a King or a
Priest. So it is in Baptism: it does not heal the wounds of actual sins,
because they have not committed them; but it takes off the evil of Original
sin: whatsoever is imputed to us by Adams prevarication, is Romans 5. 17, 18.
washed off by the death of the second Adam, into which we are baptized. But
concerning Original sin, because there are so many disputes which may intricate
the Question, I shall make use only of that which is confessed on both sides,
and material to our purpose. Death came upon all men by Adams sin, and the
necessity of it remains upon us, as an evil consequent of the disobedience. For
though death is natural, yet it was kept off from man by Gods favor, which
when he lost, the banks were broken, and the water reverted to its natural
course, and our nature became a curse, and death a punishment. Now that this
Vide August. l. 4. cont. duas Epistolas Pelag. c. 4. l. 6. contr. Jur. c. 4.
also relates to Infants so far, is certain, because they are sick, and dye.
This the Pelagians denied not. But to whomsoever this evil descended, upon them
also a remedy is provided by thesecond Adam, That as in Adam all dye, even so
in Christ shall all be made alive; that is, at the day of Judgment: then death
shall be destroyed. In the mean time, death has a sting and a bitterness, a
curse it is, and an express of the Divine Anger: and if this sting be not taken
away here, we shall have no participation of the final victory over death.
Either therefore Infants must be for ever without remedy in this evil
consequent of their Fathers sin, or they must be adopted into the participation
of Christ's death, which is the remedy. Now how can they partake of Christ's
death, but by Baptism into his death? For if there be any spiritual way
fancied, it will by a stronger argument admit them to Baptism: for if they can
receive spiritual effects, they can also receive the outward Sacrament; this
being denied only upon pretense they cannot have the other. If there be no
spiritual way extraordinary, then the ordinary way is only left for them. If
there be an extraordinary, let it be shown, and Christians will be at rest
concerning their children. One thing only I desire to be observed, That
Pelagius denied Original sin, but yet denied not the necessity of Infants
Baptism; and being accused of it in an Epistle to Pope Innocent the first, he
purged himself of the suspicion, and allowed the practice, but denied the
inducement of it: which shows, that their arts are weak that think Baptism to
be useless to Infants, if they be not formally guilty of the prevarication of
Adam: By which I also gather, that it was so universal, so primitive a
practice, to baptize Infants, that it was greater then all pretenses to the
contrary: for it would much have conduced to the introducing his opinion
against Grace and Original sin, if he had destroyed that practice which seemed
so very much to have its greatest necessity from the doctrine he denied. But
against Pelagius, and against all that follow the parts of his opinion, it is
of good use which S. Austine, Prosper, and Fulgentius argue; If Infants are
punished for Adams sin, then they are also guilty of it in some sense. Nimis
enim impium est hoc de Dei sentire justitia quod a praevaricatione liberos cum
reis voluerit esse damnatos. So Prosper. Prosper. contra Collatorem. cap. 20.
Dispendia quae flentes nascendo testantur, dicito quo merito sub justissimo
and omnipotentissimo judice eis, si nullum peccatum attrahant, arrogentur, said
S. Austin. For the guilt of sin signifies nothing but the obligation to the
punishment: and he that feels the evil consequent, to him the sin is imputed;
not as to all the same dishonor, or moral accounts, but to the more material,
to the natural account: and in holy Scripture the taking off the punishment, is
the pardon of the sin; and in the same degree the punishment is abolished, in
the same God is appeased, and then the person stands upright, being reconciled
to God by his grace. Since therefore Infants have the punishment of sin, it is
certain the sin is imputed to them; and therefore they need being reconciled to
God by Christ: and if so, then, when they are baptized into Christ's death, and
into his Resurrection, their sins are pardoned, because the punishment is taken
off, the sting of natural death is taken away, because Gods anger is removed,
and they shall partake of Christ's Resurrection: which because Baptism does
signify and consign, they also are to be baptized. To which also add this
appendant Consideration, That whatsoever the Sacraments do consign, that also
they do convey and minister: they do it, that is, God by them does it; lest we
should think the Sacraments to be mere illusions, and abusing us by deceitful
ineffective signs: and therefore to Infants the grace of a title to a
Resurrection, and Reconciliation to God by the death of Christ is conveyed,
because it signifies and consigns this to them more to the life and analogy of
resemblance, then Circumcision to the Infant sons of Israel. I end this
Consideration with the words of Nazianzen, (...). Orat. 40. in S. Baptis.
Our birth by Baptism does cut off every unclean appendage of our natural
birth, and leads us to a celestial life: and this in children is therefore more
necessary, because the evil came upon them without their own act of reason and
choice, and therefore the grace and remedy ought not to stay the leisure of
dull Nature, and the Formalities of the Civil Law.

5. The Baptism of Infants does to them the greatest part of. 18.
that benefit which belongs to the remission of sins. For Baptism is a state of
Repentance and pardon for ever. This I suppose to be already proved, to which I
only add this Caution, That the Pelagians to undervalue the necessity of
supervening grace, affirmed, That Baptism did minister to us grace sufficient
to live perfectly, and without sin for ever. Against this S. Jerome sharply
declaims, and affirms, Lib. 3. adv. Pelag. 6. lib. 1. in initio.
Baptismum praeterita donare ^^ccata, non futuram servare justitiam: that is,
non statim ju^tum facit and omni plenum justitia, as he expounds his meaning in
another place. Vetera peccata conscindit, nov as virtutes non tribuit; dimittit
a carcere, and dimisso, si laboraverit, praemia pollicetur. Baptism does not so
forgive future sins, that we may do what we please, or so as we need not
labor and watch, and fear perpetually, and make use of Gods grace to actuate
our endeavors; but puts us into a state of pardon, that is, in a Covenant of
Grace, in which so long as we labor and repent, and strive to do our duty, so
long our infirmities are pityed, and our sins certain to be pardoned upon their
certain conditions; that is, by virtue of it we are capable of pardon, and must
work for it, and may hope it. And therefore Infants have a most certain
capaciry and proper disposition to Baptism: for sin creeps before it can go,
and little undecencies are soon learned, and malice is before their years, and
they can do mischief and irregularities betimes; and though we know not when,
nor how far they are imputed in every month of their lives, yet it is an
admirable art of the Spirit of grace, to put them into a state of pardon, that
their remedy may at least be as soon as their necessity. And therefore
Tertullian and Gregory Nazianzen advised the Baptism of children to be at three
or four years of age; meaning, that they then beginning to have little
inadvertencies and hasty follies, and actions so evil as did need a lavatory.
But if Baptism has an influence upon sins in the succeeding portions of our
life, then it is certain, that their being presently innocent, does not hinder,
and ought not to retard the Sacrament; and therefore Tertullian's Quid festinat
innocens aetas ad remissiionem peccatorum? Lib. de Baptis* c. 18.
what need Innocents hasten to the remission of sins? is soon answered. It is
true, they need not in respect of any actual sins, for so they are innocent:
but in respect of the evils of their nature, derived from their original, and
in respect of future sins in the whole state of their life, it is necessary
they be put into a state of pardon before they sin, because some sin early,
some sin later; and therefore unless they be baptized so early, as to prevent
the first sins, they may chance dye in a sin, to the pardon of which they have
yet derived no title from Christ.

6. The next great effect of Baptism, which children can have,. 19.
is the Spirit of Sanctification, and if they can be baptized with Water and
the Spirit, it will be sacrilege to rob them of so holy treasures. And
concerning this, although it be with them, as S. Paul says of Heirs, The heir
so long as he is a child differs nothing from a servant, though he be Lord
of all; and children, although they receive the Spirit of Promise, and the
Spirit of Grace, yet in respect of actual exercise, they differ not from them
that have them not at all, yet this hinders not but they may have them. For as
the reasonahle soul and all its faculties are in children, Will and
Understanding, Passions, and Powers of Attraction and Propulsion, yet these
faculties do not operate or come abroad till time and art, observation and
experience have drawn them forth into action: so may the Spirit of Grace, the
principle of Christian life, be infused, and yet lie without action till in its
own day it is drawn forth. For in every Christian there are three parts
concurring to his integral constitution, Body, and Soul, and Spirit; and all
these have their proper activities and times, but every one in his own order,
first that which is natural, then that which is spiritual. And as Aristotle
said, A man first lives the life of a plant, then of a beast, and lastly of a
man, is true in this sense: and the more spiritual the principle is, the longer
it is before it operates, because more things concur to spiritual actions, then
to natural: and these are necessary, and therefore first; the other are
perfect, and therefore last. And who is he that so well understands the
Philosophy of this third principle of a Christians life, the Spirit, as to know
how or when it is infused, and how it operates in all its periods, and what it
is in its being and proper nature; and whether it be like the soul, or like the
faculty, or like a habit, or how or to what purposes God in all varieties does
dispense it? These are secrets which none but bold people use to decree, and
build propositions upon their own dreams. That which is certain, is, that *The
Spirit is the principle of a new life, or a new birth. *That Baptism is the
laver of this new birth. *That it is the seed of God, and may lie long in the
furrows before it springs up. *That from the faculty to the act, the passage is
not always sudden and quick. *That the Spirit is the earnest of our
inheritance, that is, of Resurrection to eternal life: which inheritance
because children we hope shall have, they cannot be denied to have its Seal and
Earnest, that is, if they shall have all, they are not to be denied a part.
*That children have some effects of the Spirit, and therefore do receive it,
and are baptized with the Spirit, and therefore may with Water: which thing is
therefore true and evident, because some children are sanctified, as Jeremy and
the Baptist, and therefore all may. And because all signification of persons is
an effect of the holy Ghost, there is no peradventure, but they that can be
sanctified by God can in that capacity receive the holy Ghost: and all the
ground of dissenting here, is only upon a mistake, because Infants do no act
of holiness, they suppose them incapable of the grace of Sanctification. Now
Sanctification of children, is their adoption to the inheritance of sons, their
presentation to Christ, their consignation to Christ's service, and to
Resurrection, their being put into a possibility of being saved, their
restitution to Gods favor, which naturally, that is, as our nature is depraved
and punished, they could not have. And in short the case is this: *Original
Righteousness was in Adam after the manner of nature, but it was an act or
effect of grace, and by it men were not made, but born righteous; (...).
Dionys. AErop. Eccles. Hier. cap. 3. part. 3.
the inferior faculties obeyed the superior, the mind was whole and right, and
conformable to the Divine Image, the Reason and the Will always concurring,
the Will followed Reason, and Reason followed the Laws of God, and so long as a
man had not lost this, he was pleasing to God, and should have passed to a more
perfect state. Now because this, if Adam had stood, should have been born with
every child, there was in Infants a principle which was the seed of holy life
here, and a blessed hereafter; and yet the children should have gone in the
road of nature, then as well as now, and the Spirit should have operated at
natures leisure; God being the giver of both, would have made them instrumental
to, and perfective of each other, but not destructive. Now what was lost by
Adam, is restored by Christ, the same Righteousness, only it is not born, but
superinduced, Ut quod perdideramus in Adam, i. e. secundum imaginem and
similitudinem esse Dei, hoc in Jesu Christo reciperemus. Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 30.
not integral, but interrupted, but such as it is, there is no difference, but
that the same or the like principle may be derived to us from Christ, as there
should have been from Adam, that is, a principle of obedience, a regularity of
faculties, a beauty in the soul, and a state of acceptance with God. And we
see also in men of understanding and reason, the Spirit of God dwells in them,
(which Tatianus describing, uses these words, (...), The soul is possessed with
sparks, or materials of the power of the spirit) and yet it is sometimes
ineffective and unactive, sometimes more, sometimes less, and does no more do
its work at all times, then the soul does at all times understand. Add to
this, That if there be in Infants naturally an evil principle, a proclivity to
sin, an ignorance and pravity of mind, a disorder of affections (as experience
teaches us there is, and the perpetual doctrine of the Church, and the
universal mischiefs issuing from mankind, and the sin of every man does
witness too much) why cannot Infants have a good principle in them, though it
works not till its own season, as well as an evil principle? If there were not
by nature some evil principle, it is not possible that all the world should
choose sin: In free agents it was never heard, that all individuals loved and
chose the same thing to which they were not naturally inclined. Neither do all
men choose to marry, neither do all choose to abstain: and in this instance
there is a natural incclination to one part; but of all the men and women in
the world, there is no one that has never sinned. If we say that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, said an Apostle. 1 John
1. 8.
If therefore nature has in Infants an evil principle, which operates when
the child can choose, but is all the while within the sou; either Infants have
by grace a principle put into them, or else sin abounds where grace does not
superabound, expressly against the doctrine of the Apostle. The event of this
discourse is, that if Infants be capable of the Spirit of grace, there is no
reason but they may and ought to be baptized, as well as men and women; unless
God had expressly forbidden them, which cannot be pretended: and that Infants
are capable of the Spirit of grace, I think it made very credible. Christus
infantibus infans factus sanctificans infantes, said Irenaeus, Christ became an
Infant Ep. ad Fiden. lib. 3. cp. 8.
among the Infants. and does sanctify Infants: and S. Cyprian affirms, Esse
apud omnes sive infantes sive majores natu unam divini muneris aequitatem.
There is the same dispensation of the divine grace to all alike, to Infants as
well as to men. And in this Royal Priesthood, as it is in the secular, Kings
may be anointed in their Cradles; Dat (Deus) sui Spiritus occultissimam S. Aug.
lib. de pec. Mer. and remiss. c. 9.
gratiam, quam etiam latenter infundit in parvulis, God gives the most secret
grace of his Spirit, which he also secretly infuses into Infants. And if a
secret infusion be rejected, because it cannot he proved at the place and at
the instant, many men that hope for heaven will be very much to seek for a
proof of their earnest, and need an earnest of the earnest. For all that have
the Spirit of God cannot in all instants prove it, or certainly know it:
neither is it yet defined by how many indices the Spirits presence can be
proved or signified. And they limit the Spirit too much, and understand it too
little, who take accounts of his secret workings, and measure them by the
material lines and methods of natural and animal effects. And yet because
whatsoever is holy, is made so by the holy Spirit, we are certain that the
children of believing, that is, of Christian parents, are holy, S. Paul
affirmed it, and by it has distinguished ours from the children of
unbelievers, and our marriages from theirs: and because the children of the
Heathen when they come to choice and reason, may enter to Baptism and the
Covenant if they will, our children have no privilege beyond the children of
Turks or Heathens, unless it be in the present capacity, that is, either by
receiving the holy Ghost immediately, and the Promises, or at least having a
title to the Sacrament, and entering by that door. If they have the Spirit,
nothing can hinder them from a title to the water; and if they have only a
title to the water of the Sacrament, then they shall receive the Promise of the
holy Spirit, the benefits of the Sacrament: else their privilege is none at
all, but a dish of cold water, which every village nurse can provide for her
newborn babe.

But it is in our case as it was with the Jews children: our children. 20.
are a holy seed; for if it were not so with Christianity, how could S. Peter
move the Jews to Christianity, by telling them the Promise was to them and
their children? For if our children be not capable of the Spirit of Promise and
Holiness, and yet their children were holy, it had been a better Argument to
have kept them in the Synagogue, then to have called them to the Christian
Church. Either therefore 1. there is some holiness in a reasonable nature,
which is not from the Spirit of holiness; or else 2. our children do receive
the holy Spirit, because they are holy; or if they be not holy, they are in
worse condition under Christ then under Moses: or if none of all this be true,
then our children are holy by having received the holy Spirit of Promise, and
consequently nothing can hinder them from being baptized.

And indeed if the Christian Jews, whose children are circumcised,. 21.
and made partakers of the same Promises and Title, and Inheritance and
Sacraments, which themselves had at their conversion to the faith of Christ,
had seen their children now shut out from these new Sacraments, it is not to be
doubted but they would have raised a storm, greater then could easily have been
suppressed: since about their Circumcisions they had raised such Tragedies and
implacable disputations: and there had been great reason to look for a storm;
for their children were circumcised, and if not baptized, then they were left
under a burden which their fathers were quit of, for S. Paul said unto you,
Whosoever is circumcised, is a debtor to keep the whole Law. These children
therefore that were circumcised, stood obliged for want of Baptism to perform
the Laws of Ceremonies, to be presented into the Temple, to pay their price, to
be redeemed with silver and gold; to be bound by the Law of pollutions and
carnal ordinances: and therefore if they had been thus left, it would be no
wonder if the Jews had complained and made a tumult: they used to do it for
less matters.

To which let this be added, That the first book of the New. 22.
Testament was not written till eight years after Christ's Ascension, and S.
Marks Gospel twelve years. In the mean time, to what Scriptures did they
appeal? by the analogy or proportion of what writings did they end their
Questions? whence did they prove their Articles? They only appealed to the Old
Testament, and only added what their Lord superadded. Now either it must be
said that our blessed Lord commanded that Infants should not be baptized, which
is no where pretended; and if it were, cannot at all be proved: or if by the
proportion of Scriptures they did serve God, and preach the Religion, it is
plain, that by the Analogy of the Old Testament, that is, of those Scriptures
by which they proved Christ to be come, and to have suffered, they also
approved the Baptism of Infants, or the admitting them to the society of the
faithful Jews, of which also the Church did then principally consist.

7. That Baptism (which consigns men and women to a blessed. 23.
Resurrection) does also equally consign Infants to it, has nothing, that I
know of, pretended against it, there being the same signature and the same
grace, and in this thing all being alike passive, and we no way cooperating to
the consignation and promise of grace: and Infants have an equal necessity, as
being liable to sickness and groaning with as sad accents, and dying sooner
then men and women, and less able to complain, and more apt to be pityed and
broken with the unhappy consequents of a short life, and a speedy death, and
infelicitate priscorum hominum, with the infelicity and folly of their first
Parents: and therefore have as great need as any, and that is capacity enough
to receive a remedy for the evil which was brought upon them by the fault of
another.

8. And after all this, if Baptism be that means which God has. 24.
appointed to save us, it were well if we would do our parts toward Infants
final interest; which whether it depends upon the Sacrament and its proper
grace, we have nothing to rely upon, but those Texts of Scripture which make
Baptism the ordinary way of entering into the state of salvation: save only we
are to add this, that because of this law Infants are not personally capable,
but the Church for them, as for all others indefinitely, we have reason to
believe, that their friends neglect shall by some way be supplied; but Hope
has in it nothing beyond a Probability. This we may be certain of, that
naturally we cannot be heirs of Salvation, for by nature we are children of
wrath, and therefore an eternal separation from God, is an infallible
consequent to our evil nature: either therefore children must be put into the
state of grace, or they shall dwell for ever where Gods face does never shine.
Now there are but two ways of being put into the state of grace and salvation;
the inward, by the Spirit, and the outward, by Water, which regularly are
together. If they be renewed by the Spirit, what hinders them to be baptized,
who receive the holy Ghost as well as we? If they are not capable of the
Spirit, they are capable of Water; and if of neither, where is their title to
heaven, which is neither internal nor external, neither spiritual nor
sacramental, neither secret nor manifest, neither natural nor gracious, neither
original nor derivative? And well may we lament the death of poor babes that
are (...), concerning whom if we neglect what is regularly prescribed to all
that enter heaven, without any difference expressed, or case reserved, we have
no reason to Nisi qui renatus suerit etc. utique nullum excipit, non infantem,
non aliqua praeventum necessitate. Ambr. de Abrah. patr. lib. 2. c. 11.
be comforted over our dead children, but may weep as they that have no hope.
We may hope when our neglect was not the hinderance, because God has wholly
taken the matter into his own hand, and then it cannot miscarry; and though we
know nothing of the children, yet we know much of Gods goodness: But when God
has permitted it to us, that is, offered and permitted children to our
ministry, whatever happens to the Innocents, we may well fear left God will
require the souls at our hands: and we cannot be otherwise secure, but that it
will be said concerning our children, which S. Ambrose used in a case Lib. 2.
c. 11. de Abrah. patriare.
like this, Anima illa potuit salva fieri, si habuisset purgationem, This soul
might have gone to God, if it had been purified and washed. We know God is
good, infinitely good, but we know it is not at all good to tempt his goodness:
and he tempts him, that leaves the usual way, and pretends it is not made for
him, and yet hopes to be at his journeys end, or expects to meet his child in
heaven, when himself shuts the door against him, which for ought he knows is
the only one that stands open. S. Austin was severe in this Question against
unbaptized Infants, therefore he is called durus Pater Infantium: though I know
not why the original of that opinion should be attributed to him, since S.
Ambrose said the same before him, as appears in his words above quoted in the
margent.

And now that I have enumerated the blessings which are consequent to Baptism,
and have also made apparent, That Infants. 25.
can receive these blessings, I suppose I need not use any other persuasions to
bring children to Baptism. If it be certain they may receive these good things
by it, it is certain they are not to be hindered of them without the greatest
impiety, and sacrilege, and uncharitableness in the world. Nay, if it be only
probable that they receive these blessings, or if it be but possible they may,
nay unless it be impossible they should, and so declared by revelation or
demonstratively certain, it were intolerable unkindness and injustice to our
pretty innocents, to let their crying be unpityed, and their natural misery
eternally irremediable, and their sorrows without remedy, and their souls no
more capable of relief, then their bodies of Physic, and their death left with
the sting in, and their Souls without Spirits to go to God, and no Angel
guardian to be assigned them in the Assemblies of the faithful, and they not to
be reck oned in the accounts of God and Gods Church. All these are sad stories.

There are in Scripture very many other probabilities, to persuade. 26.
the Baptism of Infants, but because the places admit of diverse
interpretations, the Arguments have so many diminutions, and the certainty that
is in them is too fine for easy understandings, I have chosen to build the
ancient doctrines upon such principles which are more easy and certain, and
have not been yet sullied and rifled with the contentions of an adversary. This
only I shall observe, That the words of our blessed Lord [Unless a man be born
of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven] cannot be
expounded to the exclusion of children, but the same expositions will also make
Baptism not necessary for men: for if they be both necessary ingredients, Water
and the Spirit, then let us provide water, and God will provide the Spirit; if
we bring wood to the Sacrifice, he will provide a Lamb. And if they signify
distinctly, one is ordinarily as necessary as the other, and then Infants must
be baptized, or not be saved. But if one be exegetical and explicative of the
other, and by Water and the Spirit is meant only the purification of the
Spirit, then where is the necessity of Baptism for men? It will be as the other
Sacrament, at most but highly convenient, not simply necessary, and all the
other places will easily be answered, if this be avoided. But however, these
words being spoken in so decretory a manner, are to be used with fear and
reverence; and we must be infallibly sure by some certain infallible arguments,
that Infants ought not to be baptized, or we ought to fear concerning the
effect of these decretory words. I shall only add two things by way of
Corollary to this Discourse.

That the Church of God ever since her numbers are full, have. 27.
for very many ages consisted almost wholly of Assemblies of them who have been
baptized in their Infancy: and although in the first callings of the Gentiles,
the chiefest and most frequent Baptisms were of converted and repenting persons
and believers, yet from the beginning also the Church has baptized the Infants
of Christian Parents; according to the Prophecy of Isaiah, Isa. 49. 22.
Behold, I will lift up my hands to the Gentiles, and set up a standard to the
people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be
carried upon their shoulders. Concerning which, I shall not only bring the
testimonies of the matter of fact, but either a report of an Apostolical
Tradition, or some Argument from the Fathers, which will make their testimony
more effectual in all that shall relate to the Question.

The Author of the book of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, attributed. 28.
to S. Denis the Areopagite, takes notice, that certain unholy persons, and
enemies to the Christian Religion, think it a ridiculous thing that Infants,
who as yet cannot understand the Divine Mysteries, should be partakers of the
Sacraments; and that professions and abrenunciations should be made by others
for them and in their names. He answers, that Holy men, Governors of Churches,
have so taught, having received a Tradition from their Fathers and Elders in
Christ: by which answer of his, as it appears, that he himself was later then
the Areopagite; so it is so early by him affirmed, that even then there was an
ancient Tradition for the Baptism of Infants, and the use of Godfathers in the
ministry of the Sacrament. Concerning which, it having been so ancient a
Constitution of the Church, it were well if men would rather humbly and
modestly observe, then like scorners deride it, in which they show their own
folly as well as immodesty. For what undecency or incongruity is it, that our
parents natural or spiritual should stipulate for us, when it is agreeable to
the practice of all the laws and transactions of the world, an effect of the
Communion of Saints and of Christian Economy? For why may not Infants be
stipulated for as well as we? all were included in the stipulation made with
Adam; he made a losing bargain for himself, and we smarted for his folly: and
if the faults of Parents, and Kings, and relatives, do bring evil upon their
children, and subjects, and correlatives, it is but equal that our children may
have benefit also by our charity and piety. But concerning making an agreement
for them, we find that God was confident concerning Abraham, that he would
teach his children: and there is no doubt but Parents have great power, by
strict education and prudent discipline, to efform the minds of their children
to virtue. Joshua did expressly undertake for his household, I and my house will
serve the Lord: and for children we may better do it, because till they are of
perfect choice, no Government in the world is so great, as that of Parents over
their children, in that which can concern the parts of this Question: for they
rule over their understandings, and children know nothing but what they are
told, and they believe it infinitely: and it is a rare art of the Spirit, to
engage Parents to bring them up well in the nuriure and admonition of the Lord;
they are persons obliged by a superinduced band, they are to give them
instructions and holy principles, as they give them meat; and it is certain
that Parents may better stipulate for their children, then the Church can for
men and women; for they may be present Impostors and Hypocrites, as the Church
story tells of some, and consequently are (...), not really converted, and
ineffectively baptized: and the next day they may change their resolution, and
grow weary of their Vow: and that is the most that children can do when they
come to age: and it is very much in the Parents, whether the children shall do
any such thing, or no; -- purus and insons
[Ut me collaudem] si and vivo carus amicis,
Causa fuit Pater his --
Ipse mihi custos incorruptissimus omnes
Circum Doctores aderat; quid multa? pudicum
(Qui primus virtutis honos) servavit ab omni
Non solum facto, verum opprobrio quoque turpi:
-- ob hoc nunc
Laus illi debetur, and a me gratia major.
Horat,

For Education can introduce a habit and a second nature, against which
children cannot kick, unless they do some violence to themselves and their
inclinations. And although it fails too often when ever it fails, yet we
pronounce prudently concerning future things, when we have a less influence
into the event, then in the present case, (and therefore are more unapt persons
to stipulate) and less reason in the thing it self (and therefore have not so
much reason to be confident.) Is not the greatest prudence of Generals
instanced in their foreseeing future events, and guessing at the designs of
their enemies, concerning which they have less reason to be confident, then
Parents of their childrens belief of the Christian Creed? To which I add this
consideration, That Parents or Godfathers may therefore safely and prudently
promise, that their children shall be of the Christian faith, because we not
only see millions of men and women who not only believe the whole Creed only
upon the stock of their education; but there are none that ever do renounce the
faith of their Country and breeding, unless they be violently tempted by
interest or weakness, antecedent or consequent. He that sees all men almost to
be Christians, because they are bid to be so, need not question the fittingness
of Godfathers promising in behalf of the children for whom they answer.

And however the matter be for Godfathers, yet the tradition of baptizing
Infants passed through the hands of Irenaeus, Omnem. 39.
aetatem sanctificans per illam quae ad ipsam erat similitudinem. L. 2. c. 39.
Omnes n. venit per semetipsum salvare, omnes inquam qui per eum renascuntur in
Deum, infantes, and parvulos, and pueros, and juvenes, and seniores. Ideo per
omnem venit aetatem, and infantibus infans factus sanctifica^s infantes, in
parvulis parvulus, etc. Christ Vide etlam Constit. Clementis. (...) Lib. 5. ad
Romans c. 6. idem homil. 14. in Lucam and lib. 8. hom. 8. in Levitic.
did sanctify every age by his own susception of it, and similitude to it. For
he came to save all men by himself, I say all who by him are born again unto
God, Infants, and children, and boys, and young men, and old men. He was made
an Infant to Infants, sanctifying Infants, a little one to the little ones,
etc. And Origin is express, Ecclesia traditionem ab Apostolis suscepit etiam
parvulis dare baptismum. The Church has received a Tradition from the Apostles
to give Baptism to Children. And S. Cyprian in his Epistle to Fidus, gives
account of this Article: for being questioned by some less skillful persons,
whether it were lawful to baptize Children before the eighth day; he gives
account of the whole question, and a whole Council of sixty six Bishops upon
very good reason decreed, that their baptism should at no hand be deferred,
though whether six, or eight, or ten days, was no matter, so there be no
danger or present necessity. The whole epistle is worth the reading.

But besides these authorities of such who writ before the starting. 30.
of the Pelagian Questions, it will not be useless to bring their discourses,
of them and others, I mean the reason upon which the Church did it both before
and after.

Irenaeus his argument was this; Christ took upon him our nature. 31.
to sanctify and to save it; and passed through the several Irenaeus.
periods of it, even unto death, which is the symbol and effect of old age;
and therefore it is certain he did sanctify all the periods of it: and why
should he be an infant, but that infants should receive the Crown of their
age, the purification of their stained nature, the sanctification of their
persons, and the saving of their souls by their Infant Lord and elder Brother?

Omnis enim anima eousque in Adam censetur donec in Christo recenseatur: tamdiu
immunda quamdiu recenseatur. Every. 32.
soul is accounted in Adam till it be new accounted in Christ; Tertullian.
and so long as it is accounted in Adam, so long it is unclean; and we know no
unclean thing can enter into heaven; and therefore our Lord has defined it,
Unless ye be born of water and the spirit, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven: that is, ye cannot be holy. It was the argument of Tertullian; Lib.
de anima: c. 39. and 4a S. Cyprian epist. ad Fidum.
which the rather is to be received, because he was one less favorable to the
custom of the Church in his time of baptizing Infants, which custom he noted
and acknowledged, and has also in the preceding discourse fairly proved. *And
indeed (that S. Cyprian may superadde his Symbol) God who is no Cyprian.
accepter of persons will also be no accepter of ages. * For if to the greatest
delinquents sinning long before against God; remission of sins be given when
afterward they believe, and from Baptism and from Grace no man is forbidden,
how much more ought not an Infant be forbidden, who being new born, has sinned
nothing, save only that being in the flesh, born of Adam in his first birth;
he has contracted the contagion of an old death? Who therefore comes the
easier to obtain remission of sins, because to him are forgiven not his own,
but the sins of another man. None ought to be driven from Baptism and the Grace
of God, who is merciful, and gentle, and pious unto all; and therefore much
less Infants, who more deserve our aid, and more need the divine mercy,
because in the first beginning of their birth crying and weeping, they can do
nothing but call for mercy and relief. For this reason it was (says Origin)
that they to whom the secrets of the Divine Origin. lib. 5. ad Romans C. 6.
mysteries were committed, did baptize their Infants, because there was born
with them the Impurities of sin, which did need material absolution as a
Sacrament of spiritual purification; for that it may appear that our sins have
a proper analogy to this Sacrament, the body it self is called the body of sin:
and therefore the washing of the body is not ineffectual toward the great work
of pardon and abolition. Indeed after this absolution there remains
concupiscence, or the material part of our misery and sin: For Christ by his
death only took away that which when he did dye for us, he bore in his own
body upon the tree. Now Christ only bore the punishment of our sin, and
therefore we shall not dye for it, but the material part of the sin Christ bore
not. Sin could not come so near him; It might make him sick and dye, but not
disordered and stained. He was pure from Original and Actual sins; and
therefore that remains in the body, though the guilt and punishment be taken
off, and changed into advantages and grace; and the Actual are cured by the
Spirit of grace descending afterward upon the Church, and sent by our Lord to
the same purpose.

But it is not rationally to be answered what S. Ambrose says, quia omnis
peccato obnoxia, ideo omnis aetas Sacramento. 33.
S. Ambros. de Abraham patriar. l. 2. c. 11.
idonea: For it were strange that sin and misery should seize upon the innocent
and most unconsenting persons; and that they only should be left without a
Sacrament, and an instrument of expiation. And although they cannot consent to
the present susception, yet neither do they refuse; and yet they consent as
much to the grace of the Sacrament, as to the prevarication of Adam and because
they suffer under this, it were but reason they should be relieved by that. And
S. Greg. Naz. (...). Or. c. 40. in S. Baptis.
it were better (as Gregory Nazianzen affirms) that they should be consigned
and sanctified without their own knowledge, then to dye without their being
sanctified; for so it happened to the circumcised babes of Israel: and if the
conspersion and washing the door posts with the blood of a lamb, did
sacramentally preserve all the firstborn of Goshen, it cannot be thought
impossible or unreasonable that the want of understanding in children should
hinder them from the blessing of a sacrament, and from being redeemed and
washed with the blood of the Holy Lamb, who was slain for all from the
beginning of the world.

After all this it is not inconsiderable that we say the Church. 3. 4.
has great power and authority about the Sacraments; which is observeable in
many instances. She appointed what persons she pleased, and in equal power made
an unequal dispensation and ministry. The Apostles first dispensed all things,
and then they left off exterior ministeries to attend to the word of God and
prayer: and S. Paul accounted it no part of his office to baptize, when he had
been separated by imposition of hands at Antioch, to the work of preaching and
greater ministeries; and accounted that act of the Church, the act of Christ,
saying, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: they used
various forms in the ministration of Baptism, sometimes baptizing in the name
of Christ, sometimes expressly invocating the Holy and ever Blessed Trinity:
one while [I baptize thee] as in the Latin Church, but in Greek, [Let the
servant of Christ be Baptized:] and in all Ecclesiastical ministeries the
Church invented the forms, and in most things has often charged them, as in
absolution, excommunication, and sometimes they baptized people upon their
profession of repentance, and then taught them; as it happened to the Jailer and
all his family; in whose case there was no explicit faith before hand in the
mysteries of Religion, so far as appears; and yet he, and not only he, but all
his house were baptized at that hour of the night when the earthquake was
terrible, and the fear was pregnant upon them, and this upon their Masters
account, as it is likely: but others were baptized in the conditions of a
previous faith, and a new begun repentance Non ut delinquere desinant, sed quia
desierunt, as Tertul. phraseth it.
. They baptized in rivers or in lavatories, by dipping or by sprinkling; for so
we find that S. Laurence did as he went to martyrdom, and so the Church did
sometimes to Clinicks, and so it is highly convenient to be done in Northern.
Countries according to the prophecy of Isaiah, So shall he sprinkle many
Nations, Isa. 52. 15.
according as the typical expiations among the Jews were usually by sprinkling:
and it is fairly relative to the mystery, to the sprinkling with the blood of
Christ and the watering of the 1 Pet. 1. 2.
furrows of our souls with the dew of heaven, to make them to bring forth fruit
unto the Spirit Aqua refectionis and haptisms lavacrum quo anima sterilis
ariditate peccati ad bonos fructus inferendos divinis muneribus irrigatur.
Cassidor. m. 23. ps. 2.
and unto holiness. The Church sometimes dipped the Catechumen three times;
sometimes but once: some Churches use fire in their baptisms, so do the
Ethiopians, and the custom was ancient in some places. And so (...), dixit
Heracleon apud Clem. Alex.
in the other Sacrament; sometimes she stood and sometimes kneeled, and
sometimes received it in the mouth, and sometimes in the hand: one while in
leavened, another while in unleavened bread: sometimes the wine and water were
mingled, sometimes they were pure; and they admitted some persons to it
sometimes, which at other times she rejected: sometimes the Consecration was
made by one form, sometimes by another: and to conclude, sometimes it was
given to Infants, sometimes not: and she had power so to do; for in all things
where there was not a Commandment of Christ expressed or employed in the nature
and in the end of the institution, the Church had power to alter the
particulars, as was most expedient, or conducing to edification: and although
the after ages of the Church which refused to communicate Infants, have found
some little things against the lawfulness, and those ages that used it found
out some pretenses for its necessity; yet both the one and the other had
liberty to follow their own necessities, so in all things they followed Christ.
Certainly there is infinitely more reason why Infants may be communicated, then
why they may not be baptized. And that this discourse may revert to its first
intention; although there is no record extant of any Church in the world, that
from the Apostles days inclusively to this very day ever refused to baptize
their children, yet if they had upon any present reason they might also change
their practice, when the reason should be changed; and therefore if there were
nothing else in it, yet the universal practice of all Churches in all ages, is
abundantly sufficient to determine us, and to legltimate the practice, since
Christ has not forbidden it. It is sufficient confutation to disagreeing
people to use the words of S. Paul, We have no such custom, nor the Churches
of God, to suffer children to be strangers from the Covenant of Promise, till
they shall enter into it as Jews or Turks may enter, that is, by choice and
disputation. But although this alone to modest and obedient, that is, to
Christian Spirits, be sufficient, yet this is more then the question did need.
It can stand upon its proper foundation.

Quicunque parvulos recentes ab uteris matrum baptiz andos Council. Milevit.
Can. 2.
negat, anathema est.

He that refuses to baptize his Infants, shall be in danger of the Council.

The PRAYER.
O Holy, and Eternal Jesus, who in thy own person were pleased to sanctify the
waters of Baptism, and by thy institution and Commandment did make them
effectual, to excellent purposes of grace and remedy, be pleased to verify the
holy effects of Baptism to me and all thy servants whose names are dedicated to
thee in an early and timely presentation, and enable us with thy grace to
verify all our promises, by which we were bound, then when thou did first
make us thy own portion and relatives in the consummation of a holy Covenant. O
be pleased to pardon all those undecencies and unhandsome interruptions of that
state of favor in which thou did plant us by thy grace, and admit us by the
gates of Baptism: and let that Spirit which moved upon those holy waters never
be absent from us, but call upon us and invite us by a perpetual argument and
daily solicitations and inducements to holiness; that we may never return to
the filthiness of sin, but by the answer of a good conscience may please thee
and glorify thy name, and do honor to thy religion and institution in this
world, and may receive the blessings and the rewards of it in the world to
come, being presented to thee pure and spotless in the day of thy power when
thou shall lead thy Church to a Kingdom, and endless glories. Amen.

The End.

