A True Relation of what has passed between the English Company Trading to the
East Indies, and the Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading into
the East Indies, touching an Agreement between both Companies: Together with
some Remarks thereon.
At a Court of Directors for the English Company Trading to the East Indies,
held the 8th of November, School.
UPON a Proposal then made by Thomas Papillon Esquire That an Accommodation might
be set on Foot between this Company and the Old East India Company. Nov. 8.


The Court thanked him for his Trouble, and told him, That they had a
Disposition to agree with the Old Company upon reasonable Terms, and desired to
know what Proposals the Old Company would make, which being made by Persons
duly empowered thereunto, this Court would then endeavor to get a full
Authority to Treat with them in order to attain a happy Conclusion.

And on the 17th of the same Month, Nov. 17.
the said Answer was Read and Approved at a General Court holden for the said
English Company.

At a Court of Directors, held the 17th of January, School.
Sir William Hedges, and Sir John Lethieullier, from the Old Company, Jan. 17.
acquainted the Court that Mr. Charles Blunt a Member of this Company, had
brought to them a Copy of the Answer given by this Court to Mr. Papillon, which
they said they had Communicated to their Court, and that by their Order they
delivered a Copy of the Resolution of their General Court in two Papers, both
of the same Tenor and Contents, viz.

At a General Court of Adventurers, holden the 13th Day of January, School.
Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Court, That they are willing to Join
in a Coalition, with the Subscribers to the Two Millions: Provided it can be
done on Safe, Just, and Reasonable Terms.

To which Message the Chairman, by Order of the Court, made Answer;

Gentlemen,

This Court was upon rising when you were pleased to bring in these two Papers,
but they will call a Court on purpose to Weigh and Debate their Contents.

And accordingly on the 23d of January a Court of Directors was Summoned for
that purpose, Jan. 23.
where it was

Resolved, That the Answer to Mr. Papillon of the 8th of November last, which
was Read and Approved at a General Court of this Company the 17th of the same
Month, be sent and delivered to the Governor and Company of Merchants of London
Trading into the East Indies, whereby it does appear, that this Company is
willing to receive such Proposals as are Safe and Reasonable.

And they Ordered that the said Resolution should be carried and delivered in
Writing, to the Old East India Company, on Wednesday then following, by Sir
Streynsham Master and Sir James Bateman, two of their Members.

At a Court of Directors, held the 25th of January.
Sir Streynsham Master Reported, Jan. 25.
That he and Sir James Bateman had carried the Resolution of this Court of the
23d Instant, to the Court of Committees of the Old East India Company, and that
the same was Read in their Presence, and then they withdrew, and having staid
without some time, Sir William Gore and Sir Samuel Dashwood, two of the Members
of the Court, came out and acquainted them, That they had nothing further to
say at present.

At a General Court of the Members of the English Company Trading to the
East Indies, held the 2d of February, School.
What had passed between both Companies being Communicated to them, Feb. 2.
they came to the following Resolution, viz.

Resolved,

That this Court does incline to an Agreement with the Governor and Company of
Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies, upon Safe, Just, and
Reasonable Terms.

And they ordered, That the said Resolution be carried and delivered to the
Ordinary Committee, or Grand Committee of the Governor and Company of Merchants
of London Trading into the East Indies, by Sir Streynsham Master and Sir James
Bateman.

At a Court of Directors held the 3d of Feb. School.
Sir Streynsham Master reported, Feb. 3.
That Sir James Bateman and he had (according to the Order of the General
Court) been this day at the Court of Committees of the Governor and Company of
Merchants of London Trading to the East Indies, and had delivered the
Resolution of the said General Court of this Company held yesterday, to the
said Court of Committees, which was there Read, and the Governor acquainted
them, That if this Court would meet to morrow, they would then send an Answer
in Writing by Members of their own Court.

Ordered,

That a Court be Summoned to morrow Morning, to receive the said Answer.

And accordingly a Court of Directors was held the 4th of February, Feb. 4.
when the Answer reported to the General Court as hereunder, was brought to
them; whereupon they Resolved to call a General Court on Tuesday then next
following.

A General Court was accordingly held Febr. 2. School. Feb. 7.

And the Chairman acquainted them, that Sir Streynsham Master, and Sir James
Bateman had on Friday the 3d. of February Instant, delivered the Resolution of
this Court of the 2d. of Feb. and in Answer thereunto the Court of Directors
did on Saturday last receive a Paper by the hands of Sir William Pritchard and
Sir Samuel Dashwood, in the following words.

The 3d of February School. At a meeting of the Grand Committee of 52. appointed
by the General Court of the Governor and Company of Merchants of London,
Trading to the East Indies.
Whereas a Resolution from the General Court of the Members of the English
Company Trading to the East Indies, holden the 2d. Instant, was brought by Sir
Streynsham Master, and Sir James Bateman to this Committee in Haec verba, viz.

Resolved,

That this Court does incline to an Agreement with the Governor and Company of
Merchants of London Trading to the East Indies, upon Safe, Just and Reasonable
Terms. The same being debated and considered;

Resolved,

That a General Court be called on Tuesday Morning next, and that this
Committee will then propose to them the Authorizing and Impowering Seven
Persons to Treat, pursuant to the Resolutions of both Companies; Provided The
Court of Directors of the said English Company do call a General Court to meet
at the same time, and propose to them the naming the like number of Persons for
the same purpose.

And the Chairman acquainted the Court, that upon receipt of the said Paper,
the Court of Directors had called this General Court to communicate the same
unto them.

And then the Court took the same into consideration; and whilst they were upon
the Debate, Sir Richard Levitt and Sir John Lethieullier brought and delivered
to the Court a Paper, which was Read, and is as follows.

At a General Court of the Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading
into the East Indies, holden the 7th of February School.
This Court now thought fit to Nominate the Persons following, viz. Sir William
Pritchard Knight. and Alderman, Sir Samuel Dashwood Knight. and Alderman, Sir William
Langhorn Bar. Sir William Gore Knight. Alderman and Sheriff, Francis Eyles Esquire Mr.
William Fawkener, and William Hewer Esquire whom they do Authorize and Empower to
Treat with the like number of Persons to be Appointed by the General Court of
the English Company Trading to the East Indies, pursuant to the Resolutions of
both Companies, and to Report their Proceedings to this Court in Ten days, or
sooner.

Then the Court continued the Debate, and came to the following Resolutions,
Viz.

Resolved,

That on Tuesday the 14th of this Instant February, this Court will Choose by
the Ballot Twenty four Persons out of the General Court, to be added to the
Court of Directors to be a Grand Committee, in order to a Treaty to be set on
foot with the Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading to the
East Indies.

Resolved,

That on Friday the 17th of this Instant February, this Court will Choose by
the Ballot Seven Persons out of the said Grand Committee of Forty eight, to
Treat with the Seven Persons nominated by the aforesaid Governor and Company.

And the Court ordered, That a Copy of the said Resolutions should be carried
by Sir William Scawen and Sir Edmond Harrison, and delivered to the Court or
Committee of the Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading to the
East Indies.

And the same were carried accordingly; Feb. 9.
And at a Court of Directors held the 9th of February Sir William Scawen and
Sir Edmond Harrison Reported, That they had delivered the said Resolutions to
the Grand Committee of the Old East India Company, and being withdrawn, and
having stayed about an hour and half, they were again called in, and a Paper
was delivered to them in the Words following, viz.

At a Grand Committee of 52 for the East India Company, holden the 8th of
February School.
This Committee taking into Consideration the Resolution of the General Court
of the Members of the English Company Trading to the East Indies, held the 7th
Instant, this Day brought them by Sir William Scawen and Sir Edmond Harrison,
do return for Answer, That they are of Opinion the said Resolution is not a
Satisfactory Answer to the Paper sent by this Company on Tuesday last; but they
will lay the same before the next General Court of the Governor and Company of
Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies.

At a General Court of the English Company Trading to the East Indies, held
Feb. 21. School.
Resolved,

To send a Message to the Old East India Company, to acquaint them, Feb. 21.
That this Court have Chosen Sir William Scawen, Sir Streynsham Master, Sir
Edumund Harrison, Samuel Shepherd Esquire Gilbert Heathcote Esquire Brook Bridges Esquire
and Mr. Nathanael Gould, to Treat with the Seven Persons nominated by the
Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies, in
order to an Agreement. And Sir Theodore Janssen and Alderman Withers were
ordered to carry the said Message the first Court-Day.

Whereupon the Secretary sent to the Old East India House, to know when there
would be a Court; and was answered, That there would be one on Wednesday, the
22d of February.

At a Court of Directors, held Feb. 22. School.
Sir Theodore Janssen reported, Feb. 22.
That Alderman Withers and he had this Day been at the East India House, to
deliver the Message ordered by the General Court; and that Mr. Dubois came out,
and told them, That there was no Court there that Day, nor would there be any
that he knew of till Friday next, their usual Court-Days being Wednesdays and
Fridays.

At a Court of Directors, held Feb. 24. School.
Sir Theodore Janssen informed the Court, Feb. 24.
That he with Alderman Withers were this Day again at the Old East India House,
and were informed, that there was no Court there: Whereupon they desired to
speak with the Secretary, who sent word, That he was not well, and therefore
desired to be excused; but Mr. Woolley, the Under-Secretary, acquainted them,
That the Gentlemen went away as they came, and that there was not a Court;
whereupon they said they had been there twice, and being disappointed, they
desired he would send word when a Court would be held there. To which he
answered, he would speak to the Governor, and if he gave him Leave, he would do
it.

The Remarks on what has passed between the Two Companies.
THE Answer given to Mr. Papillon the 8th of November, and afterward Read and
Approved in a general Court, showed a forward Disposition in the English
Company to an Agreement with the Old Company.

Notwithstanding there appeared in the Old Company no Disposition on their Part
toward an Agreement till above Two Months after, to gain time (as may be
reasonably supposed) for the Dispatch of their Ships.

Then they sent their Resolution to join in a Coalition, etc. In Answer to
which the Court of Directors of the English Company the 23d of January, sent a
Repetition of the Answer given so long before to Mr. Papillon; Adding, That it
did thereby appear, that the English Company was willing to receive such
Proposals as were Safe and Reasonable.

What had passed between both Company's being Communicated the 2d of February
to the General Court of the English Company, they declared they inclined to an
Agreement with the Old Company; Which Resolution was sent to the Old Company
the day following.

And the next day a Court of Directors was called on purpose to receive an
Answer thereunto, which they were told would then be sent to them, and was
accordingly sent, being a Copy of the Resolution of their Court.

Whereupon the English Company did Summon a General Court accordingly, which
Court appointed that 24 Persons should be chosen by way of Ballot, and added to
the 24 Directors, to be a Grand Committee for setting a Treaty on foot, and did
then also appoint, that 7 Persons should be chosen by way of Ballot to Meet and
Treat with the 7 Persons nominated by the Old Company; and the English Company
the next day sent to acquaint the Old Company with the said Resolutions, and
did accordingly forthwith prepare and Print a List of all their Adventurers,
and gave public Notice, That on the 14th every Adventurer should bring in his
Vote of the 24 Persons to be chosen; and the next day being the 15th the
Scrutineers met, and on the 16th Declared on whom the Choice fell; and on the
17th they Balloted for the 7, who were Declared the 18th; all which was
performed in as short a time as was possible; The said English Company being by
their Constitution and Charter to make all such Elections by the Ballot.

By the whole proceedings of the English Company, and their sending Two several
times on the usual Court Days of the Old Company, the Names of the Seven
Persons chosen to Treat with them; it plainly appears, how ready the English
Company has been to Treat with the Old Company: notwithstanding the doubtful
Expressions in the Resolution of their General Court to join in a Coalition
with the Subscribers to the Two Millions: and also such a Message sent by them,
that the Answer of the English Company was not Satisfactory. And therefore the
Reflections of the English Company's having Trifled or Delayed, are unjustly
cast upon them by the Old Company.

Thus Matters stood when the Old Company were pleased by Petitioning the
Honorable House of Commons to break off the Treaty.


