A True RELATION OF THE LATE FIGHT BETWEEN Sr William Wallers FORCES, and
those sent from OXFORD. With the manner of Sir WILLIAM WALLERS Retreat to
Bristoll, and the Condition of His Army at this present. Sent from a Colonel
in that Army now in Bristoll, to a Friend of his in LONDON.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dexter, for R. Dunscum. 1643.

A True RELATION OF The late Fight, between Sir WILLIAM WALLERS Forces, and
those sent from OXFORD.
SIR, I received yours of the 11. instant, to which I gave present answer.

For News with us, it has the face of bad: but for my own part, I see a very
great Deliverance in it, and Gods immediate hand in saving this Army.

I shall give you a brief account of the progress and success thereof since
the last defeat given Sr. Ralph Hopton on La^sdowne, which is thus:

Friday the Enemy lay in Marshfield, we lay that night in the Field, within two
miles of him.

Saturday he marched to Chipenham, we followed and kept the Field.

Sunday he retreated to the Devises, we pursued and fought with him, and killed
many of his Horse, and especially Foot: but it being late we durst not enter
the Town, but still kept the Field in a green near Roode.

The next morning, being Monday, we drew up to Bagnall hill with our whole
Body: That night we sent out many ^ar^^es, and ^rew down to Runway we brought
in many Prisoners, beat the Lord of Craford, took 8. Colors, and some Officers

Next night we had intelligence of a great Party coming with Ammunition, which
we took, being six Cart loads: but the Enemy running away in due time, we had
but few Prisoners

That night Prince Maurice, and the Marquess, with most of their Horse, stole
away for Oxford* we did light on their Rear with a small party, and took 17 or
18 Prisoners.

Tuesday morning we fell upon the Town, which they well defended: In the
afternoon desired a Parle, and two hours cessation which on good reason was
granted them: but they not conforming to our Demands, we fell on again that
night, though coldly.

The next day Wednesday, we continued our assault, beat them from all their Out
works and Guards: but that day and night being extreme wet, hindered us much.

Thursday night we had resolved on a general assault: but this resolution was
scarce taken, but news came that the Enemy from Oxford was within two miles,
with two thousand horse, which made us draw up to Bagnall hill, without Drum or
Trumpet, where we found the Enemy in sight, marching toward us; we longed to
Charge them with our horse which we did with some disadvantage, and were put to
a retreat disorderly: But rallied again with the help of our Reserve. The
Enemy came on, and we charged them the second time, and then all our Horse were
Routed, their Reserve standing firm. We fled; they followed, yet our Foot
being scarce considerable, stood one hour and an half, and forced their Horse
to retreat diverse times: but their Foot coming up from the Devises, made ours
leave their Arms and fly. We have lost only ^0. horse, and at the most 200.
Common Soldiers slain, and taken prisoners; about 500 arms. No man of note
killed or hurt, only Sir Arthur Haslerigge who received a wound in his arm,
and an hurt in his ear, but not dangerous: he fought very bravely. We know we
killed many of their best Men, but not known to us by name, because we l^st the
Field: We retreated all to this City, and hope to make good Bath also.

As this was a great loss to us, so likely to all the West unless the Lord
General suddenly help; however, we acknowledge Gods over ruling power in our
great deliverance: the Enemy having six Regiments of horse, and 700. Dragoons,
that never presented themselves in our view, but lay in ambush* as diverse
report, who saw them and have since broke through their army, and are returned
to us. The same also is confessed by Mayor Byron, whom we took prisoner.

Finis.

