A TRVE RELATION Of the proceedings of the SCOTTISH ARMY NOW IN IRELAND, By
three LETTERS. The First Sent from General Major MONROE to General LESLIE his
Excellence. The Second Writ by the Major and Aldermen of Londonderry to
General Major MONROE. The Third Sent by the Earl of ANTRUM to General Major
Monroe. Which Letters were sent by General Major Monroe to General LESLIE his
Excellence.

London Printed for John Bartlet, 1642.

General Major MONROE his Letter to General LESLEY.
Right Honorable,
HAving received your Letter of the fourth of May from Captain Fraser at my
return to Carrickfergus, on Thursday the twelfth at night; please your
Excellence to be informed truly of the passages of our first expedition
toward the Newrie; having broken up from Carrickfergus the twenty seventh of
April at night, we marched to Millone, being nine miles from Carrickfergus,
and a mile beyond Belfast, where we remained the twenty eight, till after
midday, that my Lord Connoway, Colonel Chitchester, with a thousand commanded
foot, did join with us, and three troops of horse, and two troops
Dragooners, with our small pieces, and one big piece of five pound bullet taken
off the Castle of Carrickfergus: And being forced to leave a part of our
provision for ten days behind us, for want of carridge horses. We broke up
Boden, as we might be served to quarter that night at Drumbo, having directed
from Carrickfergus one of the Kings ships toward Carlingford with some
provision of Meal, Chiese and Ammunition, for which we had no transport by
land, giving him order to secure the water mouth at Carlingford, being the
water passes to the Newrie. The other ship I directed toward Colraine and
Londonderry, with some relief to them both, and to bring intelligence from
thence against our return. The twenty ninth we marched toward Lessnagarvie,
where we joined with eight hundred foot and two troops of horse of my Lord
Clannebowies, and my Lord Ards, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Montgomrie,
and Lieutenant Colonel Hamilton; and being in all about three thousand four
hundred foot, in two divisions, viz. Connoway Chitchester, Clannebowies and
Ardis making one division, Sinklers commanded men, him and I being a thousand
six hundred we made up the other division, and marched day about in the
Vauntguard and gave out the orders night about my Lord Connoway and I. We had
also with us three troops Dragooners at fifty a piece, and five troops of
horse at forty a piece; and all being put in order, we marched toward the
woods of Kilwarline, where the Enemy lay in one Pass with 2500. men, and sixty
horse, commanded by my Lord Ev^ck Mack^rtane Sir Con Macginnische and Sir Rorie
Macginnische, they having cast off one bridge on the Pass, and retired from it
to another Pass in the woods; I commanded our horsemen to go about and to
draw up on their flank in the wood, having way to pass but one horse after
another: in the mean time our commanded Muskateers and four of our
fielding-peeces were brought over the Pass, and made good one pass till our
whole Army was set over, and then our Canons forced them to give ground, till
we made open the second pass being strait, having moss and bogs on every
side; at length our commanded Muskateers charged the front, and the Cavilree on
the flanks, till they were forced with loss to retreat in disorder athwart
the woods and bogs on several hands, in which time our whole Army came over
the pass, and then our commanded Muskateers skirmished with them for three
miles in the woods on both flanks while the body of the Army was making
passages free to carry through the Canon and horsemen: at night we encamped all
horse and foot in one body, the whole night in arms in the midest of the wood.
In this skirmish Sir Rorie Mackginnische and Mackartans, two active men,
brothers were killed with one hun^red and fifty more; with the loss of two men
on our side. and four wounded. About Sir Rorie was found diverse Letters, which
furnished us with intelligence of all their designs in opposing us in that
field, and of their intentions elsewhere.

Saturdy the last of April, we marched in the former order through the woods,
toward Lochbricklane, where being come on the plain, our horsemen on the
wings killed diverse of them retiring, and some taken prisoners were hanged
thereafter. And being come late to quartar we could not engage that night with
the intaking of the Island, where there lay a wicked Garrison in a fast place
environed within a loch, being a refuge in safety, and their Boat d^awne.
Sunday the first of May, being eight miles from the Newrie, I commanded the
Cavilrie and Dragoneers to march, for blocking up the Newrie, till our coming:
and they being gone, I persued the Island from the land with Canon and Musket
for a time, and finding the roagues despirate, I adventured upon promise of
reward six hieland-m^n with their arms, Pike and sword, to swin under me^cy of
our own Canon, to bring away their Boat, whereof three swimmers dyed, two
retired, and the sixth alone brought away the Boat, being shot through with a
fielding-peece; she was clamped up with salt hides, and being manned again,
took in the I Will, the whole sixty therein put to the sword, and our p^isoners
which they had released. And leaving a Sergeant and twelve Muskateers there, we
marched toward the Newrie; and having summoned the Town and Castle to come in
to our mercy or no mercy, the Town gave over, the Castle held out, alleging
He was able to keep it seven years. In the mean time we granted a time to the
next morning to Him to advise; during which time I fully recognished the house
and perceived that I could take it in by pittard or by fire. On Monday the
second of May, prepared our fagots, and made ready our batteries, before
tuesday at midday, resolving to take it in rather by terror of our Canons
then by fire or pittard, which would make the place unprofitable for us; next
if it were taken so Sir Edward Traver a man of good account, being there
Prisoner, had died also by them or with them; so having all things in
readiness quainted them again there was no quarter for them but he and his
Garrison to march forth without Arms with white sticks in their hands, and he
should have a free Convoy, and their lives spared. These of the town should
have no other quarter then to come forth in our reverence. And our prisoners to
be safely delivered unto us, which they once accorded unto: but getting
intelligence Sir Philome was near hand for their relief, they resolved to
delay till the next morning, which being refused, we forced up their outer gate
and were ready to pittard the second were not for fear of the prisoners who
cried for mercy; and that the gate should be made up instantly as was done, and
the Castle that night guarded by us and the prisoners guarded in the Town.

On Wednesday the fourth of May, the Captain was sent away with a Convoy, and
the townsmen detained till trial should be had of their behaviors; as also
the garrison of Carlingford fled away for fear and the Captain of the Kings
ship made booty there and man^ed the Castle of Carlingford. This day I did
write to Dundaak^ to Sir Henry ^^gburne to come to the Newrie to learn of him
the estate of the Country beyond him who came to us on thursday the fifth of May
of whom I could learn nothing, who being returned we entered in e^amination of
the townsmen, if all were Papists; and the indifferent being severed from the
bad whereof 60. with two Priests were shot and hanged the indifferent are
banished: which being done, finding the place comodious for our Army, I
resolved to place Lieutenant Colone^l Sinkler with his men to maintain the
place, having joined with them ^00. of my Lord Ards and my Lord Clannebowies
men till the rest of their own regiment might be sent to them by woter from
Carrickfergus. And in my simple judgment your Exce^lence shall find that
place a convenient part to draw the third of the Army there being nearest the
strength of the Enemy, in the Counties of Ardmach, Tyran, Monacan and Cavan
otherwise it will be impossible ^o transport your Army from Carrickfergus for
lack of ca^iage and toylsome ways; for in this last march five of my cariages
were broken, being but fielding pieces, which are the only Cannon for use in
this service: and our horses also in the most parts of the Country will not be
useful but rather a toil to the foot to guard them; for it will be a War in
my judgment very strange, for in the whole march I had never any alarm given
us being quartered in the fields untrenched.

Friday the sixth of May having settled the Garrison, I resolved to march toward
the enemy to Ardmach: and having sent forth one strong party of Horse and
Dragoneers toward their Army, they thinking the whole Army was marching;
retired back on Ardmach and burnt the town, puttingall the British to the
sword and retired to the straits of Tyron; whereupon we being scarce of
victuals and our body weakened, our soldiers burdened with unnecessary trash
of baggage. I resolved to return with the Army home, marching through my Lord
Evankes Country, Mackartan and Slawtneils, being only the considerable Enemy
in the Country of Down. And in our March I resolved my self with 800.
Musketeers to put them from their strengths in the Mountains of Monrue, and to
rob them of their cattle, which we did. I marching through the Mountains, on
the right hand, and the Army, Horse and foot and Artillary marching through the
Valley on the left hand, where we joined together. On Sunday the eight at
night, four miles from the Pass of Durdrum, bordering betwixt my Lord Evanks
Lands and Mackartans. Monday the ninth, we divided our Army in three, Colonel
Home with 500. commanded Musketeers two troops of Dragoneers, and one troop of
Horse; to Connoway the Artillary cattle and baggage safest way toward
Mackartanes own house; the rest of the Horse^ Lieutenant Colonel Montgomrie
and 200. commanded Muskateers were sent about the Mountains to run through
betwixt Kilwarning woods and Killernie woods to the randevous the next day at
Mackartanes house; and hearing Mackartane with his forces and cattle were
lying in one strait in the woods of Killernie, I marched, thither my self,
with the body of the foot and Colors: and having quartered on Monday at night
within three miles of the Enemy, came upon them the next morning unawares
without sound of Drum, so they were scattered. And having commanded further
three bodies of Musketeers to several parts, appointing one randevow for all,
we brought together to our quarters at night above four thousand cattle, and
joined all together at night at Mack^r^anes house; and diverse were killed of
the Rebels, being scattered on all hands; and one strong body of them on one
pass in the woods fore-gathered with the horsemen, and Lieutenant Colonel
Montgomrie, where the foot behooved to guard the horse, they being unskilful
in their l^ding, having lost four horses and five men.

Wednesday the 11. hearing the Enemy was resolved to fight with us in the wood,
we marched with our Artillery and commanded men in the Vanguard; our two
divisions marching after with commanded men in the flanks, we were forced to
make several stopped to clear the passages they had stopped with wood to keep
us up; our cattle marched next to the Army, being guarded with Pike-men and
Muskateers on all quarters; our baggage next to them, our horsemen and
Dragonee^s in the Rere of all. The Rebels being drawn up on the hills
perceiving our order of march, durst not engage with us so cumming free off, we
quartered at night in Drumbo: and the next morning divided our cattle, such as
remained unstolen by the horsemen and plunderers, being an infinite number of
poor contemptible countrymen, which could not be reduced to order. And on
thursday the twelfth, we returned to our several quarters, all our victuals
being spent, except our cowes. At my return I received one letter from my Lord
Marquess of Argile, craving advice where he should land his men in the County
of Antrum; likewise one other letter from the Earl of Antrum, rather to entrap
me then to approve himself a loyal Subject; the third I received from the
town of Londonderry showing their necessities, which letters I have answered
severally as I could best for the time.

And for answer to your Excellence of this fourth of May* I find Companies
cumming over and no provision with them, which questionless, except it be
prevented will breed disorders amongsts us: for there is not provision here for
the Forces already come to give them bread, and if I had not had meal that
came from Scotland, and some Biscuit borrowed from the Kings Ships, I had not
intended the Expedition for the Newrie, and I did think in sixteen days time,
the most part being out of the Garrison; that the Major should have had store of
bread for a new Expedition in readiness to go into the County of Antrum, to
assist the Marquis of Argiles forces at their landing against the Rebels, being
dangerous for them, except we be able to divert the Enemy toward the
band-water, in regard my Lord Antrum is joined strong with the Rebels, making a
pretext of laying down of Arms, in the mean time does what he can to cut our
throats; and except the men come suddenly I cannot draw to the fields to assist
Argile; neither can I get Sinclers regiment well provided, who are at the
Newrie; for in ten days time all the provision thereabouts will be eaten up,
till more forces join with them to enlarge his freedom.

And my Lord Linsies men I have quartered in Broad Island and Ylmagie, where
they have houses but no victuals; and if all should be trusted to the Major of
Carrickf^rgus his furnishing one thousand must li^e on one hundred men's
allowance of bread a day: so that meal must be the provision which will fit us
best to go to the fields.

In all our journey we could not rammasse ten serviceable horse for Cannon or
baggage, but above eight hundred colts and fillies were rammassed together out
of the Mountains and Woods by the poor contemptible robbed people and
plunderers, which I followed the Army, which I could not in pity take from
them. The most of our carriage that was weighty at this time was drawn by
Oxen, our baggage horse were scarce and weak. But I hope when grass grows up
we may get some horses from them, if we could be served meanly, for the
present which no man can supply so well as my Lord Clunnebowies and my Lord
Arddis, Master Arthur Hill, and James Edmistoun of Broad Island and Ylemagies;
and this* is all the help your Excellence may expect for transporting of
Baggage or Ammunition, except it be brought from Scotland for the time.

I must entreat your Excellence to cause send one Copy of this Information to
our Commissioners, and another to my Lord Chancellor, since I cannot have time
to write to them; please your Excellence to receive the letter that came from
Londonderry the 27. of April; as also the Earl of Antrums letter from
Dunluce the last of April, directed to my self. So having no further to
acquaint your Excellence with for the time; wishing your Excellence an happy
arrival here: I remain

Your Excellence humble and obedient servant, ROBERT MONROE.
Carrickfergus this 13. of May, 1642.
The Major and Aldermens Letter of Londonderry to General Major MONROE.
Right honorable and noble Sir,
WE of this City of Londonderry and other parts, have either bin forgotten,
or given over for loss, as we conceive; for all other parts of the Kingdom are
plentifully supplied, and yet though we have made our wants and miseries known
diverse times to Dublin and to England and Scotland, yet no relief ever came to
us, but only thirty barrels of powder brought by Captain Bolline from Dublin,
long before Christmas, which was partly upon the arrival thereof disposed to
all needful parts; and want of powder and arms here has bin our ruin. It is
the great providence and goodness of God that we are hitherto preserved,
having bin so ill armed and provided for; all the arms within his Majesty's
store here were shipped to Dublin the last summer, and nothing left here but old
decaid Calivers, which we have hitherto made a shift with, and trimmed them up
to our great charges.

We have raised seven hundred men for the defense of this City and keep them
hitherto at our own charges, in expectation of money and other supplies, but
there is not one hundred good swords amongst them and their arms but mean.
Sir William Steward, Sir Robert Steward, and Sir Ralph Gore had Commissions
from his Majesty out of Scotland in November for raising their Regiments, and
two horse troops, they lie in the County of Tyrone and thereabout, and so have
done all this winter, to oppose the enemy, but being unprovided for, and not
one penny to pay them, they could never attempt any great service. It is much
that they keep the enemies from our walls to this hour, now our powder is
gone, our victuals is beginning to fail, and these three Regiments had bin
starved long since, if we of this City had not relieved them with Biefe,
Butter, Heri^s, and other necesaries, to a great value, but this will hold out
no longer, for we have not now victuals enough for our own men in the City.
And if a Ship of Bristow had not arived here with some Peace, Meal and Wheat,
we could not have shifted longer, and all that will not last the Regiments
fourteen days; for the provision of ^he Country is destro^ed by the enemy,
or de^oured by our own men; and we a^e in^^^ed to feed multitudes of
unserviceable people that are fled hither for relief; so if the enemies sword
spare us, famine will dispatch us, except God in mercy provide for us. But this
is not all, for now at this very hour. Sir Phileme O. Neal having gathered
from al parts what forces he can make, is with a very great Army of Horse and
fo^t at Siraband and the foord of within ten or twelve miles of this City,
intending (by all the intelligence we can get) to set up his rest, and
despirately to break in upon us, where all the forces we can make are ready to
bid him welcome.

Sir Philome on the one side of the River, and ours on the other, in sight one
of the other: so as we of this City were enforced not only to send a great
part of our men out of the City to join with the^, but also unfurnished and
parted with that little powder was left us, which with a little we gat out of
the Bristow ship we have sent to encounter this Irish Rebel. And now to revive
our fainting spirits God has provided for our relief, and sent this bearer
Captain Strange into Lochfoyle, who being in his Majesty's service and sent
for the comfort of his Majesty's distressed Subjects into these parts we have
made a true relation to him of our despirate estate and the great danger, we
are in, for want of powder and other provi^^on, that we have not only
prevailed with him to lend us for the present six barrers of powder, but also
to set sail for us to Carrik fergus, to present our wants and dangers we are in
to your Honorable consideration, most earnestly praying that for the love of
God; and honor of our King and the safety of this place and people, ye will
dispatch him back again to us with a good and large proportion of Powder,
Match, and head Muskets, Swords Pikes, some Spades and Shovels, whereof we have
not any; and of these or what else may be had as much as ye can possibly spare
us; for we want all things fit to defend a distressed Country, and offend a
despirate Enemy.

We also pray that you will restore the Captain the six barrels of Powder we
have borrowed of him; and if there be any Biscuit, Cheese or any other victuals
to be spared to send us some good proportion thereof. So being at present in
great haste, and perplexity, with our service presented to your honor, we
remain

London Derry the 27. of Apill, 1642. Your humble servants Robert Thornton,
Major Henry Asburne, Ian. Pha^.


The Earl of Antrims Letter to General Major MONROE.
Noble Colonel,
I Was glad when I heard you were to be employed in this Kingdom, but now more
pleased to hear that you and others of your name are safely arrived. I hope
you believe I have not been ignorant of the relation that has bin between
your Family and mine, and still continued by those of my name in Scotland,
especially by Sir Donald, I shall be very ready to keep the same
correspondency, if I had the opportunity. And now having the occasion by your
journey into Ireland, I shall be as willing to give you a belief of it as any
other friend whatsoever. And I am very confident to receive a return from you
accordingly.

I cannot so easily express any particulars, as I should be centent to do by
word of mouth; and if you please to do me the favor to meet me at Glenarme,
and to signify to me the time, I shall take it as a great argument of your
respects and friendship to me; and you may be there as much Master of the place
as my self. I shall not go attended in the posture of a Soldier, but in my
accustomed manner, that the lookers on may take notice of our familiar meeting
and respect to each other. And I hope we shall agree in the maine point for his
Majesty's service and the quieting of my Country; and I shall strive to
relieve Coleraine with victuals very shortly.

I am sorry that in my absence my people were so unfortunate as to do any
hostile act, though in their own defense, being compelled to it for safety of
their lives, which they say they can make appear in a convenient time: and the
relation of the manner of the one and the other, I must refer to our meeting,
and then I shall be better able to tell your honor how much I am

Your affectionate friend and humble servant, ANTRIM.
Dunluce the last of Apil, 1642.
FINIS.

