A true RELATION Of the TRANSACTION Of the Commands of both HOUSES of
PARLIAMENT in the execution of the Militia in the County of LEICESTER. By the
right Honorable Henry Earl of Stamford, Lord Lieutenant of the said County.
The honorable the Lord Ruthen, Sir Arthur Haselrigge Knight, Deputy
Lieutenants, and others subservient to the same Commands. Performed in the
Town and County of Leicester aforesaid, before and upon Wednesday the two and
twentieth of June 1642. With the Votes of both Houses of Parliament,
dissanuling his Majesty's illegal Commission of Array.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that this execution
of the Militia for Leichestershire, with these Votes, be forthwith published in
Print.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliam.



LONDON, Printed for George Lindesay, and for all those who truly love and
honor the King and Parliament, and desire their Amity and Unity. July 5. 1642.

A Relation of the execution of the Ordinance of Parliament touching the
Militia.
ON Saturday the fourth of June the Earl of Stamford came to Leicester, where
his Lordship issued out his warrants to all the head Constables to summon all
the Trained, and desired all the private men within their several divisions to
appear before him, or his Deputies at the Town of Leicester on Wednesday
following. Afterward the very same Saturday, came a messenger from York with
a writ to the high Sheriff, to send forth his Majesty's Proclamations to the
contrary. Notwithstanding the warrants being sent out by the head Constables,
the Country came in, both Trained Soldiers, private men and Volunteers, far
beyond expectation, who generally declared themselves for the King and
Parliament.

But the said Earl, thought fit again the week following to appoint the five
companies of the Trained Bands to appear severally in such convenient places
as might be most for their ease, and least chargeable, and thereupon they came.

The first on Tuesday, June the fourteenth, to Broughton-Ashley, where appeared
above an hundred Volunteers, and the Trained and private men, all save only
out of one division, the head Constable thereof being persuaded by the Parson
of the Town, where he lives, refusing to send out his warrants; and yet out of
that division, the Trained Soldiers and private men in many Towns came in
without warning.

The second, on Wednesday at Kibworth, where there was a very good appearance,
except some of the Clergy, with above an hundred Volunteers.

The third, on Thursday at Melton Mowbray, where they made: general appearance.

The fourth, upon Friday at Ruinborough, where the appearance was very good,
considering how many great Papists and ill affected people live thereabouts.

The last, on Monday at the Coptoake, there was a general appearance of the
Trained and private men with two hundred Volunteers at the least. And in every
one of these places, very many of the Country men came to the said Earl, and
desired him to help them to arms for their own defense, and the public
safety.

And after his return home from that days Muster* he was advertised that
Richard Hawford, Sir John Bale Knight, John ^ate Esquire, had prevailed with
Mr. Major of Leicester to set a guard upon the remainder of the Magazine left
at that place, and that one of that worthy Gentleman's servants should watch the
same, together with diverse desperate fellows of that Town; the Earl repaired
thither, accompained with the Lord Ruthen, Sir Arthur Haselrig Mr. Thomas
Bramour, and diverse other Gentlemen of good worth in that County, and commanded
the Major to remove away the remainder of the Powder, Match and Bullets, and
put it into a place of more strength and safety.

But on Wednesday the fifteenth of June, as the said Earl returned from
Kibworth, he heard at Leicester that Mr. Henry Hastings Esquire, was
immediately before come thither from York with a commission of Array. So the
said Earl having first given advertisement thereof to the Parliament, removed
very early the next morning a great part of the Magazine from the Town of
Leicester for more security to his own house. That day being Thursday, Master
Hastings caused the under Sheriff (in the absence of (...) high Sheriff) to
send forth warrants in the high Sheriffs name, to the whole County, as well
Trained Soldiers, private men and the Clergy should come to Leicester
according to his commission, there to be mustered upon the Wednesday following.
In the interim, the said Earl having notice given him from diverse persons, of
many menacing words cast forth against him, tending to the hazard of his life,
and destruction of his house; on Monday the said Earl set a guard about his
house of an hundred and fifty of his neighbors, tenants and servants, who
hearing the report, came and offered themselves to do him service, whom he
maintained at his own charge.

On Tuseday early in the morning a messenger from the high Court of Parliament,
did attach the under Sheriff for sending forth warrants by virtue of the
commission of Array, and with a sufficient guard carried him away to the
Parliament.

In the afternoon Master Hastings being newly returned again from York, came
to Loughborough, and hearing that the under Sheriff was gone, sent out again
other warrants himself to summon all the Towns near his abode to come to him
at Loughborough betimes the next morning, and being the Master of certain
Cole-mines he caused all his horses belonging to the engines, to be in a
readiness, and there raised about one hundred Collyers out of Darbishire, whom
he had armed with Pikes, Muskets and Calivers, and few or none of the Trained
Bands coming into him* he assembled his friends (many of them Papists and such
others as are ill affected toward the proceedings of Parliament) at
Loughborough on Wednesday morning, where, and at Ashby-de-lazouch he bought up
all the powder and old troopers sadles that on the sudden could be got: when
all were come in together, he made proclamations that whosoever wanted arms
should be furnished from Garradon Abbey, and other Popish places, as is
credibly repotted; and so they marched with drums and colors toward
Leicester, eight miles distant, himself still marching before them when they
came near a Town.

Within three miles of the Town of Leicester, he caused powder, match and
bullets to be delivered to every Musketier, and commanded by a Sergeant that
every man should charge with powder and bullet, which was done immediately, and
match lighted, and so himself marched in the head of them into the Town of
Leicester, and commanded they should not discharge till the word of command was
given.

The Earl of Stamford having intelligence of his march by Scouts which he sent
abroad, might have laid his ambuscado, and by the advantage of the way have cut
them all off, for the said Earl was furnished with about an hundred and fifty
Musketeers and shot, and twenty good horse well mounted with carabines and
pistolls, besides the neighboring Towns came running in, offering their lives
and fortunes at his dispose, and in effect, the whole County ready and willing
to have been raised at his command.

The provocations were great from Mr. Hastings, and his troops consisting of
horse as well as pike men and musketeers, who gave out by the way (to the
terror of the people that came affrighted and gave intelligence to the said
Earl) that they would fetch away the Magazine from him, fire his house, have
his heart blood, and never leave him till they had made him turn up the white
of his eyes. Yet the said Earl chose rather to stand upon his guard at home,
then to sally out and levy a war, well weighing with himself the misery
that might have ensued, not to this County alone, but to the whole Kingdom.

When Mr. Hastings and his company were come into the field, but not in the
place where by the warrant he had appointed the Country to meet (very few of
the Trained Bands obeying that summons) having made a speech, and therein
pretended his affection to his Country, that he had not a Papist in his
company, and that his desire was to avoid the effusion of blood, he began to
read his Commission of Array.

Thereupon the high Sheriff caused the Votes of both Houses of Parliament to
be read, wherein his Commission was voted illegal: So a Messenger from both
Houses of Parliament did presently attach him as a delinquent, as also some
others of the Commissioners that were present with him, by virtue of a Warrant
from the high Court of Parliament. Then notwithstanding his foresaid Oration,
diverse of his Company both horse and foot did cock their Match and draw out
their Pistolls, and presented them toward the high Sheriff: Master Hastings
and the rest being much danted at the unexpected courage and spirit both of the
high Sheriff and the Messenger, said after they had executed his Majesty's
Commission they would appear at the Parliament; but the horse pressing upon
them (consisting chiefly of the four delinquents their Captains, Officers,
and Servants, with others, Papists and unknown persons, rescued them, and shot
at the Messenger, and two Butchers of Leicester throwing Mr. Hastings on
horseback, he drew out his Pistolls and marched directly with the rest of his
company to his Inn, and shut up the Gates.

The Earl of Stamford hearing of the Rescue, sent foam of his Servants to
Leicester, to give command to every man that had any Soldiers in his house to
seize their Arms when they were asleep. In the mean while Master Hastings and
the rest hearing what men the said Earl had in a readiness, and apprehending
that Mr. Sheriff might require his aid, did all thereupon very fairly run
away that night at a leven of the clock. So it hapened that all or most of
their Arms were seized upon according to the stratagem proposed, and are now
remaining at the dispose of the said Earl of Stamford, the which shall be
employed as both Houses of Parliament please to command.

It is to be remembered that Mr. Hastings had his man at Leicester ready upon
the coming down of the Earl of Stamford to carry him word, and that he
immediately posted away to York, and brought back with him Proclamations, which
he dispersed about the Country, writing himself upon the backside in the
nature of a warrant that it was to be conveyed from town to town, and
published in every place.

That the day before the Country was to come in, that he came himself to
Leicester and Master Major and the Aldermen being met in the Town Hall to
advise about the appearance of the trained soulders in the Town (which Master
Major promised on Saturday before should come in, if the Earl of Stamford would
grant him a warrant which was granted) Master Hastings came to the Hall, and
sent for Master Major from his brethren, and so changed his resolucion that he
utterly refused to issue out any warrants, for which Master Hastings since has
procured a letter of thanks from the King to the Major.

Notwithstanding the backwardness of the Major, about 100. men, many of the
Majors Brethren, and of the Company of the Borough, with others well affected
to the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, and the safety of them, came as
volunteers well Armed, and many others offered in a short time to provide
themselves with Arms, to be ready at the next Summons of the Earl of Stamfords
to be trained and exercised.

Die Sabbathi 18. Iunii 1642.

Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.

THat this Commission of Array for Leicester is against Law and the Liberty and
property of the Subject.

Die Lunae 20. Irunii, 1642.

Resolved upon the Question, etc.

THat all those that are Actors in putting the Commission of Array in execution,
shall be esteemed as disturbers of the peace of the Kingdom, and betrayers of
the liberty of the Suject.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

A NARATION Of the Service performed by John Chambers, and James Stanforth, by
command of both Houses of Parliament touching the Militia.
ON Saturday the eighteenth of this instant June, 1642. they received at the
rising of the House of Commons their warrants against the several Delinquents
therein named, viz. Henry Hastings Esquire, Son to the Right Honorable the
Earl of Huntington, Henry Hastings of Humerston Esquire, Sir Richard Hawford
Knight, Master Pate, Sir John Bale Knight, and Master Gregory the
Under-Sheriffe of the County of Leicester.

On Monday the 20 of the said Month, they came by eleven of the clock in the
morning to Broadgate, in the said County, to the House of the Right Honorable
the Earl of Stamford; where they were informed that his Lordship, together
with the Lord Ruthin, and Sir Arthur Haslerigg, were training of Soldiers at a
place called C^pt Oak, three miles distant from the Lord Stamfords house,
where the said Chambers and Stanforth waited till the evening, when they
returned from the Muster, and presently took horse as the Lords, Sir Arthur
Haslerigg, and others then presently did, and waited on them to the Town of
Leicester; where they attended the said Lords: and Sir Arthur Haslerigg, who
received information that Sir Richard Hawford had prevailed with Thomas Ruddier
the Mayor there, to set a Guard on the remainder of the Magazine, and they
having sent for the said Mayor and Justices of the said Town of Leicester,
removed the same from the South-gate, into a strong Tower called Neworks-Gate
near the Town; by the approbation of the said Mayor, and Justices who were
then present that evening, and the next day they waited for further command
from their Lordships, and Sir Arthur Haslerigg; who being at Leicester; where
they heard that Master Henry Hastings, sir Richard Hawford, and others,
intended to come in a Warlike manner against them the day following being
Wednesday, the 23. of the said June, after the Lords, and Sir Arthur Haslerigg
had fixed the Votes of both Houses on the In-Gates, where they the said Master
Hastings, and the other Delinquents were to lie, and had done what was possible
in the business for the time present. About nine of the clock in the morning
they departed to the Lord Stamfords, leaving the said Chambers, and Stanforth,
together with one Thomas Horton, one of the said Sir Arthurs servants at
Leicester, to wait on the said High-Sheriffe Archdale Palmer Esquite, to
manage the business, as the Sheriff and they were required.

On the Wednesday aforesaid, about eight of the clock in the morning, the
High-Sheriffe came to Leicester, attended on by men Armed with swords and
javelins to keep the Kings Peace there; that being in an Inn called the Hearon
in Leicester; the said Chambers saw a Barrel brought in by a Porter, which he
deemed to be Gunpowder, which doubts to satisfy, the Porter was examined:
whereupon he confessed, the Barrel was filled with Gunpowder, and that it was
sent thither by Master Andrew Hawford. Son to the said sir Richard Hawford;
which Powder, the High-Sheriffe then seized upon, by power of an Order of the
Honorable House of Parliament, Dated the eleventh day of June aforesaid.

That about ten of the clock the said day, one Master Walter Hastings mounted
on a Bay stone-horse, with a great saddle and Petronels, in a Warlike manner
Rid into the yard of the said Inn, and with him the Lord Lovelace, and one
Master Killegrew (as they were informed) who traversing up and down the said
Yard on horseback, the said Walter Hastings swore that he would eat up the
Lord Stamford; to which one of the said gentlemen replied, leave one bit for
me, or to the same effect; and then the said Hastings made a short distracted
speech to the people saying: What, my friends and countrymen, ye stand for the
King and the Hastings, who have ever been true to the Crown: The people
answered, we are all for the King and the Parliament. Then the said Hastings
required the said Sheriff to read His Majesty's Proclamation, which (with an
oath of God damn him) he the said Hastings swore the Sheriff had received;
Whereunto the Sheriff modestly replied, it was not true; which done, he the
said Hastings departed, and the rest of his company, in an outrageous and
uncivil manner, swearing and cursing as they rid out of the said Inn.

About two of the clock of the same day, they the said High-Sheriffe,
Chambers, and Stanforth, had intelligence that the said Delinquents, or most of
them, with all their Troops and Foot Soldiers, to the number of about 300,
were met in a Commou or green, called the Horse Fair near the said Town,
whither they repaired, attended on by the said Sheriff, men on Foot, and found
the said Parties there, met some of them on great Horses, with Petronels, and
the rest Armed with swords, Muskers, Caleevers, Pikes, and Halberts.

Master Henry Hastings, alighted and told the Sheriff, and the rest; he was
come thither to execute his Majesty's Commission of Array, to himself and
others, then granted for that County, and then tendered to the said Sheriff
two bundels, the one of Proclamations, the other of books, with an imposition
on the Sheriff to read and publish the same; Master Hastings swearing, he was
the Kings body and Soul; and the said Sheriff being often and very uncivilly
pressed by the said Master Hastings, to read and publish the said
Proclamations, made this answer: I cannot perform His Majesty's single
commands, till I have acquainted the Parliament therewith, nor do any thing
contrary to their Votes, I am for the King and for the Parliament, (and if I
perish, I perish.) Whereupon the said Chambers produced the last Votes of both
Houses concerning the illegality of the Commissions of Array, and read the same
plainly and openly, endeavoring thereby to let the people hear them so read.
And likewise read the last Declaration of both Houses concerning the Militia,
concluding with these words; God save the King and Parliament: which words the
people plausibly reiterated (except the said Henry Hastings, who (as before)
again said, he was the Kings body and soul;) and then and there the said
Chambers drew forth the Warrants of both Houses, and entreated the peoples
silence, read them openly, and called the Delinquents Master Henry Hastings,
Sir Richard Hawford, Sir John Bale, Master John Pate, they being then and there
present and within hearing (as the said Chambers was informed) requiring them
at their utmost perils to yield their obedience to the power of the said
Warrants; and the said Chambers required the Sheriff to keep the Kings peace,
and to be aiding and assisting unto him the said Chambers in this due execution
of the said Warrants. To prevent and utterly hinder the due execution whereof,
the said Master Hastings began to read the Kings Commission, which being in
Latin, and he not being ready therein, did there endeavor to comment upon the
meaning thereof in English, which being altogether then unable to do, one
Master Edward Palmer the Town Clarke of Leicester, took the said Commission
out of his hand, saying, it ought to be read, who read it in Latin, to which
most of the people gave ear, but answered nothing. That done, the said
Chambers laid a strict command on the said Sheriff to have a special care of
the said Delinquents, and required them likewise to obey: which words the said
Sir Richard Hawford hearing (being very near to the said Chambers) answered
thus, viz. When this his Majesty's great business is over, then I Will come to
you Master Sheriff, and give such security for my attendance on the Parliament
as shall be fitting. Master Hastings also willed the said Chambers to repair
to the Angel in Leicester, where all the Delinquents (as he said) intended to
lodge that night, where he should have civil deportment from them; which he
much doubted, seeing their carriage before in the Field to be so outrageous

Immediately after that Master Hastings pretended he would divide the Troopers
and Soldiers into four parts, and call them by their names; but having
severed them for his own advantage, to gain his Horse, he was (by two rude
Butchers, one by name Henry Cotes, as the said Chambers was informed) lifted up
into his great Saddle, and a Petronell ready cockt given into his hands, by one
of the said Butchers. Then the Cavaleers and the rest of the Soldiers joining
with the rude multitude, and about four and twenty Parsons in Canonical
Coats, well horsed, rid all toward the Town with loud exclamations, a KING, a
KING, others, for the KING, for the KING, in a strange and unheard of manner;
Captain Worsley giving the Word of command to the Soldiers, Make ready, Make
ready; which as they were providing to do, a sudden and extraordinary
abundance of rain falling, the Soldiers were hindered from firing.

Then the said Master Walter Hasting endeavored to ride over the said
Chambers, who to prevent that, got up a high bank, whereon a rude fellow
standing struck him with a club on the breast, and with the violence thereof
the said Chambers fell backward into a ditch, but as soon as his strength
served him to recover himself, he made all the haste he possibly could toward
the Town to escape murdering: then they followed Master Sheriff, Chambers
and Stanforth crying out at the Cap, at the Cap, which was at that time on
Chambers his head, and one of the persons endeavored to ride over the said
Sheriff, another of them would have ridden over the said Stanforth, and Master
Walter Hastings gave fire at Chambers with one of his Petronels, but the same
did not discharge; so they got to the said Inn with much hazard, who
afterward were in forced, for their own safety, to stand upon their guard;
and being very much tired, were unable that night to do any further service,
except the writing of a Letter, which Chambers did, and recommended the same to
the Lord Stamford, and the rest to satisfy what done, and to have further
direction what was fitting after to be done therein; which directions about one
of the clock in the morning were, that the said Chambers and Stanforth should
by the assistance of the said Sheriff, and the Major, and Justices of
Leicester, use their best power and endeavor to surprise the said Delinquents:
But they too sensible of their ill carriage and misdemeanour, privately in the
evening had got away, leaving the Soldiers behind them. About two of the
clock the said morning, the said Chambers and Stanforth, with the assistance
of the Justices and other Townsmen, with about forty persons more, made
several searches in Innes and other drinking-houses, where they found many
soldiers laid in bed, some on the bed, but most of them distempered with
drink; and then seized on their Arms, and caused them to be carried to the
Sheriff in the said Inn, viz. one great Saddle, three Petronels, and about
one hundredth Pikes, one Lance, above threescore Muskets and Caleevers, about
twenty Swords, and four long Pieces about seven foot in length. All which the
said Chambers and Stanforth, and others of the Sheriffs men, searching, found
charged some with Bullets, some with half Bullets, and others with goose shot
very deeply and dangerously; which ammunition being left in the Sheriffs
custody, part of them were delivered to some of the train Band, and the rest
presented by the said Chambers to the Lord Stamford.

Then the said Chambers being further informed that Master Henry Hastings had
procured about an hundred and twenty Colliers out of Darbishire, to attend him
to Leicester; upon the like search, the said Chambers with Stanforth being
accompanied with the said Justices and Townsmen, found two of them, who
confessed they were poor Darbishire Colliers, neither trained men, nor men
that had at any time before that borne Arms for any other, and that they and
their fellows were commanded to come to Leicester in aid of his Majesty, and
their Master the said Master Hastings; which said Colliers never appeared
before the Sheriff to demand or receive their Arms, but got privately away:
the Major in the whole progress of this business, seemed backward to do any
thing for the Parliament, and as forward to further Master Hastings in the
business aforesaid. The effect of which proceedings the said Chambers and
Stanforth thought fit humbly to present to the construction and grave
consideration of this Honorable Assembly; ready always to prostrate themselves
and service at your further commands,

John Chambers, James Stanforth.


FINIS.

