Deus Justificatus.

TWO DISCOURSES OF ORIGINAL SIN, Contained in two Letters TO PERSONS of HONOR,
Wherein the question is rightly stated, several objections answered, and the
truth further cleared and proved by many arguments newly added or explained.

By Jer. Tailor D.D.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston 1656.

Deus Justificatus,

OR, A Vindication of the glory of the Divine Attributes in the Question of
ORIGINAL SIN.

Against the Presbyterian way of Understanding it.

By JER. TAILOR, D.D.

Lucretius. Nam neque tam facilis res ulla est, quin ea primum, Difficilis
magis ad credendum constet --

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane. 1656.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and religious Lady, The Lady CHRISTIAN, Countess
Dowager of Devonshire.

Madam,
WHen I reflect upon the infinite disputes which have troubled the public
meetings of Christendom concerning Original sin, and how impatient and vexed
some men lately have been, when I offered to them my endeavors and conjectures
concerning that Question, with purposes very differing from what were seen in
the face of other men's designs, and had handled it so, that God might be
glorified in the Article, and men might be instructed and edified in order to
good life; I could not but think that wise Heathen said rarely well in his
little adagy, relating to the present subject; (...). Mankind was born to be a
riddle, and our nativity is in the dark; for men have taken the liberty to
think what they please, and to say what they think; and they affirm many
things, and can prove but few things; and take the sayings of men for the
Oracles of God, and bold affirmatives for convincing arguments; and Saint Paul's
text must be understood by Saint Austins commentary, and Saint Austin shall be
heard in all, because he spoke against such men who in some things were not to
be heard; and after all, because his Doctrine was taken for granted by ignorant
ages, and being received so long, was incorporated into the resolved Doctrine
of the Church, with so great a firmness, it became almost a shame to examine
what the world believed so unsuspectingly; and he that shall first attempt it,
must resolve to give up a great portion of his reputation to be torn in pieces
by the ignorant and by the zealous, by some of the learned, and by all the
Envious; and they who love to teach in quiet; being at rest in their chaires
and pulpits will be froward when they are awakened, and rather then they will
be suspected to have taught amiss, will justify an error by the reproaching
of him that tells them truth, which they are pleased to call new.

If any man differs from me in opinion, I am not troubled at it, but tell him
that truth is in the understanding, and charity is in will, and is or ought to
be there, before either his or my opinion in these controversies can enter, and
therefore that we ought to love alike, though we do not understand alike; but
when I find that men are angry at my Ingenuity and opennesse of discourse, and
endeavor to hinder the event of my labors, in the ministry of Souls, and are
impatient of contradiction or variety of explication, and understanding of
Questions, I think my self concerned to defend the truth which I have
published, to acquit it from the suspicion of evil appendages, to demonstrate
not only the truth, but the piety of it, and the necessity, and those great
advantages which by this Doctrine so understood may be reaped, if men will be
quiet and patient, void of prejudice and not void of Charity.

This (Madam) is reason sufficient why I offer so many justifications of my
Doctrine, before any man appears in public against it; but because there are
many who do enter into the houses of the rich and the honorable, and whisper
secret oppositions and accusations rather then arguments against my Doctrine;
and the good women that are zealous for Religion, and make up in the passions
of one faculty what is not so visible in the actions and operations of another,
are sure to be affrighted before they be instructed, and men enter caveats in
that Court before they try the cause. I have found, that some men, to whom I
gave and designed my labors, and for whose sake I was willing to suffer the
persecution of a suspected truth, have been so unjust to me, and so
unserviceable to your Honor ( Madam,) and to some other excellent and rare
personages, as to tell stories, and give names to my proposition, and by secret
murmurs hinder you from receiving that good which your wisdom and your piety
would have discerned there, if they had not affrighted you with telling, that a
snake lay under the Plantane, and that this Doctrine which is as wholesome as
the fruits of Paradise, was inwrapped with the infoldings of a Serpent, subtle
and fallacious.

Madam, I know the arts of these men; and they often put me in mind of what was
told me by Mr. Sackvill the late Earl of Dorsets Uncle; that the cunning Sects
of the World (he named the Jesuits and the Presbyterians) did more prevail by
whispering to Ladies, then all the Church of England and the more sober
Protestants could do by fine force and strength of argument. For they by
prejudice or fears, terrible things, and zealous nothings, confident sayings
and little stories, governing the Ladies consciences, who can persuade their
Lords, their Lords will convert their Tenants, and so the World is all their
own. I wish them all good of their profits and purchases; but yet because they
are questions of Souls, of their interest and advantages; I cannot wish they
may prevail with the more Religious and Zealous Personages: and therefore
(Madam) I have taken the boldness to write this tedious letter to your Honor,
that I may give you a right understanding and an easy explication of this great
Question; as conceiving my self the more bound to do it to your Honor, not
only because you are Zealous for the Religion of this Church, and are a person
as well of reason as of Honor, but also because you have passed diverse
obligations upon me, for which, all my services are too little a return.

Deus Justificatus, OR, A Vindication of the Divine Attributes.
IN Order to which, I will plainly describe the great lines of difference and
danger, which are in the errors and mistakes about this Question.

2. I will prove the truth and necessity of my own, together with the
usefulness and reasonableness of it.

3. I will answer those little murmurs, by which (so far as I can yet learn)
these men seek to invade the understandings of those who have not leisure or
will to examine the thing it self in my own words and arguments.

4. And if any thing else falls in by the bie, in which I can give satisfaction
to a Person of Your great Worthiness, I will not omit it, as being desirous to
have this Doctrine stand as fair in your eyes, as it is in all its own colors
and proportions.

But first (Madam) be pleased to remember that the question is not whether
there be any such thing as Original Sin; for it is certain, and confessed on
all hands almost. For my part, I cannot but confess that to be which I feel,
and groan under, and by which all the World is miserable.

Adam turned his back upon the Sun, and dwelt in the dark and the shadow; he
sinned, and fell into Gods displeasure and was made naked of all his
supernatural endowments, and was ashamed and sentenced to death, and deprived
of the means of long life, and of the Sacrament and instrument of Immortality,
I mean the Tree of Life; he then fell under the evils of a sickly body, and a
passionate, ignorant, uninstructed soul; his sin made him sickly, his
sickliness made him peevish, his sin left him ignorant, his ignorance made him
foolish and unreasonable: His sin left him to his nature, and by his nature,
who ever was to be born at all, was to be born a child, and to do before he
could understand, and bred under Laws, to which he was always bound, but which
could not always be exacted; and he was to choose, when he could not reason,
and had passions most strong, when he had his understanding most weak, and was
to ride a wild horse without a bridle, and the more need he had of a curb, the
less strength he had to use it, and this being the case of all the World, what
was every man's evil, became all men's greater evil; and though alone it was
very bad, yet when they came together it was made much worse; like Ships in a
storm, every one alone has enough to do to out-ride it; but when they meet,
besides the evils of the storm, they find the intolerable calamity of their
mutual concussion, and every ship that is ready to be oppressed with the
tempest, is a worse tempest to every vessel, against which it is violently
dashed. So it is in mankind, every man has evil enough of his own; and it is
hard for a man to live soberly, temperately, and religiously; but when he has
Parents and Children, brothers and sisters, friends and enemies, buyers and
sellers, Lawyers and Physicians, a family and a neighborhood, a King over him,
or Tenants under him, a Bishop to rule in matters of Government spiritual, and
a People to be ruled by him in the affairs of their Souls, then it is that
every man dashes against another, and one relation requires what another
denies; and when one speaks, another will contradict him; and that which is
well spoken, is sometimes innocently mistaken, and that upon a good cause,
produces an evil effect, and by these, and ten thousand other concurrent
causes, man is made more then most miserable.

But the main thing is this; when God was angry with Adam, the man fell from
the state of grace; for God withdrew his grace, and we returned to the state of
mere nature, of our prime creation. And although I am not of Petrus Diaconus
his mind, who said, that when we all fell in Adam, we fell into the dirt, and
not only so, but we fell also upon a heap of stones; so that we not only were
made naked, but defiled also, and broken all in pieces; yet this I believe to
be certain, that we by his fall received evil enough to undo us, and ruin us
all; but yet the evil did so descend upon us, that we were left in powers and
capacities to serve and glorify God; Gods service was made much harder, but
not impossible; mankind was made miserable, but not desperate, we contracted an
actual mortality, but we were redeemable from the power of Death; sin was
easy and ready at the door, but it was resistable; Our Will was abused, but
yet not destroyed; our Understandding was cosened, but yet still capable of the
best instructions; and though the Devil had wounded us, yet God sent his Son,
who like the good Samaritan poured Oil and Wine into our wounds, and we were
cured before we felt the hurt, that might have ruined us upon that Occasion. It
is sad enough, but not altogether so intolerable, and decretory, which the
Sibylline Oracle describes to be the effect of Adams sin.

(...)
(...)
(...)
Man was the work of God, framed by his hands,
Him did the Serpent cheat, that to deaths bands
He was subjected for his sin: for this was all,
He tasted good and evil by his fall.
But to this we may superadde that which Plutarch found to be experimentally
true, Mirum quod pedes moverunt ad usum rationis, nullo autem fraeno passiones:
the foot moves at the command of the Will and by the empire of reason, but the
passionsare stiff even then when the knee bends, and no bridle can make the
Passions regular and temperate. And indeed (Madam) this is in a manner the sum
total of the evil of our abused and corrupted nature; Our soul is in the body
as in a Prison; it is there tanquam in aliena domo, it is a so journer, and
lives by the bodies measures and loves and hates by the bodies Interests and
Inclinations; that which is pleasing and nourishing to the body, the soul
chooses and delights in: that which is vexatious and troublesome, it abhorres,
and has motions accordingly; for Passions are nothing else but acts of the
Will, carried to or from material Objects, and effects and impresses upon the
man, made by such acts; consequent motions and productions from the Will It is
an useless and a groundless proposition in Philosophy, to make the Passions to
be distinct faculties, and seated in a differing region; for as the reasonable
soul is both sensitive and vegetative, so is the Will elective and passionate,
the region both of choice and passions, that is, When the Object is
immateriall, or the motives such, the act of the Will is so merely
intellectual, that it is then spiritual, and the acts are proper and
Symbolical; but if the Object is material or corporal, the acts of the Will
are adhaesion and aversation, and these it receives by the needs and
inclinations of the body; now because many of the bodies needs are naturally
necessary, and the rest are made so by being thought needs, and by being so
naturally pleasant, and that this is the bodies day, and it rules here in its
own place and time, therefore it is that the will is so great a scene of
passion and we so great servants of our bodies.

This was the great effect of Adams sin which became therrefore to us a
punishment because of the appendant infirmity that went along with it; for Adam
being spoiled of all the rectitudes and supernatural heights of grace, and
thrust back to the form of nature, and left to derive grace to himself by a new
Economy, or to be without it; and his posterity left just so as he was left
himself; he was permitted to the power of his enemy that betrayed him, and put
under the power of his body whose appetites would govern him; and when they
would grow irregular could not be mastered by any thing that was about him, or
born with him, so that his case was miserable and naked, and his state of
things was imperfect and would be disordered.

But now Madam, things being thus bad, are made worse by the superinduced
Doctrines of men, which when I have represented to your Ladyship and told upon
what accounts I reprove them, your Honor will find that I have reason.

There are one sort of Calvin's Scholars whom we for distinctions sake call
Supralapsarians, who are so fierce in their sentences of predestination and
reprobation, that they say God looked upon mankind only, as his Creation, and
his slaves, over whom he having absolute power, was very gracious that he was
pleased to take some few, and save them absolutely; and to the other greater
part he did no wrong, though he was pleased to damn them eternally, only
because he pleased; for they were his own; and Qui jure suo utitur nemini facit
injuriam says the law of reason, every one may do what he please with his own.
But this bloody and horrible opinion is held but by a few; as tending directly
to the dishonor of God, charging on Him alone that He is the cause of men's
sins on Earth, and of men's eternal torments in Hell; it makes God to be
powerful, but his power not to be good; it makes him more cruel to men, then
good men can be to Dogs and sheep; it makes him give the final sentence of Hell
without any pretense or color of justice; it represents him to be that which
all the World must naturally fear, and naturally hate, as being a God
delighting in the death of innocents; for so they are when he resolves to damn
them: and then most tyrannically, cruel, and unreasonable; for it says that to
make a postnate pretense of justice, it decrees that men inevitably shall sin,
that they may inevitably, but justly, be damned; like the Roman Lictors who
because they could not put to death Sejanus daughters as being Virgins,
defloured them after sentence, that by that barbarity they might be capable of
the utmost Cruelty; it makes God to be all that thing that can be hated; for it
makes him neither to be good, nor just, nor reasonable; but a mighty enemy to
the biggest part of mankind; it makes him to hate what himself has made, and
to punish that in another which in himself he decreed should not be avoided: it
charges the wisdom of God with folly, as having no means to glorify his
justice, but by doing unjustly, by bringing in that which himself hates, that
he might do what himself loves: doing as Tiberius did to Brutus and Nero the
Sons of Germanicus; Varia fraud induxit ut concitarentur ad convitia, Sueton.
in vita. liber.c. 54.
et concitati perderentur; provoking them to raise, that he might punish their
reproachings. This opinion reproaches the words and the Spirit of Scripture, it
charges God with Hypocrisy and want of Mercy, making him a Father of Cruelties,
not of Mercy, and is a perfect overthrow of all Religion, and all Laws, and
all Government; it destroys the very being, and nature of all Election,
thrusting a man down to the lowest form of beasts and birds, to whom a
Spontaneity of doing certain actions is given by God, but it is in them so
natural, that it is unavoidable. Now concerning this horrid opinion, I for my
part shall say nothing but this; that he that says there was no such man as
Alexander, would tell a horrible lie, and be injurious to all story, and to the
memory and fame of that great Prince, but he that should say. It is true there
was such a man as Alexander, but he was a Tyrant, and a Blood-sucker, cruel and
injurious, false and dissembling, an enemy of mankind, and for all the reasons
of the world to be hated and reproached, would certainly dishonor Alexander
more, and be his greatest enemy: So I think in this, That the Atheists who deny
there is a God, do not so impiously against God, as they that charge him with
foul appellatives, or maintain such sentences, which if they were true, God
could not be true. But these men (Madam) have nothing to do in the Question of
Original Sin, save only, that they say that God did decree that Adam should
fall, and all the sins that he sinned, and all the world after him are no
effects of choice, but of predestination, that is, they were the actions of
God, rather then man.

But because these men even to their brethren seem to speak evil things of God,
therefore the more wary and temperat of the Calvinists bring down the order of
reprobation lower; affirming that God looked upon all mankind in Adam as fallen
into his displeasure, hated by God, truly guilty of his sin, liable to Eternal
damnation, and they being all equally condemned, he was pleased to separate
some, the smaller number far, and irresistibly bring them to Heaven; but the
far greater number he passed over, leaving them to be damned for the sin of
Adam, and so they think they salve Gods Justice; and this was the design and
device of the Synod of Dort.

Now to bring this to pass, they teach concerning Original sin.

1. That by this sin our first Parents fell from their Original righteousness
and communion with God, and so became dead in sin and wholly defiled in all
the faculties, and parts of soul and body.

2. That whatsoever death was due to our first Parents for this sin, they being
the root of all mankind, and the guilt of this sin, being imputed, the same is
conveied to all their posterity by ordinary generation.

3. That by this Original corruption we are utterly indisposed, disabled, and
made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil; and that from
hence proceed all actual trangressions.

4. This corruption of nature remains in the regenerate, and although it be
through Christ pardoned and mortified, yet both it self and all the motions
thereof, are truly and properly sin.

5. Original sin being a transgression of the righteous Law of God, and
contrary thereunto, does in its own nature bring guilt upon the sinner whereby
he is bound over to the wrath of God and curse of the Law, and so made subject
to death with all miseries, spiritual, temporal, and eternal. These are the
sayings of the late Assembly at Westminster.

Against this heap of errors and dangerous propositions I have made my former
discoursings, and statings of the Question of Original sin. These are the
Doctrines of the Presbyterian, but as unlike truth, as his assemblies are to
our Church; for concerning him I may say.

Nemo tam prope proculque nobis. He is the likest and the unlikest to a Son of
our Church in the world; he is nearest to us and furthest from us; and to all
the world abroad he calls himself our friend, while at home he hates us and
destroys us.

Now I shall first speak to the thing in general and its designs, then I shall
make some observations upon the particulars.

1. This device of our Presbyterians and of the Synod of Dort is but an
artifice to save their proposition harmless, and to stop the outcries of
Scripture and reason, and of all the World against them. But this way of
stating the article of reprobation is as horrid in effect as the other. For

1. Is it by a natural consequent that we are guilty of Adams sin, or is it by
the decree of God? Naturally it cannot be; for then the sins of all our
forefathers, who are to their posterity the same that Adam was to his, must be
ours; and not only Adams first sin, but his others are ours upon the same
account. But if it be by the Decree of God, Instit. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 7. Vind.
Great. l. 1. p. 1. digres. 4. c. 3.
by his choice and constitution, that it should be so. (as Mr. Calvin and Dr.
Twisse (that I may name no more for that side, do expressly teach) it follows,
that God is the Author of our Sin; So that I may use Mr. Calvin's words; How is
it that so many Nations with their Children should be involved in the fall
without remedy, but because God would have it so? and if that be the matter,
then to God, as to the cause, must that sin, and that damnation be accounted.

And let it then be considered, whether this be not as bad as the worst, For
the Supralapsarians say, God did decree that the greatest part of mankind
should perish, only because he would: The Sublapsarians say, That God made it
by his decree necessary, that all we who were born of Adam should be born
guilty of Original Sin, and he it was who decreed to damn whom he pleased for
that sin, in which he decreed they should be born; and both these he did for no
other consideration, but because he would. Is it not therefore evident, that he
absolutely decreed Damnation to these Persons? For he that decrees the end, and
he that decrees the only necessary and effective means to the end, and
decrees that it shall be the end of that means, does decree absolutely alike;
though by several dispensations: And then all the evil consequents which I
reckoned before to be the monstrous productions of the first way; are all
Daughters of the other; and if Solomon were here, he could not tell which were
the truer Mother.

Now that the case is equal between them, some of their own chiefest do
confess, so Dr. Twisse. If God may ordain Men to Hell for Adam's sin, which is
derived unto them by Gods only constitution: he may as well do it absolutely
without any such constitution: The same also is affirmed by Maccovius, Disp.
18. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 23. Sect. 23.
and by Mr. Calvin: and the reason is plain; for he that does a thing for a
reason which himself makes, may as well do it without a reason, Or he may make
his own Will to be the reason, because the thing, and the motive of the thing,
come in both cases, equally from the same principle, and from that alone.

Now (Madam) be pleased to say, whether I had not reason and necessity for what
I have taught: You are a happy Mother of an Honorable Posterity, your Children
and Nephews are Dear to you as your right eye, and yet you cannot love them so
well as God loves them, and it is possible that a Mother should forget her
Children, yet God even then will not, cannot; but if our Father and Mother
forsake us, God takes us up: Now Madam consider, could you have found in your
heart when the Nurses and Midwives had bound up the heads of any of your
Children, when you had born them with pain and joy upon your knees, could you
have been tempted to give command that murderers should be brought to slay them
alive, to put them to exquisite tortures, and then in the midst of their
saddest groans, throw any one of them into the flames of a fierce fire, for no
other reason, but because he was born at Latimers, or upon a Friday, or when
the Moon wasin her prime, or for what other reason you had made, and they could
never avoid? could you have been delighted in their horrid shrieks and
outcries, and taking pleasure in their unavoidable and their intolerable
calamity? could you have smiled, if the hangman had snatched your Eldest Son
from his Nurses breasts, and dashed his brains out against the pavement; and
would you not have wondered that any Father or Mother could epsy the innocence
and pretty smiles of your sweet babes, and yet tear their limbs in pieces, or
devise devilish artifices to make them roar with intolerable convulsions?
could you desire to be thought good, and yet have delighted in such cruelty? I
know I may answer for you; you would first have dyed your self. And yet say
again, God loves mankind better then we can love one another, and he is
essentially just, and he is infinitely merciful, and he is all goodness, and
therefore though we might possibly do evil things, yet he cannot, and yet this
doctrine of the Presbyterian reprobation, says he both can and does things,
the very apprehension of which has caused many in despair to drown or hang
themselves.

Now if the Doctrine of absolute Reprobation be so horrid, so intolerable a
proposition, so unjust and blasphemous to God, so injurious and cruel to men,
and that there is no color or pretense to justify it, but by pretending our
guilt of Adams sin, and damnation to be the punishment: then because from truth
nothing but truth can issue; that must needs be a lie, from which such horrid
consequences do proceed. For the case in short is this; If it be just for God
to damn any one of Adam's Posterity for Adam's sin, then it is just in him to
damn all; for all his Children are equally guilty; and then if he spares any,
it is Mercy: and the rest who perish have no cause to complain. But if all
these fearful consequences which Reason and Religion so much abhor do so
certainly follow from such doctrines of Reprobation, and these doctrines wholly
rely upon this pretense, it follows, that the pretense is infinitely false and
intolerable; and that it cannot be just for God to damn us for being in a
state of calamity, to which state we entered no way but by his constitution and
decree.

You see, Madam, I had reason to reprove that doctrine, which said, It was just
in God to damn us for the sin of Adam.

Though this be the maine error; yet there are some other collateral things
which I can by no means approve, such is that. 1. That by the Sin of Adam our
Parents became wholly defiled in all the faculties and Powers of their souls
and bodies. And 2. That by this we also are disabled, and made opposite to all
good, and wholly inclined to all evil. And 3. That from hence proceed all
actual transgressions. And 4. that our natural corruption in the regenerate
still remains, and is still properly a sin.

Against this, I opposed these Propositions; That the effect of Adams sin was
in himself bad enough; for it divested him of that state of grace and favor
where God placed him; it threw him from Paradise, and all the advantages of
that place, it left him in the state of Nature; but yet his nature was not
spoiled by that sin; he was not wholly inclined to all evil, neither was he
disabled and made opposite to all good; only his good was imperfect, it was
natural and fell short of heaven; for till his nature was invested with a new
nature, he could go no further then the design of his first Nature, that is,
without Christ, without the Spirit of Christ, he could never arrive at heaven,
which is his supernatural condition; But 1. There still remained in him a
natural freedom of doing good or evil. 2. In every one that was born, there
are great inclinations to some good. 3. Where our Nature was averse to good, it
is not the direct sin of Nature, but the imperfection of it, the reason being,
because God superinduced Laws against our natural inclination, and yet there
was in nature nothing sufficient to make us contradict our nature in obedience
to God; all that being to come from a supernatural and Divine principle. These
I shall prove together, for one depends upon another.

1. And first, that the liberty of will did not perish to mankind by the fall
of Adam is so evident, that St. Austin who is an adversary in some parts of
this Question, but not yet, by way of question, and confidence asks, Quis
^utem nostrum dicat quod primi hominis peccato perierit liberum arbitrium de
humano genere? Lib. 1. ad Bonifac. c.2.
Which of us can say, That the liberty of our Will did perish by the sin of the
first Man? And he adds a rare reason; for it is so certain, that it did not
perish in a sinner, that this thing only is it by which they do sin,
especially when they delight in their sin, and by the love of sin, that thing
is pleasing to them which they list to do.] And therefore when we are charged
with sin, it is worthy of inquiry, whence it is that we are sinners? Is it by
the necessity of nature, or by the liberty of our Will? If by nature, and not
choice, then it is good and not evil; for whatsoever is our Nature is of Gods
making, and consequently is good; but if we are sinners by choice and liberty
of will, whence had we this liberty? If from Adam, then we have not lost it;
but if we had it not from him, then from him we do not derive all our sin; for
by this liberty alone we sin.

If it be replied, that we are free to sin, but not to good; it is such a
foolery, and the cause of the mistake so evident, and so ignorant, that I
wonder any man of Learning or common sense should own it. For if I be free to
evil; then I can choose evil, or refuse it; If I can refuse it, then I can do
good; for to refuse that evil is good, and it is in the Commandment [ Eschew
evill] but if I cannot choose or refuse it, how am I free to evil? For
Voluntas and libertas, Will and Liberty in Philosophy are not the same: I may
will it, when I cannot will the contrary; as the Saints in Heaven, and God
himself wills good; they can not will evil; because to do so is imperfection
and contrary to felicity; but here is no liberty; for liberty is with power, to
do, or not to do; to do this or the contrary; and if this liberty be not in us,
we are not in the state of obedience, or of disobedience; which is the state of
all them who are alive, who are neither in hell nor Heaven. But that our case
is otherwise, if I had no other argument in the world, and were never so
prejudicate and obstinate a person, I think I should be perfectly convinced by
those words of S. Paul 1 Cor. 7.37. The Apostle speaks of a good act tending
not only to the keeping of a Precept, but to a counsel of perfection; and
concerning that, he has these words; Nevertheless, he that stands steadfast
in his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his own will, and has
so decreed in his heart that he will keep his Virgin, does well; The words are
plain, and need no explication. If this be not a plain liberty of choice, and a
power of will, then words mean nothing, and we can never hope to understand one
another meaning. But if sin be avoidable, then we have liberty of choice.
If it be unavoidable, it is not imputable by the measures of Laws, and
Justice; what it is by Empire and Tyranny, let the Adversaries inquire and
prove: But since all Theology, all Schools of learning consent in this, that an
invincible or unavoidable ignorance does wholly excuse from sin; why an
invincible and an unavoidable necessity shall not also excuse, I confess I
have not yet been taught.

But if by Adam's sin we be so utterly indisposed, disabled, and opposite to
all good, wholly inclined to evil, and from hence come all actual sins,
that is, That by Adam we are brought to that pass, that we cannot choose but
sin: it is a strange severity, that this should descend upon Persons
otherwise most innocent, and that this which is the most grievous of all
evils; prima and maximapeccantium poena est peccasse. (Seneca) To be given
over to sin, is the worst calamity, the most extreme anger never inflicted
directly at all for any sin, as I have therwise proved, and not indirectly,
but upon the extremest anger; which cannot be supposed, unless God be more
angry with us for being born Men, then for choosing to be sinners. Doctr. and
Pract. of Repent.


The Consequent of these Arguments is this; That our faculties are not so
wholly spoiled by Adams fall, but that we can choose good or evil, that our
nature is not wholly disabled and made opposite to all good: But to nature are
left and given as much as to the handmaid Agar; nature has nothing to do with
the inheritance, but she and her sons have gifts given them; and by nature we
have Laws of Virtue and inclinations to Virtue, and naturally we love God, and
worship him, and speak good things of him, and love our Parents, and abstain
from incestuous mixtures, and are pleased when we do well, and affrighted
within when we sin in horrid instances against God; all this is in Nature, and
much good comes from Nature, Plinius. ep.12.lib.
neque enim quasi lassa and effaeta natura est, ut nihil jam laudabile pariat;
Nature is not so old, so absolute and dried a trunck as to bring no good fruits
upon its own stock; and the Frenchmen have a good proverb, Bonus sanguis non
mentitur, a good blood never lies; and some men are naturally chaste, and some
are abstemious, and many are just and friendly, and noble and charitable: and
therefore all actual sins do not proceed from this sin of Adam; for if the sin
of Adam left us in liberty to sin, and that this liberty was before Adams fall;
then it is not long of Adams fall that we sin; by his fall it should rather be
that we cannot choose but do this or that, and then it is no sin; But to say
that our actual sins should any more proceed from Adams fall, then Adams fall
should proceed from it self, is not to be imagined, for what made Adam sin when
he fell? If a fatal decree made him sin, then he was nothing to blame.

Fati ista culpa est
Nemo fit fato nocens
No guilt upon mankind can lie
For what is the fault of destiny.
And Adam might with just reason lay the blame from himself, and say as
Agamemnon did in Homer, (...)
(...)


It was not I that sinned, but it was fate or a sury, it was God and not I, it
was not my act, but the effect of the Divine decree, and then the same decree
may make us sin, and not the sin of Adam be the cause of it. But if a liberty
of will made Adam sin, then this liberty to sin being still left us, this
liberty and and not Adams sin is the cause of all our actual.

Concerning the other clause in the Presbyterian article, that our natural
corruption in the regenerate still remains, and is still a sin, and properly a
sin: I have (I confess) heartily opposed it, and shall besides my arguments,
confute it with my blood, if God shall call me; for it is so great a reproach
to the spirit and power of Christ, and to the effects of Baptism, to Scripture
and to right reason, that all good people are bound in Conscience to be zealous
against it.

For when Christ came to reconcile us to his Father, he came to take away our
sins, not only to pardon them, but to destroy them; and if the regenerate, in
whom the spirit of Christ rules, and in whom all their habitual sins are dead,
are still under the servitude and in the stock's of Original sin, then it
follows, not only that our guilt of Adams sin is greater then our own actual,
the sin that we never consented to, is of a deeper grain then that which we
have chosen and delighted in, and God was more angry with Cain that he was born
of Adam, then that he killed his Brother; and Judas by descent from the first
Adam contracted that sin which he could never be quit of: but he might have
been quit of his betraying the second Adam, if he would not have despaired; I
say not only these horrid consequences do follow, but this also will follow;
that Adams sin has done some mischief that the grace of Christ can never cure;
and generation stains so much, that regeneration cannot wash it clean. Besides
all this; if the natural corruption remains in the regenerate and be properly
a sin, then either Gods hates the regenerate, or loves the sinner, and when he
dies he must enter into Heaven, with that sin, which he cannot lay down but in
the grave: as the vilest sinner lays down every sin; and then an unclean thing
can go to Heaven, or else no man can; and lastly, to say that this natural
corruption, though it be pardoned and mortified, yet still remains, and is
still a sin, is perfect nonsense; for if it be mortified, it is not, it has no
being; if it is pardoned it was indeed, but now is no sin; for till a man can
be guilty of sin without obligation to punishment, a sin cannot be a sin that
is pardoned; that is, if the obligation to punishment or the guilt be taken
away, a man is not guilty. Thus far (Madam) I hope you will think I had reason.

One thing more I did and do reprove in their Westminster articles: and that
is, that Original sin, meaning, our sin derived from Adam, is contrary to the
law of God and does in its own nature bring guilt upon the sinner; binding him
over to Gods wrath etc. that is, that the sin of Adam imputed to us is
properly, formally, and inhaerently a sin. If it were properly a sin in us, our
sin, it might indeed be damnable; for every transgression of the Divine
Commandment is so: but because I have proved it cannot bring eternal damnation,
I can as well argue thus: this sin cannot justly bring us to damnation,
therefore it is not properly a sin: as to say; this is properly a sin,
therefore it can bring us to damnation. Either of them both follow well: but
because they cannot prove it to be a sin properly, or any other ways but by a
limited imputation to certain purposes; they cannot say it infers damnation.
But because I have proved, it cannot infer damnation, I can safely conclude, it
is not formally, properly, and inherently a sin in us.

Nec placet o superi vobis cum vertere cuncta
Propositum, nostris erroribus addere crimen.
Nor did it please our God, when that our state
Was changed, to add a crime unto our fate.
I have now (Madam) though much to your trouble quitted my self of my
Presbyterian opponents, so far as I can judge fitting for the present: but my
friends also take some exceptions; and there are some objections made, and
blows given me as it happened to our Blessed Savior, in domo illorum qui
diligebant me; in the house of my Mother and in the societies of some of my
Dearest Brethren. For the case is this.

They join with me in all this that I have said; viz. That Original sin is ours
only by imputation; that it leaves us still in our natural liberty, and though
it has divested us of our supernaturals, yet that our nature is almost the
same, and by the grace of Jesus as capable of Heaven as it could ever be, by
derivation of Original rightousnesse from Adam. In the conduct and in the
description of this Question, being usually esteemed to be only Scholastical,
I confess they (as all men else) do usually differ; for it was long ago
observed, that there are 16. several famous opinions, in this one Question of
Original sin. But my Brethren, are willlng to confess, that for Adams sin
alone no man did or shall ever perish. And that it is rather to be called a
stain then a sin. If they were all of one mind and one voice in this article,
though but thus far, I would not move a stone to disturb it, but some draw one
way and some another, and they that are aptest to understand the whole secret,
do put fetters and bars upon their own understanding by an importune regard to
the great names of some dead men, who are called masters upon earth, and whose
authority is as apt to mislead us into some propositions, as their learning is
useful to guide us in others: but so it happens, that because all are not of a
mind, I cannot give account of every disagreeing man; but of that which is
most material I shall. Some learned persons are content I should say no man is
damned for the sin of Adam alone; but yet that we stand guilty in Adam, and
redeemed from this damnation by Christ; and if that the article were so stated,
it would not entrench upon the justice or the goodness of God; for his justice
would be sufficiently declared, because no man can complain of wrong done him
when the evil that he fell into by Adam is taken off by Christ; and his
goodness is manifest in making a new Census for us, taxing and numbering us in
Christ, and giving us free Redemption by the blood of Jesus: but yet that we
ought to confess that we are liable to damnation by Adam, and saved from thence
by Christ; that Gods justice may be glorified in that, and his goodness in
this, but that we are still real sinners till washed in the blood of Lamb; and
without God, and without hopes of heaven, till then: and that if this article
be thus handled, the Presbyterian fancy will disappear; for they can be
confuted without denying Adams sin to be damnable; by saying it is pardoned in
Christ, and in Christ all men are restored, and he is the head of the
Predestination; for in him God looked upon us when he designed us to our final
state: and this say they is much for the honor of Christ's Redemption.

To these things (Madam) I have much to say; some thing I will trouble your
Ladyship withal at this time, that you and all that consider the particulars
may see, I could not do the work of God and truth if I had proceeded in that
method. For

1. It is observable that those wiser persons, who will by no means admit that
any one is or ever shall be damned for Original sin, do by this means hope to
salve the justice of God; by which they plainly imply that to damn us for this,
is hard and intolerable; and therefore they suppose they have declared a
remedy. But then this also is to be considered; if it be intolerable to damn
children for the sin of Adam, then it is intolerable to say it is damnable; If
that be not just or reasonable, then this is also unjust and unreasonable ^ for
the sentence and the execution of the sentence are the same emanation and issue
of justice and are to be equally accounted of. For.

2. I demand, had it been just in God, to damn all mankind to the eternal
pains of hell, for Adams sin, committed before they had a being, or could
consent to it, or know of it? if it could be just, then any thing in the world
can be just, and it is no matter who is innocent, or who is criminal directly
and by choice, since they may turn Devils in their Mothers bellies; and it
matters not whether there be any laws or no, since it is all one that there be
no law, and that we do not know whether there be or no; and it matters not
whether there be any judicial process, for we may as well be damned without
judgment, as be guilty without action: and besides, all those arguments will
press here which I urged in my first discourse. Now if it had been unjust
actually to damn us all for the sin of one, it was unjust to sentence us to it;
for if he did give sentence against us justly, he could justly have executed
the sentence; and this is just, if that be. But

3. God did put this sentence in execution; for when he sent the Holy Jesus
into the world, to die for us and to Redeem us, he satisfied his Fathers Anger,
for Original sin as well as for actual, he paid all the price of that as well
as of this damnation; and the horrible sentence was brought off; and God was so
satisfied that his justice had full measure; for so all men say who speak the
voice of the Church in the matter of Christ's satisfaction, so that now,
although there was the goodness of God, in taking the evil from us; yet how to
reconcile this process with his justice, viz. That for the sin of another
their God should sentence all the world to the portion of devils to eternal
ages; and that he would not be reconciled to us, or take off this horrible
sentence, without a full price to be paid to his justice; by the Savior of the
world, this, this is it that I require may be reconciled to that Notion which
we have of the Divine justice.

4. If no man shall ever be damned for the sin of Adam alone, then I demand
whether are they born quitt from the guilt; or when they are quitted? if they
be born free; I agree to it; but then they were never charged with it, so far
as to make them liable to damnation. If they be not born free, when are they
quitted? By baptism, before, or after? He that says before or after, must
speak wholly by chance and without pretense of Scripture or tradition, or any
sufficient warrant; and he cannot guess when it is. If in Baptism he is
quitted, then he that dies before baptism, is still under the sentence, and
what shall become of him? If it be answered, that God will pardon him, some way
or other, at some time or other; I reply, yea, but who said so? For if the
Scriptures have said that we are all in Adam guilty of sin and damnation, and
the Scriptures have told us no ways of being quit of it, but by baptism, and
faith in Christ; Is it not plainly consequent that til we believe in Christ, or
at least till in the faith of others, we are Baptized into Christ, we are
reckoned still in Adam, not in Christ, that is, still we are under damnation,
and not heirs of heaven but of wrath only?

5. How can any one bring himself into a belief that none can be damned for
Original sin, if it be of this persuasion that it makes us liable to damnation;
for if you say as I say, that it is against Gods justice to damn us for the
fault of another, then it is also against his justice to sentence us to that
suffering which to inflict is injustice. If you say it is believed upon this
account, because Christ was promised to all mankind, I reply, that yet all
mankind shall not be saved; and there are conditions required on our part, and
no man can be saved but by Christ, and he must come to him or be brought to
him, or it is not told us, how any one can have a part in him; and therefore
that will not give us the confidence is looked for. If it be at last said that
we hope in Gods goodness that he will take care of innocents, and that they
shall not perish, I answer, that if they be innocents, we need not appeal to
his goodness, for, his justice will secure them. If they be guilty and not
innocents, then it is but vain to run to Gods goodness, which in this
particular is not revealed; when it is against his justice which is revealed;
and to hope God will save them whom he hates, who are gone from him in Adam,
who are born heirs of his wrath, slaves of the Devil, servants of sin (for
these Epithetes are given to all the children of Adam, by the opponents in this
Question) is to hope for that against which his justice visibly is engaged, and
for which I hope there is no ground, unless this instance of Divine goodness
were expressed in revelation; For so even wicked persons on their deathbed are
bidden to hope without rule and without reason or sufficient grounds of trust.
But besides; that we hope in Gods goodness in this case is not ill, but I ask,
is it against Gods goodness that any one should perish for Original sin? if it
be against Gods goodness, it is also against his justice; for nothing is just
that is not also good. Gods goodness may cause his justice to forbear a
sentence, but whatsoever is against Gods goodness, is against God, and
therefore against his justice also; because every attribute in God is God
himself: For it is one thing to say [This is against Gods goodnesse] and the
contrary is agreeable to Gods goodnesse] Whatsoever is against the goodness of
God is essentially evil: But a thing may be agreeable to Gods goodness, and
yet the other part not be against it. For example; It is against the goodness
of God to hate fools and idiots: and therefore he can never hate them. But it
is agreeable to Gods goodness to give heaven to them and the joys beatifical:
and if he does not give them so much, yet if he does no evil to them hereafter,
it is also agreeable to his goodness: To give them Heaven, or not to give them
Heaven, though they be contradictories; yet are both agreeable to his
goodness. But in contraries the case is otherwise: For though not to give them
heaven is consistent with the Divine goodness, yet to end them to hell is not.
The reason of the difference is this. Because to do contrary things must come
from contrary principles; and whatsoever is contrary to the Divine goodness is
essentially evil. But to do or not to do, supposes but one positive principle;
and the other negative, not having a contrary cause, may be wholly innocent as
proceeding from a negative: but to speak more plain. Is it against Gods
goodnese that Infants should be damned for Original sin? then it could never
have been done, it was essentially evil, and therefore could never have been
decreed or sentenced. But if it be not against Gods goodness that they should
perish in hell, then it may consist with Gods goodness; and then to hope that
Gods goodness will rescue them from his justice, when the thing may agree with
both, is to hope without ground; God may be good, though they perish for Adams
sin; and if so, and that he can be just too upon the account, of what attribute
shall these innocents be rescued; and we hope for mercy for them.

6. If Adams posterity be only liable to damnation, but shall never be damned
for Adams sin, then all the children of Heathens dying in their infancy, shall
escape as well as baptized Christian children: which if any of my disagreeing
Brethren shall affirm, he will indeed seem to magnify Gods goodness, but he
must fall out with some great Doctors of the Church whom he would pretend to
follow; and besides, he will be hard put to it, to tell what advantage
Christian children have over Heathens, supposing them all to die young; for
being bred up in the Christian Religion is accidental, and may happen to the
children of unbelievers, or may not happen to the children of believers; and if
Baptism adds nothing to their present state, there is no reason infants
should be baptized; but if it does add to their present capacity (as most
certainly it does very much) then that Heathen infants, should be in a
condition of being rescued from the wrath of God, as well as Christian Infants,
is a strange unlookt for affirmative, and can no way be justified or made
probable, but by affirming it to be against the justice of God to condemn any
for Adams sin. Indeed if it be unjust (as I have proved it is) then it will
follow, that none shall suffer damnation by it. But if the hopes of the
salvation of Heathen infants be to be derived only from Gods goodness, though
Gods goodness cannot fail, yet our argument may fail; for it will not follow,
because God is good, therefore Heathen infants shall be saved: for it might as
well follow, God is good, therefore Heathens shall be no heathens, but all turn
Christians. These things do not follow affirmatively. But negatively they do.
For if it were against Gods Goodness that they should be reckoned in Adam unto
eternal death, then it is also against his Justice, and against God all the
way; and then, either we should find some revelation of Gods honor in
Scripture, or at least, there would be no principle (such as is this pretense
of being guilty of damnation in Adam) to contest against it.

7. But to come yet closer to the Question, some Good Men and wise suppose,
that the Sublapsarian Presbyterians can be confuted in their pretended grounds
of absolute reprobation, although we grant that Adams sin is damnable to his
posterity, provided we say, that though it was damnable, yet it shall never
damn us. Now though I wish it could be done, that they and I might not differ
so much as in a circumstance, yet first it is certain that the men they speak
of can never be confuted upon the stock of Gods Justice, because as the one
says, it is just that God should actually damn all for the sin of Adam: So the
other says, it is just that God should actually sentence all to damnation; and
so there the case is equal: Secondly, they cannot be confuted upon the stock
of Gods goodness; because the emanations of that being wholly arbitrary, and
though there are negative measures of it, as there is of Gods Infinity, and we
know Gods goodness to be inconsistent with some things, yet there are no
positive measures of this goodness; and no man can tell how much it will do
for us: and therefore without a revelation, things may be sometimes hoped,
which yet may not be presumed; and therefore here also they are not to be
confuted: and as for the particular Scriptures, unless we have the advantage
of essential reason taken from the divine Attributes, they will oppose
Scripture to Scripture, and have as much advantage to expound the opposite
places, as the Jews have in their Questions of the Messiah; and therefore si
meos ipse corymbos necterem, if I might make mine own arguments in their
society, and with their leave; I would upon that very account suspect the
usual discourses of the effects and Economy of Original sin.

8. For where will they reckon the beginning of Predestination? will they
reckon it in Adam after the fall, or in Christ immediately promised? If in
Adam, then they return to the Presbyterian way, and run upon all the rocks
before reckoned, enough to break all the World in Pieces. If in Christ they
reckon it (and so they do) then thus I argue. If we are all reckoned in Christ
before we were borne, then how can we be reckoned in Adam when we are born I
speak as to the matter of Predestination to salvation, or damnation; For as for
the intermedial temporal evils, and dangers spiritual, and sad infirmities,
they are our nature, and might with Justice have been all the portion God had
given to Adam, and therefore may be so to us, and consequently not at all to be
reckoned in this inquiry: But certainly, as to the maine.

9. If God looks upon us all in Christ, then by him we are rescued from Adam;
so much is done for us before we were born. For if this is not to be reckoned
till after we were borne, then Adam's sin prevailed really in some periods, and
to some effects for which God in Christ had provided no remedy: for it gave no
remedy to children till after they were born, but irremediably they were born
children of wrath; For if a remedy were given to children before they were
born, then they are born in Christ not in Adam; but if this remedy was not
given to children before they were born, then it follows, that we were not at
first looked upon in Christ, but in Adam, and consequently he was caput
praedestinationis the head of predestination, or else there were two; the one
before we were born, the other after. So that haeret lethalis arundo: The arrow
sticks fast and it cannot be pulled out, unless by other instruments then are
commonly in fashion. However it be, yet me thinks this a very good probable
argument.

As Adam sinned before any child was born, so was Christ promised before; and
that our Redeemer shall not have more force upon children, that they should be
born beloved and quitted from wrath, then Adam our Progenitor shall have to
cause that we be born hated and in a damnable condition, wants so many degrees
of probability, that it seems to dishonor the mercy of God, and the reputation
of his goodesse and the power of his redemption.

For this serves as an Antidote, and Antinomy of their great objection
pretended by these learned persons: for whereas they say, they the rather
affirm this, because it is an honor to the redemption which our Savior
wrought for us, that it rescued us from the sentence of damnation, which we had
incurred. To this I say, that the honor of our blessed Savior does no way
depend upon our imaginations and weak propositions: and neither can the
reputation and honor of the Divine goodness borrow aids and artificial
supports from the dishonor of his Justice; and it is no reputation to a
Physician to say he has cured us of an evil which we never had; and shall we
accuse the Father of mercies to have wounded us for no other reason but that
the son may have the Honor to have cured us? I understand not that. He that
makes a necessity that he may find a remedy, is like the Roman whom Cato
found fault withal; he would commit a fault that he might beg a pardon; he
had rather write bad Greek, that he might make an apology, then write good
latin, and need none. But however; Christ has done enough for us; even all
that we did need, and since it is all the reason in the World we should pay him
all honor; we may remember, that it is a greater favor to us that by the
benefit of our Blessed Savior, who was the Lamb slain from the beginning of
the world, we were reckoned in Christ, and born in the accounts of the Divine
favor; I say, it is a greater favor that we were born under the redemption of
Christ, then under the sentence and damnation of Adam; and to prevent an evil
is a greater favor then to cure it; so that if to do honor to Gods goodness
and to the graces of our Redeemer, we will suppose a need, we may do him more
honor to suppose that the promised seed of the woman did do us as early a
good, as the sin of Adam could do us mischief; and therefore that in Christ we
are born, quitted from any such supposed sentence, and not that we bring it
upon our shoulders into the World with us. But this thing relies only upon
their suppositions,

For if we will speak of what is really true and plainly revealed: From all the
sins of all mankind Christ came to redeem us: He came to give us a
supernatural birth: to tell us all his Fathers will; to reveal to us those
glorious promises upon the expectation of which we might be enabled to do every
thing that is required; He came to bring us grace, and life, and spirit; to
strengthen us against all the powers of Hell and Earth; to sanctify our
afflictions, which from Adam by Natural generation descended on us; to take cut
the sting of death, to make it an entrance to immortal life; to assure us of
resurrection, to intercede for us, and to be an advocate for us, when we by
infirmity commit sin; to pardon us when we repent. Nothing of which could be
derived to us from Adam by our natural generation; Mankind now, taking in his
whole constitution, and design, is like the Birds of Paradise which travelers
tell us of in the Molucco Islands; born without legs; but by a celestial power
they have a recompense made to them for that defect; and they always hover in
the air, and feed on the dew of heaven: so are we birds of Paradise; but cast
out from thence, and born without legs, without strength to walk in the laws of
God, or to go to heaven; but by a power from above, we are adopted in our new
birth to a celestial conversation, we feed on the dew of heaven, the just does
^live ^oy faith, and breaths in this new life by the spirit of God. For from
the first Adam nothing descended to us but an infirm body, and a naked soul,
evil example and a body of death, ignorance and passion, hard labor and a
cursed field, a captive soul and an imprisoned body, that is, a soul naturally
apt to comply with the appetites of the body, and its desires whether
reasonable or excessive: and though these things were not direct sins to us in
their natural abode and first principle, yet there are proper inherent miseries
and principles of sin to us in their emanation. But from this state, Christ
came to redeem us all by his grace, and by his spirit, by his life and by his
death, by his Doctrine and by his Sacraments, by his promises and by his
revelations, by his resurrection and by his ascension, by his interceding for
us and judging of us; and if this be not a conjugation of glorious things great
enough to amaze us, and to merit from us all our services, and all our love,
and all the glorifications of God, I am sure nothing can be added to it by any
supposed need of which we have no revelation: There is as much done for us as
we could need, and more then we could ask, Nempe quod optanti Divum promittere
nemo
Auderet, volvenda dies en attulit ultro!
Vivite faelices anime quibus est fortuna peracta.
Jam sua --
the meaning of which words I render, or at least recompense with the verse of a
Psalm.

To thee O Lord I Will pay my vow
My knees in thanks to thee shall bow, Psalm. 56. by Bp. King.

For thou my life keepst from the grave
And do my feet from falling save,
That with the living in thy sight
I may enjoy eternal light.
For thus what Ahasuerus said to Ester, Vetercs literas muta, change the old
letters; is done by the birth of our Blessed Savior. Eva is changed into Ave,
and although it be true what Bensirach said, From the woman is the beginning of
sin, and by her we all die, yet it is now changed by the birth of our Redeemer,
from a woman is the beginning of our restitution, and in him we all live; thus
are all the four quarters of the World renewed by the second Adam: (...), The
East, West, North, and South, are represented in the second Adam as well as the
first, and rather, and to better purposes, because if sin did abound, Grace
shall superabound.

I have now Madam given to your honor such accounts, as I hope being added to
my other papers, may satisfy not only your Ladyship, but those to whom this
account may be communicated. I shall only now beg your patience, since your
Honor has been troubled with Questions, and inquiries, and objections, and
little murmurs to hear my answers to such of them as have been brought to me.

1. I am complained of, that I would trouble the World with a new thing; which
let it be never so true, yet unless it were very useful, will hardly make
recompense for the trouble I put the world to, in this inquiry.

I answer; that for the newness of it; I have already given accounts that the
opinions which I impugn, as they are no direct parts of the article of
Original sin, so they are newer then the truth which I have asserted. But let
what I say seem as new as the reformation did, when Luther first preached
against indulgences, the presence of Novelty did not, and we say, ought not to
have affrighted him; and therefore I ought also to look to what I say, that it
be true, and the truth will prove its age. But to speak freely Madam, though I
have a great reverence for Antiquity, yet it is the prime antiquity of the
Church; the ages of Martyrs and Holiness, that I mean; and I am sure that in
them, my opinion has much more warrant then the contrary; But for the
descending ages I give that veneration to the great names of them that went
before us, which themselves gave to their Predecessors; I honor their memory,
I read their books, I imitate their piety, I examine their arguments; for
therefore they did write them, and where the reasons of the Moderns and their's
seem equal, I turn the balance on the elder side, and follow them; but where
a scruple or a grane of reason is evidently in the other balance; I must
follow that. Nempe qui ante nos ista moverunt, non Domini nostri, sed Duces
sunt. Seneca. ep. 33. They that taught of this Article before me, are Good
Guides, but no Lords and Masters; for I must acknowledge none upon earth: for
so am I commanded by my Master that is in Heaven; and I remember what we are
taught in Palingenius, when we were boys.

Quicquid Aristoteles, vel quivis dicat eorum,
Dict a nihil moror a vero cum forte recedunt:
Saepe graves magnosque viros, famaque verendos
Errare and labi contingit, plurima secum
Ingenia in tenebras consueti nominis alti,
Authors ubi connivent deducere easdem.
If Aristotle be deceived, and say that is true,
What nor himself, nor others ever knew,
I leave his text, and let his Scholars talk
Till they be hoarse or weary in their walk:
When wise men err, though their fame ring like Bells,
I escape a danger when I leave their spells.
For although they that are dead some ages before we were borne, have a
reverence due to them, yet more is due to truth that shall never die; and God
is not wanting to our industry any more then to theirs; but blesses every age
with the understanding of his truths. AEtatibus omnibus, omnibus hominibus
communis sapientia est, nec illam ceu peculium licet antiquitati gratulari. All
ages, and all men have their advantages in their inquiries after truth; neither
is wisdom appropriate to our Fathers. And because even wise men may be
deceived, and therefore that when I find it, or suppose it so (for that is all
one as to me and my duty) I must go after truth where ever it is; certainly it
will be less expected from me to follow the popular noises and the voices of
the people, who are not to teach us, but to be taught by us: and I believe my
self to have reason to complain when men are angry at a doctrine because it is
not commonly taught; that is, when they are impatient to be taught a truth,
because most men do already believe a lie; recti apud nos locum tenet error ubi
publicus fact^us est, So Seneca ( Epist. 123.) complained in his time: it is a
strange title to truth which error can pretend, for its being public; and we
refuse to follow an unusual truth; quasi honestius sit quia frequentius, and
indeed it were well to do so in those propositions who have no truth in them
but what they borrow from men's opinions, and are for nothing tolerable, but
that they are usual.

Object. 2. But what necessity is there in my publication of this doctrine,
supposing it were true; for all truths are not to be spoken at all times; and
if a truth gives offense, it is better to let men alone, then to disturb the
peace.

I answer with the laboring man's Proverb; a pennyworth of ease is worth a
Penny at any time; and a little truth is worth a little Peace, every day of the
week: and caeteris parious, Truth is to be preferred before Peace; not every
trifling truth to a considerable peace: but if the truth be material, it makes
recompense, though it brings a great noise along with it; and if the breach of
Peace be nothing but that men talk in Private, or declame a little in
public; truly then (Madam) it is a very pitiful little proposition, the
discovery of which in truth will not make recompense for the prattling of
disagreeing Persons. Truth and Peace make an excellent yoke; but the truth of
God is always to be preferred before the Peace of men, and therefore our
Blessed Savior came not to send Peace, but a sword; That is, he knew his
doctrine would cause great devisions of heart; but yet he came to persuade us
to Peace and Unity. Indeed if the truth be clear, and yet of no great effect
in the lives of men, in government, or in the honor of God, then it ought not
to break the Peace; That is, it may not run out of its retirement, to disquiet
them, to whom their rest is better then that knowledge. But if it be brought
out already, it must not be deserted positively, though peace goes away in its
stead. So that peace is rather to be deserted, then any truth should be
renounced or denied; but Peace is rather to be procured or continued, then some
truth offered. This is my sense (Madam) when the case is otherwise then I
suppose it to be at present. For as for the present case, there must be two
when there is a falling out, or a peace broken; and therefore I will secure it
now; for let any man dissent from me in this Article, I will not be troubled at
him; he may do it with liberty, and with my charity. If any man is of my
opinion, I confess I love him the better; but if he refutes it, I will not
love him less after then I did before: but he that dissents, and reviles me,
must expect from me no other kindness but that I forgive him, and pray for him,
and offer to reclaim him, and that I resolve nothing shall ever make me either
hate him, or reproach him: and that still in the greatest of his difference, I
refuse not to give him the communion of a Brother; I believe I shall be chidden
by some or other for my easiness, and want of fierceness, which they call
Zeal, but it is a fault of my nature; a part of my Original sin: Vnicuique
dedit vitium Natura Creato,
Mi Natura aliquid semper amare dedit. Propert.
Some weakness to each man by birth descends,
To me too great a kindness Nature lends.


But if the Peace can be broken no more then thus; I suppose the truth which I
publish will do more then make recompense for the noise that in Clubs and
Conventicles is made over and above. So long as I am thus resolved; there may
be injury done to me, but there can be no duel, or loss of Peace abroad. For
a single anger, or a displeasure on one side, is not a breach of peace on both;
and a War cannot be made by fewer, then a bargain can; in which always there
must be two at least.

Object. 3. But as to the thing; If it be inquired (...) (...); what profit,
what use, what edification is there, what good to souls, what honor to God by
this new explication of the Article? I answer; that the usual Doctrines of
Original sin are made the great foundation of the horrible proposition
concerning absolute Reprobation; the consequences of it^ reproach God with
injustice, they charge God foolishly, and deny his Goodness and his Wisdom in
many instances: and whatsoever can upon the account of the Divine Attributes be
objected against the fierce way of Absolute Decrees; all that can be brought
for the reproof of their usual Propositions concerning Original sin. For
the consequences are plain; and by them the necessity of my Doctrine, and its
usefulness may be understood.

For 1. If God decrees us to be born sinners; Then he makes us to be sinners:
and then where is his goodness?

2. If God does damn any for that, he damnes us for what we could not help,
and for what himself did, and then where is his Justice?

3. If God sentence us to that Damnation, which he cannot in justice inflict,
where is his Wisdom?

4. If God for the sin of Adam brings upon us a necessity of sinning; where
is our liberty? where is our Nature? what is become of all Laws, and of all
Virtue and vice? How can men be distinguished from Beasts: or the Virtuous from
the vicious?

5. If by the fall of Adam, we are so wholly ruined in our faculties, that we
cannot do any good, but must do evil; how shall any man take care of his
ways? or how can it be supposed he should strive against all vice, when he can
excuse so much upon his Nature? or indeed how shall he strive at all? for if
all actual sins are derived from the Original, and then is unavoidable, and
yet an Unresistable cause, then no man can take care to avoid any actual
sin, whose cause is natural, and not to be declined. And then where is his
providence and Government?

6. If God does cast Infants into Hell for the sin of others, and yet did not
condemn Devils, but for their own sin; where is his love to mankind?

7. If God chooses the death of so many Millions of Persons who are no sinners
upon their own stock, and yet swears that he does not love the death of a
sinner, viz. sinning with his own choice; how can that be credible, he should
love to kill Innocents, and yet should love to spare the Criminal? where then
is his Mercy, and where is his Truth?

8. If God has given us a Nature by derivation, which is wholly corrupted,
then how can it be that all which God made is good? for though Adam corrupted
himself, yet in propriety of speaking, we did not; but this was the Decree of
God; and then where is the excellency of his providence and Power, where is the
glory of the Creation?

Because therefore that God is all goodness, and justice, and wisdom, and
love, and that he governs all things, and all men wisely and holily, and
according to the capacities of their natures and Persons; that he gives us a
wise law, and binds that law on us by promises and threatenings; I had reason to
assert these glories of the Divine Majesty, and remove the hindrances of a
good life; since every thing can hinder us from living well, but scar cely can
all the Arguments of God and man, and all the Powers of heaven and hell
persuade us to strictness and severity.

Qui serere ingenuum volet agrum,
Liberet arva prius sruticibus
Falce rubos, silicemque resecet, Boeth. lib. 3. Metr. 1.

Ut nova fruge gravis Ceres eat.
He that will sow his field with hopeful seed,
Must every bramble, every thistle weed:
And when each hindrance to the grain is gone,
A fruitful crop shall rise of corn alone.
When therefore there were so many ways made to the Devil, I was willing
amongst many others to stop this also; and I dare say, few Questions in
Christendom can say half so much in justification of their own usefulness
and necessity.

I know (Madam) that they who are of the other side do and will disavow most
of these consequences; and so do all the World, all the evils which their
adversaries say, do follow from their opinions; but yet all the World of men
that perceive such evils to follow from a proposition, think themselves bound
to stop the progression of such opinions from whence they believe such evils
may arise. If the Church of Rome did believe that all those horrid things were
chargable upon Transubstantiation, and upon worshipping of Images, which we
charge upon the Doctrines, I do not doubt but they would as much disowne the
Proposition, as now they do the consequents; and yet I do as little doubt but
that we do well to disown the first, because we espy the latter: and though the
Man be not, yet the doctrines are highly chargable with the evils that follow
it may be the men espy them not; yet from the doctrines they do certainly
follow; and there are not it the World many men who own that is evil in the
pretense, but many do such as are dangerous in the effect; and this doctrine
which I have reproved, I take to be one of them.

Object. 4. But if Original sin be not a sin properly, why are children
baptized? and what benefit comes to them by baptism?

I Answer, as much as they need, and are capable of: and it may as well be
asked, Why were all the sons of Abraham circumcised, when in that Covenant
there was no remission of sins at all; for little things and legal impurities,
and irregularities there were; but there being no sacrifice there but of
beasts, whose blood could not take away sin, it is certain and plainly
taught us in Scripture, that no Rite of Moses was expiatory of sins. But
secondly. This Objection can press nothing at all; for why was Christ
baptized, who knew no sin? But yet so it behoved him to fulfill all
Righteousness. 3. Baptism is called regeneration, or the new birth; and
therefore, since in Adam Children are borne only to a natural life and a
Natural death, and by this they can never arrive at Heaven, therefore Infants
are baptized, because until they be borne anew, they can never have title to
the Promises of Jesus Christ, or be heirs of heaven, and coheir's of Jesus. 4.
By Baptism Children are made partakers of the holy Ghost, and of the grace of
God; which I desire to be observed in opposition to the Pelagian Heresy, who
did suppose Nature to be so perfect, that the Grace of God was not necessary,
and that by Nature alone, they could go to heaven; which because I affirm to be
impossible, and that Baptism is therefore necessary, because nature is
insufficient, and Baptism is the great chanel of grace; there ought to be no
envious and ignorant load laid upon my Doctrine, as if it complied with the
Pelagian, against which it is so essentially and so mainly opposed in the main
difference of his Doctrine. 5. Children are therefore Baptized, because if they
live they will sin, and though their sins are not pardoned before hand, yet
in Baptism they are admitted to that state of favor, that they are within the
Covenant of repentance and Pardon: and this is expressly the Doctrine of St.
Austin, lib. 1. de nupt. and concup. cap. 26. and cap. 33. and tract. 124. in
Johan. But of this I have already given larger accounts in my Discourse of
Baptism. part. 2 p. 194. in the great Exemplar. 6. Children are baptized for
the Pardon even of Original sin; this may be affirmed truly, but yet
improperly: for so far as it is imputed, so far also it is remissible; for the
evil that is done by Adam, is also taken away in Christ; and it is imputed to
us to very evil purposes, as I have already explicated: but as it was among
the Jews who believed then the sin to be taken away, when the evil of
punishment is taken off; so is Original sin taken away in Baptism; for
though the Material part of the evil, is not taken away, yet the curse in all
the sons of God is turned into a blessing, and is made an occasion of reward,
or an entrance to it. Now in all this I affirm all that is true, and all that
is probable: for in the same sense, as Original stain is a sin, so does
Baptism bring the Pardon. It is a sin metonymically, that is, because it is
the effect of one sin, and the cause of many; and just so in baptism it is
taken away, that it is now the matter of a grace, and the opportunity of glory;
and upon these Accounts the Church Baptizes all her Children.

Object. 5. But to deny Original sin to be a sin properly and inherently,
is expressly against the words of S. Paul in the 5. Chapter to the Romans, If
it be, I have done; but that it is not, I have these things to say. 1. If the
words be capable of any interpretation, and can be permitted to signify
otherwise then is vulgarly pretended, I suppose my self to have given reasons
sufficient, why they ought to be. For any interpretation that does violence to
right Reason, to Religion, to Holiness of life, and the Divine Attributes of
God, is therefore to be rejected, and another chosen; For in all Scriptures,
all good and all wise men do it.

2. The words in question [ sin] and [ sinner] and [ condemnation] are
frequently used in Scripture in the lesser sense, and [ sin] is taken for the
punishment of sin; 1 Kings. 1. 21. Zech. 14. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Isai. 53. 10.
Hebr. 9. 28. 1 Kings. 1. 21.
and [ sin is taken for him who bore the evil of the sin, and [ sin] is taken
for legal impurity; and for him who could not be guilty, even for Christ
himself; as I have proved already: and in the like manner [ sinners] is used,
by the rule of Conjugates and denominatives; but it is so also in the case, of
Bathsheba the Mother of Solomon. 3. For the word [ condemnation,] it is by the
Apostle himself limited to signify his temporal death; for when the Apostle
says Death passed upon all men, in as much as all men have sinned; he must
mean temporal death; for eternal death did not pass upon all men; and if he
means eternal death he must not mean that it came for Adams sin; but in as much
as all men have sinned, that is, upon all those upon whom eternal death did
come, it came because they also have sinned. 4. The Apostle here speaks of sin
imputed; therefore not of sin inherent: and if imputed only to such purposes
as he here speaks of, viz. to temporal death, then it is neither a sin
properly, nor yet imputable to Eternal death so far as is or can be inplyed by
the Apostles words. 5. The Apostles says; by the disobedience of one many were
made sinners: so that it appears that we in this have no sin of our own,
neither is it at all our own formally and inherently; for though efficiently it
was his, and effectively ours as to certain purposes of imputation; yet it
could not be a sin to us formally; because it was Vnius inobedientia, the
disobedience of one man, therefore in no sense, could it be properly ours. 6.
Whenever another man's sin is imputed to his relative, therefore because it is
another and imputed, it can go no further but to effect certain evils to
afflict the relative, but to punish the cause; not formally to denominate the
descendant or relative to be a sinner; for it is as much a contradiction to say
that I am formally by him a sinner, as that I did really do his action. Now to
impute] in Scripture, it signifies to reckon as if he had done it; Not to
impute is to treat him so as if he had not done it. So far then as the
imputation is, so far we are reckoned as sinners; but Adams sin being by the
Apostle signified to be imputed but to the condemnation or sentence to a
temporal death; so far we are sinners in him, that is, so as that for his sake
death was brought upon us; And indeed the word [ imputare] to impute] does
never signify more, nor always so much. Imputare vero frequenter ad
significationem exprobrantis accedit, sed citra reprehensionem, says
Laurentius valla; It is like an exprobation, but short of a reproof; so
Quintilian. Imput as nobis propitios ventos, and secundum mare, ac civitatis
opulentae liberalitatem. Thou do impute, that is, upbraid to us our
prosperous voyages, and a calm Sea, and the liberality of a rich City. Imputare
signifies oftentimes the same that computare; to reckon or account: Nam haec in
quarta non imputantur, say the Lawyers, they are not imputed, that is, they are
not computed or reckoned. Thus Adams sin is imputed to us, that is, it is put
into our reckoning, and when we are sick and die, we pay our Symbols, the
portion of evil that is laid upon us: and what Marcus said, I may say in this
case with a little variety legata in haereditate -- sive legatum datum sit
haeredi, sive percipere, sive deducere vel retinere passus est, ei imputantur:
the the legacy whether it be given or left to the heir, whether he may take it
or keep it, is still imputed to him; that is, it is within his reckoning

But no reason, no Scripture, no Religion does enforce; and no divine Attribute
does permit that we should say that God did so impute Adams sin to his
posterity, that he di really esteem them to be guilty of Adams sin; equally
culpable, equally hateful; For if in this sense it be true that in him we
sinned; then we sinned as he did, that is, with the same malice, in the same
action; and then we are as much guilty as he; but if we have sinned less, then
we did not sin in him; for to sin in him, could not by him be lessened to us;
for what we did in him we did by him, and therefore as much as he did; but if
God imputed this sin less to us then to him, then this imputation supposes it
only to be a collateral and indirect account to such purposes as he pleased:
of which purposes we judge by the analogy of faith, by the words of Scripture,
by the proportion and notices of the Divine Attributes. 7. There is nothing in
the design or purpose of the Apostle that can or ought to infer any other
thing; for his purpose is to signify that by man's sin death entered into the
world; which the son of Sirach Ecclus. 25. 33. expresses thus; a muliere factum
est initium peccati, and inde est quod morimur; from the woman is the beginning
of sin; and from her it is that we all die: and again, Ecclus. 1. 24. by the
envy of the Devil death came into the world; this evil being Universal, Christ
came to the world, and became our head, to other purposes, even to redeem us
from death; which he has begun and will finish, and to become to us our Parent
in a new birth, the Author of a spiritual life; and this benefit is of far more
efficacy by Christ, then the evil could be by Adam; and as by Adam we are made
sinners: so by Christ we are made righteous; not just so; but so and more, and
therefore, as our being made sinners, signifies that by him we die, so being by
Christ made righteous must at least signify that by him we live: and this is
so evident to them who read Saint Paul's words Romans 5. from verse 12. to verse
19. inclusively, that I wonder any man should make a farther question
concerning them; especially since Erasmus and Grotius who are to be reckoned
amongst the greatest, and the best expositors of Scripture, that any age since
the Apostles and their immediate successors has brought forth, have so
understood and rendered it. But Madam, that your Honor may read the words and
their sense together, and see that without violence they signify what I have
said, and no more; I have here subjoyned a paraphrase of them; in which if I
use any violence I can very easily be reproved.

As by the disobedience of Adam, Romans 5. 12. As by one man sin entered into
the world, and Death by sin: and so death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned.
sin had it is beginning; and by sin death, that is, the sentence and
preparations, the solennities and addresses of death, sickness, calamity,
diminution of strengths, Old age, misfortunes, and all the affections of
Mortality, for the destroying of our temporal life; and so this mortality, and
condition or state of death passed actually upon all mankind; for Adam being
thrown out of paradise, and forced to live with his Children where they had no
trees of Life, as he had in Paradise, was remanded to his mortal, natural
state; and therefore death passed upon them, mortally seized on all; for that
all have sinned; that is, the sin was reckoned to all, not to make them guilty
like Adam; but Adams sin passed upon all, imprinting this real calamity on us
all: But yet death descended also upon Adams Posterity for their own sins; for
since all did sin, all should die.

And marvel not that Death did presently descend on all mankind, 13. For
until the law, sin was in the World, but sin is not imputed where there is no
law.
even before a Law was given them with an appendant penalty, viz. With the
express intermination of death; For they did do actions unnatural and vile
enough, but yet these things which afterward upon the publication of the Law
were imputed to them upon their personal account, even unto death, were not
yet so imputed. For Nature alone gives Rules, but does not directly bind to
penalties. But death came upon them before the Law for Adams sin; for with him
God being angry, was pleased to curse him also in his Posterity, and leave them
also in their mere natural condition, to which yet they disposed themselves,
and had deserved but too much by committing evil things; to which things,
although before the law, death was not threatened, yet for the anger which God
had against mankind, he left that death which he threatened to Adam expressly, by
implication, to fall upon the Posterity.

And therefore it was that death reigned from Adam to Moses, 14. Nevertheless
death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adam's transgression, who is the figure of him which was to come.
from the first law to the second; from the time that a Law was given to one
man, till the time a Law was given to one nation; and although men had not
sinned so grievously as Adam did, who had no excuse, many helps, excellent
endowments, mighty advantages, trifling temptations, communication with God
himself, no disorder in his faculties, free will, perfect immunity from
violence, Original righteousness, perfect power over his faculties; yet those
men, such as Abel, and Seth, Noah, and Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Joseph, and
Benjamin, who sinned less, and in the midst of all their disadvantages, were
left to fall under the same sentence; and this, besides that it was the present
Economy of the Divine Providence and Government, it did also like Janus look
(...), it looked forwards as well as backwards, and became a type of Christ, or
of him that was to come. For as from Adam evil did descend upon his natural
Children, upon the account of Gods intercourse with Adam; so did good descend
upon the spiritual Children of the second Adam.

This should have been the latter part of a similitude, 15. But not as the
offense, so also is the free gift: for if through the offense of one many be
dead much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man
Jesus Christ has abounded unto many.
but upon further consideration, it is found, that as in Adam we die, so in
Christ we live, and much rather, and much more, therefore I cannot say, As by
one man [vers. 12] so by one man [verse 15.] But much more; for not as the
offense, so also is the free gift, for the offense of one did run over unto
many, and those many, even as it were all, all except Enoch, or some very few
more of whom mention peradventure is not made, are already dead upon that
account, but when God comes by Jesus Christ to show mercy to mankind, he does
it in much more abundance; he may be angry to the third and fourth generation,
in them that hate him, but he will show mercy unto thousands in them that love
him; to a thousand generations, and and in ten thousand degrees; so that now
although a comparison proportionate was at first intended, yet the river here
rises far higher then the fountain; and now no argument can be drawn from the
similitude of Adam and Christ, but that as much hurt was done to humane nature
by Adams sin, so very much more good is done to mankind by the incarnation of
the Son of God.

And the first disparity and excess is in this particular: for the judgment
was (...), 16. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift; for the
judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses
unto justification
(...) and (...), by one man sinning one sin; that one sin was imputed; but by
Christ, not only one sin was forgiven freely, but many offenses were remitted
unto justification; and secondly, a vast disparity there is in this; that the
descendants from Adam were perfectly like him in nature, his own real natural
production, and they sinned (though not so bad) yet very much, and therefore
there was a great parity of reason that the evil which was threatened to Adam,
and not to his children should yet for the likeness of nature and of sin
descend upon them. But in the other part the case is highly differing; for
Christ being our Patriarch in a spiritual birth, we fall infinitely short of
him, and are not so like him as we were to Adam, and yet that we in greater
unlikelinesse should receive a greater favor, this was the excess of the
comparison, and this is the free gift of God.

And this is the third degree, or measure of excess of efficacy on Christ's
part, over it was on the part of Adam. 17. For if by one offense [so it is in
the Kings MS. or,] if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they
which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life by one Jesus Christ.
For if the sin of Adam alone could bring death upon the world, who by
imitation of his transgression on the stock of their own natural choice did sin
against God, though not after the similitude of Adams transgression: much more
shall we, who not only receive the aides of the spirit of grace, but receive
them also in an abundant measure, receive also the effect of all this, even to
reign in life by one Jesus Christ.

Therefore now to return to the other part of the similitude where I began;
although I have shown the great excess and abundance of grace by Christ, 18.
Therefore as by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation:
even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life.
over the evil that did descend by Adam; yet the proportion and comparison lies
in the main emanation of death from one, and life from the other; [ judgment
unto condemnation] that is, the sentence of death came upon all men by the
offense of one; even so, by a like Economy and dispensation, God would not be
behind in doing an act of Grace, as he did before of judgmenr: and as that
judgment was not to condemnation by the offense of one: so the free gift, and
grace came upon all to justification of life, by the righteousness of one.

The sum of all is this; by the disobedience of one man (...) (...) many were
constituted or put into the order of sinners they were made such by Gods
appointment, 19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
that is, not that God could be the Author of a sin to any, but that he
appointed the evil which is the consequent of sin, to be upon their heads who
descended from the sinner: and so it shall be on the other side; for by the
obedience of one, even of Christ, many shall be made, or constituted righteous.
But still this must be with a supposition of what was said before, that there
was a vast difference; for we are made much more righteous by Christt,^hen we
were sinners by Adam; and the life we receive by Christ shall be greater then
the death by Adam; and the graces we derive from Christ, shall be more and
mightier then the corruption and declination by Adam; but yet as one is the
head, so is the other: one is the beginning of sin and death, and the other
of life and righteousness.

Now the consequent of this discourse must needs at least be this; that it is
impossible that the greatest part of mankind should be left in the eternal
bonds of hell by Adam; for then quite contrary to the discourse of the Apostle,
there had been abundance of sin, but a scarcity of grace; and the access had
been on the part of Adam, not on the part of Christ, against which he so
mightily and artificially contends: so that the Presbyterian way is perfectly
condemned by this discourse of the Apostle; and the other more gentle way,
which affirms that we were sentenced in Adam to eternal death, though the
execution is taken off by Christ, is also no way countenanced by any thing in
this Chapter; for that the judgment which for Adams sin came unto the
condemnation of the world, was nothing but temporal death, is here affirmed; it
being in no sense imaginable that the death which here Saint Paul says passed
upon all men, and which reigned from Adam to Moses, should be eternal death;
for the Apostle speaks of that death which was threatened to Adam; and of such
a death which was afterward threatened in Moses Law; and such a death which
fell even upon the most righteous of Adams posterity, Abel, and Seth, and
Methusela, that is, upon them who did not sin after the similitude of Adams
transgression. Since then, all the judgment which the Apostle says, came by
the sin of Adam, was expressly affirmed to be death temporal, that God should
sentence mankind to eternal damnation for Adams sin, though in goodness
thorough Christ he afterward took it off; is not at all affirmed by the
Apostle; and because in proportion to the evil, so was the imputation of the
sin, it follows that Adams sin is ours metonymically and improperly; God was
not finally angry with us, nor had so much as any designs of eternal
displeasure upon that account; his anger went no further then the evils of this
life, and therefore the imputation was not of a proper guilt, for that might
justly have passed beyond our grave; if the sin had passed beyond a metonymie,
or a juridical, external imputation. And of this God and Man have given this
further testimony; that as no man ever imposed penance for it; so God himself
in nature did never for it afflict or affright the conscience, and yet the
Conscience never spares any man that is guilty of a known sin.

Extemplo quodcunque malum committitur, ipsi
Displicet Authori,
He that is guilty of a sin
shall rue the crime that he lies in
And why the Conscience shall be for ever at so much peace for this sin, that a
man shall never give one groan for his share of guilt in Adams sin, unless
some or other scares him with an impertinent proposition; why (I say) the
Conscience should not naturally be afflicted for it, nor so much as naturally
know it, I confess I cannot yet make any reasonable conjecture, save this
only, that it is not properly a sin, but only metonymicall and improperly.
And indeed there are some whole Churches which think themselves so little
concerned in the matter of Original sin, that they have not a word of it in all
their Theology: I mean the Christians in the EastIndies, concerning whom Friar
Luys de Urretta in his Ecclesiastical story of AEthiopia, says, that the
Christians in AEthiopia, unde the Empire of Prestre Juan, never kept the
immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary [no se entremetieron enessas Teologias
del peccado Original: porque nunca tuvieron los entendimientes may metafisicos,
antes como gente afable, benigna, Uana, de entendimientos conversables, y
alaguenos, seguian la dotrina de los Santos antiguos, y de los sagrados
Concilies, sin disputas, ni diferencias] nor do they insert into their Theology
any propositions concerning Original sin, nor trouble themselves with such
Metaphysical contemplations; but being of an affable, ingenuous, gentile
comportment, and understanding, follow the Doctrine of the primitive Saints and
Holy Councels without disputation of difference, so says the story. But we
unfortunatly trouble our selves by raising ideas of sin, and afflict our selves
with our own dreams, and will not believe but it is a vision. And the height of
this imgination has wrought so high in the Church of Rome, that when they
would do great honors to the Virgin Mary, they were pleased to allow to her an
immaculate conception without any Original sin, and a Holy Day appointed for
the celebration of the dream. But the Christians in the other world are wiser,
and trouble themselves with none of these things, but in simplicity, honor the
Divine attributes, and speak nothing but what is easy to be understood. And
indeed religion is then the best, and the world will be sure to have fewer
Atheists, and fewer Blasphemers, when the understandings of witty men are not
tempted, by commanding them to believe impossible articles, and unintelligible
propositions: when every thing is believed by the same simplicity it is taught:
when we do not call that a mystery which we are not able to prove, and tempt our
faith to swallow that whole which reason cannot chew.

One thing I am to observe more, before I leave considering the words of the
Apostle. The Apostle here having instituted a comparison between Adam and
Christ; that as death came by one, so life by the other; as by one we are made
sinners, so by the other we are made righteous; some from hence suppose they
argue strongly to the overthrow of all that I have said; thus: Christ and Adam
are compared, therefore as by Christ we are made really righteous: so by Adam
we are made really sinners: our righteousness by Christ is more then imputed,
and therefore so is our unrighteousness by Adam^ To this, besides what I have
already spoken in my humble addresses to that wise and charitable Prelate the
Lord Bishop of Rochester, delivering the sense and objections of others; in
which I have declared my sense of the imputation of Christ's righteousness;
and besides, that although the Apostle offers at a similitude, yet he finds
himself surprised, and that one part of the similitude does far exceed the
other, and therefore nothing can follow hence; but that if we receive evil from
Adam, we shall much more receive good from Christ; besides this I say, I have
something very material to reply to the form of the argument, which is a very
trick and fallacy. For the Apostle argues thus, As by Adam we are made sinners,
so by Christ we are made righteous; and that is very true, and much more; but
to argue from hence [as by Christ we are made really righteous, so by Adam we
are made really sinners] is to invert the purpose of the Apostle, (who argues
from the less to the greater) and to make it conclude affirmatively from the
greater to the less in matter of power: as if one should say: If a child can
carry a ten pound weight, much more can a man: and therefore whatsoever a man
can do, that also a child can do. For though I can say, If this thing be done
in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry? yet I must not say therefore,
If this be done in the dry tree, what shall be done in the green? for the dry
try of the Cross could do much then the green tree in the Garden of Eden. It
is a good argument to say; If the Devil be so potent to do a shrewd turn much
more powerful is God to do good: but we cannot conclude from hence, but God can
by his own mere power, and pleasure save a soul; therefore the Devil can by his
power ruin one: In a similitude, the first part may be, and often is, less
then the second; but never greater: and therefore though the Apostle said, as
by Adam etc. So by Christ etc. Yet we cannot say as by Christ, so by Adam: We
may well reason thus. As by Nature there is a reward to evil doers; so much
more is there by God; but we cannot by way of conversion, reason thus; As by
God there is an eternal reward appointed to good actions; so by Nature there is
an Eternal reward for evil ones. And who would not deride this way of arguing.
As by our Fathers we receive temporal good things; so much more do we by God:
but by God we also receive an immortal Soul; therefore from our Fathers we
receive an immortal body. For not the consequent of a hypothetical proposition,
but the antecedent is to be the assumption of the Syllogism; This therefore is
a fallacy, which when those wise persons, who are unwarily persuaded by it,
shall observe, I doubt not but the whole way of arguing will appear
unconcluding.

Object. 6. But it is objected that my Doctrine is against the ninth Article in
the Church of England; and that I hear Madam does most of all stick with your
Honor.

Of this Madam, I should not now have taken notice, because I have already
answered it in some additional papers, which are already published; but that I
was so delighted to hear and to know that a person of your interest and Honor,
of your zeal and prudence, is so earnest for the Church of England, that I
could not pass it by, without paying you that regard and just acknowledgment
which so much excellency deserves. But then Madam I am to say, that I could
not be delighted in your zeal for our excellent Church, if I were not as
zealous my self for it too: I have oftentimes subscribed that Article, and
though if I had cause to dissent from it, I would certainly do it in those just
measures which my duty on one side, and the interest of truth on the other
would require of me; yet because I have no reason to disagree, I will not
suffer my self to be supposed to be of a Differing judgment from my Dear
Mother, which is the best Church of the world. Indeed Madam, I do not
understand the words of the Article as most men do; but I understand them as
they can be true, and as they can very fairly signify, and as they agree with
the word of God and right reason. But I remember that I have heard from a very
good hand, and there are many alive this day that may remember to have heard it
talked of publicly, that when Mr. Thomas Rogers had in the year 1584.
published an exposition of the 39. Articles, many were not only then, but long
since very angry at him, that he by his interpretation had limited the
charitable latitude which was allowed in the subscription to them. For the
Articles being framed in a Church but newly reformed, in which many complied
with some unwillingnesse, and were not willing to have their consent broken by
too great a straining, and even in the Convocation it self so many being of a
differing judgment, it was very great prudence and piety to secure the peace
of the Church by as much charitable latitude as they could contrive; and
therefore the Articles in those things, which were publicly disputed at that
time, even amongst the Doctors of the Reformation (such were the Articles of
predestination, and this of Original sin) were described, with incomparable
wisdom and temper; and therefore I have reason to take it ill, if any man shall
deny me liberty to use the benefit of the Churches wisdom; For I am ready a
thousand times to subscribe the Article, if there can be just cause to do it so
often; but as I impose upon no man my sense of the Article, but leave my
reasons and him to struggle together for the best, so neither will I be bound
to any one man, or any company of men but to my lawful Superiors, speaking
there where they can and ought to oblige. Madam, I take nothing ill from any
man, but that he should think I have a less zeal for our Church then himself,
and I will by Gods assistance be all my life confuting him; and though I will
not contend with him, yet I will die with him in behalf of the Church if God
shall call me; but for other little things and trifling arrests and little
murmurs I value none of it.

Quid verum atque decens curo, and rogo, and omnis in hoc sum;
Condo and compono quod mox depromere possim,
Nullius addictus jurare in verba Magistri:
Quo me cunque rapit tempestas deferor --
I could translate these also into bad English verse as I do the others; but
that now I am earnest for my liberty, I will not so much as confine my self to
the measures of feet. But in plain English I mean by rehearsing these latin
verses, that although I love every man, and value worthy persons in proportion
to their labors and abilities, whereby they can and do serve God and Gods
Church, yet I inquire for what is fitting, not what is pleasing; I search after
ways to advantage souls, not to comply with humors, and Sects, and
interests; and I am tied to no man's private opinion any more then he is to
mine; if he will bring Scripture and right reason from any topic, he may govern
me and persuade me, else I am free, as he is: but I hope I am before hand with
him in this question. I end with the words of Lucretius.

Desine qua propter novitate exterritus ipsa
Expuere eo animo rationem, sed magis acri
Judicio perpende, and si tibi vera videtur.
Deed manus, aut si falsa est, accingere contra.
Fear not to own what is said, because it is true,
Weigh well and wisely if the thing be true.
Truth and not conquest is the best reward;
Against falsehood only stand upon thy guard.
The End.
MADAM,
I Humbly beg you will be pleased to entertain these papers, not only as a
Testimony of my Zeal for truth and peace below, and for the Honor of God
above; but also of my readiness to seize upon every occasion whereby I may
express my self to be

Your Honors most obliged and most Humble Servant in the Religion of the H.
Jesus, Jer. Tailor.

The Stationers Postscript To the READER.
I Am not my self Ignorant, having learned it from those, whose words had in
them reason and Authority too, that the world is most benefited by those
pieces, which with greatest difficulty were gained from the modesty, or
severity, or fears of their Authors. The fruits that first drop from the tree,
are not the longest ere they rot, and the corn that lies longest in the ground,
bis quae solemn, bis frigora -- most pleases the Husbandman. I have some
confidence, the Reader, who has yet given his name to no sect, will by the
excellencies of this discourse I have now presented, be so fairly disposed to
receive my excuse, when I tell him that I publish it without the Reverend
Authors consent, that he will become rather a Patron than an Accuser of that
great ambition, he observes in me, to offer something that may instruct him,
and please him too. Because so many papers pass the Press, that deserve to
find it the place of their Burial rather than their birth, I was persuaded, my
Charity would have in it something more of merit. I intended a Benefit to the
Reader, and if my design meet with reproof in the Success, I am sure it
deserved none in its principle, for I shall not miss my aims, if his
intentions in receiving instruction be but as clear as mine were to assist him
in my meaner capacity. The Discourse in its own behalf will to the Intelligent
give sufficient assurance, that though the Authors consent be wanting, nothing
else is, that should come from him to make it entire: for I know what was
fitted for the use and made able to endure the judgment of the Honorable
person, who was the occasion of this, will with some security pass lesser
judgments. And this favor the charitable Reader will the more easily grant
me, because it will be a good advantage toward the recovering the favor of
the worthy Person, who wot the Discourse; whose displeasure I have reason to
fear, I have too far provoked by making his secrets public without his leave.
But if the intelligent Reader shall receive this little piece with the same
kindness, as the others, that were sent from the same hand, the pleading of my
own cause will put me to the less expense of words. And I know the Reverend
Author governs all his passions with such an excellent charity, and levels all
his designs of this kind to that great end of advancing piety, and holy
living, that my boldness will the more easily find pardon, because the right
understanding of this Question has a great influence upon all the parts of holy
obedience; and the discourses of this Letter, I have good authority to say, add
much to the clearness and defense of his former writings upon this Subject.
The question as it is necessary to be understood now, that it is set on foot,
so is it very difficult to all those, that first choose their interest, and
then such conclusions as are consistent with that, and frame their arguments
and premises last of all. And no man for this can charge me highly, but he
must also affirm, it is fit some things be concealed, that would free the
judgments of men from those prejudices of custom, partiality and humor, with
which Error has fortified her self in the understandings of many. The errors
of this question are so dear to one kind of men, that nothing will more
provoke their pens, then to be contradicted in this Proposition; and for the
advantage of truth and the common benefit, it was my design, that whatsoever
was needful to be said to make the truth more clear, might first get possession
of the understandings of men. Which could not, certainly, have been done if I
had delayed my hand, till I could, at that great distance from me, where he
lives, have consulted with the Author, and received returns from him. And have
no less hope, that the Honorable Person, into whose Cabinet I have too boldly
admitted the common eye, will pardon my presumption, because it is the interest
of Religion, which is so deer to every rightly instructed Christian, that they
will neither refuse for its advancement to give up their privileges, nor their
life. And when she feels the benefit of being freed from those Scruples, which
this Discourse was designed to remove, she will not conceive her light will be
made less by being common, but will be rather pleased, to have obliged, by the
emanations of a Pen so learned, all those that shall receive benefit from it.

R. Royston.
The names of some Books and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D.D.
1. (...), Course of Sermons for all the Sundays in the year, together with a
Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, and Separation of the Office
Ministerial, in fol.

2. The History of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, 2.
Edit. in fol.

7. The Rules and Exercises of holy living, in 12.

8. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12.

10. The Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fitted to the days of the
week, together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness.

11. The Doctrine and practice of Repentance rescued from Popular Errors, in a
large 8. Newly published.

The Errata.
PAge. 93. line ult its. r. it. page 13. l. 12. and bred r. and to be bred. p.
134. l. 15. r. do much more then 142. l. 17. expuere ex animo. 36l. 11. r.
taken pleasure 61. l. 1. was brought off. r. was bought-off. 85. l. 1. presence
of novelty. r the pretense of novelty. 99. l.ult. r. are not in.

An Answer to a Letter Written by the R. R.

The Ld Bp of Rochester.

Concerning The Chapter of Original Sin, In the Unum Necessarium.

By JER. TAILOR D. D.

London, Printed by E. Cotes for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1656.

An Answer to a Letter Written by the R. R. The L. Bp. of Rochester.
R. R. Father and my good Lord,
YOur Lordships Letter Dated July 28. I received not till September. 11. it seems
R. Royston detained it in his hands, supposing it could not come safely to me
while I remain a prisoner. But I now have that liberty, that I can receive any
Letters, and send any; for the Gentlemen under whose custody I am, as they are
careful of their charges, so they are civil to my person. It was necessary I
should tell this to your Lordship, that I may not be under a suspicion of
neglecting to give accounts in those particulars, which with so much prudence
and charity you were pleased to represent in your Letter concerning my
discourse of Original Sin. My Lord, in all your Exceptions, I cannot but
observe your candor and your paternal care concerning me. For when there was
nothing in the Doctrine, but your greater reason did easily see the justice and
the truth of it, and I am persuaded could have taught me to have said many more
material things in confirmation of what I have taught; yet so careful is your
charity of me, that you would not omit to represent to my consideration what
might be said by captious and weaker persons; or by the more wise and pious who
are of a different judgment.

But my Lord, first you are pleased to note that this discourse runs not in the
ordinary channel. True; for if it did, it must nurse the popular error: but
when the disease is epidemical, as it is so much the worse, so the
extraordinary remedy must be acknowledged to be the better. And if there be in
it some things hard to be understood, as it was the fate of S. Paul's Epistles
(as your Lordship notes out of S. Peter) yet this difficulty of understanding
proceeds not from the thing it self, nor from the manner of handling it, but
from the indisposition and prepossession of men's minds to the contrary, who are
angry when they are told that they have been deceived: for it is usual with
men to be more displeased, when they are told they were in error, then to be
pleased with them who offer to lead them out of it.

But your Lordship does with great advantages represent an objection of some
captious persons, which relates not to the material part of the Question, but
to the rules of art. If there be no such thing as Original Sin transmitted from
Adam to his posterity, then all that sixth chapter is a strife about a shadow,
a Non ens. A. It is true my Lord, the Question as it is usually handled, is so.
For when the Franciscan and Dominican do eternally dispute about the conception
of the Blessed Virgin, whether it was with, or without Original Sin, meaning by
way of grace and special exemption, this is de non ente; for there was no need
of any such exemption: and they supposing that commonly it was otherwise,
troubled themselves about the exception of a Rule, which in that sense which
the supposed it, was not true at all: she was born as innocent from any
impurity or formal guilt as Adam was created, and so was her Mother, and so was
all her family. * When the Lutheran and the Roman dispute, whether justice and
original righteousness in Adam was Natural or by Grace, it is de non ente: for
it was positively neither, but negatively only; he had original righteousness
till he sinned, that is, he was righteous till he became unrighteous. * When the
Calvinist troubles himself and his Parishioners with fierce declamations
against natural inclinations or concupiscence, and disputes whether it remains
in baptized persons, or whether it be taken off by Election, or by the
Sacrament, whether to all Christians or to some few; this is a (...); for it is
no sin at all in persons baptized or unbaptiz'd, till it be consented to.

My Lord, when I was a young man in Cambridge, I knew a learned professor of
Divinity, whose ordinary Lectures in the Lady Margarets Chair for many years
together, nine as I suppose, or thereabouts, were concerning Original Sin, and
the appendant questions: This indeed could not choose but be Andabatarum
conflictus. But then my discourse representing that these disputes are
useless, and, as they discourse usually, to be de non ente, is not to be
reproved. For I profess to evince that many of those things, of the sense of
which they dispute, are not true at all in any sense, I declare them to be de
non ente, that is, I untie their intricate knots by cutting them in pieces. For
when a false proposition is the ground of disputes, the process must needs be
infinite, unless you discover the first error. He that tells them they both
fight about a shadow, and with many arguments proves the vanity of their whole
process, they (if he says true) not he is the (...). * When S. Austine was
horribly puzzled about the traduction of Original Sin, and thought himself
forced to say that either the Father begat the soul, or that he could not
transmit sin which is subjected in the soul, or at least he could not tell how
it was transmitted: he had no way to be relieved but by being told that
Original Sin was not subjected in the soul, because properly and formally it
was no real sin of ours at all; but that it was only by imputation, and to
certain purposes, not any inherent quality, or corruption: and so in effect all
his trouble was de non ente. * But now some wits have lately risen in the
Church of Rome, and they tell us another story. The soul follows the
temperature of the body, and so Original Sin comes to be transmitted by
contact: because the constitution of the body is the fomes or nest of the sin,
and the souls concupiscence is derived from the bodies lust. But besides that
this fancy disappears at the first handling, and there would be so many
Original Sins as there are several constitutions, and the guilt would not be
equal, and they who are born Eunuchs should be less infected by Adam's
pollution, by having less of concupiscence in the great instance of desires,
[and after all, concupiscence it self could not be a sin in the soul, till the
body was grown up to strength enough to infect it] Besides all this, (I say)
while one does not know how Original Sin can be derived, and another who thinks
he can, names a wrong way, and both the ways infer it to be another kind of
thing then all the Schools of learning teach [and in the whole process it must
be an impossible thing, because the instrument which has all its operations by
the force of the principal agent, cannot of it self produce a great change and
violent effect upon the principal agent] does it not too clearly demonstrate,
that all that infinite variety of fancies agreeing in nothing but in an endless
uncertainty, is nothing else but a being busy about the quiddities of a dream,
and the constituent parts of a shadow? But then, My Lord, my discourse
representing all this to be vanity and uncertainty, ought not to be called or
supposed to be a (...): as he that ends the question between two Schoolmen
disputing about the place of Purgatory, by saying they need not trouble
themselves about the place; for that which is not, has no place at all; ought
not to be told he contends about a shadow, when he proves that to be true,
which he suggested to the two trifling litigants.

But as to the thing it self: I do not say there is no such thing as Original
Sin, but it is not that which it is supposed to be: it is not our sin formally,
but by imputation only; and it is imputed so, as to be an inlet to sickness,
death and disorder: but it does not introduce a necessity of sinning, nor damn
any one to the flames of Hell. So that Original Sin is not a Non ens, unless
that be nothing which infers so many real mischiefs.

The next thing your Lordship is pleased to note to me, is that in your wisdom
you foresee, some will argue against my explication of the word Damnation, in
the ninth. Article of our Church, which affirms that Original Sin deserves
damnation. Concerning which, My Lord, I do thus (and I hope fairly) acquit my
self.

1. That it having been affirmed by S. Austin that Infants dying unbaptized are
damned, he is deservedly called Durus pater Infantum, and generally forsaken by
all sober men of the later ages: and it will be an intolerable thing to think
the Church of England guilty of that which all her wiser sons, and all the
Christian Churches generally abhor. I remember that I have heard that King
James reproving a Scottish Minister, who refused to give private Baptism to a
dying Infant, being asked by the Minister, if he thought the child should be
damned for want of Baptism? answered, No, but I think you may be damned for
refusing it: and he said well. But then my Lord, If Original Sin deserves
damnation, then may Infants be damned if they die without Baptism. But if it be
a horrible affirmative, to say that the poor babes shall be made Devils, or
enter into their portion, if they want that ceremony, which is the only gate,
the only way of salvation that stands open; then the word [ Damnation] in the
9. Article must mean something less, then what we usually understand by it: or
else the Article must be salved by expounding some other word to an allay and
lessening of the horrible sentence; and particularly the word [ Deserves] of
which I shall afterward give account. Both these ways I follow. The first is
the way of the Schoolmen.

For they suppose the state of unbaptized Infants to be a poena damni; and they
are confident enough to say that this may be well supposed without inferring
their suffering the pains of hell. But this sentence of theirs I admit and
explicate with some little difference of expression. For so far I admit this
pain of loss, or rather a deficiency from going to Heaven, to be the
consequence of Adam's sin, that by it we being left in meris Naturalibus, could
never by these strengths alone have gone to Heaven. Now whereas your Lordship
in behalf of those whom you suppose may be captious, is pleased to argue. That
as loss of sight or eyes infers a state of darkness or blindness: so the loss
of Heaven infers Hell; and if Infants go not to heaven in that state, whither
can they go but to hell? and that is Damnation in the greatest sense. I grant
it, that if in the event of things they do not go to Heaven (as things are now
ordered) it is but too likely that they go to Hell: but I add, that as all
darkness does not infer horror and distraction of mind, or fearful apparitions
and phantasms: so neither does all Hell, or states in Hell infer all those
torments which the Schoolmen signify by a poena sensus (for I speak now in
pursuance of their way). So that there is no necessity of a third place; but it
concludes only that in the state of separation from Gods presence there is a
great variety of degrees and kinds of evil, and every one is not the extreme:
and yet by the way, let me observe, that Gregory Nazianzen and Nicetas taught
that there is a third place for Infants and Heathens: and Irenaeus affirmed
that the evils of Hell were not eternal to all, but to the Devils only and the
greater criminals. But neither they nor we, nor any man else can tell whether
Hell be a place or no. It is a state of evil; but whether all the damned be in
one or in twenty places, we cannot tell.

But I have no need to make use of any of this. For when I affirm that Infants
being by Adam reduced and left to their mere natural state, fall short of
Heaven; I do not say they cannot go to Heaven at all, but they cannot go
thither by their natural powers, they cannot without a new grace and favor go
to heaven. But then it cannot presently be inferred, that therefore they go to
hell; but this ought to be inferred, which indeed was the real consequent of it;
therefore it is necessary that Gods Grace should supply this defect, if God
intends Heaven to them at all; and because Nature cannot, God sent a Savior by
whom it was effected. But if it be asked, what if this grace had not come? and
that it be said, that without Gods grace they must have gone to Hell, because
without it they could not go to Heaven? I answer, That we know how it is, now
that God in his goodness has made provisions for them: but if he had not made
such provisions, what would have been we know not, any more then we know what
would have followed, if Adam had not sinned; where he should have lived, and
how long, and in what circumstances the posterity should have been provided for
in all their possible contingencies. But yet, this I know, that it follows
not, that if without this Grace we could not have gone to Heaven, that
therefore we must have gone to Hell. For although the first was ordinarily
impossible, yet the second was absolutely unjust, and against Gods goodness,
and therefore more impossible. But because the first could not be done by
nature, God was pleased to promise and to give his grace, that he might bring
us to that state whither he had designed us, that is, to a supernatural
felicity. If Adam had not fallen, yet Heaven had not been a natural consequent
of his obedience, but a Gracious, it had been a gift still: and of Adam though
he had persisted in innocence, it is true to say, that without Gods Grace, that
is, by the mere force of Nature, he could never have arrived to a Supernatural
state, that is, to the joys of Heaven; and yet it does not follow, that if he
had remained in Innocence, he must have gone to Hell. Just so it is in Infants,
Hell was not made for man, but for Devils; and therefore it must be something
besides mere Nature that can bear any man thither: mere Nature goes neither to
Heaven nor Hell. So that when I say Infants naturally cannot go to Heaven, and
that this is a punishment of Adam's sin, he being for it punished with a loss
of his gracious condition, and devolved to the state of Nature, and we by him
left so; my meaning is, that this Damnation which is of our Nature, is but
negative, that is, as a consequent of our Patriarchs sin, our Nature is left
imperfect and deficient in order to a supernatural end, which the Schoolmen
call a poena damni, but improperly: they indeed think it may be a real event,
and final condition of persons as well as things: but I affirm it was an evil
effect of Adam's sin: but in the event of things it became to the persons the
way to a new grace, and has no other event as to Heaven and Hell directly and
immediately. In the same sense and to the same purpose I understand the word
Damnation in the 9. Article.

But the word [Damnation] may very well, truly, and sufficiently signify all
the purposes of the Article, if it be taken only for the effect of that
sentence which was inflicted upon Adam, and descended on his posterity, that
is, for condemnation to Death, and the evils of mortality. So the word is used
by S. Paul 1 Cor. 11. 29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks Damnation to himself. (...) is the word, but that it did particularly
signify temporal death and evils, appears by the instances of probation in the
next words, For, for this cause some are weak amongst you, some are sick, and
some are fallen asleep. This also in the Article. Original Sin deserves
damnation, that is, it justly brought in the angry sentence of God upon Man, it
brought him to death, and deserved it: it brought it upon us, and deserved it
too. I do not say that we by that sin deserved that death, neither can death be
properly a punishment of us till we superadde some evil of our own; yet Adam's
sin deserved it so, that it was justly left to fall upon us, we as a consequent
and punishment of his sin being reduced to our natural portion. In odiesis quod
minimum est sequimur. The lesser sense of the word is certainly agreeable to
truth and reason: and it were good we used the word in that sense which may
best warrant her doctrine, especially for that use of the word, having the
precedent of Scripture.

I am confirmed in this interpretation by the 2.. of the Article: viz. of the
remanency of concupiscence or Original Sin in the Regenerate. All the
sinfulness of Original Sin is the lust or concupiscence, that is, the proneness
to sin. Now then I demand, whether Concupiscence before actual consent be a sin
or no? and if it be a sin, whether it deserves damnation? That all sin deserves
damnation, I am sure our Church denies not. If therefore concupiscence before
consent be a sin, then this also deserves damnation where ever it is: and if
so, then a man may be damned for Original Sin even after Baptism. For even
after Baptism, concupiscence (or the sinfulness of Original Sin) remains in the
regenerate: and that which is the same thing, the same vitiousness, the same
enmity to God after Baptism, is as damnable, it deserves damnation as much as
that did that went before. If it be replied, that Baptism takes off the guilt
or formal part of it, but leaves the material part behind, that is, though
concupiscence remains, yet it shall not bring damnation to the regenerate or
Baptized. I answer, that though baptismal regeneration puts a man into a state
of grace and favor, so that what went before shall not be imputed to him
afterward, that is, Adam's sin shall not bring damnation (in any sense) yet it
hinders not, but that what is sinful afterward shall be then imputed to him,
that is, he may be damned for his own concupiscence. He is quitted from it as
it came from Adam; but by Baptism he is not quitted from it, as it is subjected
in himself, if (I say) concupiscence before consent be a sin. If it be no sin,
then for it, Infants unbaptized cannot with justice be damned; it does not
deserve damnation: but if it be a sin, then so long as it is there, so long it
deserves damnation; and Baptism did only quit the relation of it to Adam (for
that was all that went before it) but not the danger of the man. *But because
the Article supposes that it does not damn the regenerate or baptized, and yet
that it has the nature of sin, it follows evidently and undeniably, that both
the phrases are to be diminished and understood in a favorable sense. As the
phrase [the Nature of sin] signifies; so does [Damnation] but [the Nature of
sin] signifies something that brings no guilt, because it is affirmed to be in
the Regenerate, therefore [Damnation] signifies something that brings no Hell:
but [to deserve Damnation] must mean something less then ordinary, that is,
that concupiscence is a thing not morally good, not to be allowed of, not to be
nursed, but mortified, fought against, disapproved, condemned and disallowed of
men as it is of God.

And truly My Lord, to say that for Adam's sin it is just in God to condemn
Infants to the eternal flames of Hell: and to say, that concupiscence or
natural inclinations before they pass into any act, could bring eternal
condemnation from Gods presence into the eternal portion of Devils, are two
such horrid propositions, that if any Church in the world would expressly affirm
them, I for my part should think it unlawful to communicate with her in the
defense or profession of either, and do think it would be the greatest
temptation in the world to make men not to love God, of whom men so easily
speak such horrid things. I would suppose the Article to mean any thing rather
then either of these. But yet one thing more I have to say.

The Article is certainly to be expounded according to the analogy of faith,
and the express words of Scripture, if there be any that speak expressly in this
matter. Now whereas the Article explicating Original Sin affirms it to be that
fault or corruption of man's nature ( vitium Naturae, not peccatum) by which he
is far gone from original righteousness, and is inclined to evil: because this
is not full enough, the Article adds by way of explanation [ So that the flesh
lusts against the spirit] that is, it really produces a state of evil
temptations: it lusts, that is, actually and habitually; [it lusts against
the spirit, and therefore deserves Gods wrath and damnation] So the Article:
Therefore; for no other reason but because the flesh lusts against the
spirit; not because it can lust, or is apta nata to lust, but because it
lusts actually, therefore it deserves damnation: and this is Original Sin: or
as the Article expresses it, it has the nature of sin; it is the fomes, or
matter of sin, and is in the original of mankind, and derived from Adam as our
body is, but it deserves not damnation in the highest sense of the word, till
the concupiscence be actual. Till then, the words of [Wrath and Damnation] must
be meant in the less and more easy signfication, according to the former
explication: and must only relate to the personal sin of Adam. To this sense of
the Article I heartily subscribe. For besides the reasonableness of the thing,
and the very manner of speaking used in the Article; it is the very same way of
speaking, and exactly the same doctrine which we find in S. James, (Jam. 1.
14.) (...): Concupiscence, when it is impregnated, when it has conceived, then
it brings forth sin: and sin when it is in production, and birth, brings forth
death. But in Infants, concupiscence is innocent and a virgin, it conceives
not, and therefore is without sin, and therefore without death or damnation. *
Against these expositions I cannot imagine what can be really and materially
objected.

But my Lord, I perceive the main outcry is like to be upon the authority of
the Harmony of Confessions. Concerning which I shall say this, that in this
Article the Harmony makes as good music as bells ringing backward; and they
agree, especially when they come to be explicated and untwisted into their
minute and explicit meanings, as much as Lutheran and Calvinist, as Papist and
Protestant, as Thomas and Scotus, as Remonstrant and Dordrechtan, that is, as
much as pro and con, or but a very little more. I have not the book with me
here in prison, and this neighborhood cannot supply me, and I dare not trust
my memory to give a scheme of it: but your Lordship knows that in nothing more
do the reformed Churches disagree, then in this and its appendages; and you are
pleased to hint something of it, by saying that some speak more of this then
the Church of England: and Andrew Rivet, though unwillingly, yet confesses, de
Confessionibus nostris and earum syntagmate vel Harmonia, etiamsi in non nullis
capitibus non plane conveniant, dicam tamen, melius in concordiam redigi posse
quam in Ecclesia Romana concordantiam discordantium Canonum, quo titulo
decretum Gratiani, quod Canonistis regulas praefigit, solet insigniri. And what
he affirms of the whole collection, is most notorious in the Article of
Original Sin. For my own part I am ready to subscribe the first Helvetian
confession, but not the second. So much difference there is in the confessions
of the same Church.

Now whereas your Lordship adds, that though they are fallible, yet when they
bring evidence of holy Writ, their assertions are infallible, and not to be
contradicted: I am bound to reply, that when they do so, whether they be
infallible or no, I will believe them, because then though they might, yet they
are not deceived. But as evidence of holy Writ had been sufficient without
their authority: so without such evidence their authority is nothing. But then,
My Lord, their citing and urging the words of S. Paul, Romans 5. 12. is so far
from being an evident probation of their Article, that nothing is to me a surer
argument of their fallibility, then the urging of that which evidently makes
nothing for them, but much against them: As 1. Affirming expressly that death
was the event of Adam's sin; the whole event, for it names no other; temporal
death; according to that saying of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. In Adam we all die. And
2. Affirming this process of death to be (...), which is and ought to be taken
to be the allay or condition of the condemnation. It became a punishment to
them only who did sin; but upon them also inflicted for Adam's sake.

A like expression to which is in the Psalms, Psalm. 106. 32, 33. They angered
him also at the waters of strife, so that he punished Moses for their sakes.
Here was plainly a traduction of evil from the Nation to Moses their relative:
For their sakes he was punished, but yet (...) for as much as Moses had sinned:
for so it follows, because they provoked his spirit, so that he spoke
unadvisedly with his lips. So it is between Adam and us. He sinned and God was
highly displeased. This displeasure went further then upon Adam's sin: for
though that only was threatened with death, yet the sins of his children which
were not so threatened, became so punished, and they were by nature heirs of
wrath and damnation; that is, for his sake our sins inherited his curse. The
curse that was specially and only threatened to him, we when we sinned did
inherit for his sake. So that it is not so properly to be called, Original Sin,
as an original curse upon our sin.

To this purpose we have also another example of God transmitting the curse
from one to another: Both were sinners, but one was the original of the curse
or punishment. So said the Prophet to the wife of Jeroboam, 1 King. 14. 16. [
He shall give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sin, and who
made Israel to sin] Jereboam was the root of the sin and of the curse. Here it
was also (that I may use the words of the Apostle) that by the sin of one man
[Jeroboam] sin went out into all [Israel] and the curse, captivity, or death by
sin, and so death went upon all men [of Israel] (...) in as much as all men [of
Israel] have sinned. If these men had not sinned, they had not been punished: I
cannot say they had not been afflicted; for David's child was smitten for his
fathers fault: but though they did sin, yet unless their root and principal had
sinned, possibly they should not have so been punished: For his sake the
punishment came. Upon the same account it may be, that we may inherit the
damnation or curse for Adam's sake, though we deserve it; yet it being
transmitted from Adam and not particularly threatened to the first posterity, we
were his heirs, the heirs of death, deriving from him an original curse, but
due also (if God so pleased) to our sins. And this is the full sense of the 12.
verse, and the effect of the phrase (...) (...).

But your Lordship is pleased to object that though (...) does once signify
[For as much as] yet three times it signifies in or by. To this I would be
content to submit, if the observation could be verified, and be material when
it were true. But besides that it is so used in 2 Cor. 5. 4. your Lordship may
please to see it used (as not only my self, but indeed most men, and
particularly the Church of England does read it and expound it) in Mat. 26. 50.
And yet if (...) were written (...), which is the same with in or by, if it be
rendered word for word, yet (...) twice in the Scripture signifies [for as much
as] as you may read Romans 8. 3. and Heb. 2. 18. So that here are two places
besides this in question, and two more ex abundanti to show, that if it were
not (...), but said in words expressly as you would have it in the meaning, yet
even so neither the thing, nor any part of the thing could be evicted against
me: and lastly, if it were not only said (...) but that that sense of it were
admitted which is desired, and that it did mean in or by in this very place:
yet the Question were not at all the nearer to be concluded against me. For I
grant that it is true [ in him we are all sinners] as it is true that [ in him
we all die] that is, for his sake we are used as sinners; being miserable
really, but sinners in account and effect: as I have largely discoursed in my
book. But then for the place here in question, it is so certain that it
signifies the same thing (as our Church reads it) that it is not sense without
it, but a violent breach of the period without precedent or reason. And after
all; I have looked upon those places where (...) is said to signify in or by,
and in one of them I find it so, Mar. 2. 4. but in Act. 3. 16. and Phil. 1. 3.
I find it not at all in any sense: but (...) indeed is used for in or by, in
that of the Acts; and in the other it signifies, at or upon; but if all were
granted that is pretended to, it no way prejudices my cause, as I have already
proved.

Next to these your Lordship seems a little more zealous and decretory in the
Question upon the confidence of the 17, 18, and 19. verses of the 5. chapter to
the Romans. The sum of which as your Lordship most ingeniously sums it up, is
this. As by one many were made sinners: so by one many were made righteous,
that by Adam, this by Christ. But by Christ we are made (...) just, not by
imputation only, but effectively and to real purposes; therefore by Adam we are
really made sinners. And this your Lordship confirms by the observation of the
sense of two words here used by the Apostle, The first is (...), which
signifies a sentence of guilt, or punishment for sin, and this sin to be theirs
upon whom the condemnation comes, because God punishes none but for their own
sin, Ezekiel. 18. 2. From the word (...) clear from sin, so your Lordship renders
it: and in opposition to this, (...) is to be rendered, that is, guilty,
criminal persons, really and properly. This is all which the wit of man can say
from this place of S. Paul, and if I make it appear that this is invalid, I
hope I am secure.

To this then, I answer: That the Antithesis in these words here urged, (for
there is another in the chapter) and this whole argument of S. Paul is full and
entire without descending to minutes. Death came in by one man, much more shall
life come by one man; if that by Adam, then much more this by Christ: by him to
condemnation, by this man to justification. This is enough to verify the
argument of S. Paul, though life and death did not come in the same manner to
the several relatives; as indeed they did not: of which afterward. But for the
present: It runs thus. By Adam we were made sinners; by Christ we are made
righteous: As certainly one as the other, though not in the same manner of
dispensation. By Adam (...) death reigned; by this man the reign of death shall
be destroyed, and life set up in stead of it; by him we were used as sinners,
for in him we died: but by Christ we are justified, that is, used as just
persons, for by him we live. This is sufficient for the Apostles argument, and
yet no necessity to affirm that we are sinners in Adam any more then by
imputation: for we are by Christ made just no otherwise then by imputation.

In the proof or persuasion I will use no indirect arguments, as to say, that
to deny us to be just by imputation is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome and
of the Socinian Conventicles, but expressly disliked by all the Lutheran,
Calvinist, and Zuinglian Churches, and particularly by the Church of England,
and indeed by the whole Harmony of Confessions: this I say, I will not make use
of; not only because I my self do not love to be pressed by such prejudices
rather then arguments; but because the question of the imputation of
righteousness is very much mistaken and misunderstood on all hands. They that
say that Christ's righteousness is imputed to us for justification, do it upon
this account, because they know all that we do is imperfect, therefore they
think themselves constrained to fly to Christ's righteousness, and think it
must be imputed to us, or we perish. The other side, considering that this way
would destroy the necessity of holy living; and that in order to our
justification, there were conditions required on our parts, think it necessary
to say that we are justified by inherent righteousness. Between these the truth
is plain enough to be read. Thus:

Christ's righteousness is not imputed to us for justification directly and
immediately; neither can we be justified by our own righteousness: but our
Faith and sincere endeavors are through Christ accepted in stead of legal
righteousness: that is; we are justified through Christ, by imputation, not of
Christ's, nor our own righteousness: but of our faith and endeavors of
righteousness as if they were perfect: and we are justified by a
Non-imputation, viz. of our past sins, and present unavoidable imperfections:
that is, we are handled as if we were just persons and no sinners. So faith was
imputed to Abraham for righteousness; not that it made him so, legally, but
Evangelically, that is, by grace and imputation.

And indeed My Lord, that I may speak freely in this great question: when one
man has sinned, his descendents and relatives, cannot possibly by him, or for
him, or in him be made sinners properly and really. For in sin there are but
two things imaginable: the irregular action; and the guilt, or obligation to
punishment. Now we cannot in any sense be said to have done the action which
another did, and not we: the action is as individual as the person; and Titius
may as well be Cajus, and the Son be his own Father, as he can be said to have
done the Fathers action; and therefore we cannot possibly be guilty of it: for
guilt is an obligation to punishment for having done it: the action and the
guilt are relatives; one cannot be without the other: something must be done
inwardly or outwardly, or there can be no guilt. * But then for the evil of
punishment, that may pass further then the action. If it passes upon the
innocent, it is not a punishment to them; but an evil inflicted by right of
Dominion; but yet by reason of the relation of the afflicted to him that sinned,
to him it is a punishment. But if it passes upon others that are not innocent,
then it is a punishment to both; to the first principally; to the Descendents
or Relatives, for the others sake; his sin being imputed so far.

How far that is in the present case, and what it is, the Apostle expresses
thus: It was (...), verse. 18. or (...); verse. 16. a curse unto condemnation, or
a judgment unto condemnation, that is, a curse inherited from the principal;
deserved by him, and yet also actually descending upon us after we had sinned,
(...) or (...); that is the judgment passed upon Adam; the (...), or (...) was
on him; but it proved to be a (...), or a through condemnation when from him it
passed upon all men that sinned. (...) and (...) sometimes differ in degrees: so
the words are used by S. Paul otherwhere (1 Cor. 11. 32.) (...); a judgment to
prevent a punishment, or a less to forestal a greater in the same kind: so
here the (...) passed further; the (...) was fulfilled in his posterity passing
on further, viz. that all who sinned should pass under the power of death as
well as he: but this became formally and actually a punishment to them only who
did sin personally: to them it was (...).

This (...) or (...), is the (...) (...), verse. 17. the reign of death; this is
called (...) (...), verse. 21. the reign of sin in death: that is, the effect
which Adam's sin had, was only to bring in the reign of death, which is already
broken by Jesus Christ, and at last shall be quite destroyed. But to say that
sin here is properly transmitted to us from Adam, formally, and so as to be
inherent in us, is to say that we were made to do his action, which is a
perfect contradiction.

Now then your Lordship sees that what you note of the meaning of (...) I
admit, and is indeed true enough, and agreeable to the discourse of the
Apostle, and very much in justification of what I taught. (...)signifies a
punishment for sin, and this sin to be theirs upon whom the condemnation comes.
I easily subscribe to it: but then take in the words of S. Paul, (...) (...),
by one sin, or by the sin of one the curse passed upon all men unto
condemnation; that is, the curse descended from Adam; for his sake it was
propagated (...) to a real condemnation, viz. when they should sin. For though
this (...) or the curse of death was threatened only to Adam, yet upon Gods
being angry with him, God resolved it should descend: and if men did sin as
Adam, or if they did sin at all, though less then Adam, yet the (...) or the
curse threatened to him should pass (...) unto the same actual condemnation
which fell upon him, that is, it should actually bring them under the reign of
death.

But then my Lord, I beseech you let it be considered, if this (...) must
suppose a punishment for sin, for the sin of him, his own sin that is so
condemned, as your Lordship proves perfectly out of Ezekiel. 18. how can it be
just that the (...) condemnation should pass upon us for Adam's sin, that is,
not for his own sin who is so condemned, but for the sin of another? S. Paul
easily resolves the doubt, if there had been any. The (...), the reign of death
passed upon all men (...) in as much as all men have sinned. And now why shall
we suppose that we must be guilty of what we did not, when without any such
(...) there is so much guilt of what we did really and personally? why shall it
be that we die only for Adam's sin, and not rather as S. Paul expressly affirms
(...) (...) in as much as all men have sinned, since by your own argument it
cannot be in as much as all men have not sinned; this you say cannot be, and
yet you will not confess this which can be, and which S. Paul affirms to have
been indeed: as if it were not more just and reasonable to say, that from Adam
the curse descended unto the condemnation of the sins of the world, then to say
the curse descended without consideration of their sins; but a sin must be
imagined to make it seem reasonable and just to condemn us. [Now I submit it to
the judgment of all the world, which way of arguing is most reasonable and
concluding: You my Lord in behalf of others argue thus. (...) or condemnation
cannot pass upon a man for any sin but his own: Therefore every man is truly
guilty of Adam's sin, and that becomes his own. Against this I oppose mine.
(...) or condemnation cannot pass upon a man for any sin but his own: therefore
it did not pass upon man for Adam's sin; because Adam's sin, was Adam's, not
our own: But we all have sinned, we have sins of our own, therefore for these
the curse passed from Adam to us. To back mine, besides that common notices of
sense and reason defend it, I have the plain words of S. Paul; Death passed
upon all men, for as much as all men have sinned; all men, that is, the
generality of mankind, all that lived till they could sin, the others that
died before, died in their nature, not in their sin, neither Adam's nor their
own, save only that Adam brought it in upon them, or rather left it to them,
himself being disrobed of all that which could hinder it.

Now for the word (...), which your Lordship renders [clear from sin] I am sure
no man is so justified in this world, as to be clear from sin; and if we all be
sinners, and yet healed as just persons, it is certain we are just by
imputation only, that is, Christ imputing our faith, and sincere, though not
unerring obedience to us for righteousness: And then the Antithesis must hold
thus; By Christ comes justification to life, as by Adam came the curse or the
sin to the condemnation of death: But our justification which comes by Christ
is by imputation and acceptilation, by grace and favor: not that we are made
really, that is, legally and perfectly righteous, but by imputation of faith
and obedience to us, as if it were perfect: And therefore Adam's sin was but by
imputation only to certain purposes; not real, or proper, not formal or
inherent. For the grace by Christ is more then the sin by Adam: if therefore
that was not legal and proper, but Evangelical and gracious, favorable and
imputative, much more is the sin of Adam in us improperly, and by imputation. *
And truly my Lord, I think that no sound Divine of any of our Churches will say
that we are (...) or (...) in any other sense: not that Christ's righteousness
is imputed to us without any inherent graces in us, but that our imperfect
services, our true faith and sincere endeavors of obedience are imputed to us
for righteousness through Jesus Christ: and since it is certainly so, I am sure
the Antithesis between Christ and Adam can never be salved by making us sinners
really by Adam, and yet just or righteous by Christ only in acceptance and
imputation. For then sin should abound more then grace; expressly against the
honor of our blessed Savior, the glory of our redemption, and the words of S.
Paul. But rather on the contrary is it true, That though by Christ we were
really and legally made perfectly righteous, it follows not that we were made
sinners by Adam in the same manner and measure: for this similitude of S. Paul
ought not to extend to an equality in all things; but still the advantage and
prerogative, the abundance and the excess must be on the part of Grace: for if
sin does abound, grace does much more abound; and we do more partake of
righteousness by Christ, then of sin by Adam. Christ and Adam are the several
fountains of emanation, and are compared aeque, but not aequaliter. Therefore
this argument holds redundantly, since by Christ we are not made legally
righteous, but by imputation only; much less are we made sinners by Adam. This
in my sense is so infinitely far from being an objection, that it perfectly
demonstrates the main question; and for my part I mean to rely upon it.

As for that which your Lordship adds out of Romans 5. 19. That (...) signifies
sinners, not by imitation, as the Pelagians dream, but sinners really and
effectively; I shall not need to make any other reply; but that 1. I do not
approve of that gloss of the Pelagians, that in Adam we are made sinners by
imitation; and much less of that which affirms, we are made so properly and
formally. But [made sinners] signifies, used like sinners; so as [justified]
signifies healed like just persons: In which interpretation I follow S. Paul,
not the Pelagians; they who are on the other side of the question, follow
neither. And unless men take in their opinion before they read; and resolve not
to understand S. Paul in this Epistle, I wonder why they should fancy that all
that he says sounds that way which they commonly dream of: But as men fancy,
so the Bells will ring. But I know your Lordships grave and wiser judgment,
sees not only this that I have now opened, but much beyond it, and that you
will be a zealous advocate for the truth of God, and for the honor of his
justice, wisdom and mercy.

That which follows, makes me believe your Lordship resolved to try me, by
speaking your own sense in the line, and your temptation in the interline. For
when your Lordship had said that [My arguments for the vindication of Gods
goodness and justice are sound and holy] your hand run it over again and added
[as abstracted from the case of Original Sin.] But why should this be
abstracted from all the whole Economy of God, from all his other
dispensations? Is it in all cases of the world unjust for God, to impute our
fathers fins to us unto eternal condemnation; and is it otherwise in this only?
Certainly a man would think this were the more favorable case; as being a
single act, done but once, repented of after it was done, not consented to by
the parties interested, not stipulated by God that it should be so, and being
against all laws and all the reason of the world: therefore it were but reason
that if any where, here much rather Gods justice and goodness should be relied
upon as the measure of the event. * And if in other cases laws be never given
to Idiots and Infants and persons incapable, why should they be given here? but
if they were not capable of a Law, then neither could they be of Sin; for where
there is no law, there is no transgression. And is it unjust to condemn one man
to hell for all the sin of a thousand of his Ancestors actually done by them?
and shall it be accounted just to damn all the world for one sin of one man?
But if it be said, that it is unjust to damn the innocent for the sin of
another; but the world is not innocent, but really guilty in Adam. Besides that
this is a begging of the question, it is also against common sense, to say that
a man is not innocent of that which was done before he had a being; for if that
be not sufficient, then it is impossible for a man to be innocent. And if this
way of answer be admitted, any man may be damned for the sin of any Father;
because it may be said here as well as there, that although the innocent must
not perish for another fault, yet the son is not innocent as being in his
fathers loins when the fault was committed, and the law calls him and makes him
guilty. And if it were so indeed, this were so far from being an excuse, to say
that the Law makes him guilty, that this were absolute tyranny, and the thing
that were to be complained of.

I hope, by this time your Lordship perceives, that I have no reason to fear
that I praevaricate S. Paul's rule: (...) (...). I only endeavor to understand
S. Paul's words, and I read them (...), in proportion to, and so as they may
not entrench upon the reputation of Gods goodness and justice: that is (...), to
be wise unto sobriety. But they that do so (...) as to resolve it to be so
whether God be honored in it, or dishonored, and to answer all arguments,
whether they can or cannot be answered, and to efform all their Theology to the
air of that one great proposition, and to find out ways for God to proceed
in, which he has never told of, (...) ways that are crooked and not to be
insisted in, ways that are not right, if these men do not (...), then I hope I
shall have less need to fear that I do, who do none of these things.

And in proportion to my security here, I am confident that I am unconcerned in
the consequent threatening. If any man shall Evangelize, (...) any other
doctrine then what ye have received, something for Gospel which is not Gospel,
something that ye have not received, let him be accursed. My Lord, if what I
teach were not that which we have received, that God is just and righteous and
true: that the soul that sins the same shall die: that we shall have no cause
to say, The Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on
edge: that God is a gracious Father, pardoning iniquity, and therefore not
exacting it where it is not: that Infants are from their Mothers wombs beloved
of God their Father: that of such is the Kingdom of God: that he pities those
souls who cannot discern the right hand from the left, as he declared in the
case of the Ninevites: that to Infants there are special Angels appointed who
always behold the face of God: that Christ took them in his arms and blessed
them, and therefore they are not hated by God, and accursed heirs of Hell, and
coheirs with Satan: that the Messiah was promised before any children were
born; as certainly as that Adam sinned before they were born: that if sin
abounds, grace does superabound; and therefore children are with greater effect
involved in the grace then they could be in the sin: and the sin must be gone
before it could do them mischief: if this were not the doctrine of both
Testaments, and if the contrary were, then the threatening of S. Paul might well
be held up against me: but else my Lord, to show such a Scorpion to him that
speaks the truth of God in sincerity and humility, though it cannot make me to
betray the truth and the honor of God, yet the very fear and affrightment
which must needs seize upon every good man that does but behold it, or hear the
words of that angry voice, shall and has made me to pray not only that my self
be preserved in truth, but that it would please God to bring into the way of
truth all such as have erred and are deceived.

My Lord, I humbly thank your Lordship for your grave and pious Council, and
kiss the hand that reaches forth so paternal a rod. I see you are tender both
of truth and me: and though I have not made this tedious reply to cause trouble
to your Lordship, or to steal from you any part of your precious time, yet
because I see your Lordship was persuaded induere personam, to give some little
countenance to a popular error out of jealousy against a less usual truth, I
thought it my duty to represent to your Lordship such things, by which as I
can, so I ought to be defended against captious objectors. It is hard when men
will not be patient of truth, because another man offers it to them, and they
did not first take it in, or if they did, were not pleased to own it.

But from your Lordship I expect, and am sure to find the effects of your
piety, wisdom and learning, and that an error for being popular shall not
prevail against so necessary, though unobserved truth. A necessary truth I call
it; because without this I do not understand how we can declare Gods
righteousness and justify him, with whom unrighteousness cannot dwell: But if
men of a contrary opinion, can reconcile their usual doctrines of Original Sin
with Gods justice, and goodness and truth, I shall be well pleased with it, and
think better of their doctrine then now I can.

But until that be done, it were well (My Lord) if men would not trouble
themselves or the Church with impertinent contradictions; but patiently give
leave to have truth advanced, and God justified in his sayings and in his
judgments, and the Church improved, and all errors confuted, that what did so
prosperously begin the Reformation, may be admitted to bring it to perfection,
that men may no longer go qua itur, but qua eundum est.

The Bp of Rochester's Letter to Dr. Tailor, with an account of the particulars
there given in charge.
WORTHY SIR,
-- Let me request you to weigh that of S. Paul, Ephesians. 2. 5. which are urged
by some Ancients: and to remember, how often he calls Concupiscence Sin; whereby
it is urged that although Baptism take away the guilt as concretively
redounding to the person, yet the simple abstracted guilt, as to the Nature
remains: for Sacraments are administered to Persons, not to Natures. I confess,
I find not the Fathers so fully, and plainly speaking of Original Sin, till
Pelagius had pudled the stream: but, after this, you may find S. Jerome in Hos.
saying, In paradiso omnes praevaricati sunt in Adamo. And S. Ambrose in Romans 1.
5. Manifestum est omnes peccasse in Adam, quasi in massa, ex eo igitur cuncti
peccatores, quiae ex eo sumus omnes; and as Greg. 39 Hom. in Ezekiel. Sine culpa
in mundo esse non potest, qui in mundum cum culpa venit; But S. Austin is so
frequent, so full and clear in his assertions, that his words and reasons will
require your most judicious examinations, and more strict weighing of them; he
says epist: 107. Scimus secundum Adam nos prima nativitate contagium mortis
contrahere; nec liberamur a supplicio mortis aeternae nisi per gratiam
renascamur in Christo; Id. de verb. Apost. Ser, 4. peccatum a primo homine in
omnes homines pertransiit, etenim illud peccatum non in font mansit, sed
pertransiit, and Romans 5. ubi te invenit? venundatum sub peccato, trahentem
peccatum primi hominis, habentem peccatum antequam possis habere arbitrium. Id.
de praedestin. and great. c. 2. Si infans unius diei non sit sine peccato, qui
proprium habere non potuit, conficitur, at illud traxerit alienum; de quo
Apost. Per unum hominem peccatum intravit in mundum; quod qui negat, negat
profecto nos esse mortales; quoniam mors est poena peccati. Sequitur, necesse
est, poena peccatum. Id. enchir. c. 9. 29. Sola gratia redemptos discernit a
perditis, quos in unam perditionis massam concreverat ab origin ducta communis
contagio, Id. de peccator, mer. and remiss. l. 1. c. 3. Concupiscentia carnis
peccatum est, quia inest illi inobedientia contra dominatum mentis, Quid
potest, aut potuit nasci ex servo, nisi servus? ideo sicut omnis homo ab Adamo
est, ita and omnis homo per Adamum servus est peccati. Romans 5. Falluntur ergo
omnino, qui dicunt mortem solam, non and ^peccatum transiisse in genus.
humanum. Prosper. resp. ad articulum Augustino falso impositum; Omnes homines
praevaricationis reos, and damnationi obnexios nasci periturosque nisi in
Christo renascamur, asserimus. Tho. 12. q. 8. Secundum fidem Catholicam
tenendum est, quod primum peccatum primi hominis, originaliter transit in
posteros, propter quod etiam pueri mox nati deferuntur ad baptismum ab
interiore culpa abluendi. Contrarium est haeresis Pelag. unde peccatum quod sic
a primo parente derivatur, dicicitur Originale, sicut peccatum, quod ab anima
derivatur ad membra corporis, dicitur actuale. Bonavent. in 2. sent. did. 31.
Sicut peccatum actuale tribuitur alicui ratione singularis personae: it a
peccatum originale tribuitur ratione Naturae; corpus infectum traducitur, quia
persona Adae infecit naturam, and natura infecit personam. Anima enim inficitur
a carne per colligantiam, quum unita carni traxit ad se alterius proprietates.
Lombar. 2. Sent. did. 31. Peccatum originale per corruptionem carnis, in anima
fit: in vase enim dignoscitur vitium esse, quod vinum accescit.

If you take into consideration the Covenant made between Almighty God and Adam
as relating to his posterity, it may conduce to the satisfaction of those who
urge it for a proof of Original Sin. Now that the work may prosper under your
hands to the manifestation of Gods glory, the edification of the Church, and
the satisfaction of all good Christians, is the hearty prayer of

Your fellow Servant in our most Blessed Lord Christ Jesu.
Jo. Roffens.

My Lord,
I Perceive that you have a great Charity to every one of the sons of the
Church, that your Lordship refuses not to solicit their objections, and to
take care that every man be answered that can make objections against my
Doctrine; but as your charity makes you refuse no work or labor of love: so
shall my duty and obedience make me ready to perform any commandment that can
be relative to so excellent a principle.

I am indeed sorry your Lordship is thus haunted with objections about the
Question of Original Sin; but because you are pleased to hand them to me, I
cannot think them so inconsiderable as in themselves they seem; for what your
Lordship thinks worthy the reporting from others, I must think are fit to be
answered and returned by me.

In your Lordships of Nevember, 10. these things I am to reply to:

Let me request you to weigh that of S. Paul Ephesians. 2. 5. The words are these [
Even when we were dead in sins, (God) has quickened us together with Christ]
which words I do not at all suppose relate to the matter of Original Sin, but
to the state of Heathen sins, habitual Idolatries and impurities; in which the
world was dead before the great Reformation by Christ. And I do not know any
Expositor of note that suspects any other sense of it; and the second verse of
that chapter makes it so certain and plain, that it is too visible to insist
upon it longer. But your Lordship adds further.

And to remember how often he calls concupiscence Sin] I know S. Paul reckons
Concupiscence to be one of the works of the flesh, and consequently such as
excludes from heaven, Col. 3. 5. Evil concupiscence] concupiscence with
something superadded, but certainly that is nothing that is natural; for God
made nothing that is evil, and whatsoever is natural and necessary cannot be
mortified; but this may and must, and the Apostle calls upon us to do it; but
that this is a superinducing, and an actual or habitual lusting appears by the
following words, verse. 7. in which ye also walked sometimes when ye lived in
them, such a concupiscence as that which is the effect of habitual sins or an
estate of sins, of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 7. 8. Sin taking occasion by
the commandment wrought in me all manner of concupiscence; that is, so great a
state of evil, such strong inclinations and desires to sin, that I grew as
captive under it; it introduced a necessity like those in S. Peter, who had
eyes (...) full of an Adulteress: the women had possessed their eyes, and
therefore they were (...) (...) they could not cease from sin: because having
(...) all concupiscence, that is the very spirit of sinful desires, they could
relish nothing but the productions of sin, they could fancy nothing but
Colloquintida and Toadstools of the earth. * Once more I find S. Paul speaking
of Concupiscence, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. Let every man knew to possess his vessel in
holiness and honor, not in the lust of concupiscence, as do the Gentiles which
know not God. In the lust of Concupiscence, that is plainly in lustfulness and
impurity: for it is a Hebraism, where a superlative is usually expressed by the
synonymon: as Lutum coeni; pluvia imbris; so the Gall of bitterness and the
iniquity of sins; Robur virium; the blackness of darkness, that is, (...), the
outer darkness, or the greatest darkness: so here the lust of Concupiscence,
that is, the vilest and basest of it. I know no where else that the Apostle
uses the word in any sense. But the like is to be said of the word lust, which
the Apostle often uses, for the habits produced or the pregnant desires, but
never for the natural principle and affection, when he speaks of sin.

But your Lordship is pleased to add a subtlety in pursuance of your former
advices and notices, which I confess I shall never understand.

Although Baptism take away the guilt as concretively redoundding to the
person, yet the simple abstracted guilt as to the Nature remains; for
Sacraments are administered to persons, not to natures] Thus I suppose those
persons from whom your Lordship reports it, intended as an answer to a secret
objection. For if Concupiscence be a sin, and yet remains after baptism, then
what good does Baptism effect? But if it be no sin after, then it is no sin
before. To this it is answered as you see: there is a double guilt; a guilt of
person, and of nature. That is taken away, this is not: for, Sacraments are
given to Persons, not to Natures.

But first, where is there such a distinction set down in Scripture, or in the
prime antiquity, or in any moral Philosopher? There is no humane nature but
what is in the persons of men; and though our understanding can make a separate
consideration of these, or rather consider a person in a double capacity, in
his personal and in his natural, that is (if I am to speak sense) a person may
be considered in that which is proper to him, and in that which is common to
him and others; yet these two considerations cannot make two distinct subjects
capable of such different events. I will put it to the trial.

This guilt that is in nature, what is it? Is it the same thing that was in the
person? that is, is it an obligation to punishment? If it be not, I know not
the meaning of the word, and therefore I have nothing to do with it. If it be,
then if this guilt or obligation to punishment remains in the nature after it
is taken from the person, then if this concupiscence deserve damnation, this
nature shall be damned, though the person be saved. Let the Objectors, my Lord,
choose which they will. If it does not deserve damnation, why do they say it
does? If it does, then the guilty may suffer what they deserve, but the
innocent or the absolved must not; the person then being acquitted, and the
nature not acquitted, the nature shall be damned and the person be saved.

But if it be said that the guilt remains in the nature to certain purposes,
but not to all; then I reply, so it does in the person; for it is in the person
after Baptism, so as to be a perpetual possibility and proneness to sin, and a
principle of trouble; and if it be no otherwise in the nature, then this
distinction is to no purpose; if it be otherwise in the nature, then it brings
damnation to it, when it brings none to the Man, and then the former argument
must return. But whether it prevail or no, yet I cannot but note, that what is
here affirmed is expressly against the words commonly attributed to S. Cyprian
(De ablutione pedum) Sic abluit quos parentalis labes infecerat, ut nec
actualis nec Originalis macula post ablutionem illam ulla sui vestigia
derelinguat: How this supposing it of Baptism can be reconciled with the guilt
remaining in the nature, I confess I cannot give an account. It is expressly
against S. Austin (Tom. 9. Tract. 41. in Johan. epist. ad Ocean.) saying,
deleta est tota iniquitas! expressly against S. Hierom, Quo^odo justificati
sumus and sanctificati, si peccatum aliquid in nobis relinquitur?

But again (My Lord) I did suppose that Concupiscence or Original Sin had been
founded in nature, and had not been a personal but a natural evil. I am sure,
so the Article of our Church affirms; it is the fault and corruption of our
Nature. And so S. Bonaventure affirms in the wo^ds cited by your Lordship in
your Letter: Sicui peccatum actuale tribuitur alicui ratione singularis
persona: ita peccatum origiuis tribuitur ratione naturae. Either then the
Sacrament must have effect upon our Nature, to purify that which is vitiated
by Concupiscence, or else it does no good at all. For if the guilt or sin be
founded in the nature, (as the Article affirms) and Baptism does not take off
the guilt from the nature, then it does nothing.

Now since your Lordship is pleased in the behalf of the objectors so warily to
avoid what they thought pressing, I will take leave to use the advantages it
ministers: for so the Serpent teaches us where to strike him, by his so warily
and guiltily defending his head. I therefore argue thus.

Either Baptism does not take off the guilt of Original Sin, or else there may
be punishment where there is no guilt, or else natural death was not it which
God threatened as the punishment of Adam's fact. For it is certain, that all men
die as well after baptism as before; and more after then before. That which
would be properly the consequent of this Dilemma, is this, that when God
threatened death to Adam, saying, On the day thou eatest of the tree thou shall
die the death, he inflicted and intended to inflict the evils of a troublesome
mortal life. For Adam did not die that day, but Adam began to be miserable that
day, to live upon hard labor, to eat fruits from an accursed field, till he
should return to the earth whence he was taken. (Genesis 3. 17, 18, 19.) So that
death in the common sense of the word was to be the end of his labor, not so
much the punishment of the sin. For it is probable he should have gone off from
the scene of this world to a better, though he had not sinned; but if he had not
sinned, he should not be so afflicted, and he should not have died daily till he
had died finally, that is, till he had returned to his dust whence he was
taken, and whither he would naturally have gone: and it is no new thing in
Scripture that miseries and infelicities should be called dying or death.
(Exodus 10. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 31. 2 Cor. 1. 10. and 4. 10, 11, 12. and 11. 23.).
But I only note this as probable; as not being willing to admit what the
Socinians answer in this argument; who affirm that God threatening death to the
Sin of Adam, meant death eternal: which is certainly not true; as we learn from
the words of the Apostle, saying, In Adam we all die; which is not true of
death eternal, but it is true of the miseries and calamities of mankind, and
it is true of temporal death in the sense now explicated, and in that which is
commonly received.

But I add also this problem. That which would have been, had there been no
sin, and that which remains when the sin or guiltiness is gone, is not properly
the punishment of the sin. But dissolution of the soul and body should have
been, if Adam had not sinned, for the world would have been too little to have
entertained those myriads of men which must in all reason have been born from
that blessing of Increase and multiply, which was given at the first Creation;
and to have confined mankind to the pleasures of this world, in case he had
not fallen, would have been a punishment of his innocence; but however, it
might have been, though God had not been angry, and shall still be, even when
the sin is taken off. The proper consequent of this will be, that when the
Apostle says, Death came in by sin, and that Death is the wages of sin, he
primarily and literally means the solemnities, and causes, and infelicities,
and untimeliness of temporal death, and not merely the dissolution, which is
directly no evil, but an inlet to a better state. But I insist not on this, but
offer it to the consideration of inquisitive and modest persons.

And now that I may return thither from whence this objection brought me; I
consider, that if any should urge this argument to me:

Baptism delivers from Original Sin.

Baptism does not deliver from Concupiscence; therefore Concupiscence is not
Original Sin.

I did not know well what to answer; I could possibly say something to satisfy
the boys and young men at a public disputation, but not to satisfy my self
when I am upon my knees and giving an account to God of all my secret and
hearty persuasions. But I consider, that by Concupiscence must be meant either
the first inclinations to their object; or the proper acts of Election which
are the second acts of Concupiscence. If the first inclinations be meant, then
certainly that cannot be a sin which is natural, and which is necessary. For I
consider that Concupiscence and natural desires are like hunger; which while it
is natural and necessary, is not for the destruction but conservation of man;
when it goes beyond the limits of nature, it is violent and a disease: and so
is Concupiscence; But desires or lustings when they are taken for the natural
propensity to their proper object, are so far from being a sin, that they are
the instruments of felicity for this duration, and when they grow toward being
irregular, they may, if we please, grow instruments of felicity in order to the
other duration, because they may serve a virtue by being restrained; And to
desire that to which all men tend naturally, is no more a sin then to desire to
be happy is a sin: desire is no more a sin then joy or sorrow is: neither can
it be fancied why one passion more then another can be in its whole nature
Criminal; either all or none are so; when any of them grows irregular or
inordinate, Joy is as bad as Desire, and Fear as bad as either.

But if by Concupiscence we mean the second acts of it, that is, avoidable
consentings, and deliberate elections, then let it be as much condemned as the
Apostle and all the Church after him has sentenced it; but then it is not
Adam's sin, but our own by which we are condemned; for it is not his fault that
we choose; If we choose, it is our own; if we choose not, it is no fault. For
there is a natural act of the Will as well as of the Understanding, and in the
choice of the supreme Good, and in the first apprehension of its proper object,
the Will is as natural as any other faculty; and the other faculties have
degrees of adherence as well as the Will: so have the potestative and
intellective faculties; they are delighted in their best objects. But because
these only are natural, and the will is natural sometimes, but not always,
there it is that a difference can be.

For I consider, if the first Concupiscence be a sin, Original Sin, (for actual
it is not) and that this is properly, personally, and inherently our sin by
traduction, that is, if our will be necessitated to sin by Adam's fall, as it
must needs be if it can sin when it cannot deliberate, then there can be no
reason told, why it is more a sin to will evil, then to understand it: and how
does that which is moral differ from that which is natural? for the
understanding is first and primely moved by its object, and in that motion by
nothing else but by God, who moves all things: and if that which has nothing
else to move it but the object, yet is not free; it is strange that the will
can in any sense be free, when it is necessitated by wisdom and by power, and
by Adam, that is, from within and from without, besides what God and violence
do and can do.

But in this I have not only Scripture and all the reason of the world on my
side, but the complying sentences of the most eminent writers of the Primitive
Church; I need not trouble my self with citations of many of them, since Calvin
( lib. 3. Instit. c. 3. 10.) confesses that S. Austin has collected their
testimonies and is of their opinion, that Concupiscence is not a sin, but an
infirmity only. But I will here set down the words of S. Chrysostom (Homil.
13. in epist. Rom.) because they are very clear; Ipsae passiones in se peccatum
non sunt Effraenata vero ipsarum immoderantia peccatum operata est.
Concupiscentia quidem peccatum non est quando vero egressa modum for as
eruperit, tunc demum adulterium fit, non a concupiscentia sed a nimio and
illicito illius luxu.

By the way I cannot but wonder why men are pleased, where ever they find the
word Concupiscence in the New Testament, presently to dream of Original Sin,
and make that to be the sum total of it; whereas Concupiscence if it were the
product of Adam's fall, is but one small part of it; [ Et ut exempli gratia
unam illarum tractem] said S. Chrysostom in the forecited place; Concupiscence
is but one of the passions, and in the utmost extension of the word, it can be
taken but for one half of the passion; for not only all the passions of the
Concupiscible faculty can be a principle of sin, but the Irascible does more
hurt in the world; that is more sensual, this is more devilish. The reason why
I note this, is because upon this account it will seem, that concupiscence is
no more to be called a sin then anger is, and as S. Paul said, Be angry, but
sin not; so he might have said, Desire, or lust, but sin not. For there are
some lustings and desires without sin, as well as some Angers; and that which
is indifferent to virtue and vice, cannot of it self be a vice; To which I add,
that if Concupiscence taken for all desires be a sin, then so are all the
passions of the Irascible faculty. Why one more then the other is not to be
told, but that Anger in the first motions is not a sin, appears, because it is
not always sinful in the second; a man may be actually angry, and yet really
innocent: and so he may be lustful and full of desire, and yet he may be not
only that which is good, or he may overcome his desires to that which is bad. I
have now considered what your Lordship received from others, and gave me in
charge your self, concerning concupiscence.

Your next charge is concerning Antiquity, intimating that although the first
antiquity is not clearly against me, yet the second is. For thus your Lordship
is pleased to write their objection [ I confess I find not the Fathers so
fully and plainly speaking of Original Sin, till Pelagius had pudled the
stream; but after this you may find S. Jerome etc.]

That the Fathers of the first 400 years did speak plainly and fully of it, is
so evident as nothing more, and I appeal to their testimonies as they are set
down in the papers annexed in their proper place; and therefore that must needs
be one of the little arts by which some men use to escape from the pressure of
that authority, by which because they would have other men concluded, sometimes
upon strict inquiry they find themselves entangled. Original Sin as it is at
this day commonly explicated, was not the Doctrine of the primitive Church; but
when Pelagius had pudled the stream, S. Austin was so angry that he stamped and
disturbed it more: and truly my Lord, I do not think that the Gentlemen that
urged against me S. Austin's opinion, do well consider that I profess my self
to follow those fathers who were before him; and whom S. Austin did forsake as
I do him in the question. They may as well press me with his authority in the
Article of the damnation of Infants dying unbaptized, or of absolute
predestination. In which Article, S. Austin's words are equally urged by the
Jansenists and Molinists, by the Remonstrants and Contra-remonstrants, and they
can serve both, and therefore cannot determine me. But then (My Lord) let it be
remembered, that they are as much against S. Chrysostom as I am against S.
Austin, with this only difference; that S. Chrysostom speaks constantly in the
argument, which S. Austin did not, and particularly in that part of it which
concerns Concupiscence. For in the inquiry, whether it be a sin or no; he
speaks so variously, that though Calvin complains of him, that he calls it only
an infirmity, yet he also brings testimonies from him to prove it to be a sin,
and let any man try if he can tie these words together. ( De peccator. mer. et
remission l. 1. c. 3.) Concupiscentia carnis peccatum est, quia inest illi
inobedientia contra dominatum mentis. Which are the words your Lordship quotes:
Concupiscence is a sin because it is a disobedience to the Empire of the
spirit. But yet in another place; ( lib. 1. de civit. Dei cap. 25.) Illa
Concupiscentialis inobedientia quanto magis absque culpa est in corpore non
consentientis, si absque culpa est in corpore dormientis? It is a sin and it is
no sin, it is criminal, but is without fault; it is culpable because it is a
disobedience, and yet this disobedience without actual consent is not culpable.
If I do believe S. Austin, I must disbeleeve him; and which part soever I take,
I shall be reproved by the same authority. But when the Fathers are divided
from each other, or themselves, it is indifferent to follow either; but when
any of them are divided from reason and Scripture, then it is not indifferent
for us to follow them, and neglect these; and yet if these who object S.
Austin's authority to my Doctrine, will be content to subject to all that he
says, I am content they shall follow him in this too, provided that they will
give me my liberty because I will not be tied to him that speaks contrary
things to himself, and contrary to them that went before him; and though he was
a rare person, yet he was as fallible as any of my brethren at this day. He was
followed by many ignorant ages, and all the world knows by what accidental
advantages he acquired a great reputation: but he who made no scruple of
deserting all his predecessors, must give us leave upon the strength of his own
reasons to quit his authority.

All that I shall observe is this, that the Doctrine of Original Sin as it is
explicated by S. Austin, had two parents; one was the Doctrine of the
Encratites, and some other Heretics, who forbad Marriage, and supposing it to
be evil, thought they were warranted to say, it was the bed of sin, and
children the spawn of vipers and sinners. And S. Austin himself, and especially
S. Hierom (whom your Lordship cites) speaks some things of marriage, which if
they were true, then marriage were highly to be refused, as being the increaser
of sin rather then of children, and a semination in the flesh, and contrary to
the spirit, and such a thing which being mingled with sin, produces univocal
issues, the mother and the daughter are so like that they are the worse again.
For if a proper inherent sin be effected by chaste marriages, then they are in
this particular equal to adulterous embraces, and rather to be pardoned then
allowed; and if all Concupiscence be vicious, then no marriage can be pure.
These things it may be have not been so much considered, but your Lordship I
know remembers strange sayings in S. Hierom, in Athenag or as, and in S.
Austin, which possibly have been countenanced and maintained at the charge of
this opinion. But the other parent of this is the zeal against the Pelagian
Heresy, which did serve it self by saying too little in this Article, and
therefore was thought fit to be confuted by saying too much; and that I
conjecture right in this affair, I appeal to the words which I cited out of S.
Austin in the matter of Concupiscence; concerning which he speaks the same
thing that I do, when he is disingaged; as in his books De eivitate Dei: but in
his Tractate de peccatorum meritis and remissione, which was written in his
heat against the Pelagians he speaks quite contrary. And who ever shall with
observation read his one book of Original Sin against Pelagius, his two books
de Nuptiis and Concupiscentia to Valerius, his three books to Marcellinus, de
peccatorum meritis and remissione, his four books to Boniface, contra duas
epistolas Pelagianorum, his six books to Claudius against Julianus, and shall
think himself bound to believe all that this excellent man wrote, will not only
find it impossible he should, but will have reason to say, that zeal against
an error is not always the best instrument to find our truth. The same
complaint has been made of others; and S. Jerome has suffered deeply in the
infirmity. I shall not therefore trouble your Lordship with giving particular
answers to the words of S. Jerome and S. Ambrose, because (besides what I have
already said) I do not think that their words are an argument fit to conclude
against so much evidence, nor against a much less then that which I have every
where brought in this Article, though indeed their words are capable of a fair
interpretation, and besides the words quoted out of S. Ambrose are none of his;
and for Aquinas, Lombard, and Bonaventure, your Lordship might as well press me
with the opinion of Mr. Calvin, Knox and Buchannan, with the Synod of Dort, or
the Scots Presbyteries: I know they are against me, and therefore I reprove
them for it, but it is no disparagement to the truth, that other men are in
error. And yet of all the Schoolmen, Bonaventure should least have been urged
against me, for the proverbs sake: for, Adam non peccavit in Bonaventura;
Alexander of Hales would often say, that Adam never sinned in Bonaventure. But
it may be he was not in earnest: no more am I.

The last thing your Lordship gives to me in charge in the behalf of the
objectors, is that I would take into consideration the Covenant made between
Almighty God and Adam, as relating to his posterity.

To this I answer, that I know of no such thing; God made a covenant with Adam
indeed, and used the right of his dominion over his posterity, and yet did
nothing but what was just; but I find in Scripture no mention made of any such
Covenant as is dreamt of about the matter of original sin: only the Covenant of
works God did make with all men till Christ came; but he did never exact it
after Adam; but for a Covenant that God should make with Adam, that if he
stood, all his posterity should be I know not what; and if he fell, they should
be in a damnable condition, of this (I say) there is nec vola nec vestigium in
holy Scripture, that ever I could meet with: if there had been any such
covenant, it had been but equity that to all the persons interessed it should
have been communicated, and caution given to all who were to suffer, and
abilities given to them to prevent the evil: for else it is not a Covenant with
them, but a decree concerning them; and it is impossible that there should be a
covenant made between two, when one of the parties knows nothing of it.

I will enter no further into this enquiry, but only observe, that though there
was no such covenant, yet the event that happened might without any such covenant
have justly entered in at many doors. It is one thing to say that God by Adam's
sin was moved to a severer intercourse with his posterity, for that is
certainly true; and it is another thing to say that Adam's sin of it self did
deserve all the evil that came actually upon his children; Death is the wages
of sin, one death for one sin; but not 10000 millions for one sin; but
therefore the Apostle affirms it to have descended on all, in as much as all
men have sinned, But if from a sinning Parent a good child descends; the child's
innocence will more prevail with God for kindness, then the fathers sin shall
prevail for trouble. Non omnia parentum peccata dii in liberos convertunt, sed
siquis de malo nascitur bonus, tanquam been affectus, corpore natus de morboso,
is generis pana liberatur, tanquam ex improbitatis domo, in aliam famil^am
datus: qui vero morbo in similitudinem generis refertur atque redigitur
vitiosi, ei nimirum convenit tanquam haeredi debitas poeas vitii persolvere,
said Plutarch ( De iis qui sero a Numine puniuntur. ex interpr. Cluserii.) God
does not always make the fathers sins descend upon the children. But if a good
child is born of a bad father, like a healthful body from an ill affected one,
he is freed from the punishment of his stock, and passes from the house of
wickedness into another family. But he who inherits the disease, he also must
be heir of the punishment; Quorum natura amplexa est cognatam malitiam, hos
Justitia similitudinem pravitatis persequens supplicio affecit, if they pursue
their kindreds wickedness, they shall be pursued by a cognation of judgment.

Other ways there are by which it may come to pass that the sins of others may
descend upon us. He that is author or the perswader, the minister or the
helper, the approver or the follower, may derive the sins of others to himself,
but then it is not their sins only, but our own too, and it is like a dead
taper put to a burning light and held there, this derives light and flames from
the other, and yet then has it of its own, but they dwell together and make
one body. These are the ways by which punishment can enter, but there are
evils which are no punishments, and they may come upon more accounts, by Gods
Dominion, by natural consequence, by infection, by destitution and dereliction,
for the glory of God, by right of authority, for the institution or exercise of
the sufferers, or for their more immediate good.

But that directly and properly one should be punished for the sins of others
was indeed practiced by some Commonwealths; Utilitatis specie saepissime in
repub. peccari, said Cicero, they do it sometimes for terror, and because their
ways of preventing evil is very imperfect: and when Pedianus secundus the
Praetor was killed by a slave, all the family of them was killed in punishment;
this was secundum veterem morem said Tacit. (Annal. 14.) for in the slaughter
of Marcellus the slaves fled for fear of such usage; it was thus, I say, among
the Romans, but habuit aliquid iniqui, and God forbid we should say such things
of the fountain of Justice and mercy. But I have done, and will move no more
stones, but hereafter carry them as long as I can, rather then make a noise by
throwing them down; I shall only add this one thing: I was troubled with an
objection lately; for it being propounded to me, why it is to be believed that
the sin of Adam could spoil the nature of man, and yet the nature of Devils
could not be spoiled by their sin which was worse; I could not well tell what
to say, and therefore I held my peace.

THE END.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
Page 8, and 9 there are seven lines misplaced, which are to be read thus: page
8. lin. 16. read, till the body was grown up to strength enough to infect it]
[and in the whole process it must be an impossible thing, because the
instrument which has all its operations by the force of the principal agent,
cannot of it self produce a great change and violent effect upon the principal
agent] Besides all this, (I say) while one does not know how Original Sin can
be derived, and another who thinks he can, names a wrong way, and both the
ways infer it to be another kind of thing then all the Schools of learning
teach: does it not too clearly demonstrate, --

The names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D.D.
1. (...), a Course of Sermons for all the Sundaies in the year, together with
a Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity and Separation of the Office
Ministerial, in fol. 2. Episcopacy asserted, in 4. 3. The History of the Life
and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, 2. Edit. in fol. 4. The Liberty of
Prophesying, in 4. 5. An Apology for authorized and Set-formes of Liturgy, in
4. 6. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12. 7. The Rule and Exercises
of holy dying, in 12. 8. The Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fitted
to the days of the week, together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness.
9. The Doctrine an practice of repentance rescued from popular Errors, in a
large 8. Newly published.
Books written by H. Hammond. D. D.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Test. by H. Hammond
D.D. in fol. 2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English Treatises of H.
Hammond, D. D. in two volumes in 4. 3. Dissertions quatuor, quibus Episcopatus
Jura ex S. Scripturis and primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam
D. Blondelli and aliorum. Authore Henrico Hammond, in 4. 4. A Letter of
Resolution of six Queries, in 12. 5. Of Schism. A Defense of the Church of
England, against the Exceptions of the Romanists, in 12. 6. Of Fundamentals in
a notion referring to practice, by H. Hammond D. D. in 12. 7. Six books of late
Controversy in defense of the Church of England, in two volumes in 4. newly
published.
Books newly published.
Doctor Cousins Devotions, in 12. The persecuted Ministry, by William Langley
late of St. Mary's in the City of Liechfield, Minister, in 4.

A Discourse of Auxiliary Beauty, or Artificial Handsomeness. In point of
Conscience between two Ladies, in 8.

Lyford's Legacy; or, an help to young People. Preparing them for the worthy
receiving of the Lords Supper, in 12.

The Principles of Holy Christian Religion: or the Catechism of the Church of
England paraphrazed. By R. Sherlock B. D. at Borwick Hall in Lancashire. in 8.

A Discourse 1. Of the Holy Spirit of God, His Impressions and workings on the
Souls of Men. 2. Of Divine Revelation, Mediate and Immediate. 3. Of Error,
Heresy, and Schism: the Nature, Kinds, Causes, Reasons, and Dangers thereof:
with directions for avoiding the same. By R. Sherlock, B. D. in 4.

THE END.

