The Great Propitiation; OR, CHRIST'S SATISFACTION; AND Man's Justification by
it upon his FAITH; that is, Belief of, and Obedience to the Gospel.

Endeavored to be made easily intelligible, and to appear rational and well
accountable to ordinary Capacities; and so more lovely and amiable. In some
Sermons preached, etc.

By JOSEPH TRVMAN, B. D. late Minister near Nottingham.

The Second Edition Corrected and Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, for K. Clavell, in Cross-key Court in Little
Britain, 1672.

The Great Propitiation, etc.
Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ: Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God, To declare, I
say, at this time, his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier
of him that believes in Jesus. (...) That is, of the faith of Jesus, of the
Christian Faith.
MY Design here is, to make the Christian Religion, in these great parts of it
Christ's Satisfaction and Man's Justification by it, plainly accountable, and so
more amiable unto you.

I shall enter into the Body of this Discourse, by these praeliminary steps.

1. God having created man a rational creature, capable of moral government,
is, by immediate resultancy, his King and Governor, and so gives him a Law,
which was not only a Law with a Commination, but a Covenant with a Promise of
eternal Happiness, upon perfect and perpetual Obedience; and, as a Law,
threatened Death upon every Disobedience. Cursed is he that continues not in
all things written in the law to do them.

2. Man loses all; becomes obnoxious to the Curse: to such a Curse as might
make us say with Moses, We exceedingly fear and quake, when we hear, or speak,
or think of it.

3. What should God now do? Should he pardon? Should he let go this hold of us?
Should this horrible Threat and Sanction of the Law vanish into smoke? We would
be apt indeed through self-love to say, Yea, by all means pardon us, and do not
inflict the Penalty. But could give no reason, but, Pardon us, right or wrong.
But this is as if an offender should say, The Law is just and equal, execute it
therefore upon others, but spare me, it is I: as if a weak Mother should say,
when her Son is convict of Felony, Spare him, he is my Son. But these words are
not dictates of Reason, but merely of folly, self-love, and interest. All mercy
is not a virtue, but that which will consist and comport with other perfections
of Wisdom and Righteousness; otherwise it is a blemish, weakness, and foolish
pity.

I grant here; The Truth of God would be no hinderance to this Pardon: For a
Rector and Lawgiver by mere threatening, by making a Law with an annexed
Penalty, does not in so doing part with his supra-legal Power, with his Power
of dispensing with his Law, except he reveal that he will not in any case
dispense with it: For, Threatenings of themselves do only constitute the dueness
of punishment, and make the Offender obnoxious: Promises indeed give a right to
the party to whom they are made: which the party promising cannot dissolve, or
take away without his consent; and to break them, would be falsehood and
unfaithfulness. If a Parent threaten to beat his Child if he commit such an
offense, he is ordinarily bound so to do; it would be ^ickleness and a loosning
of his Authority (which he is bound to keep up) to do otherwise; but he is not
so bound, as to be guilty of untruth; if he do otherwise, you cannot say he
lied. Threatenings immediately and essentially do only constitute this, That the
Rector shall have this authority over you, which he may at his pleasure
execute; and it would be to destroy government ordinarily* not to execute them,
not to keep his laws sacred and inviolable: But he that threatens, may yet
pardon, without being guilty of untruth; his truth does not hinder, but other
things. And we are sure, God has not executed this Law; else all offenders had
utterly perished; for it threatened the offenders. And Truth does as much oblige
to inflict it on the offenders, as to inflict it at all. Now these things
ordinarily hinder Governors from dispensing with their Laws; and so they would
be hindrances unto God here from merely pardoning.

1. Should God merely pardon; This does not become a Governor that has made a
Law in wisdom; to do so, would be to cast an imputation on himself of weakness,
either in Power or Wisdom: In Power, as if he was weak and unable to vindicate
his injured Law: In his Wisdom, as if he thought his Law unequal, or rashly and
unadvisedly made; and as if he thought his injured Law unworthy of a
vindication. Merely to pardon, would be to cast di^t in his own face, and to
prostitute the honor of his Power, Wisdom, and Holiness, through foolish pity,
as if his Law was not holy, just, and good.

2. Should God merely pardon, it would be to weaken his rule and government
over Angels and Men. To suffer m^n to trample on the Majesty of God, without a
vindication of his Honor, would be to encourage offenders by impunity. That
Rector is guilty of violating the authority of his own Laws, that executes not
the threatened severity of the Laws against offenders. And if God should do
thus, we might put the Apostle's question, How should God judge the world? How
should he then rule the Romans 3. 5.
world? Who but they would have said, If God dispense once so lightly with his
threatenings, and without a valuable satisfaction, why may he not do so again?
and who will value his threats? To ask for this, That God would merely pardon;
would be to ask, That God would cease to be King of the World; and he might
say, as Solomon to Adonijah, Let him ask the kingdom also, as well as ask that
which in honor I cannot grant. How could he maintain State, and Port, and
Government in the World, if he make himself appear so facile and fickle. Thus
you see reasons why God should not pardon and dispense with his Law. Meer^y to
pardon, would have been an intolerable foul blot and stain in the face of that
his Government, wherein he designed to please himself in the displaying and
contemplating the glory of his Attributes.

4. Should God therefore execute the Law according to the threat upon all
offenders to all eternity; this indeed would be just and righteous, and plain
without difficulty; and we must have said, Thy ways, O Lord, are equal, for
ours were unequal: But then these inconveniences had followed:

1. God would have lost the glory of this Gospel-Justice, this kind of Justice,
this wise and stupendous Justice, of this Justice and Righteousness in a
Mystery; the glory of being just and merciful, punishing the just for the
unjust; of laying the chastisement of others peace upon his innocent Son; which
is a glory of Justice beyond that (as I shall make appear) which would have
been in executing it upon all men to all eternity.

2. He would have lost the glory of his Mercy, the glory of that Grace and
Mercy which fills the hearts of his people with love, and the mouths of Men and
Angels with high praises of God, and lays the greatest obligation on the World.

3. All Religion had utterly perished out of the earth, truth had fallen in the
streets, and righteousness perished from the earth; there being no forgiveness
with him that he might be feared, there would have been no fear, no filial fear
of God; no love to God, he not beginning in love to us while enemies; no coming
to God, for he that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of such, coming and returning to him; no hope and so no motion* hope
being the spring of obedience. There would have been no foundation for Religion
in the World.

4. All mankind had utterly perished, and so we might have cried, as they over
Benjamin, of a Tribe being fallen in Israel. So a Tribe, a whole Tribe, a
goodly Tribe of the Creation had been utterly lost; such a Tribe, such a
beautiful Piece of God's Creation, that sometimes it is called all creatures,
and every creature. Mark. 16. 15. Col. 1. 23
As if a Man was the whole Creation, being so considerable a part of it. It was
not so with the Angels; it was only some of them that left their first estate,
and so some of them reserved in chains of darkness; but here it would have been
all. Some of the Trees of that Heavenly Paradise were left standing; but all
the Trees of this our Earthly would have been for Fuel, and not one for Fruit.

I mention not these things, as if God needed to value them, or as if he must
be moved with them, so as that he could not do otherwise than he has done. No,
we must still suppose, as it were, a great contest between his Mercy or Pity,
and his strict Justice; his Justice enclining him to execute it upon the
offenders; and his Mercy prevailing and carrying away the day, to provide and
accept of an Offering, a Propitiation.

But I bring in these, to show, there were great reasons to dispense with the
Law, if it might be done with safety to his other Attributes. And these great
ends will so far support and maintain such a dispensation with the Law (if
there can be found out a compensation, a due reparation, to the injured Law, to
do it with honor and justice) that he cannot be accused of Levity, of being
fickle, of dispensing with it lightly, upon slight grounds and motives; but
upon sufficient ones, though not necessary ones: For though Legislators may
dispense with their Laws, yet it is a weakness to do it upon slight or no
grounds.

5. Had God said to fallen man, as Moses once to Pharaoh, Glory over me in this;
take thou this honor over me, to appoint the time when the Plague of Frogs
shall be removed: So, had God said, Glory over me; take this honor over me, to
appoint what I should now do for you: Had God said, Sit down and consider; yea,
and take Angels to assist you in counsel, and tell me, how I may in these
circumstances of things do you good and my self no hurt in my government; show
mercy to you, and do no wrong, no dishonor to my self; cast no blemish on my
Law, Rule, and Government, and I will do it: We must yet have perished; the
redemption of the Soul is precious, and would have ceased for ever. We might
have wept, as John did, to think none worthy to open the Book: We might have
said, Lo, this we have by considering found out, that God cannot suffer, and
that the Creature cannot satisfy to eternity; and therefore our condition is
hopeless, our bones are dried, our hope is lost, and we are cut off for our
parts. The Wisdom of Men and Angels could not have known such a thing possible,
that God and Man could be so nearly joined, as to become one Person; that God
might suffer being Man, and satisfy being God. And further, Who durst have
made such a motion? Who durst have let such a thing enter into their thoughts,
The just to suffer for the unjust, God for Man? which yet God freely offered
and gave.

6. Though this way I am speaking of, could not be of Humane or Angelical
Reason's ready finding out, yet it would be of right Reason's ready acceptance
when found out. Right Reason would say, Could God now find out a way to
dispense with, and not execute the Law, and yet keep up the repute of the Law,
and of his Honor and Justice, as high, as if it had been in the very word
executed; could he find out a way, not to execute this dir^ful Threat, and yet
ward off those unbecoming reflections of not being Holy, Just, and a Hater of
Sin; and of not being of purer eyes than to behold Iniquity unrevenged; and to
keep and secure the Creature still in obedience, so as no encouragement to come
to transgressors of his Laws for the future; this would be the way that the
Reason of Men and Angels would acquiesce, and ^^ke delight and complacency in.
But alas, we despair of finding out such a way; but whether such a way can be
found out (as he said of dry bones living) Lord, thou know.

7. Now this is that way revealed and brought to light by the Gospel that I am
to speak of.

The Sum of the Text is comprehended in this Proposition.
Doct. Jesus Christ was set forth by God to be a Propitiation and Expiation, a
Price of Redemption for Sin and Sinners, that God might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

I shall speak of this by parts lying in the Text, following the natural order
of the things.

1. God set him forth, (...). The word that is here translated set forth,
signifies either to fore-ordain, or set forth; either ante decernere, or in
medium proferre. I shall speak something of it in both Significations.

1. God fore-determined, foreordained him a Propitiation. And so it is in the
Margent of your Bibles. This Propitiation was of Gods own invention. When
Darius perceived Dan. 6. 14
how Daniel was ensnared by his Decree, by his Law, he was greatly troubled. He
was foolishly righteous overmuch; and was averse (through care of his Honor)
to cast disrepute on his Law, though unjust, and the greatest injustice would
be in executing it. We read, he set his heart on Daniel to deliver him, and
labored (that is in contriving) till the going down of the Sun, but could not
find a way to do it, and keep up the repute of his Justice, and of his freedom
from unadvisedness, fickleness, and inconstancy with himself. But our God set
his heart on us to deliver us from the roaring Lion of Hell, and found out a
way to do the creature good, and himself and his Law no dishonor. I have found
a ransom, not by advice or consultation with others; He alone contrived it,
invented it, it was God himself that provided this Lamb for a Burnt-offering,
it was (...). Christ crucified was such wisdom as none of the Princes of this
World knew. The Angels desire (...), with stooping 1 Pet. 1^. 12:
down to look into these things. He alludes to that, that the Cherubims Exodus
25. 10.
were pictured with their faces looking down upon the Propitiatory. The Angels
knew not these things naturally, they were hid in God, and made known to them;
and not made known to them immediately or primarily, but by the Church, but by
the Revelation made to the Church. The Apostle speaking or preaching of Ephesians. 3.
9. 10
the unspeakable riches of Christ, he adds, To the intent that now unto
principalities and powers in heavenly places, might be known by the Church the
manifold wisdom of God.

How we admire them that find out Inventions, rare Inventions, especially if
beneficial ones to the world! how should we adore that Wisdom that found out
this Expedient for the salvation of the guilty Rebel-world? Here is height and
depth, length and breadth of Wisdom, to pardon and punish both together; to
display riches of Mercy and Grace, without derogation from his Justice. This
was that abyss the mind of man could not fathom: for things so far asunder, so
distant in their own nature, as greatest Mercy and greatest Justice, to be made
to meet and concentre, was a wonderful plot and contrivance of Divine Wisdom,
ever to be adored; and being now revealed, appears Wisdom to men that are
perfect, yea, to all men sober and sound in their Intellectuals that hear of it.

Again, If God thus foreordained him a Propitiation, How weak and wicked is
Socinus his arguing, who argues just contrary, That he cannot be a
Propitiation, a Satisfaction, because we grant, God foreordained him, set him
forth to be so. He argues thus: God was not at odds with men, not angry with
men, because he found out this way; therefore God was appeased, his Justice
satisfied before; he was reconciled before, and so needed no Propitiation to
make him reconciled to the World, else he would not have ordained, or given
Christ thus. All that this Argument of his proves, is this, That God, though he
was (as things stood) necessarily an Enemy by virtue of his strict Justice; yet
he was such an Enemy as desired to be atoned or appeased. Like that we read of
his command to Job's three friends, My wrath is kindled against Job 42* 7*
thee and thy two friends (says God to Eliphas) therefore take seven bullocks,
and seven rams, and go to Job and offer, etc. One may as well argue God's wrath
was not kindled against them, though he says it was, because he directs to
means how to appease his wrath; whereas it shows he was angry, but willing
and desirous of atonement, in that he shows means how to come into his
favor. The love of God, that set Wisdom on work. to find out this of Christ,
was not the love of one that was bound in Honor and Justice to be an Enemy,
that is, to execute the curse upon us, as things stood; but of one desirous of
finding out a way that he might with safety to his Honor and Justice be a
Friend as a Rector.

2. The word signifies (as it is translated) set him forth. The death of
Christ, the making Christ a Propitiation, was of Gods ordering and disposing.
God set him forth to dye. Not a Sparrow falls to the ground without Gods
Providence, much less the Son of God. They did no more, nor otherwise in
crucifying Christ, than what Gods determinate Council had appointed. The
sufferings of Christ were Heavens Counsel, and Hells Suggestion, and Earths
Execution; the effect of Gods goodness, the Devil's malice, and the Jews
hatred: When they had fulfilled all things that Acts 13. 29
were written of him, they took him from the tree and put him in a Sepulcher.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and afterward enter into glory?
It pleased the Lord to bruise Isa. 53.
him. God was never so pleased with any thing in the world, as with the
Sufferings of Christ, they were a sweet smelling Sacrifice; and yet never so
displeased with any wicked act, as with the betraying, accusing, and condemning
of Christ* He decreed and ordered the death of Christ, delighted in the thing
alone, in some sense; but had the greatest hatred against the wicked cruel
actors of it. Whom you slew with wicked hands, and so with wicked hearts. God
decreed Christ should dye a cursed death, that we might live; but their hearts
thought not so, it was in them to destroy. You intended it for evil, but the
Lord turned it for good (says Joseph Genesis 50. 20.
to his Brethren). We see God has an ordering hand about sins, an active
providence about sins: Ye sent me not hither, but God. God has his good will
and pleasure by men's evil will. The Jews did what they did to satisfy their
rage and lusts; but God ordered it to save our souls. God could have hindered
the death of Christ, but then he had hindered his own counsel and promise. Yet
take heed of the other extreme. God stirs up no man to sin. gataker
Gataker's Gods eye upon Israek.
tells us, that that difficult place, 2 Samuel 24. 1. should be read passively,
he was stirred up, incitatus est, viz. from his own heart, as the Jewish
Expositors commonly; or by Satan, as 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. and brings many instances
of it. But however, we must understand that, and such places, by leaving them
to temptation, and their own hearts; as when it is said, God has bidden Shimei
curse. And to speak of the thing in hand: God in his Providence ordered all, to
such a concurrence of circumstances, that the death of Christ was brought about
without any violence or force offered to men's wills; only God actively sends
Christ (whom the wicked hated, because of the light of his Life and Doctrine)
to Jerusalem to the Passover, and actively takes off restraints from them, so
that their is no man or thing to binder them from doing what they would; and
then God leaves them to their own hearts and wills, and they wickedly crucify
him. So that we are not to thank the Devil, nor the Jews, for what their
wickedness was instrumental to bring about; for as God is no way accessory to
their malice, cruelty and wickedness; so neither do they partake of Gods
righteousness in such acts, wherein he declares his righteousness. Therefore
God uses after to burn the rods of his anger, and this cursed act brought ruin
on this Nation, and a curse on their Children and Posterity to this day, they
no^ repenting of their sin. If God had no^ a (...)g ordering Providence about
(...) could not be said to punish or (...)n his people; for their corrections
are for the most part, by their hatred and malice, the sins of wicked men.
Suppose Gods ways above our ways, above our reach, as in some things they are,
shall we say, They are unrighteous, unjust, when he sets Him forth a
Propitiation, that he might be just.

2. Jesus Christ. * Set forth Jesus Christ, God-Man, God and Man in one Person;
Emanuel, a Mediator, a Middle-person, not only in Office, but in Nature,
partook of both Parties; not like the medium negationis, but participationis
utriusque extremi. So that we need not take up Job's dark complaint, There is
not a days-man between us, to lay his hand upon us both; i. e. Is not an Umpire
to day our differences. There is indeed a great distance, yea, a contrariety
between God and us; but though far asunder, he can reach both parties; he is
both, can lay his hand upon us both.

He is truly God, Of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came; who is Romans 9.
5. 1 John 5. 20. Tit. 2. 13.
God over all blessed for ever. Called the true God and everlasting life, God
manifest in the flesh.

He is truly man, the Word was made flesh; not only appeared in flesh as
formerly, but now made flesh.

1. He must needs be Man, that he might be near a*kin to us, our Goel; that as
man sinned, man might suffer, dye, and satisfy; that there might be as little
alteration as might be in the execution of the threatening: that, as by the
offense of one man, one akin, one near to us, death came on all; so by the
righteousness of one man, one near akin, righteousness and life might come on
all: that as man was to be redeemed, man might pay the price. He came as near
us as could be in a close union; so that the Members in some sense may be said
to have suffered in their Head. For both he which sanctifies (that is, by way
of Heb. 2. 11
expiation, for so the Author to the Hebrews often uses the word) and they
which are sanctified, are all of one; of one mass, lump, of one and the same
nature: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. Forasmuch then
as the children (that Verse 14.
is, they to be redeemed) are partakers of flesh and blood; he also himself
took part of the same, that through death, etc. Wherefore in all things it
behooved him to be made like unto his Verse 17.
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people: for in that he himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.

2. He must needs be God that suffered; not only to support the humane nature
in bearing wrath due to sinners, that it might overcome death, that it sink not
under the weight (as the Altar of Wood was to be covered Exo. 27. 2
with brass, that it might not be consumed with the fire) but to give worth to
the sufferings, to make them satisfactory, that the dignity of the person might
add virtue and value to the sufferings.

And Socinus his Objection here is contrary to all Reason, viz. That because
the Divine Nature did not suffer, it cannot be considered in the sufferings.
One may with as much reason say, It is all one whether you strike a private man
or your Prince, because the stroke lights on the body immediately, and not on
the dignity; and it is all one whether you strike a stranger or your Father,
because the stroke hits the body immediately, and not the relation of the
person. The Scripture places the emphasis, the value of the sufferings, in the
worthiness of the person, in being God. God redeemed the Church with his own
blood. If the blood of Bulls and Acts 20. 28. Heb. 9. 14
Goats sanctify to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood
of Christ, who through the eternal spirit (that is his Divinity) offered
himself, purge your Conscience, etc. Being in the form of God, and thought it
no Phil. 2. 6.
robbery to be equal with God, made himself of no reputation, and took on him
the form of a servant, humbled himself, and became obedient to the death of the
Cross. Hence called the 1 Pet. 1. 19. 1 John 1. 17
precious blood of Jesus Christ. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son that
cleanses us from all sins.

So that if any should ask, What Justice, what Equality is there in this
commutation, one suffering for many? It may be answered, He was but one, but he
was One worth Ten thousand of us; the Prince of Life was killed, the Lord of
Glory crucified. The blood of a man is of more value than the blood of a beast;
the blood of a King of more value than the blood of a common man; but the blood
of God, of more value than Ten thousand millions of Kings. Here then is a high
price indeed, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the King of Heaven and
Earth's Son, for Traitors and Traitors Sons. The Man that was Gods fellow was
smitten. Thousands of Rams, and Ten Zac. 13. 7.
thousands of Rivers of Oil, could not have bore proportion to such a suffering
for satisfaction. This is more than if all the men in the world had eternally
perished; and does more keep up the repute of the Law, before Angels and
considerate men. Set forth Jesus Christ to declare his righteousness. It
declared it indeed.

3. To dye] To dye, this we have in those words in the Text, Faith in his blood.

Object. Could not God have declared his righteousness, and his hatred of sin,
and have kept up the repute of his Law; and have made that honorable in
dispensing with it upon a less consideration? Would it not have been penalty
enough, satisfaction enough* for Christ only to have taken upon him our nature,
though he had lived as King of kings, attended with Princes, Kings, and
Emperors? Or, however, to have taken on him the form of a Servant, though he
had not dyed? Or yet would it not have been enough if he had undergone some
little part of his suffering? Would not some one or few drops of his blood have
sufficed, as those shed in his Circumcision? Some of the Ancients have spoken
strangely concerning these things; but Pope Clement the sixth, most strangely:
for by his Decretal-Epistle he has determined this difficulty so rationally in
the account of Canonists, that it is inserted into the body of the Canon Law,
Extrav. tit. Vnigenitus, viz. thus: One drop of Christ's blood was enough to
save the world; and therefore the overplus of it is laid up in the Treasury of
the Church, to be given out by the Popes, in Pardons and Indulgences. But we
are sure, God thought it not sufficient. By his blood is meant death. But yet
there remains a seeming difficulty, which I never saw or heard endeavored to
be answered, except by the Pope, as I said; and therefore I shall be the more
large in answering of it: and thus it lies: We are sure that God's becoming man
was more than if all the men in the world had ceased to be: and then on the
other hand, God was not so prodigal of his Sons blood, as to have poured it all
out, if one drop would have served the turn, and answered the ends of
Satisfaction for which it was shed.

Ans. I shall answer it plainly in these few Propositions.

1. Christ's Sufferings were not proper solution, a payment of the same; but a
satisfaction: a refusable, though valuable consideration. His Sufferings were
not an execution of the Law or Threat, but a Satisfaction that it might not be
executed. See this more fully explained afterward.

2. Satisfaction consists not in indivisibili, in a Mathematical point, that we
can say, Just so much is just, and no more.

3. Satisfactions being refusable payments, one may require more than a
valuable consideration, without any injustice; yea, as much more, as wisdom
seems meet. If some useful member in a Commonwealth (as a man fit for a
General) should commit some crime which he is to be banished for by the Laws of
the Land, and some Nobleman should intercede to the Rector, the King, and
offer himself to be whipped through the City to save this man's banishment;
here, though the whipping of a Nobleman be a greater matter intrinsically, and
of greater value; yet if he (to keep up Law and Justice) should refuse to
accept of this offer, here is nothing of injustice; yea, suppose five Nobles
should then offer themselves to be used in like manner, there is no injustice
if he should say, I will not pardon him except ten Nobles will be thus treated
to save his banishment: Here is nothing of injustice, because it is only a
Satisfaction; it is refusable, and he may refuse in infinitum, though a
thousand should thus offer themselves.

4. Those are more honorable Satisfactions, and do more answer the ends of
Satisfactions, that are of greater value than the penalty it self: the greater
the Satisfaction is, it does by so much the more speak inexorable Justice, and
show how little ground offenders have for the future to expect pardon and
impunity.

5. Those are more honorable Satisfactions, and caeteris paribus, that keep as
near as may be to the penalty threatened by the Law; because they represent the
penalty more lively, and call it to mind more effectually. As if the Nobleman
himself should be banished to save the others banishment, rather than be
scourged or pay money. The known story of Zaleucus is worth relating here. This
Zaleucus was King of the Locrians; and he designing the welfare and reformation
of his people, makes many good Laws; amongst which this was one, That whosoever
should commit Adultery, should lose both his eyes. The Prince and Heir apparent
was found guilty; the King resolves to execute the Law on his Son; the people
intercede in his behalf, (and no doubt would show him a great necessity of
dispensing with the Law; it would damage the Commonwealth to have his Successor
blind): At last overcome with their importunities, he finds out this expedient
to keep up Law and Government; he put out one of his own and one of his Son's
eyes. Suppose Zaleucus had cut off both his own arms, or had put out out one of
his Son's eyes and cut off his own right hand, it would wonderfully have
declared inexorable Justice, and they would have had little ground to have
upbraided him with partiality; for there was some necessity to dispense with
the Law, and it was done upon a dreadfully awing consideration; and his
Subjects would have had very little encouragement to transgress in hope of
relaxation of his Law for the future. But yet it more kept up the repute of the
Law, when he did keep so near the very penalty of it self. Here were exacted
two eyes, his own and Son's.

This is Answer enough to this Question. God, though he could for the reasons
formerly mentioned, admit of change of persons; yet he thought it not good in
wisdom to admit change of penalties; or however as little a change as was
necessary for the main ends, that we might be saved, and Christ overcome death
and be completely a Redeemer. Death was threatened, and Death shall be
inflicted, and without blood there shall be no remission. Yea, Soul-death was
threatened, and shall for some time be inflicted; and if man could not see
Soul-suffering, yet Angels might; yea, and men might in some measure, by his
crying out, by his sweating of clods of blood, and by his telling us of it, and
God at^esting whatever he testified, by Miracles.

So that whatever intrinsecal value a little penalty inflicted on Christ might
be of (which I have you see freely granted) yet God made account, that a little
penalty inflicted on Christ, would not be enough to declare his righteousness,
but would have some great and wonderful sufferings, to awe the World, Men, and
Angels; to declare his hatred of sin, and how difficulty he obtained of himself
to dispense with his Law; and how little hope transgressors may have of
impunity, that shall make their condition hopeless the second time, by refusing
Christ and Mercy. God would have satisfaction to the purpose, plenteous
redemption, a plenteous price of redemption, good measure, pressed down, shaken
together, and running over. You see there is no inconveniency in saying, He
has received at the Lord Christ's hand double for all our sins. God will
magnify his Law, and make it honorable for his righteousness sake, says the
Prophet. He means I suppose Isa. 42* 2^
in the punishing of transgressors; and indeed God has magnified his Law, and
made it honorable in this way of pardoning transgressors. All the Earth should
be filled, and resound with the glory of this Justice.

Thus you see this part, He set him forth to dye. And under this head I will
set before you these six Qualifications or Modifications of his death.

1. He dyed a grievous painful death, that God might be just, etc. His whole
life was indeed a continued suffering of God, a continued abasement. It is
observed, we read of his weeping, but never of his laughing. This I know does
not prove he never did laugh; and, suppose it did, it would not prove it
unlawful for us; for what was the power and faculty given for? If for use, we
are sure it was not to laugh at spiritual things. It may be he never did laugh;
it is possible that never (...) was seen on that face that was t^ be the cause
of our joy, laughter and cheerfulness. He was ever and anon thinking of the
bitter Cup he was to drink for our health. One of the bravest days that ever he
saw in the days of his servitude, was the Transfiguration day, when Moses and
Elias appeared with him in Glory; yet then it is added, and they talked of his
decease.

His whole life was a life of sorrows. Faith in his blood does not exclude his
obedience, and other parts of his sufferings; but all are comprehended under
this most eminent part, which was most grievous and painful to body and soul.

1. His Body: What torments did that endure? What scourgings, piercings? and
the exquisiteness of his bodily temperature and constitution, would augment his
torture; He had not dulled and blunted his spirits and sense by intemperance.

2. His Soul: What punishment of sense was there on his Soul in his Agony in
the Garden; when he sweat as it were clods of blood, and complained, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful unto death: and an Angel was fain to comfort him, when he
cried, Father, if it be possible let this cup pass: sure there were some dregs,
some gall and wormwood in his cup. What punishment of loss, when he cried out,
Why have thou for saken me? We hid as it were our faces from him* says the
Prophet; but this was a small matter in comparison of God's hiding his face.
His Disciples forsook him, but he complains not of their forsaking; but, why
have thou forsaken me? If it be asked, What need of soul-suffering,
soul-trouble, was not bodily enough? It is answered already, God would have
sufferings as near the same threatened as could be; would dispense as little
with the Law as might be. How are the Socinians here upon the rack, when to
give an account of his crying out and discomposure beyond the ordinary rate of
Martyrs, for they shouted and triumphed; since they maintain he suffered no
otherwise, and on no other account than they did, only to attest the truth, and
leave us an example of patience. They make his groaning heavier than his
strokes, if he had no more of bitterness in his Cup than they.

2. A shameful death. God set him forth to a public, notorious, shameful
death, that he might be just, etc. It was at a solemn time, the Passover, when
the Jews were come from all parts of the Land, and Proselytes and others from
remote parts of the World, and at the most public place Jerusalem. Then and
there the God of Heaven was spit on, stripped* and whipped naked in the sight of
the multitude, crucified before all Israel, and in the sight of the Sun. All
Nations have as it were by consent agreed, that hanging on a tree, crucifying,
should be the most contemptible death of the vil^st of Creatures, and vilest of
men. Whom you s^^w, and Acts 5. 20
hanged on a tree: the emphasis of the shame, is, hanged on a tree. So endured
the Cross and despising the shame. It is a shame for a King ^o suffer an
ignominious death, how much more for God?

He suffered as a Malefactor, as a Traitor against Caesar his Prince, as a
Blasphemer of his God, as a Deceiver and Impostor. Yet we did esteem him
stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. We (that is the generality of the
people) esteemed him as one smitten for his own sins, justly condemned for his
own sins; and so, far from taking away condemnation from others. He was numbered
with transgressors; accounted a wicked person, suffered with thieves, as being
accounted the fittest companion for them.

To live with i^famy is accounted worse than death. What is it then to dye with
infamy? Many men could with less regret bear the pain of hanging, than the
shame of it. He is insulted over in his miseries; nothing is so intolerable as
shame to noble ingenuous spirits. He is scoffed at in all his Offices; as
Priest, He saved others, himself he cannot save. As Prophet, Prophecy unto us
who smo^e thee. This Deceiver, etc. As King, Hail King of the Jews. I am the
reproach of men, Psalm. 22 6
and despised of the people, was spoken not without cause of him in the type.

3. Cursed death; that God might be just, etc.] I must not leave this out,
though I have an averseness to speak of things I do not well understand. And I
must confess that I do not so clearly understand (as I do other things) what is
meant by Curse, distinct from pain and shame. But I will tell you my thoughts
of it: As Benedictio, blessing, as Amiraldus says, seems to be the solemn
declaration of the good will of one superior in Power and Dignity. The Heb. 7.
7.
less is blessed of the greater. So Maledictio, (...), seems to be nothing
else but a solemn declaration of the anger and displeasure of the Rector and
higher Powers. So that every death that carries in it the tokens and marks of
the displeasure of the higher Powers, may be called (...), a curse. This is it,
that it be inflicted by the King for a fault; and therefore a death of hanging
on a Tree, which is inflicted for a fault, by the authority of the Higher
Powers, being a painful, and especially a shameful death (wherein the chief of
punishment consists) is accounted a Curse by the consent of Nations.

That Curse which the Apostle alludeth to, seems to be only some Gal. 3. 10.
ceremonial Curse, which was pronounced D^ut. 21. 23.
on every one that hanged on a tree, (I suppose whether rightfully or
wrongfully hanged) such a carcass was to be shunned in a special manner, and
not to be buried with ordinary burial, it may be. And this Ceremonial Curse was
by the wise foreseeing Providence of God pronounced on every one hanging on a
Tree, that it might be typical of Christ, being cursed with another kind of
curse, in being hanged on a tree, with a moral Curse, the Curse of the Moral
Law, which was due to sinners. Cursed is he that continues not in all things
written in the Law.

What a Curse did he bear in being made a curse for us? What millions of
Talents of vengeance were in his cup? All the curses written in the Book of the
Law (in a sense) fell on him; he was made (...), piaculum. The Son of God's
dearest love became the subject of his Rectoral displeasure, for us children of
wrath, that we might become objects of his favor.

4. An undeserved death of his own as for any fault. That God, etc. No guile
was in his mouth. The Lamb without spot; in all things like us, yet without
sin, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. By his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify many. And the stress is laid here in righteous. He
who knew no sin was made sin for us. He was not like the High Priest, who was
first to offer for himself, and then for the people. Therefore God ordained him
to be born of a Virgin, by the Holy Ghost, that he Isa. 53. 4, 5.
might be without sin. These seem to be opposed. We did esteem him smitten of
God and afflicted; that is, smitten as an offender for his own faults, as being
so far from taking away the curse from us, that he was cursed for his own sin.
But, says he, he was wounded for our transgressions. The Antithesis shows
these to be inconsistent. The cause was just, contrary to what David pleaded,
Let it be on me and on my Fathers house; but these sheep, what have they done?
But here it may be said, The shepherd what has he done, that laid down his
life for his sheep, when the sheep only were in fault? All we like sheep have
gone astray, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all.

And to speak here by way of anticipation, The Innocent suffering for the
Guilty, should be so far from prejudicing us against the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction to Justice, that on the contrary this alone makes it satisfactory
to right Reason; for had he himself been guilty, he had been in no capacity to
pay a ransom for others. If he was bound to pay all he had, suffer all he could
suffer for himself, How should he pay any thing for us, suffer any thing for us?

5. A willing voluntary death. That God might be just, etc. God set him forth*
but yet by his own consent: He gave himself for our sins according to ^al. 4. 1.
the will of God and our Father. That which casts a stain and blemish upon the
most Satisfactions we read of in humane Authors, and makes them ungrateful
unto us, is this, That either they did not undergo their sufferings for another
willingly, as when they chastned the Infant-Prince's darling-Pages for his
fault; or if they did undergo them willingly, they had not lawful authority and
power to do so. For men have not that full power and authority over their lives
and members, to give them a compensation for others, which they have over their
money and estates. God has not given them this power; and also Governors are
under the Law of God, and so have not regularly authority to take away men's
lives or members upon such commutations instead of others; therefore those
Authors that thought men had full authority over their lives and members, do
hugely commend the act of Zaleuchus in putting out one of his own eyes; and
were it not for this obstruction, we should commend it as one of the bravest
acts of Justice mixed with prudence, in those circumstances, that ever was. Now
both these difficulties are removed here.

1. Christ had power and authority over his own life: I have power, (...), I
have authority to lay down John 10. 18.
my life, and authority to take it up again. He had authority over his own life
(as other men have not) being God. And further, we are sure the Father gave him
leave.

2. He willingly undertook this task of dying a Propitiation for sinners.
Burnt-offering thou would not; then said I, Lo I come, I delight to do thy
will, O God. I lay down my life for my sheep, no man takes it from me (against
John 10. 16
my consent), I lay it down of my self. It was a voluntary Sacrifice, a
Free-will-Offering: He was the Priest himself, offered himself by the eternal
Spirit, though the Jews were the Butchers. Think thou not (says he to Peter
smiting off of Malchus's ear) that I cannot now pray my Father, and he shall
send me more than twelve legions of Angels? He gave Pilate no answer, as if
afraid of hindering his own Sufferings. Had he spoken as he could have done, as
one having authority, he could with few words have daunted Pilate's heart, and
caused his own release. But, he went as a Lamb to the slaughter, as a sheep
before the shearer he was dumb, and opened not his mouth. So that Pilate is
impatient at his patience, angry at his silence: Answerest thou not? When he
was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not. Had 1
Pet. 2* 23.
he but threatened, he might have forced his own dismission.

Two things can only be objected here against his willingness.

1. His great natural averseness: Father, if it be possible, etc. He feared
this Cup.

Ans. In speaking of his Humane Nature (there is no difficulty about his
Divine) we must distinguish with the Schoolmen, thus: There is volunt as ut
natura, and voluntas ut ratio. There is the natural will or inclination, and
the rational will: according to this natural will he desired to escape this
death, Nature abhorring things destructive to its self: But by his rational
will, for God's honor, and our redemption, he willingly submitted to it.
Aquinas instanceth thus: A Man according to his natural will desires to avoid a
bitter potion, and the lancing or cutting off of any Member; and yet by his
rational will, he consents to these for the good of the whole. And this is
most properly to be called the will. Quod quisque mavult* id maxim proprie
vult. This natural willingness and averseness in him does commend and advance
the meritoriousness of Christ's willingness as Mediator and merciful High
Priest; and not at all proves his unwillingness, in the properest sense of the
word.

2. Here may also be objected: He was for the most part careful to secure
himself from the Jews treacheries and injuries, and sometimes fled.

Ans. This does not prove his unwillingness to suffer, at all; but only his
choosing the fittest time and hour, and his reserving himself for the time and
place appointed by the Father: And he used to say before, that his hour was not
yet come. But consider how he carried himself when his hour was come, and he
knew it was come. Now before the feast of the Passover, Joh. 13. 1.
when Jesus knew that his hour was come that* he should depart out of this
World to the Father: Then he prepares his Disciples, These words spoke Jesus,
and Joh. 17. 1, 4.
lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come, Glorify thy
Son; I have finished my work, now glorify Ver. 4.
me with thy own self. Jesus knowing all things that should come upon him, Joh.
18 4.
went forth (to Judas and his band of Soldiers) and said unto them, Whom seek
you? they answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus says unto them, I am He. They
went backward and fell to the ground. He that threw them to the ground, could
have thrown them into hell; but he suffers them to rise again, offers himself,
and says, Whom seek you? They said, Jesus of N^zareth: Jesus answered, I have
told you, that I am he. If therefore you seek me, let these (Disciples) go
away. He had care of them, to keep them out of cruel hands, while he willingly
yielded up himself. He was straightened, till it was accomplished.

Now the main of the Socinian Objections fly before this, as dry leaves before
the wind.

One may thus rhetorize in objecting with them. What? shall not the just Judge
of all the Earth do right? Will he s^^y the righteous with the wicked? However,
will he slay the righteous, and let the wicked escape? Or, which is worse, Will
he slay the righteous for the wicked, by punishing the just for the unjust? Now
that he underwent it willingly, answers all this. God has made a Law that the
Son shall not be put to death for the Father, much less one Stranger for
another. Therefore this makes it ordinarily sinful among men, to give such, or
for the Magistrate to accept such commutations, because God has deprived them
of this power. But shall we say, His ways are unequal, because not like or
above our ways; or that that is necessarily unlawful to God, which he has made
so to us? Say they, this would declare Gods unrighteousness, to set forth an
Innocent Propitiation for the Nocent. It would do so indeed, to punish the
Innocent for the Nocent, except he choose it. All see it is not injustice to
demand debts of a bonds-man, a surety; for God has given men power over their
estates; and he willingly undertook it. I grant, it is ordinarily unlawful to
offer to be, or to except sureties, and undertakers for others with lives or
members; but the reason is, because God has not given men this power;
otherwise it would be all one. Therefore there is no injustice, in his life
going for ours. He had right and authority so to dispose of his life, as we
have not, and he willingly undertook it. If God was wroth with his beloved Son,
it was from his own Choice and undertaking, through his love to us. Father, lay
not the punishment on these my enemies and thine, I will bear it; If thou will
be paid it have Satisfaction; pour out thy wrath on me that can satisfy, not
on them that cannot, but by their eternal and utter sinking under it.

6. A Death of infinite Value. If Gods justice do require a Satisfaction, it
will not be put off with a mere show or color of one; or with a partial, lame,
defective one; but it must be commensurate and proportionable to the infinitely
heinous and numberless sins and provocations of Men, and to the justice of God;
and so it must be of infinite dignity and value. Now the death of Christ was of
infinite value; Infinite in satisfaction, but not in duration; for if in
duration, then the expiation would never have been made and perfected, and so
we should never have been redeemed. He should then (and so we) have ever
remained under the power of death and condemnation: for, the utmost farthing
would never have been paid. It would have been unworthy of Christ; it would
have been unprofitable for us, and it was not necessary for satisfaction, for
Christ to have undergone pains infinite in duration, But his sufferings being
actually infinite in merit, do more than equal a suffering only infinite in
duration; for that would never have been actually infinite.

Sins against God naturally deserve (and therefore God threatens) infinite
punishment; for Sins are increased according to the greatness of the person
against whom the offense is committed. They have not only rejected thee, b^t
rejected me, says God, as a greater matter; and it is brought in as a great
aggravation to speak evil of Dignities; and in our Law a Scandalum magnatum, is
a greater matter than the scandalizing of our Equals: Therefore Sin is of
infinite demerit, being against an infinite God. And hence it follows, that the
punishment of Sin, must either be infinite in the extremity and greatness* or
in the duration. Now to speak naturally: Reason and Justice, considering the
ends of punishment in Moral Government, would immediately urge, Let it, if it
can, be infinite in the greatness, weight and gravity, that the offender
(having satisfied in suffering) might work again. But human nature being
finite, is not capable of such infinite punishment; and upon this account it
was necessary that it should be infinite in the extensiveness and duration,
because a finite Creature is not capable of punishment infinite in
intensiveness and greatness. But now when Christ suffered for us, he underwent
punishment infinite in magnitude and greatness. But still this infinity is to
be estimated not from the intensiveness and greatness of the punishments
themselves, which human Nature (and so Christ's human Nature) was not capable
of; but from the dignity of the person that suffered them. Just as sin that is
finite in its own nature, coming from a finite creature, becomes infinite by
being committed against an infinite Majesty: So the punishments of Christ,
(being in their own nature finite) became infinite in their value and
satisfaction, by the infinite dignity of the person suffering. And the stress
(as I have told you before) is still laid on this, in Scripture; the dignity of
the person, that he was God that suffered. And this very consideration of his
death being infinite in value and recompense, and not in duration, does prevent
such a difficulty as could not be answered. For, had our Redeemer been to
continue for ever, under this condemnation of those he suffered for, this might
have made the Christian Religion less rational and credible; it would have been
such an unaccountable excess of charity, to destroy himself eternally to save
others, But God knew, and Christ knew, he could so wrestle with death and
condemnation as to overcome, and that it would not be an utter losing one worth
ten thousand of the guilty in saving them; which would have been a thing
unaccountable, to be either done, or permitted to be done, by the King and
Governor of the World: but his Sufferings were to be to him an entrance into
Glory, and the obtaining a Name above every Nature.

Thus of this Third Head to die and manner of this Death.

4. A Propitiation. Died a Propitiation, for Sin and Sinners; that is implied,
yea, signified in the very word Propitiation, that it was for Sin and Sinners.
Propitiation, (...) this is the word the Septuagint use to express the
Mercy-seat by: The word we translate Mercy-seat, is, (...) which coming from
(...) which signifies to hide, and in Piel to expiate and propitiate, this
word coming from it does so too. It signifies Opercuium, tegumentum, and
placamentum, piamentum, a cover or hiding, and an Expiation, or Propitiation;
to make God propitious, reconciled, and favorable. Now this Mercy-seat, this
Operculum Propitiatorium, was a cover of pure Gold laid over the Ark of the
Covenant, just the dimensions of the Ark, the length and breadth of it. Two
cubits and a half the length, and one cubit and a half the Exodus 35. 10, 17.
breadth of either of them, as you man see. We read nothing of the thickness of
this Propitiatory Cover; but some R^bbins say it was of one Palm. And this Ark*
which this covered, ver. 16.
had in it the Law; and so this Mercy-seat or Propitiatory that covered the Ark
wherein was the Law, typified and signified, Jesus Christ fully covering our
sins (being transgressions of the Law) out of Gods sight; the Righteousness and
Satisfaction of Christ being as broad, and as long, as the Law and our
transgressions of it. Above the Mercyseat, on either side, were the Cherubims,
and the Majesty of God appeared between the Ceerubims: Christ interposeth
between God and his Law, to make him propitious to his People. From above the
Mercy-seat Ver. 22.
between the two Cherubims will I meet thee and commune with thee. So you see,
this Mercy-seat, this Cover of Gold typified Christ, the true Propitiatory, or
Mercy-seat, covering out of God's sight all our Transgressions of the Law, and
God through him meeting with us, and made propitious and reconciled to us. And
here now, Christ is called by the name of his own type, as often elsewhere,
when he is called the Lamb and Lamb slain; and so called the Propitiatory, or
Propitiation, God having made him really that to us, which that did but typifie.

Christ was made an Expiation and Ransom, and Propitiation for Sins; for these
things the Hebrew word signifies.

Here now, under this Head, I will make it my business irrefragably to prove to
you, what I have taken hitherto almost for granted.

1. He died not for Himself; He was the Lamb without spot; as indeed he that
was to wash away others spots, was to be without spot Himself. Messiah cut off,
but not for himself.

2. He could not die but for some Sin; Death befalls not Men, as Men, but as
Sinners. The Apostle proves all to be Sinners, because all die? else it was
impossible in justice. God Act. 2. 24
raised him up, having loosed the pains of death; for it was not possible he
should be holden of it; Death being but the Servant of God's Justice, and
Christ having satisfied Justice, it could not but let go its hold. He could not
but be taken from prison and from judgment. We may use the same argument: it
was impossible, Death could not have taken hold of Him at all, had it not been
for Sin.

3. It remains therefore that he died for our sins, according to the Scripture;
for none else come in competition. None will pretend He died for the Sins of
Angels, good or bad, or of Brutes which are not capable of sin. Was delivered
to death for our sins. Bore the sins of many. Gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us. The professed Adversaries of this Doctrine (the Socinians)
will grant, He died in some sense for our Sins. Therefore, How died he for our
Sins?

1. He died for our Sins so as to turn us from them, this is truth; but this
is, as they suppose, all, and they will grant no more: But we must go further.

2. He died for our Sins, as a meritorious deserving cause of his Death. For
the transgression of my people was he smitten. Wounded for our transgressions.
Isa. 53. Romans 4. 25.
Delivered to death for our sins. So that if it be asked, What means the heat
of this great anger? wherefore was he thus wounded? We must answer, He was
wounded for our transgressions. We have pierced him, this has been by our
means; we have ate sour grapes, and his teeth were set on edg; the Children
ate sour grapes, and the everlasting Father's teeth were set on edg.

3. He died for our sins; in our place and stead, that we might not perish for
them. In our place and stead for expiation, for satisfaction, for compensation;
though not in such an un^ound irrational sense as some pretend, and I shall
have occasion to speak of hereafter in a more convenient place.

I shall prove this, first, from express Scriptures; second, from the
peculiarity of his Death; third, from the Sacrifices that typified Him.

1. From express Scriptures, in three Instances.

1. We often read of his Sufferings for our fins, (...), This man after he had
^ffered one sacrifice for sins. Heb. 1. 12 Gal. 1. 4.
Who gave himself for our sins. Now this word translated, for, may signify
only the final cause, as to turn us from them: But words must be understood
secundum subjectam materiam, according to the subject matter, and in such
speeches the subject matter will not bear that sense. We never read in
Scripture (or any where else) of one dying and suffering for sins; but it is
for them as the meritorious cause of the sufferings, as some compensation for
the fault; as when he says, I will punish you for your iniquities. And, Israel
suffered for the sins of Jeroboam.

2. We often read of his Suffering for persons. I lay down my life for my
sheep. Redeemeth us from the curse Joh. 10. 17. Gal. 3. 17.
of the Law, being made a curse for us. (...), and the usual sense of this is,
instead of another. As Paul could wish himself accursed for his brethren. Yet I
know this phrase [for another] may in some instances signify only the final
cause, only for their good, and not in their stead. A man may be said to die
for his Country (only as the final cause) for their good; and to lay down his
life for his brother, only for his good, to save his life.

But it is not capable of such a narrow sense, when one dies for another as a
sinner, as an offender. Now we read of Christ's dying, the just for the unjust;
there it must be meant in his stead. And, when sinners, he died for us. And, Hs
who knew no sin was made sin; that is, a Sin-offering for us The word (...) and
(...), are the words the Septuagint express a Sin-offering by: called in Hebr.
(...) and (...). So that place, Romans 8. 3. (which, as it is translated is
scarce sense) should have been translated, God sending his own Son in the
likeness of ^inful flesh, and a Sin-offering, (...), condemned ^^a in the
flesh, as the same words are well translated, Heb. 10. 6. In Burnt-offering and
Sacrifice for sin. (...), thou have no pleasure. And so again verse. 8.
. It is good sense to say, such a one died for his Country, as in the Wars,
only to denote the final cause, for the good of his Country. But because Men go
not into the Wars, because of their faults, neither are they killed in the
Wars ordinarily for any fault; Men die not in the Wars as Malefactors, but as
Soldiers: It would not be sense to use such speeches, He died for his Country
though an innocent man; it would be a frigid, sapless, dilute manner of
speaking; for here would be no Opposition in it. But you see, He who knew no
sin was made sin for us. We esteemed him smitten of Isa. 53.
God. But he was wounded for our sins, 2 Cor. 5. 15.
etc. Because we thus judge, if one dyed for all, then were all dead, and he
dyed for all, etc. This place would not be true, if one interpret, dying for
all, only for the good of all, not in their stead. For it would not be true
arguing, If Christ died for the good of all, then were all dead. But this way
that I am speaking of, is good and cogent. If in the stead and room of all,
they all were judicially dead.

Again, the word used in the Original [for us] is not only (...), which may,
when there is fit subject matter, signify only the final cause; but it is also
(...), which (as Grotius well observes) always imports either contrariety or
commutation: and it can by no means signify contrariety, therefore it
signifies commutation, compensation. He gave himself, (...), a ransom for many;
like, (...) Mat. 20. 28.
(...). i. e. vice. So (...). And they were called (...), who devoted
themselves to death in the stead of others.

3. He is said in many places to redeem us. Gave himself for us, that he 2 Tit.
2. 14.
might redeem us from our iniquities. To ransom us: to be a (...), a ransom. He
gave himself (...), a ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2. 6.
Now the proper import of redeem, and such words, is by way of price. And what
if (as they object) the word redeem sometime be used Metaphorically, for our
deliverance from any evil, whether with price, or without; for redemption by
power; as when he says, I will redeem you with stretchedout arm, and with
great judgment; Does it therefore follow, that it can possibly so signify
redemption by power, when we are said to be redeemed with price, and bought
with a price, and with a price of great value? and when we are told with what
price we are redeemed, Not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19. Act. 20. 28.
with the precious blood of Christ. And when we read it was done, by bearing
the punishment due unto us; His own self bare our sins in his body on a tree?

2. This is plainly proved by the peculiarity of his Death. We will readily
grant, He died for us, as none in the world else ever died for us; therefore
not only for our good. Socinus and his Followers tell us, that Christ having
taught as a Prophet sent from God, a Doctrine of holiness and piety, and that
they that embrace it, believe, repent, return, shall be saved notwithstanding
all their former sins; He died only to confirm the truth of his Doctrine, and
to leave the world an example of patience and submission, courage in suffering;
but not for expiation, and satisfaction. Certainly, Christ did some singular
thing by his Death; and if this be all, we may ask, What singular thing has he
done? Have not all Martyrs done the same by their Death? they taught true
Doctrine, and died to give Witness to the Truth, and to encourage us in
sufferings. Did not the Apostles do the same? the Apostle speaks of his
sufferings for their good, in Col. 1. 24.
this sense, Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, for the Church.
Therefore I endure all things for the Elects 2 Timothy 2. 10.
sake, that they also may obtain the Salvation by Jesus Christ. And yet he
speaks it with abhorrence; Was Paul crucified for you? Do we suffer 1 Cor.
^1. 13.
for you in the sense that Christ suffered for you, as a Satisfaction? as an
Expiation? And if this be all the meaning of our Redemption by his blood, and
Justification by his blood; then we may as well say, We are redeemed and
justified by the blood of Martyrs; however as really, though not fully; his
death and sufferings being at most but a greater attestation of the truth, and
encouragement of us in our suffering for it.

If Christ died only for the Confirmation of the Gospel which he preached, and
for our encouragement and imitation in suffering for the truth; we may say,
Where is the Lamb for the Burnt-offering? We are guilty, and want atonement;
Captives, and want a ransom. If we should look on Christ's Death (as one says)
through Socinus his Spectacles, we should look on it as neither satisfactory to
God nor us; we have yet no help meet for us, there is no days-man between us;
he that was to come, is not come; And yet, we look not for another.

3. I shall prove it from the Sacrifices under the Old Testament, which
typified and shadowed out these things. The Law had a shadow of good Heb. 10.
1, 2.
things to come; not the very image; implying Christ's Sacrifice was the very
reality. The blood of Bulls and Goats could not expiate moral guilt; but only
shadowed out that which could do it. Every Priest stands daily Heb. 10. 11,
12.
ministering and offering often times the same Sacrifices, which can never take
away sins. But this Man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins, etc. They
were but dumb shows of this Tragedy to be acted. Consider these three things.

1. These Sacrifices did take away, did expiate typical guilt (in some sense,)
took away the typical punishment of being excluded the congregation and
society, and such temporal punishment as was to be inflicted by God or Man, for
such faults as they were appointed Offerings for: For the Apostle says, The
blood of bulls and goats did sanctify thus far, to the purifying of the flesh:
Now by sanctify, he means expiate, (which will appear by perusing how this
Author uses this word in other places of that Epistle) and not taking away the
fault it self. But these Sacrifices were Heb. 9. 14 Lev. 10. 14
but only typical of that, which took away the eternal punishment and moral
guilt and obligation. Now since these typical Sacri^ices were expiatory,
satisfactory in respect of typical guilt, What similitude can there be? what
relation of Types can they have, if Christ's offering up Himself was no
expiation for real moral guilt? for Types were not ordained for their own
sakes, but for the sake of those things they did shadow out. Why would God put
them upon typical propitiatory Sacrifices, if they did signify nothing of real
Propitiation?

2. The Sacrifices were offered in Men's stead, in the Sinners stead, to make
atonement for his Soul, for his Life, that he died not for such typical guilt,
He shall put his hand on the Lev. 1. 4.
head of the Burnt-offering, and it shall be accepted for him. They were
offered for Man's good indeed; but how for his good? why, in his stead? When a
man was to die they died for him, and he was kept alive. And that which yet
makes it more plain is this, because in capital offenses, where men were
absolutely to die without remedy, there were (as is well observed by many) no
private Sacrifices instituted, because the man himself was to die for his
fault, and so a beast could not die in his stead. And if Sacrifices were only
offered for the good of Men, and not by way of compensation, and expiation, in
their stead, What possible reason can be given, why no Sacrifices were to be
offered for them that were to be taken away out of the land of the living?

3. Now Christ is called our Sacrifice, Walk in love, as Christ also has Ephesians.
5. 2.
loved us, and has given himself for us, an Offering and Sacrifice to God, for
a sweet smelling savor. He alludeth to the expression of the Old Testament,
where God is said to smell a sweet savor, or a savor of rest in their
Sacrifices. He is called (as was said before) Genesis 8. 21 Lev. 1. 9.
by the name of his own Types, Lamb without spot. Behold the Lamb, (...), the
Lamb of God; the eminent Lamb, the true propitiatory Lamb indeed that did that
in reality, which others but represented, that did really take away, and
expiate the sins of the World. So he is called our Passover.

I will here answer two Objections more before I pass to another general head.

Object. But can one satisfy himself? Christ was God (and so the party
offended) as well as Man.

Answ. Passing by what may colourably be said upon consideration of the
distinctions of Persons? I answer,

1. Do we not read of God reconciling the World to himself. God was 2 Cor. 5.
19.
the Agent in it, and this he could not do but by finding out some way to
satisfy and propitiate himself, that he might not impute their sins.

2. Did not Zaleucus in part help to satisfy his own Law by his own suffering,
losing one of his own eyes (as we heard in the story forementioned)? And this
is not accounted an imprudent act, but commended highly by the Authors that
relate it, as a worthy noble act, and expedient; and I told you, we have only
one thing to object against it, which cannot be objected here.

3. Tell me, O vain dark man, that would teach God, that reply against
God, What way was there else possible? Think a little on that: What way so ever
you will propound, as suppose, of less satisfaction (by some mere creature), or
no satisfaction; you may see the reason why you like it better, is, because you
have not the hatred of Sin, and love of Holiness, and care of Law and Justice,
that God has: nor indeed such as you ought to have; or else you must say, You
would have had God suffer Mankind remedilesly to perish; and then it is because
you have not that love to Mankind that God and Christ had: And this last is the
most seeming rational ground of our offense; and surely we will easily be
prejudiced against, and offended with, what God does, when God displeases us,
because he did not leave us irrecoverably to perish without remedy. O curvae in
terris animae and caelestium manes? O the crooked mind of dark man!

Object. But some have objected, It is impossible; one cannot suffer for
another. I have already answered what can be objected about the injustice, but
here the impossibility is objected.

Answ. 1. God's ways are above our ways and understandings. Shall we say that
is impossible, which he has said he has done, because we cannot understand it?

2. It is not oriously possible. God's forbidding Men to punish one for
another, argues the thing possible; he would not forbid impossible things. The
Heathens knew it very possible, we may see, by their offering up the fruit of
their body, for the sin of their soul.

3. It is so highly possible, that it has been and is common amongst Men. How
common is the translation of punishment from one to another; as in Hostages,
and men undertaking to bring out the offender? liable to the mulct of the
offender. Solomon writes much about avoiding suretiship, because, the debtor
failing, he must pay. Which takes it for granted as a thing common.

4. If the Papists, who yet would not be accounted Socinians (and many of them
are not) should scoff at this doctrine of Justification by Christ's
Righteousness and Satisfaction, as absurd, impossible (as some of them do); you
may tell them how shamefully they contradict themselves, and grant it eminently
possible by their proclaiming a Justification by the merits and sufferings of
Saints. Saint Francis his Wounds, and Becket's Blood; yea, the Virgin's Milk
will justify Men; yea, the scourgings and severities, and good deeds of Men of
their religious Orders, will so stand Men in stead, as if they had done those
things themselves: And yet some of them can make little or nothing of Christ's
Death.

5. To declare his Righteousness, (...), is, to declare plainly his
Righteousness. There is such a rectitude in God's Nature as causes him to hate
sin, and inclines him to punish it; and this natural justice inclines him to
punish fin in the person that commits it; but yet not as fire burns, that
cannot do otherwise; but this inclination (or this which we must conceive as
analogical to an inclination) is subject to his wisdom, and orderable by it.
And this Economy or dispensation concerning a Satisfaction, was as Governor
and Rector of the world, that he might not dishonor Himself in pardoning, to
secure the glory of his Justice, which would otherwise have been aspersed by
sins impunity, and to please himself in displaying the glory of his Attributes.
God is just, and this was an act of justice, governing justice, to declare at
this time, etc. We are prone to think, that this time of the Gospel was only a
time of love, grace, and compassion to sinners; but we see it was also a time
of Demonstration of Justice, of the strictest justice, and most inflexible
holiness and hatred of sin. He hereby shows how little he respects persons,
that if the dearest Son of his love will intercede, undertake for the pardon of
sinners, He shall pay dear for it. Here is inexorable Justice indeed. There
were indeed former demonstrations of God's justice, in the Destruction of the
Old World; Overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Babylonian Captivity; but
never any like this at this time, to vindicate his injured Law and Honor
before Men and Angels. It is natural to God to have a regard to himself, to his
own honor and concernment, that he make not himseif contemptible slighted as a
patron of sin, or no great en(...) to it: And as Rector it beho(...) assert his
Majesty, and keep up the repute of his Law and Government. How unworthy is it
of a Rector, by impunity and indulgence, to seem to have a confederacy with the
breakers of his Law? Though he pardon offenders, yet it must be in such a way
as there may be no ground of suspicion, as if he was pleased with sin, become
such a one as themselves, or not highly displeased with the violators of his
Law; it must be upon dreadfully-awing honorable terms. What can you imagine
Christ's Death was a compensation for, or a satisfaction unto; but to those
high and glorious Attributes of his Wisdom, Justice and Holiness? that saving
the honor of these, he might pardon and advance to dignity rebels against
Heaven, upon their returning to their subjection and allegiance; that the
honor and credit of these might be maintained, and yet the offenders not
perish. And this atrocious death of the Son of God for sin, did do God great
honor in the face of the Sun, and of the World: did assert his holiness and
ha(...) proclaim his Righteousness, and is a loud Thunderclap of terror
against such as shall again a second time, and after such hope brought in, undo
themselves: And by this, all the dishonor that would have come to God, by
pardoning submitting and yielding enemies and rebels, is cleared and wiped
off, and the repute of the Law as well secured and kept up, and offenders
(considerate) no more imboldened to slight Him, and his Laws, and Threats, by
looking on him as no great enemy to sin; than if the penalty had been executed
upon all Men for ever. I shall add no more here, because I have prevented my
self in speaking largely of this before.

6. That God might be just, and a justifier of fallen man, that God might be just
and merciful.

1. That God might be just: it would not be sense to stop here; for, God would
have been just without this Propitiation, inflicting the punishment on sinners
themselves; but then he would have been merely just, and no justifier of fallen
man; because man could never have satisfied; he would have been always paying,
and yet the debt always to pay still; so that there could never have been any
Justification of sinners.

2. But that he might be just, and a justifier, He set out Christ a
Propitiation for the remission of sins. Here you see two causes of Christ's
death. The love of God to Man one, and the justice of God the other. He was
induced to this amazing act by his Philanthropy, his love of man, and zeal of
justice. He so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believed on him, might not perish, but might have everlasting life.
And here his justice did not swallow up his Mercy, nor his Mercy his Justice,
but they are of quite distinct considerations. Here is a loud Testimony of his
Love to us, and love to his Law and Justice; of love to us, that Christ should
die rather than we perish; and of love to his Law and Justice, in that he
hereby took order that they should not be injured by his pardoning of us.

Yet observe well here, (for the understanding of the things, I have spoken of,
and shall speak of, depend much upon it) that this love was not the love of
Complacency or Rectoral love; for that is, and was, the fruit of Christ's
Death; but a love of pity, such as was consistent with Rectoral and Legal
hatred. Zaleucus might lawfully have a love of pity to his Son, before his
invented Satisfaction; but Rectoral wrath and hatred: He was bound in honor as
a just Rector to execute the Law, to keep it sacred and unblemished; and this
restrained his natural pity, from doing an injury to justice. And this Love
that I am speaking of, was the Love of one that was bound in honor and justice
to be an enemy, as things stood; but yet of one willing to find out some way,
that he might, with safety to his honor and justice, be a friend, as
Governor; that is, might justly not inflict the penalty. Thus you see the love
of Pity that sent Christ, was not the fruit of Christ's Death: But his love of
Complacency, his justifying love, Pardoning love, Rectoral love, that is the
fruit of his Death.

7. Justifier of Sinners, of fallen Man, that is implied in the word Propitiation
and remission of sin, and in the whole texture of the words. And here I will
show you, he died for Justification of the greatest of sinners, upon their
acceptance of him; yea, and of sinners then long since dead.

1. For the Pardon and Justification of the greatest Sinners, worst of Men,
whose throat was an open Sepulcher, and their feet swift to shed blood; as is
expressed before, in this Chapter. The greatest Sins cannot exceed the price
paid; for they are but the Sins of Man: but the Sufferings were the Sufferings
of God. They that were guilty of the hainousest act that ever the Sun saw, of
that horrid act of Crucifying Christ; upon their repentance, and being pricked
in their hearts, were forgiven; as we read in the Acts of the Apostles.

2. For the Pardon and Justification of Sinners, then dead before Christ's
death, God now declares his righteousness in the remission of those past sins.
Whether all those that were justified and saved under the Old Testament, did
know of this to come satisfaction, or not, I do not now dispute. But this is
plain (whether they knew of it or not) they were not justified and saved
without God's having respect to this to come Propitiation; it was by virtue of
this which is now declared. It is now declared to Men and Angels, that it was
upon the account of the Satisfaction intended and promised. They were justified
by virtue of Satisfaction designed and undertaken by Christ, and in due time to
be exacted and paid; but through the forbearance of God, the exacting of the
price for sins past and fore-committed, was deferred till the time of the
Gospel. A Meritorious cause is a Moral cause; and for a Moral cause to operate
and have its effect, it is not necessary that it do exist, it suffices that it
have an Esse cognitum, a being in knowledge. A man may be properly said to have
bought that which he has not yet paid for, and may have the actual benefit of
his purchase; if he has undertaken the payment, and the other accepts of, and
rests satisfied with his promise and undertaking. Grotius lib. de Satisf. thus
interprets this place, remission of sins past. And it seems probable enough
to be the meaning of this difficult place, Sanguis Christi profuit, antequam
fuit. Both the Ancients were, and we are saved by Christ; and God has now set
him forth a Propitiation for those past sins. And indeed till Christ thus came,
the Satisfaction was not paid, but through the forbearance of God, thus served
the turn, that it was undertaken, and promised, and typified, and represented
by the Sacrifices and Types which shadowed it out; but the Truth, Reality, and
true Sacrifice, came not till Christ. And God did forbear to inflict wrath on
them, because he should at length have satisfaction; and now he declares his
Righteousness in exacting the prefigured Satisfaction. They drank of the
spiritual Rock that followed them, which Rock was Christ. Hence it is not
improbably concluded by some, that he is called, The Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world. Yet I rather incline to them that read it -- written
from the foundation of the world in the book of the Lamb slain. Because in the
same Book, we read, Rev. 17. 18. Whose names were not written in the book of
life from the foundation of the world.
Rev. 13. 8. comparing it with that place, 1 Pet. 1. 19, 20. Redeemed with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without spot, who verily was
foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifested in these
last times, etc. Heb. 9. 15. The Apostle speaking of Christ's Sacrifice, says,
It was for the expiation of transgressions under the old Covenant; and (H^b. 9
6.) teaches us by undeniable consequence, that the virtue of Christ's death
reached to them before Christ; for he proves, that Christ need not (and so
shall not be offered often) be offered again to the end of the world; with this
argument, Because he was not often offered from the beginning of the world:
which reason of his, leans upon this implied foundation, That the death of
Christ was as necessary for, and as influential into the salvation of those in
the Ages before Christ, as in th^se Ages after his death. Col. 1. 20. And
(having made peace by the blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all things to
himself: by him, I say; whether they be things in Heaven, or things in the
Earth. By things in Heaven cannot be meant Angels (as some yet hold); for if we
should grant, that their confirmati^n was from Christ^ as Mediator, which yet
seems harsh; for who will say, if Adam had stood, his confirmation should have
been from Christ? Vasques and Becanus seem fully to prove the contrary against
other Schoolmen, by such Arguments as these. 1. ^t is virtually to say* They
should not have had their confirmation except Man had fallen; or else, that he
should have been sent a Mediator without Man's fall. 2. Christ died for all
those for whom he was Mediator, or merited any thing for* And the Apostle
seems to assert the contrary, by that phrase, (...), he did not take hold of,
or relieve Angels (for so learned men observe the word signifies). But should
all this be granted, yet they were not reconciled by Christ; for that implies
enmity: but here he says, that he might reconcile all things to himself,
whether things in Heaven, etc. It seems very probable, that by things in Heaven
are meant the Patriarchs and ancient Saints before dead. That place, Gal. 3.
16, 17. is most express; first* That there was a Law of Grace, called the
Covenant or Promise, confirmed or enacted of God in Christ with fallen man; the
tenor whereof was this, That all sincerely obedient believers, such as Abraham
was* should be saved and blessed. 2. That this was made by God in Christ,
before the giving of the Law by Moses.

8. Lastly, That he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in
Jesus; or, that is of the faith of Jesus, (...), that is, of the Christian
faith.

God set not forth Christ to dye merely for this end, that Sinners might be
justified without any more ado, only be sinners. Some have said, Be but sure of
this, that you are sinners, and you may believe you are justified. The
immediate effect of this Satisfaction, as satisfaction, and which is an
essential consequent of a satisfaction to Justice, is only this, That, that
obstacle being removed, he might be left at liberty to act in the pardon of
sinners, in what way, and upon what terms he pleased. The immediate effect is,
That God might be just, though he should pardon sinners; that he might pardon
salva justitia; not that he must pardon them, come what will of it; or be
unjust: not that sinners should ipso facto be pardoned, the price being
undertaken or paid, and accepted. The Justice of God, as a flaming sword,
obstructed all treating with us upon any terms of reconciliation whatsoever;
and this would have been an eternal bar to all influences and effluxes of
favor and bounty whatsoever. Now this Justice being satisfied (as I have
before made out) and this bar and obstacle removed, Divine Grace and Benignity
is left at liberty freely to act how it pleases, and in what way, and upon
what terms and conditions it thinks meet.

Object. Here the Antinomians object, What do you talk of terms and conditions?
Is it not injustice to refuse immediately to justify the Party? immediately to
pardon and acquit the offender, for whom the price was paid? And is it not
injustice to set them terms and conditions of their benefit by the price paid
for their justification and salvation, so as without the performance of them
they shall have no benefit by the said price?

Ans. It is not injustice. That which misleadeth men, and makes them think
otherwise, is, their looking on God as if he was properly a Creditor, whereas
he is Governor; and sins are not properly debts owing to God, but so called
metaphorically, because in some things alike they subject us to danger and
trouble, as debts do; and they look upon sinners as Debtors, and Christ as a
Surety properly. Get these things well into your minds, and you may see through
these mists.

First, Labor to understand this, that the case here is not properly the case
of Debtors, but of offending Subjects; and God is not to be looked upon
properly as a Creditor, but as a Rector, Governor, Legislator; and the Person
Christ sustained; and the part he acted in his Sufferings, was not in a strict
sense (though figuratively once so called) that of a Surety paying the debt it
self, and discharging the Bond, by paying the very thing it self in the
obligation; but of a Mediator, expiating Guilt, and making reparation to
Justice some other way than by the execution of the Law; yea, endeavoring that
the Law, the legal threat, might not be executed, by making amends for the
non-execution of it.

Secondly, Get this into your minds, That the Sufferings of Christ were not
properly an execution of the Law (though they may figuratively be so called)
but a satisfaction to Justice, that the Law-threat might not be executed. The
sufferings of Christ were not the very individual things threatened; for it
threatened the offenders should dye, and be damned; Cursed is every one that
continues not, etc. In the day thou eatest, thou shall dye. So that it was not
Christ was threatened, but we; for he was not the offender. His sufferings
therefore were not the idem, but the tantundem; not proper payment, but a
valuable consideration, or you may call it a refusable payment, though it be
not properly payment at all; not solution or payment in the strictest sense,
but a satisfaction in the strictest sense: The essence of which lies in this,
that it is justly and fairly refusable. In payment of debts, the most Laws
admit payment by a Substitute, and take it as all one in account of Law,
whosoever pays it, so it be but paid; yea, in many cases, though it be by
another without the Debtor's knowledge; it was paid by the same person in Law,
though not by the same natural person; and if any Laws do lay any stress on the
person of the Debtor, so that it shall be judged as no payment except paid in
person, such are hard Laws, and against natural equity; so that though payment
should justly according to such Munucipal Laws, be refusable from another, yet
it is not fairly tefusable: But it is quite otherwise in all Law and natural
Equity in the case of obedience and punishment: for here the Laws do justly and
equitably determine the very person that shall obey or suffer; and allow not
any delegation, as doing or suffering by another: so that if another suffer, it
is not the same in Law; if the penalty be suffered by another natural person,
it is suffered by another person in Law. And here, Dum alius solvit, aliud
solvitur, therefore such suffering of another contrary to Law, may be a
satisfaction that the Rector may with hono^r not execute the Law, but cannot
possibly be an execution of the Law, the idem, the same threatened.

I will make all plain to you thus:

Suppose the Law-threat had run thus: If any man sin, he shall dye, be damned,
or another for him; [he, or another] thus disjunctively; either of these would
have been the very thing threatened, the same in Law, as the Principal and
Surety are; and then all these after-mentioned inconveniences would have
followed.

First, In this case, had God provided one to dye for us, here would have been
nothing of pardon. Here indeed would have been grace and favor in thus
procuring one; but nothing of pardon, remission of sin: for it would not have
been a refusable payment; either of their deaths would have been the same in
Law, and so no act of Pardon or Grace to acquit upon it: whereas God for
Christ's sake forgiveth. We have by Ephesians. 4. 32
his blood the remission of sins. This would have been like proper solution;
and then the strictest Justice cannot deny an acquittance and justification to
the party, for whom it is paid; and there need not be, there cannot be, in this
case, any such thing as pardon: pardon and full satisfaction may stand
together, but not pardon and solution, or payment. e. g. If a Law be made, that
threatens, That for such an offense the Delinquent shall sit in the Stocks, or
another for him, thus disjunctively; here would be grace and favor in the
Prince, to procure one to sit for the offender, but nothing of pardon or
remission: for the utmost rigor of Justice could not refuse to acquit upon it;
here is no remitting any thing the Law requires, no pardon at all: for the Law
never required the offender himself should suffer, but he or another
indifferently.

Secondly, It would also in this case be injustice to inflict the least part of
the penalty threatened, upon the offender, when the other has suffered; because
it would be to inflict what was never threatened by the Law, and so what is not
due: for the utmost Justice requires no more than the suffering of one of them.

Thirdly, It would also in this case be nonsense, or injustice, to prescribe
the Delinquent terms or conditions on which he should have justification; the
benefit of the other's death, or of the other's sitting in the Stocks; or else
to have no benefit by them: for the offender would have right without
performing such conditions. And therefore as a plain denying the offender the
thing he has right to, would be injustice; so, to reduce back his absolute
right to a conditional, would be injustice in part: To threaten damnation if
men believe not, repent not, would be something of injustice, being a partial
denial.

Fourthly, Also in this case the offender would be justified immediately by the
other's death, by the Law that threatened, by the very Law of Works; there would
need no Covenant of Grace, or Gospelpromise; it would be injustice to prescribe
terms of benefit by it, as Faith, Repentance, as in the other case the
Delinquent would have right to impunity for his offense, by the other's sitting
in the Stocks, by the very Law that threatened it. There needs no Law of Grace
for requital; for it is the idem in Law, the very thing threatened, and so not
refusable by the strictest Justice; to promise here, would be to promise that
which we have right to without promise; and such promises would not be of
Grace, but mere Nullities.

But this death of Christ was a satisfaction much like a refusable payment: for
the threat was, The soul that sinned should dye, be damned; not he, or another.
The death of Christ was a satisfaction, a refusable payment; for God might have
refused, if Christ had interceded, as Moses, Blot me, I pray thee, out of the
Book of Life for the people; and save their souls, their lives. God might have
answered, Those that sin against me, I have only threatened, and those only I
will punish; but of thee will I require nothing, and from thee will I accept
nothing. For the threat was not, If a man sinned he should dye, or some other
for him (for then, either of them would have been the idem, the same in Law),
and so not refusable; but it was that the offender himself should dye: so that
whatsoever else than the offender's sufferings, could be offered, was
refusable, and so could be but a Satisfaction. And then these things will suit
and agree:

1. Here is pardon and remission, in accepting and acquitting: for he might
have refused to accept of Christ's death, and to acquit us upon it. It is
plainly, a not standing to his threat, a dispensing with his Law,
notwithstanding Christ's death, for him not to execute the Law upon us, though
an honorable dispensing with it.

2. Being a Satisfaction, a refusable payment, God may take off what part of
the penalty He and his Son agreed, from the offender, and leave on him what
part they please, and as long as they please and judge meet: And indeed, though
they did agree, and God has promised for Christ's death-sake, that they who
perform the Gospel-condition, shall not perish, but shall have eternal life:
they shall not undergo eternal sorrows, Hell-sorrows; yet they never agreed,
and God never promised that Believers should not be afflicted for their sins in
this life, or that they should not dye temporally, or that the ground as to
them should be freed from that first curse; or that believing Women should not
undergo pain in Childbearing; for these things God does inflict: therefore the
Son in paying the ransom, and the Father in accepting, never agreed they
should be freed from them in this life; though yet they did, so to moderate and
help in them, and sanctify by them, that a Christian life in this World is
worth living. Phil. 1. 22. To live in the flesh is worth while, (...), operae
pretium. And it is contrary to all Scripture, to say, Believers afflictions are
not for sin; and if they were not for sin, they would not be chastisements or
corrections: for it is of the essence of chastisement, that it be a punishment;
for punishment is the genus, and the whole nature of it is in every species, in
every chastisement. Punishment is truly defined, the infliction of a natural
evil, for a moral evil; and this is in every chastisement. If a Father should
whip his Child, not for any fault, but only to do him good, we might possibly
call it blood-letting, but not chas^isement, because it is not pe(...) If ^e
tie up his Child, not for any (...) but left he run into dangers in his
absence, you cannot call this, correction or chastisement, though grievous to
the Child, because it is not for a fault. And if God do punish his people with
temporal chastisements, then they are so far, and as to those temporal
chastisements, unpardoned; so far as they are punished, so far they are
unpardoned. If a Traitor be pardoned, but must lose some part of his Goods, he
is then pardoned as to his Life and Lands, but not as to that part of his
Goods. It is not less absurd to speak of chastening for a fault never
committed, than for a fault perfectly and every way pardoned. You may see how
this answers these difficulties: If it be a Satisfaction, he may pardon the
offenders, as to their ruin and destruction by their sins, and yet leave some
part of the penalty on them, that may make their hearts ache, and eyes weep;
though they be as brands plucked out of the fire, yet he may choose not to make
them immediately in this life, be like those whose garments smelled not of it,
without any show of injustice.

3. If the Sufferings of Christ were a Satisfaction, a refusable payment; then,
As God is bound no further to acquit the parties for whom it is paid, than he
accepting it, and Christ paying it, agreed: so (which is the main thing I have
spoken all this, to answer), He is bound only in such a way, and on such terms
and conditions, to acquit the Offender, as the party paying the price, and the
party accepting of it, agreed on.

Now God did not set forth Christ a Propitiation, and Christ did not give
himself a Pr(...)ion, that sinners should immediately be acquitted without any
more ado, only be sinners: for the Father and Son had a care, not only of the
offender's good, but also of their own honour^ for, if we shall suppose* that
through this Satisfaction, it might now well have consisted with God's Justice;
yet it is certain, it was not consistent with his wisdom and prudence in
Government, to pardon and deliver those that should slight deliverance; so to
re^eem Creatures, as to have them lawless; to lose his Rule and Government over
them; that they may say, We are delivered to commit all these abominations; to
be like Schoolboys, that have their orders, that they may do well if they will;
but if they will not, the Master cannot justly, according to those Temporary
Laws, punish them. Christ was not properly a Surety (though Metaphorically once
so called) who has only a care of one party to get deliverance for the Debtor,
and cares not for the Creditor; but he was a Mediator, a middle person, and
had care of both; would have their redemption and deliverance only in such a
way, as should no way dishonor God. He had a care of the Worship, Service, and
Honor of God, as well as of man's impunity and deliverance; and he would also
have a care that he should not be reproached as an unholy Savior; to have
redeemed one to live, as if the Blood of the Covenant was an unholy thing, and
would allow them impunity in all sin. He would not for his part have his
unspotted Righteousness to serve as a covering to wrap and cover wilfully
continuing running sores. Nay, Christ was so far from merely designing and
bargaining for the salvation of them that should continue wilful contemners of
God and his Laws; from intending his death for a Sanctuary, where wilful
continuing enemies might find refuge and safety; that his design was, to bring
Religion into the World, and to fetch it back from that swoon wherein it must
needs have lain, had not Christ dyed, had there been no hope for repenting
returning sinners. He was so far from merely purchasing the pardon of any, live
they as they list, that one of the great ends of his death was, That purchasing
such hope for them that returned, they might purify themselves; purchasing
such Promises, they might cleanse themselves from all pollutions of flesh and
spirit. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself Tit. 2. 14.
a peculiar people zealous of good works. He bare our sins (that is, the (...)
Pet. 2. 24
punishment of our sins) in his own body on a tree, that we being dead unto
sin, might live unto righteousness. That whereas God would have had no service,
no obedience, there being no forgiveness with him that he might be feared, but
Earth would have been like Hell; now God might have such poor shattered service
as our degenerate estate is capable of.

Therefore be sure, He would not use such an unlikely means as this; to bargain
for, and purchase of his Father pardon of sinners, so absolutely, that should
they wilfully slight their Redeemer* they should yet have the benefit of his
death, and he should be unjust in denying them pardon, and therefore wish them
only to repent, believe, reform, out of good nature, and ingenuity, and by way
of thankfulness; but if they should refuse, he should be unjust, according to
such an Economy, if he deny to them the pardon and justification procured by
Christ. Nay, let any man that is not forsaken of Reason, as well as Religion;
that is not giddy and drunk with error, and is not ignorant of the wickedness
of man's nature, judge, Whether this would be as likely a means for Christ to
bring Religion into the World, to obtain that they should have the fruit and
benefit of his death to justification and salvation, whether they repent,
return, or no^ you shall have these things, live as you list; only I beseech
you, by way ^f gratitude, repent, reform: Or, for God to give his Son, and
Christ give himself, that whosoever should believe, repent, return, should have
(...) benefit of it; and otherwise (...) short. Whether of these are (...)lier
way to lay such a sound (...) the world, judge (...) Would (...) pardoning sins
against the first (...) nant, show so dreadfully (by the death of his Son) how
hardly and difficultly he dispensed with his Law, that men might after go on in
sin without danger? Surely one of the ends of Christ's dying was to show, that
if he would not pardon sinners against the first Covenant, without such a
stupendous Satisfaction, how hopeless will their condition be, that perform
not the terms of this second Covenant, founded in the blood of Christ!

Christ never agreed for the salvation of final impenitent Unbelievers, never
satisfied for that, though he did for impenitency, and unbelief, and rejection
of Christ for a time, provided they came in at last. He obtained of God, not to
take every denial, every rejection, for an utter loss of all (for then we had
all perished); but obtained that God would wait, and be long-suffering to
sinners, and accept them to righteousness and life, provided they come in
before death. They that have a mind to it, notwithstanding Christ's bearing
their sins, may bear them themselves: and many will do so; even they that
knowing the terms of Justification and Salvation by Christ, do choose rather his
eternal wrath and displeasure, than to accept him on the condition of his love
and favor.

They agreed that they, and they only, shall have benefit by this Propitiatory
death of Christ, that shall, in this life, perform the conditions whereon it is
offered, and if they finally refuse it on these terms, they shall have no
benefit by it, but the wrath of God shall abide on them; yea, and they shall
perish with heavier perdition, with so^^r punishment, because of their treading
under foot the blood of the Covenant; slighting of it as not worthy their
acceptance upon the terms of it: Which is this new Covenant, this second
Covenant made in the blood of Christ.

So that I may say, Though immediately and antecedently, to the consideration
of fixing the terms, and making this second Covenant, Christ dyed (as I told
you before) that God might be just, though he should pardon sinners; yet he
dyed eventually, and the new Covenant being considered, that God might be just,
and the justifier of him that is of the faith of Jesus. He so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed, etc. And for this
cause he is the Mediator of the new Covenant, that by means of death for the
redemption of Transgressions, they which are called (that is, Heb. 9. 15
effectually called, converted) might receive the promise of the eternal
Inheritance.

Now it is necessary for your instruction herein, that I make out to you these
three things.

1. What Justification is. 2. What the Covenant. 3. What the Condition.
First, What Justification, and to justify, ^s.

If you know what Condemnation is, you may by it know what Justification is:
for contraries are mutually known by one another. Now Condemnation is contrary
to Justification. Who shall lay any thing to Romans 8. 33
the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies, Who is he that
condemns? If there be a controversy between men, Deu. 25. 1
and they come unto judgment, that the Judges may judge them; then they shall
justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked.

Now there is a two fold Condemnation, viz. by the Law, and according to the
Law; that is, by the Law, and by the sentence of the Judge.

A man that transgresses a Law, is immediately condemned by the Law. Adam in
the very moment he transgressed the Law, was condemned in Law; that is, made
guilty, the death threatened was made due to him. And again, when an offender is
proceeded against according to the Law, and, by the sentence of the Judge*
sentenced according to the Law, then he is Sententially condemned: First, the
Law condemns him, and then the Judge according to the Law.

So there is a Justification in Law, and a Justification by the Sentence of the
Judge. And these two senses of the word can only challenge any kind of
propriety; one is called Sentential Justification, by the sentence of the Judge,
pronouncing him righteous, and one that ought to be acquitted according to the
Law. The other is called (...).
Constitutive Romans 5. 19
Justification, or Justification in Law; which is, of one that has right to be
acquitted, when accused. When the Scripture speaks of Justification by
Christ, by faith, or to life, it constantly uses it in one of these senses. He
that is a believer, that has performed the Gospelcondition, is justified
immediately, ipso jure, in Law-title, by the Law of Grace; he is constitutively
justified by that Covenant or Gospelgrant [He that believes, shall be saved];
has right to not-perishing, and a right to eternal life, by this promise;
though he is not sententially justified till the day of Judgment: The Lord
grant he may find mercy at that day, says the Apostle. By the Law of Grace or
Promise, immediately the sinner upon his believing, has right to impunity, as
to Hell, and right to the Inheritance by Promise; and at the last day shall be
adjudged to it, to the immediate possession of all those Immunities which were
given by the Law of Grace or Promise. Not the hearers, but the doer of the Law
shall be justified -- In the Gal. 5. 5.
day when God shall judge the secrets of all men according to my Gospel. We
through the spirit do wait for the hope of righteousness by faith; that is, for
justification by faith at the last day. But this Sentential justification is to
come. Therefore whenever the Scripture speaks of justification in this life
(as for the most part it does), being justified by faith, we have peace with
God. But you are sanctified, you are justified -- it is to be understood of
justification in Lawtitle; and in this sense it is to be understood here. We
may say of a man whose case is good according to the Law, that ought to be
acquitted when it comes to trial, The Law justifies him, the Law acquits him,
he is justified already in Law; and so are believers in this life: There is no
condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh
but after the spirit. The justification here spoken of, is expressed by another
word in the Text, viz. Remission of sins. And the Scripture constantly uses
Justification in the Gospelway, and pardon or remission of sins, as equipollent
terms; and the Apostle proves, there is no justification now by works, but by
pardon of sins, Romans 4. 7, 8.
citing it out of the Psalms; Blessed are they whose iniquities are pardoned,
and whose si^^ are covered. Blessed is the man to wh^^ the Lord does not impute
iniquity. Observe the place, and you will see he uses imputing righteousness
without works, and not imputing iniquity, as the very same. Again, in the Text
justified freely by his grace through the (...)pt(...) that is in Christ, is
th^s (...) Scriptures, Redemption through his Ephesians. 1. 7.
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. And,
redemption through his blood, even Col. 1. 14.
the remission of sins. Be it known unto Acts 13. 38, 39.
you therefore brethren, that through this Man is preached unto you the
remission of sins; and by him all that believe are justified from those things
from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. The blood of the
Matt. 26. 28.
new Covenant shed for the remission of sins. And this justification of
sinners, or forgiveness of sins, is reckoned as one Article of the Creed, as
essentially necessary to salvation to be believed.

And indeed, the Justification (in law) of fallen man, is all one with the pardon
of sin. And as for the respective difference of pardon being a discharge from
the obligation of the Law to punishment; and justification from the
condemnation and accusation of the Law; it is so little, that it is not worth
while to clear it to you; for the obligation of the Law to punishment, and the
condemnation and accusation of the Law, are one and the same act.

Justification of one guilty, is all one with pardon of sin. Yet there is this
difference between Justification taken at large, and pardon, viz. None can be
pardoned but an offender; but a man that was never an offender, is capable of
being justified (as Adam would have been, had he stood) against any charge
pleaded or pleadable against him. But if once a man be guilty of the breach of
a Law, his Pardon and Justification are all one; for there can be no
justification of offenders, but by a legal discharge of the sinner from the
obligation to punishment, which is pardon. So that Justification actively
taken, is an act of God, whereby he pardons our sins, or discharges us from
condemnation, or gives right to salvation, notwithstanding our sins. All these
are the same, and only differ in words. If you should define Justification, An
act of God, whereby he pardons our sins, and constituteth us righteous; all
the fault here is only this, You do tautologize; for there needs no more to
righteousness, than pardon of sin: for that which puts an offender into such
a state, as if he had performed the Law in all things, that does perfectly
justify, or constitute him righteous: but, pardon of all sins, both of
omission and commission, does put a man into that state, as if he had performed
the Law in all things (for it puts him into that estate, as if he had
transgressed the Law in nothing; therefore, as if he had performed the Law in
all things). It is impossible to find a middle. I say, there needs no more to
righteousness, than pardon of sin. If all his sins be pardoned, he is ipso
facto non reus, not guilty; and if not guilty, he is justus, just. It is
impossible to find any medium (...), in capaci, in a capable Subject. In a
subject incapable, where there is not debitum inessendi; there may be
notguilty, not-unjust, and yet not-just; as in a Brute or Stone. If a man by
his sin be guilty, be obliged to lose Heaven and go to Hell; if his sin be once
pardoned, this obligation once dissolved, he is in statu quo prius, has right
to Heaven, and to be free from Hell. If right to any good thing that a man
should have, if innocent, should yet be wanting to a man pardoned (as you may
see I did yield such a thing before as to this li^e) the want of that good
thing is part of punishment; and therefore he is not wholly pardoned, no more
than wholly justified as yet, except the right to that good thing be restored.
If the poena damni, the loss of the enjoyment of God be punishment^, then
pardon of sin restores right to the enjoyment of God; else not fully pardoned,
no more than justified. If a Traitor be pardoned, but must lose his Goods, he
is then pardoned and justified as to his Life and Lands, but not as to his
Goods. So that they are the same thing, his pardon and justification; and there
is no more in the justification of an offender, than pardon of sin. Those
learned men that oppose this, constantly grant, That if pardon of sin put an
offender into such an estate, as if he had performed the Law in every thing,
then it would apparently be the whole of Justification: and also that pardon of
sin puts him into such an estate, as if he had offended the Law in nothing;
and also that the satisfaction of Christ is enough for pardon of sin. But they
maintain, that it is possible for a man not to have offended the Law in any
thing, and yet not to have fulfilled the Law in every thing; which I should by
no means tell them that know it not, was it not in duty to instruct you, that
it is opposed without show of reason.

And by the way you may see how contrary to Reason (as well as Scriture) that
way of theirs is, who hold, That Christ's fulfilling of, and Christ's obedience
to the Law, is accounted, imputed, as if believers had fulfilled and obeyed the
Law in his so doing: You may hold the active and passive righteousness of
Christ a satisfaction to Justice for our breach of the Law; both of them a
valuable consideration, on which God will acquit the offenders, so they do but
perform the Gospel-conditions; and I can easily answer all the Arguments I have
read, to exclude his active obedience from being part of the satisfaction to
Justice for the breach of the Law: But to hold, over and beside such a
satisfaction for our disobedience, that there is made over to us a right to his
obedience, so as God to account us as if we had obeyed the Law in him; beside
the danger of making God account men as perfect as Christ, and accounting that
which is not true;

First, It is altogether needless: for the Law requires not of us, both
suffering and obedience, in respect of the same time and actions, but only one
of them; either our obedience, or our undergoing the penalty. And it is vainly
alleged, that it requires suffering for the time past, and obedience for the
future. It is in effect to deny Christ has satisfied for future sins: Ere long
those future sins will be past; and if we do not obey for the future, we sin;
and if we sin, the Law requires only our suffering for expiation; and that,
Christ's Satisfaction, Expiation, Propitiation, has satisfied for.

Secondly, It makes the death and sufferings of Christ needless: for if we
obeyed the Law in him, he being in our stead, so as God accounted us to have
obeyed in him; then there was no need of his death: for though we obeyed not in
our selves, yet we obeyed in Christ. If a Soldier be by the Martial Law to
watch his hour or dye; if another be accepted to watch for him, so as it may be
said another has watched for him; though he did not watch, what, Must this
other Soldier dye for him, as well as watch for him? No Law requires both. It
was not, Do this, and dye. If his obedience was so formally for us, as to be
accepted by God for us, as if we had fulfilled the Law in every thing, What
need was there of a Satisfaction, to make as if we had b^oken the Law in
nothing? and vice versa.

Thirdly, If Christ fulfilled the Law for us in this sense, so as it is to be
imputed to us, as if we had fulfilled the Law our selves; then we should be
freed altogether from any obligation from the Law to obedience; just as we are
freed from the condemnation of the Law, because Christ underwent it as a
Satisfaction for us, we should not then sin in notobeying the Law, and we could
not be pardoned by Christ for our sins in not obeying the Law; for they are no
sins according to this Hypothesis.

If there be a Law, That if a servant, hired for a year, shall refuse to serve
his year's service (if his Master require) he shall lie in the prison a year.
Suppose one hired did not serve a year, but another served a year good and
faithful service for him, Must this hired man also serve a year for himself, or
he is to blame? and, Must this man, accepted to serve a year for him, also lie
in prison for him? What if I did not serve a year, yet another served for me,
and better service than I can perform? What need is there, may he say, that I
should serve it my self? Do I think I can mend his work? do it better my self,
than I have done it in him?

I am almost ashamed to lay open the weakness of them that hold these things,
after such multitudes of learned Protestants have shown their absurdity. How
much clearer is the Scripture* way, of God for Christ's sake justifying and
pardoning us, for Christ's Satisfaction, Propitiation? than to talk of our
fulfilling the Law; yea, or (which is not so ill) our satisfying in Him,
suffering in Him, or redeeming our selves in Him, or God accounting us to have
satisfied in Him. These are Phrases the Scripture is a stranger unto: though if
they will say, as some, They mean no more by such speeches, but that God for
Christ's Satisfaction gives us all these Gospel-mercies: I shall only say, They
might speak plainer. And our satisfying in Him is true, in a figurative sense,
though not in a proper sense; and so God's accounting us to have satisfied in
Him: yet, in no possible sense is our fulfilling the preceptive part of the Law
in Him, true; for, this would make Christ's satisfaction needless.

Now since I have defined Justification by pardon of sin; it is necessary that
I tell you what Pardon is: Pardon is a dissolution, or discharge from the
obligation to punishment. It is none of these four things that only pretend to
come in competition.

1. Pardon of sin is not, A making sin cease to be: for that is to be ascribed
to Sanctification, which is a real change in opposition to relative.

2. It is not, making that it should be said, that the sin was never committed;
this is impossible.

3. It is not, making sin that it do not in its own nature deserve damnation.

4. It is not, the executive taking off the penalty; for this is a consequent
of pardon, by virtue of justice and faithfulness. Yet sometimes it is used in
this improper sense in Scripture.

But it is, A dissolution of the obligation to punishment; the dueness of the
penalty is taken away immediately by pardon, and so remotely and ultimately the
penalty; God being just and faithful, will not inflict what is not due, what he
has made not due by his Law of Grace.

So that Justification actively taken for God's act, is an act of God, whereby
he pardons our sins, or, dissolveth the obligation to punishment. And then
Justification, when taken passively for the effect of Justification, is, A
dissolution of, or discharge from the obligation to Hell and Punishment, or a
right to Salvation; or, a right to be free from Condemnation, which is nothing
else but a right to salvation.

It does not, in this Discourse, concern me to speak of the further degrees of
Happiness superadded: for, Justification of it self comprehends no more than
right to what would have been due to us if we had been righteous without
pardon, had never transgressed the Law: for, Justification is from some thing,
as well as to some thing. Yet this, on the by: Greater things than we fell
from, do come to man by the same Law of Grace, by the same blood of Christ, and
upon the performance of the same condition, that Justification or pardon of sin
does. As for the meritorious cause of this Justification, I have spoken very
largely of it already: for whose sake, merit, Cujus intuitu: I told you that he
justifies us through the redemption that is in Christ; and I dare not ever and
anon return to speak of it here, lest I should confound your understandings. I
shall, after this, speak of God's working Faith in us, that we might be
justified, and Christ's meriting of it. Therefore do not in your too forward
thoughts overrun me, as if I denied any thing I come not yet to speak of.

Now I will tell you what this act of God is; how God discharges the sinner,
and dissolveth this obligation to Punishment, and so gives right to salvation
which we lost by our sins.

It is by some new Law or Constitution, by some Covenant or Promise, founded in
Christ's Satisfaction. It is some judicial juridical act, and therefore by some
Law-act. I thus prove it.

1. It is impossible that a man that is a sinner should have right to be freed
from condemnation, but it must be by some Law of Grace, some legal discharge.
Such a jus or right cannot possibly pass, but by some Law-act. If a Rector
should refuse to inflict the penalty on a man guilty or condemned, this is not
Pardon or Justification. You may call it Suspension, Impunity; but the offender
has no right to the Impunity, the obligation to punishment is not dissolved by
it. Yea, suppose God should have resolved within himself never to inflict the
penalty; yet he might inflict it when he would, without injustice (though I
confess not without mutability), the offender has no right to impunity by such
an intention, no jus, the obligation is not dissolved till some lex remedians,
some remedying Law, some Rectoral Law of Oblivion, some Act of Pardon and
Oblivion: else, it is only forbearance, but no acquittance, no discharge, no
pardon, no justification.

2. God will be true to his own Laws, and will not leave a man unpunished to
whom punishment is due by his own Constitutions, all things considered; but his
judgment and execution will be according to Truth and Law. He that condemns
Prove. 17. 15.
the righteous, and justifies the wicked, they both are an abomination to the
Lord. He will sentence men according to his own Laws; and he will not justify
or condemn pro libitu, but according to his own declared Laws. He will not
sententially hereafter justify, nor will he account justified here, any
sinner, but whom the new Law of Grace, the Gospel founded in the blood of
Christ justifies, which only justifies Believers.

3. Condemnation is by some Law: therefore Justification must be by some Law;
for, Contraries are of the same general nature. As condemnation is by a
Law-threat; so Justification of a sinner must be by a Law-promise. It is a
Law-rule, that Obligations are dissolved by the same way whereby they are made.
The Apostle speaking of boasting being excluded in Justification, asks, By
what Law? and answers, By the Law of Faith; implying plainly, Men are justified
by the Law of Faith.

4. We may clearly see it by the tenor of the Covenants, Romans 10. 5, 6, 9
Moses describes the righteousness of the Law, the tenor of the Covenant of
Works, which would have justified men, had they performed the condition of it:
The man which does these things, shall live in them. But the righteousness of
faith, the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, the word which we preach, is this:
If thou confess with thy mouth, and believe with thy heart, that God has
raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Had man performed the Legal
Condition, perfect and perpetual obedience, the Law of Works would have
justified him. Therefore, now, if a man perform the Gospel-condition; the
Gospel, this Law of Faith, will justify him. See also Gal. 3. 16, 17, 21, 22,
of the two Covenants. To Abraham and his seed were the Promises made; that is,
to Abraham, and all true Believers that are of the Faith of Abraham; as he
fully explains himself in other places of the Chapter, especially the last
verse. And is the Law against the Promises of God, against this Covenant
confirmed of God in Christ, That he that believes shall live? Had there been a
Law which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by that
Law: but the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith
of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. We may argue plainly thus:
This Law, this Covenant-Promise, Believe and live; can give life, that is,
right to life; for some do perform the Condition of this Law: Therefore, verily
Righteousness is and must be by this Law. Can any man possibly give a reason
why that Law would have justified, would have given right to life, and so
righteousness have been by it, to a man that had performed perfect obedience,
and not this Believe and live, perform the Gospel-conditions and live; and not
this justify, give right to life, and so righteousness be by it?

5. To deny this, is to say, the Gospel-Promises are mere Ciphers and
Nullities; they have no effect, if they do not give right to Impunity and
eternal life, which is Justification to those that perform the conditions: Nay,
it is to deny that they are Promises; for if Promises, they must have the
common nature of Promises, which is to give right. To deny the efficacy of
them, is to deny they are gracious Promises; it is to say they are useless, as
to giving the right; we should have had right without them. It is no Act of
Oblivion, much less a very gracious Act of Oblivion, that does not pardon and
justify properly them that perform the Conditions of it; no Act of Oblivion to
him that would be justified by doing that which is the condition of it without
it. And this, by the way: They that say, Faith attaineth right as an
Instrument, and not as a condition, make all the Promises Nullities; they in
effect say, We should have had right, had we performed that thing which is the
condition, without such a promise.

Thus you see, Justification must be by some Law of Grace; and indeed
Protestants seem agreed, it is a Juridical Act. Now what Law of Grace is it?
What names is it to be called by? You may call it, The Promise, the Covenant,
the Law of Grace, the Law of Faith, the Gospel; by these names it is called in
Scripture. The tenor of it is this: He that turns, shall live: He that
believes, shall be saved: He that accepts Christ in the Gospel-way, on the
Gospel* terms, shall have the benefit of this Propitiation to his justification
and salvation, though never so great a sinner. This is the Gospel, the Law of
Faith, the Law or Covenant of Grace founded in the blood of Christ. These
Promises are Yea and Amen in Christ; are the Covenant confirmed of God in
Christ, as the Apostle calls them. And by this all were justified and saved,
that ever were saved by the blood of Christ. You shall all be judged, that is,
justified or condemned, sententially, according to this Gospel. And, as you
shall be sententially judged according to this Law of Liberty at the last day;
so, you are here in this life constitutively justified or condemned here in
law. The word which Christ spoke shall John 1^. 48.
condemn (...) at (...) last day; shall justify or (...). So it does in
Law(...) them that obey the Gospel here. For not the hearers of the (...) are
just before God (he speaks Romans 2. (...), (...)
of the Law of Grace: it is like that. Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord; but he that does the will of my Father, shall inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven); but the doers of the Law shall be justified, in the day when God shall
judge the secrets of all hearts, according to my Gospel.

I hope you now begin to see into the nature of Justification; and by seeing
what it is, you see what it is not. Only these things following, to my best
remembrance, are, and can with any show be pretended to be called
Justification; except what the Pupists pretend. That it is nothing else but
Sanctification; which I pretermit as ridiculous. He would not be an abomination
to God, that could justify the wicked; that is, sanctify them, according to
their interpretation.

First, It is not. Our knowing we are justified, which some call Justification
in Conscience. For,

1. The Scripture never calls Assurance (our knowing we are justified)
Justification.

2. We may be justified in Scripture-sense by this Gospel, having the condition
of Justification, and yet not know it; yea, think we are not justified, and
have no right to salvation; else, woe to troubled souls. And we may not be
justified, and think we are.

3. In this sense we should be properly said to justify our selves, and not
God to justify us: for it is we that know we are justified, by the act whereby
we know it; and not God, though God enable us to know we are justified.

Secondly, Justification is not, God's knowing we are justified, and have right
to Impunity, right to Heaven: it is not God's knowing, accounting us, judging
us justified: for we are first justified, pardoned in order of Nature, though
not of Time, before he knows, accounts us so be. We first have this right to
Impunity, Salvation, before He knows or accounts us to have it. The Object is
in order of Nature before the Act; a thing is, before it be known. If there be
an Act of Oblivion made, upon condition of Rebels laying down their Weapons;
Offenders are pardoned, justified in Law-title, upon laying down their Weapons,
in order of Nature, before the King, or any else, know or account them
pardoned. God does not account men's sins pardoned, till first they be so by
his own Law of Grace. They that justify the wicked, or condemn the righteous,
are both an abomination to the Lord. As God did not account Adam guilty,
condemned, till first he was so, by his own Law, through sin; so he does not,
will not account any justified, pardoned; till first they are so by his own Law
of Grace made in the Blood of Christ, which is upon their performing of the
Condition of it.

Thirdly, Justification is not, God's knowing we shall be justified. God indeed
does know men shall be justified when they believe: but this is not
Justification. It does not follow that a man is justified, and his sin
pardoned, who is going on in all villainy, because he belongs to the Election
of Grace, because God knows he will believe, and so will be justified when
brought home. For, 1. God knows, till he believe, he is unjustified, his sin
not pardoned, he is under the curse of the Law, and under the Rectoral
displeasure of God: for, Without Faith it is impossible to please God. God
hates all workers of iniquity with this Rectoral hatred. He that believes
not, is condemned already; he is so far from being justified. You cannot say of
such a man, he is justified, his sins pardoned, but he knows it not. No; till
a man believe the wrath of God abides on him. Hell is yet his due, by God's
own Laws of Government; though Heaven will be so, when he believes. 2. Else
Justification and pardon of ^in would be from Eternity, which we are sure is
contrary to all Scripture that makes them consequent of Faith, Repentance, and
Conversion, whatsoever some have said to the contrary, -- turn them from
darkness to light, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance,
etc. We have believed, Gal. 2. 16.
that we may be justified by the faith of Christ. To whom righteousness shall
Romans 4. 24.
be imputed, if we believe. That they may return every man from his evil Jer.
36. 3.
way, that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin. -- lest they should see
with their eyes, and be converted, Mar. 4. 12
and their sin be forgiven them.

Fourthly, Justification is not, God's intending, decreeing, willing that men
should be justified when they believe. 1. Then it would be from Eternity; which
is repugnant to all Scripture: God speaks of it as a thing future. God
intended from Eternity, That our King should be King of England; but he was not
King of England till his Father was dead, and then h^ (...) the legal Title. 3.
God's intending from Eternity to condemn men for their sins, is not
Condemnation; else men would be condemned from Eternity: but, then men are
condemned when they sin, and the Law condemns them. So, God's intending to
justify sinners upon believing, is not Justification: But, when men believe,
then God justifies them by his Law of Faith. 3. To say, This is meant by
Justification, is to make nonsense of all those places of Scripture that make
it future. When he says, God will justify; we must then say the meaning is,
He will willjustifie. We must double the word will.

Fifthly, Some tell us, That Justification is properly and formally Christ's
suffering or obedience, or properly God's laying our sins on Christ. But then
we must say, Christ never merited our pardon or justification; we are not
forgiven for Christ's sake: for, Christ never merited th^se things which they
call Justification, viz. his own sufferings, or our sins laying on him.

Could you think of any other thing to call Justification, beside what I have
here taught you, I could with much ease show you the absurdity of it. These are
the likeliest of any I can think of, to pretend to be it; that are not it, and
are pretended by some to be it.

You now see, or may see, Justification is God's Juridical Act by his Gospel,
by his Law of Grace. If an Act of Oblivion be made on these terms, That
whosoever of such Rebels shall go and promise before some Justice of Peace,
they will be loyal Subjects for the future; as soon as ever they have thus
promised, this Law justifies, pardons them. They did not pardon themselves
(that is a foolish pretense of some weak men, contrary to the knowledge of all
Lawyers and Divines, yea, of any rational men), but the Lawgiver did pardon
them by this Rectoral Act of Pardon upon their promise. If there be a Law in
force, that every Felon should dye: but there is also another remedying* Law,
That if the Felon read, he shall not dye: When he reads, the Law pardons
him; the Lawgiver by this Law justifies him from the charge and condemnation
of the other Law.

It is by this Gospel, this perfect Law of Liberty, that we are justified; this
is that new Law that Ministers are sent to preach: Go preach the Gospel to
every creature. He that believes, shall be saved. He that believes not, shall
be damned. This is our great business, To tell men the condition on which they
shall be pardoned, justified, and so saved. And should any Ministers be
ignorant of their great Message? yea, so ignorant as to say, These are no
conditions, no terms, nothing required of us in order to attaining* the benefit
of Christ's death? How sad should this be to us? Men are justified or condemned
here in this life, by this Gospel, in a Law-sense; and, in this sense,
Scripture for the most part uses the word Justify; and men shall hereafter be
justified or condemned sententially according to this Gospel. Thus I have told
you what Justification is; which was the first Question propounded to be
answered: and I have tacitly slidden into the second Question, What the
Covenant is? and answered that. The third propounded was, To tell you what the
Condition is.

Thirdly, What is meant by this, (...), Him that believes in Jesus; or, Him
that is of the faith of Jesus. This is the Question now to be answered, What is
the Condition of the Covenant of Grace, of the Law of Grace, on the performance
of which this Propitiation, this price of Redemption shall be ours, for our
justification and salvation? Ours, I say, with this limitation [For our
justification and salvation]; or, to speak more strictly, The condition of our
justification and salvation by it: For, God never gives us interest in his
Son's Merits and Satisfaction in its essential nature, but only in the fruits
and effects of it. He gives us his Merit only in such a sense as a man be said
figuratively to give a Captive a sum of money, which it may be the Captive
never handled, never had it given to him at all properly, but only it was paid
to the King of that Country for his ransom.

I answer: What would you wish or desire it should be? Think of that a little;
for that is it, I dare say, if you think or desire rationally. Should God say,
O ye guilty Rebels, I have found a Ransom; I have found out a way that I can
now pardon you with safety to my Honor and Justice. Now, as ingenuous men,
speak, and tell me, what I shall do for you? Should I pardon you, and give you
Heaven and Happiness, though you should continue to live in all Villainy, hating
me and my holy ways, slighting my Law and Government? We would answer, No. This
would not become the holy and universal Magistrate and King of the World; this
would be unworthy of God: For, then we might say, We are delivered to commit
all these abominations: this we have begun to do, an nothing will be restrained
from us which we can imagine to do; and there will be none to put us to shame.
Speak then like honest men that have some sparks of ingenuity. We should say,
Make not the terms perfect obedience; for, we brake that old Covenant that had
these terms, when, we had our perfect strength; and now we are weakened
wonderfully, shattered wonderfully by our fall.

Ans. Make the condition, the terms this: That if we, humbly acknowledging our
desert of damnation, repenting us of our iniquities, and seeking to thee for
forgiveness, shall sincerely desire and endeavor to please thee, and keep thy
Commandments, and shall bewail it with grief when we fall short, and fail in
this our duty, that then we shall have the benefit of this Propitiation: So
that only our wilful chosen casting off thee and thy Government, shall undo us.
And make it, that though we should have long refused thee, yet if at length we
thus repent and return, we shall find this mercy.

This is well said thus far: And though this be not now enough for us, yet this
seems to comprehend all the condition required of men to justification and
salvation, before the appearance of Christ in the flesh. There were Promises of
Forgiveness, Justification, and right to Heaven, made known to the World by
Noah the Preacher of Righteousness, and others, upon the condition of
repentance and returning to God. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?
was said to a great sinner. This was Gospel, not Law; for that requires that a
man never have been a sinner. The Book of Job is generally with reason held to
be written before the Law of Moses; and his Friends knew and taught this
Doctrine, and name it as coming from the Ancients by Tradition, If any Job 8.
5, 6, 7, 8. Chap. 33. 27, 28. Chap. 22. 21, 22, 23
man shall say, I have sinned and perverted that which is right, and it profits
me not; he will deliver his soul from going down into the pit. And these
Promises were made by virtue of this death of Christ. Moses enters the people
into this Covenant, To be the Lord's people; and promises on that, God will be
their God: and he sprinkleth blood, and says, Behold the blood of the Covenant
which the Lord has made with you this day; upon their engaging to be the
Lord's people, and to obey his voice; to signify, it was made in the blood of
Christ. And he says, I have set before you life and death, in that I command
you to walk in his ways: And that which he commanded, was not the old
conditions, which were impossible, viz. Never to have been sinners. It is not
in the Heavens, or beyond the Sea; but is nigh thee, in thy heart and in thy
mouth. It was, to love God in sincerity, and walk in his ways And the Apostle
cites this, and says it is Gospel, even the word of faith which they preached,
Romans 10. 6. Yea, and the sons of strangers that join themselves to the Lord, to
love the name of the Lord, and take hold of this Covenant, to them ^e would
give, etc. And so the Prophets, If the wicked turn from his wickedness, he
shall live, he shall not dye. This was the Gospel; this promise was made in the
blood of Christ: for the Law admits of no pardon upon repentance. And any that
were justified and saved upon the performance of these conditions, were saved
only by the death of Christ promised and undertaken; and this obedience and
turning to God, is a great part of the Gospel-condition. So that obedience is
called Faith; and disobedience, Infidelity. He that believes Joh. 3. 16
on the Son, (...), has everlasting life: but he that believes not, (...), he
that believes not, or obeys not the Son, or is not persuaded by him. So, To
day if ye will hear (that is, obey) his voice, Heb. 3, 7, 12
harden not your hearts, as in the provocation. Take heed lest there be in any
of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God: To whom
swear he, they should not enter into his rest? But to them that believed not,
(...), or to them that were disobedient? So we see they could not enter in
because of unbelief. We see how disobedience and unbelief are promiscuously
used, Heb. 4. 1. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of
entering into rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. For unto us was
the Gospel preached, as well as unto them; but the word did not profit them,
not being mixed with faith (or obedience, used promiscuously) in them that
heard it. You may observe hence, that they had the Gospel preached to them in
the Wilderness; and you may here see what the Gospel is; A promise of rest and
happiness to sinners, to fallen man; and we see, Heaven was promised under the
type of Canaan; and we see, the Gospel is a conditional promise: for, if
absolute, the missing of Heaven and rest would have been ascribed to God's
unfaithfulness, and not to man's disobedience or unbelief: and you see, what
the condition of the Gospel is, by seeing faith and obedience counted as one.
Seeing therefore it remains Heb. 4 6.
that some must enter in, and they to whom it was first preached entered not in
because of unbelief, (...) because of disobedience; and so the Margent of your
Bibles have it, also ver. 11. And the Apostle tells us what Faith was necessary
in those days, Heb. 11. 5, 6. Enoch had this testimony, that he pleased God;
but without faith it is impossible to please God: for he that comes to God
must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. It is essential to Religion, to believe there is forgiveness with
God, that he may be feared. The Gospel-condition is rather the diligent seeking
of Him (if you will place it in one of these acts only) than the believing he
is, and is a rewarder of them that come to him: for, this may be without that
seeking, but not that seeking without this. I think it was not an essential
condition to Justification and Salvation in those days, to have an explicit
knowledge and belief of Christ's death and satisfaction, though God did pardon
them upon their returning unto him upon the account only of that to come
Satisfaction. And that which is like a Mathematical demonstration to me, that
it was not an essential condition of pardon and salvation, is this, viz. If it
was an essentially necessary condition of Justification then, then no man could
be in a state of justification and salvation, without an explicit knowledge of
Christ's death and satisfaction to come. But the Disciples of Christ (at least
some of them) were truly regenerate men, truly children of God, and in a
justified estate before Christ's Resurrection, and believed it not. That they
were truly the people of God, and in a justified estate before his
resurrection, is clear; for says Christ (before that), You are clean, through
the word I have spoken to you. And it is said of Nathaniel, A true Israelite,
in whom is no guile. And else we must say, God had no people in the world at
that day; for you will confess, they were the best. And again, it is apparent
they did not believe any such thing as his death, and paying a price of blood.
Nay, they were so far from believing he should so dye, that they rather
believed that he should not so dye. When ever he spoke any thing of his death,
it is said, They understood Mat. 16. 23. Mark 9. 31, 32 Luke 9. 44, 45* Luke
18. 34.
none of these things: and, Far be it from thee: and when dead, they thought it
unlikely that he should be a Redeemer: We trusted this was he that should have
redeemed Israel. They looked on him as the promised Messiah, but thought he was
to be some great Temporal Deliverer, and his Redemption should be with Power,
and not with Price. How then could they be saved, if they had then died? I
answer: That they, as others before them, believed God would pardon sinners
upon their repentance, and returning from sin unto God; but for whose sake or
merit they knew not.

I do not here deny but some before them might and did know something of
Christ's death and Propitiation: and I do not deny, it was their fault they
knew no more, and understood no more the Types and Prophesies of him: but all
that I contend for, is this, that it was not a necessary condition of
salvation; else the Disciples had not been in a justified estate. And I may add
this, John Baptist was under a clearer dispensation than they before him, and
the least in the Kingdom of Heaven in a clearer than John, and so the Disciples
in a clearer than John. Hence it is very probable, If the Disciples knew not
any thing of it, very few before them did, that lived under more obscure
Dispensations, and had not the helps they had. Now such repentance, sincere
obedience, and turning, is still a part of the Gospel-condition: for, this is
not taken away now under the Gospel; it is as much a condition of the Covenant,
as ever, That we take God for our God, and turn from sin* Will any man say,
That Ministers are not to preach from those Texts, If the wicked turn from his
wickedness, he shall live. And, If you live after the flesh, you shall dye; but
if you through the spirit do mortify, etc. These things are as much a
condition as ever. But there is something added under the Gospel, something
required of us as necessary, that was not so to them. Now, if you believe not I
am He, you shall dye in your sins.

It might be replied (to continue the former Dialogue), You have well said in
propounding this to be a condition; Nonnulla hic desiderari, Habes confitentem
reum: sed quae mihi solutionem alienarum quaestionum (...) imponerent. In
quibus quidem aqua mihi non multum haeret: At harum enodatio plusculum
insumeret chartae; paucis enim expedire non licet. Et forsan invidiam mihi
conciliaret, quae tu hujus generis ad populum conatibus maximopere cavenda est.
Dumque necessitas rerum in confesso est unde oritur non adeo laborandum: nec
est tanti, nobis clar^ evangelii luce agenti^^s; nostra enim res non ageretur.
^uare fere^at animus h^c ut vides aliquantulum (...). and h^antia, relinquere;
and proculdubio praestat operasis de rebus and explicatu difficilibus tacere
quam pauca dicere.
but there is something more yet, is fit to be required of those that live
under the clear Dispensation of the Gospel, viz. That we, after Christ is thus
come, should explicitly know, believe, trust in, and honor our Redeemer. It
is sit there should be faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, as well as repentance
toward God: That he should save only those that come to God by him, and ask in
his Name: That over and above being true Israelites in whom is no guile, there
should be a belief of Christ, and his death and resurrection. And so indeed
there are new Articles essential to our Creed; Except you believe I am he, you
shall dye in your sins.

To conclude, This is the Gospelcondition: God says to us as Solomon to
Adonijah (when fled to the horns of the Altar): He deserves to dye; but if he
will show himself a worthy man, not a hair of his head shall fall to the
ground: but if iniquity be found in him (if he will be false and treacherous to
me and my Government) he shall dye. It is seemingly too high an Allusion; but
the New Testament often uses the word [worthy] for carrying in our weak
measure suitably. I mean however no more but this; Be but Christians in good
earnest; believe the truth of the Gospel steadfastly, in such a degree as to
venture all upon it; and love God and Christ heartily, and serve them according
to your weak shattered ability faithfully, so that it shall be the real grief
of your soul when you fall short; and this shall serve your turn. So the terms
are the whole of Christianity, the whole duty of man, so far as integrity and
sincerity. What does Solomon mean, when he says, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man, but the whole condition of
happiness? Does he set us on any thing not required under the gospel? These are
the terms of the Covenant of Grace, established in the Blood of Christ, which
you shall be judged, justified, or condemned by; and they are just before God,
are justified in Law, that do thus; and shall be sententially pronounced just,
that do thus in sincerity, though not perfectly; and they that do not, shall be
condemned, notwithstanding Christ's death. Such only are of the Christian
Faith. I understand Faith thus largely; and it is plain the Scripture does,
when ever any promise of Justification is made to it.

Do but well consider these few things following, to remove prejudice, and to
let you see into the nature of things; and I hope you will easily be convinced
what are the terms.

1. There are the same terms and conditions of Justification and of Salvation.
Whatsoever is the condition of the one, is also of the other: For, the Apostle
argues in the same manner against salvation by works, as justification by
works. Yea, it is apparent in the nature of the thing: for, Justification
passively taken (as I told you before) is nothing else but right to salvation;
and we need no more for Heaven, than right to it. Do but get and keep right to
Heaven (which is Justification), and we need no more on our part. As for
possession, that is God's work, by his Angels, carrying away souls, raising
bodies. Many worthy men have said, That Repentance, sincere Obedience, are only
for Possession, and not for Right. But we are not to work for Possession at
all; we need not get upon a Hill, when about to dye, to save the Angels a
labor of carrying our souls too far. Do but get and keep Right, and to deny
Possession to us (if we have right to it by Promise) would be unfaithfulness in
God; which we need not to fear. Therefore if you will grant, that all the
things I have spoken of, are required necessary to salvation, then they are
also to justification. Only still, it is here, as in all other things of like
nature, Consent, hearty consent to the Gospel-terms, immediately instateth us
in Justification, and right to Heaven. But if we would have continuance of our
Justification and right to Heaven, we must continue to consent to those terms,
as to the sincerity of our hearts and endeavors; else we should lose our
Justification and right to Heaven; and the reason why we cease not to be
justified, is because God keeps us from departing from him, by keeping in us
care and watchfulness. Thus we see whatsoever we may lawfully do for Salvation,
the same we may lawfully do for Justification.

2. Whatsoever duty there is, that if we do not, we should have no right to
salvation, or justification, that is a condition of our salvation and
justification. It is too common a saying, and a great upholder of the
Antinomian way: Do but believe, say some, (and by believing, they do not mean
as I do, the whole of Christianity; but some one act, as, believing my sins are
pardoned, or reliance, or accepting Christ for my Savior) and such acts as
accepting Christ for Lord, and sincere obedience will follow; but they are not
conditions of Justification and Salvation; but put that one act, and they will
naturally and inevitably follow. But ask them, Suppose they do not follow? They
will answer, You must not suppose it, they will; for, they dare not ordinarily
say, That if they do not follow it, you will yet have right to Heaven. I will
show you the vanity of such talk. This is virtually to say, God never made
promise to these as conditions, never suspended salvation on them, but they
will follow faith naturally. This is to say, Godliness has not the promise of
this life, or however not of that to come; else it would be a condition of the
promise. The instance that is usually brought of it, is this: There cannot be a
seeing-eye without the body; yet it is the eye that only sees. So Faith only is
the Condition, only attains right, but cannot be without works. Now I will
bring this to make it like the case in hand: Suppose one promise you such a
reward if you bring him, and give him the seeing eye of such a Beast; we are
sure (if the meaning be according to the words) you would have right to the
reward, if you brought him a seeing-eye without the body; though indeed you
cannot: yet we are sure, if you did, you would have right, and he would be
unjust in denying you the reward, though you brought not the body. And on the
contrary: Suppose we be sure this is a truth, If you should bring him a
seeing-eye, it would not attain right without the body; Then we are equally
sure, that we mistook his words or meaning, he spoke synecdochically: for then
it is equally a condition that the body be brought, as that the seeing-eye be
brought; and it is equally influential into right: for, come to those things
that do naturally and universally accompany and follow one another, and where
but one of them is made the condition, and the other not; the absence of that
which is not a condition, would no way hinder right; and so not right to
Justification and Salvation. If a man become a Christian indeed, it naturally
and inevitably follows, he shall be hated of wicked men; but God never
suspending Justification and Salvation upon it, never making this a Condition,
we may truly say, If a man be a sincere Christian, it would not hinder his
justification and salvation, though the wicked did not hate him. So if it be
true, that a man cannot be a true Christian, but he must eat, drink, and
breathe; these are natural Concomitants: yet these not being made Conditions,
though he did never eat, drink, nor breathe, he shall be saved. If you can say
of any Grace, or any measure of Grace, as Assurance, or Joy, That it is not
necessary to justification and salvation: Then only you may say, They are not
Conditions of these. If any one beloved sin, knowingly and wilfully continued
in, would hinder a man's pardon, justification, or right to Heaven; then a
sincere desire and endeavor, according to his ability, to get rid of that
beloved sin, is a Condition of his Pardon and Justification.

3. All Conditions of Justification and Salvation, are equally Conditions,
equally influential into right. If only an accident, or mode of a thing, be
made a Condition with the thing; it is equally a Condition with the thing it
self. If one promise to bring me a white Horse, and you shall have such a
reward: It is equally a condition, and as much influential into right, that it
be White, as that it be a Horse; so in any instance you can bring, either in
fact or fiction. If I promise something upon condition you bring me a Hundred,
and you bring only Ninety-nine; you have no more right than if you brought
none; and the odd one is as much a Condition as Ninety-nine. If any shall say,
The Condition is a working Faith; then, that it be working, is equally a
Condition, and equally influential into right, as, that it be Faith.

4. There is no such thing as receiving Righteousness, or Justification, or
Pardon. Many make this their great strong hold. Repentance and sincere
Obedience, are not receptive, receiving Graces, as Faith is; and so cannot
receive Justification and Righteousness. Now this falls; for, there is no act
of receiving these, Justification, Right to Heaven, Righteousness, comes, on
Men. The free gift came upon all to justification. As by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation. As condemnation comes upon men
without any act of receiving it, it is a resultancy from the Law upon
disobedience; so Justification, Right to Heaven, is a resultancy from a
Law-promise (the condition being performed) I know you may object that place,
-- turned from darkness to light, that they may receive remission of sins. But
one of an ordinary capacity may perceive it is a figurative expression (because
in natural things, where there is giving, there is receiving): for, if once men
be turned from sin to God, Pardon comes by virtue of God's Promise; and Right
to the Inheritance comes on them. And we may figuratively say, Adam received
his condemnation by eating: And so we read in Scripture of receiving
condemnation; but there was, in propriety, no act of receiving it. If I make a
promise upon such a condition; as soon as the condition is performed. Right to
him results without any act of receiving it. Right comes upon the Felon that
reads, Right to have his Life spared; Justification, Pardon to Life comes upon
him by the Law, by reading, without any act of receiving it. Many tell us of
applying Christ's Righteousness to Justification; and this is all. It is an
obscure speech; and it is, you see by this, impossible there should be any such
thing properly. I will tell you what I guess they mean by the word [apply] viz.
Meditating upon any Truth you believe. And they mean the same by [acting
faith], viz. Meditating upon Truth we believe. This is a great duty, to
meditate on his Death, to act Faith upon his Satisfaction, and the fullness of
it; to draw our hearts to consent, and cheer our hearts after consent: But if
once they understand it is Meditation they mean, they will not surely pretend
it is the only Condition of Justification. You may say indeed, That Faith
receives Christ: But then you must not mean, by Faith, Assurance, or Reliance;
for, Why does not Love, or Fear, or Hope, as much receive as reliance? But you
must mean the moral receiving, performed by the natural act of consent,
acceptance. As one receives morally such a man to be his Master (that desires
his service) by consenting; and if you will say, Faith is Consent; why is not
Consent to be ruled by him, giving up our selves to be ruled by him, as much a
receiving Christ, as Consent to be saved and pardoned by Him? And then if you
will but grant this, this is to grant all I am pleading for. For, Consent to
have him for Lord and Savior, is to consent to be Christians indeed, to
consent to perform the whole duty of man; which is as comprehensive a word as
can be spoken, to be made the condition of salvation and justification: and if
consenting to the whole duty of man to the best of our power and knowledge be
the condition of begun-Justification and Salvation; then you will readily see,
that continuing this Consent, continuing to be Christians indeed, and to
perform the whole duty of Man, to the best of our knowledge and power, in the
integrity of our hearts, and wherein we fail to lament it, is the condition of
our continued justification and right to salvation. If a King grants a Pardon
to Rebels, on condition they will become Loyal Subjects, Consent is enough at
the first to attain right to all the benefits of it: But continued Consent, and
continual loyal carriage (in the main) toward him, is the condition of their
continued right to Impunity; and every moment of continued Loyalry, is, in
order of nature, before their continued Right. So, whereas before we consented
to the Gospel-terms, our Pardon, and Justification, and Right to Heaven, were
only offered to us upon condition, and were not actually existent at all: now
when we have heartily consented, they are really existent and actual, not
merely conditional; so that should we dye in that moment, we should be saved,
whereas had we dyed before we should have perished. But yet the continuance of
our Justification, and pardon of future sins, is still conditional.

5. It is a gross mistake that many take up with, thinking it would be a more
gracious, liberal, and free speech and promise, to say, Only believe, rely,
accept Christ for Savior, and you shall have right to Heaven, and be
justified; and I will require nothing else of you for right to Heaven: This
believing shall only be influential into your right; but yet, except you
repent, turn from sin to God, and obey, you shall have no right, shall not be
justified; than to say, Turn from sin to God, repent, believe, obey, and you
shall have right to salvation. For such a speech as the first, instead of being
a more noble free promise, is nonsense, is untruth, and a contradiction in the
very words: It is to say and unsay; it is to say, All shall be equally
influential into right, all shall be Conditions, and yet they shall not all be
Conditions, and equally influential into right. For, a Condition is that, which
if we do not, we shall have no right to the thing promised. This is a Condition
as much as any Condition, and as influential into right as any condition in the
world that is not the whole condition: for, every condition is only a sine qu^
non, and altogether only sine quibus non, and cum quibus. And therefore for any
to speak thus, is weakly to lie for God, pretending to keep up the honor of
God's free grace; ignorantly thinking, that if God require us to repent,
return, or no mercy, then it is not free; then we merit our pardon; it is not
of grace: contrary to all Reason and Scripture.

God has made the Condition required from us, as little, as small a matter as
he thought would stand with his Honor, Wisdom, and Government in the World;
and they that would make the conditions of Grace, Mercy, and Salvation through
Christ, less than God has made them (what ever good intention they have to
honor God by it) do really dishonor him as an unholy God: for God thought it
would not stand with the honor of his Holiness, to accept unto favor and life
any but they that should return from sin unto God. Ministers are to tell the
whole terms, that men may sit down and consider the cost; and if men will be
offended, and say it is a hard saying, and like not Christ and Life on these
terms: Let them be offended, they have their choice to let him alone; but they
shall know, they had life and death set before them on gracious easy terms;
and they have rewarded their own souls evil for good. Again, if a necessity of
Repentance and sincere Obedience to Justification, would hinder it from being
free; then such as say thus, and tell us, these things are only for possession;
do virtually grant, that possession of Salvation is not free: But what
Christian-ears can endure this, that Possession is not equally free with Right,
that both are not of free grace?

6. They that say, There is only one act to be done by us for Pardon,
Justification, and Right to Heaven; and whosoever shall do any other duty or
act for these ends, seeks to be justified by works, in the Apostle Paul's
sense: They make it a certain damning sin, to do any other act that we may be
pardoned, justified, obtain right to Salvation. For that certainly was it which
the Apostle wrote against. Now quae nimium probant, nihil probant; that which
will prove more than they, upon deliberate thoughts, dare grant that use the
argument; that answers it self as to them. Surely they dare not own what
inevitably follows from this. Then it follows, that no man must pray for pardon
of sin, upon pain of damnation; for this is to do one act more for
Justification, than that one act. No man must repent for this end, That his
iniquities may be blotted out; that is, for Justification. No man must by
patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory and immortality; for, then he
must be damned: for, surely welldoing comprehends more than believing, when
they take it for one act; but God has said, To such only he will give eternal
life. No man must do the Commands of God for this end, That he may have right
to salvation: If he do, he shall be accursed: whereas God says, Blessed Rev.
ult. 14.
are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of
life.

What? has God made promise to repentance, returning, sincere Obedience, of
Pardon, Justification, Heaven; and shall we provoke God if we perform the
condition for attaining the benefit, and expect the benefit upon performing the
condition? Would not this be as rational, to threaten death for sin, and yer be
angry at us for fearing his threat, for avoiding the sin upon the account of
his threat? as to be angry at us, yea, (according to this principle) damn us
for performing the condition of the Promise, that we may have right to the
thing promised? There is no possible avoiding this consequence: for, if you may
act for reward, then for right to the reward: for you are not (as I showed
before) to act for Possession any further than for right to it. And if any
should object, But you must not expect Justification and Salvation to come by
these; this would be to say, You must think God unfaithful, and his Promises
nullities; and we are apt to be too distrustful herein without bidding; or, but
you must not think to merit by these things. Very true; but is it impossible to
perform them for these ends, but we think to merit by them? Do they that say,
they may do the one act of Believing for Justification, think they merit
Justification by it?

Sure I am, that many that held these things notionally, did not hold them
practically: for many of the worthiest men, both Prelates and others, that ever
England had, held these things notionally, yet so as to deny the consequence;
but never any good man held them practically, I mean except just in a sudden
fit of temptation.

I shall now yet more fully make out to you what this Gospel-condition, the
Covenant-terms of Justification and Salvation, and all other benefits by Christ
are, (for they have all the same condition, every Covenant-benefit or any
Covenantbenefit) by reciting some of the most eminent Names the Gospelcondition
is called by; which is an easy matter to do: and some may think it as well let
alone, as needless. But the thing I am speaking of, seems to me to be as
weighty a matter as any point in Divinity, and is opposed by many; and
therefore it shall not be grievous or burdensome to me; and for you, I think it
safe and needful; and let the more intelligent pardon my using so many words,
yea, and Tautologies, since I do it that the lowest-parted may understand me,
and doubt no more.

That Condition which we are to be justified and saved by, is called by many
Names, which yet always mean the same thing for substance.

1. It is called Knowledge, By his Isa. 53 11.
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. Knowledge here is taken
objectively, not subjectively, viz. for our knowledge of Christ, not his
knowledge whereby he knows. So, This is life eternal (i. e. the condition of
life) to know thee and thy Son; but it means also, Love, Believe, Obey, and
carry suitably to such Knowledge.

2. The Gospel-condition is called Confession. If we confess, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins. So, if any man say, I have sinned and
perverted that which is right, it profits me not, he will deliver his soul.
But the meaning is, Si caetera sint paria. Confess so, as to forsake, obey,
etc. Else if God meant no more, by these Promises we should have right; and he
would be unfaithful in denying us possession, though we forsake not our sins.

3. Sometime it is called Faith. The righteousness of Faith speaks on this
wise; that is, the Gospel, the Law of Faith, in opposition to the Covenant of
Works. If thou confess with Romans 10. 9.
thy mouth, and believe in thy heart, that God has raised him from the dead,
thou shall be saved. What does he mean no more than you must believe Christ is
risen? Nay, you must believe he is ascended into Heaven also; yea, and believe
the whole Gospel, and obey and carry suitably to the Gospel also: The
Gospel-condition, which is a sincere endeavor according to the best of our
knowledge, to perform the whole duty of man, is frequently called by the name of
Believing, in the New Testament; because it was the great business at that
time, to persuade the Jews and Gentiles that Christ was the Messiah, and that
he rose again. There were new Articles now added to the old ones, new
Conditions to the old. They take it for granted as a thing known, that they
were to repent and obey, that they knew the duty of repentance toward God. But
this was the great difficult Doctrine, to persuade them there was a necessity
of Faith in the Lord Jesus, and to believe his death and resurrection. Try the
spirits, for many false prophets are gone out into the world (and 1 John 4. 1,
2, 3.
gives this as a trial of the Prophets), every spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: but he that confesses it not, is
not of God. We may take this as a probable interpretation of the place. He
takes it for granted, that they knew, they that taught wickedness and idolatry
were not of God, whatever confession they made of Christ. But his meaning may
be; If any coming as a Prophet, seeming to be a man teaching Holiness; he is
not of God, if he deny Christ come in the flesh: but if he add to other such
virtues, Faith in the Lord Jesus, he is of God. You may easily apply it to the
case in hand. And whatever interpretation else you will give of this, as
confessing Christ in time of trial; yet it must be meant, and teach suitably to
such confession. What do you think the wicked Jews meant, when they said, If we
let this man alone, all men will believe on him? What did they mean, some one
act, and that one act that many now hold to be only necessary to salvation,
though not agreed ordinarily what it is? Surely they meant, They will believe
he is the Messiah, and so love him, obey him, stick to him. If one bid you
believe in such a Physician, trust in him, and he will cure you; cannot you
easily understand he means also, Take his Counsel, follow his directions, by
believing in him? So when he says, Believe, and thou shall be saved; he
means, Believe, and carry as one that believes; love, obey, turn.

4. Sometime called Repentance. Repent, that your iniquities may be blotted.
John preached repentance for the remission of sin. Surely, you will grant, that
is for Justification. And Christ did not take away this Condition; nay, he
preached it himself: Except you repent, you shall perish. He meant, believe,
obey also.

5. Called Conversion. -- Turn them from darkness to light, that they Mar. 4. 12
may receive remission. Lest they should see with their eyes, and be converted,
and their sins should be forgiven them. Implying the terms that God has bound
himself to by promise through Christ's death to the world, so as he cannot in
faithfulness break. If converted, he must forgive, having made this new Law of
Grace.

6. Called Obedience. Being made perfect through suffering, having fully
satisfied, he became the Author of eternal salvation to those that obey him.
Surely this holds out the terms on which men shall have the justifying saving
benefit of Christ's death. But there is implied in this also the belief of the
truth of the Gospel. So, Hear and your souls shall live. That is, obey for
life, for justification, for right to salvation.

7. Keeping the Commandments. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that
they may have right to the tree of life. Not the hearers of the Law are just
before God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified. Not every one that
says unto me, Lord, Lord; but he that does the will of my Father, shall
inherit the Kingdom. If the Erek. 18. 21.
wicked turn from all his sins which he has committed, and keep all my
statutes, he shall live; all the transgressions that he has done shall not be
mentioned. This is not the Law of Works, but the Gospel: for, the Law promises
no mercy to the returning wicked. Consider these three places: In Jesus Christ
neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but Gal. 5. 6.
faith, which works by love. In Jesus Gal. 6. 15.
Christ neither circumcision, etc. but a new creature. Again, In Jesus Christ 1
Cor. 7. 19.
neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but the keeping
the Commandments of God. Do not these three expressions mean the same thing,
the same Gospel-condition?

8. Regeneration, New Creature. Except a man be born again, etc. Not by works
of righteousness which we have Tit. 3. 15.
done, but according to his mercy has he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. One would think you might gather
hence, what the Apostle Paul means by Works, and what by Faith, the
Gospel-condition.

9. Sanctification. Except I wash thee, thou can have no part in me. And,
without holiness none shall see the Lord. Godliness has the promise of this
life, and that which is to come. Is not Justification, right to Heaven among
the number of those things? Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings, learn to do well. Come now, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be white as snow; though red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

I could name many other Names, as Fearing God, Hoping in him, Trusting in him,
etc. But I will name but one more.

10. Sometime it is expressed by words that import a Continuance; and this is
indeed the condition of the continued Justification and right to Heaven. To
them he will give eternal Col. 1. 21, 22, 23.
life, who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for immortality. Yet now
has he reconciled in the body of his flesh, through death, to present you
blameless and unreproved in his sight, if you continue in the faith, grounded
and settled, and be not removed away from the hope of the Gospel, which you have
heard, and was preached to every creature under Heaven. That is, upon condition
that as you have received the Christian Faith, so you continue in it to the
end, notwithstanding all sufferings; by the encouragement of that hope which
this Gospel supplies unto you. If we 1 John 1. 7
walk in the light, as he is in the light, the blood of Christ cleanses us
from all sin. There is no condemnation to Romans 1. 8.
them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. Whose house are we, if we hold Heb. 3. 6.
fast our confidence unto the end.

But yet believers are justified at present. But you are sanctified, but you
are justified, says the Apostle: you are so, upon your first cordialconsent to
the Gospel-terms. It is here as in all other things of the like nature. What
makes a Servant, but Consent? When the Master is willing to have him, and
propounds the terms, he consents to the terms.

I have set Life and Death before you, and told you the condition of Life by
Christ.

Would we go and consider this condition, and the reasonableness of it, and the
glorious things that would come by it; and would we go, and in the strength of
God and Christ, call Heaven and Earth to record; yea, and Hell to witness, That
we consent, give up our selves to be ruled and saved by Christ; would we enter
into Covenant to be the Lord's people, and his Christ's, to walk in all
well-pleasing, and not to allow our selves in any known sin, or in the neglect
of any known duty; and to use the means God has appointed to know his will,
and for the destruction of sin; and this as honest men really intending
performance even till death; being so far from designing treacherously to turn
aside in difficulties, that it is our greatest fear and dread, lest we should
deal falsely in this Covenant: From this time you are justified by this Law of
Grace, and have right to Heaven, though you should have black and sad thoughts,
and think you are not: and, you may pray with encouragement, Keep this in the
thoughts of our heart for ever, and confirm our hearts unto thee; and God will
keep those that thus commit themselves unto him. But yet this is true, if you
should fall utterly away, this Law of Grace would cease to justify you,
because you withdraw this consent, and so cease to have the condition of it;
and the reason why we do not lose Justification, and right to Salvation, is,
Because God keeps his fear in our hearts, lest we should draw back, and his
soul have no pleasure in us. Do not say, This is not to be supposed; for you
ought to put such suppositions to your selves: viz. If I should now leave off
to be wise, and to do good, I should perish. For what else does God threaten?
for, If the righteous forsake his righteousness, he shall dye. As a man that
never makes this Supposition, [If Christ had not died, I had perished; or, if
God had not converted me] cannot but be very unthankful; which Suppositions are
at least as equally impossible as the Supposition of your total Apostasy. So a
man that never makes these Suppositions, [If I should fall away, I should lose
all] cannot but be very unwary and remiss in care and watchfulness.

Concerning those several Names the Gospel-condition is called by, let me add
this Observation. I know sometime these words may be, and are used in Scripture
in their proper sense, for one act, and no more. And it may be sometimes by
confess, may be meant no more than confess. And sometime Faith is used only for
Faith; as when he says, He that comes to God must believe that God is: There,
by believing, is meant only assent: And so when we read of Faith's
operativeness, it means only the belief of the Truth (and so would I be
understood, when I at any time speak of Faith's operativeness, as purifying
their hearts by Faith); yet whenever any Promise is made to any Grace or Act
whatsoever of Justification, Salvation, Pardon; there it implies the whole
Gospel-condition, and all Graces essential to Christianity. It must be
understood, caeteris paribus, if other things answer thereto. And this I can
prove evidently to you by this argument; else a man would have right by the
Promise upon his Confessing, though he did not forsake; and, by believing that
Christ is risen from the dead, though he should refuse to obey the Gospel; and
God would be unfaithful in denying him the things promised. If you promise a
Vintner so much money to send you such a Butt that stands in his Cellar, and he
sends you the empty Vessel; if you can assure me that you are not by truth and
promise bound to pay him, then I am equally sure, that you meant the Vessel and
the Wine also: you spoke Synecdochically.

Methinks I may say as the Town-Clark of Ephesus once did, with greater reason
than he, These things are (...), things that cannot be spoken against.

Object. Is not this, working for Justification, or Righteousness? Is there no
danger in seeking to be justified and saved by works?

Ans. No danger at all in this sense; and yet great danger in another sense:
but it is so far from being dangerous in this sense, that it is indispensably
necessary to salvation: They only shall be blessed that keep his Commandments,
in Gospel-sincerity, that they may have right to the tree of life; that is,
that they may be justified. And I dare confidently say, that never any did
sincerely obey God (whatever confused notions some good men have had in their
brains, that they held only speculatively), but for this end, among others,
that they might have right to Heaven, which is Justification; for as humane
nature now is (and I think I may say the same concerning the state of
Innocence), it is not capable of undergoing the difficulties of obedience, but
for such ends, To escape the curse, and attain the blessing; which is to attain
Justification, and escape Condemnation. And to say otherwise, is to say, God
has indeed made promises of remission of sins, and Heaven, to those that
repent, turn from sin, and obey the Gospel; but I will not regard these
promises, I will not be moved by them, I will do none of these things for these
ends; but I will only act out of love. Which yet, I could show you, would be
impossible: For, how can I love him who I think has done me no good? and, how
can I think he has done me any good, when I think my own salvation is no good?
as I certainly do, if I do not desire and endeavor it. And God has threatened
those that go on in sin, with a Curse, and Hell. But I will not refrain sin for
these ends, that I may escape Hell; I will only act out of Love; I will be
above Scripture; I will neither be moved with promises nor threats. But there
is another sense which the Apostle speaks of as damnable. The Pharisaical
Jews would have Justification and Righteousness without pardon; would purely
and merely be justified, so as not to be pardoned, that it should be no favor
to justify them, but their due without grace and pardon; (and that makes him
prove, out of David, the necessity of pardon, Romans 4.) and that would be in
effect to say, without the Satisfaction and Righteousness of Christ: and if so,
Christ died in vain, this would make void his death; they would have their
obedience to the Moral Law (which they commonly interpreted as reaching only to
the outward act) either to be perfect, or so little defective, that the great
meritoriousness of being Abraham's Seed, and circumcised; and their strict
observance of the Ceremonial Law, and other Traditions never commanded, would
make up what wanted: And their Righteousness being complete of it self, their
Justification would be of due debt from the old Law, through Justice; and not
of Pardon and Grace through a Propitiation. And so too many among us look upon
their good works as meritorious; though they be sinners, and know it, yet they
think the good works of Alms, and other things, which they look upon as no
duties, will satisfy for those sins; and think God would do them wrong, if he
do not for their good deeds pardon their evil deeds; think their good works are
very good, and deserving much from God; and their evil not very evil; and so
God would be very hard, yea, unjust, if he should condemn them. If this was
true, then no need of Christ, he then dyed in vain; then salvation would be of
debt from natural Justice, from the old Law, and not of Grace, and Mercy, and
Pardon through Christ. Will any dare to say, If what I have spoken be true,
that he will pardon none but repenting, returning, believing sinners, that it
is not of Pardon, Mercy, Grace, but of debt from the old Covenant, which allows
no Pardon?

I confess Paul's Epistles about Justification are hard to be understood; and I
am confident many Expositors are, and have been notoriously mistaken about
these things; and that by Faith he means (as I do) Faith and Obedience to the
Gospel. I have written something to show to my Acquaintants the meaning of
these places, which I think make them appear rational and plain to this sense,
and (absit verbo invidia) will do so to rational men. But it is not fit to
speak so largely here. I wish you to read considerately, Cap. 3. v. 5. of his
Epistle to Titus. Can you imagine when the Apostle says, Gal. 2. 16. Knowing
that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of
Christ, we have believed that we might be justified, etc. That he means, we did
not repent that we might be justified; did not obey, turn from sin, that we
might be justified, or not be condemned? All that I will do here further, shall
be to speak so as to keep you from dangers on both sides, if you will observe
this distinction, and it will be plain I hope to the meanest capacity.

There is in this Justification by Christ spoken of, (there being two Laws or
Covenants, one of Works, and the other of Grace, a lex remedians, and both in
force; else if the old Law, as a Law, with its penalty, was repealed, it would
be no sin not to obey perfectly; and we might say, Christ his death had not
satisfied for our sins, and the legal desert of them, but prevented them from
being sins, and from legally deserving damnation) there is in this
Justification, as it were, a twofold Righteousness or Justification; and the
distinction of these two is so necessary to any competent measure of
understanding this Doctrine of Justification, and would be so helpful to make
us understand it, and speak intelligibly of it, that I desire you would never
forget it: Passive Justification, the effect of active, is our right;
constituted as I have showed you. But to speak of active Justification, It is
essentially from some Charge pleaded, or possibly pleadable against us.

1. Suppose the Accusation be, We are sinners, have offended God, deserved
wrath, broken the first Covenant, the Law of Works: and under this are
comprehended sins against the Gospel; for they are sins against the Moral Law,
which Christ has satisfied for all the breaches of, that ever were or shall
be. For the Original Law of Nature is this, Keep all my Commandments which I
have or shall reveal to thee any way whatsoever, whether by Nature, or any
other way of making my will known (the eating of the forbidden fruit was
against this Moral Law, though immediately against a particular Revelation) or
thou shall dye. Now if this be the Accusation, thou art a sinner, have deserved
death, transgressed the Law, refused Christ and the Gospel a long time; yea,
and have notoriously sinned since conversion. Here nothing will justify,
nothing will answer this Accusation, but this: Christ has dyed, satisfied; God
has set him forth to be a Propitiation. It would be improper and vain here to
plead, We have repented, believed: for thou art a cursed Creature, and there is
no blood or satisfaction in these; thou will rather be damned for thy failings
in these; they are imperfect at best, and however cannot buy off thy former
sins. Here we must plead nothing in our selves to this Accusation: nay, we must
confess we have nothing in our selves to justify us against this Accusation of
being sinners, deserving wrath. That that must answer this Accusation, is
altogether without us. To plead, to justify from this Accusation, something
within us, is to spit in Christ's face, is damnable: for whatever we plead,
must be a Righteousness, or it is no way pleadable. If we have a Righteousness
to answer this, Christ dyed in vain.

2. But now suppose another Accusation which is possibly pleadable against us:
suppose the accusation be, But thou have no lot or portion in this
Satisfaction; for all have not interest in it: but there was a second Covenant
made, wherein God made it over only upon Gospel-terms, and conditions of
repenting, believing, obeying sincerely, upon sincerity and uprightness, and
truth in the inward parts: for, it was enacted that none should have the
benefit of it, to justify them against the old Law, but they that performed
the condition.

Here now is no danger of pleading, to answer this Accusation, something in our
selves; nay, it is duty, and we wrong our selves if we have the condition, and
do not. Ye must say, Yea, through grace I have repented, believed, endeavored
to obey God sincerely, and have lamented when I have fallen short; I have
received Christ for my Lord and Savior, and endeavored to serve him, and do
at this day. And this will be your righteousness against this Accusation, will
justify you against this Accusation.

It would be foolishly impertinent to plead here, Christ has dyed, has made
satisfaction to the Law; when the Charge, the Accusation is, Thou have no
interest in him, and his death, and the purchased benefits. And it would be
false and ridiculous to plead what they that falsely are called the only
Preachers of Freegrace would have you plead, viz. That Christ has repented for
thee, performed the Gospel-conditions for thee. Here you may and must plead
something in your selves, even the performance of the Gospel-condition. You
must not confess you have nothing to plead, except you have not; and then I
would say, Are you mad wilfully to refuse Christ? I know, men may think they
have not, and yet have this condition; and then God knows, there is this good
thing in them toward God and Christ, though they think not so; and so they are
justified, and know not. But if you say, I have nothing in me to answer this
Accusation, and say true, and continue in this estate; you will be condemned
upon this Accusation at the last day, when judged according to the Gospel, and
are at present under condemnation in law.

But if you be sincere Christians, and in some comfortable measure know it, you
may in this sense rejoice in your selves; you may say, I have proved my own
work, and so have joy in my self, and not in another. This is our rejoicing,
the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in
this world. You may say of a godly man, he has that within him that will bear
him out, and mean by it the sincerity of his heart; but then you must not mean
it to satisfy for his ill deeds, or against the first accusation; but against
this only, of having no part in Christ. Here a man may glory; Let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me, Jer. 9. 24. We
may say in the Apostle John's sense and words, Our hearts, our consciences
acquit us, and condemn us not. 1 John 3. 20, 21. If our hearts truly condemn
us, God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. Beloved, if our
hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God; and whatsoever we
ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things
that are pleasing in his sight.

So that you may now see, that 1. God justifies as the principal Efficient. 2.
The Promise or Covenant of God (If thou believe, thou shall be saved) as the
instrument, or less principal efficient: for an Instrument is essentially an
efficient; and the act of the principal and instrument are essentially one and
the same act, and both proper Efficients of the effect. If one strike with a
rod, he strikes and the rod strikes, though less principally, yet both truly.
If a man promise, he gives right, and the promise gives right properly. 3.
Christ's Death and Merits justify as a Satisfaction to God's Justice, that he
might pardon with safety to his honor and government. 4. The faith of Christ,
or true Christianity as the condition. Now a condition is a causa sine qua non;
and it is agreed that a causa sine qua non, is no cause, but only so
necessarily called for want of a better word; just as we are forced to speak
always of non-entities, as if they were entities whenever we speak of them, as
Tenebrae sunt, Nihil fuit. So I was wittingly forced, sometimes before, to use
the word of Faith's influence into right. And it is almost impossible to speak
otherwise, but any intelligent man may see, though the performance of the
Gospel-condition seems at the first view to have something like influence
into right, like causality, yet it has not; but that influence which it
seems to have, is to be ascribed in propriety only to God and the Promise.
When a Felon reads, it was not his reading that pardoned him, but the
Legislators by the Law upon his reading. So that they err that use to tell us,
that Faith is a cause of Justification, and not other graces; for it is no
cause, it does not in propriety justify and pardon our sins at all. If Faith
did merit, then it would be a moral efficient of our right. Methinks none
should say, Faith is an Instrument of Justification; for then it would be a
true proper saying in the strictest sense, Faith pardons our sins, Faith
acquitteth us.

You have seen upon what honorable terms God has dispensed with his Law in
not executing it, however not fully executing it upon offenders.

1. He does execute some of it in this life upon his pardoned ones, pardoned as
to the great matters: for Christ did not bargain, that the curse should in
every part be taken off immediately upon their believing. No, God makes sin
evil and bitter to them in this life many ways; and they must dye, and their
bodies rot in the grave for a time. God told Moses, he had pardoned the
Israelites (that is, so as not to cut them off from being a people); but as
truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord,
their carcasses shall fall in the wilderness. And I doubt not, but this tends
to the honor of God's Justice, to leave some drops of this curse upon us in
this life; and we ought to take notice of his righteousness, as well as mercy
in afflicting us.

Some will object, But the Sufferings of Believers are not satisfactory.

Ans. I know they are not in the strict sense of the word: for that signifies
compensation enough for the fault; or, in the sense the Papists use the word,
For little Sufferings buying off other Sufferings; yea, the great or eternal
suffering. And some object, They are not vindictive; and when they explain the
word, they mean, they are not eternal or totally destructive; which is true
indeed. But if any by the words Satisfactory or Vindictive, mean, that they are
not inflicted by the Rector by virtue of the Law for a fault, in token of his
displeasure, and for the honor of his Justice, and warning of others. I must
deny it, and say, So far as they are for sin, they are satisfactory and
vindictive in this sense; and can plainly prove it.

2. That which God has and will take off (as indeed all will be clear taken
off at the great, full, executive Redemption, the Resurrection of the body)
Christ has paid deer for it.

3. Though Christ has paid this great Price, yet we shall have this benefit by
it, only upon such terms of honor to God, as acknowledging in deep sense of
our unworthiness, God's righteousness if he had condemned us, and turning from
sin, accepting the Redeemer. Methinks we should be so far from quarrelling at,
that we should see high reason for, and admire the wisdom of God in this whole
Transaction; and while we see some of his ways are rational, conclude all are
so, and our ignorance is the cause they appear no more amiable to us.

Here is no shadow of injustice in the Universal Magistrate of the World,
neither to Christ, nor to Christians, nor to the Commonwealth of the World, nor
to his old Law that was not executed.

1. No wrong done to Christ: for, he underwent it willingly, Et violenti non
fit injuria; No wrong can be done to a mind willing of the damage.

2. Not to Christians: The highest praises are due to God from them, and given
by them, for this very transaction.

3. Not to the World: It was to reform it, and lay a new foundation of Religion
in it.

4. Not to his Law: For, the repute of that has been as well secured, and kept
as inviolable by the revelation of this to be adored Justice of God, as if it
had been executed upon all offenders to all Eternity.

I will answer but one Objection more, before I come to apply all.

Some will expect to hear, how this whole Doctrine is consistent with Election
and Special Grace.

If you ask men of different persuasions concerning general and special Grace,
How it comes to pass that any of the degenerate sons of Adam are saved? They
will answer, Only by Grace and Mercy through Christ. If you ask them further,
How comes it about that some are saved, and some perish, notwithstanding this
Grace? They will further answer, Because some believe, perform the
Gospel-condition, others not. If you demand, How comes this, that some perform
the Gospelcondition, and not others? They will still concent in answering, Some
will, and some will not; some choose mercy on the terms of it, and others choose
rather to perish than to accept Christ and Mercy on the Gospelterms. Thus far
they agree commonly; so that it does not properly concern me to speak (in this
Discourse) of the things wherein they differ; both granting all that I affirm.
But if you enquire further of them, How comes it to pass that some are thus
willing, and others not? Here they disagree: Some will say, this of man's
willingness, it is to be ascribed to man himself; or give such answer that it
inevitably follows from it; and that God does no more in this case for one than
for another; helps one as much as another; and then consequently it follows,
that a man converted is not a jo^ more beholden to God than one not converted,
God doing no more for him than the other. And some doctrinally hold, That God
gives men only free will, and the Gospel or objective Evidence; and will go no
further with any. I cannot understand how such can pray for Grace, or for God's
giving them to improve the Gospel, and his Providence, while they mean only,
Give us Free Will (which I grant in some sense they have, though I utterly
dislike the (...) that some plead for) and the Gospel and objective evidence,
which they have already, and hold that God will do no more for any; whereas God
only disowns respecting of persons in Rectoral and Judicial Acts, as punishing
and rewarding, as will appear upon view of those places; but no where the doing
that for the working the Condition in some, which he does not for others, but
owns the contrary. I dread to affirm, That a man in this sense makes himself to
differ; though man's sin and unwillingness (and so destruction) is plainly of
himself, yet not his willingness. And though I may well excuse my self from
intermedling in these Controversies, yet I will in short give you an account of
my thoughts concerning them. Though I doubt, some will say (which I cannot much
contradict) that I had better have said nothing of this nature, than speak so
little. All that I shall say of this Difficulty, shall be in answer to this
following Objection.

Object. Is not the Condition it self of Justification and Salvation, and the
working the Condition it self, the fruit and effect of Christ's Death?

Ans. I shall endeavor to show you how it is, and how it is not, in these
Propositions.

1. The death of Christ foreseen, undertaken, or undergone, as a Propitiation,
Expiation, Satisfaction, was only for sin, and so for pardon of sin, that God
might with safety to his Justice not execute the penalty, but might show
kindness and favor to offenders, notwithstanding the Threat; and therefore, as
a Satisfaction, with this kind of causality, causes no more; and then it being
agreed between the Father and Son, that only Believers (in the Scripture-sense)
should have the benefit of it for salvation; We can only say (setting aside the
comfortable reprieval, and the objective evidence, and whatever other common
helps and assistances of the Spirit there are which were necessary in order to
trial), He gave his Son (and Christ, himself) that whosoever repented, believed
on him, should not perish, but have eternal life.

2. This death and satisfaction, and the benefit of them offered to sinners on
these terms, are as a moral cause in their own nature influential to work the
Condition, Faith and Repentance. The death of Christ (this promise being made
with it) is an object, aptum natum, a thing objectively, naturally influential
to work this effect; and so being the cause of this cause of Faith, it is the
cause of the thing caused: for, there would have been no foundation of Religion
and turning to God, but for God's being made so far pacified, as to accept
sinners on these terms, and make it known to men. But this is nothing singular,
but common to all that enjoy the Gospel; and it means no more but this, It
would have this effect if men did their duty, and improved it a right.

3. The working the Condition, the making the Gospel actually efficacious for
the working the Condition, is to be ascribed to God's Decree, and his execution
thereof, as most properly its effect; and uses therefore to be ascribed to the
Father, rather than the Son. Take this account of it. A foundation being laid
(or foreseen as laid) in the blood of Christ, that God might, with safety to
his Honor and Justice, return into favor with sinners; and that he could as
Rector (and so would) pardon repenting returning sinners; and that this was all
he could do as Rector, with Honor and Justice; he could descend no lower than
to make this Law of Grace, this act of Oblivion, He that repents, believes,
returns, shall be saved: and he must be true to his own Laws; it would not
stand with his Honor to pardon any but upon these terms: Now these things, and
this Law being foreseen, and also foreseeing that all men would yet perish by
refusing Christ, rejecting Mercy, through the wilful chosen wickedness of their
own hearts, notwithstanding the death of Christ for them, and the objective
evidence of the Gospel: He does this other act I am now speaking of, as
Dominus, Lord Proprietary. For, as saving and justifying them that believe, is,
actus justitiae, (the Law being considered) The 17th Article of our 39 Articles
of Religion, can mean no less than what is here affirmed.
a Rectoral act, so, as Lord Proprietary, he decreed, resolved from eternity
to, and does in time, make and cause such particular men (by setting home
Truths in evidence, and softning their hearts by his spirit in a way to us
possibly much unknown, and not fit to be insisted on here) to believe, repent,
return, or accept Christ on his own terms, whom otherwise he foresaw would
reject Christ even as others.

I look upon this Election which is ascribed to the Father, as the foundation
of the first difference, of one differing from another: For, as being
regenerate, converted, makes a difference, makes men actually choice men,
executively elect men, differing men (the righteous is more excellent than his
neighbor): So this Decree, to give such men grace, to convert them, is the
foundation of this first difference; as having the condition of the Promise,
makes the first difference, so the Decree to work it is the first foundation
of it.

This is that the Apostle speaks of as a depth to be admired, that God should
condemn men, or decree to condemn men for their sin, that reject Christ and
Grace; this he does not wonder at; he could, and we can give sufficient reason
for that; neither does he wonder that God should save or decree to save by
Christ those that repent and believe, and not others; there is a congruity in
the thing, a Satisfaction, being that he may do it with Honor: But, that when
all would have rejected Christ and Mercy, that he should harden some, that is,
leave them to the hardness of their own hearts, and soften others, make some
repent, believe, that would have refused grace, this was his wonder, and the
thing unaccountable to the Apostle; and so ir is to us.

Th^se are said to be drawn by the Father, and given to Christ by the Father;
and this of drawing men to Christ, making them to accept Christ, is ascribed,
you see, rather to the Father than the Son. All that the Father gives me,
shall come Joh. 6. 37.
unto me; and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast off; and I will
raise him up at the last day. He seems to refer to that giving mentioned, Ask
of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance: that is, I will
make that Christ shall be their Lord actually (like that, Isa. 55.) and they
subject to his Laws actually. I will bring them to the obedience of Faith,
which God does in giving Faith and Repentance, in giving the first Grace, in
working in them the condition of the Covenant, which is the fruit of Election:
for this giving cannot be meant of those that are actually Believers, or
foreseen and looked on as such by him; for he says, they shall come unto me,
shall believe on me: and this belief and coming is named as the effect of God's
giving men to Christ; and so the giving is antecedent to the coming in all
consideration. So Ver. 44. No man can come unto me except the Father which has
sent me draw him. Ver. 45. It is written, They shall all be taught of God:
every man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me.
Ver. 65. No man can come unto me, except it be given him of my Father: This he
said, knowing that there were some that believed not. Such is the wilful
wickedness of the world, that all would reject Christ; yea, and they cannot do
otherwise in some sense, though they can in another sense (which senses I could
make plain to you, but it would take up too much time, and be too large a
digression), so that the working the Condition, the first Grace, the first
difference is to be ascribed to Election.

4. Though the common saying is, That Christ's death merited no Volitions, no
Decrees; and so his foreseen death merited not, that God should will such and
such things; and the most build much upon Aquinas his saying, Deus vult hoc
propter hoc, sed non propter hoc vult hoc; meaning there are reasons and
motives, causes of the things willed, but not of the willing of those things:
yet I look upon this saying as mere words, and void of truth; and we ought to
have other conceptions, or else we shall have conceptions unworthy of God. Yet
many go in such a method in speaking of God's Decrees, that they make this such
a main Pillar of their Fabric, that for one to hold that God's love or pity,
or man's misery, was any motive to God to send his Son to dye (which God forbid
any should deny) would destroy their whole method: for, it is impossible that
any thing should be, or be considered, as, ratio rei volitae, a reason of the
thing willed; but it must be, and must be considered, as, ratio actus
voluntatis, as the reason of the willing: For, a reason or motive is
essentially a motive to the will of the principal Agent: for, what can it
possibly be conceived to move, but the Will? Can it be a Motive, and move
nothing? or, can it be actually a prevailing-reason, and not prevail with the
Will? What ever God does in time for the Merits of Christ, he decreed and
willed from eternity to do it in time for the Merits of Christ: for, whatsoever
God does now in time for any end whatsoever, or upon any motive whatsoever, he
decreed and willed for that end, and upon that motive, from eternity to do it.
If God in time created rain to make the earth fruitful, then the reason why he
decreed and willed to cause rain, was, that the earth might be fruitful. And
for us to conceive otherwise of God, would be for us to conceive him to act
irrationally, as willing things for no end; and would put a stop to all
admiration of the wisdom of God seen in his Providence; and therefore, such a
conception of him would be offensive to him: for we ought to conceive of him in
the most honorable way we are able; and that is the most pleasing to Him, who
is above our best conceptions. If he condemn men in time for their refusal of
Christ, then he decreed to condemn them because he foresaw that they would
refuse Christ: If he save none, justify none in time, but for their believing;
then he willed and decreed from eternity to save none (with any decree or
violence, that we are to conceive of, as distinct from his Will or Decree, to
work the Condition in men, that they might be justified and saved) but those he
foresaw should believe. And it seems plain, that as he absolutely and without
condition justifies and saves none; so neither did he absolutely, and without
condition, decree to justify and save any. But God foreseeing what an order
and concatenation of things he would make, and was bound in Honor to make,
notwithstanding Christ's death: As in time, without Condition, (though not
without means) He works Faith and Repentance, works the Condition in the
Elect, that they may be justified and saved by Christ: So he willed and decreed
absolutely, and without condition, to work the condition, the first Grace, that
they might be justified and saved by Christ.

5. Though Christ's death as a satisfaction, expiation, was the cause of no
more to us than this, That, if we repent and believe, we shall be justified and
saved; Satisfaction and Propitiation being only for sin: yet, considering this
suffering of Christ, as a highly pleasing meritorious act, as a worthy
voluntary undertaking for the Honor of God we may say, Christ did merit that
God should give this Faith, work this Condition, and keep it in the Elect: for
all would, notwithstanding this (and the easy reasonable terms made of their
interest in it) through their own wilful wickedness, have perished; and he
deserved that his blood should not thus far be lost, as water spilt on the
ground; but that he should have some fruit of the travel of his soul, in seeing
a Seed, actually to honor, venerate, and adore their Redeemer. Though I must
say, for the honor of our Redeemer in this great affair, He will have some
reward in those that perish, in that he did a wonderful kindness for them, it
being only through their own chosen refusal, that they had no benefit by it.
His Goodness and Grace is not therefore no Grace because men reject it. And to
do a good and gracious act, is a reward and satisfaction in it self. And you
may as well maintain, That, except God be ignorant, and know not that men will
reject his mercy, he cannot be righteous and just in punishing them for it:
which is contrary to the knowledge of the whole world; as to say, Except God be
ignorant, and know not that they will through their wicked wilfulness refuse
his Mercy, his Grace and Mercy is no Grace and Mercy. If one of you take a
long, tedious, and hazzardous journey, to dissuade your friend from something
you hear he designs to do, which you know will undo him, though he wilfully
persist, and will not be persuaded by you, and so is undone by it; yet he is
bound to thank you all his life after, and your kindness cease not to be
kindness; and you have this satisfaction and reward, You did a kind act, though
he reap no benefit. And suppose you might have prevailed with him, if you had
there stayed longer with him, and taken more pains; yet your kindness cease
not to be a kindness because you did no greater kindness; since that which you
did, would have been enough, had it not been for his wilful obstinacy: And his
after-ruing of his own folly, bears a loud testimony to, and tends to the
honor of your kindness, Oh that I had hearkened to my Friend! How have I hated
instruction, and would not incline mine ear to him that instructed me? They in
Hell, if they would and could do as befits them, or as Christ has deserved
from them, would spend time as well in admiring the love of God, and the
Redeemer, in this wonderful once offered and urged Kindness, as in ruing that
they lost it through their own chosen wilful madness. Some go on such grounds
in speaking of these things, that (holding to their way) they must necessarily
deny that sinners in Hell will ever rue, and befool themselves for their loss
of salvation by Christ: But if any will hold so much power in man to receive
Christ, as that they will rue it as their madness, and folly, and sin, to
reject him, and perish by so doing; I can from that demonstrate (as clearly as
I can do any thing) that this I now speak in this digression inevitably
follows. Let me but ask you this, Was there no cause for Adam (when fallen from
the benefit) to thank God for making that promise, Obey and Live; when as God
might have annihilated him, notwithstanding his obedience, had it not been for
that promise? And do you never thank God for it, though God knew he would fall?
But to return: As Christ's sufferings did not as an expiation or satisfaction,
but as a highly meritorious act, deserve or obtain, that God should give
greater things to those that believe, than Adam lost, for the honor of the
Redeemer, and of this great work of Redemption: so, he did deserve, that God
should cause some to believe; and so from eternity his death, foreseen or
undertaken, was a cause, a meritorious cause or motive why God would, that is,
decreed, to make some, and so, though more remotely, such particular persons,
the Elect, to accept offered mercy and Christ, which they would otherwise (as
others) have rejected. Some call this, the Covenant of Redemption; but it is an
immanent act, and from eternity, and an elicite act of the will; and therefore
is properly a Decree, and belongs to the Will of Purpose, and not to his
Legislative Will, his Rectoral Will. Methinks you may see hence, how it comes
to pass that we sometimes read of Christ's dying for the world; and in other
places, that he laid down his life for his sheep; sometime, tasted death for
every man, dyed for all; sometime again, gave himself for the Church; in one
place, a Savior of the Body; in another, a Savior of the world. He dyed for
the Elect and World both, so far, that whosoever should believe on him, should
not perish; but for the Elect, as they which were much in his eye, being those
who certainly should believe, and so be actually saved. Though God and Christ
did, as one says, aeque intend this satisfaction, a propitiation conditionally
applicable to every one; yet he did not, ex aequo, as fully intend it for to be
actually applied to every man. There is much of truth in that frequently cited
passage of Ambrose, Christus passus est pro omnibus, pro nobis tamen
specialiter passus est. Like that, a Savior of all men, especially of them
that believe.

Will any dare to say, Here is nothing of grace or kindness to the World? Joh.
3. 16. He so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. V. 17.
For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. Cannot you see plainly here what is meant by
the World, and that his first coming was to save it, though his second will be
to take a severe account? V. 18. He that believes on him, is not condemned;
but he that believes not, is condemned already, because he believes not. Can
you say, a sick man dyed, because he took not such a Medicine; when, if he had
taken it, it would not have cured him? You cannot say, the Devils continue to
be condemned, because they reject Christ; because, if they should accept him,
they would still perish; for there was no satisfaction made for them: And may
not the same be said of them that perish, if no satisfaction be made for them?
So John 12. 47. If any man hear my words, and believe not (surely you will say
this is meant of a non-elect man) I judge him not; for I came not into the world
to condemn the world, but to save the world. Which reason would have no show of
reason, except Christ came to save that man, except he be one of that World he
came to save. If Election and Redemption were of the same latitude and
strictness, you might as well say to sinners, Repent, for you are elected, for
you are foreknown in the Scripture-sense, for you are given to Christ by the
Father, in that special sense; as, Repent, for you are redeemed, Christ dyed
for you; you are bought with a price: therefore glorify God with your bodies
and spirits, which are his: But the Apostle would not venture to speak thus,
You are elected; therefore repent, glorify God: for he should have spoken what
he knew not to to be true.

I will say no more but this here: Whether is it a more likely way to lay a
foundation for Religion in the World, to encourage and draw men's hearts to
repent, return, to tell them Christ has dyed for you, and has obtained this
of the Father for you, That if you return, you shall live, notwithstanding all
your former sins; or, to say, Repent, return: for, for any thing you know,
Christ has dyed for you; for any thing you know, he has obtained this from
God, That if you turn, you shall live; though it is ten to one he has not: or
however, we cannot tell whether he has or no. And if he has not, then as this
is true, that if the Devils should repent and return, they should yet perish,
because no Satisfaction was made for them; so if you should repent and believe,
you should yet perish, because no Satisfaction made for you.

Application.
FRom all that has been spoken, we may learn these things:

Use 1. This informs us, That God could not in Justice, without a
Satisfaction, pardon our sins. I know such moral things consist not in a point;
I dare not therefore say, He could not pardon the least offense without a
Satisfaction, or such a great Satisfaction: It is enough to say, He could not
pardon such and so great sins as ours and the worlds, upon repentance, without
Satisfaction. Many men of renown of late days, have in this too much symbolized
with Socinus, and have maintained that God could, if he had so pleased, have
pardoned the world, and received them on the Gospel-terms into favor, without
a Satisfaction: and that the death of Christ was from the Will of God, and not
from his Justice; and some of the Ancients have thus spoken. Now to prove, that
we must not conceive his punishing-Justice as merely a free act of his Will and
Wisdom; that he might as well do otherwise, but as a virtue or rectitude
inherent in his nature. Let these things be considered.

1. Express Scripture, Hab. 1. 13. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil;
that is, without being angry at it, without punishing it. Now what can be meant
by the purity of his eyes, but the holiness, justice, and righteousness of his
Nature, Psalm. 11. 5. The wicked his soul hates. Ver. 8. For the righteous Lord
loves righteousness; not merely because he will. Josh. 24. 19. He will not
forgive your trespasses, for he is a jealous God.

2. A man cannot imagine God indifferent, or almost indifferent, whether he
punish or pardon sinners; but in so doing he fancies him very little abhorring
sin, very indifferent whether men obey or disobey; which is to have more
unworthy thoughts of him than we have of some men. It is as necessary for us to
conceive God to do that, which we cannot better conceive and express, than by
saying and conceiving, He crossed a strong inclination, in not executing the
Law upon Offenders themselves, through a stronger inclination of love and pity
to man, not to execute, but to provide and accept an offering; as it is
necessary for us to conceive of God, as one crossing a strong inclination of
affection to his Son, in offering up his dear Son. And whatever vain and bold
disputers may say to the contrary, it is our duty so to conceive, and we please
God in so conceiving; and there is truth in the main in our conception,
notwithstanding the inadequateness of our Conceptions: for, we should have
sinful and false apprehensions, if we should conceive it was all one to God;
and that it was altogether, or almost, indifferent to him, whether he punish
the Offender himself, or no; or whether he offer up his Son or no; or whether
man perish or no.

3. The very Heathens knew something of the Natural Justice of God by the light
of Nature, as we read Romans 1. 32. which could not be, if the deserved
Condemnation (there mentioned) came merely from the free will of God, and not
from his nature: for things of his Free Will can only be known by a Revelation
of his Will, and not by Nature.

4. How can his Justice be demonstrated? By an act which his Justice requires
not? What weakness would it be for a Prince to affect a name of Justice and
Righteousness, in doing those things he might indeed justly do, but to the
doing of which he was no way bound in Justice and Honor. If he could well
enough, and justly and honorably enough, have pardoned offenders without, but
chose to show his Justice and hatred of sin, in the death of his Son, it would
be to demonstrate and make a show of something that is not in reallity. To
affirm this, would be to accuse him of Pageantry. Socinus and Crellius
themselves, that deny God's essential Justice, yet say, that he cannot with
safety to his Justice and Sanctity, save impenitent sinners. What is this but
to grant what they deny, even an essential Justice? They grant in this so much,
that it seems wilfulness in them not to grant all. To let go that which is
with much show of reason insisted on by some, That all would have been
impenitent without the Satisfaction; surely, the reason why He cannot pardon
impenitent sinners, is, because this mode of sin, contumacy in it, is sin: and
where then will any fix, and say, Hither he may go in pardoning without
Satisfaction, and no further? See the Apostle here going further, implying,
that he could not have justified, saved repenting believing sinners, without
this Propitiation, that he might be just, and the justifier of him that
believes etc. And the Apostle argues a necessity of satisfaction by Christ's
death, because sin could not otherwise have been taken away; plainly implying,
that repentance would not have taken it away, Heb. 10. 1, 4. And how weak would
his Argument be, to prove a necessity of this Expiation, because it was
impossible the blood of Bulls and Goats should take it away. If it might be
taken away without any expiation at all, why then not with such low things?

5. God is said to commend his love and kindness to us, in that, when we were
sinners, Christ dyed for us: but what great love could there be showed, if
there was no necessity of such an Expiation? There was indeed wonderful love,
if Justice required our blood, for his love and pity to overcome, and swallow
up such inexorable fury! to find out, and give for us such a Ransom! But if
Justice no way required it, What great Love would it be? In such a case it
might indeed be Love, but not eminent stupendous Love, To pardon: for, he
obliges less by pardoning, that may easily pardon without diminishing the
repute of his Justice, or doing himself (as it were) any injury; and he
obliges and engages the more, that forgiveth that which is so contrary to his
Holiness, Justice, and Honor, that there needs so great and atrocious a
Satisfaction, as putting out, or tormenting the Apple of his own Eye, his dear
Son, to make Expiation. But if no such thing was necessary, then to pardon in
such a dreadful way, as by the death of his Son, would not be an act of mercy,
or of love, but of wisdom, if of any thing; if that indeed may be called
wisdom, to give up thus his Son without necessity.

6. It seems contrary to the Wisdom and Goodness of God, when he might go so
easy, and near, and plain a way in pardoning sinners, to go in so difficult a
way, and in a way so far about; for then it was a large digression to flee to a
Satisfaction. And surely God that does not afflict men merely because he will,
would not afflict his innocent Lam. 3. 33
beloved Son, merely because he will, if he could, without reluctance, without
grating on his Justice, Holiness, and Honor, have scattered our sins as a
Cloud, with an easy breath of his mouth.

Object. But may not one justly part with his own right? Can there be any
injustice in pardoning a Debtor without Satisfaction? And is not he more to be
commended that does it without any Satisfaction? May not a party offended
forgive a wrong against him? If one threaten to beat a man that deserves it,
may he not justly pass it over without any satisfaction?

Ans. He may; and I grant all. But the things I am treating of, are not Debts,
but Offenses; and these not offenses against private persons, as such: God is
(as most hold) the Governor of the World, necessarily and essentially; however
we are sure he has taken on him the government of it: and although it had been
a free act at the first to undertake it, yet when he has once undertaken it,
he by so doing obliges himself to govern it wisely, holily, and righteously;
to punish offenses, and not to let things run at random. And God is not to be
considered as a private person, that pardons as a party offended; or as a
Creditor, that parts with his own right; but as the public Judge and
Governor of the World, who is, by taking this place upon him, engaged to judge
and rule righteously, and to render to men according to their works. There is a
wide difference between Pecuniary debts, which one forgives as a private man;
or injuries done to a man in particular, which he forgives as a private man:
and Criminal offenses against Law and Government. A Magistrate, being also in
another respect a private man, having a private interest of his own, may, as
other men, forgive things which belong to his profit, as Debts; and may forgive
injuries and affronts done to him, so far as they prejudice his private
Interest: But he may not justly (however, ordinarily) forgive things which
belong to his Office and Duty, incumbent on him as Governor to punish, in
vindictive Justice: for hereby he would be wanting in his duty, and also guilty
of violating the authority of his own Law and Rule, and of undoing of the
Commonwealth by lenity and indulgence.

I know, a Rector or Governor may in some cases dispense with, and not execute
his Law: For sometimes Laws are unjustly made; sometime about low petty
matters, that do not much concern the Commonweal to have them executed;
sometime it would tend to the destruction of the Community, to execute them,
though not unwisely made at first; and sometime he wants power to execute them,
the offenders being too numerous, or too potent; and so it may be his duty to
pardon and dispense with the penalty without any more ado: e. g. Saul
intentionally made a good Law, threatened death to any that should eat before
the evening, that he might obtain the greater conquest over his flying Enemies:
Jonathan his Son transgresses it; Saul resolves to execute the Law; the people
hinder him, and rescue Jonathan: now Saul could not execute the Law for want of
strength; for the people are the strength of the King. And there seems to be
much reason in what Jonathan said. It was an ill Law, and proved a hinderance
to the slaughter of his enemies; and in what the people plead, to wit, That he
might well dispense with this Law, as to Jonathan, because he had wrought with
God that day a great salvation. There was indeed such a deed done by him that
day, such a high meritorious act, as would amount to a partial, if not a total
satisfaction: So that it would not much weaken Government, encourage Offenders,
take off from the repute of Readiness Rectoral Justice, to pardon one in such a
circumstance.

But a Rector cannot without injustice, ordinarily, and in weighty causes,
dispense with his Laws; since it would be, To be wanting to his duty: and it
would certainly tend to the debauching and ruin of the Community, by breaking
the reins of Government, and encouraging Offenders. It is ordinarily as much
the duty of the supreme Magistrate, to execute good Laws, or some way to keep
them sacred and honorable, as it is to make, good Laws; for, both duties are
built upon the same foundation. Who will say, That Parents may justly,
lawfully, and honestly, cast off all care of correcting their Children for
their faults, and leave all things to their wills? This would be, not so much a
parting with their right (as the Objection speaks) as a ceasing from, and being
wanting in their duty and office; and God's Rectorship and Government, is to be
conceived of by us, analogically to an Office.

2. Hence learn the Excellency and Satisfactoriness of the Christian Religion,
and our great felicity in living in these last days and shiningdays of the Son
of Man, wherein the Earth is, and has been filled with the glory of the Grace
and Mercy, and of the Justice and Holiness of God, in comparison of former
days. The Christian Religion discovers plainly to us, that which the Heathens
were fearfully bewildred about. They had Convictions of sin, and terrors and
consternations of mind for sin, and fearful lookings for of judgment and fiery
indignation: They knew, that they that did such things as they did were worthy
of death; they saw need of Romans 1. 31
attoning God, need of an Expiation; and some of them saw, the blood of Bulls
and Goats could not take away sin: Some offered (not knowing what they did) the
fruit of their body for the sin of their soul; when they might be flying and
hovering about (in their meditations and enquiries after these things) like
Noah's Dove, and find no rest; We have this safe Ark of the Righteousness and
Satisfaction of Christ discovered and opened to us, where there is Rest for the
sole of the foot of our souls. When their soul drew near to the grave, and
their life to the Destroyer, they had none to tell them of such a
Righteousness, such a Ransom.

The Heathens had indeed some obscure wavering knowledge of this fundamental
Article of Religion, the Remission of sins; partly by Tradition, which in
ancient times was more convincing; in after and corrupter days, more obscure
and doubtful: partly by the Law of Nature in the Book of Providence, seeing the
goodness and benignity of God to them, notwithstanding their great
provocations, they might and did thence waveringly gather, That God was
merciful, and would be found in mercy of them that did turn and seek him
diligently. He left not himself without witness, in that he did them good, and
gave them rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with
food and gladness; and this was, that Acts 14. 17. and 17. 27.
they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find him.
But this knowledge was so weakened by the contrary arguments that militate
against it, That that very deep apprehension of God's Holiness and Justice, and
those very consternations of mind for sins, which were likely to conduce, in
working this repentance and reformation, would be very apt much to weaken, if
not almost to blot out this notion, That there was hope for them, and
forgiveness with him that he might be served and feared: That it is no wonder
if it was ineffectual to work this change, and these diligent enquiries after
God, and that Salvation which they were not fully sure was attainable; though
yet it was their heinous sin, and high irrationality and madness, not thus to
seek him (though to the undoing of themselves in this life) upon these
probabilities and half-promises [if haply] and [it may be if we turn we shall
live] and this will be their greatest condemnation. It is no wonder if never
any did, sincerely and thoroughly, turn from sin to God amongst them (since
Tradition was quite worn out, or rendered suspicious and unconvincing) without
some supernatural Revelation, as by the Prophets and their Writings. I say,
since Tradition lost or corrupted: for, in Abraham's time, Abraham thought it
probable there might be fifty righteous persons in Sodom, though it proved
indeed otherwise; and he was better acquainted with the state of those times
than we are at this distance. And to come to the Jews before Christ's time,
that had the Oracles of God, and to whom the Lord sent Messengers, rising up
betime, and sending them, because he had compassion on them saying, Turn and
live. And If the wicked turn from his wickedness, and keep all my Commandments,
be shall live. Yet it is next to an impossibility, but that those amongst them
that knew little or nothing of this great price or Satisfaction, that scarce
understood any thing of their Prophesies, Types, and Sacrfices; but that those
should have muddied and fluctuating thoughts about this pardon of sin, when
deeply convinced of God's Holiness and hatred of sin, and of the hainousness of
their sins, how it could stand with his Justice and Honor to give eternal life
to such unworthy wretches, upon their repentance and poor broken obedience.
Good hearts, sensible of God's Holiness, and the hainousness of sin, would be
apt to say, Though he will pardon sin, yet it may be not such great sins as
ours. What unanswerable Arguments taken from God's Justice and Holiness, might
they seem to have against it! No wonder if they, that knew so little of this
great Transaction, though sincere ones, were all their lives subject to
bondage, through fear of death. No wonder if they were as Servants, and our
condition the state of Sons in comparison of theirs; though the almost visibly
convincing knowledge they had of God, and his placableness and mercy, did
prevail with them to perform the Gospel-condition, to be true Israelites,
sincere servants of God. Blessed be God that has revealed those things to us,
that were hid comparatively from many wise, prudent, yea, and holy men! What
helps have we, which they wanted, to turn to God! What helps to the love of
God, and to all cheerful obedience! He so wonderfully loving us first, even
while ungodly; as we may clearly and with open face, comparatively to them, now
see, Romans 5. 8. God commends his love to us, in that while we were sinners,
and enemies, and ungodly, Christ died for us. And if so, much more now when we
are converted, and so justified by his blood, we may easily believe, We shall
be saved from wrath through him; for, then we have a Right by Promise, ver. 10.
For, if when we were enemies, living in opposition to Heaven; and so he, as
Rector, an Enemy to us: if then he found a ransom, and we were then reconciled
to God in the death of his Son, quoad meritum, so far as concerns the price,
and the conditional pardon made out thereupon; much more being actually
reconciled, as we are upon the performing the Gospel-condition, we shall be
saved by his living to intercede for us, and to see we have the fruit of his
Death, and our Faith, the salvation of our souls, v. 11. And not only so, but
when thus converted, we joy in God, as having now received the atonement. There
was an atonement in his death before; but now we have interest in it, having
performed the Gospel-condition, we are actually, and not only, quoad meritum,
justified by it. What madness is in our hearts, if we refuse to hear Him that
has thus convincingly spoken to us from Heaven? O foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ was evidently held out crucified amongst you? He means, by the Ministry
of the Gospel: for, Christ was crucified at Jerusalem, and not at Galatia. And
the same may by the same reason be urged on us. O foolish, yea more than
foolish, even bewitched Creatures we, to do such an unreasonable thing, as to
refuse to obey the Gospel; even we, before whose eyes Christ is evidently held
forth crucified. If we perish, we may every one of us say with him in Terence,
Et prudens, and sciens, vivus vidensque pereo, I perish knowingly, and with my
eyes open. We may say with the Apostle, God in times past suffered (yet not
altogether, but comparatively, as the following words show) all Nations to walk
in their own ways, Acts 14. 16. yea, and the Jewish Nation in comparison of us.
And God (Acts 17. 30.) neglected those times of ignorance (as the words should
be translated), but now commands, even with almost compelling-evidence and
power, all men every where, where Christianity comes, to repent.

3. This informs us, That fallen man could never have fulfilled the Law, or
satisfied Justice for the breach of it; else Christ needed not to have died for
this end, That God might be just: for, God might then have been just, and the
justifier of fallen man, after their good deeds, and sufferings, or
satisfactions, without Christ's death: whereas the Apostle tells, All are
concluded under sin; and, that therefore all that were or are justified, were,
are, and shall be justified, were, are, and shall be justified only this way,
by the pardon of sin through this Propitiation, upon their Faith, Repentance,
and new Obedience. To account our Reformations, Humiliations, Faith, Obedience,
in the place of a Satisfaction, Expiation, for our evil deeds, is to pervert
the design of the whole Gospel. Christ is become of Gal. 5. 4.
none effect to you, whosoever of you seek to be justified by the Law.

How contradictory to this whole Doctrine is the avowed Popish Tenent of
Merits! Though some of their deluded ones amongst us are kept so ignorant of
their own Religion, as to tell us, Their Church holds no such thing, as the
meriting eternal life by their works. I know they are all to pieces about this,
as well as about other things they hold it Heresy to deny. But did these never
hear or read them discoursing of their works of Super-erogation; that they can,
not only merit, but so over-merit, as to supererogate, and have much to spare
for those that need Merits? Many of them, as Bellarmine confesses, speak at a
higher rate for Merit than he himself; and yet this moderate man is too high of
all conscience. Jam vero opera bona justorum Bellar. de Justif. lib. 5. cap. 17.
meritoria esse vitae aeternae ex condigno, non solum ratione pacti and
acceptationis, sed etiam ratione operis; probatur his Argumentis, etc. He
maintains here, The good works of pious men are meritorious of eternal life, ex
condigno, and that not only upon the account of God's Covenant and Acceptance
(which is a contradiction in the very words); but upon the account of the very
works themselves. And he tells us, Cap. 12, One drop of Christ's blood was of
merit enough to have saved the whole World, for the infinite Dignity of the
Person; and cites the Decretal Epistle of Clement the sixth, to prove it; and
then adds: At non dissimilis debet esse ratio meriti in Capite and membris:
Igitur sicut Christi meritum, ita merita justorum aliorum vim accipiunt a
dignitate personae: that is, There is the same account of Merit in the Head and
in the Members; therefore as the Merits of Christ received their force or
virtue from the Dignity of his Person, so do the Merits of other just and holy
men from the Dignity of their Persons. Yet he allows the Merit of good works to
be ascribed not only to the Dignity of the Persons of good men, and worthiness
of the works themselves, but also to God's promise and acceptance; though it
be a contradiction: for if of meritorious works, then not of grace; and if of
grace, then not of meritorious works; else grace is not grace, and merit is not
merit, Romans 11. 6. But Vasquez, the renowned Jesuit, affirms and endeavors
to prove these three things: 1. Opera ex se-ipsis Gabr. Vas. Com. in 1am 2ae
qu. 114. disp. 214. Cap. 5. 7, 8
absque etc. That the good works of just men are of themselves, without any
Covenant and Acceptance, worthy of eternal life. 2. Nullum dignitatis
accrementum, etc. That no accession of dignity does come to the works of the
just, by the Merits or Person of Christ. 3. Operibus justorum accessisse quidem
promissionem, etc. That God's promise is annexed indeed to the works of just
men; yet it belongs no way to the reason of the merit. If you be Christians,
you abhor such talk; and I will offend your ears no longer with it.

How far is the performance of the Gospel-condition from meriting the things
promised, when Christ dyed for this end, That God might justify and save them
that perform it? There is no other Name given under Heaven whereby we can be
saved. Neither Saints nor Angels could by any means redeem us, or give to God a
ransom for us: for then, Christ dyed still in vain; for it is in vain for that
to be done with greater cost which may be done with less. Could we once see all
our righteousness to be as filthy rags; could we cry out in sense of our
unworthiness, Wherewith should we come before him? Then we might with great
delight hear Christ sayiug, Come unto me, take up my yoke, and you shall find
rest for your souls.

4. They much wrong God and Christ, that think, Christ dyed to procure liberty
to sin, or to free men from duty, from obedience to the Law. He dyed to free
men from the curse of the Law, but not from obedience to it; but from the
curse, on condition of their sincere obedience. Christ has indeed procured
pardon for our sins and imperfect obedience; but enjoins us, under the greatest
forfeiture, a sincere endeavor of universal obedience. Some have said, Do but
believe you shall be saved, and you shall be saved; do but keep up a good
conceit of your safety, a strong faith (as they call it) you are safe. Others,
Do but rely, and you are justified, and shall be saved. This reliance on Christ
for justification and salvation, is a great duty, but a secondary one. None
should trust in God, or stay himself on him for salvation, but such as first
have the main of the Gospelcondition; such as fear the Lord, and obey the voice
of his Prophets, Isa. 50. 10. It would be a Minister's sin to bid people rely
on Christ for salvation, that are going on resolvedly in their sins; for such
should be so far from relying on him to save them, that they ought to believe
He will not save such as they; and it is to dishonor Christ to think he will.
But they are to bid them consent to the Gospel-terms, perform the
Gospel-condition, and so rely. Reliance is a very inconvenient word to express
the condition of justification by, because it is separable from justification:
for a man may rely, and yet perish, Mich. 3. 11. And one may be in a justified
estate, having the true Gospel-condition of heart-consent, and yet think God
will not save him, through some misapprehensions: And surely, they do not rely
and trust on him to save them while they judge he will not, though they know
none else can save them. But hearty-consent to the Gospel-terms, is inseparable
from justification: for, a man cannot be or continue in a justified estate,
without hearty willingness to obey the Gospel. Ministers are to bid the
greatest resolved sinners believe, while they take belief in the
Scripture-Gospel-sense, for consent to the Gospel-terms, for accepting Christ
for their Lord and Savior, for believing the Gospel, and carrying suitably to
such a belief; but not in that sense that many use the words Faith and
Believing. Christ, you see, dyed not that those might be justified that refuse
finally to give sincere obedience to the Law, and so obedience to the Gospel;
but that he might be a justifier of him that is of the Faith of Christ, of the
Christian Faith, a Christian indeed.

5. We may learn hence, the infinitely mischievous nature of sin. What
wickedness and malignity is there in it, when nothing but the blood of Christ
could expiate it? And, oh the deep stain that sin makes, that nothing but such
precious blood could wash out! A desperate Disease sure, that required such a
desperate remedy! The evil of sin should be more seen by us in Christ's dying
for it, than in millions being damned for it. If we could look into Hell, and
see the torments there, they could not so fully show us God's hatred of sin, as
Christ crucified does.

Sin strikes at the Being of God, striveth with all its might that God might
not be; it is enmity against God. In every act of deliberate sin we make a
scoff at God's Holiness, contemn his Justice; we slight his Counsel as
foolishness; think we know better than he, what is good for our selves; or we
think God a deceiver, one that envies our good, and counsels us for our
hurt; we strike at his Rule and Dominion. No wonder if God be an enemy to sin,
and set himself against it to purpose. No wonder, if God with great difficulty,
and much ado, has returned into favor with sinners. What fools are they that
make a mock of sin, a sport at sin, at a high affront of the High and Holy
Majesty of Heaven and Earth! Will you laugh at that which was such a weight on
the shoulders of the Mighty God, and Prince of Peace, and must be a bitter
weight to thee in Repentance, ere thou get easement? Oh the blindness and
profaneness of the secure World! What a leight matter do they make of sin!
Make but little matter of outward gross sins; and look upon inward sins, as
Pride, Malice, Covetousness, as no sins. How easily they think God might
pardon, and wonder God should make so much ado, think his thoughts should be
like theirs, and he should hate it no more than they. How far are their
thoughts from his thoughts!

Oh you that have slight thoughts of sin, as of a tame mild thing that has no
sting, no great hurt in it; Let not my soul come into your secrets. You do in
your hearts blaspheme this great and stupendous transaction of Heaven, and
that worthy name of Christ wherewith you are called: You despise God in your
hearts, and say as David to Saul, After whom does the King of Israel pursue?
after a dead dog? after a flea? As if he should say, Methinks the great King of
Israel should never be so vain, as to trouble himself about such an
inconsiderable fellow as I am. A dead dog cannot bite; a flea can bite, but a
flea-biting is a small matter: you that think sin but like a flea, and its hurt
like a flea-biting, you do charge the God of Israel in your hearts foolishly,
as if he made all this ado in Christ's death about nothing; you in effect
maintain, as if God did magno conatu magnas nugas agere, as if these things
were but Childrens play; as if Christ dyed as a fool dies, to no purpose: for,
if sin be such a slight matter, then Christ died in vain. How far are your
thoughts from God's thoughts! You shall see it an evil and bitter thing, and of
dreadful desert; and admire at, instead of contemning this. Justice of God
manifested in this wise plot of the Trinity, for man's salvation, before ever
you come to have this great benefit of it.

6. This speaks dreadfully to all unbelieving, impenitent, Christ-refusing
sinners: What will become of them that slight their Redeemer, that shall have
no part in his blood, because they tread it under foot? If Christ died for this
end, because else God could not with safety to his Justice pardon believing,
repenting, returning sinners; what will become of them that believe not, repent
not, return not? The death of Christ is to incorrigible sinners the
dreadfullest story they can read; it sets convincingly forth before their
eyes, and thundereth out to their ears, the inexorable Justice of God, and what
a fearful thing it is to fall into the offended hands of the living God. It may
make a man sweat, may put a man into an agony, to tell of those things that are
by the sufferings of Christ, proclaimed aloud to the World, to befall wilful
contemners of this offer of Christ and Grace. If these things were done to the
green tree, what shall be done to the dry? If he whose judgment was not to have
drunk this Cup, has drunk so deeply of it, Art thou he that shall go
unpunished? Jer. 49. 12. How shall they escape that neglect so great salvation!
You that say, you cannot believe God will be so severe to impenitent sinners,
as the Scripture and your Ministers tell you: See here dreadful Justice, and
believe; see here how severely God dealt with his only beloved Son, when he had
undertaken to satisfy for our sins, to be as it were our Substitute. If any
should now escape, surely he should; he was but as a Surety. How little
encouragement have thou to think he will dispense again with his threat, that
have seen how hardly he has dispensed with it before? God has once indeed
accepted of a great Sacrifice for sin; but if men now once finally refuse him
that thus speaks from Heaven, There remains no more sacrifice for sin. If any
man when he hears the words of this curse (that fell on Christ, being made a
Curse for us) shall bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
though I walk in the way of my own heart, and not after the appointment of my
Lord-Redeemer; surely the wrath of God shall smoke against that man, and God
shall blot out his name from under heaven, and he shall bear his iniquity
himself for ever and ever. What remains for such, but a fearful looking for
of judgment and fiery indignation that shall devour such adversaries, such
enemies that would not have this man (the Lord Jesus) to rule over them.

7. This speaks comfort to true Believers, to repenting, returning sinners;
notwithstanding their great sins they have been guilty of before conversion,
and since conversion. God has, you see, set forth Christ a Propitiation. You
need not fear, that you should feel what he felt, such expiatory Hell-sorrows,
or eternal and destructive punishments. Yours shall be common to men, common to
Christians; leight afflictions, and for a moment, and sanctified and well
rewarded. When your hearts ache, and consciences accuse, and the Law, and
Justice, and Holiness of God, seem to urge for Satisfaction, look here at
Christ made a Propitiation. Do not say, It is we that have sinned, and we must
suffer; the sins were committed by us, and must lie on us for ever. What did
God lay the punishment of our sins on Christ for? It would have been thus if
Christ had not dyed; if it must yet be thus, Christ dyed in vain. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifies, who is he
that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea rather is risen again, who is at
the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us: who will make it
his business to see you have the fruit of his death. God is wellpleased with
you, through him that loved us, and gave himself an offering and satisfaction
to God for a sweetsmelling savor.

Thou art often, it may be, saying within thy self, I want Righteousness; The
righteous Lord loves righteousness; Heaven is a place only of righteous ones:
How can such an unworthy Creature stand before him without righteousness? If I
had not sinned, or not so hainously sinned, how well it would have been with
me? O happy Angels and Saints in glory, they have righteousness! Why,
notwithstanding our unrighteousness, yet in the Lord Christ we have
righteousness, whereby we are made acceptable in the Beloved. So that now
Justice it self is become your friend. Now because God is just, the penitent
true Believer is and must be justified. Now God is faithful and just, to
forgive you your sins; it would not be justice and faithfulness to do
otherwise, when he has made this Righteousness over to the World by this Law
of Grace, this second Covenant; and you have the condition of the Covenant.

You that are sensible of the great wrong you have done the Lord, here you may
comfortably see it made up and satisfied for. Lord, thou art well paid; thou
have greater Satisfaction in saving than in damning me: in damning me, thou
have only my blood for Satisfaction; but in saving me, the blood of Christ. God
has been dishonored by you; but look here, and see Christ giving him as much
honor as you deprived him of.

The price is paid, yea, and accepted by God; and he has declared his
Satisfaction therewith, and made a Law of Grace upon it, and cannot go back;
and now says, Fury is not in me. This should be health to our bones, and wine
to our hearts. And that which has satisfied God for the sins of Thousands now
in Heaven, may well serve to satisfy the Conscience of any yielding,
submitting, turning sinner upon earth. Here is a Pillow to lay heads and hearts
on; here is stability and certainty; here is something for the sole of the foot
of our souls to rest on. You may come boldly to the Throne of Grace, having
such a High Priest. You may sit under Christ's shadow with great delight,
shaded from the heat of God's displeasure. He was scorched with God's wrath,
that we might be cooled, shaded, comforted, by that shadow that he has made
for wearied souls, by being hanged on a Tree. All other shadows are shadows
fleeing away. Worldly comforts and shadows are like Burning-glasses, the more
they shadow us, the more they scorch us, for the most part. There is a Worm in
all other Gourds; they dye, but our Redeemer lives; and because I live, you
shall live also.

8. This speaks, comfort may I call it? that seems too high a word; and
therefore I will rather say, It speaks encouragement to sinners thinking upon a
return, and to sinners to return. Here is a great encouragement to come, Return
and live. There is no greater hinderance to motion, than want of hope; [no man
has hired us]; we have no wages offered us. Judah was called upon to return;
but she answered, No, for there is no hope; for I have loved strangers, and
after them I will go, Jer. 2. 25. It is as good, we use to say, to sit idle, as
work idle. How little encouragement would there have been for Prayers, Tears,
Repentance, Reformation, if Christ had not dyed? Esau (we read, Heb. 12. 17.)
found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. The
meaning is (as you may plainly see by perusing the places) though he sought it
with tears, that his Father Isaac would repent and change his mind, and call
back the blessing from Jacob, and give it to him; yet he found no place for his
Father's repentance, for change of his Father's mind, though he wept, and said,
Bless me, O my Father. So, if Christ had not dyed, you would have found no
place for God's repentance, for altering his sentence, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things written, etc. Though you had sought it carefully
with tears, He would have said, What I have written, I have written. It would
have been uncomfortable praying, when we must in effect say, Lord dishonor thy
self for our sakes: Uncomfortable asking, to ask for that which God in Justice
and Honor cannot grant; when God may answer, Even ask the Kingdom also: Ask as
well that I be not God, as that I be not just. But now though God may have
glory in my destruction (the glory of his Justice); yet he may have greater
glory in my salvation, even the glory of this stupendous Justice and Mercy?
Now there may be glory to God on high, and yet peace on earth, and good will
toward sinful man.

Here is yet hope for the greatest sinners: It is now no blemish to God's
Honor to save the greatest Offenders. He designed great things in giving
Christ; there is plenteous redemption. He is able to save to the uttermost them
that come to God by him. The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. No spot or
stain is of so deep a dye, that the blood of Christ cannot wash it out: No
Disease so desperate, that he cannot cure it: No Debt so great as to be
unsatisfied for. Aggravate thy sin to the highest, and spare not; this Red Sea
of Christ's blood is large enough, deep enough to drown the tall Egyptian Host
of thy sins.

If one man by his sin was able to destroy a World, surely God by his
Sufferings is able to save the World, would the whole World run after him, as
the Jews once enviously spoke. So long as thou art one of the World, and thy
particular sins are not so great as the sins of the whole World, thou have
encouragement to come; They that come to him, he will in no wise cast off, as
if above his power to cure and heal. Come unto me all you that labor, and are
heavy-laden; take up my yoke, and I will ease you. He says not, I will do it
if I can; it is a provocation to make such a supposition: to despair here, is
to make Christ as no Christ. Whosoever will, let him come. None shall ever be
able to lift up their heads so high against God hereafter, as to say, Lord I
would, and thou would not; I would have had thee on thy own terms at last,
though I long rejected thee, and thou would not help me, or receive and
accept me upon this my hearty willingness. No, God will be able to say of those
that perish, I would, and you would not. Nothing but final wilful refusal of
Christ and his Government, shall undo you. It was a convincing sign of recovery
from sickness, to Hezekiah, that the Sun went back. Are we sick, sinsick, even
to death? Let this be a convincing sign of hope to us, Our Sun, the Sun of
Righteousness has gone back many degrees. Let this persuade thee, he will not
deceive thee; if he would, he could have done it at an easier rate than the
blood of his Son. God is willing; wast thou but willing, all is done. It is
certain there cannot be any other hinderance. How willing was God to save thee,
that sent Christ to dye for thee? and sure Christ valued thy Soul much, or he
would not have given such a Price.

EXHORTATION.
1. STudy this Truth, this Mystery of Christ's death more. The Angels
themselves desire to look into it; they are Students in this piece of Divinity,
though it little concern them in comparison of us. Socrates said of Philosophy,
That it was nothing else but a meditating on death. We may with more show say
of Christianity, Christian Divinity; It is nothing else but meditatio mortis
Christi, the Meditation on Christ's death. How unworthy are they of the name of
Christians, that neglect this study? that had rather hear or read any Moral
Discourse of commendable Heathens, than the Gospel of Christ? When Austin could
take little delight in Tully's Works (though worthy ones in their kind) because
the Name [Jesus] was not found there: Yet some look on Christianity, and the
study of Christ, as below them.

How unworthy of that worthy Name, wherewith yet they would be called, are that
sort of people risen up in our days, that call our Christ a carnal Christ? that
call this Christ without us, that dyed at Jerusalem, rose again, and sits in
Heaven, A carnal Christ? They are all for a Christ within us, a Spiritual
Christ (as they speak), and that in opposition to a Christ without us. What do
they mean by a Christ within us? a work of Grace on the heart? Let us grant
they take it in such a sober sense: This is indeed the condition of our
interest in Christ without us; but this is not the Atonement, the Propitiation
that the Angels desire to look into: For, this Holiness they have in a more
glorious manner, than our Christ within us, our imperfect holiness, can present
to their view. This was not that Christ crucified that the Apostle did so prize
the knowledge of. And this work of Grace could never have been within us, had it
not been for a Christ without us; and had it been within us, yet it would never
have been available to Salvation or Justification, but for the Christ without
us. There is no blood, no satisfaction in this Christ within us; nothing but
what would have been esteemed by God, and is, in reality, as menstruous rags,
in respect of attaining Justification without this work of Christ without us
upon the Cross. And yet these would make, Grace should I say? I rather say,
Morality and Civility; yea, to speak truly of some of them, Incivility and
Discourtesie, their righteousness; though it be a Gospel-command to be
courteous. These delight so little in our Christ without us, that it is with
much difficulty that they will confess Christ come and crucified in the flesh,
if indeed they will confess it: for-some shrink at such a question, and would
fain put it off. And I dare say, That any of you that ever heard them talk, can
bear witness, that they speak not as men delighting in, or making any account
of this Propitiation, Ransom, etc.

Cursed are they that love not our Lord Jesus. These honor not God. The honor
that comes to God by works of Creation and Providence, is counted as no honor
in comparison of the honor that comes to him by this Redemption; therefore it
is said, He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father. God
accounts all honor as no honor in comparison of this; Hence we read Ephesians.
3. ult. Unto him be glory in the Church, by Jesus Christ. Phil. 1. 11. Being
filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the
glory and praise of God. And, Spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. And in Heaven the loudest and highest praises will be upon this
account, Worthy is the Lamb to receive honor, etc. These seeking to establish
their own righteousness, make void the righteousness of God, through their
ignorance of the righteousness of God. Wonderful! that ever the Devil should so
bewitch people! that ever the God of this world should so far blind men's eyes!
that ever he should so prevail with this device to work Christianity out of
men's hearts, so as to make them renounce the Christian Religion, under
pretense of high Christianity! to look on Christ as a carnal Christ, or the
blood of Christ as a common or unholy thing; on our Redeemer (whom all
Christians venerate and adore) as a low nothing; and to call his faithful
Ministers Liars and Deceivers.

But study you these things, that you may admire Christ; for he is, and is to
be admired in, and of all his people. Here is not such obscurity, as to
discourage your endeavo^rs; nor such facility as to occasion your contempt. You
may easily see enough to admire all your days, and yet still you are to learn.
It may be said to them of the highest form, Go and learn what it means, what
Christ crucified means. Here is a riddle of Mercy, a riddle of Wisdom, a riddle
of Justice. Christ is called [Wonderful]; He is so in his Natures, Offices,
Death. Let these things be much in your mind. It is like his complaint, Diem
perdidi, I have lost a day; to have cause to say, I have lived another day, and
have not had a serious thought of Christ and his Death. Do this in remembrance
of me. Look upon him whom we have pierced. Study the reasons and ends of his
sorrows and sufferings. He dyed not as a fool dies; it was for some great End,
and this end must not be frustrated. Woe to us if it be as to us! This knowledge
would be better to us than our daily bread; this study is more necessary than
our appointed food. Is there but one Medicine in the World to heal us, and will
you not learn it, study it, and the use and virtue of it, and how to apply it
by Meditation. that it may have its diversity of effects upon us? St. Paul
desired to know nothing but Christ and him crucified. And Peter's last words of
Exhortation in his last Epistle are, Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus. And acting our faith and knowledge of these things, by Meditation,
would be hugely influential to work and increase Grace. Come to other knowledge,
and he that increases knowledge, increases grief and sorrow: but he that
increases in this knowledge, and is suitably affected with it, lays a
foundation for perfect peace, quietness, and assurance for ever.

Let Ministers study this more, and so preach this more. I desire to know
nothing among you (that is, to know so as to preach nothing among you) save
Christ and him crucified. Preach not your selves, but Christ. Use much
plainness of speech. Preach not like Moses, with a vail on your face. Let not
people live and dye in ignorance of Christ, if you can help it: Discover all to
sinners. Let them see the Lord their Righteousness.

Now in studying and contemplating these things: Admire!

1. Admire the Justice of God. Never was such Justice heard of since the world
began; Justice in a Mystery; He spared not his Son, that he might spare
Sinners. He hardened his heart against the cry of his Son, that he might opeu
his heart to the cry of Sinners. Behold how he not only loved us, but hated
sin! The dreadful instances of man cast out of Paradise, the drowning of the
World, the destruction of Jerusalem, the reservation of the fallen Angels in
horror and darkness, are fearful Monuments of God's hatred of sin.

But here Justice and Holiness shine as the Sun in the Firmament. When his
beloved Son stood in the place and stead of Sinners, he must dye such a
shameful, painful, accursed death. Surely had there been any respect of persons
with God, could Justice have been perverted and drawn aside with any
considerations, his only beloved Son should have escaped. Here is inexorable
Justice! inflexible Justice! This declared his Righteousness indeed, that he
would not spare Sin, but punish it, though on his innocent Son. Here is
infinite Justice, fear it, dread it. Make this God thy fear and thy dread.

2. Admire the love of the Father and the Son. The Father: Bless God for this
Propitiation. How dreadful was our condition! How if Justice had taken thee by
the throat, and said, Pay me what thou owe? thou could not have replied,
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. God lays great engagements upon
us, in causing his Sun to shine, in giving rain and fruitful seasons, in making
provision for our bodies; but that which should endear him most to the world,
and should occasion our highest praises, should be the providing a
Righteousness for our souls. Oh that the Lord should look upon such dead dogs
as we are. What is man that thou art mindful of him; and the son of man, that
thou should visit him! That thou should give him such a Physician as thy
Son, to cure him with his blood! What is man that thou should magnify, and
set thy heart upon him! Admire and wonder at the love of the Son; that Christ,
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, should be willing to dye for such dead dogs!
That God's fellow should be willing to be smitten and wounded, that by his
stripes we might be healed! that he should give Himself, his Blood, and Soul, a
Ransom for Traitors, for Enemies! That he should intercede, as Moses, Blot me,
I pray thee, out of the book of life; and say as Paul, Let me rather be
accursed! That he should say to his Father, If they have wronged thee, put it
on mine account, I will pay it; written, not with my hand, but with my blood!
That he should say with Rebeccah, On me be thy curse, my Son! That Christ
should go into the fire, that we may be as brands plucked out of the fire! That
the most blessed should be willing to be cursed, that we cursed ones might be
blessed! That such a Tree of life, such a fruit-bearing Tree, should be willing
to be cut down and dye, to save Trees of death, dead, dry, and barren Trees,
cumbring the ground. It is commonly said of men undone by Suretiship, Their own
kind hearts undid them: We may say of our Redeemer, His own kind heart laid him
thus low, brought these calamities upon him. How dear should he be to us!
Quanto pro me vilior tanto mihi charior.

Labor to know the love of God and Christ, which passes knowledge, that you
may be able to comprehend with all Saints, the height, length, depth, and
breadth of it, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. Had we hearts as full of love as they could
hold, yea, as full as all the hearts of Men and Angels could hold, we could not
love him as he deserves from us. We had need, with the Widow, to beg and borrow
Vessels to fill; our hearts cannot hold enough. Were we not cold frozen pieces
of earth, the fire would burn while we are musing. This love of God and Christ
would set our hearts on fire.

3. Admire the Wisdom of God in this great Transaction! This was matter of
reproach amongst the Heathen, their grand Objection against Christianity, Deus
vester Patibulo affixus est: Your God was crucified: and, Christ crucified was
to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. But it is wisdom
to them that are perfect; and to them that are saved by Christ, Christ is the
wisdom of God, and the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 8, 24, 25. Never was such a
strain of Wisdom heard of as this, since the World began. O the wise plot and
contrivance of the Trinity, for the salvation of lost man! here are Treasures
of Wisdom; unsearchable riches of Wisdom; Wisdom in a mystery, to find out a
way for the greatest Justice and Mercy to meet. Wisdom bringing light to us out
of Christ's darkness, life out of his death; making the fall of Christ the
rising of the World. Such Wisdom as the Princes of this World knew not; such
Wisdom as the subtle Devils could not fathom. Wisdom confounding the Devils,
and making them to help forward our salvation, by endeavoring our ruin in
destroying Christ. He destroyed his own Kingdom, in seeking to destroy Christ's
Kingdom.

2. Exhort. Keep humble and low thoughts of your selves; yea, be ashamed and
confounded in your selves, because of his kindness in being thus pacified
toward you. Look to the hole of the pit whence you were dug, and see what
you were by nature, and what your lot and portion was. Look at your selves, at
the best, but as Beggars in the elder Brother's Clothes. Say of your
Righteousness, Alas, it was but borrowed! Some are admiring their own virtuous
lives, the innocent lives they have lived; these cannot but slight the Death
and Satisfaction of Christ: This is a direct opposition to the Grace of the
Gospel: and Publicans and Harlots will have benefit by this, before them that
justify themselves. What needed Christ to dye for thee, if thou be so good as
thou would make thy self? The design of the Gospel is, That every mouth might
be stopped in boasting, and all flesh be guilty in their own sight before God.
And this is one part of the condition of life and righteousness through Christ,
To be deeply sensible how just it would have been with God to have damned us.
And the full soul, in this sense, cannot but loathe this honeycomb. And these
Truths would be sweet unto us, were we pinched with want and hunger.

3. Prize your Souls; set a high value on them, since God did so, Christ did
so: They were ransomed at a high rate. You have heard sometime of the ransom
of a King, as a huge matter; it is nothing to the ransom of a Soul; this is
precious indeed, Christ that well knew the worth of Souls, paying so dear for
them. Our souls were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold;
do not sell them away for silver and gold, for that which could not purchase
them. We were not freeborn; with a great sum was this freedom, this reprieve
and hopeful time of trial obtained; sell them not away for trifles. Thirty and
two years and upwards was this Temple in building, this Soul in redeeming, by
Jesus Christ the Son of God; lose it not, sell it not, for the sinful fading
pleasures of a few days; destroy it not in three days.

4. Look too, that this Blood be not lost; this great Counsel of Heaven lost as
to us. Look to your selves, that we lose not the things which we have wrought,
but that we receive a full reward, 2 John v. 8.

It is sad thing for a man to complain, I have beaten the air, and spent my
strength in vain. Have you done and suffered so many things in vain, if it be
yet in vain? But much more should this prevail with us; Take heed that you lose
not the things that Christ has wrought. A sad thing for Ministers to complain,
We have spent our strength in vain; but much more for Christ to say, I have
lost my labors, tears, wounds, death, as to these men.

The Righteousness, and Pardon, and Life, which he has purchased, were not for
Himself; he has no more need of them, than the Heavens have need of rain, or
the Sun of light. Cut off, but not for himself: therefore, if you refuse this
offer, you endeavor interpretatively that it may be said of Christ, He died as
a fool dies. You say to Christ's face virtually, You might have been wiser
than to work and take pains for one that gives you so little thanks.

Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? Is this thy thanks to thy Redeemer? Has
not Christ deserved thee? If the Devil and Sin have, and will do more for thee,
let them take thee: Say then, I love my Master Sin and Satan, and will not go
out free. But study how thou will answer it to God, and look thy Redeemer in
the face. Do you mock God, and your Redeemer? and say, You might have spared
your self, as Peter bade you? Who bade you thus love me? You might have let the
loving me alone. God will not be mocked; Be you not mockers lest your bonds be
made strong; And Christ will yet have some reward in well-doing, and honor in
thy ruin; thy refusal, and punishment for it.

But these are secondary Ends, and Ends only upon supposition of rejection of
his Grace. The primary End of his Death and Law of Grace, is your Salvation:
for, he came not into the world primarily to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. God swears, he desires not the death of the
wicked, but rather that he would turn and live. The primary End of the Gospel
and Law of Grace, is your Obedience and Salvation; and secondarily, upon
supposition of your refusal, Condemnation. It cannot be said of a Governor
making a Law, It was weakly done of him when he foresaw many would break it,
except he want Power or Justice to vindicate it. Dare you say, It was not
wisely done of God to make the first Covenant with Promise to Adam, because he
foresaw he would lose the benefit of it, and incur the curse? And dare you say,
It was no kindness? Suppose God had not known; Would that have made any change
in the thing, by making the sin greater, and God's kindness more? This is to
say, God's Omniscience hinders him from being Rector of the World, from being
able to make gracious Promises to the obedient, and just Threatenings to the
disobedient. Take heed of such Doctrines as would in their own nature cause you
to have hard thoughts of God, and discourage your return to him; and conclude
they are false, that are so expressly contrary to the whole tenor of the
Gospel: Though you know not how to answer the Objections, I dare confidently
tell you others can, and have answered in the main such difficulties
satisfactorily, and that in a way well agreeing with special grace. And I could
do it satisfactorily to you I think; and should now, if I thought it not
inconvenient to turn to an alien subject. But suppose I could not, no nor the
ablest men, must we therefore deny plain Scripture-truths, because men know but
in part, and can answer many difficulties but imperfectly? But to return: Shall
Christ fall short of the primary End of the travel of his soul? This is the
reward and fruit Christ waits for, To see the travel of his soul; to see his
seed, a generation of sinners, turning and accepting his offered salvation; and
then he will say, My blood was well shed indeed; I am well paid, well
satisfied, so Israel be but thus gathered: and this he waits for, and strives
with thee about.

Again, Is this thy kindness to thy own soul, Not to hearken to the cry of its
necessity for a Savior? It is in your power to reject the counsel of God
against your selves, to your hurt; it is in your power to frustrate all, and to
make your selves of those that shall have neither lot nor portion in this
matter. But if you perish, it is not long of Christ, but of your selves; you
choose it. Would you be wise, you should be wise for your selves: but, if you be
scorners, you alone shall bear it. Once all was lost, hopeless and helpless you
were; but through this Propitiarion it is once more brought to your choice
whether you will perish or no. Why will you dye? If you will dye, who can help
it? I cannot: I can only witness, I called, and you refused to come: And I
hereby call you, Noverint universi, etc. Be it known therefore unto you, Men
and Brethren, That through this Man, and this Name, is preached to you the
forgiveness of sins; and by him all that shall believe, all that shall receive
him, shall be justified. And there is no other Name under Heaven given whereby
you can be justified and saved; and if you refuse him, it is in vain to look
for another.

Are you willing to comply with this design of God for your eternal welfare? Or
must I say you refuse to come? Will you, or will you not, accept Christ for
your Lord Redeemer, to sanctify and save you? If you will indeed, you shall
certainly be saved: If you will not, why will you not? What displeasure have
you taken against Christ? What blemish do you see in him? What is there that
offends you in this wise stupendous dispensation of Christ crucified? What
prejudice have you entertained against this Counsel of God? What, do you think
his terms too hard, so that all things considered, it would not be for your
good? Then you think Christ If any doubt of the truth of the Scripture
Doctrine, let them, if they judge their souls worth so much pains, read those
learned Books lately written in English on this Subject, and doubt if they can.
counsels you for your hurt: if so, you have interpretatively worse thoughts
of Christ, than you ought to have of the Devil; for, you ought to think the
Devil no worse than he is: and if you think Christ calls you for your hurt
and loss, and tells you what you shall never find true; you think Christ envies
your good, and would deceive and cheat you, by persuading you out of it; and
what is this, but to think him worse than the Devil? for the Devil, though he
would deceive you, yet he never dyed and shed his blood to deceive you: but, if
it be for your hurt to turn from sin, and deny your selves, and take up his
yoke, Christ has dyed to undo you; which would be strange maliciousness! O the
hainousness of this sin of refusing Christ! It is virtually to esteem him the
horrid'st Impostor that ever the Sun saw.

What a dreadful thing it is to stay a day or a night under the guilt of this
refusal of Christ! He that thus believes not, is condemned already, and is yet
under the curse: and if he do but walk up and down the few more days, and sleep
out the few more nights of his life, he will be remediless: for there is no
more sacrifice for sin.

But yet there is Balm in Gilead; there is a Physician there; why is not our
health recovered? There are Treasures in Christ; Treasures of Righteousness he
would fain part with. Oh say, These and these neglect Christ, despise his
Riches; It may be thy Master (if thou be a servant) sleights this great and
honorable One's Treasures, and will not receive at his hands the things which
he has bought and brought; but say thou, as Gehazi, As the Lord lives, I will
run after him, and take something of him: and I can assure thee in his Name,
whose Messenger I am, That he will be as ready to part with it to thee, as ever
Naaman was to Gehazi.

5. Have nothing to do with Sin. The Philistines would not tread on the
threshold they thought brake their Idol Dagon's neck. The Jews would not put
the Thirty pieces given for betraying Christ, into the Treasury, because it was
the price of blood, Mat. 27. 6. Will you look on sin as gain? on that which you
have gotten by sin, as gain? It is the price of blood. Should that be pleasing
to thee which was so bitter to Christ? David would not drink of the water his
Worthies had ventured their lives for, but poured it out, and said, Is not this
the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives? 2 Samuel 23. 17. Will thou put that Serpent into thy bosom, that has stung to death thy dearest
Relation? A strange sight for a Child to delight in that Sword or Knife that
killed his Father. Some will break God's Law for the gain of twopence. God
made not such a leight matter of the breach of his Law. Let this conspicuous
Justice of God be as a flaming-sword to keep you from sin. Since Christ has
died for sin, let us dye unto sin; yea, let us rather choose to dye than to sin.

Lastly, Live to your Lord Redeemer; walk as they that are bought with such a
price; say to Christ, as the people ^o Gideon, Rule thou over us, for thou have
delivered us from the hand of our enemies. He died, that they which live, might
not live to themselves. A strong and constraining bond of obedience and
thankfulness, is laid upon us. Offer up Souls and Bodies a living sacrifice to
him, that offered up himself a dead sacrifice for us. Be cheerful in suffering
for him; grudg not at suffering any thing for him, that suffered so much for
thee. Christ loved not his life unto the death for our sakes.

A Discourse concerning the Apostle Paul's meaning, by Justification by Faith,
occasioned by some passages in the Sermons.
An Endeavor to make apparent, That the Apostle Paul, by Justification by
works, and by the Law, means justification for men's deserts and merits, or by
unsinning obedience without pardon: And by Justification by Faith, means pardon
of sin upon men's believing and turning from sin to God: And that it is not in
the least his design to exclude Repentance and sincere Obedience from being a
condition of our justification; but that he includes them in the word Faith.

FIrst, We are sure, whatever the Apostle teaches, is consistent with himself
and the whole tenor of Scripture: Therefore his meaning cannot be, That it is
not necessary, or that it is dangerous for any to repent and turn from sin, for
pardon, or justification and salvation. But this I have already cleared.

Secondly, We are sure, Whatever the Apostle says is true, and his arguing
cogent; as when he tells us, Romans 4. 4. To him that works, the reward is not
reckoned of grace, but of debt: and Romans 11. 6. If by grace, then it is no more
of works; but if it be of works, then it is no more of grace. Now this would
not be true (for a reward may be of works, and yet of grace) unless by works he
understand meritorious works, or full and complete innocence. If there be a
promise made of a reward to a work, yet if the work be inconsiderable in value
to the reward, this reward is to be ascribed to the grace, and favor, and
kindness, of him that promises and gives the reward, and not to the merit of
his work that receives it. It would be in this case, of Grace as the Cause,
though of Works as the Condition; the Works not being meritorious. Else it
would be impossible for any promise to be a gracious promise, that has any
duty for the condition of it; which to affirm, would be the abhorring of any
rational soul, yea though the condition was to be performed by the man's own
strength (whatever any say to the contrary), which yet is not in the
case-in-hand, I willingly grant; yea, a conditional promise would not be one
jot less gracious, if the condition was to be performed by man of himself; and
is not more gracious, because God causes us to perform it; only this causing
us to perform it, is more of grace. Dare any deliberately say, these
conditional promises were not of grace, because a work made the condition? viz.
If the wicked turn, he shall live. Repent, that your iniquities may be blotted
out. Nay, do we not expressly read, Such are of grace? Jer. 3. 1, 12. Thou have
played the harlot with many lovers; yet return, and I will not cause mine anger
to fall on you: For I am gracious and merciful. 2 Chronicles. 30 19. The good Lord
pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek, etc. though he be not
cleansed according, etc. Nehem. 13. 22. Remember me, my God, concerning this
also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy. Jonah knew, if God
spared Nineveh upon repentance, it would be an act of grace; I know thou art a
gracious God, and merciful, Jonah 4. 2. Whatsoever any one gives or promises to
another who works, more than the merit of the work amounts to, is of grace; and
the justification of any man upon any terms less than the obedience of the Law
in every thing, is of Gospel Grace, to wit, of pardon.

Thirdly, The opposition of the Apostle is good and true, if by works be meant
meritorious works, deserving the reward, or full and complete obedienee to the
Law in every thing, viz. If of meritorious works, then not of grace; then the
reward is no more than what is owing in strict Justice; and one need not cry
gratias, grace, grace; need not give thanks for such a reward. And, if of
complete unsinning obedience; one needs not pardon, cannot be pardoned, cannot
give thanks for the reward, as having of it, upon the account of sin, pardoned.

Object. But would not Adam's justification have been of grace, if he had
continued in his innocence, though it would have been of works?

This some object against this Tenent, That the Apostle meant it of meritorious
works, or full obedience; and I never saw this well cleared, and many are much
puzzled with it; therefore I will speak the more largely to it.

Ans. I distinguish here between justification simply taken, as justification
of an innocent man accused or accusable, though falsely; and between the
justification of a man with the resultancies from it; which, though immediate
resultancies, yet come on him upon his mere justification, by virtue of some
gracious Law, Promise, or Covenant, made on condition of his innocence.

First, Suppose there had been no promise made of everlasting happiness to
Adam, on condition of continued innocence; but only a threatening, That if he
sinned, he should dye, be damned. First, In this case while he had continued
innocent, it would have been of debt, not to have condemned him as a sinner;
and so justification of him from any thing befalling him for the breach of the
Law, would have been of debt, and not of grace; no thanks. Secondly, But his
justification in this case would have reached but a little way, would have
resulted no further than I have expressed: For God might yet when he pleased,
have annihilated him; for it seems not rational to affirm, That if God make a
rational Creature, he may not lawfully and in equity unmake and annihilate it,
except it offend him: this would be to impose hard terms on God. But yet it
would be of due debt, that this annihilation should not be as a token of his
displeasure, and for the breach of the Law, if he had not broken it, as is
supposed.

Secondly, Suppose the Covenant ran thus: If he obey, he shall live eternally
happy; but if he sin, he shall dye, be damned; as it is supposed it did.

First, Here, while man keeps his innocence, That he be justified as innocent,
and not condemned as guilty; is of natural equity, and not of grace. Which
would have been enough, had we no more to say, to justify the Apostle's
speech, if we take it not strictly, but as we use to do other moral sayings;
the foundational and most immediately obvious part of justification, being of
debt.

Secondly, But that this very justification should reach so far as right to
continued life and happiness, would be of grace; because that promise that
causes this right to result, during him innocent, was of grace, and not of debt.

Thirdly, Yet this justification thus resulting to continued life and
happiness, would not (man continuing obedient) have been of Gospel Grace, of
that kind of grace which the Apostle has occasion mainly to speak of, which is
Mercy and Pardon; it would not have been of Gospel Grace, of forgiveness; which
is the thing the Apostle has much in his eye. No thanks would be due upon the
account of forgiving him any thing.

Fourthly, But to clear all beyond possibility of exception; The Apostle only
speaks ex hypothesi, and on supposition: for the Creature cannot possibly merit
any thing of God (but as abovesaid, that, if innocent, he be not condemned as
guilty) and the Apostle knew, their works were not meritorious, that his
opposers pretended were so. Now suppose, I say, that obedience was meritorious
of eternal life, of the reward; suppose, man did any thing meritorious of
Heaven; then ex hypothesi, salvation would not be of grace in any sense, but
properly of debt, which is all the Apostle here affirms. And it seems the
Pharaisaical Jews went as high (as some Papists do now) as to hold their good
works meritorious of eternal life; and our Jewish Antiquaries manifest, that
this Tenent was common amongst them; and you see, if of meritorious works, then
not of grace in any sense. And in this sense Adam's justification to life upon
his unsinning obedience, would not have been of meritorious works, but of
grace, though not of pardon and Gospel Grace and Mercy. It is easy to answer,
take it which way you will. For if you will by works understand no more than
perfect obedience to the Law, then justification will not be of Gospelgrace,
which is pardon. But if by works you will understand works properly meritorious
of salvation; then if of works, not of grace at all. And in some places the
Apostle seems to take the words in one sense, sometimes in the other. For, as
here he seems to mean proper merit; so, Gal. 3. 10. As many as are of the
works of the Law, are under a curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one
that continues not, etc. implies, Man should have been blessed and not
cursed, as being justified by works, had he fulfilled, etc. Here justification
would have been of works not properly meritorious, but being of Law-works, it
would not be by Gospel Grace and pardon; though there would have been in such a
case the Law-grace spoken of. For (to speak by way of anticipation) if God was
not bound in strict Justice to make such a promise, If man obey perfectly, he
shall be happy; if the making of it was of grace, the making of it does not
hinder the performance of it from being of grace, law-grace; no more than God's
making this law, That sinner that repents and believes, shall be saved, makes
man's justification for being of Pardon and Gospel Grace.

Object. The Jews Works and Privileges were not meritorious nor perfect:
Therefore the Apostle does not mean by works, meritorious works, or perfect.

Ans. First, It is true, they were not meritorious, else they would have been
justified and saved of debt, without Christ's satisfaction.

Secondly, But they maintained and pretended their works such, and this was to
make Christ's death vain. This very opinion made them slight Christ, and kept
them from submitting to the righteousness of God, the Gospel-way of
justification. And (by the way) if any should now have this conceit concerning
faith, repentance, sincere obedience, works of charity, viz. that they are
meritorious of their justification and salvation, a satisfaction for their
sins, recompense enough to Justice; they would be in the same condemnation with
these, and Christ should profit them nothing. For, this was the reason why
Circumcision and other observations of the Law would undo them (Gal. 5. 2.),
not because they had that merit in them which they supposed; for then they
would have been justified and saved by them: but because they conceited them
meritorious, making them worthy deserving men; and so could not possibly,
during this conceit, expect or desire justification in God's way of grace or
Mercy through a Propitiation; they could not but despise it, as esteeming they
had no need of it, as indeed they had not, if their conceit was true.

Fourthly, Faith and Repentance are works (it would move a man with pity to see
the weakness of men's attempts to prove that faith is not a work, when Christ
himself calls it a work) therefore his design is not to exclude every good work
from any interest in justification; else he would exclude Faith it self; but
only perfect or meritorious works, or works conceited so to be, which comes all
to one: for as works really complete or meritorious, would essentially hinder
pardon by Christ's death, being essentially inconsistent: so a man conceiting
his works meritorious, is by God's Law of Grace excluded from any interest in
this Propitiation. For he has made it a part of the condition, That men be
sensible of their unworthiness, unrighteousness, and undone estate without
Christ and Pardon. You see what the Apostle's meaning is not. Now that you may
see what his meaning is, let these two things be well considered, viz. What the
Jews Opinions were; and, What the Apostle's Design was.

First, What the Jews Opinions were which Paul opposed; which are something
plain from Scripture, and are made more plain by the Writings of ancient Jewish
Authors.

First, They held their good works meritorious of eternal life: yea, some of
them maintained, that any one Commandment kept by a Jew, thus merited.

Secondly, They had high thoughts of their great worth, as being Abraham's
seed, and circumcised worthy men: Think not to say, We have Abraham to our
Father. They were great boasters; Where is boasting then? Many of them held,
all Jews (with very little exception) should inherit eternal life; yea, though
dying by the hand of Justice for crimes.

Thirdly, Yet the more Pharisaical sort talked of repentance as a thing of
little use to them that were of strict observance to make up what wanted: The
righteous person needing no repentance, seems to be spoken alluding to their
opinion. The common people that knew not the Law, that knew not or used not
their Traditions, were looked on by them as cursed, hopeless; no justification
for such, nothing would serve to save them, but taking up their way. John's
Doctrine of remission of sin, and justification upon repentance and leading a
new life, without Pharisaical, strict, unwritten observances and traditions,
which were not possible to be kept by people of ordinary employment, was almost
new doctrine amongst them, and was derided by the Pharisees, as much as such
doctrine would be by the strict and religious Orders (as they are called)
amongst the Papists; but was embraced as welcome news to the common people; for
salvation to be a thing of possible attainment, by ordinary people sensible of
their guilt; yea, and by Publicans and Soldiers, without leaving their course
of life, provided they carry regularly in it; and by Harlots, upon leaving
their lewd courses.

Fourthly, They held the Law required no more than the observance of the
outward man.

It was a determined case amongst their David Kimchi in Psalm. 66. v. 18. Aben
Ezra in Dialog. Josephus lib 12. Antiq. Ju-Judaic. cap. 13.
Doctors before, and about these days, That evil thoughts and desires were not
sin; and that the Tenth Commandment was not a Command, but a Counsel, which men
would do well to observe; but sinned not in neglecting the observance of it.
They had determined that, unless in the case of worshipping false Gods, no sin
could be committed by the will, without an actual commission following; and so,
that it was no sin to desire to adulterate a Neighbor's Wife, so the act
followed not. And then, no wonder if many of them supposed themselves to need
no pardon or Gospel-favour from God; no wonder, if the Pharisees be represented
as having nothing to confess, never asking for pardon, never saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner!

Fifthly, They placed the most of their confidence in Ceremonial matters,
tything mint, etc. neglected the weightier matters of the law, faith,
repentance; placed much in observance of unscriptural-Traditions, to make up
what might any way want of their external observation of the Law to justify
them. And it seems the Pharisaical Jews in the Apostles days never pretended
any meritoriousness of faith in God or Christ, fear of God, love of God,
repentance, Christian obedience; therefore he never speaks directly of
excluding these from merit, though, by consequence, and by the parity of
reason, they are excluded. It rather appears, that they looked on such things
as low unworthy things, in comparison of those things they most gloried in; and
thought them needless as conditions, and that they might be justified without
them upon their external observances; or else he would more copiously, and ex
professo, have told us, how these also are so far from meriting, that it would
be damnable to account them meritorious, as he does by consequence; and would
have yet told us more fully, they are conditions of the promise (as the Apostle
James does afterward) and included in the word Faith which he uses. But this
not being the Controversy, he securely comprehends all these things, obedience
to the Gospel, the whole of Christianity, in the word Faith, as being a word
used ordinarily by Christians to comprehend the whole of Christianity. By
Faith, he meant Believing, and Living such lives as those Christians at that
time (that observed not the Ceremonial Law) lived. And we now by the word
Believers, mean sincere Christians. When that great dissension arose, Acts 15.
5. some teaching, that except men were circumcised, and kept the Law of Moses,
they could not be saved or justified; they meant, by Moses Law, those Commands
that required such observances as were now really unnecessary to justification
and salvation, being mortuae dead, though not yet mortiferae deadly: For had
they only taught, That except men repent, and fear and love God, and obey him,
they could not be saved; the Apostles would not have opposed them in it. But
they meant. Except men were circumcised, and did those things many of which
none uncircumised were to do (according to the Jews own opinion) they could not
be justified and saved.

Now their allegations to maintain their merits, being diverse and various, and
not punctually set down, because well known to those to whom he more
particularly wrote: It need not offend us, that sometime the Apostle has
reference to one of these pretenses, sometime to another; and that transitions
are often obscure; and that he sometimes speaks only of the Ceremonial Law,
sometime only of the Moral, sometimes of both; and sometime it is not easily to
be determined which he speaks of.

Nay, suppose that true which some alledg (to prove that it is not much of the
Apostle's business here to prove man's justification lies in pardon of sin)
viz. That it is improbable any should think they needed no pardon (which yet is
an opinion too frequent with men now, if there be any such, as none question
but there are, that think they have so lived, that set one thing against
another, it would be hard or unjust measure for God to condemn them: for these
judge freedom from the penalty to be due from natural Justice, and so not
pardon) yet how ordinary is it for men that will pertinaciously defend an
error, as these did (to wit, the excluding of the Gentiles without
circumcision) to fly to some allegations that they can scarce believe
themselves?

Secondly, Consider what was the Apostle's Design, what he aimed mainly to
prove, in those seemingly difficult passages about Justification, and you will
find it was no way pertinent to it, to make an opposition between what God has
joined as necessary, viz. Belief of, and obedience to, the Gospel. Now you will
find his great Design, by observing what occasioned those passages from him,
which was this.

The Pharisaical Jews, all of them, yea some of them that were so far convinced
of Christ's being the true Messiah, (by the undoubted attesting evidences) as
to profess themselves Christians (Acts 15. 5. Certain of the sect of the
Pharisees which believed, said, that it was needful to circumcise the Gentiles,
and to command them to keep the Law of Moses) were wicked opposers of Paul's
(the Minister of the Gentiles) preaching to, and receiving into the Church the
Gentiles (1 These. 2. 15. They please not God, and are contrary to all men,
forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved); they could
not endure that the sinners of the Gentiles (as they were called probably
ordinarily by them in opposition to Jews by nature, Gal. 2. 15.) should be
esteemed in as good a condition as they, when God had once purified their
hearts by faith; and so no difference in that respect.

They are (think they) unworthy, base, vile men; though Christians, they are
uncircumcised men (Ephesians. 2. 11. You are called uncircumcision (i. e. by way of
contempt) by that which is called circumcision in the flesh).

But these Jews thought themselves brave, worthy, deserving persons (yea,
though they lived wickedly) in that they were Abraham's seed, and observed the
Ceremonial Law, in which they chiefly placed their merits; they gloried, We
have Abraham to our Father, we are circumcised; and thought upon that account
they deserved great respect from God and man: and should the vile uncircumcised
Gentiles be in as good a condition as we, upon their receiving the Gospel?
What, are not Jews better than other men? And indeed, the Apostle himself,
before his great change, thought these things highdeserving privileges; and he
names them as things he had much ado to obtain of himself to deny, formerly
counting them great gain; much ado he had to quit confidence in things which he
counted of, as making him such a full, rich, worthy Person, as to need no
favor, mercy, or forgiveness; though after, he counted them as nothing for
these ends; yea, as loss and hinderance, as he had used them, Phil 3. 23.
Beware of dogs, and of Concision (that is, these Pharisaical Jews): for we are
the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus,
and have no confidence in the flesh (he called them concision, tearing dogs,
rending, persecuting, as the word signifies; and they were: and says, we are
rather the circumcision, i. e. truly honorable). V. 4. Though I might also
have confidence in the flesh: if any other man thinks he has that whereof he
might trust in the flesh, I more; being circumcised the eighth day, a Hebrew of
the Hebrews, a Pharisee, touching the righteousness which is of the law,
blameless: but these things which were gain (of much deserving worth in my
thoughts) I accounted as loss, that I might be found in Christ, not having my
own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is of Christ by faith.

It would be strange, unwelcome, yea, abhorred doctrine, to teach the Religious
Orders (as they call them) amongst the Papists, That they are no better than
others, except they live better. They would reply, Notwithstanding our vicious
lives, yet we are of such an Order, and have observed such rules in diet,
garments, and so have many good merits, are men of great deserts. You may
easily guess what the things were they placed merit in, if you consider that
few men use to place merit in the fear and love of God, or sincere desires and
universal endeavors to obey him, but in some external observance, void of
internal; and ordinarily, chiefly in such things as either are no duties, as
Popish austerities; or in such things as they account no duties, as giving
alms; and so think they thereby supererogate, do so much not-required as will
recompense their neglect of God and inward holiness.

They might, and it is probable did plead thus against the Gentiles being saved.

First, They are or were great sinners, idolaters, sinners of the Gentiles, and
so there is no salvation for them by the Messiah. God would not be righteous,
to admit such into favor, to justify such; this would be to deal with men
contrary to their deserts, to justify unrighteous men.

Secondly, However there can be no hope for them except they become Jews first;
and then their becoming Jews, and being circumcised, and observing the
Ceremonial Law (which they looked upon as things of great worth) may make such
an expiation and recompense for their Idolatries; will make them such worthy
persons, as God may admit them into favor; as they thought that Ruler worthy
to whom Christ should do that kindness; for, say they, he has built us a
synagogue. But without thus doing, such low things as their repentance, and
belief of, and obedience to, the Gospel, will stand them in no stead, they
cannot be justified and saved.

And they might have this carnal motive, thus to oppose their admittance
without circumcision; We shall glory in their flesh, in thus getting them
circumcised; for it will keep those things still in repute; and we shall
however be the chief, being natural, and the other but adventitious Jews.

Now the Apostle begins to answer to these things, toward the end of the second
Chapter to the Romans.

Ver. 17. Behold thou art called a Jew; a very honorable Name, but too worthy
and honorable in your esteem; and restest in the law; chiefly in the
Ceremonial; and make thy boast of God, as having God, in having Abraham to be
your Father; like that, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord.

Ver. 19. And art confident thou art a guide, an instructor of the foolish,
especially in ceremonial services and traditions; but thou neglectest the
weighty matters of the Law, thou live loosly and wickedly, and yet countest
it enough; thou art a Jew, and so a worthy deserving man.

Ver. 25. Circumcision and such things would profit, or however would have
profited; if you did sincerely obey the Moral Law, if you did walk in that
inward holiness that such things as Circumcision obliged you to. But if thou
live wickedly, thou art no more a truly worthy person, than the Gentiles that
live wickedly.

Ver. 26. And if the uncircumcision, the Gentiles, be converted and keep the
righteousness of the law, live holily, do that which circumcision obliged you
to, they shall be accounted the circumcised men, the better men.

Ver. 28. For he is not a Jew, a worthy man, who is only so in such externals;
neither is that the available thing to be circumcised in the flesh. V. 29. But
he is rather the excellent man, and he is approved of God, who is circumcised
in heart. And though this be looked on as nothing by you, and such as you, in
comparison of outward circumcision, yet his praise is of God; God esteems him,
and approves him, though of grace. And this, as he had told us before in this
Chapter (not the hearers but the doers of the Law shall be justified, in the
day when he shall judge all men according to the Gospel) is the condition of
justification and salvation, and not the outward.

Chap. 3. v. 1. What advantage then was there to the Jews? and what profit of
circumcision?

Ver. 2. Much every way; it taught you and obliged you to this inward holiness;
but chiefly, because to them were committed the oracles of God; you had great
helps that others wanted. For what though you lived wickedly? this does not
hinder but that these things did in their own nature stir up, teach, and oblige
you to holiness.

Ver. 9. But what, were not we Jews better than the Gentiles, so as they to be
sinners, and we holy worthy men? No; we confess on all hands, the Gentiles were
great sinners, and so I will prove from the Scripture were the Jews also. None
righteous, no not one; none that does good: their throat is an open sepulcher.

Ver. 19. Now whatever the Law says, it says to them under the Law; that is,
whatever the Scripture speaks, it speaks of them that lived in
Scripture-places; and this was written by David a Jew, and so he meant it of
the wickedness of the Jews.

So that all are sinners, and under condemnation, you Jews as well as others,
whatever your thoughts are to the contrary. And no flesh can be justified in
his sight by the deeds of the law; no man shall be justified as being a man
that deserves it, or as having no need to have his sin pardoned, so as his
justification to be of debt, and not to be of grace, favor, and pardon.

Ver. 25. But thus man's justification comes about; God has set forth Christ a
Propitiation, since all are sinners; and God justifies men by this, for his
sake pardoning their sins.

Ver. 27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded; but is not excluded by the
Law of Works: for if a man was justified that way, he might boast, God pardoned
him nothing; but by this Law of Faith, by this Gospel-way of pardoning sinners
without merits or strict Lawrighteousness. And therefore the Gentiles may be
saved if they become Christians, and have this heartcircumcision (though they
have not these outward privileges which you account things of such great
worth) God pardoning their sins upon their believing the Gospel, and having
their hearts purified by it, which you account such low ignoble things.

Chap. 4. This Chapter is accounted by the opposers of the doctrine I taught,
to have the greatest appearance against it; but I shall manifest, it does not
in the least oppose it. The design of this Chapter, as you will see, is to
prove the whole business, That the Gentiles may be justified and saved by grace
and pardon of sin, upon their turning from idolatries, and believing and
obeying the Gospel, without Circumcision; and he proves it by this argument,
viz. Abraham was a sinner, and was not justified for any original
righteousness, as having never sinned; nor for any meritorious works or
privileges of his that in Justice deserved the reward, by making satisfaction
for his sins (for that would still be of debt from natural Law and Equity; if a
man could do something after great Crimes that satisfies for them all, it would
be so of Justice to acquit him, as not to be of Grace; it would however be, as
the Apostle expresses it, (...), as it were by the works of the law, Romans 9.
31. as it were by the works of the Law: though not wholly or altogether, yet in
a sort, or as it were. They that grant they are sinners, and yet suppose they
make amends by some strict observance, so that it would be hard and severe if
God should condemn them, do esteem their salvation due, as it were, by the
works of the Law, they esteem it not of grace. But when it is said, Abraham was
justified; the meaning is, he was pardoned; and if so, God may justify the
Gentiles on that manner, viz. by pardoning them.

Ver. 1. Shall we say that Abraham found (i. e. all that kindness, favor, and
justification) from the flesh, i. e. from works, as we see in the following
verse? for (...), according to the flesh; is in the following verse repeated
and expounded by (...), by works. So Gal. 3. 3. made perfect by the flesh, he
expounds v. 2, 5. by the works of the law; and so, by the flesh, may signify
unsinning obedience to the law; or, by the flesh, might be meant some such
meritorious privileges as those the Jews boasted of; for Phil. 3. 3. 4. in
expounding what is meant by the flesh, he reckons up Hebrew of Hebrews,
circumcised the eighth day, a Pharisee. We may here understand either, but
rather both; for his arguing excludes both equally.

Ver. (...). No sure. For if he was justified in such a way by the law of
works, as having never been a sinner; or by some high merits deserving such
things from God, then he had whereof to boast, and say he was not pardoned, and
that his justification was of merit, and not of grace. But not before God, i.
e. but he could not boast and say, God never pardoned his sins; and that he was
one of such worth and merits, that whatever God did for him, was due debt,
whatever glorying he might make of his innocence toward men.

Ver. 3. He proves it from Scripture, that Abraham could not thus boast: What
says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness. Now this very word [counted] proves this fully, that i^ was not
due debt from God; and also, that his believing did not merit it. For the word
[counting] is like the Lawword [acceptilatio], which word [acceptilatio] is
used in such cases as when a man accepts from his debtor a penny for a hundred
pound, and acquits him upon it. So this very word implies that his believing
was so low a thing, as not to be any way meritorious of those great things God
rewarded him with upon it. He lays all the stress (as you will see by the
following verses) upon this word [counted] that it signifies graciously
acquitted him, and not as a just man that deserved it.

Ver. 4. If Abraham had been a man of high merits and deserts, or his faith any
thing meritorious, it would not have been said, God accounted it, which
signifies God graciously accounted it: For to him that works, i. e. that
meriteth by his works; the reward is reckoned of debt, and not reckoned of
grace, as this word signifies. This very word implies, that God might justly
have refused to have justified him upon his believing. This is the same
argument with that, Romans 11. 6. If it be of grace, then it is not of works, i.
e. of meritorious works; otherwise grace is not grace and mercy: but if it be
of works, i. e. meritorious works, then it is no more of grace and mercy, else
works is not works; that is, merit is not merit, merit does not deserve; which
is a contradiction.

Ver. 5. -- Counted it to him for righteousness. It cannot be said that a man's
believing, or repenting, or any other duty, is counted, that is, graciously
counted for righteousness, except the man be, and these things be void of
merit. Therefore it implies, That Abraham believed one that justified an
ungodly man, an undeserving man, a sinner, a man unjust: justified a man in the
strict sense of the law unjust, by pardoning his sins, his unrighteousness.
Yea, it is probable, that by the word [ungodly] in this verse, is implied, that
Abraham was once an Idolater as the Gentiles are. This plainly proves, his
justification was by pardon of sin; and that he was a man God might justly have
refused to have thus justified; and that he was not righteous in God's sight,
in the primary, strict, and properest sense of the word, but merely of grace
and pardon.

Ver. 6. And David fully proves this, in his describing blessedness, and
wherein it lies: for he takes for granted, that blessedness comes not by
unsinning obedience, or meritorious works, which are inconsistent with pardon;
else he would have said, Blessed are they that never sinned, or have made full
satisfaction for their sins: But he tells us it lies in not imputing iniquity;
and imputing, accounting righteousness, is nothing else but pardon of sin;
imputing righteousness, and not imputing sin, are all one, and signify the
same; because to impute or account righteous, signifies, as he proved before,
graciously to impute; and that can be nothing but pardon of sin: and so the
meaning is, God pardoned Abraham's sin upon his believing God. Which shows,
he was no such worthy man as you think your selves, so as to need no
forgiveness.

Ver. 9. Now will this blessedness of Justification come only on you Jews? Are
not the wicked Gentiles capable of it, if they turn from sin and Idols to God,
and believe his testimony of his Son, and obey him, though they never be
circumcised? for we say, his faith was reckoned for righteousness: it was not
from his worthiness, but by pardon of his sin upon believing.

Ver. 10. He yet improveth this Scripture-citation as further cogent, thus: Was
this justification conferred on Abraham when he was circumcised, or when he was
uncircumcised? You will find this was said concerning Abraham before he was
circumcised, when he was as yet uncircumcised, when he could not pretend to
this high meritorious privilege you boast of, viz. Circumcision; but when he
was as the Gentile-believers now are, that are confessedly void of such
accomplishments. Why may not they therefore be justified in such a Gospelway as
he was, having their sin pardoned through the Propitiation, upon their only
believing and obeying the Gospel? For though you look upon Faith and Obedience
as low things in comparison of Circumcision; yet these were graciously accepted
from him by God, and his sins pardoned thereon; and why may they not be
accepted from them, without meritorious works, if it be granted such are so,
which you account so?

Ver. 11. And he received the sign of circumcision, the seal of the
righteousness of the faith which he had being uncircumcised, that he might be
the father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that
righteousness might be imputed unto them also.

I shall here take a liberty not allowed me by my designed method, to speak
largely of these words, because they are difficult, and there is a strange
disagreement about the meaning of them.

The words that these are coupled unto, are these, It was counted to him in
uncircumcision; then follows, and he received the sign of circumcision.

And, that is, and then, or, and after; it is ordinal, as it is frequently.

The sign of circumcision, or Sacrament of Circumcision; it is an ordinary
manner of speaking, the genitivus specie; as we use to say, the sacrament of
Baptism, for the sacrament Baptism; so, the sign of Circumcision, for the sign
Circumcision; and Beza says he found it so, in the Accusative case, in an
ancient Copy.

By receiving the sign of circumcision, is not only or chiefly meant his
receiving it in his body, though he did so; but his receiving it in the
institution or law of it from God, as John may be said to have received
baptism, being the first to whom it was delivered by God, as an Ordinance, to
be by him as a Minister administered.

And as Moses is said (Acts 7. 28.) to receive the lively oracles of God to
give to the Jews; and John. 7. 22. Moses gave unto you circumcision, i. e. the
Ordinance of it. Without doubt he is said here to receive circumcision in the
sense that God is said (Acts 7. 8.) to give him the covenant of circumcision,
not in the sense wherein he gave it to himself, circumcised himself. I grant it
does connote secondarily his receiving it in his body, yet still as in the law
and ordinance of it, so as to begin it to others. And that which makes it
further appear to be so meant, is this, because the stress of his becoming the
father of all that believe, etc. seems to be laid here: For if it should have
the other sense, all circumcised might on the same account be called Fathers of
them that believe. And else it is probable the Apostle would have used the
ordinary word (...), and have said, he was circumcised; and not, he received
circumcision. Abraham was honored by God to be the first receiver of this
Institution. Indeed the promise or covenant that this sealed, had been made
known to the world long before, viz. That whosoever of fallen man should repent
and believe God, and obey him sincerely, should be saved: and all that were
justified before Abraham, were justified by this law of grace made in the blood
of Christ: but Abraham was the first that received from God this visible seal
to confirm it to the world.

The seal of the rightsousness of the faith, which he had being uncircumcised.
These words seem an exegetical Parenthesis, or a Parenthetical explication of
the former words, received the sign of circumcision. For these words, that he
might be the father, seem to have their dependence on, and respect to* the
former words, received the sign of circumcision. In these words here is a
definition of that, and also of every other Sacramental Institution.
Circumcision is called a sign or token of the Covenant, Genesis 17. 11. and it is
called figuratively the Covenant, v. 10. and Acts 17. 8. even as the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper is also called the Covenant; This is the new covenant in
my blood; that is, the sign or seal of the Covenant founded in my blood.

By the faith of Abraham is not here to be understood that personal individual
faith which he had; but a faith of that sort or kind, which he had, even in
such a sense as that faith which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and
Mother Eunice, is said to dwell in Timothy, to wit, not the same individual act
or habit, but a faith of the same sort or species, i. e. faith unfeigned, as he
explains it, 2 Timothy 1. 5. and so these words, the faith of Abraham, (ver. 16.
of this Chapter) must necessarily be understood to this sense.

Again, Circumcision is not said by the Apostle to be a sign or seal of his
faith, or any one's else; no, that is a mistake; though I know in another sense
Circumcision was, and Baptism and the Lord's Supper are, a seal or seals of
men's faith or restipulation, viz. as they are men's seals. We receiving them,
engage and profess we do restipulate and oblige our selves to perform faith,
the condition, and seal it by receiving the elements: We so seal, as hereby to
oblige our selves, and to be guilty of falsehood in the Covenant if we do not
perform. Yea, he that is baptized while an Infant, is a debtor to the Gospel,
as well as he that was circumcised when an Infant, was a debtor to the Law. But
this is not meant here; for this definition speaks only of Circumcision as
God's seal, and God does not seal that any man believes restipulateth; he
seals only what he says and testifies, to wit, his own part of the
Covenant. He no where testifies, that this or that man believes; but that if
he do, he shall be saved. I say, it is not said to be a seal of his faith, but
of the righteousness of his faith, of that faith which he had being
uncircumcised, of such a kind of faith. That is, it is a sign or seal of
justification upon condition of believing as he did while uncircumcised. It is
a seal of the truth of this Covenant or Promise, and of God's faithfulness in
standing to it. He that believes with such a kind of working-faith, shall be
justified and saved; or, to speak more properly, he that believes and obeys
as Abraham did.

It was indeed a seal of the righteousness of Abraham's faith (subjectively and
individually taken) but not as his faith; else it would seal righteousness and
justification to none else, upon such a faith as his. Though it did seal his
Justification, he having that sort of faith the general promise was made to;
yet it did not seal his justification primarily, but only consequentially, viz.
by sealing the general promise. It did not seal justification to his faith as
his; but as true, unfeigned, or faith of such a sort, such an operative,
obediential one, as the Promise was made to, which was sealed. It would have
sealed that thing it did seal (that promise, he that so believes shall be
saved; he that believes with such a kind of faith as is described by being
called the faith which Abraham had being uncircumcised) whether Abraham had
believed or no: for, that he believed, was, as we use to say, contingent or
accidental to the thing sealed. I know some Anabaptists, to elude arguments
drawn from hence, would have it a seal of the righteousness of Abraham's faith
only, and that it was so to none else; interpreting it to this sense, to wit,
That it was given as a reward to him, a great and signal believer, and others
were circumcised upon other accounts. But if this was the meaning, we might as
well call every great blessing (which he had as a reward of his faith, as
having children in his old age, deliverance from dangers and difficulties, and
conquering enemies, which were given to him as rewards of his faith, and tokens
of God's love) a seal of the righteousness of his faith, and a sign or token of
the Covenant, as this is called, Genesis 17. 11. and as the Rainbow is called a
sign or token of another Covenant, Genesis 9. 8.

Now if Circumcision was not a seal of Abraham's faith at all, nor a seal of
the righteousness of Abraham's faith as his (as has been, and might further be
made apparent) but of the righteousness of such a kind of faith as his was;
then it evidently and essentially follows, that it was a seal or
confirming-sign of this doctrine, covenant, or promise, made to the whole
world, That whosoever of fallen man should believe God as Abraham did, should be
righteous, treated by God as righteous; be justified, pardoned, rewarded,
blessed, (these words are promiscuously used) whether he be circumcised or not;
and so the Apostle says in the latter part of the verse, that righteousness
might be imputed to them also that believe, though not circumcised. For that he
be circumcised, is so alien from the promise, as to be no part of the
condition: for else Circumcision had sealed an untruth, if a man that should
perform the condition, should not be justified though he be uncircumcised.

And indeed, since Baptism is a seal of the same, viz. of justification or
remission of sins upon repentance, and brings forth fruits meet and suitable,
as is said of John's Baptism (and sure you will grant the faith required in
those days was included in the word Repentance): And the Lord's Supper is a
seal of the same New Covenant made in Christ's blood, called also the Gospel
which the Apostles were sent to preach. And the Apostle Paul says, He has
made us able Ministers of the New Covenant, 2 Cor. 3. 6. and we see what that
Covenant is, Romans 10. 6, 8. The word of faith which we (that is, he and other
Apostles) preach: the law of faith is this, If thou believe, thou shall be
saved. Since, I say, this is the tenor of that which Baptism and the Lord's
Supper seal, if men believe and obey the Gospel, they shall be saved; it does
demonstrably also follow, that if a man did perform the Gospel-condition, the
condition of that Covenant whereof Baptism is a seal, he would be justified and
saved whether he were baptized or no, whether he received the Lords Supper or
not (as our Divines use to prove against the Papists), else they did seal an
untruth. And surely none will deny, but those holy Ancients we read of in the
primitive time of Christianity, who terrified through an Error taught by some,
(viz. That there was no remission for sins committed after it) deferred Baptism
till toward their death, were justified before Baptism; and they that so
delayed, as to dye without it, were yet saved by virtue of the Gospel promise
which it seals. If it it seal this, He that believes in the Gospel sense, that
is, believes and obeys the Gospel, shall be saved; then it evidently
follows, that the receiving the seal is no part of the condition, nor necessary
with this kind of necessity as the condition. Though I could show you how it
may indirectly, and quasi postliminio jure, come to be necessary to the
condition; and also how it is directly necessary upon other accounts; not only
necessitate praecepti, but by way of accommodation, to work, preserve, and
increase the condition, and to comfort and assure.

And the Objection here arising is inconsiderable, viz. That one that should
refuse to be baptized (having never been baptized before) and to receive the
Lords Supper, cannot have the condition. For though in ordinary circumstances
in our days, wherein there is much light, and such things are made plain; it
would be next to an impossibility that a man should heartily believe all
Fundamentals; and be heartily willing, and earnestly desirous, to obey God and
Christ in every command, to the best of his knowledge, and yet through some
^^^or refuse the Sacrament; yet such a thing it may be is possible: for you
will not be so uncharitable as to deny this of those Ancients, Ecclesiastical
History tells us of. But however, let it be granted that this cannot be (as it
is indeed certain it cannot be in ordinary cases; for it would be ordinarily a
wilful knowing refusal to submit to Christ's rule and dominion, which indeed is
perfectly inconsistent with performing the Gospel-condition) yet this does not
oppose this hypothesis, for it speaks only on supposition, If a man were a
truly believing and sincerely obedient one, who should thus refuse to comply
with these beneficial commands, he would be justified and saved. And by the way
you may observe, that which may be very helpful to you for the understanding
these and many other things, viz. this, the difference between that which is
necessary as a condition of a promise, and that which is not a condition, but
is necessary upon some other account; you may say of any performance that is
not a condition of a promise, That if he perform it not, he will yet have
right, so he do but perform the condition, though he cannot perform the
condition without performing this thing. And consequently, if any should deny
sincere obedience to be a condition of justification, he must say (or he
ignorantly contradicts himself), That if a man should believe, though he did
resolve, never to obey, he must be justified and saved, though it should be
granted he cannot believe without obeying.

The Apostle here has proved, That Circumcision is so far from being
meritorious, as the Jews held, that it was not so much as a condition necessary
to justification. And though it might be objected here by the Jews, But why are
not the believing-Gentiles then circumcised upon those other accounts? Yet here
is enough said for the present scope in proving justification may be had
without it; and this is answered by the Apostle in other places: and also they
might easily answer themselves, knowing there was another seal instituted
instead of it, viz. Baptism, called the circumcision of Christ, Col. 2. 11.

I am sensible that I have let my Pen run out of my designed short method,
thinking these words needful to be understood, to rectify many vulgar
mistakes, and to give light to these and other controversies.

If any dislike what is here spoken, or do not understand me, or think I
contradict my self; they may pass this over, as being something alien, and only
read this following, which is enough to my main design.

What pretense have any from this place to maintain, That repentance or
obedience are not necessary to justification or right to Heaven, or that they
are not included in the word Faith? May we not say of Circumcision, that it
was, as Baptism is, a seal of remission of sins upon repentance and faith? was
it not a seal of this promise, He that repents, believes, and obeys,
walks in the steps that Abraham walked in, shall be saved? Yet that you
mistake not some words I have here used, take notice, That when I use these
words, such a kind of faith as Abraham' s, an operative faith; I grant I speak
vulgarly, customarily, and improperly; and not naturally and strictly using the
word [Faith] for that which is properly so called: for I know, that it is not
of the essence of faith to be operative or not operative; the effect is no part
of the cause; nor does ingredi definitionem; it is not the division generis in
species suas, but subjecti per adjuncta, or causae per effectus. So when we
speak of operative knowledge, we mean by it something more than knowledge, yea
something that is not knowledge, but that knowledge produces. For all that is
strictly and properly knowledge, that is understood in this phrase, operative
knowledge, may be in a wicked man. If you shall object, But not so clear a
knowledge or faith; Let that be as it will, true or false, the degree does not
alter the species. So that if I would have spoken strictly and properly, I
should have said, He that believes and obeys with that kind of faith and
obedience that Abraham did, shall be justified. This I could make plain; but it
is not my business here to prove, but my design is only to answer, thinking I
have proved sufficiently already. But to proceed with the words.

That he might be the father of all them that believe, though (...), non
obstante praeputio. (...) huic simile, 1 Pet. 3. 20. Octo animae servatae sunt
(...), per medias aquas, vel, non obstantibus: and sorsan illud, 1 Timothy 2. ult.
(...), servabitur, non obstante puerperio: nec absimile (...), 1 Cor. 3. 25.
not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them also. That he
might be the Father, etc. These words seem to have reference to the words
before the exegetical parenthesis, viz. these, and he received the sign of
circumcision: The meaning is, his faith; and then, or, and afterward, he
received the honor from God to have this sign first given to him, to use
himself for his comfort, and to transmit to others, viz. his posterity, and
those that should concorporate with them, to seal this, that whosoever should
do as he did, should be justified; that he might be the father, that is, an
eminent example, or prime pattern of the justification of others: for in this,
the Apostle seems in this place to lay the stress of his Fatherhood* in his
being a copy of the justification of others, as appears by these words
following, viz. That righteousness might be imputed to them also, whether
circumcised or not. If we shall go further, and say, There may be included this
also, That God's testification of his being justified on his believing, and his
having this honor, to have this Ordinance first given to him, to seal, that
whosoever walked in his steps should be justified; and the great exemplariness
of his faith, that all these together are as a moral Cause objectively
influential to make him a foecund causative exemplar, to bege^ many children of
his faith, to cause them to walk in his steps, that they may be justified as he
was. This is a truth; but either is no part of his meaning; or, if it be, also
connoteth in the phrase (as it is likely it is) it seems not to be insisted
on here by the Apostle, as his chief meaning of his being a father; but this
only or chiefly, his being a prime first pattern of the justification both of
the Gentile and Jewish believers. I think, I could show you great
inconsistencies and inconveniences in any other explication of this verse,
setting the present controversy aside. And because I use to think I cannot
speak very intelligibly in such things without an instance, I will here give
you one: Suppose a great King should give to an offender that has pleased him
by some exploits, a Livery to be worn by him and his Family, in token, to seal
and oblige himself to, and assure others of, this promise, That whatsoever
offender or offenders shall do as he did (before his receiving of it) he or
they shall be acquitted from all penalties. Here, 1. The first receiving this
Livery to be worn by him and his, is given as a reward to him (and not by way
of sealing) and as a peculiar token of the Royal favor; and the same may be
said of his exploits being mentioned in the promise to describe the condition
by: For it is to reward and cast an honor on him, to make them a pattern to
others. These two agree to none else; and therefore herein must the fatherhood
lie. 2. As a seal of the promise, his Livery seals his particular acquittal
only secondarily, even by sealing the general promise primarily and
immediately, viz. That whoever do as he did, shall be acquitted, whether they
have the Livery or no. That it is more assuring and comforting, etc. to his
Family, having the Livery, and performing the condition, I grant, but pass it
by as alien. 3. The King by thus honoring him, by giving him this Livery as a
reward, and also in giving him it first, and also as^ seal, with this
^ignification, tha^ whosoever shall do such exploits, etc. and also by making
his exploits the pattern the regula and mensura, has put this honor on him,
to make him as it were a father of all after thus acquitted, as receiving this
honor to be the first and chief pattern of the acquitting of all that do as he
did, they being acquitted after him in like manner only as he was. 4. He may
also be called a causative father (in the sense I have explained it) of men
after him doing as he did, and consequently being acquitted as he was, his
exploits being morally influential to incline men to attempt to express and
copy them out, because so taken notice of by the King, as to be propounded by
him to notify what kind and what manner of exploits they must be that this
acquittal is promised to.

First, A father or pattern of the manner of the justification of the
Gentile-Christians, representing, that as he was graciously pardoned, not
justified for any worthiness of his own, being a sinner, and an idolater; but
pardoned upon his believing and obeying God, and following his call, yea while
uncircumcised: so may the idolatrous uncircumcised Gentiles, that have none of
the outward privileges you Jews boast of, be received into favor upon their
turning from their idolataies, and believing and obeying the Gospel; and so he
is their father.

Ver. 12. And secondly, A father or pattern of the manner of the justification
of us Jews, that have these outward privileges, in that we must be justified
as he was. He was indeed circumcised as we are; but his justification was not
by that, or any merit of that; but the condition of his justification was his
heart-circumcision, his believing, obeying, fearing God; and so must be, and
always was the justification of any Jew, not by, or by the merit of any outward
privileges, but by God's pardoning their great sins in a Gospel-way, upon
their heartcircumcision, or walking in the steps of that faith of our father
Abraham.

Ver. 13. For the promise that he should be heir of the world, that is, have
great things, have great temporal and spiritual mercies, Canaan and Heaven, the
world to come typified by it, was not made to him and his seed, that is, such
as he, obedient believers (as you may see by the places after cited) through
the law, Obey perfectly, and live without pardon, and so not of Gospelgrace;
but through the righteousness of faith, by a promise of forgiveness in a
gracious Evangelical way, upon their repenting, believing, obeying God. See
Romans 10. 6. what is meant by the righteousness of faith, to wit, a law of grace.

Gal. 3. v. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. is a place parallel to this, where the Covenant
confirmed of God in Christ to Abraham and his seed, that is, of an inheritance
and blessedness to men walking in the steps of his faith, is called the promise
whereby he gave the inheritance to Abraham; and by his seed there, are meant
believers, as you may see plainly by v. 29. and by Christ, v. 16. is meant
Christ mystical, viz. Believers, as Expositors agree.

So also Heb. 9. 15. A Mediator of the new testament, or covenant, that they
which are called (i. e. effectually called, obedient believers) might receive
the promise of the eternal inheritance.

Ver. 14. For if only they that are of the law (that is, they that are
righteous without pardon, that perfectly obey, see Gal. 3. 10.) be heirs, are
to have great things, then faith is made void, and the promise made of none
effect; that is, then there is no place, no reward for faith, repentance, and
turning from sin to God, for those that have been sinners, or obey not the Law
perfectly, and that implied promise, which is implied in God's justifying
Abraham upon believing, God not being partial; but whosoever fears God, and
works righteousness, shall be accepted: and that promise which was sealed in
circumcision, That whosoever should believe and obey God as he did, shall find
great reward as he did, is made of none effect, if men be to attain the reward
by the Law of works without pardon. And the Law given Four hundred thirty years
after (if it require perfect obedience, so as to accept nothing less) has
disannulled this promise. Then none can be justified unless they be men of such
merits as you suppose such outward observances and privileges make you; that
it is due of strict Justice, and not from a gracious promise made to sinners.
And also I will show, that you that are of the Law, and stick to that, cannot
be justified or saved, whatever you think to the contrary.

Ver. 15. For the law works wrath: for where there is no law, there is no
transgression. This proves what he affirms before, That happiness comes not
by the Moral Law, and so neither by any subordinate revelation which is
reductively comprehended in it; not by the whole system or body of precepts
given by Moses, as for instance, by the command of circumcision, which
reductively belongs to the Moral Law, for that is, Obey whatever I shall any
way command you, or dye; and none perfectly obey. That place Gal. 3. 10. is
like this; As many as are of the works of the law (i. e. stick to that for
justification) are under a curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things written in the law to do them: Which consequence
of the Apostle's would be inconsequent, but that it leans upon this implied
foundation that none do so, viz. all things written.

So here the meaning is this: these laws, take them as laws and commands, they
only work wrath, and make sins more, by multiplying commands more, and so make
the Jews more guilty than any, and further from justification than any, having
more laws, and more clearly revealed. A man that would look to be justified by
exact obedience to every precept, and will look for no pardon, will find these
laws will be so far from justifying him, and conferring right to any reward
that they work only wrath, and oblige him the more to condemnation. For, where
there is no law, there is no transgression. Many of these things which you Jews
sinned in omitting, would have been no sins, had not God thus revealed his will
to you in such multitudes of commands; and others not so great sins.

Ver. 16. Therefore happiness is not by the law, that is, by unsinning
obedience, or making all up by meritorious works; but by faith, that is, in a
Gospel-way, by some promise made of pardon to sinners, called the law of faith;
by some promise made to sinners (to whom justification cannot be of debt); upon
their repentance, belief, and sincere endeavor of obedience. And it is thus of
faith, that it might be of grace and mercy. And it is thus of faith, that the
promise might be sure to all the seed, that is, to all that walk in the steps
of Abraham's faith, that believe, repent, obey God in difficulties, whether
they have those great privileges you boast of, as the Jews; or none such, as
the Gentiles. And so he is the father of us all both Jews and Gentiles, i. e. a
pattern of our justification; both, being justified the same way as he was.

Ver. 17. As it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations. Either
this is a remote meaning of these words cited; or it is an allusive
accommodative making use of this citation, which seems frequent with this
Apostle. The meaning however of the Apostle is this: As I have received thee
into favor upon thy believing me in every thing, and obeying and following my
call; so, many of several Nations, both Jews and Gentiles, shall receive grace
and favor, and blessedness from me, in thus turning from sin, and believing
and obeying me, as thou have, and so be justified in such a way as thou art;
and so thou shall be their Father, a prime example or pattern of their
justification.

Ver. 18, 19, 20, 21. He shows the faith of Abraham was a great and strong
faith; he believed the most unlikely things upon God's credit; believed against
hope; believed God was able to do what he promised, though never so unlikely;
he never considered the difficulty: it was a faith that carried him out to
trust and obey God in every thing. So would the Gentiles believe the
resurrection of Christ (which he compares there to Abraham's believing God
could quicken the dead, the dead womb, and also dead Isaac, Heb. 11. 19.) and
the almost-incredible things of the Gospel; and be carried on by such belief,
to obey and follow God and Christ, notwithstanding all their sufferings and
discouragements, they may be justified and saved without being circumcised, and
keeping the Ceremonial Law, or perfectly the Moral Law; as he applies this
belief of God's raising the dead, to his raising Christ from the dead, v. 24.

Ver. 22. And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness. That is, as I
have again and again explained it, he was graciously accepted and acquitted,
and rewarded upon it, and treated as if he had been an innocent just person,
though he was not so in the strict sense of the law, or natural equity.

Ver. 23, 24. Now it was not written for his sake alone that it was imputed to
him; but we may make use of it; it was written for some great end; and
therefore shows, that though the Gentiles be unworthy persons, and have no
merits by such privileges or observances, as the Pharisaical opposers of their
reception suppose themselves to have; yet if they do as Abraham did, they shall
fare as he fared; if they believe this great difficulty of raising Christ from
the dead, and carry suitable to such a faith, righteousness shall be imputed to
them also; that is, they shall be pardoned, their sins shall not be imputed to
them; which was the thing to be proved, (...).

Chap. 10. v. 11. The Apostle reassumes the same; and here are some passages
some may think make against what I have preached.

Ver. 2. The Jews have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.

Ver. 3. For they being ignorant of God's righteousness (i. e. his way of
justifying sinners by pardon) and going about to establish their own
righteousness (of perfect obedience or meritorious works) have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God, that is, God's way of pardoning sinners
by the Gospel, as he explains it, v. 6.

Ver. 4. For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes. It is to be acknowledged that the Law, as every Law, does require as
its end perfect obedience primarily; and upon default of that, secondarily the
punishment of the transgressors. But Christ has satisfied this, as much to
God's honor and its content, as if it had been perfectly obeyed, or the
penalty suffered by us. And this Propitiation is for those that believe, that
perform the Gospel condition. So that there is no necessity now of our
unsinning obedience, or our making satisfaction by meritorious works in order
to our justification; but only of our performing the Gospel-condition: and they
are ignorant of this way of God.

Ver. 5. For Moses describes the righteousness of the law, the Covenant of
Works, the way that they stick to for justification, thus: That the man that
does these things, shall live by them; i. e. without pardon, Lev. 18. 5. Gal.
3. 12. Moses describes, that is, these words of Moses taken in the strict
law-sense, as a law, and in the sense you understand them, represent that way
you stick to for justification; I say, represent that way.

For it is apparent that those very words, and the whole body of the Mosaical
law, were a Gospel Covenant of grace as they were given by Moses, and
understood, and ought to be understood by the people: The meaning was, If you
endeavor to do all these sincerely, and lament your falling short, you shall
be justified, blessed, live; otherwise you shall perish. I could make this
fully apparent, that it was a gracious Covenant: for it was spoken to sinners,
and with such words, I am the Lord thy God; and, If you will obey my voice; and
Moses sprinkleth blood, and says, Behold the blood of the Covenant; which
Covenant they restipulated to, when they promised to obey his voice; and God
says, I have heard the words of this people, and they have well said in all
that they have said: which he would not have said, if the meaning had been, We
promise to do things impossible; to make that it should be said, We never have
been sinners, and we will perfectly obey in every thing, without the least
remisness in thought, word, or deed. But to be short, see Mr. Ant. Burgess
Vindiciae Legis, 24 Lect. proving by six Arguments, That though the Law given
by Moses, taken strictly and abstractly as a rule, holds forth life on no
terms but perfect obedience: yet take it as it was given and administered by
Moses to the people as a Covenant, and so it was a Covenant of Grace, made in
the blood of Christ, promising justification and happiness upon sincere
endeavors of obedience. And Mr. Ball on the Covenant, proves the same of
these very words, and that the people did so understand it, [if you sincerely
endeavour] and ought so to understand it. So Calvin l. 2. Instit. c. 9.

These Jews were for justification by it merely as a Law, and strict Covenant
of Works, as if there was no justification to be expected from it, but by
reaching the preceptive part in every thing; and if so, then there was an end
of the Gospel preached to Abraham; then this Law that was 430 years after it,
would have disannulled the promise made of God in Christ, That whosoever should
believe, repent, obey sincerely, should be saved. Whereas, as it was given by
Moses, it was the Law of Grace and Faith, as the following verse shows; the
same for substance that was made to Abraham, and is now made to us.

But take it as a law, a strict law of works, and it is represented by that,
The man that does these things, shall live by them; which is indeed essential
to every law; any law justifies the doers of it; and in this sense there can
be no justification, that is, justification without pardon, but by doing every
thing: if you be guilty of the least omission or negligence, you are out of its
justification, and under its condemnation or curse.

Ver. 6. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaks on this wise, Say
not in thy heart, etc. That is, the tenor of the covenant or law of grace,
speaks thus, etc.

But now come to the Mosaical dispensation, as it was a covenant of grace to be
understoost with that Gospel-(...), and moderation, as it was given by Moses,
and is explained Deuteronomy. 30. 12, 13, 14, etc. and in many other places; and you
will find it is the word of faith which we preach, the same for substance with
it.

For the Gospel-rule of justification, the righteousness of faith in that
Chapter mentioned, says, Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend? etc. that is,
Be not now sollicitous, do not perplex your selves in saying, Alas I am
hopeless, for I have broken the law; or, I shall never be able exactly to obey
it for the future in every thing: Do not trouble your selves as if God required
any thing of you that you could not perform, though you was really desirous to
do it with the prevailing-bent of your soul: for as for those failings which
are consistent with this, though they be sins, yet they should not cause
despairing trouble: For Christ by his satisfaction has procured they shall not
hinder your happiness; he is the end of the Law, as was said. But all that is
required of you for life and justification, is a thing very easy, was there
but a willing mind. God will not require what you have not (as some troubled
souls are apt to think) what is so out of your power, that you cannot do it,
though you fain would; but will, if there be a willing mind, accept of what you
have, such poor stuff as our degenerate state is capable of performing, if
willing. It is now brought to your own choice (I have set life and death before
you, therefore choose life, v. 19.) you cannot now choose it on the terms of it,
and yet miss it.

Say not in thy heart, Who shall asscend into heaven? as if the obtaining of
justification to thee a sinner, was such a thing as could not be come by, was
set before thee on an impossible condition: this is in effect to deny Christ is
risen and ascended into Heaven for our justification: for, to bring Christ from
Heaven, is to do what in thee lies to deny, to hinder his ascending into
Heaven; and you do it by this saying, which is virtually to deny he has
finished his work; to think you must do some impossible thing your selves, as,
keep the law perfectly your selves for salvation.

Say not, Who shall descend into the deep? do some impossible thing to fetch up
righteousness and life for us sinners. This is in effect to deny Christ to have
dyed for our sins: What did he dye for, if some difficult impossible thing be
required of us?

Ver. 8. But what says the Gospelrule of righteousness, the righteousness of
Faith? The thing is easy to come by, that is required of thee; it is nigh
thee, even in thy heart and mouth. And this is the word of faith, the Gospel
that we preach; do but confess with thy mouth, and believe in thy heart that
God has raised him from the dead, and carry suitably to such a belief, and
thou shall be saved, without the laborious and innumerable observances of the
Jews, which they can never perfectly observe, whatever they pretend, and so can
never be justified their way.

These two it is probable he names as the most generally difficult parts of the
Gospel-condition at that day. To believe God has testified him to be the
Messiah, by raising him from the dead, notwithstanding all scoffs at the
resurrection, and endeavors to persuade you to the contrary; and confessing
him in the times of danger and difficulty, when like to lose all by it: and
many apostatizing Christians maintained it was not necessary to confess, but
that they might deny him when danger approached, so they but kept their hearts
right; which seems to be employed in those ironical expressions, 1 Cor. 4. 8,
9, 10, 11.

Ver. 10. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, etc. True hearty
yielding to the obedience of the Gospel, is enough at first for justification:
but if you would have your justification so to continue, as to reach salvation,
you must hold out to the end, in confessing him, though with the danger of your
lives.

Ver. 11. For the Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him, shall not be
ashamed. Ver. 12. For there is no difference between the Jew and Gentile: For
the same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him. Ver. 13. For
whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. It is all one as
if he had said, Whosoever believes, and carries suitably to such belief,
shall be saved; and he uses calling on God, and believing God, promiscuously;
which would not be sense, if they did not mean the same thing, the same
Gospel-condition. And indeed, as many promises of Justification and Pardon are
made to Prayer, as to Believing; but the meaning is, carry suitably to such
prayer, believe, obey, repent.

I am weary of easy work, and so give over. All those other places in this
Apostle's Epistles, that have any show to oppose the Doctrine delivered, are to
be interpreted in pursuance of this design, That men are justified only by
pardon of sin, through the Propitiation, upon performing those conditions
pardon is promised to; and so may the Gentiles be justified without such
perfect obedience to the Law, or meritorious privileges, or satisfactions. If
I should proceed, I can only repeat the same again and again, with very little
variation, upon the places following, Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Gal. 3.

Gal. 5. 2. Paul once circumcised Timothy, yet here says, Behold I Paul say
unto you, If you be circumcised, that is, upon this account (else he would not
have spoken so severely) to make you such worthy persons as to need no pardon;
Christ shall profit you nothing.

Ver. 3. For I testify again to every man that shall now be (thus, or on this
account) circumcised, he is a debtor to the whole Law. He must look to it that
he fail not in the least; for he virtually disclaims all pardon by Christ, and
so shall not have it.

So, Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according
to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost. Ver. 7. That being justified by his grace, etc. This Scripture
tells us what is meant by work, and what by faith; and plainly, to any
considering man, James 2. 14, to the end.

When some had (it is probable) mis-understood such expressions in St. Paul's
Epistles, as if only believing the truth was enough for salvation; the Apostle
James shows, that by Abraham's faith, was meant his faith and obedience; and
says that those words, believed God, mean believed God and obeyed him, in
offering up his son; and other difficulties like that, 1 Maccab. 2. 52. Was not
Abraham found faithful in temptation? and it was imputed to him for
righteousness? As Phineas executed judgment, and it was counted to him for
righteousness throughout all generations; that is, God rewarded him graciously
with an everlasting Priesthood, as if he had been a righteous man, a deserving
man; when yet he was not, by the Apostle Paul's argument, that the word
[counted] implies it was not due to him so doing, but of grace: Ver. 22, 23.
When he offered up his son, then the Scripture was fulfilled, perfectly
explained, that says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness; that is, God acquitted and rewarded him upon his faith and
obedience, as if he had been a righteous man in the strictest sense, when
indeed he was not.

And you may observe it would as much serve the Apostle Paul's arguing, and
support what he builds upon it, if the very words had run thus, Abraham
believed and obeyed, and it was counted, etc. and it is plain that was the
meaning, as you may see, Genesis 22. 8. In thy seed shall all nations be blessed,
because thou have obeyed my voice: or if they had run thus, He walked before
God, and was upright, and it was counted, etc. and this is said in effect, in
saying, If he did so, God would do great things for him, cap. 17. 2. Or if the
words had been expressly thus; Abraham feared God, and it was accounted to him
for righteousness: and we do read as much in sense, though not in express
words, Genesis 22. 12. For now I know thou fear God, seeing thou have not
withheld, etc. Ver. 16. By my self have I sworn, For because thou have done
this thing, and have not with held thy son, that in blessing I will bless thee.
It would be a poor blessing, if it did not include justification. I say, had
the words run so, the Apostle is so far from excluding these things from being
a condition of justification, that such words would as well have proved what he
is proving; only they would not so occasionally have served to press them to
the great difficult duty of that day, the believing Christ's Resurrection.

FINIS.

