The truest, and most Real RELATION OF THE APPREHENSION OF THREE MOST
NOtorious REBELS in Ireland brought to the Parliament in ENGLAND. viz. The Lord
Magwire. Colonel Read, cousin germin to Tyrone. Captain Mac Mallion brother to
Philomy O Neale.
The Relation being truly taken from their own mouths word for word as
follows. With the true description how they were first taken near Dublin,
apprehended by Captain Smith, and now by him detained, till the further censure
of the Parliament. Also the manner of their examination before a Committee of
both Houses in the Courts of WARDS. And from thence committed to the Tower,
there to remain until further Trial. Also News from YORK, with His MAJESTY'S
Propositions to the Lords there.

LONDON: Printed by true Intelligence for Tho. Powell. 1642.

The truest and most Real RELATION OF THE APPREHENSION of three most Notorious
Rebels in Ireland, brought to the Parliament in England.
LOng have the insolency of the traiterous Rebels in Ireland exulted over the
consciences, liberties, and estates of the Protestants, contemning not only
the Royal Government of the fundamental Constitutions, and Laws of the
Kingdom, but also denying to subscribe to the directions and Authority of the
Parliament of England. And as they have broken into open Rebellion, so they
have continued the same in a most unnatural and inhumane manner. But most
especially, their tyrannies have extended against those who have been unfeigned
Professors of the Protestant Religion, not sparing either sex, age, degree, or
any Nature whatsoever, or of what estate soever. And it has pleased Almighty
God to curb in their Rebellion, and add a period to their nefarious
intentions. For the Protestants have now gained a more victorious renown, and
have re-obtained many Castles and Towns there in Ireland, and have repelled
their Forces extremely, Ballinekill, Kilcullin, the Castle of Dort, Drogheda,
Clegham, Knockardnegurrah, with many other Castles and Towns have been lately
relieved by the English.

Whereupon the Rebels being highly exasperated, did congregate themselves in
manner of a Council, and in their Convocation did concur how they might by
their continued consultations there taken, overcome the Country either by some
sudden and unexspected Stratagem, or else by the policy and strength of them
all conjoined together. Wherefore they met near Dublin, and there they
intended to execute their cogitations and resolutions, expressed before, where
there were diverse Rebels met, but the English resisted, and opposed them, and
took in that Skirmish three most notorious Rebels, and being apprehended were
consequently brought to the Parliament in England, now illustriously Assembled
at Westminster. Their examination being before a Committee of both Houses, in
the Court of Wards: The true and real intelligence, and description whereof is
as follows.

The fifteenth day of this present Month, certain Rebels came marching
toward Athy, but when they perceived that the Lord Lievtenants Troop, Sir
Patricke Wymes, and Sir Thomas Lucas, with the assistance of Captain
Armestrong, General Quartermaster of the Horse, did oppose them, being before
discovered, and marching strongly with their complete Forces against them, they
began to revolt and decline from their former intentions, and so turned
immediately toward the City of Dublin: where they had concluded by the
general Council of War, taken before amongst them to meet, there being in
the said Company, the Lord Viscount Mountgarret, the Baron of Dunboine, the
Earl of Care, the Earl of Catherlagh, the Lord Baron of Loghmeh, the Lord
Magwire, with most of the Arch-Rebels in the Counties of Arkloo, Wickloo,
Manahene, etc. Here they were assembled near Dublin in a great Army, it being
the greatest company, and Forces that ever the Rebels had together; but the
Earl of Ormond, the Lord Pore, Earl of Valentia, the Lord Brabaron, Earl of
East Mead, the Lord Thomond, the Lord Lievtenants Troop, Sir Patricke Wymes,
Sir Thomas Lucas, and Captain Armestrong, most valiantly, and with courageous
magnanimity resisted them: and after some vollies of shot given, and the
English following them also very closely, in so much, that they were compelled
to fly, but many of them were slain in the pursuit, and diverse taken
prisoners; amongst whom there were three Notorious Rebels taken, viz. the Lord
Magwire, Colonel Read, Cousin Germane to Tyrone, Captain Mac Mallion,
Brother-in-Law to Philomy O Neale, and conducted from thence near Dublin with
a very strong Watch and Guard to the Parliament in England, that they may
receive whatsoever Verdict of censure, they in their discreet and deliberate
Judgments shall think exped^ent.

They were brought to the Red Lion in Holborne by Captain Smith, and others,
and there they were imprisoned, having a strong Watch, with certain Constables,
to detain them securely, least peradventure they should escape.

They were brought last Monday before a Committee of both Houses, sitting in
the Court of Wards, where when they first oppeared at their examination before
the Committee, they answered, that they were Recusants, and being borne and
brought up in the same Religion, which the Catholic Church of Rome professed,
they were also resolved to live and die in the maintenance thereof: renouncing
whatsoever shall be in opposition to the same. And that though they might be
supposed to be Rebels, and so reputed, yet they did nothing (as they strongly
did asseverate) but what the lawfulness of their Consciences did suggest unto
them. Whereupon it was Ordered by the House, that they should be committed to
strong Custody, till the further censure of the House.

News from York, with His Majesty's Propositions to the Lords there.
SIR,
I Conceive my Lord of Linssey is Admiral of England, and the Lord of Ormond
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. The King has this day made diverse Propositions to
the Lords here; As

First, to have the Declaration of both Houses of the Ninth of May to be
disavowed.

Secondly, to have justice in Hull business.

Thirdly, to have the Militia declared to be his right.

Fourthly, to have tumults punished.

Fifthly, to have the Parliament adjourned to Oxford, Winchester, York,
Coventry, Bristoll, Nottingham, or any of those places where His Majesty shall
command, and other things which I have not leisure to add.

Tomorrow they meet again, and I believe the main question will be, whether a
Declaration shall be made here, or the Lords to agree here, and vote in the
House, and in what equipage to go. Our Court increases daily, and we believe
notwithstanding the offer of an hundred thousand pound, by the Common Council;
that the King may have as much money from the Citizens as they, and I believe
here is ground for such a conceit. Here is no possibility of the Kings sudden
remove hence, though some think he may step hence to Lincoln, for three or
four days to settle that Country, but I am not of that opinion.

FINIS.

