FORMS of PRAYER Public and Private.

Together with The PSALTER or PSALMS of David, after the KINGS Translation.

Cum clamore valido et lachrymis preces, offerens, exauditus est pro sua^
reverentia^.



A Collection of offices OR FORMS of PRAYER IN Cases Ordinary and Extraordinary.

Taken out of the Scriptures and the ancient Liturgies of several Churches,
especially the GREEK.

Together with The Psalter or Psalms of David, according to the Kings
Translations; with Arguments to the same.

S. Ignatius. (...) LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher for R. Royston, at the sign
of the Angel in Ivy-lane. 1658.

The PREFACE.
WHen Judges were instead of Kings, and Hophni and Phinehas were among the
Priests, every man did what was right in his own eyes, but few did what was
pleasing in the eyes of the Lord; and the event was this, God put on his fierce
anger against them, and stirred up and armed the Enemies of their Country and
Religion, and they prevailed very far, against the expectation and confidence
of them who thought the goodness of their cause would have born out the
iniquity of their persons, and that the impiety of their adversaries would have
disabled them even from being made Gods scourges and instruments of punishing
his own people: The sadness of the event proved the vanity of their hopes; for
that which was the instrument of their worship, the determination of their
religious addresses, the place where God did meet his people, from which the
Priests spoke to God, and God gave his Oracles, that they dishonourably and
miserably lost: The ark of the Lord was taken, the impious Priests (who made
the Sacrifice of the Lord to become an abomination to the people) were slain
with the sword of the Philistines, old Eli lost his life, and the wife of
Phinehas died with sorrow, and the miscarriages of childbirth, crying out, That
the Glory was departed from Israel, because the Ark of God was taken.

2. In these things we also have been but too like the sons of Israel; for when
we sinned as greatly, we also have groaned under as great and sad a calamity.
For we have not only felt the evils of an intestine War, but God has
smitten us in our spirit, and laid the scene of his judgments especially in
Religion; he has snuffed our lamp so near, that it is almost extinguished, and
the sacred fire was put into a hole of the earth, even then when we were forced
to light those tapers that stood upon our Altars, that by this sad truth better
then by the old ceremony we might prove our succession to those holy men who
were constrained to sing hymns to Christ in dark places and retirements.

3. But I delight not to observe the correspondencies of such sad accidents,
which as they may happen upon diverse causes, or may be forced violently by the
strength of fancy, or driven on by jealousy, and the too fond opinings of
troubled hearts and afflicted spirits; so they do but help to vex the
offending part, and relieve the afflicted but with a fantastic and groundless
comfort: I will therefore deny leave to my own affections to ease themselves by
complaining of others: I shall only crave leave that I may remember Jerusalem
and call to mind the pleasures of the Temple, the order of her services, the
beauty of her buildings, the sweetness of her songs, the decency of her
Ministrations, the assiduity and Economy of her Priests and Levites, the daily
sacrifice, and that eternal fire of devotion that went not out by day nor by
night; these were the pleasures of our peace, and there is a remanent felicity
in the very memory of those spiritual delights which we then enjoyed as
antepasts of heaven, and consignations to an immortality of joys. And it may
be so again when it shall please God who has the hearts of all Princes in his
hand, and turns them as the rivers of waters; and when men will consider the
invaluable loss that is consequent, and the danger of sin that is appendant to
the destroying such forms of discipline and devotion in which God was purely
worshipped, and the Church was edified, and the people instructed to great
degrees of piety, knowledge, and devotion.

4. And such is the Liturgy of the Church of England. I shall not need to
enumerate the advantages of Liturgy in general, though it be certain that some
Liturgy or other is most necessary in public addresses, that so we may imitate
the perpetual practice of all settled Churches since Christianity, or ever since
Moses Law or the Jewish Church came to have a settled foot, and any rest in the
land of Canaan. [2.] That we may follow the example, and obey the precept of
our blessed Savior, who appointed a set form of devotion (and certainly they
that profess enmity against all Liturgy can in no sense obey the precept given
by him who gave command, When ye pray, say, Our Father. [3.] That all that come
may know the condition of public Communion, their Religion, and manner of
address to God Almighty. [4.] That the truth of the proposition, the piety of
the desires, and the honesty of the petitions, the simplicity of our purposes,
and the justice of our designs may be secured beforehand, because Whatsoever
is not of faith is sin (and it is impossible that we should pray to God in the
extempore prayers of the Priest, by any faith but unreasonable, unwarranted,
insecure and implicit.) [5.] That there may be union of hearts, and spirits,
and tongues. [6.] That there may be a public symbol of Communion in our
prayers, which are the best instruments of endearing us to God, and to one
another; (...) Private prayer not assisted with the concord and unity of a
public spirit is weaker and less effectual, says S. Basil. [7.] That the
Ministers less learned may have provisions of devotions made for them. [8.]
That the more learned may have no occasion of ostentation ministered to them,
lest their best actions, their prayers, be turned into sin. [9.] That
extravagant levities, and secret impieties be prevented. [10.] That the offices
Ecclesiastical may the better secure the articles of Religion. [11.] That they
may edify the people by being repositories of holy and necessary truths ready
formed out of their needs, and described in their Books of daily use; for that
was one of the advices of the Apostle, teaching and admonishing one another in
Psalms, Coloss. 3^
and hymns, and spiritual songs. [12.] That men by the intervening of authority
may be engaged to certain devotions. [13.] That not only the duty, but the
very form of its ministration may be honored by the countenance of authority,
and not be exposed to contempt by reason of the insufficiency of its external
warrant. [14.] That the assignation of such offices, and appropriating them to
the ministry of certain persons may be a cancel to secure the enclosures of
the Clerical orders from the usurpings and invasions of pretending and
unhallowed spirits, [15.] That indetermination of the office may not introduce
indifferency, nor indifferency lead in a freer liberty, or liberty degenerate
into licentiousness, or licentiousness into folly, and vanity; and these come
sometime attended with secular designs, lest these be cursed with the immission
of a peevish spirit upon our Priests, and that spirit be a teacher of lies, and
these lies become the basis of impious theoremes, which are certainly attended
with ungodly lives; and then either Atheism or Antichristianism may come,
according as shall happen in the conjunction of time and other circumstances;
for this would be a sad climax, a ladder upon which are no Angels ascending or
descending, because the degrees lead to darkness and misery.

5. But that which is of special concernment is this, that the Liturgy of the
Church of England has advantages so many and so considerable as not only to
raise it self above the devotions of other Churches, but to endear the
affections of good people to be in love with Liturgy in general.

6. For to the Churches of the Roman Communion we can say that ours is
reformed, to the reformed Churches we can say that ours is orderly and decent;
for we were freed from the impositions and lasting errors of a tyrannical
spirit, and yet from the extravagancies of a popular spirit too: our
reformation was done without tumult, and yet we saw it necessary to reform; we
were zealous to cast away the old errors, but our zeal was balanced with
consideration and the results of authority: Not like women or children when
they are affrighted with fire in their clothes; we shak'd off the cole indeed,
but not our garments lest we should have exposed our Churches to that nakedness
which the excellent men of our sister Churches complained to be among
themselves.

7. And indeed it is no small advantage to our Liturgy, that it was the
offspring of all that authority which was to prescribe in matters of Religion.
The king and the Priest, which are the Antistites Religionis, and the
preservers of both the Tables joined in this work, and the people as it was
represented in Parliament were advised withal, in authorizing the form after
much deliberation; for the Rule, Quod spectat ad omnes ab omnibus tractari
debet, was here observed with strictness, and then as it had the advantages of
discourse, so also of authorities, its reason from one and its sanction from
the other, that it might be both reasonable and sacred and free, not only from
the indiscretions, but (which is very considerable) from the scandal of
popularity.

8. And in this I cannot but observe the great wisdom and mercy of God in
directing the contrivers of the Liturgy with the spirit of zeal and prudence,
to allay the furies and heats of the first affrightment. For when men are in
danger of burning, so they leap from the flames, they consider not whither but
whence: and the first reflections of a crooked tree are not to straightness,
but to a contrary incurvation, yet it pleased the Spirit of God so to temper
and direct their spirits, that in the first Liturgy of King Edward they did
rather retain something that needed further consideration, then reject any
thing that was certainly pious and holy; and in the second Liturgy, that they
might also thoroughly reform, they did rather cast out something that might with
good profit have remained, then not satisfy the world of their zeal to reform,
of their charity in declining every thing that was offensive, and the clearness
of their light in discerning every semblance of error or suspicion in the
Roman Church.

9. The truth is, although they framed the Liturgy with the greatest
consideration that could be, by all the united wisdom of this Church and
State, yet as if Prophetically to avoid their being charged in after ages with
a crepusculum of Religion, a dark, twilight, imperfect Reformation, they joined
to their own star all the shining tapers of the other reformed Churches,
calling for the advice of the most eminently learned and zealous Reformers in
other Kingdoms, that the light of all together might show them a clear path to
walk in. And this their care produced some change; for upon the consultation
the first form of King Edwards Service Book was approved with the exception of
a very few clauses, which upon that occasion were reviewed and expunged, till
it came to that second form and modest beauty it was in the Edition of M D L
II, and which Gilbertus a German approved of as a transcript of the ancient and
primitive forms.

10. It was necessary for them to stay somewhere. Christendom was not only
reformed, but divided too, and every division would to all ages have called for
some alteration, or else have disliked it publicly; and since all that cast
off the Roman yoke, thought they had title enough to be called Reformed, it
was hard to have pleased all the private interests and peevishness of men that
called themselves friends, and therefore that only in which the Church of Rome
had prevaricated against the word of God, or innovated against Apostolical
tradition, all that was pared away. But at last she fixed, and strove no
further to please the people, who never could be satisfied.

11. The Painter that exposed his work to the censure of the common passengers,
resolving to mend it as long as any man could find fault, at last had brought
the eyes to the ears and the ears to the neck, and for his excuse subscribed,
Hanc populus fecit. But his [Hanc ego] that which he made by the rules of art,
and the advice of men skilled in the same mystery was the better piece. The
Church of England should have pared away all the Canon of the Communion, if she
had mended her piece at the prescription of the Zuinglians; and all her office
of Baptism, if she had mended by the rules of the Anabaptists, and kept up
Altars still by the example of the Lutherans, and not have retained decency by
the good will of the Calvinists; and now another new light is sprung up, she
should have no Liturgy at all, but the worship of God be left to the managing
of chance, and indeliberation, and a petulant fancy.

12. It began early to discover its inconvenience; for when certain zealous
persons fled to Frankford to avoid the funeral piles kindled by the Roman
Bishops in Queen Mary's time, as if they had not enemies enough abroad they
fell foul with one another, and the quarrel was about the Common Prayer Book,
and some of them made their appeal to the judgment of Mr Calvin, whom they
prepossessed with strange representments, and troubled phantasms concerning it,
and yet the worst he said upon the provocation of those prejudices was that
even its vanities were tolerable. Tolerabiles ineptias was the unhandsome
Epithete he gave to some things which he was forced to dislike by his
overearnest complying with the Brethren of Frankford.

13. Well! upon this the wisdom of this Church and State saw it necessary to
fix where with advice she had begun, and with counsel she had once mended. And
to have altered in things inconsiderable upon a new design or sullen mislike,
had been extreme levity, and apt to have made the men contemptible, their
authority slighted, and the thing ridiculous, especially before adversaries,
that watched all opportunity and appearances to have disgraced the Reformation.
Here therefore it became a Law, was established by an Act of Parliament, was
made solemn by an appendant penalty, against all that on either hand did
prevaricate a sanction of so long and so prudent consideration.

14. But the Common Prayer Book had the fate of S. Paul, for when it had escaped
the storms of the Roman Sea, yet a viper sprung out of Queen Mary's fires,
which at Frankford first leaped upon the hand of the Church, but since that
time it has gnawn the bowels of its own Mother, and given it self life by the
death of its Parent and Nurse.

15. For as for the Adversaries from the Roman party, they were so convinced
by the piety and innocence of the Common Prayer Book, that they could accuse it
of no deformity, but of imperfection, of a want of some things which they
judged convenient, because the error had a wrinckle on it and the face of
antiquity. And therefore for ten or eleven years they came to our Churches,
joined in our devotions, and communicated without scruple, till a temporal
interest of the Church of Rome rent the Schism wider, and made it gape like the
jaws of the grave.

And let me say, it adds no small degree to my confidence and opinion of the
English Common Prayer Book, that amongst the numerous Armies sent from the
Roman Seminaries, (who were curious enough to enquire, able enough to find
out, and wanted no anger to have made them charge home any error in our
Liturgy, if the matter had not been unblameable, and the composition excellent)
there was never any impiety or heresy charged upon the Liturgy of the Church;
(for I reckon not the calumnies of Harding, for they were only in general,
calling it [Darkness, etc.] from which aspersion it was worthily vindicated by
M. Deering.) The truth of it is, the Compilers took that course which was
sufficient to have secured it against the malice of a Spanish Inquisitor, or
the scrutiny of a more inquisitive Presbytery, for they put nothing of
controversy into their prayers, nothing that was then matter of question; only
because they could not prophecy, they put in some things which since then have
been called to question, by persons whose interest was highly concerned to
find fault with something. But that also has been the fate of the Penmen of
holy Scripture, some of which could prophecy, and yet could not prevent this.
But I do not remember that any man was ever put to it to justify the Common
Prayer against any positive, public, and professed charge by a Roman
Adversary: Nay, it is transmitted to us by the testimony of persons greater
then all exceptions, that Paulus 4t^s in his private entercourses and Letters
to Queen Elizabeth did offer to confirm the English Common Prayer Book, Tortura
Torti P. 142.
if she would acknowledge his Primacy and authority, and the Reformation
derivative from him. And this lenity was pursued by his Successor Pius 4tus,
with an [omnia de nobis tibi polliceare] he assured her she should have any
thing from him, Cambd. Annal. A. D. 1560.
not only things pertaining to her soul, but what might conduce to the
establishment and confirmation of her Royal Dignity; amongst which, that the
Liturgy newly established by her authority should not be rescinded by the Popes
power, was not the least considerable.

16. And possibly this has cast a cloud upon it in the eyes of such persons
who never will keep charity or so much as civility but with those with whom
they have made a league offensive and defensive against all the world. This
has made it to be suspected of too much complianc^ with that Church, and her
Offices of devotion, and that it is a very Cento composed out of the Mass Book,
Pontifical, Breviaries, Manuals, and Portuises of the Roman Church.

17. I cannot say but many of our Prayers are also in the Roman Offices. But
so they are also in the Scripture, so also is the Lords Prayer, and if they
were not, yet the allegation is very inartificial, and the charge peevish and
unreasonable, unless there were nothing good in the Roman Books, or that it
were unlawful to pray a good prayer which they had once stained with red
letters. The Objection has not sense enough to procure an answer upon its own
stock, but by reflection from a direct truth, which uses to be like light
manifesting it self and discovering darkness.

18. It was first perfected in King Edward the sixths time, but it was by and
by impugned through the obstinate and dissembling malice of many: They are the
words of M. Fox in his Book of Martyrs. Then it was reviewed and published with
so much approbation, that it was accounted the work of God; but yet not long
after there were some persons qui divisionis occasionem arripiebant (says
Alesius) vocabula and pene syllabas expendendo, they tried it by points and
syllables, and weighed every word, and sought occasions to quarrel, which being
observed by Archbishop Cranmer, he caused it to be translated into Latin and
sent it to Bucer, requiring his judgment of it, who returned this answer, That
although there are in it some things quae rapi possunt ab inquietis ad materiam
contentionis, which by peevish men may be cavill'd at, yet there was nothing in
it but what was taken out of the Scriptures, or agreeable to it, if rightly
understood; that is, if handled and read by wise and good men. The zeal which
Archbishop Grindal, Bishop Ridly, Dr Tailor, and other the holy Martyrs and
Confessors in Queen Mary's time expressed for this excellent Liturgy before and
at the time of their death, defending it by their disputations, adorning it by
their practice, and sealing it with their bloods, are arguments which ought to
recommend it to all the sons of the Church of England for ever, infinitely to
be valued beyond all the little whispers and murmurs of argument pretended
against it: and when it came out of the flame, and was purified in the Martyrs
fires, it became a vessel of honor, and used in the house of God in all the
days of that long peace which was the effect of Gods blessing, and the reward
(as we humbly hope) of an holy Religion, and when it was laid aside in the days
of Queen Mary, it was [to the great decay of the due honor of God, and
discomfort to the Professors of the truth of Christ's Religion] they are the
words of Queen Elizabeth, and her grave and wise Parliament.

19. Archbishop Cranmer in his purgation, A. D. 1553. made an offer if the
Queen would give him leave, to prove All that is contained in the Common Prayer
Book, to be conformable to that order which our blessed Savior Christ did both
observe and command to be observed. And a little after he offers to join issue
upon this point, That the Order of the Church of England, set out by authority
of the innocent and godly Prince Edward the sixth, in his high Court of
Parliament, is the same that was used in the Church fifteen hundred years past.

20. And I shall go near to make his words good. For, very much of our Liturgy
is the very words of Scriptures. The Psalms and Lessons, and all the Hymns
save one, are nothing else but Scripture, and owe nothing to the Roman
Breviaries for their production or authority. So that the matter of them is out
of question holy and true; As for the form, none ever misliked it but they that
will admit no form, for all admit this that admit any. But that these should be
parts of Liturgy needs not to be a question, when we remember that Hezekiah and
the Princes made it a Law to their Church to sing praises to the Lord with the
words of David, 2 Chronicles. 29.
and of Asaph the Seer, and that Christ himself did so and his Apostles after
the manner of the Jews in the Feast of Passover, sung their Hymns and
portions of the great Allelujah in the words of David and Asaph the Seer too,
Apoc. 15. Exodus 15. Psalm. 145. Jer. 10. 6,7.
and that there was a song in heaven made up of the words of Moses and David,
and Jeremy the Seer, and that the Apostles and the Church of God always chose
to do so, according to the commandment of the Apostle, that we sing Psalms and
Hymns to God. I know not where we can have better then the Psalms of David and
Asaph, and these were ready at hand for the use of the Church, insomuch that in
the Christian Synaxes, particularly in the Churches of Corinth S. Paul observed
that every man had a Psalm, it was then the common devotion, and Liturgy of all
the faithful, and so for ever; and the Fathers of the fourth Council of Toledo
justify the practice of the Church in recitation of the Psalms and Hymns by
the example of Christ and his Apostles, who after Supper sung a Psalm: and the
Church did also make hymns of her own, in the honor of Christ and sung them:
Such as was the [Te Deum] made by S. Ambrose and S. Augustine, and they stood
her in great stead, not only as acts of direct worship to Christ, but as
Conservators of the articles of Christ's Divinity, of which the Fathers made use
against the heretic Artemon, as appears in Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 28. Eccles.
Hist.

21. That reading the Scripture was part of the Liturgy of the Apostolical
ages, we find it in the tenth Canon of the Apostles, in Albinus Flaccus,
Rabanus Maurus and in the Liturgy attributed to S. James. Deinde leguntur
fusissime oracula sacra veteris Testamenti and Prophetarum, and Filii Dei
Incarnatio demonstratur, Passio, Resurrectio ex mortuis, ascensus in Coelum,
secundus item adventus ejus cum gloria. Atque id fit singulis diebus, etc.

22. So that since thus far the matter of our devotions is warranted by Gods
Spirit, and the form by the precedents of Scripture too, and the ages
Apostolical, above half of the English Liturgy is as Divine as Scripture it
self, and the choice of it for practice is no less then Apostolical.

23. Of the same consideration is the Lords Prayer, commanded by our blessed
Savior in two Evangelists; the Introit is the Psalm. 95. and the Responsories
of Morning and Evening Prayer, ejaculations taken from the words of David and
Hezekiah; the Decalogue recited in the Communion is the ten words of Moses, and
without peradventure was not taken into the Office in imitation of the Roman;
for although it was done upon great reason, and considering the great ignorance
of the people they were to inform, yet I think it was never in any Church
Office before, but in Manuals and Catechisms only: yet they are made Liturgick
by the suffrages at the end of every Commandment, and need no other warrant
from antiquity but the 20. Chapter of Exodus. There are not many parts beside,
and they which are, derive themselves from an elder house then the Roman
Offices; The Gloria Patri was composed by the Nicene Council, the latter
Versicle by S. Jerome, though some eminently learned (and in particular)
Baronius is of an opinion that it was much more ancient. It was at first a
confession of faith, and used by a newly baptized Convert and the standers by,
and then it came to be a Hymn, and very early annexed to the Antiphones, and
afterward to the Psalms and Hymns, all except that of S. Ambrose beginning
with [Te Deum] because that of it self is a great Doxology. It is seven times
used in the Greek Office of Baptism, and in the recitation of it the Priest and
people stood all up and turned to the East, and this custom ever continued in
the Church, and is still retained in the Church of England in conformity to the
ancient and Primitive custom, save only that in the Let any we kneel, which
is a more humble posture but not so ancient, the Letanies having usually been
said walking, not kneeling or standing. But in this the variety is an ornament
to the Churches garment. S. Gregory added this Doxology to the Responsory at
the beginning of prayer, after, O Lord make have to help us; That was the last,
and yet above a thousand years old, and much elder then the body of Popery. And
as for the latter part of the Doxology, I am clearly of opinion, that though it
might by S. Hierome be brought into the Latin Church, yet it was in the Greek
Church before him, witness that most ancient Hymn or Doxology, (...). However,
as to the matter of the Doxology, it is no other then the Confession of the
three most blessed persons of the Trinity which Christ commanded, and which
with greatest solemnity we declare in Baptism; and certainly we can no ways
better, or more solemnly and ritually give glory to the Holy Trinity, then by
being baptized into the profession and service of it. The Trisagion was taught
to the Greek Church by Angels; but certain it is, it sprang not from a Roman
fountain; and that the Canon of our Communion is the same with the old Canon of
the Church many hundred years before Popery had invaded the simplicity of
Christian Religion, is evident, if we compare the particulars recited by S. De
Spir. sanct. c. 27.
Basil, De celebratione Missarum c. cum Matthew.
Innocentius, his Epistle to John Archbishop of Lions, In gemma animi l. 1. c.
86.
Honorius the Priest, De Divin. Offic.
Alcuinus, and Super Act. 20. Una autem Sabbathi.
Walafridus Strabo, and if we will, we may add the Liturgy said to be S.
James's, and the Constitution of S. L. 8. c. 17.
Clement, (for whoever was the author of these, certainly they were ancient)
Radulphus Tongrensis and the later Ritualists, Cassander, Pamelius, Hittorpius,
Jacobus Goar and the rest.

24. And that we may be yet more particular, the very Prayer for Christ's
Catholic Church, in the Office of Communion, beside that it is nothing but a
plain execution of an Apostolical precept, set down in the Preface of the
Prayer, it was also used in all times, and in all Liturgies of the ancient
Church. And we find this attested by S. Myst^gog. Catcchis. 5.
Cyril of Jerusalem, Deinde postquam confectum est illud spirituale
sacrificium... obsecramus Deum pro communi Ecclesiarum pace, pro tranquillitate
mundi, pro Regibus, etc. To the same purpose also there is a testimony in S.
Chrysostom, Hom. 6. i^ 1 Epist. ad Tim.
which because it serves not only here, but also to other uses, it will not be
amiss here to note it: Quid autem sibi vult [primum omnium? ] In obsequio scil.
quotidiano, perpetu^que divinae religionis ritu. Atque id noverunt fideles
quomodo diebus singulis mane and vespere orationes fundantur ad Dominum,
quomodo pro omni mundo and Regibus, and omnibus qui in sublimitate positi sunt,
obsecrationes in Ecclesia fiant. Sed forte quis dixerit, pro omnibus, quod ait,
tantum fideles intelligi voluisse. At id verum non esse quae sequuntur,
ostendunt. Denique ait, pro Regibus, neque enim tunc Reges Deum colebant. It is
evident by this, that the custom of the Church was not only in the
celebration of the holy Communion, but in all her other Offices to say this
Prayer, not only for Christ's Catholic Church, but for all the world.

25. And that the charity of the Church might not be misconstrued, he produces
his warrant. S. Paul not only expressly commands us to pray for all men, but
adds by way of instance, for Kings, who then were unchristian, and heathen in
all the world. But this form of Prayer is almost word for word in S. Ambrose.
In Comment.
Haec regula Ecclesiastica est tradita a Magistro gentium qua utuntur
Sacerdotes nostri, ut pro omnibus supplicent... deprecantes pro Regibus...
orantes pro iis quibus sublimis potestas credita est, ut in justitia and
veritate gubernent... postulantes pro iis qui in necessitate varia sunt, ut
eruti and liberati Deum collaudent incolumitatis Authorem. So far goes our
form of Prayer. But S. Ambrose adds, Referentes quoque gratiarum actiones....
And so it was with us in the first Service-books of King Edward, and the
Preface to the Prayer engages us to a thanksgiving; but I know not how it was
stolen out, the Preface still remaining, to chide their unwariness that took
down that part of the building, and yet left the gate standing. But if the
Reader please to be satisfied concerning this Prayer, which indeed is the
longest in our Service Book, and of greatest consideration, he may see it taken
up from the universal custom of the Church, and almost in all the words of the
old Liturgies, if he will observe the Liturgies themselves of S. Basil, S.
Chrysostom, and the concurrent testimonies of Apologet. c. 14.
Tertullian, Ep 59. ad Paulin.
S. Austin, Ep. 1.
Celestine, De dogmat. Eccles. cap. 30.
Gennadius, L. 1. de vocat. gent. c. 4.
Prosper, and In Commentar.
Theophylact.

26. I shall not need to make any excuses for the Churches reading those
portions of Scripture which we call Epistles and Gospels before the Communion.
They are Scriptures of the choicest, and most profitable transaction. And let
me observe this thing, That they are not only declarations of all the
mysteries of our redemption, and rules of good life, but this choice is of the
greatest compliance with the necessities of the Christian Church that can be
imagined. For if we deny to the people a liberty of reading Scriptures, may
they not complain as Isaac did against the inhabitants of the land, that the
Philistines had spoiled his well, and the fountains of living water; If a free
use to all of them, and of all Scriptures were permitted, should not the Church
her self have more cause to complain of the infinite licentiousness and
looseness of interpretations, and of the commencement of ten thousand errors,
which would certainly be consequent to such permission? Reason and Religion
will chide us in the first, reason and experience in the latter. And can the
wit of man conceive a better temper and expedient, then that such Scriptures
only or principally should be laid before them all in daily Offices, which
contain in them all the mysteries of our redemption, and all the rules of good
life? which two things are done by the Gospels, and Epistles respectively: the
first being a Record of the life and death of our blessed Savior; the latter,
instructions for the edification of the Church, in pious and Christian
conversation; and all this was done with so much choice, that as obscure places
are avoided by design, as much as could be, so the very assignation of them to
certain festivals, the appropriation of them to solemn and particular days does
entertain the understandings of the people with notions proper to the mystery,
and distinct from impertinent and vexatious questions. And were this design
made something more minute, and applicable to the various necessities of times,
and such choice Scriptures permitted indifferently, which might be matter of
necessity and great edification, the people of the Church would have no reason
to complain that the fountains of our Savior were stopped from them, nor the
Rulers of the Church, that the mysteriousness of Scripture were abused by the
petulancy of the people to consequents harsh, impious, and unreasonable in
despite of government, in exauctoration of the power of superiors, or for the
commencement of schisms and heresies. The Church with great wisdom has first
held this torch out, and though for great reasons intervening and hindering, it
cannot be reduced to practice, yet the Church has shown her desire to avoid
the evil that is on both hands, and she has shown the way also, if it could
have been insisted in. But however, this choice of the more remarkable portions
of Scripture is so reasonable and proportionable to the nature of the thing,
that because the Gospels and Epistles bear their several shares of the design,
(the Gospel representing the foundation, and prime necessities of Christianity,
and the mysterious parts of our Redemption, the sum, the faith, and the hopes
of Christianity) therefore it is attested by a ceremony of standing up, it
being a part of the confession of faith: but the Epistles containing
superstructures upon that foundation, are read with religious care, but not
made formal or solemn by any other circumstance. The matter contains in it
sufficient of reason and of proportion, but nothing of necessity, except it be
by accident, and as authority does intervene by way of sanction.

27. But that this reading of Epistles and Gospels before the Communion was one
of the earliest customs of the Church, I find it affirmed by Rabanus Maurus.
Sed enim initio mos iste cantandi non erat, Institut. Cleric. l. 1. c. 32.
qui nunc in Ecclesia ante sacrificium celebratur: Sed tamen epistolae Pauli
recitabantur and sanctum Euangelium. The custom of reading S. Paul's Epistles,
and the holy Gospel before the Sacrament was from the beginning. Some other
portions of Scripture were read upon emergent occasions instead of the Epistle,
which still retain the name of Epistle, but it is so seldom, that it happens
upon two Sundays only in the year, upon Trinity Sunday, and the 25. Sunday
after; upon Saints days it happens oftener, because the story requires a
particular rememoration, and therefore is very often taken out of the Acts of
the Apostles, but being in substitution only of the ordinary portion of the
Epistle of S. Paul, or other the Apostles, it keeps the name of the first
design, though the change be upon good reason, and much propriety.

28. There remains now nothing but the Let any and Collects to be accounted
for: for the matter of which I shall need to say nothing, because the
Objections whatsoever have been against them are extremely low, and rather like
the intemperate talk of an angry child, then pressures of reason or
probability, excepting where they are charged with their virtues, for their
charity in praying for all men, for their humility in acknowledging such a
worthlesness in our selves, as not to dare to ask our petitions upon our own
confidences. These things fall like water against a rock, or like the
accusations against our blessed Savior, the unreasonableness of them splits
themselves.

29. But for the form I think themselves will make answer, when they consider
that they are nothing but a pursuit of that Apostolical precept, which next to
the Lords Prayer was the first Scripture pattern whence the Church framed her
Liturgies, First of all, let there be made intercessions and prayers and
supplications, 1 Timothy 2.
and giving of thanks for all men. In which words if there be not an
impertinent repetition of diverse words to the same sense, then needs must
(...), be as much distinct from each other in their form, as they are all from
(...).

30. S. Augustine expounds (...) prayers made in and about the blessed
Eucharist. Epist. 59. ad Paulin. q. 5.
Ideo in hujus sanctificatione and distributionis praeparatione existimo
Apostolum jussisse proprie fieri. (...), id est, orationes. Interpellationes
autem vel postulationes siunt cum populus benedicitur.

31. But S. Augustine if he were not deceived in his Criticism, says that
beside the general name of Prayer, which is signified by all those words, (...)
in Scripture signifies votum or desire, such surely as we express by sudden and
short emissions, and then (...) is but a prayer, (...) that is, but an
expression of short and ejaculatory desires, and may be better applied to such
forms of prayer as are our Collects, rather then the longer and more solemn
parts of the Canon of Communion. (...) though it signify an address to God, yet
it may with propriety enough be applied to our interlocutory prayers where the
people bear a share; for (...) signifies congressum or colloquium, (...) (...)
Isocrat. make no frequent societies or confederations with them. However,
although Grammarians may differ in assigning these several words to their
proper, minute, and incommunicable signification, yet it is most clear, that
they mean not prayers distinct, and made several by the variety of matter, but
several addresses differing only in modo orandi, and therefore by these are
intended the several forms of prayer and supplication: and the Church has at
all times used prayers of all variety, long and short, ejaculatory, determined
and solemn. And the Church of England understood it in this variety, calling
the short jaculatory prayers and responsories by the names of Letanies, or
suffrages, which I should render in the phrase of S. Austin to be
postulationes, or (...), but the longer Collects he calls prayers, which is the
true rendering of (...) (I suppose) and therefore twice in the Letany, after the
short responsories, the Priest says [Let us pray] by that minding the people of
the Apostles precept, that prayer as well as supplications be made. * For the
Letanies it is certain, the form is of great antiquity; Mamercus Bishop of
Vienna made solemn Letanies 400. years after Christ, and he and all his Diocese
repeated them together: And therefore I know not what matter of doubt there can
be reasonable in the form, since besides that we have the wisdom of so many
ages, and holy and prudent persons to confirm them, the form is made with
design to represent all the needs of the Catholic Church, and to make the
prayer it self fitted for an active and an intense devotion; and that it
cooperates rarely well to these ends, is so true, that of the first every man
is judge, of the second, every man may be judge that will without prejudice,
and with pious predispositions use the form; for if they help my devotion
infinitely, they may do as much to another, if he be disposed as I am; and he
that says they do no advantage or singular relish to my spirit, may as well
tell me the meat I eat does not please me because he loves it not; but the
exceptions which are against it are so fantastic, and by chance, that unless
it be against a single adversary, and by personal engagement, they cannot be
noted in the series of a positive discourse. Sometimes they are too long, and
sometimes they are too short, and yet the objectors will make longer and
shorter when they please; and because no law of God has prescribed to us in
such circumstances, if the Church leaves the same liberty to their private
devotions, it is not reasonable they should prescribe to her in public, and in
such minutes, in which the ordinary prudence of one wise man is abundantly
sufficient to give him Laws and directions, and in matters of greater
difficulty.

32. Of the same consideration is the form of our Church Collects, which are
made pleasant by their variety of matter, are made energetical and potent by
that great endearment of [per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum] are cleared from
a neighborhood of tediousness by their so quick intercision and breakings off,
and have for their precedent the forms of Prayer used by the religious of
Palestine mentioned by Cassian, De instit. Cleric. lib. 1. c. 32.
Et hae fuerunt Monachorum jaculatoriae orationes, ut frequentius Dominum
deprecantes jugiter eidem cohaerere possimus, and ut insidiantis. Diaboli
jacula quae infligere nobis tum praecipue insistit cum oramus, succincta
vitemus brevitate. In all these forms of prayer there is no difference but what
is circumstantial, and therefore although these circumstances be of great
efficacy for the procuring of accidental advantages to our spirits which are
often swayed, moved and determined by a manner as much as by an essence, yet
there is in it nothing of duty and obligation, and therefore it is the most
unreasonable thing in the world to make any of these things to be a question of
Religion.

33. I shall therefore press these things no further, but note that since all
Liturgy is and ever was either prose or verse, or both, and the Liturgy of the
Church of England as well as most others, is of the last sort, I consider that
whatsoever is in her devotions besides the Lessons, Epistles and Gospels (the
body of which is no other thing, then was the famous Lectionarium of S. Jerome)
is a compliance with these two dictates of the Apostle for Liturgy: the which,
one for verse, the other for prose, in 1 Psalms and 2 Hymns and 3 Spiritual
songs [for verse:] for prose, 4 deprecations, and 5 prayers, and 6
intercessions, and 7 giving of thanks, will warrant and commend, as so many
parts of duty, all the portions of the English Liturgy.

34. If it were worth the pains, it were very easy to enumerate the Authors,
and especially the occasions and time when the most minute passages, such I
mean as are known by distinct appellatives, came into the Church, that so it
may appear, our Liturgy is as ancient and primitive in every part, as it is
pious and unblameable, and long before the Church got such a beam in one of her
eyes, which was endeavored to be cast out at the reformation. But it will not
be amiss to observe that very many of them were inserted as Antidotes, and
deleteries to the worst of heresies, as I have discoursed already, and such was
that clause [through Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee
in the unity of the holy Spirit ever one God] and some other phrases parallel
were put in, in defiance of the Macedonians, and all the species of the
Antitrinitarians, and used by S. Ambrose in Millain, S. Austin in Africa, and
Idacius Clarus in Spain; and in imitation of so pious precedents, the Church of
England has inserted diverse clauses into her Offices.

35. There was a great instance in the administration of the blessed Sacrament.
For upon the change of certain clauses in the Liturgy upon the instance of
Martin Bucer, instead of [the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given
for you preserve your body and soul unto everlasting life] was substituted this
[take and eat this in remembrance, etc.] and it was done lest the people
accustomed to the opinion of Transubstantiation and the appendant practices,
should retain the same doctrine upon intimation of the first clause. But in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, when certain persons of the Zuinglian
opinion would have abused the Church with Sacramentary doctrine, and pretended
the Church of England had declared for it in the second clause of 1552; the
wisdom of the Church thought it expedient to join both the clauses; the first
lest the Church should be suspected to be of the Sacramentary opi^ion, the
latter lest she should be mistaken as a Patroness of Transubstantiation. And
both these with so much temper and sweetness, that by her care she rather
prevented all mistakes, then by any positive declaration in her prayers,
engaged her self upon either side; that she might pray to God without strife
and contention with her brethren. For the Church of England had never known how
to follow the names of men, but to call Christ only her Lord and Master.

36. But from the inserting of these and the like clauses which has been done
in all ages, according to several opportunities and necessities, I shall
observe this advantage which is in many, but is also very signally in the
English Liturgy, we are thereby enabled and advantaged in the meditation of
those mysteries, de quibus festivatur in sacris (as the Casuists love to speak)
which upon solemn days we are bound to meditate and make to be the matter and
occasion of our address to God; for the offices are so ordered that the most
indifferent and careless cannot but be reminded of the mystery in every
Anniversary, which if they be summed up will make an excellent Creed, (and then
let any man consider what a rare advantage it will be to the belief of such
propositions when the very design of the Holy Day teaches the hard handed
Artizan the name and meaning of an article) and yet the most forward and
religious cannot be abused with any semblances of superstition. The life and
death of the Saints which is very precious in the eyes of God, is so remembered
by his humble and afflicted handmaid the Church of England, that by giving him
thanks and praise, God may be honored, the Church instructed by the
proposition of their example, and we give testimony of the honor and love we
owe and pay unto Religion by the pious veneration and esteem of those holy and
beatified persons.

37. Certain it is, that there is no part of Religion, as it is a distinct
virtue, and is to be exercised by interior acts and forms of worship, but is
in the offices of the Church of England. For if the soul desires to be humbled
she has provided forms of Confession to God before his Church; if she will
rejoice and give God thanks for particular blessings, there are forms of
thanksgiving described and added by the Kings authority upon the Conference at
Hampton Court, which are all the public, solemn, and foreseen occasions for
which by Law and order provision could be made: if she will commend to God the
public and private necessities of the Church, and single persons, the whole
body of Collects and devotions supplies that abundantly: if her devotion be
high and pregnant, and prepared to fervency and importunity of congress with
God, the Letanies are an admirable pattern of devotion, full of circumstances
proportionable for a quick and an earnest spirit; when the revolution of the
Anniversary calls on us to perform our duty of special meditation, and
thankfulness to God for the glorious benefits of Christ's Incarnation, Nativity,
Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension (blessings which do as well deserve a day
of thanksgiving as any other temporal advantage, though it be the pleasure of a
victory) then we have the offices of Christmas, the Annunciation, Easter and
Ascension: if we delight to remember those holy persons, whose bodies rest in
the bed of peace, and whose souls are deposited in the hands of Christ, till
the day of restitution of all things, we may by the Collects and days of
Anniversary festivity not only remember, but also imitate them too in our
lives, if we will make that use of the proportions of Scripture allotted for
the festival which the Church intends; to which if we add the advantages of
the whole Psalter which is an entire body of devotion by it self, and has in
it forms to exercise all graces by way of internal act and spiritual intention,
there is not any ghostly advantage which the most religious can either need or
fancy, but the English Liturgy in its entire constitution will furnish us
withal. And certainly it was a very great wisdom, and a very prudent and
religious Constitution so to order that part of the Liturgy, which the ancient
called the Lectionarium, that the Psalter should be read over twelve times in
the year, the old Testament once, and the new Testament thrice, beside the
Epistles and Gospels, which renew with a more frequent repetition such choice
places as represent the entire body of faith and good life. There is a
defalcation of some few Chapters from the entire body in the order, but that
also was part of the wisdom of the Church not to expose to public ears and
common judgments, some of the secret rites of Moses Law, or the more
mysterious prophecies of the new Testament, whose sense and meaning the event
will declare, if we by mistaken and anticipated interpretations do not
obstruct our own capacities, and hinder us from believing the true events,
because they answer not those expectations with which our own mistakes have
prepared our understandings: as it happened to the Jews in the case of Antiochus,
and to the Christians in the person of Antichrist.

38. Well! thus as it was framed in the body of its first Constitution and
second alteration, those excellent men whom God chose as instruments of his
honor and service in the reformation, to whom also he did show what great
things they were to suffer for his Names sake, approved of it with high
testimony, promoted it by their own use and zeal, and at last sealed it with
their blood.

39. That they had a great opinion of the piety and unblameable composure of
the Common Prayer Book, appears 1 in the challenge made in its behalf by the
Archbishop Cranmer, to defend it against all the world of Enemies; 2 by the
daily using it in time of persecution and imprisonment (for so did Bishop
Ridley, and Dr Tailor, who also recommended it to his wife for a legacy:) 3 by
their preaching in behalf of it (as many did) 4 by Hulliers hugging it in his
flames with a posture of great love and forwardness of entertainment, 5 besides
the direct testimony which the most eminent learned amongst the Queen Mary
Martyrs have given of it. Amongst which that of the learned Rector of Hadley,
Dr Rowland Tailor, is most considerable: his words are these in a Letter of his
to a friend; [But there was after that by the most innocent King Edward (for
whom God be praised everlastingly) the whole Church Service with great
deliberation, Acts and Monument. page 1385. page 1608, 1565. page 1840. page
1844. and alibi.
and the advice of the best learned men of the Realm, and authorized by the
whole Parliament, and received and published gladly by the whole Realm: which
Book was never reformed but once, and yet by that one reformation it was so
fully perfected according to the rules of our Christian Religion in every
behalf, that no Christian conscience could be offended with any thing therein
contained. I mean of that Book reformed.]

40. I desire the words may be considered and confronted against some other
words lately published, which charge these holy and learned men but with a
half-fac'd light, a darkness in the confines of Egypt, and the suburbs of
Goshen. And because there is no such thing proved of these blessed Men, and
Martyrs, and that it is easy to say such words of any man that is not fully of
our mind, I suppose the advantage and the outweighing authority will lie on
our part in behalf of the Common Prayer Book, especially since this man and
diverse others died with it and for it according as it happened by the
circumstance of their charges and articles, upon which they died; for so it was
in the cases of John Rough, Page 1848, 1649, 1840.
John Philpot, Cutbert Simson, and seven others burnt in Smithfield, upon whom
it was charged in their indictments, that they used, allowed, preached for, and
maintained respectively the Service Book of King Edward. To which articles they
answered affirmatively, and confessed them to be true in every part, and died
accordingly.

41. I shall press this argument to issue in the words of S. Ambrose cited to
the like purpose by Vincentius Lirinensis. Contra haeres. c. 7.
Librum sacerdotalem quis nostrum resignare audeat, signatum a Confessoribus,
and multorum jam martyrio consecratum? Quomodo fidem eorum possumus denegare,
quorum victoriam praedicamus? Who shall dare to violate this Priestly book,
which so many Confessors have consigned, and so many Martyrs have hallowed with
their blood? How shall we call them Martyrs, if we deny their faith, how shall
we celebrate their victory, if we dislike their cause? If we believe them to be
crowned, why shall we deny but that they strove lawfully? So that if they dying
in attestation of this Book were Martyrs, why do we condemn the Book for
which they died? If we will not call them Martyrs, it is clear we have changed
our Religion since then. And then it would be considered whether we are fallen?
For the Reformers in King Edwards time died for it, in Q. Elizabeth's time they
avowed it under the protection of an excellent Princess, but in that sad
interval of Q. Mary's reign it suffered persecution, and if it shall do so
again, it is but an unhandsome compliance for Reformers to be unlike their
Brethren, and to be like their Enemies, to do as do the Papists, and only to
speak great words against them; and it will be sad for a zealous Protestant to
live in an age that should disavow K. Edwards and Q. Elizabeth's Religion and
manner of worshipping God, and in an age that shall do as did Q. Mary's
Bishops, persecute the Book of Common Prayer, and the Religion contained in it.
God help the poor Protestants in such times: But let it do its worst, if God
please to give his grace, the worst that can come is but a Crown, and that was
never denied to Martyrs.

42. In the mean time I can but with joy and Eucharist consider with what
advantages and blessings the pious Protestant is entertained and blessed, and
armed against all his needs by the constant and Religious usage of the Common
Prayer Book. For besides the direct advantages of the Prayers and devotions,
some whereof are already instanced, (and the experience of holy persons will
furnish them with more) there are also forms of solemn benediction and
absolution in the Offices, and if they be not highly considerable, there is
nothing sacred in the Evangelical Ministry, but all is a vast plain, and the
Altars themselves are made of unhallowed turf.

43. Concerning Benediction (of which there are four more solemn forms in the
whole Office, two in the Canon of the Communion, one in Confirmation, one in
the Office of Marriage) I shall give this short account, that without all
question the less is blessed of the greater, and it being an issue spiritual,
is rather to be verified in spiritual relation, then in natural or political.
And therefore if there by any such thing as regeneration by the Ministry of
the word, and begetting in Christ, and Fathers and Sons after the common faith
(as the expressions of the Apostle make us to believe) certain it is, the
blessings of Religion do descend most properly from our spiritual Fathers, and
with most plentiful emanation. And this has been the Religion of all the
world, to derive very much of their blessings by the Priests particular and
signal ministration; Melchisedech blessed Abraham, Isaac blessed Jacob, and
Moses and Aaron blessed the people. So that here is benediction from a Prince,
from a Father, from the Aaronical Priest, from Melchisedech, of whose order is
the Christian, in whose Law it is a sanction, that in great needs especially,
the Elders of the Church be sent for, and let them pray over him that is
distressed. That is the great remedy for the great necessity. And it was ever
much valued in the Church, insomuch that Nectarius would by no means take
investiture of his Patriarchal Sea, until he had obtained the benediction of
Diodorus the Bishop of Cilicia: Eudoxia the Empress brought her son Theodosius
to S. Chrysostom for his blessing, and S. Austin and all his company received
it of Innocentius Bishop of Carthage; It was so solemn in all marriages, that
the marrying of persons was called Benediction. So it was in the fourth Council
of Carthage, Sponsus and sponsa cum benedicendi sunt a Sacerdote, etc.
benedicendi, for married.... And in all Church Offices it was so solemn, that
by a Decree of the Council of Agatho, A. D. 380. it was decreed, ante
benedictionem Sacerdotis populus egredi non praesumat. By the way only, here
is (...) for two parts of the English Liturgy. For the benediction in the
Office of marriage by the authority of the Council of Carthage, and for
concluding the Office of Communion with the Priests or Bishops benediction by
warrant of the Council of Agatho, which Decrees having been derived into the
practice of the universal Church for very many ages, is in no hand to be
undervalued, lest we become like Esau, and we miss it when we most need it. For
my own particular, I shall still press on to receive the benediction of holy
Church, till at last I shall hear a Venite benedicti, and that I be reckoned
amongst those blessed souls who come to God by the ministeries of his own
appointment, and will not venture upon that neglect, against which the piety
and wisdom of all Religions in the world infinitely do prescribe.

44. Now the advantages of confidence which I have upon the forms of
benediction in the Common Prayer Book are therefore considerable, because God
himself prescribed a set form of blessing the people, Number. 6. 23.
appointing it to be done not in the Priests extempore, but in an established
form of words: and because, as the authority of a prescript form is from God,
so that this form may be also highly warranted, the solemn blessing at the end
of the Communion, is in the very words of S. Paul.

45. For the forms of Absolution in the Liturgy, though I shall not enter into
consideration of the Question concerning the quality of the Priests power which
is certainly a very great ministry, yet I shall observe the rare temper, and
proportion which the Church of England uses in commensurating the forms of
Absolution to the degrees of preparation and necessity. At the beginning of the
Morning and Evening Prayer after a general Confession usually recited before
the devotion is high and pregnant, (whose parts like fire enkindle one another)
there is a form of Absolution in general, declarative and by way of
proposition. In the Office of the Communion, because there are more acts of
piety and repentance previous and presupposed, there the Churches form of
Absolution is optative and by way of intercession. But in the Visitation of the
sick, when it is supposed and enjoined that the penitent shall disburthen
himself of all the clamorous loads upon his conscience, the Church prescribes a
medicinal form by way of delegate authority, that the parts of justification
may answer to the parts of good life. For as the penitent proceeds so does the
Church: pardon and repentance being terms of relation they grow up together
till they be complete; this the Church with greatest wisdom supposes to be at
the end of our life; (grace by that time having all its growth that it will
have here) and therefore then also the pardon of sins is of another nature then
it ever was before, if being now more actual and complete, whereas before it
was in fieri in the beginnings and smaller increases, and upon more accidents
apt to be made imperfect and revocable. So that the Church of England in these
manners of dispensing the power of the Keys does cut off all disputings and
impertinent wranglings, whether the Priests power were Judicial or declarative;
for possibly it is both, and it is optative too, and something else yet, for it
is an emanation from all the parts of his Ministry, and he never absolves, but
he preaches or prays or administers a Sacrament; for this power of remission is
a transcendent, passing through all the parts of the Priestly Offices; For the
keys of the Kingdom of heaven are the promises and the threatenings of the
Scripture, and the prayers of the Church, and the Word and the Sacraments, and
all these are to be dispensed by the Priest, and these keys are committed to
his Ministry, and by the operation of them all he opens and shuts heaven gates
ministerially; and therefore S. Paul calls it verbum reconciliationis, and says
it is dispensed by Ministers, as by Ambassadors or Delegates: and therefore it
is an excellent temper of the Church, so to prescribe her forms of Absolution,
as to show them to be results of the whole Priestly Office, of Preaching, of
dispensing Sacraments, of spiritual Cure, and authoritative deprecation. And
the benefit which pious and well disposed persons receive by these public
Ministeries, as it lies ready formed in our blessed Saviors promise [erit
solutum in coelis] so men will then truly understand when they are taught to
value every instrument of grace or comfort by the exigence of a present need,
as in a sadness of spirit, in an unquiet conscience, in the arrest of death.

46. I shall not need to procure advantages to the reputation of the Common
Prayer, by considering the imperfections of whatsoever has been offered in its
stead: but yet Directory.
; a 1 form of worship, composed to the dishonor of the Reformation, accusing
it of darkness, and intolerable inconvenience 2 a direction without a rule: 3 a
rule without restraint: 4 a prescription leaving an indifferency to a
possibility of licentiousness: 5 an office without any injunction of external
acts of worship, not prescribing so much as kneeling: 6 an office that only
once names reverence, but forbids it in the ordinary instance, and enjoins it
in no particular: 7 an office that leaves the form of ministration of
Sacraments so indifferently, that if there be any form of words essential, the
Sacrament is in much danger to become invalid, for want of provision of due
forms of Ministration: 8 an office that complies with no precedent of
Scripture, nor of any ancient Church: 9 that must of necessity either want
authority, or it must prefer novelty before antiquity: 10 that accuses all
the Primitive Church of indiscretion at the least: 11 that may be abused by the
indiscretion, or ignorance, or malice of any man that uses it: 12 into which,
heresy or blasphemy may creep without possiblity of prevention: 13 that has no
external forms to entertain the fancy of the more common spirits: 14 nor any
allurement to persuade and en^ice its adversaries: 15 nor any means of
adunation and uniformity amongst its confidents: 16 an office that still
permits children, in many cases of necessity to be unbaptized, making no
provision for them in sudden cases: 17 that will not suffer them to be
confirmed at all, (ut utroque Sacramento renascantur, as S. Cyprians phrase is,
that they may be advantaged by a double rite:) 18 that joins in marriage as
Cacus did his oxen, in rude, inform and unhallowed yokes: 19 that will not do
piety to the dead, nor comfort to the living, by solemn and honorary offices of
funeral: 20 that has no forms of blessing the people any more 21 then
described forms of blessing God, which are just none at all: 22 an office that
never thinks of absolving penitents, or exercising the power of the Keys, after
the custom and rites of Priests: 23 a Liturgy that recites no Creed, no
Confession of Faith, so not declaring either to Angels or men, according to
what Religion they worship God; but entertaining, though indeed without a
symbol, Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Manichees, or any other Sect, for
ought there appears to the contrary: 24 that consigns no public Canon of
Communion, but leaves that as casual and fantastic as any of the lesser
offices: 25 an office that takes no more care then chance does, for the reading
the holy Scriptures: 26 that never commemorates a departed Saint: 27 that has
no Communion with the Church Triumphant, any more then with the other parts of
the Militant: 28 that never thanks God for the redemption of the world by the
Nativity, and passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of our blessed Savior
Jesus, but condemns the memorial even of the Scripture Saints, and the
memorial of the miraculous blessings of redemption of mankind by Christ
himself, with the same accusation it condemns the Legends and portentous
stories of the most suspected part of the Roman Calendar: 29 an office that
out of zeal against Judaism condemns all distinction of days, unless they
themselves distinguish them: that leaves no signature of piety upon the Lords
day, and yet the Compilers do enjoin it to a Judaical superstition: 30 an
office that does by implication undervalue the Lords Prayer, for it never
injoyns it, and does but once permit it: 31 an office that is new without
authority, and never made up into a sanction by an Act of Parliament: an order
or Directory of devotion that has all these ingredients and capacities (and
such a one there is in the world) I suppose is no equal match to contest with
and be put in balance against the Liturgy of the Church of England, which was
with so great deliberation compiled out of Scriptures, the most of it, all the
rest agreeing with Scriptures, and drawn from the Liturgies of the ancient
Church, and made by men famous in their generations, whose reputation and glory
of Martyrdom has made it immodest for the best of men now to compare
themselves with them: and after its composition considered by advices from
abroad, and so trimmed and adorned that no excrescency didremain; the Rubricks
of which Book was writ in the blood of many of the Compilers, which has had a
testimony from Gods blessing in the daily use of it, accompanying it with the
peace of an age, established and confirmed by six Acts of Parliament directly
and collaterally, and is of so admirable a composure, that the most industrious
wits of its Enemies could never find out an objection of value enough to make
a doubt, or scarce a scruple in a wise spirit. But that I shall not need to set
a night-piece by so excellent a beauty, to set it off the better, its own
excellencies are Orators prevalent enough, that it shall not need any
advantages accidental.

47. And yet this excellent Book has had the fate to be cut in pieces with a
penknife, and thrown into the fire, but it is not consumed; at first it was
sown in tears and is now watered with tears, yet never was any holy thing
drowned and extinguished with tears. It began with the Martyrdom of the
Compilers, and the Church has been vexed ever since by angry spirits, and she
was forced to defend it with much trouble and unquietness: but it is to be
hoped that all these storms are sent but to increase the zeal and confidence of
the pious sons of the Church of England. Indeed the greatest danger that ever
the Common Prayer Book had, was the indifferency and indevotion of them that
used it but as a common blessing; and they who thought it fit for the meanest
of the Clergy to read prayers; and for themselves only to preach, though they
might innocently intend it, yet did not in that action consult the honor of
our Liturgy; except where charity or necessity did interpose. But when
excellent things go away, and then look back upon us, as our blessed Savior
did upon S. Peter, we are more moved then by the nearer embraces of a full and
an actual possession. I pray God it may prove so in our case, and that we may
not be too willing to be discouraged; at least that we may not cease to love
and to desire what is not publicly permitted to our practice and profession.

48. But because things are otherwise in this affair then we had hoped, and
that in very many Churches in stead of the Common Prayer which they use not,
every man uses what he pleases, and all men do not choose well, and where
there are so many choosers there is nothing regular, and the Sacraments
themselves are not so solemnly ministered as the sacredness and solemnity of the
mysteries do require, and in very many places where the old excellent forms are
not permitted, there is scarce any thing at all, but something to show there
was a shipwreck, a plank or a cable, a Chapter or a Psalm; some who were
troubled to see it so, and fain would see it otherwise, did think it might not
be amiss that some of the Ancient forms of other Churches, and of the prayers
of Scriptu^e should be drawn together, and laid before them that need; as
supposing that these or the like materials would make better fuel for the fires
of devotion then the straw and the stubble which some men did suddenly or
weakly rake together when ever they were to dress their Sacrifice: Now although
these prayers have no authority to give them power, yet they are humbly and
charitably intended, and that may get them love, and they have been (as to the
matter of them) approved by persons of great learning and great piety, and that
may sufficiently recommend them to the use of those who have no other, or no
better, and they no way do violence to Authority, and therefore the use of
them cannot be insecure; and they contain in them no matter of question or
dispute, and therefore cannot be justly suspected of interest or partiality:
and they are (especially in the chiefest offices) collected out of the
devotions of the Greek Church, with some mixture of the Mozarabick and
AEthiopick, and other Liturgies, and perfected out of the fountains of
Scripture, and therefore for the material part have great warrant and great
authority: and therefore if they be used with submission to Authority, it is
hoped they may do good; and if they be not used, no man will be offended.

49. I hope there will be no need of an apology or an excuse for doing an act
of charity; If no man will confess that he needs any of these, they can be let
alone, for they are intended only for them that do; but if there be a need,
these prayers may help to obtain of God to take that need away, and to supply
it in the mean while. But there is nothing else intended in this design but
that we may see what excellent forms of prayer were used in the ancient Church,
what a rare repository of Devotion the Scripture is, how it was the same spirit
of prayer that assisted the Church of England, and other Churches of God, how
much better the Curates of souls may help themselves with these or the like
offices, then with their own extempore, how their present needs may be
supplied, and their devotion enlarged, and a day of Religion entirely spent,
and a provision made for some necessities in which our calamities and our
experience of late have too well instructed us. For which and for other great
reasons all Churches have admitted variety of Offices. In the Greek Church it
is notorious, they have three public Books, and very many added afterward by
their Patriarchs, their Bishops, and their Priests; some are said often, and
others sometimes: and in Spain the Mozarabick office was used until the time of
Alfonsus the 6th, and to this very day in six Parishes in Toledo, and in the
Cathedral Church it self in the Chapel of Friar Francis Ximenez; and at
Salamanca upon certain days in the Chapel of Doctor Talabricensis. And after
all, these may be admitted into the use and ministry of families, for all the
necessities of which here is something provided.

50. He that gathered these things together intends as humbly, as piously, as
charitably as he can do in any action whatsoever; and if any of his brethren
can tell his heart better then himself, I am sure he may say much more of it;
but if any man can think I have in it any purpose less pious, or less severe,
or that there is any obliquity, or any thing but what is here expressed, I must
answer for it if there be, and he must answer for it if there be not.

January has xxxi. days. The Moon xxx.
Sun in Aquar. rises h. 7. m. 52. sec. 34. In lat. 52. sets h. 4. m. 7.
sec. 26. Jan. 10. h. 8. m. 3. sec. 56. In lat. 54. h. 3. m. 56. sec. 4. Morning
prayer. Evening prayer. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less. 19 1 A Calend.
Circumcision * * * * 8 2 b 4 Non. Genesis 1. Matt. 1 Genesis 2. Romans 1. 3 c 3 3 2 4 2
16 4 d Pr. No. 5 3 6 3 5 5 e Nonae. Edward K. 7 4 8 4 6 f 8 Idus Epiphany * * *
* 13 7 g 7 Genesis 9. Matt. 5 Genesis 12 Romans 5. 2 8 A 6 Lucian. 13 6 14 6 9 b 5 15 7
16 7 10 10 c 4 17 8 18 8 11 d 3 19 9 20 9 18 12 e Pr. Idus 21 10 22 10 7 13 f
Idus Hilary Bp. 23 11 24 11 14 g 19 Call. of February 25 12 26 12 15 15 A 18 27
13 28 13 4 16 b 17 29 14 30 14 17 c 16 Sulpitius Bp. 31 15 32 15 12 18 d 15
Prisca Virg. 33 16 34 16 1 19 e 14 Ulstan Bp. 35 17 37 1 Cor. 1. 20 f 13 Fabian
38 18 39 2 9 21 g 12 Agnes 40 19 41 3 22 A 11 Vincent. Mart. 42 20 43 4 17 23 b
10 44 21 45 5 6 24 c 9 Timothy Bp. 46 22 47 6 25 d 8 Conv. S. Paul. * * * * 14
26 e 7 Polycar. Mart. Genesis 48 Mat. 23 Genesis 49 1 Cor. 7. 3 27 f 6 50 24 Exodus 1
8 28 g 5 Exodus 2 25 3 9 11 29 A 4 Valerius Bp. 4 26 5 10 19 30 b 3 C. R. M. 7
27 8 11 8 31 c Pr. Call. 9 28 10 12 February has xxviii. days. The Moon xxix.
Sun in Pisc. rises h. 7. m. o. sec. 28. latit. 52. sets h. 4. m. 59 sec.
32. Feb. 8. h. 7. m. 1. sec. 40. latit. 54. h. 4. m. 58 sec. 20. Morning
prayer. Evening prayer. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less. 1 d Calend. Fast
Exo. 11 Mark 1 Exo. 12 1 Cor. 13 16 2 e 4 Non. Purific. Mary. * 2 * 14 5 3 f 3
Blasius Exo. 13 3 Exo. 14 15 4 g Pr. No. 15 4 16 16 13 5 A Nonae Agathe 17 5 18
2 Cor. 1 2 6 b 8 ld. 19 6 20 2 7 c 7 21 7 22 3 10 8 d 6 23 8 24 4 9 e 5
Apollon. Virg 32 9 33 5 18 10 f 4 Scholast. Virg. 34 10 Lev. 18 6 7 11 g 3 Lev.
19 11 20 7 12 A Pride. ld. 26 12 Nu. 11 8 15 13 b Idus Nu. 12 13 13 9 4 14 c 16
Call. Valentine 14 14 16 10 15 d 15 17 15 20 11 12 16 e 14 21 16 22 12 1 17 f 13
23 Lu. di. 1 24 13 18 g 12 25 dim. 1 27 Galat. 1 9 19 A 11 30 2 31 2 20 b 10 32
3 35 3 17 21 c 9 36 4 Deuteronomy. 1 4 6 22 d 8 Deuteronomy. 2 5 3 5 23 e 7 Fast 4 6 5 6 14
24 f 6 S. Matthias * 7 * Ephesians. 1 3 25 g 5 6 8 7 2 26 A 4 8 9 9 3 11 27 b 3
Aug. B. Hippo 10 10 11 4 28 c Pr. Call. Osw.p,and Co. 12 11 15 5 in every
Bissextile the Golden Numbers are to be supposed to stand the day after the
place they now possess, as 16 upon the 3. day, 5 upon the 4, 13. upon the 6,
and so in all the rest, because in every Leap-year the changes of the Moon are
upon those following days. March has xxxi. days. The Moon xxx.
Sun in Ariet^ rises h. 6. m. 0. sec. 0. sets h. 6. m. 0. sec. 0. throughout
the World. March 10. h. 6. m. 0. sec. 0. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. 1
Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less 19 1 d Calend. David Deu. 16 Luke 12 Deu. 17
Ephesians. 6 8 2 e 6 Non. Cedde 18 13 19 Philip. 1 16 3 f 5 20 14 21 2 5 4 g 4 22
15 24 3 5 A 3 25 16 26 4 13 6 b Pr. No. 27 17 28 Coloss. 1 2 7 c Nonae.
Perpetua 29 18 30 2 8 d 8 Id. 31 19 32 3 10 9 e 7 33 20 34 4 10 f 6 Josua 1 21
Josua 2 1 Thessalonians. 1 18 11 g 5 3 22 4 2 7 12 A 4 Gregory. 5 23 6 3 13 b 3 7 24 8
4 15 14 c Pride. Id. 9 John 1 10 5 4 15 d ldus 23 2 24 2 Thessalonians. 1 16 e 17 Call.
Aprilis. Judge. 1 3 Judge. 2 2 12 17 f 16 Patrick Bp. 3 4 4 3 1 18 g 15 Edward 5
5 6 1 Timothy 1 19 A 14 Joseph. sp. Mar 7 6 8 2, 3 9 20 b 13 Cuthbert 9 7 10 4 21
c 12 Benedict 11 8 12 5 17 22 d 11 13 9 14 6 6 23 e 10 15 10 16 2 Timothy 1 24 f 9
Fast 17 11 18 2 14 25 g 8 Ann^n Mary * 12 * 3 3 26 A 7 Judge. 19 13 Judge. 20 4
27 b 6 Init. R. Caroli 21 14 Ruth 1 Titus 1 11 28 c 5 Dorothy Virg. Ruth 2 15 3
2, 3 29 d 4 4 16 1 Samuel 1 Philemon. 19 30 e 3 1 Samuel 2 17 3 Hebr. 1 8 31 f Pr.
Call. Adelme Bp. 4 18 5 2 April has xxx. days. The Moon xxix.
Sun in Taur. rises h. 4. m. 50. sec. 32. latit. 52. sets h. 7. m. 0. sec.
28. April 9. h. 4. m. 56. sec. 20. latit. 54. h. 7. m. 1. sec. 40. Morning
prayer. Evening prayer. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less. 16 1 g Calend. 1 Samuel 6 Joh. 19 1 Sa. 7 Hebr. 3. 5 2 A 4 Non. 8 20 9 4 3 b 3 Richard. 10 21 11 5
13 4 c Pr. No. Ambrose. 12 Acts 1 13 6 2 5 d Nonae. 14 2 15 7 6 e 8 Id. 16 3 17
8 10 7 f 7 18 4 19 9 8 g 6 20 5 21 10 18 9 A 5 22 6 23 11 7 10 b 4 24 7 25 12
11 c 3 Guthliac. Con 26 8 27 13 15 12 d Pride. Id. 28 9 29 James 1 4 13 e Idus
30 10 31 2 14 f 18 Call. May. 2 Samuel 1 11 2 Sa. 2 3 12 15 g 17 Oswal. Archb. 3
12 4 4 1 16 A 16 5 13 6 5 17 b 15 7 14 8 1 pet. 1 9 18 c 14 9 15 10 2 19 d 13
Alphege 11 16 12 3 17 20 e 12 13 17 14 4 6 21 f 11 15 18 16 5 22 g 10 17 19 18
2 Pet. 1 14 23 A 9 S. George. 19 20 20 2 3 24 b 8 Ulfrid. Conf. 21 21 22 3 25 c
7 Mark Evang. * 22 * 1John 1 11 26 d 6 2 Sa. 23 23 2 Sa. 24 2 27 e 5 1 Kin. 1
24 1 Kin. 2 3 19 28 f 4 3 25 4 4 8 29 g 3 5 26 6 5 30 A Pr. Call. 7 27 8 2, 3
John May has xxxi. days. The Moon xxx.
Sun in Gem. rises h. 4. m. 7. sec. 26. latit. 52. sets h. 7. m. 52. sec.
34. May 11 h. 3. m. 56. sec. 4. latit. 54. h. 8. m. 3. sec. 56. Morning prayer.
Evening prayer. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less. 16 1 b Calend. Phil. and
Jacob. * * * Jude 5 2 c 6 Non. 1 Kin. 9 Acts 28 1 Ki. 10 Romans 1 3 d 5 Inv. of
Cross. 11 Matt. 1 12 2 13 4 e 4 13 2 14 3 2 5 f 3 15 3 16 4 6 g Pr. No. Joh.
Porr. L^^. 17 4 18 5 10 7 A Nonae. Jo. of Beverly 19 5 20 6 8 b 8 Id. 21 6 22 7
18 9 c 7 2 Kin. 1 7 2 Kin. 2 8 7 10 d 6 3 8 4 9 11 e 5 5 9 6 10 15 12 f 4 7 10
8 11 4 13 g 3 9 11 10 12 14 A Pride. ld. 11 12 12 13 12 15 b Idus 13 13 14 14 1
16 c 17 Call. June. 15 14 16 15 17 d 16 17 15 18 16 9 18 e 15 19 16 20 1 Cor. 1
19 f 14 Dunstan. 21 17 22 2 17 20 g 13 23 18 24 3 6 21 A 12 25 19 Ezra 1 4 22 b
11 Ezra 3. 20 4 5 14 23 c 10 5 21 6 6 3 24 d 9 7 22 9 7 25 e 8 Aldelmus Bp.
Neh. 1 23 Neh. 2 8 11 26 f 7 Augustine. 4 24 5 9 27 g 6 Bid Pri^st. 6 25 8 10
19 28 A 5 9 26 10 11 8 29 b 4 13 27 Hest. 1 12 16 30 c 3 Hest. 2 28 3 13 5 31 d
Pr. Call. Petronil. Virg. 4 Mark 1 5 1^ June has xxx. days. The Moon xxix.
Sun in Cancer rises h. 3. m. 44. sec. 36. latit. 52. sets h. 8. m. 15.
sec. 24. June 11. h. 3. m. 32. sec. 48. latit. 54. h. 8. m. 27. sec. 12.
Morning prayer. Evening prayer. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less. ^ 1 e
Calend. Nicom. Ma^t. Hest. 6 Mark 2 Hest. 7 1. Cor. 15 13 2 f 4 Non. 8 3 9 16 2
3 g 3 Erasm. Bish. Job 1 4 Job ^2 2 Cor. 1 4 A Pr. No. 3 5 4 2 10 5 b Nonae.
Boniface Bish. 5 6 6 3 6 c 8 Id. 7 7 8 4 18 7 d 7 9 8 10 5 7 8 e 6 11 9 12 6 9
f 5 13 10 14 7 15 10 g 4 15 11 16 8 4 11 A 3 Barnabas Ap. * * * * 12 b Pride.
Id. 17,18 Mar. 12 Job 19 2 Cor. 9 12 13 c Idus 20 13 21 10 1 14 d 18 Call. of
July. 22 14 23 11 15 e 17 24, 25 15 26, 27 12 9 16 f 16 28 16 29 13 17 g 15
Botulph. Con. 30 Luke 1 31 Galat. 1 17 18 A 14 32 2 33 2 6 19 b 13 34 3 35 3 20
c 12 36 4 37 4 14 21 d 11 38 5 39 5 3 22 e 10 Alban Martyr 40 6 41 6 23 f 9
Fast 42 7 Prove. 1 Ephef. I 11 24 g 8 John Bapt^st * * * * 25 A 7 Prove. 2 Luke 8
Prove. 3 Ephesians. 2 19 26 b 6 4 9 5 3 8 27 c 5 6 10 7 4 28 d 4 Leo Bp. ^ast 8 11 9
5 16 29 e 3 Peter and Paul * * * * 5 30 f Pr. Call. Pro. 10 Luke 12 Pro. 11
Ephesians. 6 July has xxxi. days. The Moon xxx.
Sun in Leo rises h. 4. m. 7. sec. 26. In lat. 52. sets h. 7. m. 52. sec.
34. July 12. h. 3. m. 56. sec. 4. In lat. 54. h. 8. m. 3. sec. 56. Morning
prayer. Evening prayer. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less. 1 g Calend.
Visit. of Mary Pro. 12 Luke 13 Pro. 13 Philip. 1 13 2 A 6 Non. 14 14 15 2 2 3 b
5 16 15 17 3 4 c 4 18 16 19 4 10 5 d 3 20 17 21 Coloss. 1 6 e Pr. No. 22 18 23
2 18 7 f Nonae. 24 19 25 3 7 8 g 8 Idus 26 20 27 4 9 A 7 Cyril Bp. 28 21 29 1 Thessalonians. 1 15 10 b 6 31 22 Eccles. 1 2 4 11 c 5 Benedict. Eccles. 2 23 3 3 12 d 4
4 24 5 4 12 13 e 3 6 John 1 7 5 1 14 f Pr. Idus 8 2 9 2 Thessalonians. 1 15 g Idus
Swithin 10 3 11 2 ^ 16 A 17 Call. of August 12 4 Jerem. 1 3 17 b 16 Kenelm. King
Jerem. 2 5 3 1 Timothy 1 17 18 c 15 Arnulph Bp. 4 6 5 2, 3 6 19 d 14 6 7 7 4 20 e
13 Marg. Virg. 8 8 9 5 14 21 f 12 10 9 11 6 3 22 g 11 Mary Magd. 12 10 13 2 Timothy 1 23 A 10 14 11 15 2 11 24 b 9 Fast 16 12 17 3 25 c 8 James Ap^stle * 13 *
4 19 26 d 7 Anne Mother Jer. 18 14 19 Titus 1 8 27 e 6 of Mary. 20 15 21 2, 3
28 f 5 Samson Bp. 22 16 23 Philemon 6 29 g 4 24 17 25 Hebr. 1 5 30 A 3 26 18 27
2 31 b ^ r. Call. German Bp. 28 19 29 3 August has xxxi. days. The Moon xxx.
Sun in Virg rises h. 4. m. 59. sec. 32. latit. 52. sets h. 7. m. 0. sec.
28. August 13. h. 4. m. 56. sec. 20. latit. 54. h. 7. m. 1, sec. 40. Morning
prayer. Evening prayer. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less. 13 1 c Calend.
Lammas Jere. 30 Joh. 20 Jere. 31 Hebr 4. 2 2 d 4 Non. 32 21 33 5 3 e 3 34 Acts
1. 35 6 10 4 f Pr. No. 36 2 37 7 5 g Nonae. 38 3 39 8 18 6 A 8 Id.
Transfigurat. 40 4 41 9 7 7 b 7 Name of IHS 42 5 43 10 8 c 6 44 6 45, 46 11 15
9 d 5 47 7 48 12 4 10 e 4 Laurence 49 8 50 13 11 f 3 51 9 52 James 1 12 12 g
Pride. Id. Lam. 1 10 Lam. 2 2 1 13 A Idus 3 11 4 3 14 b 19 Call. of September 5
12 Ezec. 2 4 9 15 c 18 Ezec. 3 13 6 5 16 d 17 7 14 13 1 Pet. 1 17 17 e 16 14 15
18 2 6 18 f 15 33 16 34 3 19 g 14 Dan. 1 17 Dan. 2 4 14 20 A 13 3 18 4 5 3 21 b
12 Bernar. Conf. 5 19 6 2 Pet. 1 22 c 11 7 20 8 2 11 23 d 10 Tim. Ep. Fast 9 21
10 3 24 e 9 Barth^s. Ap^^^ * 22 * 1 John 1 19 25 f 8 Lewis King Dan. 11 23 Dan.
12 2 8 26 g 7 Hist. Su 24 Prove. 30 3 27 A 6 Hosea 1 25 Hos. 2, 3 4 16 28 b 5 4
26 5, 6 5 5 29 c 4 Behead. of Joh. 7 27 8 2 and 3 John 30 d 3 9 28 10 Jude 3 31
e Pr. Call. Paulinus Bp. 11 Matt. 1 12 Romans 1 September has xxx. days. The Moon
xxix.
Sun in Libra rises h. 6. m. 0. sec. 0. sets h. 6. m. 0. throughout the World.
September. 13. h. 6. m. 0. sec. 0. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. 1 Lesson. 2
Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less. 2 1 f Calend. Giles Hos. 13. Matt. 2 Hos. 14 Romans 2
10 2 g 4 Non. Joel 1 3 Joel 2 3 3 ^ 3 3 4 Amos 1 4 18 4 b Pr. No. Amos 2 5 3 5
7 5 c Nonae. 4 6 5 6 6 d 8 Id. 6 7 7 7 15 7 e 7 Enurchus Bp. 8 8 9 8 4 8 f 6
Nativ. Mary Obad. 1 9 Jonah 1 9 9 g 5 Jon. 2, 3 10 4 10 12 10 A 4 Micah 1 11
Mich. 2 11 1 11 b 3 3 12 4 12 12 c Pride. Id. 5 13 6 13 9 13 d Idus 7 14 Nah. 1
14 14 e 18 Call. of October. Ex- Nah. 2 15 3 15 17 15 f 17 altation of ^ Hab. 1 16
Hab. 2 16 6 16 g 16 3 17 Zeph. 1 1 Cor. 1 17 A 15 Lambert Bp. Zeph. 2 18 3 2 14
18 b 14 Hagg. 1 19 Hagg. 2 3 3 19 c 13 Zech. 1 20 Zec. 2, 3 4 20 d 12 Fast 4, 5
21 6 5 11 21 e 11 S. Matt^ew * 22 * 6 22 f 10 Zach. 7 23 Zech. 8 7 19 23 g 9 9
24 10 8 8 24 A 8 11 25 12 9 25 b 7 Firminius Bp. 13 26 14 10 16 26 c 6 Cyprian.
Malac. 1 27 Malac. 2 11 5 27 d 5 3 28 4 12. 28 c 4 Exuperius Bp. Tobit. 1 Mark
1 Tobit 2 13 13 29 f 3 S. ^ichael * 2 * 14 2 30 g Pr. Call. Hierome Pres. Tobit
3 3 Tobit 4 15 October has xxxi. days. The Moon xxx.
Sun in Scorp. rises h. 7. m. 0. sec. 28. latit. 52. sets h. 4. m. 59. sec.
32. October. 3. h. 7. m. 1. sec. 40. latit. 54. h. 4. m. 58. sec. 20. Morning
prayer. Evening prayer. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less. 1 A Calend.
Remigius Exodus, ^. ad verse 14. Mark 4 Joth. 20 1 Cor. 16 10 2 b 6 Non.
Leodeger. Bp. Tobit 7 5 22 2 Cor. 1 3 c 5 9 6 Tob. 10 2 18 4 d 4 11 7 12 3 7 5
e 3 13 8 14 4 6 f Pr. No. S. Faith Judith 1 9 Judith 2 5 15 7 g Nonae. 3 10 4 6
4 8 A 8 Id. Pelagia Virg. 5 11 6 7 9 b 7 7 12 8 8 12 10 c 6 9 13 10 9 1 11 d 5
11 14 12 10 12 e 4 Wilthfrid Bp. 13 15 14 11 9 13 f 3 Edward King 15 16 16 12
14 g Pride. Id. Wisd. 1 Lu. di. 1 Wisd. 2 13 17 15 A Idus 3 dim. 1 4 Galat. 1 6
16 b 17 Call. of November 5 2 6 2 17 c 16 Ethelderd. Vir 7 3 8 3 14 18 d 15 Luke
Evan^. * 4 * 4 3 19 e 14 Fredesw. Virg. Wisd. 9 5 Wis. 10 5 20 f 13 11 6 12 6
11 21 g 12 11000 Virg. 13 7 14 Ephesians. 1. 22 A 11 Mary Salom. 15 8 16 2 19 23 b
10 17 9 18 3 8 24 c 9 19 10 Ecclus 1 4 25 d 8 Crispine Ecclus 2 11 3 5 16 26 e
7 4 12 5 6 5 27 f 6 Fast 6 13 7 Philip. 1 28 g 5 Simon and Jude * 14 * 2 13 29
A 4 Narcissus Bp. Ecclus 8 15 Ecclus 9 3 2 30 b 3 10 16 11 4 31 c Pr. Call. Fast
12 17 13 Coloss. 1 November has xxx. days. The Moon xxix.
Sun in Sagittar. rises h. 7. m. 52. sec. 34. latit. 52. sets h. 4. m. 7.
sec. 26. November. 12. h. 8. m. 3. sec. 56. latit. 54. h. 3. m. 56. sec. 4.
Morning prayer. Evening prayer. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less. 10 1 d
Calend. All Saints * * * * 18 2 e 4 Non. Ecclus 14 Luc. 18 Ecclus 15 Coloss. 2
7 3 f 3 Wenefrid 16 19 17 3 4 g Pr. No. 18 20 19 4 15 5 A Nonae 20 21 21 1 Thessalonians. 1 4 6 b 8 Id. Leonard 22 22 23 2 7 c 7 Willibr. archb. 24 23 25 and 26
ad verse 6. 3 12 8 d 6 27 24 28 4 1 9 e 5 29 John 1 30 5 10 f 4 31 2 32 2 Thessalonians. 1 9 11 g 3 Martin Bp. 33 3 34 2 12 A Pride. Id. 35 4 36 3 17 13 b Idus
Brice Bp. 37 5 38 1 Ti ^ 1 6 14 c 18 Call. of December. 39 6 40 ^^3 15 d 17
Machure Bp. 41 7 42 4 14 16 e 16 43 8 44 5 3 17 f 15 Hugh Bp. 45 9 46 adv. 20 6
18 g 14 47 10 48 2 Timothy 1 11 19 A 13 Elizabeth 49 11 50 2 20 b 12 Edmund King
51 12 Baruc. 1 3 19 21 c 11 Present. Mary. Baruc. 2 13 3 4 8 22 d 10 Cicily
Vi^g. 4 14 5 Titus 1 23 e 9 Clement Bp. 6 15 ^saiah 1 2, 3 16 24 f 8 Isaiah 2
16 3 Philemon 5 25 g 7 Katherine Vir. 4 17 5 Hebr. 1 26 A 6 6 18 7 2 13 27 b 5
8 19 9 3 2 28 c 4 10 20 11 4 29 d 3 Fast 12 21 13 5 10 30 e Pr. Call. Andrew
Apost * A^^s 1 * 6 December has xxxi. The Moon xxx.
Sun in Capric. rises h. 8. m. 15. sec. 24. latit. 52. sets h. 3. m. 44.
sec. 36. December. 11. h. 8. m. 27. sec. 12. latit. 54. h. 3. m. 32. sec. 48.
Morning prayer. Evening prayer. 1 Lesson. 2 Lesson. 1 Lesson. 2 Less. 1 f
Calend. Isai. 14 Acts 2 Isai. 15 Hebr. 7 18 2 g 4 Non. 16 3 17 8 7 3 A 3
Barbara 18 4 19 9 4 b Pr. No. Osmund Bp. 20, 21 5 22 10 15 5 c Nonae 23 6 24 11
4 6 d 8 Id. Nicholas Bp. 25 dim. 7 26 12 7 e 7 27 dim. 7 28 13 12 8 f 6 Concep.
Mary 29 8 30 James 1. 1 9 g 5 31 9 32 2 10 ^ 4 33 10 34 3 9 11 b 3 35 11 36 4
12 c Pride. Id. 37 12 38 5 ^7 13 d Idus Lucie Virg. 39 13 40 1 Pet. 1 6 14 e 19
Call. of January. 41 14 42 2 15 f 18 43 15 44 3 ^^ 16 g 17 O Sapientia 45 16 46
4 3 17 A 16 47 17 48 5 18 b 15 49 18 50 2 Pet. 1 ^1 19 c 14 51 19 52 2 20 d 13
Fast 53 20 54 3 19 21 e 12 Thom. Apost. * 21 * 1 John 1 8 22 f 11 Isai. 55 22
Isai. 56 2 23 g 10 57 23 58 3 16 24 A 9 59 24 60 4 5 25 b 8 Christmas. * * * *
26 c 7 S. Stephen. * * * * 3 27 d 6 ^. John. * * * * 2 28 e 5 ^nnocents. * Acts
25 * 1 John 5 29 f 4 Isai. 61 26 Isai. 62 2 John 10 30 g 3 63 27 64 3 John 3^ A
Pr. Call. ^ilvester Bp. 65 28 66 Jude

Proper Lessons to be read on Sundays, and all the moveable Feasts throughout
the year, whose Lessons are not set down in the Calendar.
Sundays of Advent. Mattens. Evensong. 1 Isaiah 1. Isaiah 2. 2 5 24 3 25 26 4
30 32 Sundays after Christmas. Mattens. Evensong. 1 Isaiah 37. Isaiah 38. 2 41
43 Sundays after Epiphany. Mattens. Evensong. 1 Isaiah 44. Isaiah 46. 2 51 53 3
55 56 Sundays after Epiphany. Mattens. Evensong. 4 Isaiah 57. Isaiah 58. 5 59
64 Septuagesima Genesis 1. Genesis 2. Sexagesima 3 6 Quinquages. 9 12
Quadragesima or the First Sunday in Lent. 19 22 2 27 34 3 39 42 4 43 45 5
Exodus 3. Exodus 5. 6 9 10 Easter day 1 Lesson. Exodus 12. Exodus 14. 2 Lesson.
Romans 6. Acts 2. Sundays after Easter. Mattens. Evensong. 1 Numbers 16. Numbers
22. 2 23 25 3 Deuteron. 4. Deuteronom. 5. 4 6 7 5 8 9 Ascension day. 10 2 Kings
2. Sunday after Ascension day. 12 Deuteron. 13. Whitsunday. 1 Lesson. 16
Wisdom 1. 2 Lesson. Acts 10. from v. 34. to the end. Acts 19. to v. 21.
Trinity Sunday 1 Lesson. Genesis 18. Josua 1. 2 Lesson. Matthew. 3. Sundays after
Trinity. 1 Josua 10. Josua 23. 2 Judges 4. Judges 5. 3 1 Samuel 2. 1 Samuel 3.
Sundays after Trinity. Mattens. Evensong. 4 1 Samuel 12. 1 Samuel 13. 5 15 17 6
2 Samuel 12. 2 Samuel 21. 7 22 24 8 1 Kings 13. 1 Kings 17. 9 18 19 10 21 22 11
2 Kings 5. 2 Kings 9. 12 10 18 13 19 23 14 Jeremiah 5. Jeremiah 22. 15 35 36 16
Ezech. 2. Ezech. 14. 17 16 18 18 20 24 19 Daniel 3. Daniel 6. 20 Joel 2. Micah
6. Sundays after Trinity. Mattens. Evensong. 21 Habakkuk 2. Proverbs 1. 22
Proverbs 2. 3 23 11 12 24 13 14 25 15 16 26 17 19 Proper Lessons for Holy days,
and the four days before Easter. S. Andrew. Proverbs 20. Proverbs 21. S.
Thomas. 23 24 Nativity of our blessed Savior. Isaiah 7. from v. 10. to the
end. 1 Lesson. Isaiah 9. Titus 3. from v. 2 Lesson. Luke 2. to v. 15 4. to the
end. S. Stephen. Proverbs 28. Eccles. 4. 1 Lesson. Act. 6. from v. Acts 7. from
v. 2 Lesson. 8. to c. 7. v. 30. 30. to ver. 55. S. John. 1 Lesson. Eccles. 5.
Eccles. 6. 2 Lesson. Apocal. 1. Apocal. 22. Innocents. Jer. 31. to v. 18
Wisdom 1. Mattens. Evensong. Circumcision 1 Lesson. Genes. 17. Deuteronomy. 10. to v.
12 2 Lesson. Romans 2. Coloss. 2. Epiphany. Isaiah 40. 1 Lesson. Luke 3. to the
Isaiah 49. 2 Lesson. middle of v. 23 John 2. to v. 12. Conversion of Wisdom 5.
S. Paul. 1 Less. Acts 22. unto Wisdom 6. 2 Less. verse. 22. Acts 26. Purific.
of the Virg. MARY. Wisdom 9. Wisdom 12. S. Matthias. 19 Ecclus. 1.
Annunciation of our Lady. Ecclus. 2. 3 Wednesday before Easter. Hosea 13. Hosea
14. Thursday. Daniel 9. Jeremy 31. Goodfriday. Genesis 22. Isaiah 53. Easter
even. Zechary 9. Exodus 13. Monday in Easter week. 1 Lesson. Exodus 16. Exodus
17. 2 Lesson Matthew 28. Acts 3. Tuesday in Easter week. Exodus 20. 1 Lesson.
Luke 24. unto Exodus 32. 2 Lesson. verse. 13. 1 Corinthians. 15. S. Mark. Ecclus. 4.
Ecclus. 5. Philip and ^acob. 1 Les. Eccles. 7 1 Less. 9. 2 Les. Acts 8.
Mattens. Evensong. Monday in Whitsonweek. Genesis 11. Numbers 11. 1 Lesson.
unto v. 10. from verse 16. 2 Lesson. 1 Corinthians. 12. unto verse 30. Tuesday in
Whitsonweek. 1 Samuel 19. from v. 18. to the end. Deuteron. 30. S. Barnabas. 1
Lesson. Ecclus 10. Ecclus. 12. 2 Lesson. Acts 14. Acts 15. to v. 36 S. John
Bapt. 1 Lesson. Malachy 3. Malachy 4. 2 Lesson. Matthew. 3. Mat. 14. to v. 13 S.
Peter. 1 Lesson. Exodus 15. Ecclus. 19. 2 Lesson. Acts 3. Acts 4. S. James.
Ecclus. 21. Ecclus. 23. S. Barthol. 25 29 S. Matthew. 35 38 S. Michael. 39 44
S. Luke. 51 Job 1. S. Simon and Jude. Job 24 and 25. 42 All Saints. Wisd. 3. to
v. 13. Wisd. 5. to v. 17 1 Lesson. Heb. 11. from ver. Apoc. 19. unto 2 Lesson.
33. to the 7. verse of the 12. Chapter. verse 17. * Note that when two Lessons
are not set down in this Table of the Festivals, the second Lesson is that
which is appointed on ordinary days in the Calender.

Of Holidays. These to be observed for Holidays and none other, by the Laws of
England.
ALL Sundays in the year. The days of the feasts of the Circumcision of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Of the Epiphany. Of the Purification of the blessed Virgin.
Of S. Matthias the Apostle. Of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin. Of S.
Mark the Evangelist. Of S. Philip and Jacob the Apostles. Of the Ascension of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist. Of S. Peter the
Apostle. Of S. James the Apost. Of S. Bartholomew the Apostle. Of S. Matthew
the Apostle. Of S. Michael the Archangel. Of S. Luke the Evangelist. Of S.
Simon and Jude the Apostles. Of All Saints. Of S. Andrew the Ap. Of S. Thomas
the Ap. Of the Nativity of our Lord. Of S. Stephen the Mart. Of S. John the
Evang. Of the holy Innocents. Monday and Tuesday in Easter week. Monday and
Tuesday in Whitsonweek.


Note that in Bissextile or Leap-year, when the sixth of the Calends of March
are twice repeated, under the letter F. the Feast of S. Matthias is to be kept
on the latter of the two, according to the old verses, Bissextum sextae Martis
tenuere Calendae
Posteriore die celebrantur Festa Mathiae.


A CALCULATION OF All the moveable Feasts of the CHURCH of ENGLAND during 50
Years.
An Almanac for 50. years.
The year of our Lord The Golden Number The Epact The Dominical Letter Sundays
after the Epiphany Septuagesima Sunday Shrovetuesday 1657 5 25 d 2 Jan. 25
Febr. 10 1658 6 6 c 4 Febr. 7 23 1659 7 17 b 3 Jan. 30 15 1660 8 28 A g 6 Feb.
19 Mar. 7 1661 9 9 f 4 10 Febr. 26 1662 10 20 e 2 Jan. 26 11 1663 11 1 d 5
Febr. 15 Mar. 3 1664 12 12 c b 4 7 Febr. 23 1665 13 23 A 2 Jan. 22 7 1666 14 4
g 5 Febr. 11 27 1667 15 15 f 3 3 19 1668 16 26 e d 1 Jan. 19 4 1669 17 7 c 4
Febr. 7 23 1670 18 18 b 3 Jan. 30 15 1671 19 29 A 6 Febr. 19 Mar. 7 1672 1 11 g
f 4 4 Febr. 20 1673 2 22 e 2 Jan. 26 11 1674 3 3 d 5 Febr. 15 Mar. 3 1675 4 14
c 3 Jan. 31 Febr. 16 1676 5 25 b A 2 23 8 1677 6 6 g 5 Febr. 11 27 1678 7 17 f
2 Jan. 27 12 1679 8 28 e 5 Febr. 16 Mar. 4 1680 9 9 d c 4 8 Febr. 24 1681 10 20
b 3 Jan. 30 15 1682 11 1 A 5 Febr. 12 28 1683 12 12 g 4 4 20 1684 13 23 f e 2
Jan. 27 12 1685 14 4 d 5 Febr. 15 Mar. 3 1686 15 15 c 3 Jan. 31 Febr. 16 1687
16 26 b 2 23 8 An Almanac for 50. years.
The year of our Lord Easter day Rogation Sunday Ascension day Trinity Sunday
Sundays after Trinity Advent Sunday 1657 Mar. 29 May 3 7 May 24 26 Nov. 29 1658
April 11 16 20 June 6 24 28 1659 3 8 12 May 29 25 27 1660 22 27 31 June 17 23
Dec. 2 1661 14 19 23 9 24 1 1662 Mar. 30 4 8 May 25 26 Nov. 30 1663 April 19 24
28 June 14 23 29 1664 10 15 19 5 24 27 1665 Mar. 26 April 30 4 May 21 27 Dec. 3
1666 April 15 May 20 24 June 10 24 2 1667 7 12 16 2 25 1 1668 Mar. 22 April 26
April 30 May 17 27 Nov. 29 1669 April 11 May 16 May 20 June 6 24 28 1670 3 8 12
May 29 25 27 1671 23 28 June 1 June 18 27 Dec. 3 1672 7 12 May 16 2 25 1 1673
Mar. 30 4 8 May 25 26 Nov. 30 1674 April 19 24 28 June 14 23 29 1675 4 9 13 May
30 25 28 1676 Mar. 26 April 30 4 21 27 Dec. 3 1677 April 15 May 20 24 June 10
24 2 1678 Mar. 31 5 9 May 26 26 1 1679 April 20 25 29 June 15 23 Nov. 30 1680
11 16 20 6 24 28 1681 3 8 12 May 29 25 27 1682 16 21 25 June 11 24 Dec. 3 1683
8 13 17 3 25 2 1684 Mar. 30 4 8 May 25 26 Nov. 30 1685 April 19 24 28 June 14
23 29 1686 4 9 13 May 30 25 28 1687 Mar. 27 1 5 22 26 27 An Almanac for 50.
years.
The year of our Lord The Golden Number The Epact The Dominical Letter Sundays
after the Epiphany Septuagesima Sunday Shrovetuesday 1688 17 7 A g 5 Feb. 12
Febr. 27 1689 18 18 f 2 Jan. 27 12 1690 19 29 e 5 Feb. 16 Mar. 4 1691 1 11 d 4
8 Febr. 24 1692 2 22 c b 2 Jan. 24 9 1693 3 3 A 5 Febr. 12 28 1694 4 14 g 4 4
20 1695 5 25 f 1 Jan. 20 5 1696 6 6 e d 4 Febr. 9 25 1697 7 17 c 3 Jan. 31 16
School 8 28 b 6 Febr. 20 Mar. 8 1699 9 9 A 4 5 Febr. 21 1700 10 20 g f 3 Jan. 28
13 1701 11 1 e 5 Febr. 16 Mar. 4 1702 12 12 d 3 1 Febr. 17 1703 13 23 c 2 Jan.
24 9 1704 14 4 b A 5 Febr. 13 28 1705 15 15 g 4 4 20 1706 16 26 f 1 Jan. 20 5
An Almanac for 50. years.
The year of our Lord Easter day Rogation Sunday Ascension day Trinity Sunday
Sundays after Trinity Advent Sunday 1688 April 15 May 20 May 24 June 10 24 Dec.
2 1689 Mar. 31 5 9 May 26 26 1 1690 April 20 25 29 June 15 23 Nov. 30 1691 12
17 21 7 24 29 1692 Mar. 27 1 5 May 22 26 27 1693 April 16 21 25 June 11 24 Dec.
3 1694 8 13 17 3 25 2 1695 Mar. 24 April 28 2 May 19 27 1 1696 April 12 May 17
21 June 7 24 Nov. 29 1697 4 9 13 May 30 25 28 School 24 29 June 2 June 19 23 27
1699 9 14 May 18 4 25 Dec. 3 1700 Mar. 31 5 9 May 26 26 1 1701 April 20 25 29
June 15 23 Nov. 30 1702 5 10 14 May 31 25 29 1703 Mar. 28 2 6 23 26 28 1704
April 16 21 25 June 11 24 Dec. 3 1705 8 13 17 3 25 2 1706 Mar. 24 April 28 May
2 May 19 27 1

A Table To find Easter for ever.
The Golden Number. A B C D E F G 1 April 9. 10 11 12 6 7 8 2 Mar. 26. 27 28 29
30 31 April 1 3 April 16. 17 18 19 20 14 15 4 April 9. 3 4 5 6 7 8 5 Mar. 26.
27 28 29 23 24 15 6 April 16. 17 11 12 13 14 15 7 April 2. 3 4 5 6 Mar. 31
April 1 8 April 23. 24 25 19 20 21 22 9 April 9. 10 11 12 13 14 8 10 April 2. 3
Mar. 28 29 30 31 April 1 11 April 16. 17 18 19 20 21 22 12 April 9. 10 11 5 6 7
8 13 Mar. 26. 27 28 29 30 31 25 14 April 16. 17 18 19 13 14 15 15 April 2. 3 4
5 6 7 8 16 Mar. 26. 27 28 22 23 24 25 17 April 16. 10 11 12 13 14 15 18 April
2. 3 4 5 Mar. 30 31 April 1 19 April 23. 24 18 19 20 21 22

When you have found the Sunday letter for that year on which you require
Easter, guide your eye downward from it, till you come over against that number
which is Prime for that year, and that number which is directly under the
Dominical and collateral to the Prime shows the time of Easter. But note that
the name of the Month is set at the left hand, or else just with the Figure,
and follows not as in other Tables by descent but collaterally.

A Table of what is contained in this Book.
A Preface. The Church Calendar; with a Table of Lessons for every day of the
year. An advertisement to the Reader touching the lengthening or shortning of
the Offices. Morning Prayer throughout the year. Evening Prayer throughout the
year. Additionals to the former Offices. viz. A prayer before Sermon. A prayer
after Sermon. A prayer when a sick person desires to be publicly prayed for. A
prayer for seasonable weather. A prayer on the same occasion, or in the time of
any other judgment. A shorter form of Morning prayer for a family. A short form
of Evening prayer for a family. Varieties to be added upon the great Festivals
or Solemnities of the year, viz. Upon Christmas day. Good Friday. Easter day.
Ascension day. Whitsunday. Trinity Sunday.
A Collect to be used upon any of the Festivals or commemoration of the
Apostles. * Note that the Collect for Christmas day may be used upon the
Annunciation. An Office or Order for administration of the holy Sacrament of
the Lords Supper. A form of administration of the Holy Sacrament of Baptism.
Devotions and proper offices for Women, viz. An Office for safe childbirth. An
Office of public Thanksgiving for safe childbirth, or deliverance from any
great sickness, calamity, or fear. A prayer to be said immediately after the
woman's delivery: to be said by the Minister or any other attendant. A prayer
for the new born child. A prayer to be said by a new married wife. A prayer for
a fruitful womb. A prayer to be said by an afflicted wife in behalf of a
vicious husband. A prayer of thanksgiving if she have escaped any violence or
danger from him. A mothers prayer for her children. The Widows prayer. A prayer
to be used by the widow if she have children of both sexes. The Offices or
Forms of Prayer and Devotion for the miserable and afflicted, viz. An Office to
be said in the days of persecution of a Church by Sacrilegious or violent
persons. A prayer for an Army, or Navy in time of War. An Office for Prisoners.
for Prisoners in General. of Debt. of Crime. condemned to death or War, or
Oppression.
An Office or form of prayer for Sailers or Mariners. A form of prayer and
blessing to be used over him that in the beginning of a journey desires the
prayers of the Minister of the Church. A prayer in behalf of Fools or
Changelings. A prayer for Madmen. A prayer in behalf of Heretics and seduced
persons. *Note that these three last prayers are also to be used upon Good
Friday. An Office at the Visitation of the sick. An Office for Burial of the
dead. A form of d^^otion to be used and said in the days of sorrow and
affliction, of a family or private person. A private prayer to be said by or
for a person apt to be afflicted with fear of death. Gods anger. the uncertain
state of his soul.
A form of Thanksgiving, after a plentiful harvest. after recovery from a a
plague or other sickness. after a Victory, or the prosperous ending of a War.
The Great Penitential Letanies. The Psalter or Psalms of David after the Kings
Translations, with Arguments newly fitted to the design and sense of every
Psalm.
An Advertisement to them that shall use these PRAYERS.
BEcause no prayers are the more pleasing to God for being long, and they are
oftentimes displeasing even to good men if they be very long; and yet on the
other side, if the devotion be long it is the better, and if that be lasting,
it ought to be supplied with materials, like gummes to the Altar of incense,
and fuel for the holy fires: he that collected these devotions did design to
serve the advantages both of length and shortness, that the most devout may be
fitted, and the most secular and employed may not be wearied.

1. Therefore, although every thing is set down at length, that the trouble of
references and turnings back might be avoided, and therefore seem longer then
they are; and the Hymns are sometimes double, that the variety might be more
apt to please and to instruct, and the Offices are made full, that upon the
more solemn days when people come with a greater and more active devotion and
greater leisure, their time and their piety might be employed; yet on other
days there is but one Lesson appointed, and one Hymn to follow it.

2. The prayers are divided into smaller portions, that with ease any of them
may be omitted by persons whose occasions force them from their attendance on
longer Offices; besides that there are two forms of Morning and Evening Prayer,
the one shorter, the other longer.

3. In the beginning of Morning and Evening Prayer, some of the devotions which
are set down are desired and intended to be used but seldom; not only to
avoid tediousness, but for other reasons very obvious, that the Ministers more
solemn power and office might not be less regarded, by being daily (and
consequently very often without just dispositions) offered: I mean it
concerning the form of Absolution. The Confession may be shortened as there is
cause, by making use only of some of the sections, and leaving out the other.

4. If upon Communion days, the morning Prayer and the Communion Office be not
read at one time, but the morning Prayer be read at seven or eight of the clock
in the morning; and the Communion office at the time of celebration; or if it
be convenient that they be both together, if then the Sermon be in the
afternoon, the length will be very tolerable.

5. These Prayers being intended only as a charitable ministry to them who
are not permitted to use those which were appointed formerly, there is no
necessity upon any one, and he may use as much or as little as he please, and
therefore no man will have cause to complain of length or shortness.

For the Offices themselves, I pray God bless them to all those ends whither
they are designed, and to which in their own nature they can minister: And as I
humbly recommend them to Gods blessing, so I do submit them to the judgment
of my afflicted Mother the Church of England, and particularly to the censure
of my spiritual Superiors: and I desire that these Prayers may no longer be
used in any public place, then my Lds the Bps upon prudent enquiries and grave
considerations shall perceive them apt to minister to Gods glory, and useful to
the present or future necessities of the Sons and Daughters of the Church of
England.

MORNING PRAYER, Throughout the YEAR.
Say one or more of these Sentences.

HE that covers his sins shall not prosper: but he that confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy. Prove. 28. 13.

To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him. Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God to walk in
his laws which he has set before us by his servants the prophets. Dan. 9. 10.

If we say that we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness 1 John 1. 8, 9.

The sacrifices of God, are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O
God thou will not despise. ^sal. 51. 17.

Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, and
make you a new heart, and a new spirit. For why will ye die? I have no pleasure
in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God. Wherefore turn your selves
and live ye. Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32.

After which say,

Draw nigh therefore unto God, and he will draw nigh unto you. Cleanse your
hands and purify your hearts. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and
make a confession of your sins unto him, with a hearty sorrow and a humble
hope, begging for pardon at the throne of Grace.

Let us pray.

The Confession.
I.
O Almighty God, Great Lord of Heaven and Earth, we miserable sinners with fear
and shame cast our selves down before thee, humbly confessing our manifold
sins and unsufferable wickednesses, by which we have deserved thy wrath, and
that we should be separated from the sweetest comforts of thy presence for ever.

II.
We confess O Great God we have sinned against thee by knowledge and by
ignorance, by folly and by surprise, by word and deed, by anger and desires, by
night and by day, in private and in public, by the lusts of the flesh, and the
vanity and pride of our spirits: our sins of omission are infinite, and the
sins of our tongue cannot be numbered; O God thy words and laws are holy, and
thy judgments are terrible; but we have broken all thy righteous laws and
commandments, and we have great cause to be afraid of thy severest judgments,
and where shall we appear, when thou art angry with us?

III.
But thou shall answer for us, O Lord our God: Thou art our Judge, but thou art
our Redeemer; we have sinned, but thou O Blessed Jesus art our Advocate. Have
mercy upon us; have mercy upon us most miserable sinners; Enter not into
judgment with us least we die, let not thine anger arise least we be consumed;
but spare us gracious Lord, spare thy servants whom thou have redeemed with thy
most precious blood; O reserve not evil in store for us against the day of
vengeance, but show thy goodness in us, and let thy mercies be magnified upon
us; deliver us O Lord from the power of sin; and preserve us from the
punishments of it through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Deprecation to be used upon solemn days or at the discretion of him that
ministers.
I.
O Lord our God whose power is infinite, whose glory is supreme, whose mercy
is without measure, whose goodness is unspeakeable, despise not thy returning
servants who earnestly beg for pardon and to be reconciled to thee: sanctify O
God our bodies and souls, search out our spirits, and cast out all iniquity
from within us; all weak principles and false arguings, every impure lust and
filthy desire, all pride and envy, all hypocrisy and lying, all inordinate
love of this world, and base Covetousness; all hardness of heart, and
unrelenting dispositions, all peevishness and hasty anger, all mindfulnesse of
injuries and revengfulnesse, all blasphemy and irreligion; and every motion of
soul and body which can withdraw us from thee, and is against thy will and
commandment.

II.
Gracious Father give us perfect pardon for what is past, and a perfect
repentance of all our evils, that for the time to come we may with pure
spirits, with broken and contrite hearts, with sanctified lips and holy desires
serve thee religiously, walk humbly with our God, converse justly and
charitably with men, and possess our souls in patience and holiness, and our
bodies in sanctification and honor through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The prayer of absolution to be said by the Minister alone according to his
piety and discretion when he sees cause, [not frequently.
OUr Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus, the great shepherd and Bishop of our
souls, that lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world, who promised
paradise to the repenting theife, and gave pardon to the woman taken in
adultery, he pardon and forgive all your sins known and unknown.

***O Blessed Jesus, in whatsoever thy servants as men bearing flesh about
them, and inhabiting this world, or deceived by the Devil, have sinned, whether
in word or deed, whether in thought or desire, whether by omission or
commission, let it be forgiven unto them by thy word and by thy spirit; and for
ever preserve thy servants from sinning against thee, and from suffering thine
eternal anger, for thy promise sake, and for thy glorious Names sake, O Blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus. Amen.

Then devoutly and distinctly say the Lords Prayer.

Our Father which art in heaven * Hallowed be thy Name * Thy Kingdom come *
Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven * Give us this day our daily bread
* And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us *
And lead us not into temptation * But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Doxology.
GLory be to the Father of mercies, the Father of Men and Angels, the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Glory be to the most holy and eternal son of God, the Blessed Savior and
Redeemer of the World; the Advocate of sinners, the Prince of Peace, the Head
of the Church, and the mighty Deliverer of all them that call upon him.

Glory be to the holy and Eternal spirit of God, the Holy Ghost the comforter,
the sanctifying and life-giving Spirit.

All Glory and thanks, all honor and power, all love and obedience, be to the
Blessed and undivided Trinity, one God Eternal.

The Heavens declare thy glory: the Earth confesses thy providence: the sea
manifests thy power; and every spirit, and every understanding creature
celebrates thy greatness for ever end ever * All glory and majesty, all
praises and dominion be unto thee O God, Father Son and Holy Ghost for ever and
ever. Amen.

Then arising from their knees let the Psalter be read in order as shall be
judged convenient: that is to say: The ordinary portions for every day, Morning
and Evening prayers and Psalms particularly chosen for special days of
festivity, or of Humiliation, respectively.

After the Psalms, ending with, [Glory be to the Father etc. Read a chapter in
the old Testament. The chapter out of the old Testament is to be read on
Sundaies and Festivals; and not omitted without great occasion: but on ordinary
days, it may suffice after the Psalms immediately to read the lesson out of
the new Testament.

After which recite this Hymn to the honor of God; saying the verses
interchangeably.

* Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous: for praise is comely for the Upright.

The word of the Lord is true, and all his works are faithful.

* He loves righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness
of the Lord.

By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth.

* He gathers the waters of the Sea together as an heap: he lays up the
depth in storehouses.

Let all the earth fear the Lord: let all the inhabitants of the world stand in
awe of him.

* Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: upon them that hope
in his mercy.

To deliver their souls from death: and to keep them alive in the time of
famine.

* Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out
of all.

Evil shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous shall be
desolate.

* Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with Men
that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties:

Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning: for in thee do I
trust: cause me to know the way wherein I should walk: for I lift up my soul
unto thee.

* Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God; thy spirit is good: lead me
into the Land of uprightness.

Gather not my soul with sinners: nor my life with bloody men.

* The poor man cried, and the Lord heard him; and saved him out of all his
troubles.

O taste and see that the Lord is good: blessed is the man that trusts in him.

* O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee; which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of
Men.

Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of Man, Thou
shall keep them secretly in a pavillion, from the strife of tongues.

* O love the Lord all ye his Saints: for the Lord preserves the faithful,
and plentifully rewards the proud doer.

Be of good courage and he shall strengthen your heart, all you that hope in
the Lord. Glory be to the Father etc.

Or this.

* SIng praises unto God, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing
praises. For God is the King of all the Earth: sing ye praises with
understanding.

God reigns over the Nations: God sits upon the throne of his holiness.

* He is our refuge and strength: a very present help in trouble.

Many O Lord our God are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and thy
thoughts which are toward us: They cannot be reckoned in order.

* For God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the Earth.

Thou did cleave the fountain and the flood; thou driest up mighty rivers.

* The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou have prepared the light and
the Sun.

Thou have set all the borders of the Earth, thou have made Summer and Winter.

* Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: worship the Lord in the
beauty of Holiness.

The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory thundreth, the Lord
is upon many waters.

* The voice of the Lord is powerful: the voice of the Lord is full of Majesty.

The voice of the Lord makes the hindes to calve, and discovers the forests:
and in his temple does every man speak of his glory.

* Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous: and shout for joy all ye that
are upright in Heart.

For this God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide unto death.
Glory be to the Father. etc.

Then read a lesson out of one of the four Gospells, or the Acts of the Holy
Apostles: in order, or by choice upon extraordinary occasions.

After which recite one of these following Psalms.

* THe mighty God even the Lord has spoken, and called the earth from the
rising of the sun unto the going down thereof.

Out of Sion, the perfection of beauty, God has shined.

* Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before
him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him.

He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the Earth that he may Judge
his people.

* And the heavens shall declare his righteousness, for God is Judge himself.

His Name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long as the
Sun: and men shall be blessed in him: all Nations shall call him blessed.

* Blessed be the Lord God the God of Israel who only does wondrous things.

And blessed be his Glorious Name for ever: and let the whole Earth be filled
with his glory. Amen. Amen. Glory be to the Father etc. As it was in the
beginning etc.

Or this, to be said especially on Communion days.

Psalm. 23. * THe Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want.

He makes me to lie down in Green pasture, he leads me beside the still
waters.

*He restores my soul: he leads me in the paths of righteousness, for his
Names sake.

Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil, for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

* Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies, thou
anointest my head with oil, my cup runs over.

Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I
will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. Glory be to the Father etc.

Then say the Apostles Creed [or the Nicene creed if it be a great festival of
the Church.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and earth * And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord * which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of
the Virgin Mary * suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried * He descended into hell * The third day he rose again from the dead *
He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty * From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the Dead.

* I believe in the holy Ghost * The holy Catholic Church the communion of
Saints * the forgiveness of sins * the resurrection of the body * and the life
everlasting. Amen.

The Nicene Creed to be said upon the great Solemnities of the year.

I Believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and earth, and of
all things visible and invisible: and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God, begotten of his Father before all worlds, God of God,
Light of light, very God of very God begotten, not made, being of one substance
with the Father, by whom al things were made: who for us men and for our
salvation came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost of the
virgin Mary, and was made man, and was crucified also for us under Pontius
Pilate. He suffered, and was buried, and the third day he rose again according
to the Scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of
the Father. And he shall come again with glory to judge both the quick and the
dead: whose kingdom shall have no end. And I believe in the holy Ghost, the
Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with
the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified, whospake by the
Prophets. And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge
one Baptism for the remission of sins. And I look for the resurrection of the
Dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen.

After the Creed.

Minister.

The Lord be with you.

People.

And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

OUr Father which art in heaven * hallowed be thy Name * Thy Kingdom come *
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven * Give us this day our daily bread
* And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us *
And lead us not into temptation * But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

I.
O Great King of heaven and earth, the Lord and patron of all ages, receive thy
servants approaching to the throne of grace in the Name of Jesus Christ; give
unto every one of us what is best for us, cast out all evil from within us,
work in us a fullness of holiness, of wisdom and spiritual understanding,
that we increasing in the knowledge of God may be fruitful in every Good work
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The collect for the morning.

II.
O Almighty Father great God of all the world, who dwell in the light to
which no man can approach, in thy presence there is no night in the light of
thy countenance there is perpetual day: We thy servants whom thou have
preserved this night, who bless and glorify thee this day, who live by thy
power, who desire to walk by thy laws, to be blessed by thy providence, to be
defended by thy Almighty hand, humbly pray unto thee that this day, and all the
days of our lives may be holy and peaceable; send thy holy spirit the spirit
of peace, to be the guide of our way, the guard of our souls and bodies.
Grant that all the chances and accidents of this day may be healthful to our
bodies, and profitable to our souls; and that we may spend the remaining
portion of our life in blessing and peace and holiness. Make thou the latter
end of our days to be Christian, without shame and without torment; and when
we shall appear before thy dreadful seat of Judgment grant that we may not
be confounded, but may stand upright in the congregation of the Saints,
acquitted by the death of Christ, justified by his resurrection, pardoned by
his sentence, saved by his mercy, that we may rejoice in his salvation, and
sing thy praises for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer against temptations. III.
O God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thy Name is great, thy essence is
infinite, thy goodness is eternal, and thy power has no limit; thou art the
God and Lord of all, Blessed for evermore; Look down in mercy and compassion
from thy dwelling, hear our prayers and supplications, and deliver us from all
temptations of the world, the flesh, and the Devil. Take not thy grace from
us, let us never want thy help in our needs, nor thy comfort in the day of our
danger and calamity. Never try us beyond our strengths, nor afflict us beyond
our Patience, nor smite us but with a Fathers rod * We have no strengths of our
own, thou art our confidence, our rock and our strong salvation. Save us O
God, from the miseries of this world, and never let us suffer the intolerable
calamities of the next. Rescue us from the evils we have done, and preserve us
from the evils we have deserved, that we living before thee with clean hearts,
and undefiled bodies, and sanctified spirits, may at the day of Judgment be
presented pure and spotless by the blood of the lamb, that we may sing
eternal. Allelujahs in heavenly places to the honor of God our Savior who
has redeemed our souls from death, our eyes from tears, and our feet from
falling. Grant this in the richness of thy mercy through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Then shall be added upon all Sundaies and Festivals of the year this
following prayer: and upon other days as opportunity is to be had: all or
some portions.

The prayers for kings etc. and the state Ecclesiastical are never to be
omitted: but on ordinary days it may suffice to recite them omitting so much
of either as is included in the Columns. [*]

The prayer of intercession, for all states of Men and Women in the Catholic
Church. I.
SAve us defend and keep us in thy fear and love O thou God of mercy and grace:
Give unto us the light of thy countenance, pardon of our sins, health of our
body, sanctification of our spirits, peace from heaven, and salvation of our
souls in the day of our Lord Jesus. Amen.

For the Catholic Church. II.
HEar our prayers for thy holy Church Catholic which thou have redeemed with
thy blood, sealed and sanctified with thy spirit: Extirpate all heresies and
false doctrines, unite all her divisions, let her be prosperous under thy
favor, and the protection of Kings and Princes and the whole secular arm:
that she may daily celebrate thy Name, with strict obedience, and pure
spiritual sacrifices, that she may be accepted and prevail in her daily and
nightly prayers, and that the gates of hell may never prevail against her: let
her live in the spirit, and reign in thy glory through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

For the supreme power. III.
WE pray unto thee O great King of Heaven and earth for all Christian Kings,
Princes, Governors and states: Crown them with justice and peace, and with
the love of God, and the love of their people [*] let holiness be the ornament
of their heads; invest them with the armor of righteousness, and let the
anointing from above make them Sacred and venerable, wise and holy [*] that
being servants of the King of Kings, friends of religion, Ministers of justice,
and patrons of the poor, they may at last inherit a portion in the Kingdom of
our Lord Jesus.

For the state Ecclesiastical. IV.
REmember all them that do the Lords work in the ministry and conduct of
souls. Give them great gifts and great holiness [*] that wisely and
charitably, diligently and zealously, prudently and acceptably, they may be
guides to the blind, comforters to the sad and weary, that they may strengthen
the weak, and confirm the strong, separate the vile from the precious, boldly
rebuke sin, patiently suffer for the truth, and be exemplary in their lives
[*] that in all their actions and sermons, in their discipline and
ministrations, they may advance the good of souls, and the honor of our Lord
Jesus. Amen.

For all orders and states of men, etc. V.
O Blessed God who art rich in mercy and compassion, take care of all states
of Men and Women in the Christian Church, the Nobility and Gentry, Magistrates
and Judges, Advocates and Physicians, Merchants and Artificers, Husbandmen and
Tradesmen, the Laborers and the Hirelings: give them grace in their several
callings to glorify thee, and to keep a good conscience both toward God and
toward Man, that they may find eternal comfort in the glorious day of our Lord
Jesus.

For the miserable and afflicted. VI.
In mercy remember the poor and needy, the widows and the Fatherless, the
strangers and the friendlesse, the oppressed and the greived, the Decrepit and
the sickly, the young men and the tempted, the weak of heart and the weak in
body, them that languish and them that are dying; Relieve their necessities,
comfort their sorrows, sanctify their calamities, strengthen their
weaknesses, and suffer not the Devil to prevail over them in the days of
their sorrow and disadvantage: and in thy due time deliver them from their sad
bondage into thy glorious liberty of the sons of God through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

VII.
BE a guide to the travelers, a star and a port to Mariners, the comfort and
strength of Miners and Gallislaves. Pity good God, all Gentlemen that are
fallen into poverty and sad misfortunes, strengthen and deliver all women that
are in sharp and dangerous labor, all them that roar and groan with
intolerable pains and noisome diseases: Have mercy and compassion upon all
that are afflicted with illusion of the night and frightfull apparitions, that
are haunted or possessed with evil spirits, or troubled with despairing or
amazed consciences, with the stone and with the gout, with violent colics and
grievous ulcers: give them pity and give them patience, a speedy deliverance
from their calamity, and a sanctified use of the rod of God through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

VIII.
WE pray unto thee O Blessed Father in behalf of all that are in banishment
and captivity, in fetters or hard services, in want or extreme poverty, in
great fear or in any great passion. Keep them from sinning against thee, and
from being swallowed by too great a sorrow. Let the accidents of their lives be
under the command of reason, and of thy holy spirit, and end in holiness and
comfort, in peace and joys eternal, through the mercies of our God in our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

For the preservation from danger and evil. IX.
KEep us O God from famine and pestilence, from Earthquakes and inundations,
from fire and sword, from invasion by foreign enemies and from civil wars,
from false religion and from discountenancing the true: let every Christian
soul find pity at the throne of grace: let all our errors and ignorances find
pardon by Christ, and remedy by the holy spirit of Christ; hear all our
prayers, relieve all our necessities, sanctify all the events of thy
providence, and the changes of our life, that we may for ever love and for ever
fear thee, and all things may work together for our Good unto thy glory
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The blessing.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communication
of the holy spirit of God be with us, and with all our Relatives, and with all
the servants of God this day and for evermore. Amen.

The end of Morning Prayer.
EVENING PRAYER, Throughout the YEAR.
EVENING PRAYER, Throughout the YEAR.
Say one or more of these Sentences.

O Lord the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, because
they have for saken the Lord, the fountain of living waters.

O Lord though our iniquities testify against us, have mercy upon us for thy
names sake; for our backslidings are many, we have sinned against thee.

Seek the Lord while he may be found: call upon him when he is near.

There is no peace says my God to the wicked.

Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
remnant of the transgression of his heritage? he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy.

Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God for,
he will abundantly pardon.

Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabits eternity, whose name is holy,
I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and
humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to renew the heart of
them that are contrite.

After which add this short exhortation.

I Beseech you that are present to join with me in a humble confession of sins
to Almighty God, casting your selves down with all humility before the throne
of Grace.

The Confession.
I.
ALmighty God powerful and merciful, thou art a jealous God against
persevering sinners, but a gracious father to the penitent, let thy merciful
ears be opened to the petitions of thy servants who with sorrow and shame
confess their sins unto thee.

II.
We have loved the world, not thee: we have obeyed the desires of our own
hearts, not thy holy laws and Commandments: we have often left our duty
undone, but cease not to please our senses and to feed greedily upon vanity:
thou have commanded us to love our brethren, and instead of loving them we have
slandered and reproached, injured and tempted them, envied their good, and
rejoiced in their calamity.

III.
O Blessed God we are ashamed when we rememberd our own follies, our violent
passions, our peevishness and pride, our vain thoughts and unprofitable
words, our uncharitable and useless conversation: we spend our days in
idleness and folly, our nights in the images and causes of death; and though
our sins are so many that we cannot number them, yet we so little apprehend our
own dangers that we neither leave them utterly nor heartily deplore them.

IV.
But O God thou God of pity and compassion have mercy upon us: For thou art our
Father, merciful and gracious, and thou have revealed to mankind an infinite
mercy in Jesus Christ. For his sake be pleased to give us repentance, and to
give us pardon, and grant that our souls being washed in the blood of the holy
Lamb and the Baptism of repentance, we may live a gracious, a holy and a
blessed life, in all godliness and honesty, and sobriety, and may die in the
love of God, in the charity of our neighbors, in the Communion of the Church
and in a sure and certain hope of life eternal, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The prayer of Absolution to be said by the Minister alone according to his
piety and discretion when he sees cause.

OUr Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus the great Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls, that lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, who promised
Paradise to the repenting theife, and gave pardon to the woman taken in
adultery, he pardon and forgive all your sins known and unknown.*** O Blessed
Jesus in whatsoever thy servants as men bearing flesh about them, and
inhabiting this world, or deceived by the Devil, have sinned whether in word
or deed, whether in thought or desire, whether by omission or commission, let
it be forgiven unto them by thy word and by thy spirit; and for ever preserve
thy servants from sinning against thee, and from suffering thine eternal
anger, for thy promise sake, and for thy glorious Names sake, O Blessed Lord
and Savior Jesus. Amen.

Then devoutly and distinctly say the Lords Prayer.

OUr Father which art in heaven *Hallowed be thy Name * Thy Kingdom come * Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven * Give us this day our daily bread*
And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us* And
lead us not into temptation* But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the Glory, for ever. Amen.

The Doxology.
GLory be to the Father of mercies, the Father of Men and Angels, the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Glory be to the most holy and eternal son of God, the Blessed Savior and
Redeemer of the World; the Advocate of sinners, the Prince of Peace, the Head
of the Church, and the mighty Deliverer of all them that call upon him.

Glory be to the holy and Eternal spirit of God, the Holy Ghost the comforter,
the sanctifying and life-giving Spirit.

All Glory and thanks, all honor and power, all love and obedience, be to the
Blessed and undivided Trinity, one God Eternal.

The Heavens declare thy glory: the Earth confesses thy providence: the sea
manifests thy power; and every spirit, and every understanding creature
celebrates thy greatness for ever and ever* All glory and majesty, all praises
and dominion be unto thee O God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for ever and ever.
Amen.

Then arising from their knees let the Psalme's be said in order, unless some
extraordinary occasion do intervene: in which case let Psalms be selected
according to the occasion, or as is afterward described, concluding with,
Glory be to the Father. etc.

Then read upon all Sundaies and Festivals of the year a chapter in the old
Testament; either in order or by choice.

After the lesson recite this Hymn.

* I Will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember the wonders
of old: I will meditate of allthy works, and talk of thy doings.

Thy way O God is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God?

* Thou art the God that do wonders, thou have declared thy strength among
the people.

Thou even thou art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when thou art
angry.

* For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full
of mixture, and he powers out of the same: but the dregs thereof all the
wicked of the earth shall wring them out and drink them.

But I will declare for ever: I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.

* For thou art my hope O Lord God: thou art my trust from my youth.

By thee have I been holden up from the womb: thou art he that took me out of
my Mothers bowels, my praise shall be continually of thee.

* For the Lord is a sun and a shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: and
no good thing will he withhold from them that live a godly life.

O Lord of Hosts; Blessed is the Man that puts his trust in thee. Glory be
to the Father etc.

Or this.

* GOd is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints: and to be had in
reverence of all them that are about him.

Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise thou stillest
them.

* The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world, and the
fullness thereof, thou have founded them.

Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne, mercy and truth shall
go before thy face.

* For lo thine enemies O Lord, lo thine enemies shall perish: all the
workers of iniquity shall be scattered.

The righteous shall flourish like a Palm tree: he shall grow like a cedar in
Lebanon.

* Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts
of our God.

They shall still bring forth fruit in their old age: they shall be fat and
flourishing.

To show that the Lord is upright: he is our rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him. Glory be to the Father. etc.

Then read a lesson out of the Epistle of S. Paul, or any of the Canonical
Epistles; in order or selected upon special occasions.

After the lesson, say this Psalm.

* GIve ear O Lord unto my prayer: and attend to the voice of my supplications.

Turn us O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to cease.

* For thou Lord art good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to all
them that call upon thee.

O Remember not against us former iniquities, let thy tender mercies speedily
prevent us.

* Help us O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: deliver us and
purge away our sins for thy names sake.

Teach us thy way O God, and we will walk in thy truth: unite our hearts to
fear thy Name.

* O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice and be glad all our
days.

So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever: we
will show forth thy praise from generation to generation.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Or this.

* IN thee O Lord do I put my trust, let me never be ashamed: deliver me in
thy righteousness.

Into thy hand I commend my spirit; thou have redeemed me O Lord God of truth.

* Make thy face to shine upon thy servants: save us for thy mercies sake.

For great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee:
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men.

* The Angel of the Lord encamped round about them that fear him, and
delivers them.

Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou shall
compass me about with songs of deliverance.

* Thou make darkness and it is night, wherein all the beasts of the forest
do creep forth.

O Lord how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the
earth is full of thy riches.

* The Glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his
works.

He appointed the moon for certain seasons; and the sun knows his going
down.

* I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live. I will sing praise unto my God
while I have my being: my meditation of him shall be sweet, I will rejoice in
the Lord.

I will both lay me down in peace and sleep: for thou Lord make me dwell in
safety.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Or else say 103. Psalm, or the 91. or the 121.

Then shall follow the Apostles Creed.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and earth * And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord * which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of
the Virgin Mary * suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried * He descended into hell * The third day he rose again from the dead *
He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty * From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the Dead.

* I believe in the holy Ghost * The holy Catholic Church, the communion of
Saints * the forgiveness of sins * the resurrection of the body * and the life
everlasting. Amen.

Minister.

The Lord be with you.

People.

And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

Our Father which art in heaven * Hallowed be thy Name * Thy Kingdom come *
Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven * Give us this day our daily bread
* And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us *
And lead us not into temptation * But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Then follows the first collect as at Morning Prayer.

I.
O Great King of heaven and earth, the Lord and patron of all ages, receive thy
servants approaching to the throne of Grace in the Name of Jesus Christ. Give
unto every one of us what is best for us, cast out all evil from within us,
work in us a fullness of holiness, of wisdom and spiritual understanding,
that we increasing in the knowledge of God may be fruitful in every Good work
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.

SAve us, defend and keep us in thy fear and love O thou God of mercy and
grace. Give unto us the light of thy countenance; pardon of our sins, health of
body, sanctification of our spirits, peace from heaven, and salvation of our
souls in the day of our Lord Jesus. Amen.

I. For repentance and a Holy life.
ALmighty God the fountain of holiness and felicity who by thy word and by
thy spirit do conduct all thy servants in the ways of peace and sanctity,
inviting them by promises, and winning them by love, endearing them by
necessities, and obliging them by the perpetual testimonies of thy loving
kindness, grant unto us so truly to repent us of our sins, so carefully to
reform our errors, so diligently to watch over all our actions, so
industriously to do all our duty, that we may never transgress thy Holy laws
willingly; but that it may be the work of our lives to obey thee, the joy of
our souls to please thee, the satisfaction of all our hopes, and the
perfection of our desires to live with thee in the holiness of thy Kingdom of
grace and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

II. For Peace.
O Almighty and most gracious Father who art the fountain of peace, and the
Father of Unions, we pray unto thee for peace, for love, and for thy salvation,
Let a holy peace for ever dwell in our consciences. Let peace and holiness,
and Gods blessing for ever adorn, support and enlarge this Or Parish or Church
or Commonwealth.
family. Let there be peace and Union of minds in all Christian assemblies, one
heart, and one voice, the same faith and an eternal charity. Make wars to
cease in all the world, that the peace and the design of the Gospel may be
advanced, the laws of the holy Jesus may be obeyed, and his Name be magnified
in all the world for ever and ever. Amen.

III. For all Christian Princes and the Ecclesiastical state.
ALmighty God who rulest in the Kingdoms of men, and in all events of the
world, defend those with thy mercy whom thou have adorned with thy power, lift
up the horn, advance the just interests of all Christian Kings, Princes, and
states by the power of thy venerable and lifegiving passion.

*** Give unto all them who serve thee in the ministeries of religion wisdom
and holiness, the blessings of peace, and great abilities to minister
prosperously to the good of souls by the power and aides of thy holy Spirit of
wisdom.

IV.
Pardon all our sins; take away our iniquities from us all, and preserve us
from all danger and trouble, from need and persecution, from the temptations of
the Devil, from the violence and fraud of all our enemies. Keep us O God from
sinning against thee, and from suffering thy wrath, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

V The collect for the Evening.
O Almighty Father who give the Sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of
the Moon and of the Stars for a light by night, vouchsafe to receive us this
night and ever into thy favor and protection, defending us from all sad
casualties and evil accidents, ruling and governing us with thy holy spirit,
that all darkness and hurtful ignorance, all infidelity and weakness of
heart, all inordinate fear and carnal affections may be remooved far from us,
that we being justified by the mercies of God in our Lord Jesus, may be
sanctified by thy spirit, and glorified by thy infinite mercies in the day of
the glorious appearing of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

VI. For a blessed death.
O Most gracious and most holy Redeemer who by dying for us becamest the author
of life unto us, and have subdued all the powers of hell and the grave, taking
away the sting of death and breaking in pieces the powers of darkness; have
mercy upon us now and at the hour of our Death: Let thy holy Spirit govern all
our words and actions, our thoughts and designs, our civil intercourse, and
the duties of religion; and grant to us so perfectly to obey his commandments,
and attend his motions all the days of our life, that we may by holy habits
and a constant performance of our duty wait for the coming of our Lord, and
be ready to enter with him at whatsoever hour he shall come.

VII.
O be merciful unto us in the day of our calamity, and of thy visitation:
strengthen our faith in the day of our sicknesses and trial, when the Cloud is
thick and the storm is great: that we may rely upon thy grace, invocate thy
mercies, hope in thy goodness, and receive the end of our hopes the salvation
of our souls. O Let us never descend into the dwellings of the wicked, nor
into the place of them that know not God; but be pleased here to guide us with
thy council, and after that receive us with thy glory through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Or this.

O Eternal God thou fountain of life and pardon, there is no number of thy
days nor of thy mercies; be merciful unto us now and at the hour of our
death; let not thy servants be arrested with sudden death, that we be neither
unready in our accounts, nor snatched hence with an imperfect duty, nor
surprised in an act of sin, nor called upon when our lamps are untrimm'd; let
it be neither violent nor untimely, hasty, nor unblessed but after the ordinary
visitation of men, having in it an excellent patience and an exemplar piety,
and the greatest senses and demonstrations of thy eternal mercies. Preserve O
God our reason and religion, our faith and our hope, our sense and our speech
perfect and useful till the last of our days, and grant that we may die the
death of the righteous, and let our last end be like to his, free from debt and
deadly sin, having first discharged all our obligations of justice, and made
competent provision for our relatives, that none of ours be left miserable and
unprovided in our departure; but grant that being blessed by thy providence,
and sanctified with thy spirit, they may for ever be servants of the Lord Jesus.

II.
Thou know Lord the secrets of our hearts, shut not up thy merciful eyes
and ears unto our prayers, but spare us O Lord most holy, O God most mighty, O
holy and merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not at
our last hour for any pains of death to fall from thee; but strengthen us with
a mighty grace and support us with an infinite mercy, giving us perfect
measures or repentance and great treasures of charity, that at the general
resurrection in the last day we may be found acceptable in thy sight, and
receive that blessing which thy welbeloved son shall then pronounce to all them
that love and fear thee, saying, Come ye Blessed children of my Father,
receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. * This
mercy O most merciful Father vouchsafe to give unto us and all thy servants
through Jesus Christ our Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

Here may be inserted any of the portions of the prayer of intercession, which
is at the end of Morning Prayer.

The Blessing.
THe Lord bless you and keep you: The Lord make his face to shine upon you and
be gracious unto you. The Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon you
and give you peace:

The blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost be amongst you
and abide with you, and be your portion for ever and ever. Amen.

The end of Evening Prayer.
To be added to the foregoing Offices upon special occasions immediately
before the blessing at Morning or Evening Prayer.

A prayer before Sermon.
O Lord God fountain of life, giver of all good things who give to men the
blessed hope of eternal life by our Lord Jesus Christ, and have promised thy
holy Spirit to them that ask him; Be present with us in the dispensation ofthy
holy word [ This clause is to be omitted if there be no Sacrament that day.
and Sacraments] grant that we being preserved from all evil by thy power, and
among the diversities of opinions and judgments in this world from all errors
and false doctrines, and led into all truth by the conduct of thy holy spirit,
may for ever obey thy heavenly calling: that we may not be only hearers of the
word of life, but doers also of good works, keeping faith and a good
conscience, living an unblameable life, usefully and charitably, religiously
and prudently in all godliness and honesty before thee our God, and before all
the world, that at the end of our mortal life we may enter into the light and
life of God to sing praises and eternal hymns to the glory of thy name in
eternal ages, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In whose name let us pray in the words which himself commanded. saying,

OUr Father which art in heaven * Hallowed be thy Name * Thy Kingdom come *
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven * Give us this day our daily bread
* And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us *
And lead us not into temptation * But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer of Thanksgiving after Sermon; if it be convenient by reason of the
time or other circumstances.

I.
ALmighty God our glory and our hope, our Lord and Master, the Father of mercy
and the God of all comfort, we humbly present to thee the sacrifice of a
thankful spirit in a joyful acknowledgment of those infinite favors, by
which thou have supported our state, enriched our spirits, comforted our
sorrows, releiv'd our necessities, blessed and defended our persons,
instructed our ignorances and promoted our eternal interest. * We praise thy
name for that portion of thy holy word of which thou have made us partakers
this day. Grant that it may bring forth fruit unto thee, and unto holiness in
our whole life, to the glory of thy holy name, the edification of our Brethren,
and the eternal comfort of our souls in the day of our Lord Jesus.

II.
Have mercy upon all that desire, and upon all that need our prayers. Ease the
pains of the sick, support the spirit of the disconsolate, hear the cries of
Orphans and Widows in their calamity, and restore all that are oppressed to
their rights, and sanctify to them all their wrongs; pity the folly, and pity
the calamities of poor mankind; in mercy remembering them that are appointed to
die, comfort and support their spirits, perfect and accept their repentance,
and receive the souls returning unto thee, whom thou have redeemed with thy
most precious blood.

III.
Lord pity and pardon, direct and bless, sanctify and save us all. Give
repentance to all that live in sin, and perseverance to all thy sons and
servants for his sake who is thy beloved, and the foundation of all our hopes,
Our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus, to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit
be all honor and glory, praise and adoration, love and obedience now and for
evermore. Amen.

If this whole office be said at Morning or Evening Prayer respectively; the
Collect before sermon here put down, may be used instead of the Usual prayer
before sermon; ending with the Lords prayer: and the Sermon to begin
immediately before the blessing.

The Sermon being ended; the prayer of thankes-giving may be said, and the
congregation dismissed with the blessing set down at the end of Evening Prayer.

A prayer when a sick person desires to be publicly prayed for.

I.
O Almighty and most gracious Father who art the fountain of life and health
and pardon, hear the prayers of thy servants in behalf of our Brother [or
Sister] the miserable for the afflicted, of sinners for him [or her] whom thou
have smitten. Lord lay no more upon him then thou shall enable him to bear,
but give him patience; and do thou thy self open a door for his escape, even
by a holy and a reformed life, and a speedy recovery, or else by a blessed
death, as thou in thy infinite loving kindness shall choose for thy glory and
his eternal interest.

II.
Lord give unto thy servant a perfect repentance and a perfect pardon of all
his sins. Remember not the errors of his youth, the weakness of his spirit,
the surprises of his life, and the crimes of his choice: but join his present
sufferings to the passion, his prayers to the intercession, and his repentance
to the merits of our dearest Savior Jesus, that he may be pardoned and pitied,
comforted and supported, sanctified and saved in the day of recompenses.

III.
Blessed Jesus who have overcome all the powers of sin, Hell and the grave,
take from thy servant all inordinate fear of death, give him a perfect
resignation of his will and conformity to thine; restrain the power of the
enemy, that he may not prevail against the soul which thou have redeemed: If
it be thy will give him a speedy restitution of his health, and a holy use of
the affliction: or if thou have otherwise decreed, preserve him in thy fear and
favor, and receive his soul to mercy, to pardon, and eternal life through thy
mercies and for thy compassion sake, O Blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

I. For seasonable weather in time of drowth, immoderate rain, or scarcity, or
death of Cattle, etc.
O Lord God whose providence is universal and suffer nothing to happen in
vain, have mercy upon thy servants who have deserved thy wrath and to suffer
thy indignation in every expression by which thou art pleased to signify it.
Thou O God coverest the Heaven with clouds, and preparest rain for the earth;
thou make the grass to grow upon the mountains, and herb for the use of
men: Thou give fodder unto the cattle, and feedest the young ravens that call
upon thee; Hear us O God who are thy servants, and the sheep of thy pasture;
we have indeed wandered and gone astray, but do thou be merciful unto us and
bring us home to thee: Take away thine anger from us; Bless the labors of the
husbandman, and the fruits of the field, refresh the weary earth with
seasonable showers [or, According to the present need of rain or fair weather
respectively.
seasonable weather] for thou have the key of rain, and the key of providence,
thou did bind up the heavens with ribs of iron, and thou did open again
the sluices of water at the prayer of thy servant Elijah, and thy hand is not
shortened, and thy mercies have no limit.

II.
Open thy hand O God and fill us with thy loving kindness, that the Mower may
fill his hand, and he that binds up the sheaves his bosom, that our garners
may be full with all manner of store; that our sheep may bring forth thousands
and ten thousands in our streets: That our oxen may be strong to labor, that
there be no breaking in, or going out, that our hearts may be replenished with
food and gladness, that there be no complaining in our streets. Give us
sufficient for this life; food and raiment, the light of thy countenance, and
contented spirits; and thy grace to seek the Kingdom of heaven and the
righteousness thereof in the first place, and then we are sure all these
things shall be added unto us. Grant the desires and hear the prayer of thy
servants for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and only savior. Amen.

Or this upon the same occasion, or in the time of any other judgment.

ALmighty Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, we have sinned, and thou have
smitten us, and al our evils that we suffer are drawn upon our heads by our
own impious hands; let thy threatenings and thy judgments, thy love and thy
fear, thy promises and thy precepts; work in thy servants an excellent
repentance, and let our repentance obtain thy favor, and thy favor remove
the present evil [ of Drowth, of immoderate rain, of Murren, of Plague, of
War, of Sicknesse] from us [ according to the present occasion]; sanctify
unto us thy rod, and support us with thy staff, and restore us to those
comforts which we need and which thou have promised to give to them that love
and fear thee, that repent of their sins, and beg for pardon; through Jesus
Christ our Lord Amen.

A shorter form of Morning prayer for a Family.
A more private office for the family to be said betimes in the Morning on
Sundaies, or at any hour of the morning upon the other days of the week.

In the name of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus. Our Father, etc.

The morning Hymn.
* HEarken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God, for unto thee will I
pray.

My voice shall thou hear in the morning. O Lord in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee and will look up.

* Great is our Lord and greatly to be praised; his eyes are ever upon the
righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry.

Thy mercy O Lord is in the heavens; and thy faithfulness reaches unto the
clouds.

* Thy righteousness is like the great mountains, thy judgments are a great
deep: O Lord thou preservest both man and beast.

How excellent is thy loving-kindnesse O Lord, therefore the children of men
put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

* For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light we shall see light.

According to thy name O God, so is thy praise to the ends of the earth: thy
right hand is full of righteousness.

* The Lord, the Lord God is merciful and gracious, long-suffering and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty.

What is man that thou should magnify him, and that thou should set thy
heart upon him?

* And that thou should visit him every morning, and try him every moment!

If thou would seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the
Almighty:

* If thou were pure and upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make
the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.

O Lord be gracious unto us, we have waited for thee, be thou our arm every
morning; our salvation also in the time of trouble.

* O send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me to
thy holy hill, unto thy dwelling.

O put your trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him
is plenteous redemption: he shall redeem his people from their sins.

* Then shall their light break forth as the morning, and their health shall
spring forth speedily; for the glory of the Lord shall be their reward.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end.
If there be time and convenience, let a chapter be read out of the Sapiential
books in order. viz. The proverbs of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, the Wisdom of
Solomon, Ecclesiasticus.

Then shall follow the Creed, To be said by all together.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and earth * And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord * which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of
the Virgin Mary * suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried* He descended into hell * The third day he rose again from the dead *
He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty * From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the Dead.

* I believe in the holy Ghost * The holy Catholic Church, the communion of
Saints * the forgiveness of sins * the resurrection of the body * and the life
everlasting. Amen.

Minister.

The Lord be with you

People.

And with thy spirit.

I. Let us pray.
O Eternal and most blessed Savior Jesus, thou art the bright morning star,
and the sun of righteousness, thou do enlighten our eyes with thy beauties,
and our hearts with thy comfort and with the joys of God, thou art the
fountain of health and life, of peace and truth, of rest and holiness; thou
give to them that want, thou comfortest them that suffer, thou forgivest them
that repent, and hear the prayers of all them that call upon thee; we adore
thee and praise thy glories, and rejoice in thy salvation, and give thee thanks
for thy blessing and defending us this night, from all the evil which we have
deserved every day, and from all the violences and snares by which the enemy
of mankind would have hurt us, or destroyed us, unless he had been restrained
by thy eternal goodness and thy almighty power. Blessed be God.

II.
We acknowledge O God and Father of our life that we are less then the least
of all thy mercies, and our iniquity is greater then we can bear: our thoughts
are vain, our words are foolish and useless, injurious and uncharitable, our
actions criminal and hateful; our devotion cold, our passions violent and
unreasonable; our duties imperfect, our repentance little, our holiness none
at all. O God our Judge we confess before thee that we neither know thee as we
ought, nor have taken care that we might; we live in the world to our selves,
but without just regards of thee and of religion; we daily receive thy
blessings, and yet we provoke thee every day; we tremble not at thy judgments
though we have deserved them, nor fear till the evil day comes upon us; we are
greedy of doing evil, but impatient of suffering any: in prosperity we forget
thy severity and justice: in afflictions we are timorous and amazed, and dare
not rely upon thy goodness, nor with confidence and love expect the effects
of thy mercies and forgiveness. Every thing can tempt us to sin, and we fall
infallibly; but by all the arts of thy Spirit and the methods of thy mercy we
are not brought to obey thee as we ought: Our state is sad, our condition is
sinful, our hopes are broken, and we often forget our selves, and still
neglect and despise our own danger.

III.
BUt O God our Father, merciful, and gracious, have mercy upon us. Be pleased
to admit thy servants to a full pardon of all our sins, let us not persevere in
any one sin, nor pass from one sin to another. Smite us not O God in thy
anger, and let not thy wrath descend upon our guilty heads. Thy anger O God is
insufferable, thy vengeance is the portion of accursed souls, and thou have
prepared the everlasting fire for the Devil and his Angels for ever. O Lord
thou Father of our life and lover of souls, let us never have our portion in
the bottomless pit, in the lake that burueth with fire and brimstone for ever:
but let our portion be in the actions of repentance, in the service of God, in
the aids and comforts of thy Spirit, in duty and holiness, in the light of
thy countenance, and in the likeness and in the inheritance of our Lord Jesus.
O God let not thy arrows smite us, nor thy judgments consume us; keep us from
all expressions of thy wrath, and let us rejoice in thy mercies and
loving-kindnesses for ever and ever. Amen.

IV.
And that thy servants may reasonably and humbly hope for thy final mercies and
deliverance, be pleased to give us all that we need in order to the performance
of our duty, and work all that in us by which we may please thee. Instruct us
in thy truth, and prepare the means of salvation for us, providing for the
necessities, and complying with the capacities of evey one of us. Take from us
all blindness of heart, and carelessenesse of spirit, all irreligion, and
wilful ignorance. Create in us a love of holy things, and open our hearts that
we may perceive and love and retain the things of God with diligence, and
humility and industry. O God our Father, pity our weaknesses and temptations,
our avocations and unavoidable divertisements, the prejudices and evil
contingencies happening in the state of our lives: Enable us with sufficient
and active graces to do whatsoever thou requirest of us severally. Require no
more of any one of us then thou have or shall give unto us, neither do thou
exact all that; for we all confess our weaknesses and defects, our strange
imperfections and inexcusable wanderings and omissions: but be pleased to cure
all our vicious inclinations; and take care to remoove from us all those
temptations which without thy mighty grace are not to be avoided, and if they
come are by our weaknesses not to be overcome. Keep us O God from flattery and
irreligion, from vicious complyances, and evil customs, and let not the
reverence of any man cause us to sin against thee; keep us upright in our
religion and worshippings of thee, and let no change of the World engage us in
a state of life against our duty for Jesus Christ his sake our Dearest Lord and
Savior.

V.
Keep us O God by thy holy Spirit of grace from all the sins of idleness and
intemperance, from injustice and sensuality, from the lust of the flesh and the
lust of the eyes, from the pride of life and vanity of spirit, from being
careless of our duty of false in our trust, from breach of promise or
reproachful language, from slandering or traducing any man, from false
accusation and false witness, from faction and envy; Grant us thy grace that
we may be diligent in our business, just in our charges, provident of our
time, watchful in our duty, careful of every word we speak. O make us to be
pleased in the offices of religion, useful to those that employ us, dutiful
to our superiors, loving to each other, conscientious in private, humble in
public, patient in adversity, religious and thankful in prosperity.

VI.
O Blessed God take care of our souls, and of our bodies: keep us from sharp
and tedious sicknesses; let us never fall into want, or be unprovided for in
our age, and forsake us not O God, when we are gray headed; Grant us great
measures of thy Spirit, that we may abstain from all appearances of evil, and
from all occasions of it, and that we may take care to do whatsoever is honest
and of good report, that having laid up a treasure of good works against the
day of thy visitation, we may rejoice in the day of our death, and find mercy
at the day of judgment, through the goodness of our God, and by the grace of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

VII.
Bless and sanctify, defend and save all Christian Kings, Princes, Governors
and States; Grant that all powers, Civil and Ecclesiastical may join together
in the promoting the honor of God and the kingdom of the Lord Jesus, and may
find the blessings of God, and the rewards of the Lord Jesus in this world and
in the world to come. Give health and comfort, peace and holiness, long life
and increase of grace to the chiefest of this family [his Wife and children]
grant that their portion may be in religion, Here name what relation you please.
and the love of God, keep them from all evil by the guard of Angels, and lead
them into all good by the conduct of thy good Spirit.

VIII.
In mercy and great compassion remember all them that are miserable and
afflicted, persecuted or poor, that have lost their estates or lost their
liberty, their health or their peace, their innocence or their hopes; restore
them O Lord to all good, and to all useful comforts, and let not the enemy of
mankind invade thy portion, or destroy any soul for whom thou have paid the
price of thy most precious blood. Hear us O God in mercy, and bless all our
relations, and prosper all our labors, and sanctify all our intentions, and
forgive us all our sins, and relieve all our necessities, and defend us from
all dangers, and especially from our own selves, from our evil habits, and
foolish customs, from our weak principles and sad infirmities, from our evil
concupiscence and vicious inclinations, from the power of the Devil, and from
thy wrath, and bring us in mercy and truth, in holiness and comfort, in labor
and certainty to a fruition of the glories of God, in the inheritance of our
blessed Savior. Grant this O God our Father, for the merits and by the
redemption and intercession of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communication
of the holy Spirit of God be with us, defend and guide, sanctify and save us,
and al our relatives, and all the servants of God this day and for evermore.
Amen.

A short form of Evening prayer for a family. In the name of our Blessed Lord
and Savior Jesus.
Our Father, etc.

The HYMN.
O* Lord our Lord how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth, thou have set thy
glory above the Heavens.

When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars
which thou have ordained.

* What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou
visitest him?

For thou have made him little lower then the Angels, and have crowned him with
glory and honor.

* Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands: and have put
all things under his feet.

All sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the field, the foul of the air,
and the fishes of the sea.

* O Lord our Governor how excellent is thy name in all the world!

The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament shows his handy work.

* Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge.

Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of
the world.

* To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee and not be silent: O Lord
my God I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

Show me thy ways O Lord, teach me thy paths, lead me in thy truth and teach
me; for thou art the God of my salvation, on thee do I wait all the day.

* Remember O Lord thy tender mercies and thy loving-kindnesses; for they have
been ever of old.

Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgression: according to thy
mercy remember thou me for thy goodness sake O Lord.

* For thy names sake O Lord pardon mine iniquity, for it is very great: O
keep my soul and deliver me, let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in
thee.

That which I see not teach thou me: I have done iniquity, but I will do no
more: for there is no darkness, nor shadow of death where the workers of
iniquity may hide themselves.

* For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings: but
none says, where is God my maker who gives songs in the night.

But I put my trust in thee O Lord; I have said thou art my God?

* Into thy hand I commend my spirit, thou have redeemed me O Lord God of truth.

I will lay me down in peace: for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Or this.

* PReserve me O God, for in thee do I put my trust: O my soul thou have said
unto the Lord, thou art my Lord: my goodness extends not to thee;

But to the Saints which are in the earth, and to the excellent in whom is all
my delight.

* The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest
my lot.

I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel: my reins also instruct me
in the night seasons.

* I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand I
shall not be moved. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices: my
flesh also shall rest in hope.

For thou will not leave my soul in hell: neither will thou suffer thine Holy
one to see corruption.

* Thou will show me the path of life; in thy presence is the fullness of joy,
at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

As the heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee O
God.

* My soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when shall I come and
appear in the presence of God?

The Lord will command his lovingkindnesse in the day time, and in the night
his song shall be with me; I will make my prayer unto the God of my life.

* For thou art the God that do wonders; thy way O God is in the sanctuary:
who is so great a God as our God?

Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the Fowler, and from the
noisome pestilence.

* Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night: nor for the arrow that
flies by day.

For he shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways;
they shall bear thee in their hands least thou dash thy foot against a stone.

* I will remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watch;
for thou have been my health, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I
rejoice.

Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God of our
salvation.

* He that is our God is the God of salvation: and unto God the Lord belong the
issues of death.

Also unto thee O Lord belongs mercy: for thou rendrest to every man
according to his work.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Lesson.
1 Thessal. 5. 2. YOur selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so
comes as a theife in the night. * For when they shall say, peace and safety,
then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child:
and they shall not escape. * But ye brethren are not in darkness, that that
day should overtake you as a theife; ye all are children of the light and
children of the day: we are not of the night or of darkness? * Therefore let
us not sleep as do others; but let us watch and be sober. * For they that
sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be drunken are drunken in the night. *
But let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and
love, and for an helmet the hope of salvation. * For God has not appointed us
to wrath; but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ: * Who died for us,
that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him.

Or read a chapter in the Sapientiall books in order.

After the lesson recite the Creed.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

The Lord be with you.

Ans.

And with thy Spirit.

Let us Pray.

I.
The confession of sins taken out of the prayer of S. Ephraim the Syrian.

O Almighty God who dwell in the inaccessible light, before whom the
greatest mountains are like the dust of the balance, and in whose sight the
heavens are not pure, and the Angels tremble, and the Saints are charged with
folly, and all the world shall fear in thy glorious presence; we confess to
thee O Lord, Father of heaven and earth, all those sins which we have wrought
in private and in public; for thou know all things, and nothing is hid from
thy righteous eyes. Thou art the God of mercy and pity, and thou would have
all, even strangers to be saved; we fly therefore unto thee who art the lover
and Savior of all the souls of the faithful. Have pity upon us who have many
times imbitterd and greiv'd thy most holy spirit, to the joy of our enemies and
the sad ruin of our pitiable and wounded souls. Behold O God we have been
dead in sins and trespasses, and servants to thy enemy. There is no kind of
sins but we have committed, or would have committed; If it were pleasant, we
cared not for the foulness, but if we were tempted we did fall; and where we
did fall, there we did love to lie; we have sinned worse then the adulteress
or the theife, more then the publican or the prodigal, oftener then David or
Manasses: we have sinned against greater mercies, a more determined conscience,
a better law, a clearer revelation, more terrible threatenings, and better, much
better promises.

II.
We know O God and tremble at the sad remembrance, that all our sins shall be
placed before our faces at the day of thy dreadful appearance; O look upon us
with a mighty pity, let not the Angel of wrath snatch our precious souls from
thy beatifick presence; Take not the sweet refreshments of thy Spirit from us
one hour. O Dearest Lord, thou lover of souls, take not our lives from us
while our souls are unprepared and unready, unexcus'd and unpardoned; for thou
know the abyss of our sins, and thou know what is that abyss of flames
and anger which is prepared for foolish and unwary souls.

III.
Most Blessed Savior Jesus thou gave thy life to redeem us from death; and
thou art the Judge of those actions for which thou were a sacrifice; and to
give sentence upon those men for whom thou art an advocate and make
perpetual intercession: O suffer us not to fall under thine eternal anger;
destroy the whole body of sin in us; bring our understandings into the
obedience of God, our affections under the dominion of reason, our reason into
a perfect subordination to thy Holy Spirit; that we may love thee and fear
thee, and by repentance and charity may enter into thy favor, and dwell there
by a holy perseverance all our days, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

IV. The Prayers.
Do thou open our eyes that we may see our own vilenesses and forsake them,
and our foolish errors that we may amend them, and all our infirmities that we
may watch against them, and all our duty that we may pursue it earnestly and
passionately, prudently and entirely, presently and for ever. Cause us to
return to our duty with greater fervor and devotion then ever we have sinned
against thee with pleasure and delight, and as we have dishonourd thee by our
unworthiness, so grant that we may glorify thee tentimes more, weeping
bitterly for our sins, watching against them strictly, hating them infinitely,
and forsaking them utterly. O grant that we may every day renew our repentances
and vows of a better life, and make us to do every day what we promise, and
what is our duty; so imprinting a holy religion and a severe repentance in our
spirits, that we may confess our sins with a real and humble sorrow, and beg
for pardon because we desire it, and ask for thy help because we will make
use of it, and number our sins because we will leave them, not resting in
forms of godliness, but living in the power of it, in love and duty, in
holiness and godly choice through Jesus Christ our Lord.

V.
MOst Gracious God and Father imprint in our hearts great apprehensions of thy
power and thy glories, of thy judgment and thy mercies; of our sins and of our
change approaching, of our fugitive life and the day of our death, of our duty
and our danger, and the inexpressible terrors of the day of Judgment; and in
proportion to such apprehensions teach us O God to walk in this world with
fear and caution, with hope and purity, with diligence and devotion,
religiously and usefully, humbly and charitably, with love and obedience to
thee, with love and Justice to our neighbors, with sober spirits and chaste
bodies, with temperance and peace, with faith and patience, with health and
holiness, in the favor of God and the friendlinesse of our neighbors, in the
communion of the Church, and in obedience to all good laws; that we being
blessed by thy providence, defended by thy ministering Angels, conducted by thy
good Spirit, instructed by thy word, nourished by the body of Christ, cleansed
by his blood, and clothed with his righteousness, may grow from grace to grace
in the increase of God to the fullness of Christ, being subjects of thy
Kingdom of grace in this world, and heirs of the Kingdom of glory in the
world to come through Jesus Christ our Lord.

VI.
GIve us pardon, O thou God of mercy and peace, for all the errors and follies,
the ignorances and omissions, the rash words and imprudent actions of which any
of us has been guilty this day or at any time before; we confess our sins
every day, and yet every day sin against thee; and we pray unto thee for all
the blessings that we need, and thou give us all that we pray for and much
more; but yet we regard thee not, but every day have new matter of shame and
sorrow.

Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
FOr if thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, we shall not be
able to abide or stand upright in judgment: Thy mercy is great, and thou have
blessed us this day, and kept us from the evils of our inclination, and the
evils of temptation: and though in the things wherein our consciences do not
accuse us we are not justified, but by thy mercies and loving-kindnesse in
Christ Jesus, yet we rejoice in thy goodness to us, and praise thy bounties
and thy love, and hope in thy mercies, and beg of thee that thou will pardon us
and keep us, this night and ever; sanctify and save us, bless us at home and
abroad, in the works of our calling and the duties of religion, in our persons
and relations; make us to do what pleases thee, and to be what thou have
designed us to be, and to receive what thou have promised, and to keep us from
all the evil we have deserved, for Jesus Christ his sake our dearest Lord and
Savior. Amen.

THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communication
of the holy Spirit of God be with us, and with all our relatives, and with all
the servants of God for ever and ever. Amen.

Varieties to be added upon the great Festivals of the Year.
Upon Christmas day.
The Psalms appointed at Morning Prayer. Psalm 2. Psalm 45. Psalm 110.
Evening Prayer. Psalm 87. Psalm 89.


The Hymn for Christmas day, to be said after the second lesson at Morning and
Evening Prayer.

* PRaise waits for thee O God in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be
performed.

* O thou that hear prayer unto thee shall all flesh come.

* Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee,
that he may dwell in thy courts: He shall be satisfied with the goodness of
thy house, even of thy Holy Temple.

* By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us O God of our
salvation, who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them
that are a far off upon the sea.

* Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for
my soul.

* The people that walked in darkness has seen a great light; and they that
dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined.

* O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare
the wonders that he has done for the children of men.

* He turns the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into
water-springs.

* He makes the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of
Children.

* For unto us a child is borne, unto us a son is given, and the government
shall be upon his shoulders.

* His name shall be called wonderful, counselor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the prince of peace.

* Of the increase of his Government and peace there shall be no end.

* He shall sit upon the throne of David to order his Kingdom, and to
establish it with judgment and justice for ever and ever.

* O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare
the wonders that he has done for the children of Men.

Minister.

Glory be to God on high.

Answer.

And on earth peace, good will toward men.

Minister, Amen.

Answer, Amen.

Then proceed to the Nicene Creed.

The collect to be inserted after the first collect of the Morning and Evening
prayer; and may be said during the twelve days.

ALmighty God who have so loved the world that for our redemption from sin and
misery thou gave thy son, that he taking upon him our nature, and being borne
of a Virgin, might perform to thee the obedience which mankind owed, and pay
the price in which we were indebted, and teach us what thou would have us to
do, and convey to us all the good which thou did design for us; overshadow
us with thy holy Spirit of grace, that we may conceive Christ in our hearts by
faith, relyup on him in a holyhope, and express him in anexcellent charity;
that as he was pleased to take upon him our nature, so we may be borne again,
and be partakers of the Divine nature, that conforming to his image, following
his example, and being filled with his Spirit, we may grow in the knowledge and
love of God, and live in righteousness; that being thy sons by a holy
adoption, we may partake of the inheritance of thy welbeloved son, the
firstborne of all the creatures, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ Amen.

Upon Good Friday.
Instead of the Psalms of the day read at Morning Prayer. Psalm 22. Psalm
25. Psalm 51.
Evening Prayer Psalm 81. Psalm 85. Psalm 86. Psalm 88.
or any three of them.

The Collect.
O Most Blessed, most gracious Savior Jesus who by thyobedience unto death
even the death of the cross did become the sacrifice of the world, the great
example of patience, the Lord of life, the good shepherd laying down thy life
for thy sheep, and the mediator between God and man; let thy wounds heal,
thy blood cleanse, thy death make us to live, and thy Spirit make us to work
righteousness all our days; that we may by thy aid and by thy example obey
our heavenly Father with all our powers and all our faculties, with our reason
and our affections, with our souls and with our bodies, with our time and with
our estate, in prosperity and adversity; that we may bear our cross
patiently, and do thy work cheerfully, and be ready to benefit mankind with
great charity and great industry, that being followers of thy life and
partakers of thy death, we may receive a part in the resurrection of the just
to the joys of God in thy inheritance O most blessed, most Gracious Savior
Jesus. Amen.

For Easter day.
The Psalms appointed for Morning Prayer. Psalm 30. Psalm 45. Psalm 47.
Evening Prayer. Psalm 57. Psalm 66. Psalm 72.


The Hymn to be said after the second lesson at Morning and Evening prayer.

IN thee O Lord I have put my trust, let me never be put to confusion, but rid
me and deliver me in thy righteousness; incline thine ear unto me and save me.

Be thou my strong hold whereunto I may always resort: thou have promised to
help me, for thou art my house of defense and my Castle.

* For thou O Lord God art the thing that I long for: thou art my hope even
from my youth.

Thorough thee have I been holden up ever since I was borne: thou art he that
took me out of my mothers womb; my praises shall be always of thee.

* O let my mouth be filled with thy praise that I may sing of thy glory and
honor all the day long.

Thy righteousness O God in very high: and great things are they which thou
have done: O God who is like unto thee^

* O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me? and yet did
thou turn and refresh me: yea and broughtest me from the deep of the earth
again.

Thou have brought to me great honor, and comforted me on every side.

* Therefore will I praise thee and thy faithfulness O God playing upon an
instrument of music: unto thee will I sing upon the harp, O thou holy one of
Israel.

My lips will be feign when I sing unto thee: and so will my soul whom thou
have delivered.

* Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which only does wondrous
things.

And blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever, and all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty. Amen. Amen.

Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
The Collect,
O Most Holy, most Glorious Savior and redeemer Jesu who for our sakes did
descend from the glories of God to the pains and labors of the earth, and
did pass from a painful life to an ignominious death, from the bitterness
of death to the darkness of the grave, and by thy divine power did raise
thy self from death to life again; we give thee thanks for thy infinite love
to us and all mankind; we acknowledge thee to be our Lord, and confess thee to
be our God, we adore thy Majesty, and rejoice in thy mercies; we humbly pray
thee to enable us with thy Spirit to believe all thy doctrines, and to obey all
thy Commandments, that after a holy and a religious life spent in doing honor
to thy holy Name we may be partakers of thy holy resurrection, passing from
death to life, from the darkenesses of the grave to the light of Heaven, from
an imperfect duty to the perfection of holiness in the fruition of the joys
of God in thy eternal Kingdom, O Most holy, Most Glorious Savior and
Redeemer Jesu. Amen.

Upon Ascension day.
Instead of the Psalms of the day read at Morning Prayer. Psalm 15. Psalm
21. Psalm 24.
Evening Prayer Psalm 92. Psalm 96. Psalm 97.


The Collect.
O Blessed High Priest, Holy Jesus, King of the world and head of the Church,
who when thou had taken upon thee our Nature and our sin, and appeased thy
Fathers wrath, and performed all his will, and overcome death and rescued all
obedient souls from the hand of the enemy, did ascend to thy Eternal
Father, and open the Kingdom of Heaven to all beleivers; thou have espoused
thy Church unto thy self with the eternal circles of thy providence, with thy
love and with thy care, with thy word and with thy Spirit, thy promises and thy
holy intercession; thou had a feeling of our infirmities, and art our
merciful High Priest making intercession for us for ever; O be pleased to
represent and supply all our wants, excuse all our infirmities, pity all our
calamities, pardon our sins, and send down thy holy spirit of grace into our
hearts, that though we walk upon the earth yet our conversation may be in
heaven, and there also may be our portion and inheritance for ever through thy
mercies O most Gracious Savior and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

For Whitsunday.
Psalms for Morning Prayer. Psalm 87. Morning Prayer. Psalm 89.
Evening Prayer. Psalm 2. Evening Prayer. Psalm 45. Evening Prayer. Psalm
110.


The Hymn to be said after the second lesson at Morning and Evening Prayer.

* SIng a loud unto God our strength: make a joyful noise unto the God of
Jacob.

I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy wonders of
old: I will meditate of all thy works, and talk of thy doings.

* Thy way O God is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God? thou
art the God that do wonders; thou have declared thy strength among the
people.

Vow and pay unto the Lord your God: let all that be round about him bring
presents unto him that ought to be feared.

* He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is terrible to the Kings of the
earth.

Say unto God, how terrible art thou in thy works: thorough the greatness of
thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.

* Sion heard and was glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced: because of thy
judgments O Lord.

For thou Lord art high above all the earth: thou art exalted far above all
Gods.

* Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.

Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous: and give thanks at the remembrance of his
Holiness.

* The Lord has made known his salvation: his righteousness has he openly
showed in the sight of the Heathen.

He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: all the ends
of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

* Give unto the Lord (O ye kinreds of the people) give unto the Lord glory and
strength.

For he comes, For he comes to judge the earth: he shall judge the world
with righteousness, and the people with his truth.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
The Collect.
O Eternal God the Great Father of spirits, the great Lover of souls, who
did send thy holy Spirit upon thy Church in the day of Pentecost, and have
promised that he shall abide with thy Church for ever, let thy holy Spirit lead
us into all truth, defend us from all sin, enrich us with his gifts, refresh us
with his comforts, rule in our hearts for ever, conduct us with his truth, and
lead us in the way everlasting, that we living by thy Spirit, and walking in
him, may by him be sealed up to the day of our redemption; O let thy Spirit
witness to our spirits that we are the children of God, and make us to be so
for ever, through Jesus our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee in the
unity of the same Spirit one God world without end. Amen.

Upon Trinity Sunday.
O Blessed ineffable and most mysterious Trinity how admirable are thy
beauties, how incomparable are thy perfections, how incomprehensible are those
relations of the three most Blessed Persons, which we believe and admire and
adore but understand not! The Angels are amazed in the unimaginable beauties of
that glorious presence, and are swallowed up with the Ocean of thy infinity.
How then can we who are in the lowest order of understanding creatures, and
have removed our selves further from thee and the participation of thy
excellencies, by a sinful life, praise thee either according to our duty, or
thy glories! yet be pleased to accept the humblest adorations, and with a
favorable and a gracious eye behold the lowest worshippings and duty of thy
servants. We confess and glory in thy omnipotency, thy immensity, thy
goodness, thy uncircumscribed Nature, thy truth, thy mercy, thy omniscience. O
let us also receive thy blessings and gracious influences, that we may adore
thee with all our powers and possibilities for ever, love thee with all our
affections for ever, serve with our best and earliest and all our industry:
that being here wholly inebriated with love, and busied in thy service and the
duties of a holy obedience, we may to all eternity rejoice in the beholding of
those glories, which are above all capacities, above all heavens, above all
Angels, even those glories which stream forth from the throne of the Eternal
God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, to whom be glory and dominion,
honor and adoration, eternally confessed due and humbly paid by all men and
all Angels world without end Amen.

A Collect to be used upon any of the Festivals, or Commemoration of the
Apostles.

ALmighty God who have built thy holy Church upon the foundation of the
Apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, we
bless and magnify thy Name, thy holy and ever glorious Name for thy great
graces which thou gave to thy Apostles, and Prophets, and Martyrs in the
days of their flesh; and this day we have thy servant [S. Paul S. Peter S.
James, etc. here name the Apostle etc.] in remembrance; praising thee for the
benefits which the church has received by his ministry and example; we pray
unto thee to give us thy grace, that we [obeying thy doctrine which he taught
and published and] following his example as he followed Christ, we also may
with safety and holiness pass through this valley of tears, that serving thee
in our generation, advancing thy honor, and obeying thy laws, we may in the
society and communion of Saints and Angels sing eternal Hallelujahs to the
honor of thy mercy and of thy majesty through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An Office or Order for the Holy Sacrament: of the LORDS SUPPER.
An Office or order for the Administration of the Holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper according to the way of the Apostolical Churches and the doctrine of
the Church of England.

THE ANTECOMMUNION.
OUr Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven, Give us this day our daily bread, And
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us, And
lead us not into temptation But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Collect.
O King of Glory, Lord and Maker of the World, thou art a God knowing all
things, and all thoughts even long before they are, be thou present with us in
this religious solemnity calling upon thee. Deliver us from the shame of our
sins, from the corruption and evil inclinations that attend them, an^ from all
the evils that may justly follow them. Cleanse our wills and our understandings
from all evil lusts and concupiscence, from the deceits of the world, from the
violence and snares of the Devil, from all guile and hypocrisy, from every
evil word and work, that we may serve thee faithfully, worship thee
religiously, and pray unto thee acceptably through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Minister humbly say this prayer of preparation first in behalf
of himself, then of the congregation.

O Lord God who in mercy and great compassion do consider thy people and
have given unto us thy unworthy servants, miserable sinners, confidence and
commandment to present our selves before thee at thy holy table to represent a
holy, venerable and unbloody sacrifice for our sins, and for the errors and
ignorances of all thy people, look upon me the meanest and most polluted of
all them that approach to thy sacred presence. Pity me O God and wash away all
my sins. Cleanse my heart, and my hands, my head and my lips from all
impurities of the flesh and spirit: and remoove far from me all irreverence and
undecency, all foolish imaginations and vain reasonings, and by the power of
the Holy Ghost make me worthy for this ministry, accepting this service for
his sake whose sacrifice I represent, and by whose commandment I minister,
even our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

HAve mercy upon this thy people who with hungry and thirsty souls come to be
refreshed and comforted by the divine Nutriment of thy Holy Body and Blood.
Pity our infirmities, despise not our unworthiness, Curse not our follies, and
take not from thy servants thy grace and the light of thy Divine Countenance,
but according to the multitude of thy great mercies do away all our offenses
that without self condemnation we may appear before thy glory, covered with
the veil of Jesus, adorned with the robe of his righteousness, and
illustrated with the brightness of thy Divine spirit; that we may live by thy
grace, and feel thy mercy and pardon in this world and in the world to come
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Minister rising up rehearse with a loud voice the Eight
Beatitudes: the people still kneeling.

Minister.

Our Lord Jesus seeing the multitudes, went up into a mountain; and he opened
his mouth, and taught them saying.

1. BLessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

People.

Lord pardon our faults and incline our hearts to obey thee that we may inherit
this blessing.

Minister.

2. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.

People.

Lord pardon our faults and incline our hearts to obey thee that we may inherit
this blessing.

Minister.

3. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the Earth.

People.

Lord pardon our faults and incline our hearts to obey thee that we may inherit
this blessing.

Minister.

4. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they
shall be filled.

People.

Lord pardon our faults and incline our hearts to obey thee that we may inherit
this blessing.

Minister.

5. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.

People.

Lord pardon our faults and incline our hearts to obey thee that we may inherit
this blessing.

Minister.

6. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.

People.

Lord pardon our faults and incline our hearts to obey thee that we may inherit
this blessing.

Minister.

7. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.

People.

Lord pardon our faults and incline our hearts to obey thee that we may inherit
this blessing.

Minister.

8. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs
is the Kingdom of heaven.

People.

Lord make us ready in heart and body to obey thee in every thing, that we may
inherit all these blessings in the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus. Amen.

Let us Pray.

O Lord God our Creator who have given us life and being, and have shown unto
us the way of salvation, vouchsafing to us the revelation of Heavenly
Mysteries, and have commanded to us this service in the power of the Holy Ghost
and obedience of the Lord Jesus, be thou well pleased O Lord with this our
service and duty, and grant that with a holy fear, and a pure conscience we
may finish this service, presenting a holy sacrifice holily unto thee, that
thou may receive it in heaven, and smell a sweet odor in the union of the
eternal sacrifice which our Blessed Lord perpetually offers; and accept us
graciously as thou did entertain the gifts of Abel, the sacrifice of Noah,
the services of Moses and Aaron, the peace offering of Samuel, the repentance
of David and the incense of Zecharias; and as from the hands of thy Holy
Apostles thou did accept this ministry; so vouchsafe by the hands of us
miserable sinners to finish and perfect this oblation, that it may be
sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and be accepted in the Lord Jesus; that we being
adopted into the society and participation of his holiness and sufferings,
admitted to his service, incorporated to his body, united to his purity, made
partakers of his intercession, pardoned by his mercy, sanctified by his grace,
confirmed by his strengths, professing his religion, beleiving in his word,
hoping in his promises, and keeping all his commandments may receive the
reward of faithful and wise stewards in the day of righteous judgment.

Grant this O God for his sake who is the food of our souls, and the joy of
our hearts, the object of our faith and hope, and the great example of charity
and all excellencies, our Lord and Savior Jesus, Christ. Amen.

Then all arising from their knees, shall be read some portions of scripture,
relating to the present Mystery. viz.

1 EPistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, 11 chap. from verse 23. to the end.

The Gospel according to S. Marc. 14. 2. verse unto verse the 26.

Or,

1 Epistle of S. Paul written to the Corinthians, 10 chapter from verse 1. to
the 18.

Gospel according to S. Matthew 26. verse 17. to verse 30.

Sometimes one of these may suffice, but never above two are to be used at
once, one out of the Epistles, one out of the Gospels.

Then shall follow this Eucharistical Hymn, all standing up, reciting the
verses interchangeably.

ONe thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will seek after; that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to visit his Temple.

For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion, in the secret of
his Tabernacle shall he hide me, and set me upon a rock.

* Therefore will I offer in the Tabernacle sacrifices of joy, I will sing and
speak praises unto the Lord.

The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?

* Examine O Lord and prove me: try my reins and my heart.

For thy loving-kindnesse is before my eyes: and I will walk in thy truth.

* I have not sat with vain persons; neither will I go in with dissemblers.

I will wash my hands in innocence: and so will I compass thine altar, O Lord.

* That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy
wondrous works,

O taste and see that the Lord is good: blessed is the man that trusts in him.

* Look at the generations of old and see, did ever any trust in the Lord and
was confounded? or did any abide in his fear and was forsaken? or whom did he
ever despise that called upon him?

For the Lord is full of compassion and mercy, longsuffering and very pitiful,
and forgiveth sins, and saves in time of affliction.

* Ye therefore that fear the Lord, believe him: and your reward shall not
fail.

They that fear the Lord, will seek that which is well pleasing unto him: and
they that love him shall be filled with the law.

* They that fear the Lord will prepare their hearts, and humble their souls in
his sight.

For as his Majesty is, even so is his mercy.

* What shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits which he has done
unto me?

I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

* Return unto thy rest O my soul: for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee.

I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and call upon the Name of
the Lord.

* The Lord has been mindful of us and he will bless us; he will bless them
that fear the Lord, both small and great.

Blessed be the name of our God, from this time forth for evermore. Praise the
Lord.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
Then shall the Minister with a loud voice pronounce this Commination.

THus says the Lord Jesus, Apocal. 22.
I am Alpha and Omega the beginning and the end, the first and the last.
Blessed are they that do his commandment, that they may have right to the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City. For without are
Dogs and Sorcerers, Whoremongers and Murderers. The Idolaters and the Filthy,
the Fearful and the Unbeleiving, the Hypocrite and the Liars, the Drunkards and
the Envious, the hinderers of Gods word, and the Slanderers of their
neighbors, the Swearers and the Covetous, the Impenitent and the Uncharitable
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone. And
behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me to give every man according as
his work shall be.

I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things in the
Churches. I am the root and offspring of David; and the bright morning star,
And the Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that hears come: and let
him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely.

BUt first cleanse your hands and purify your hearts, repent you truly of all
your sins past, retain no affection to any thing that displeases God: Resolve
against all sin, strive against all, pray against all, watch against all, and
so shall ye be meet partakers of this holy table: But if any of you here
present live in any known sin of which ye have not truly repented, and which
you do not mean presently and utterly to forsake, In the name of Jesus Christ
I pronounce every such person to be unworthy of these holy mysteries, and that
he cannot receive them but to his condemnation.

Judge therefore your selves brethren that ye be not judged of the Lord: for it
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, and who is able
to dwell with the everlasting burning?

But if any of you after this severe admonition shall presume to approach these
sacred mysteries with an impure and disobedient heart; let him know that he
pollutes the blood of the everlasting Covenant, he eats and drinks damnation
to himself, not discerning the Lords Body. I have given you warning, I have
discharged my duty.

ALl you who truly repent you of your sins, and are in love and charity with
your neighbors, and intend to lead a holy life in all godliness and sobriety
and honesty, draw near and take these holy mysteries to your comfort; first
make your humble confession of sins to God, and meekly beg his pardon for what
is past, and his grace for the time to come.

The Confession to be said by all kneeling.

ALmighty God, we miserable sinners do humbly confess, and are truly
sorrowful for our many and great, our innumerable and intolerable crimes of
which our consciences do accuse us by night and by day, and by which we have
provoked thy severest wrath and indignation against us. We have broken all thy
righteous laws and commandments by word or by deed, by vain thoughts or
sinful desires: we have sinned against thee in all our relations, in all
places and at all times, we can neither reckon their number, nor bear their
burden, nor suffer thy anger which we have deserved. But thou O Lord God, art
merciful and gracious: have mercy upon us: Pardon us for all the evils we have
done: Judge us not for all the good we have omitted: Take not thy favor from
us, but delight thou to sanctify us and save us, and work in us to will and to
do of thy good pleasure all our duty, that being sanctified by thy Spirit, and
delivered from our sins, we may serve thee in a religious and a holy
conversation, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Minister rising up shall pronounce, Absolution in the form described
at Morning Prayer.

OUr Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls,
that Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world, who promised Paradise
to the repenting Thief, and gave pardon to the woman taken in Adultery, he
pardon and forgive all your sins known and unknown.

*** O Blessed Jesus, in whatsoever thy servants as men bearing flesh about
them, and inhabiting this world, or deceived by the Devil, have sinned, whether
in word or deed, whether in thought or desire, whether by omission or
commission, let it be forgiven unto them by thy word and by thy Spirit; and for
ever preserve thy servants from sinning against thee, and from suffering thine
eternal anger for thy promise sake, and for thy glorious Names sake, O Blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus. Amen.

Then all rising up.

There shall be made a collection for the poor by the Deacon or Clerk while the
Minister reads some of these sentences, or makes an exhortatation to charity
and alms.

TO do good and to distribute forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased. Hebr. 13. 16.

Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy: the Lord shall deliver him
in the time of trouble: The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he
shall be blessed upon the earth, and thou will not deliver him into the will of
his Enemies. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou will make all his bed in his sickness. Psalm. 41. 1, 2, 3.

He which sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he which sows
bountifully shall reap bountifully. Every man according as he purposes in his
heart, so let him give, not grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves a
cheerful giver. 2 Cor. 9. 6, 7.

Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye
fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations. Luke 16. 9.

Give alms of such things as ye have, and behold all things are clean unto
you. Lu. 11. 41.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed children
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; Naked, and ye clothed me; I was
sick and ye visited me; I was in prison and ye came unto me. Matthew. 25. 34, 35.

Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teaches in all
good things. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows,
that shall he also reap. Gal. 6. 6, 7.

If there be none fit to gather: the Minister himself shall gather it. And when
he has done or received it from the hand of him that gathered it, let him in
an humble manner present it to God, laying it on the Communion table; secretly
and devoutly saying;

LORD accept the oblation and alms of thy people: and remember thy servants
for this thing at the day of Judgment.

Then shall follow the address to the H. Mysteries; the poeple shall come up to
the H. Table where it is the custom, or near it, where it is most fit to
communicate: and then,

The Minister shall say.

Let us pray.

O God who by thy unspeakable mercy have sent thy only begotten Son into the
world, that he might bring the wandering sheep into his fold, turn not away from
us miserable sinners, who worship and invocate thee in these Holy Mysteries.
For we do not approach to thee in our own righteousness, but in the hope and
confidence of that glorious mercy by which thou have sent thy holy Son to
redeem miserable and lost Mankind. We humbly beseech thee to grant that these
mysteries which thou have ordein'd to be ministeries of salvation to us, may
not become an occasion of our condemnation, but of pardon of our sins, of the
renovation of our souls, of the sanctification and preservation of our bodies,
that we may become well pleasing to thee our God, in the obedience of our Lord
Jesus, with whom, and with thy holy Spirit, thou reignest over all, one God,
Blessed for evermore. Amen.

Minister.

Lift up your hearts.

People.

We lift them up unto the Lord.

Minister.

Let us give thanks unto our Lord God.

People.

It is just and right so to do.

Minister.

It is indeed truly just, righteous, and fitting; to praise and to glorify, to
worship and adore, to give thanks and to magnify thee the great Maker of all
creatures visible and invisible, the treasure of all good, temporal and
eternal: The fountain of all life, mortal and immortal: The Lord and God of all
things in Heaven and Earth, the great Father of his Servants, the great Master
of his Children.

The Heavens and the Heaven of Heavens, and every power therein; the Sun and
the Moon, and all the stars of the sky; the sea and the earth, the heights
above and the depths below; Jerusalem that is from above, the Congregation
celestial, the Church of the firstborn written in the Heavens, the spirits of
the Prophets and of just men made perfect, the souls of the Apostles and all
holy Martyrs, Angels and Archangels, Thrones and Dominions, Principalities and
Powers, the spirits of Understanding and the spirits of Love, with never
ceasing Hymns and perpetual Anthemes cry out Night and Day,

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts: Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory.
Hosanna. Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

Hosanna in the highest.

Here begins the COMMUNION.

After a decent pause for short Meditation, The Minister shall with a loud
voice say, Our Father, etc. And then this (...) or Denunciation.

LET all corruptible flesh be silent, and stand with fear and trembling, and
think within it self nothing that is earthly, nothing that is unholy. The King
of Kings and the Lord of Lords, Christ our God comes down from Heaven unto us,
and gives himself to be meat for the souls of all faithful people.

* All the glorious companies of Angels behold this and wonder, and love and
worship Jesus. Every throne and Dominion, the cherubims with many eyes, and the
Seraphims with many wings cover their faces before the majesty of his glory;
and sing a perpetual song for ever: Allelujah, Allelujah. Globe to God on high,
and in earth peace, good will toward men. Allelujah.

Then shall follow this Prayer of Consecration, to be said by the Minister
standing.

I.
HAve mercy upon us, O Heavenly Father, according to thy glorious mercies and
promises, send thy Holy Ghost upon our hearts, and let him also descend upon
these gifts, that by his good, his holy, his glorious presence, he may
sanctify and enlighten our hearts, and he may bless and sanctify these gifts.

That this Bread may become the Holy Body of Christ.

Amen.

And this Chalice may become the life-giving Blood of Christ.

Amen.

That it may become unto us all that partake of it this day, a Blessed
instrument of Union with Christ, of pardon and peace, of health and blessing,
of holiness and life Eternal, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

II.
Holy and blessed art thou O king of Eternal ages, fountain and giver of all
righteousness.

* Holy art thou the eternal and only begotten son of God, our Lord Jesus
Christ, Redeemer of the world.

* Holy art thou O Blessed Spirit that searchest all things, even the depths
and hidden things of God.

Thou O God art Almighty: thou art Good and gracious, Dreadful and venerable,
Holy and merciful to the work of thine own hands.

Thou did make man according to thine image: thou gave him the riches and
the rest of Paradise: When he fell and broke thy easy Commandment thou did
not despise his folly, nor leave him in his sin, but did chastise him with
thy rod, and restrain him by thy law, and instruct him by thy Prophets, and at
last did send thy Holy Son into the world that he might renew and repair thy
broken image.

The People shall answer,

Blessed be God. He coming from heaven and taking our flesh by the power of
the Holy Ghost of the V^rgin Mary conversed with men, and taught us the way of
God, and the dispensation of Eternal life.

People.

Holy Jesus! Blessed be God.

But when for the redemption of us sinners he would suffer death upon the Cross
without sin, for us who were nothing but sin and misery, in the night in which
he was betrayed, he took bread, he looked up to heaven, he gave thanks, he
sanctified it, he brake it and gave it to his Apostles, saying,

(Take eat, The Minister at those words shall touch the Bread.
This is my body which is broken for you. Do this in remembrance of me.

Likewise after Supper he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks and
blessed it, he gave it to them, saying,

Drink ye all of this, for Here he must touch or handle the Chalice.
this, is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for you and for many,
for the remission of sins.

Do this in remembrance of me.

For as often as ye shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye shall show
forth the Lords death till he come.

The people shall answer,

Amen.

Minister.

We believe and we confess.

People.

We declare thy death and confess thy resurrection.

Then the Minister kneeling shall say this prayer of Oblation.

I.
WE sinners thy unworthy servants in remembrance of thy life-giving passion,
thy Cross and thy pains, thy death and thy burial, thy resurrection from the
dead, and thy ascension into Heaven, thy sitting at the right hand of God,
making intercession for us, and expecting with fear and trembling thy
formidable and glorious return to judge the quick and dead, when thou shall
render to every man according to his works, do humbly present to thee, O Lord,
this present sacrifice of remembrance and thanksgiving, humbly and passionately
praying thee not to deal with us according to our sins, nor recompense us after
our transgressions; but according to thy abundant mercy, and infinite goodness,
to blot out and take away the handwriting that is against us in the book of
remembrances which thou have written: and that thou will give unto us
spiritual, celestial, and eternal gifts, which neither eye has seen, nor ear
has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to understand, which
God has prepared for them that love him, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall follow the reception and distribution of the Holy Sacrament.

The Minister first receiving, and privately saying this short prayer.

O Blessed Jesus, My Lord and my God, thou art the celestial food and the life
of every man that comes unto thee. I have sinned against heaven and before
thee, and am not worthy to partake of these holy Mysteries: but thou art my
merciful Savior: grant that I may religiously, thankfully, and without reproof
partake of thy Blessed body and blood for the remission of my sins, and unto
life eternal. Amen.

Then reverently taking in his hand the consecrated bread that he means to eat,
let him say,

THE Body of our Lord Jesus which was broken for me, preserve my body and Soul
into everlasting life. Amen.

Then praying a while privately let him receive the Chalice saying,

THE Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for the remission of my
sins, cleanse my Soul, and preserve it into everlasting life. Amen.

Then let him pray awhile privately, and recommend to God his own personal
necessities spiritual and temporal, and the needs of all his Relatives, etc.

After that, let him distribute it first to the Clergy that helps to officiate,
and after that, to the whole Congregation that offers themselves, saying the
same words, changing the person.

While the Minister of the Mysteries is praying privately; the people may
secretly pray thus, or to this purpose.

I Believe O God and confess that thou art Christ the Son of the living God,
who came into the world to save sinners whereof I am chief. Lord make me this
day partaker of thy heavenly Table; for thou do not give thy secrets to thy
enemies, but to the sons of thine own house. Let me never give thee a Judas
kiss; I confess thee and thy glories, I invocate thee and thy mercies: I trust
upon thee and thy goodness like the thief upon the Cross; Lord remember me in
thy kingdom, with the remembrances of an everlasting love.

Lord I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof; but as thou did
safe to lie in a Manger with beasts, and to enter into the house of Simon the
leper, nor did despife the repenting harlot when she kissed thy feet; so
vouchsafe to lodge in my soul, though it be a place of beastly affections and
unreasonable passions; throw them out and dwell there for ever; purify my
soul, accept the sinner, cleanse the leper, so shall I be worthy to partake of
this Divine Banquet. Amen.

When every of the Communicants has received in both kinds, let the Paten and
Chalice (if any of the consecrated Elements remain) be decently covered, and
then shall follow these prayers.

THE POSTCOMMUNION.
The Minister and People devoutly kneeling shall say the Lords prayer the people
repeating every petition after the Minister.

Our Father which art in heaven. Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass aganist us. And lead
us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. For thine is the Kingdom, the
Power and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Then the Minister shall pray this prayer for the Catholic Church.

I.
REceive O Eternal God this sacrifice for and in behalf of al Christian people
whom thou have redeemed with the blood of thy Son, and purchased as thine own
inheritance. From the fountains of mercy, the springs of our Blessed Savior,
let all thy people upon whom the name of Jesus is called, receive confirmation
and increase of grace, fruitfulness in good works, and perfect understanding in
the way of godliness: Defend O God thy Church and preserve her from all heresy
and scandal, from sacrilege and Simony, from covetousness and pride, from
factions and schism, from Atheism and irreligion, from all that persecute the
truth, and from all that work wickedness, and let not thegates of hell prevail
against her, nor any evil come near to hurt her.

II.
Give thy blessing O God to this Nation; remember us for good and not for evil;
be reconciled unto us in the Son of thy love, and let not thine anger be any
longer upon us, nor thy jealousy burn like fire. Send us health and peace,
justice and truth, good laws and good government; an excellent religion
undivided, undisturbed; temperate air, seasonable, showers, wholesome dewes,
fruitful seasons: Crown the year with goodness, and let the clouds drop
fatness, that we may glorify thy name, and confess thy goodness while thou
bear witness to us from heaven, filling our hearts with food and gladness.

III.
With a propitious eye and a great pity behold the miseries of mankind; put a
speedy period to all our sins and to all our calamities: Hear the sighings of
the distressed, the groans of the sick, the prayers of the oppressed, the
desires of the poor and needy; support the weakness of them that languish and
faint ease the pains of them that are in affliction and call to thee for help.
Take from the miserable all tediousness of spirit and despair: Pardon all the
penitents, reform the vicious, confirm the holy, and let them be holy still;
pity the folly of young men, their little reason and great passion, succor the
infirmities and temptations of the aged, preserving them that they may not sin
toward the end of their lives, for Jesus Christ his sake.

IV.
Admit O Blessed God into the society of our prayers and the benefits of this
Eucharist our Fathers and Brethren, our wives and children, our friends and
Benefactours, our charges and relatives, all that have desired our prayers and
all that need them, all that we have, and all that we have not remembered; thou
know all their necessities and all their dwellings; their joys and their
sorrows, their hopes and their fears, the number of their sins and the measures
of their repentances; O dear God sanctify them and us, let our portion be in
the good things of God, in religion and purity, in the peace of Conscience, and
the joys of the Holy Ghost, in the love of God and of our Neighbors. O gather
us to the feet of thy elect when thou will, and in what manner thou art
pleased: only let us appear before thee without shame and without sins through
the merits of JESUS Christ, our most merciful Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Then shall follow the Eucharistical prayers.

I.
GLory be to thee, O God our Father, who have vouchsafed to make us at this
time partakers of the Body and Blood of thy holy Son: We offer unto thee O God
our selves, our souls and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and living
sacrifice unto thee. Keep us under the shadow of thy wings and defend us from
all evil, and conduct us by thy Holy Spirit of grace into all good; for thou
who have given thy holy Son unto us, how shall not thou with him give us all
things else? Blessed be the Name of our God for ever and ever. Amen.

II.
Glory be to thee O Christ our King, the only begotten Son of God, who were
pleased to become a sacrifice for our sins, a redemption from calamity, the
Physician and the Physic, the life and the health, the meat and the drink of
our souls; thou by thy unspeakable mercy did descend to the weakness of
sinful flesh remaining still in the perfect purity of spirit, and have made us
partakers of thy holy Body and Blood: O condemn us not when thou come to
judgment, but keep us ever in thy truth, in thy fear and in thy favor, that
we may have our portion in thine inheritance where holiness and purity, where
joy and everlasting praises do dwell for ever and ever. Amen.

III.
Proceeding from glory to glory, we still glorify thee O Father of Spirits,
and pray thee for ever to continue thy goodness toward us. Direct our way
aright, establish us in holy purposes, keep us unspotted in thy faith, let the
enemy have no part in us, but conform us for ever to the likeness of thy holy
Son; lead us on to the perfect adoption of our Souls and to the redemption of
our bodies from corruption, and fill our hearts and tongues with everlasting
praises of thy name thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Blessing.
The peace of God which passes all understanding keep your hearts and minds in
the knowledge and love of God and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and the
blessing of God Almighty, and Father, Son and Holy Spirit, be upon you and
abide with you, and be your portion for ever and ever. Amen.

The end of the Communion Office.
A form of Administration of the Holy Sacrament: OF BAPTISM.
A FORM OF Administration of the Holy Sacrament OF BAPTISM.
Pure water being provided and put into the Fount, or into a Lavatory of
silver, or some other clean vessel, fit and decent for this sacred action; the
Minister being vested in an Ecclesiastical habit shall begin with this
exhortation.

Dearly beloved Brethren,

FOrasmuch as from our first parents we derive nothing but flesh and
corruption, and that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven; it
is necessary that every man who is reckoned in Adam should be also reckoned in
Christ, that every one who is born of the flesh, be also born again, and born
of the spirit, that every son of man by nature may become the son of God by
Adoption, be incorporated into Christ, entitled to the promises and become heir
of heaven by grace and faith in Jesus Christ, and that this cannot be done but
by being admitted to the Covenant of grace in Baptism, our Blessed Savior,
saying, that except a man be born again of water and of the Spirit he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God; let us humbly and devoutly pray unto God in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ that he will be pleased to send down his holy
Spirit upon these waters of Baptism; that they may become to this infant [ If
the place be populous and Baptismes frequent, and this water be kept (as it is
usual in most Churches both of East and West:) then that clause within the
Columns) may be used, else not.
all that shall be washed in them] a laver of regeneration, and a well of water
springing up to life eternal: and that this infant may be admitted to the
Covenant of grace and pardon, of mercy and holiness, receiving from grace, what
by nature he cannot have, that being baptized in water to the remission of
sins, he may all his life walk in this Covenant of grace and holiness, as a
lively member of the holy Church which is the mystical body of Christ our Head.

Let us Pray.

I.
O Almighty and Eternal God, Father of Men and Angels, Lord of heaven and
earth, whose spirit moving upon the waters at the beginning of the world
produced every living and every moving creature; thou by the flood of waters
did wash away the iniquity of the old world, and by preserving to thy self a
generation of holy persons whom thou did bring up from those waters did
consign to us a type of regeneration; Look O Lord graciously upon the face of
thy Church, and multiply in her thy regenerations, and the new births of thy
Spirit. With the abundance of thy grace make thy holy city to rejoice, and
still open this holy fountain of Baptism for the reformation and
sanctification of all the nations of the world, that thy blessed Spirit
sanctifying these waters, a new and heavenly offspring may hence arise, full
of health and light; that humane nature, which was made after thy own image,
being reformed and restored to the honor of its first beginning, may be
cleansed from all the impure adherencies of sin, preserved from the Dominion of
it, and rescued from all its sad effects, that what shall be so born in the
womb of the Church, may dwell in the house of God, and Reign with thee for
ever in the inheritance of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus. Amen.

II.
OUR Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus who was baptized of John in Jordan, who
walked upon the waters, who converted water into wine, who out of his precious
side shed forth blood and water, the two Sacraments of life, unto his holy
Church, and commanded his disciples to teach all nations, baptizing them with
water in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: he bless
and sanctify by his holy Spirit this water, that it may be instrumental and
effective of grace, of pardon and sanctification: Hear us O most gracious God
that whoever shall be baptized in this water may be renewed by thy grace,
justified by thy mercy, sanctified by thy Spirit, preserved by thy providence
and guided by thy word, that in this water springing from the Paradise of God
the Soul [or Souls] presented unto thee may be cleansed and purified, and that
there may be added to thy Church daily such as shall be saved in the day of thy
glorious appearing, O Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus. Amen.

Then the Minister and People arising from their knees the following Gospel
shall be read.

Hear the words of the holy Gospel written by S. Matthew in the third chapter,
etc.

Verse 13. to verse 17. inclusively.
THen comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be baptized of him. *
But John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee and come
thou to me? And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer it to be so now; for thus
it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffered him. And Jesus
when he was baptized went up straitway out of the water, and lo the heavens
were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove and
lighting upon him. * And lo a voice from heaven saying, This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased.

Hear likewise what S. Mark writes in his tenth chapter.

Verse 13. and 17. exclusively.
THE Jews] brought children [to Christ] that he should touch them, and his
Disciples rebuked those that brought them. * But when Jesus saw it he was much
displeased and said unto them. Suffer the little children to come unto me and
forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you,
whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child he shall not
enter therein. * And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them and
blessed them.

FRiends in these Gospels you see the actions and hear the words of our Blessed
Savior, how he commanded little children to be brought unto him, how he
rebuked those that would have kept them away, how readily he blessed them, how
kindly he embraced them, how he pronounced them capable of, and entitled to the
kingdom of God: how he commanded us to receive the kingdom as infants
received it, and affirmed that we can no way receive it but by being like them:
you know also that although Christ commanded them to be brought unto him, there
is no ordinary and appointed way for Infants to come to Christ, and no way
po^^^ble for them to be brought to Christ but by this new birth and
regeneration in the laver of Baptism: you see also by the example and words of
our Blessed Lord himself, that even the most innocent persons ought to be
baptized. For he himself who knew no sin, was yet baptized in the Baptism of
Repentance, and so to do was the fulfilling of righteousness; we may therefore
easily perceive that the innocence of infants and their freedom from actual sin
cannot excuse them from Baptism: and if we remember that although our Blessed
Savior required faith of them who came to be healed of their diseases, yet by
the * faith of others who came in behalf of such as could not be brought or
could not come, Matt. 8. 13. and
Matthew. 9. 28.
the sick person was healed; John 4. 50.
Mark. 9. 23.
we are sufficiently instructed that although Infants have no more actual faith
then they have actual sin, yet the faith of others can be and is by the usual
and revealed method of the divine mercy as well imputed to them to the purposes
of grace and life, as the sin of Adam can be imputed to the purposes of death,
that as in Adam all die so in Christ all should be made alive: we may therefore
from these certain evidences conclude that God allows in you this obedience
and charity in bringing this child to Christ, to receive all blessings of which
he is capable, a title to the promises and adoption to be the child of God, a
sanctification by the spirit, a designation to the service of Christ, and
putting him into the order of eternal life. All this may be omitted between the
Columns, according to the discretion of him that ministers.
Therefore [as circumcision was the seal of the righteousness of faith, and yet
min^stred to infants eight days old, and commanded so severely, that God said
the uncircumcised child whole flesh is not circumcised^ that soul shall be cut
off from his people: so Baptism which is now the Romans 41. 11, 12, 13, 17.
Gallat. 3. 14. 29
seal of the same faith and the same righteousness, and a figure like unto the
former is to be administered to infants although they have no more actual faith
then the children of the Israelites had; our Blessed Savior having made
Baptism as necessary in the new Testament as Circumcision in the Old. For
because little children can receive the kingdom of God, and in infants there
is no incapacity of receiving the mercies of God, the adoption to be children
of God, a title to the promises, the covenant of repentance and a right to
pardon; whosoever shall deny to baptize infants when he is justly required, is
sacrilegious and uncharitable. Since therefore the Church of God has so great,
so clear so, indubitable a warrant to baptize infants, and therefore did
always practice it,] let us humbly and charitably give thanks to God for his
great mercies unto us all, and with meekness and love recommend this child to
the grace of God.

Let us pray.

O Almighty and eternal God who have redeemed us from sin and shame, from the
gates of hell and the sting of death, and from ignorance and darkness by thy
holy Son, who is that light which lightneth every man that comes into the
world, we praise and glorify thy name that thou have called us to the
knowledge of thy will, and the love of thy name, and the service of thy majesty
which is perfect freedom, the freedom of the sons of God.

II.
As thou have dealt graciously with us so deal with this infant whom we humbly
bring and offer to our blessed Savior Jesus, that he should receive him and
bless him with the blessings of an everlasting love. Receive him O most
gracious Lord, who is thy child by creation, make him thine also by adoption
into thy covenant of grace and favor: let him be consigned with thy Sacrament,
be admitted into Christ's kingdom, enter into his warfare, believe his
doctrine, labor and hope for his promises, that this child witnessing here a
good confession, may have his understanding for ever brought unto the
obedience, his affections to the love, and all his faculties to the service of
Christ; and after he has served thee in his generation he may receive his part
and portion in thy glory thorough Jesus Christ our Lord.

Then arising from their knees the Minister shall say unto the Godfathers and
Godmothers as follows.

Well beloved friends, you have brought this child to be presented unto Christ
as a servant of his laws and a Disciple of his doctrine, ye have prayed that
God would receive him and give him a portion in the Gospel and kingdom of his
Son; ye have heard what promises God has made on his part, and ye believe and
know all his words are yea, and Amen, and not one tittle of them shall pass
unaccomplished; now therefore because it is a Covenant of grace and favor on
Gods part and of faith and obedience on ours, though God prevents us with his
grace, and begins to do for us before we can do any thing to him, yet you,
under whose power this child is, and by whose faith and charity this child
comes to Christ in holy Baptism, must also on his [or her] behalf promise that
he will forsake the devil and all his wicked works, that he will faithfully
believe Christ's holy Gospel, and dutifully keep all Christ's Commandments.

Minister.

Do thou abjure and renounce and promise to forsake the Devil and all his
wicked works, not to listen to his temptations, not to be led by the flesh, by
the vain powers of the world, by carnal or covetous desires, but thou will be
the servant of the Lord Jesus?

Answer.

I forsake them all and will be a servant of Jesus.

Minister.

Do thou believe in God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and Earth? And in
Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord? And that he was conceived by the
holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary, that he suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dead, and buried, that he went down into hell, and also did rise
again the third day, that he ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right
hand of God the Father Almighty, and from thence he shall come again at the end
of the world to judge the quick and the dead? And do thou believe in the
holy Ghost, the Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the remission of
sins, the resurrection of the flesh, and everlasting life after death?

Answer.

All this I will profess and steadfastly believe.

Minister.

Will thou be baptized into this faith.

Answer.

That is my desire.

Let us Pray.

O Almighty God, who have given the promise of thy Spirit to us and to our
children, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call; Give thy holy Spirit
to this infant that the evil spirits of darkness may not take thy portion from
thee, nor hurt the body, nor deceive the understanding, nor corrupt the will,
nor tempt the affections of this infant: but that thy Spirit who blows where
it lists, and no man knows whence he comes nor whether he goes, may be in
this child as the seed of God springing up to life eternal, that the kingdom of
God which is within, and comes not with observation, may early rule and
conduct this infant, prevent the folly of his childhood from growing up to sins
in his youth, and may work strongly in him when his weakness, his ignorances
and temptations are most powerful to prevail upon him; that from his cradle to
his grave he may be guided by the Spirit of God in the paths of the divine
Commandments. Admit him O God into the bosom of the Church, into the arms of
thy mercy, into a right of the promises, into the service of Christ, into the
Communion of Saints; and give him power to become the Son of God, that being
buried with Christ in Baptism, he may also rise with him thorough the faith of
the operation of God thorough the same our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Then the Minister of the Sacrament shall take the child in his arms and ask
the Name.

Then naming the child aloud he shall dip the head or face or body of the child
in the water, saying,

N. I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.

Dipping the head at the naming of the holy Trinity.

If the child be weak, or any other great Cause intervene, it may suffice
instead of dipping to sprinkle water on the face, using the same form of words.

Then shall the priest make the sign of the Cross upon the child's forehead,
saying,

WE sign this child with the sign of the Cross, and enroll him a Soldier under
the banner of Christ to signify, and in ceremony to represent, that the duty
of this and all baptized persons is manfully to fight under the banner of
Christ against the flesh, the world, and the Devil, all the days of their
life: and by the power which Christ our Blessed Lord who has the key of David
has given unto me, I admit this child into the Communion of Saints, into the
bosom of the visible Church, the kingdom of Grace, and the title to the
promises Evangelical, and the hopes of glory.

OUr Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus who when he had overcome the sharpness of
death did open the kingdom of heaven to all believers, and gave unto his Church
the keys of the kingdom, that his ministers might let into it all that come
to him, he of his infinite goodness and truth, make good his gracious promises
upon this infant, that what we do on earth according to his will, he may
confirm in heaven by his spirit and by his word, to the glory of the blessed
and undivided Trinity, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.

Then shall the Minister add this Invitation.

SEeing now (dearly Beloved) that this infant has received holy Baptism, and
is washed in the laver of regeneration, admitted into the bosom of the Church,
into the Covenant of faith and repentance, pardon and holiness; let us give
thanks to God for these graces, and pray that this child may lead his life
according to the present undertaking.

I.
WE give thee thanks and praise O heavenly and most gracious Father, that it
has pleased thee to call this child to thy holy Baptism, to renew him with thy
holy Spirit, to admit him into the Church, to adopt him for thy child, and to
receive him unto the profession of thy faith: and we humbly beseech thee to
grant unto him thy grace to accompany him all the days of his life, that he
may hold fast the profession of his faith, making his calling and election
sure, that his body being washed in pure water, and he tasting of the heavenly
gift, being made partaker of the holy Ghost, and sprinkled in his heart from an
evil Conscience, he may follow thee in the regeneration, and after the end of
this life he may for ever be with them who have washed their robes and made
them white in the blood of the Lamb. Grant this, O God our Father thorough
Jesus Christ our Blessed Savior and Redeemer.

II.
O most holy, most gracious Savior Jesus who love thy Church, and have given
thy self for it, that thou may sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of
water in the word; do thou with thy holy Spirit enlighten, and with thy word
instruct the understanding of this child that he may live by faith, and may
perceive the secrets of thy kingdom, and know thy will, and obey thy laws, and
promote thy glory.

III.
O God be thou his Father for ever, Christ his elder Brother and his Lord; the
Church his Mother; let the body of Christ be his food, the blood of Christ his
drink, and the Spirit the earnest of his inheritance. Let faith be his
learning, Religion his employment, his whole life be spiritual, heaven the
object of his hopes, and the end of his labors; let him be thy servant in the
kingdom of grace, and thy Son in the kingdom of glory thorough Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the priest add this blessing.

OUr Blessed Lord God, the Father of men and Angels, who has sent forth his
An-Angels ministers, appointing them to minister to the good of them who shall
be heirs of salvation, he of his mercy and goodness send his Holy Angel to be
the Guardian of this child, and keep him from the danger and violence of fire
and water, of falls and sad accidents, from evil tongues, and evil eyes, from
witchcraft and all impressions of the spirits of darkness, from Convulsions and
Rickets, from madness and stupidity, from folly and evil principles, from bad
examples and from evil teachers, from crookedness and deformity, from the
mutilation of a member or the loss of sense, from being useless and
unprofitable, from being impious, harsh natured and unreasonable; and make him
a wise, useful, and a holy person, beloved of men, and beloved of God, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

Amen.

YOU the Godfathers and Godmother of the child as you have done this charity to
the infant to bring him to Holy Baptism, so you must be sure to continue your
care over him till he be instructed in his duty, taught what vow he has made
by you, and how he shall perform it: To this purpose you shall take care that
he may learn the Lords prayer, the Apostles Creed, and the Commandments of our
Lord, that he may know how to pray, what to believe, and what to practice, and
when he is in all these things competently instructed, neglect not any
opportunity of bringing him to the Bishop that he by imposition of hands and
invocation of the holy Spirit of God may procure blessing and spiritual
strength to this child. Which duty when you have done you are discharged of
this trust, and from the mercies of God may humbly hope for the reward of your
charity.

So ends the office of Baptism.
THE DEVOTIONS and PROPER OFFICES for WOMEN.
An office for safe Childbirth.
I.
O Almighty Father of Men and Angels, in whose hands are the keys of life and
death, of the womb and of the grave, look down at this time in great mercy and
gentlest compassion upon thy servant. Thou have O God upon the weakest of
mankind fixed the sharpest decree of painful childbirth: but so thou love to
magnify thy mercies and thy power, that thy strength may be seen in our
weakness: so let it be O God unto thy handmaid, let thy loving kindness be her
confidence and her rest, her hope and her security, now and in the hour of her
travail.

II.
LORD let thy holy Angels be present with thy servant in their holy and
charitable ministeries about her person; it is a great thing that we require;
but we beg it of the great King of Heaven and Earth, the Lord of Angels, who
has promised that his Angels shall stand in circuit round about them that fear
the Lord: Look O Lord upon her fear, it is humble, but it is trembling: look
upon her love, and make it what it is not yet: do thou sanctify her fear of
thee, and change it into obedience, and carefulness of duty; increase her love
of thee, and make it to be pure and perfect, operative and buisie, zealous and
obedient: make it to grow up to the perfections of a Christian, and pass unto
the beauties of holiness; so shall thy servant feel thy daily mercies, and no
evil shall come near to hurt her.

III.
GRacious Father give thy servant leave to rely upon thy glorious promises:
thou have commanded us to call upon thee in our trouble, and have promised to
deliver us: O look upon thy handmaid, leave her not nor forsake her, for
trouble is hard at hand, and there is none that can help or deliver, but only
thou O God. In thee O Lord do we trust, let thy servants never be confounded.
Be pleased O Lord to give thy servant patience, and dereliction of her own
desires, perfect resignation of her own will, and a conformity to thine; that
she may with joy receive the blessing which thou will choose for her, and which
we humbly beg of thee, even that she may have a holy, a healthful, a joyful and
a safe deliverance of her burden: Lord keep her from all sad accidents and evil
contingencies, from violent pains and passions, from all undecency of
Comportment and unquietness of Spirit, from impatience and despair, from doing
any thing that is criminal, or feeling any thing that is intolerable.

IV.
O Lord my God give thy servants leave to pray to thee in behalf of this thy
handmaid, that thou will not cut her off in the midst of her days, nor
forsake her when her strength fails: but spare her O God, not for any
purposes of vanity, or the satisfaction of any impotent or secular desires, but
that she may live to serve thee, to redeem her time misspent in folly, to get
victory over temptations, and perfect dominion over her passions, to grow great
in religion, and of an excellent charity and devotion. O spare her a little
that she may recover her strength, before she goes hence and be no more seen:
so shall thy servant rejoice in thy mercies, and speak of thy loving kindness
in the Church of thy redeemed ones; and will spend her days in holiness and
zealous pursuances of religion. Remove her sins far from her as the East is
from the west; for thou did send thy most holy Son to die for us, and redeem
us from all the powers of sin and hell: thou know whereof we were made, and
remembrest that we are but dust: O do not visit her sins upon her by a hasty
death, but manifest thy mercies and thy pardon by giving her a mighty grace,
that she may live a holy life: and be pleased to grant this also that those
impresses of pious resolutions and religious purposes of fear and love, of hope
and desire, which thy grace in the circumstances of her present condition makes
upon her, may abide in her soul for ever, and in the days of ease and safety
may be as operative and productive of holiness, as now they are of a hearty
prayer and passionate desires for thy mercies upon her in a safe and blessed
childbirth.

V.
LORD bless her child, grant it may be born with a right shape and a perfect
body, with a comely countenance and straight limbs, with entire senses and
expedite faculties, with an excellent power of understanding and sweet
dispositions, and let thy holy Spirit of grace conduct it to the Sacrament of
Baptism, and in safety and holiness from the Cradle to the grave. Grant this O
Eternal God for his sake who was born of a holy maid, and suffered the
infirmities of nature, and dyed for our sins, and rose again for our
Justification, even our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

An Office of Public Thanksgiving for Women after their delivery from
Childbirth; [or any great sickness, or calamity, or fear.]
At the end of the morning prayer immediately before the blessing, the woman
presenting her self before God on her knees in some convenient place near to
him that ministers, begin with this exhortation.

FOrasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God who has commanded us when we are
afflicted to pray, and has promised to be with us in trouble, and has made
good his truth and mercy unto you in standing at your right hand in the day of
your sorrow and danger, giving you safe deliverance [ and a living and a
hopeful child This may be inserted or omitted according to the present
circumstances.]
] you shall therefore return to him the sacrifice of a thankful and joyful
heart in an humble acknowledgement of the divine mercies and goodness unto you
in this great blessing and deliverance [from the pain and peril of Childbirth.]
Or else name any other instance in which the Minister is required to give
thanks.

The psalm or Hymn of Thansgiving.
* THE Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want; he makes me lie down in green
pastures, he leads me besides the still waters.

He restores my Soul, he leads me in the paths of righteousness for his
names sake.

* Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death I will fear no
evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

I will declare thy name unto my Brethren: in the midst of the Congregation
will I praise thee.

* Ye that fear the Lord praise him, for he has not despised nor abhorred the
affliction of the afflicted, neither has he hid his face from him, but when he
cried unto him he heard.

O Lord my God I cried unto thee and thou have healed me.

* O Lord thou have brought up my Soul from the grave, thou have kept me alive
that I should not go down to the pit.

Sing unto the Lord O ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the remembrance of
his holiness.

* For his anger endures but for a moment; in his favor is life: weeping may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

I cried unto thee O Lord: unto the Lord I made my supplication.

* What profit is there in my blood, when I go down into the pit? shall the
dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?

Hear O Lord and have mercy upon me: Lord be thou my helper.

* Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou have put off my
sackcloth and girded me with gladness.

To the end that my glory may sing praise unto thee and not be silent: O Lord
my God I will give thanks to thee for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
Or else say the [Te Deum.

WE praise thee, O God, we knowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting.

* To thee all Angels cry aloud: the heavens and all the powers therein.

To thee Cherubim, and Seraphim, continually do cry,

* Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath,

Heaven and earth are full of the majesty of thy glory.

* The glorious company of the Apostles praise thee.

The goodly fellowship of the Prophets praise thee.

* The noble army of Martyrs praise thee.

The holy Church thoroughout all the world does acknowledge thee:

* The Father, of an infinite majesty.

Thy honorable, true, and only Son.

* Also the holy Ghost, the Comforter.

Thou art the King of glory, O Christ.

* Thou art the everlasting Son, of the Father

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou did not abhor the Virgins
womb.

* When thou had overcome the sharpness of death: thou did open the
kingdom of heaven to all believers.

* Thou sit at the right hand of God: in the glory of the Father.

We believe that thou shall come to be our judge.

* We therefore pray thee help thy servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting.

* O Lord save thy people, and bless thine heritage.

Govern them: and lift them up for ever.

* Day by day we magnify thee.

And we worship thy name: ever world without end.

* Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.

* O Lord let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.

O Lord in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.

Minister.

The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy Spirit.

Let us pray.

O Most merciful Savior and Redeemer Jesus, who were born of a pure and a holy
maid, who have felt the calamities of Mankind, and know how to pity our
infirmities, and rejoicest in doing and showing mercy to all that need and to
all that call to thee for succor, we give thee thanks and praise that thou
have heard the prayers and considered the cries, and releeved the necessities
of this thy servant, and kept her life from the grave, still continuing to her
a portion in the land of the living, and opportunities of serving thee. O be
pleased to continue and increase and to sanctify thy mercies to thy servant:
pardon al her sins, pity her infirmities, enable her duty, keep her from all
evil by thy blessed providence, let her portion be in the things of God and of
Religion, in the light of thy countenance, and the service of thy Majesty; that
she walking humbly and devoutly before thee; piously and dutifully to her
Relatives, doing justice, and giving good example to those with whom she shall
converse, may find the rewards of holiness, and the eternal mercies of God in
the day of thy glorious appearing, O Blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

Then shall be added this form of blessing.

THE Lord bless you and keep you: The Lord make his face to shine upon you and
be gracious unto you. The Lord lift up the light of his Countenance upon you
and give you peace.

The blessing of God Almighty, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be amongst you, and
abide with you, and be your portion for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer to be said immediately after the Woman's delivery, either by the
Priest or by any other in attendance.

O Almighty Lord and Father who healest every sickness and every disease, and
art ever gracious and always present to the prayers of them who in the day of
trouble call upon thy holy Name, thou have given delivery to this thy servant [
and made her the mother of a living child] still be pleased to continue and
renew thy loving kindness unto her; keep her from all violent accidents and
intolerable pains, from colds and fevers, defend her by the custody of thy
holy Angels of light, from all impresses of the powers of darkness: give her
rest and ^eep, a quiet spirit, and an easy ^ody, Confidence in thee and a
daily sense of thy ^^ercies; a speedy restitution of health and strength, and a
thankful heart to praise thee in the Congregation of Saints, and to serve thee
with an increasing and a persevering duty all the days of her life, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then if there be time and fitted circumstances add this prayer for the Child.

O Eternal God who have promised to be a Father to a thousand generations of
them that love and fear thee; be pleased to bless this child who is newly come
into a sad and most sinful world. O God preserve his life, and give him the
grace and Sacrament of Baptismal regeneration: do thou receive him and enable
him to receive thee, that he may have power to become the child of God; keep
him [or her] from the spirits that walk at noon, and from the evil Spirits of
the night, from all charms and enchantments, from sudden death and violent
accidents: give unto him a gracious heart and an excellent understanding, a
ready and unloosed tongue, a healthful and a useful body and a wise soul, that
he may serve thee and advance thy glory in this world, and may increase the
number of thy Saints and servants in the kingdom of our Lord Jesus. Amen.

To God the Father of our Lord Jesus:

To the eternal son of God, the son of man:

To the Spirit of the Father and the Son:

Be all honor and glory, praise and thanksgiving, love and obedience, now and
for evermore. Amen.

A prayer to be said by a new married wife entering into a family.

I.
O Eternal God the Father of wisdom and mercy, thou have been my guide and my
defense all my days, thou did take me from my mothers womb, and did
conduct me thorough the varieties of my life with much mercy and the issues of
a loving and wise providence: I bless thy name O Lord for all thy
dispensations; thou have done all things with infinite goodness and infinite
wisdom: thou have kept me from the effects of thy wrath, and the evils of my
own infirmities: thou did defend me from evils by the guard of Angels, and
did lead me into good by the conduct of thy holy Spirit: Thou have always
heard my prayer, ever being more ready to bless me then I to ask it: thou have
said unto me, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee; be therefore graciously
pleased to hear the prayer of thy handmaid, that I may have the aids of an
excellent providence and a mighty grace to do my duty in all my relations, in
all varieties and changes of the world, until my great change shall come.

II.
GIve thy blessing to thy servant my dear husband, give him a long life and a
confirmed health; encircle him with blessings, adorn him with thy grace,
nourish him with content, refresh him with a perpetual succession of comforts,
let the light of thy Countenance be upon him in all his actions and the
accidents of his life, and grant that he may still more and more increase in
the love and fear of thy holy name, that despising the things of this world he
may hunger and thirst after the things of God and of religion, and may have his
portion in the gathering together of the Saints in the kingdom of grace and
glory.

III.
BLess me, even me, O my Father, and grant that I may in all things do my duty
to thee my God: give me a perfect command over all my passions and affections,
that they being subject to my will, and my will guided by reason, and my reason
by religion, I may never suffer any undecency or violent transport, but may
pass thorough all the accidents of my life with meekness and a sober spirit,
with patience and charity, with prudence and holiness. O be pleased to give thy
servant a right judgment in all things, that I may not be amazed at trifles
nor discomposed by every contrariety of accidents, nor passionate for the
things of the world, nor discontent if thou should smite me: but that I may
with an even and a quiet spirit do my duty, and comply with every variety of
thy providence, and obey my husband, and be amiable in his eyes, and useful and
careful for his children: ever desiring to approve my self to thee in a holy
and hearty obedience, in piety and devotion, in patience and humility, in
chastity and purity, in all holiness of conversation: and do thou give thy
holy and blessed Spirit to guide and teach me all my days, that I may overcome
all my infirmities, and comply with and bear the infirmities of others, and
charitably pardon their errors, and fairly expound their actions, and wisely
perceive their intentions, and with a Christian ingenuity deport my self in all
things, giving offense to none but doing good to all I can; that I may receive
pardon from thee for all my sins, and a pity for all my infirmities, and thy
blessing upon all my actions, and a sanctification of all my intentions, and
when my life is done I may have the peace of God, and the testimony of a holy
Conscience to accompany me to my grave, and to consign me to a holy and a
blessed resurrection, to partake of the inheritance which thou have provided
for thy saints and servants. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our dearest
Lord and Savior. Amen.

For a fruitful Womb.

I.
O Most gracious and eternal God, Father and Lord of all the creatures, thou
did sanctify marriage in the state of Innocence, in the dwellings of
paradise, and did design it for the production of mankind, and did give it
as one of the first blessings of mankind. O be pleased to look upon thy
handmaid who waits for thy mercy, and humbly begs of thy infinite goodness to
make me partaker of that blessing which thou did design to all the sons and
daughters of Adam: thou O God have the keys of heaven and hell, of rain and
providence, of the womb and the grave: O let not thy servant feel the curse of
dry breasts and a barren womb, but make me a joyful Mother of children, that
thy handmaid may serve thee in increasing the number of thy redeemed ones, and
may minister blessings to this family into which thou have adopted me, and may
bring comfort to my dear husband, whom do thou bless, and love, and sanctify
for ever.

II.
O God I confess I am unworthy of this or any other favor; I am less then the
least of thy mercies, yet our weakness and unworthiness cannot be the measures
of thy mercy: thou art good and gracious, infinitely gracious, essentially
good, and delightest in showing mercy to them that call upon thee, and put
their trust in thee: O dear God I remember that thou did relieve the sorrows
of thy servant Hannah, and gave her the blessing of children; thou did
bless the womb of Elizabeth who was barren; thou spakest the word and the
rocks did rend, and they sent forth a pleasant stream: Thy hand is not shortened
and thy mercies are not less then ever, no less then infinite, and why should
not thy servant hope that thou will hear my prayer and grant the desire of my
soul? Even so O gracious father let it be as thou please: thy wisdom is
infinite, and thy counsels are secret, and the ways and lines of thy
providence are like the path of a bird in the air, not to be discovered by our
weak sight.

III.
I Know O God that thou love to hear our prayers, and thou delightest in the
humble, passionate and resigned desires of thy servants. Although O God I
desire this blessing with an earnestness as great as any temporal favor, yet I
humbly submit my desires, my interests, my content and all that I am or have to
thy holywill and pleasure, humbly begging of thee that I may cheerfully suffer,
and obediently do thy will, and choose what thou choosest, and observe the
ways of thy providence, and revere thy judgment, and wait for thy mercy, and
delight in thy dispensation, and expect that all things shall work together for
good to them that fear thee. O let thy holy Spirit for ever be present with me,
and make me to fear thee and to love thee above all the things in the world for
ever, and then no ill can come unto thy servant: for whosoever loves thee
cannot perish. Hear the prayer of thy servant, and relieve my sorrow, and
sanctify my desires and accept me in the Son of thy love and of thy desires,
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

A prayer to be used by an afflicted wife in behalf of a vicious Husband.

I.
O Eternal Father thou preserver of men, thou great lover of souls, who did
send thy holy Son to die that mankind might be redeemed, and sin might be
destroyed: Thou know how intolerable a thing it is that a Soul should to
eternal ages be incircled with thy wrath, and the indignation of a mighty and
an angry God; and therefore do love to do miracles of mercy, because thou
love not that a sinner should perish: Be pleased to give thy handmaid leave
to present her humble desires in behalf of a sinner, one sinner for another;
the miserable for him that is ready to perish. Lord look down in mercy upon my
Husband; snatch him from the jaws of Hell, suffer him not to perish in his
sin; but open his eyes with the light of thy word and of thy Spirit, that he
may espy his danger, that he may behold the deformity of his sins [ the
injuriousness of his actions, the folly of his pleasures] the iniquity of his
vows.

II.
CLeanse his hands and heart from all unrighteousness [ from bloud-guiltiness,
from rapine, from violence, from cruelty] O Lord, and purify his soul and body
from all impurity, [ from all intemperance, from the violence and fury of
passion] giving him a perfect repentance, and a perfect pardon: and if it be
thy will, let me also some way or other cooperate toward the recovery of his
precious soul; and be pleased to remember the sufferings of thy handmaid, not
that he may receive evil, but that I may find good from thy gracious hands in
the day of recompense, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

If she have escaped any violence intended against her by his malice or
passion; then add this prayer of thanksgiving.

O God my God and Father, thou have strangely preserved and rescued me from
evil, thou have made decrees in heaven for my safety and preservation; and for
the glory of thy own name thou have diverted the arrow that was directed
against me. What am I O Lord, and what can I do, or what have I done that thou
should do this for me? I am O God a miserable sinner, and I can do nothing
without a mighty grace, and I have done nothing by my self but what I am
ashamed of, and yet I have received great mercies and miracles of providence. I
see, O God, I see that thy goodness is the cause and the measure of all my
hopes and all my good: and upon the confidence and greatness of that goodness I
humbly beg of thy sacred Majesty to keep and defend me from all evil by thy
wise providence; to lead me into all good by the conduct of thy divine Spirit;
and where I have done amiss give me pardon, and where I have been mistaken give
me pity, and where I have been injured give me thy favor and a gracious
exchange; that I may serve thee here with diligence and love, and hereafter may
rejoice with thee and love thee as I desire to love thee, and as thou deservest
to be loved, even with all the powers and degrees of passion and essence, to
eternal ages, in the inheritance of Jesus, whom I love, for whom I will not
refuse to die, in whom I desire to live and die; to whom with thee O gracious
Father and the holy Spirit be all honor and glory, love and obedience for ever
and ever. Amen.

A Mothers prayer for her children.

I.
MOst Gracious and Eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Father of Men
and Angels, Father of mercies and God of all comforts, thou have promised to be
a Father to a thousand generations of them that love and fear thee; be thou a
God and a Father to me and the children which thou have given me. Enable me O
Lord to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord and in the fear
of God to the praise of thy holy Name. O give me thy grace and favor that I
may instruct them with diligence and meekness, govern them with prudence and
holiness, provide for them useful employments and competent provisions of life
and comfort, leading them in the paths of religion and justice, by example and
precepts of holiness; never provoking them to wrath, never indulging them in
their follies, never conniving at an unworthy action: and that all my children
may be thine, O preserve them in thy favor, or take them away from hence while
they are. If thou please, let them live to a full age, but secure to them a
full measure of piety and holiness thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

II.
TO this end give them grace to obey their Parents, that doing the duty, they
may receive the promise; preserve them from sin and shame, from youthful
follies and youthful crimes. Sanctify them thoroughout in their bodies, and
souls, and spirits; that their thoughts may be pure and holy, not displeasing
or misbecomming the eye of him who is the searcher of hearts; let their words
be true, prudent and ingenuous, seasoned with grace and apt to minister grace
unto the hearers: let all their actions in their whole life be such as
becomes the servants of Jesus, holy and useful, that they may not be burdens
to the public, or to their family, but pleasing thee and doing good to others
they may increase in the love of God, and in favor with men, and may have the
portion of the meek and humble in this world, and of the pure and merciful in
the world to come thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The VViddows Prayer.

I.
O Eternal God, most Gracious Lord and my most merciful Father, thou art my
refuge and my hope, my sanctuary and my rock my guardian and protector all my
days. I have offended thee and thou have smitten me, I have deserved very much
evil, and thou have corrected me with the gentle visitation of a Fathers rod:
and though thy hand is heavy and thy rod presses me sore by reason of my own
weakness and infirmities, yet when I consider how little I suffer in respect of
what I have deserved, I cannot but adore thy goodness, and delight in thy
mercies, and run for help and comfort, support and conduct from that hand which
smites me. O my God give me patience under thy afflicting hand; for my
impatience I fear has provoked thee to anger, and has doubled my own
calamity; and since my duty is my proper cure, and will make thy hand easy, and
thy anger little, give thy servant a quiet and a r^signed, a humble and a meek
spirit, that I may not become my own tormenter, and my sin may not be my own
punishment.

II.
O My gracious Lord, do to me what seems good in thy own eyes; I am like
clay in the hands of the potter, and what am I that I should repine against the
acts of thy providence and dispensation? Behold O God, thy Handmaid is but a
worm before thee; shall dust and ashes repine against God? Thou art just and
righteous in all thy ways, and though thou have afflicted me sore, yet
blessed be thy holy Name I have not lost my hope, and I can yet pray, and I
will trust in thee though I die; only be thou pleased to let this thy heavy
hand efforme in me the effects of grace, and conform me to the likeness of
the holy Jesus my dearest Savior; that I may so bear the Cross that I may
never displease him, nor dishonor the excellent name of a Christian by which I
am called.

III.
I Am O my God by the means of thy heavy hand not only under the discipline
of a Child, but have also obtained a new title to thy especial providence and
protection; for thou art the patron of the poor, the helper of the
friendlesse, the father of the fatherless, and the defender of the widows,
and if these be the effects of thy anger, and that when thou smitest us thy
verystrokes are healing, and thy displeasure is medicinal, what shall thy
servant expect will be the effect of thy pardon and loving kindness? but yet O
my Lord help me in my duty, and though I have failed in all my relations
hitherto, by my impatience and murmr, by my careless comportment and
undutifull behavior toward thee; yet now let my sad state of Widdowhood be a
state of holiness and repentance, of devotion and a severe religion. Let me
recollect my years in bitterness, and my soul in sorrow for my sins; let me
have no affections for the things of this world; but let my hope and all my
joy, my desires and my conversation be in heaven, and all my employment and
care be how I may enjoy thee in holy and spiritual unions and adherencies.

IV.
O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps: I have often resolved to live innocently, and I
have often broken all my holy purposes; and I cannot of my self think one good
thought as of my self, but my sufficiency is of thee; thou art my strength: O
preserve thy servant in my single state of Widdowhood, that I may never have
any thought of change till the day of my great change shall come; be thou O God
a covering of the eyes unto thy handmaid; let me have no loves but thine, no
affections but for thy service; and since thou have broken in pieces that holy
band of conjugal society which thy holy ordinance did tie between my dear
[Lord and] Husband and thy handmaid, give me thy grace dearly to preserve his
memory, to retain the impresses and remembrances of that affection, and to
entertain no new ones; but wholly employ my time, my estate, and all my powers
in [ If she have children insert this within the Colu^ns
bringing up my children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, in making
fair and fitting provisions for them, in giving them good example] in bearing
the burden of the Lord sweetly, in prayers and fastings, in alms and piety,
in reading and meditating, in spiritual and Sacramental Communions, that when
the work of my life is done, I may find pardon and favor, and acceptance at
the hands of my Lord, and a portion among thy saints and servants.

If there be children of both sexes let the following portion be added.

V.
O My God now thy servant has taken upon me to speak to my Lord, let not my
Lord be angry not reject the prayer of his servant, interceding and praying for
my children, the pledges of my dear [Lord and] Husband: preserve them O God in
the strictest duty and services to thy self: O be thou their God and father,
let thy providence be their portion, thy service their employment, thy Angels
their guards; keep them so by thy preventing and restraining grace that they
may not by their own sins provoke thee to anger and jealousy; and let not the
sins of their forefathers be visited upon them in thy anger and displeasure:
thou love to show mercy, and thou delightest in the affections of thy loving
kindness, and thou art displeased when our vilenesses constrain thee to power
down thy judgments on us. O be pleased to grant that they living in holy
obedience to thee, may feel a perpetual stream of mercy, refreshing and
supporting them, and let them not bear another burden, for thou art just and
merciful, righteous and true, and have sentenced every one to bear their own
iniquity.

VI.
GReat God of mercy, heal all the breaches of this family, preserve and
increase the remaining comforts and advantages of it, support the estate, renew
thy favor to it, and perpetually pour down thy blessings upon it; for the
light of thy countenance and thy gracious influence does preserve and bless,
support and nourish, honor and advance persons, and families, and kingdoms.
Bless my eldest son; give him an obedient and a loving spirit, a provident and
a wise heart, a worthy and a pious comportment, a blessed [ and an honourable]
posterity: to my younger sons give health and holiness, wisdom and fair
fortunes, the love of God and good men: to my daughters give thy perpetual
grace and favor, that they may live in honor and a severe chastity, free from
sin and shame, from temptation and a snare, and let their portion be in the
blessing, in the love and service of God. Let them live in the favor of God
and man, useful to others, and honor to their family, a comfort to all their
relatives and friends, and servants to thy divine Majesty.

VII.
PReserve me thy servant from all evil, lead me into all good; change my
sorrows into comforts, my infirmity into spiritual strength; take all
iniquity from me, and let thy servant never depart from thee. I am thine, O
save me; I am thine, sanctify me and preserve me for ever; that neither life
nor death, health nor sickness, prosperity nor adversity, weakeness within nor
cross accidents without may ever separate me from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Amen, Blessed Jesus, Amen.
The Offices or Forms OF Prayer and Devotion for The Miserable and Afflicted.
An Office to be said in the days of persecution of a Church, by sacrilegious
or violent persons.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Minister.

O God make speed to save us.

Answer.

O Lord make have to help us.

Minister.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Answer.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

I.
A Hymn petitory and complaining.
O God the Heathen are come into thine inheritance: thy holy Temple have they
defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones.

The adversaries roar in the midst of the congregations, and set up their
banners for tokens.

* They have set fire upon thy holy places: and have defiled the dwelling
places of thy Name, even unto the ground.

They have destroyed all the carved work thereof with axes and hammers.

* Yea they have said in their hearts, Let us make havoc of them altogether:
thus have they spoiled the houses of God in the land.

O God how long shall the adversary do this dishonor? how long shall the
enemy blaspheme thy name; for ever?

* Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy
bosom: for they have devoured Jacob, and laid wast his dwelling place.

They have said, come and let us root them out, that they be no more a people,
and that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

* Hold not thy tongue O God; keep not still silence: refrain not thy self O
God: for they have cast their heads together with one consent, and are
con^ederate against thee.

They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy
hidden ones.

* O Lord God of hosts how long will thou be angry with thy people that prays?

Thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and give them plenteousnesse of
tears to drink.

* Will thou be displeased at us for ever? and will thou stretch out thy wrath
from one generation to another?

Will thou not turn again and quicken us, that thy people may rejoice in thee?

* Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he be no more entreated? Is
his mercy clean gone for ever? and is his promise come utterly to an end for
evermore?

Has God forgotten to be gracious? and will he shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure?

* O do thou bring the wickedness of the ungodly to an end, but guide thou
the just.

Bring down the ungodly and malicious: take away his iniquity and thou shall
find none.

* Show thy mavelous loving kindness, thou that art the Savior of them that
put their trust in thee, from such as resist thy right hand.

So will not we go back from thee: quicken us and we will call upon thy name.

* Turn us again O Lord God of Hosts.

Cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

* Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
I. A Hymn consolatory, in time of persecution.
* THE Lord is in his Holy temple; the Lords seat is in Heaven; his eyes
consider the poor: and his eyelids try the children of men.

Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord: and the people whom he has
chosen for his own inheritance.

* For thou shall save thy people that are in adversity: and shall bring down
the high looks of the proud.

Thou shall keep them O Lord, thou shall preserve them from this generation for
ever: For the righteous Lord loves righteousness; his countenance will behold
the thing that is just.

* For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise says the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that swells against
him.

For the Lord will not fail his people, neither will he forsake his
inheritance: until righteousness turn again unto judgment: and all such as
be true in heart shall follow it.

* O how plentiful is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee, and that thou have prepared for them that put their trust in thee, even
before the sons of men!

Thou shall hide them privily by thine own presence from the provoking of al
men; thou shall keep them secretly in thy tabernacle from the strife of
tongues.

* Great plagues remain for the Ungodly: but who so puts his trust in the
Lord, mercy embraces him on every side.

He calls upon the Lord, and the Lord hears him, yea and saves him out of
all his troubles.

* He delivers their souls from death, and feeds them in the days of
famine: They shall not be confounded in the perilous time, and in the days of
dearth they shall have enough.

The Lord orders a good man's going, and makes his way acceptable to himself.

* Though he fall, he shall not be cast away: for the Lord upholdeth him with
his hand.

Thou Lord shall save both man and beast: how excellent is thy mercy O God! and
the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

* O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts in
him.

The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
prayers.

* The righteous cry and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all
their troubles.

O love the Lord all ye his Saints: for the Lord preserves them that are
faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud doer.

* The salvation of the righteous comes of the Lord: which is also their
strength in the time of trouble.

And the Lord shall stand by them and save them: he shall deliver them from the
Ungodly, and shall save them, because they put their trust in him.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
The following Hymns may be said in the public or private calamities of a
Church, of a family, of a single person; under persecution or oppression, false
imprisonment, unjust and vexatious law-suites, etc.

III.
* MY soul waits still upon God: for of him comes my salvation. He verily
is my strength and my salvation, so that I shall not greatly fall.

Thou also shall light my candle: the Lord my God shall make my darkness to be
light.

* Thou have given a token for such as fear thee, that they may triumph because
of the truth.

Therefore were thy beloved delivered: help me with thy right hand and hear
me.

* O praise the Lord which dwells in Sion: show the people of his doings.

For when he makes inquisition for blood, he remembers and forgets not the
complaint of the poor.

* For the poor shall not always be forgotten: the patient abiding of the
meek shall not perish for ever.

He has not despised nor abhorred the low estate of poor: he has not hid his
face from him, but when he called unto him he heard him.

* Wherefore should the wicked blaspheme God, while he does say in his heart,
Tush thou God carest not for it?

Surely thou have seen it: for thou beholdest ungodliness and wrong, that
thou may take the matter into thine hand: the poor commits himself unto
thee: for thou art the helper of the freindlesse.

* Lord thou have heard the desire of the poor: thou preparest their heart and
thine ear hearkneth thereto.

To help the fatherless and poor to their right: that the man of the earth be
no more exalted against them.

* O cast thy burden upon the Lord and he shall nourish thee: and shall not
suffer the righteous to fall for ever.

Hold thee still in the Lord, and abide patiently upon him: but greive not thy
self at him whose way does prosper, against the man that does after evil
counsels.

* For wicked doers shall be rooted out: but they that wait upon the Lord,
they shall inherit the earth.

For yet a little while and the wicked shall not be: yea thou shall diligently
consider his place, and it shall not be.

* But the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the
abundance of peace.

So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous:
doubtless there is a God that judges the Earth.

* Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
IIII. A Hymn consolatory and petitory for the Church and Clergy in times of
persecution.
* BLessed are they that dwell in thy house; they will be always praising thee.

Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways.

* Blessed is the people O Lord that can rejoice in thee: they shall walk in
the light of thy countenance.

For the Lord God is a sun and a shield: the Lord will give grace and glory,
and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

* Many O Lord my God are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and thy
thoughts which are toward us: they cannot be reckoned up in order to thee: if
I would declare and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered.

Many shall see it and fear, and put their trust in the Lord.

* The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks occasion to slay him: but the
Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.

The righteous shall rejoice in the Lord, and put his trust in him: and all
they that are true of heart shall be glad.

* Keep innocence and take heed unto the thing that is right: for that shall
bring a man peace at the last.

They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.

* He that now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed, shall
doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him.

The Lord from out of Sion shall so bless thee, that thou shall see Jerusalem
in prosperity all thy life long, and peace upon Israel.

* For God will save Sion, and build the Cities of Judah, that men may dwell
there and have it in possession.

The posterity also of his servants shall inherit it, and they that love his
name shall dwell therein.

* Arise O Lord into thy resting place, thou and the Arc of thy strength.

Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt; thou have cast out the heathen and
planted it.

* Thou made room for it; and when it had taken root it filled the land.

The hills were covered with the shadow of it: and the boughs thereof were like
the goodly Cedar trees.

* Why have thou then broken down her hedge, that all that go by pluck off her
grapes.

The wild boar out of the wood does root it up, and the wild beasts of the
field devour it.

* Turn thee again thou God of hosts: behold and visit this vine, and the
place of thy vineyard that thy right hand has planted, and the branch that
thou made so strong for thy self.

Turn us again O God, show the light of thy countenance, and we shall be
whole.

* Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness.

Let thy Saints sing with joyfulnesse.

* So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever.

We will show forth thy praise from generation to generation.

* Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
If there be occasion add the Lxxxix Psalm. and the xxi. and the Lxi.

Then for the lesson, Read. Judges II. or or III. I. Samuel. XXXI Ezra IX.
Nehemiah IX. Daniel IX. or Matthew XIX. verse. 16 to the end of Mat. XX Matthew
XXI.

* If there be famine, or dearth, or drowth, read Jerem. 14.

If two lessons be read at one meeting, then let one of the former Hymns be
read between the two lessons; and omitted before.

If but one lesson be read, or After the second lesson [if there be two] say
this Psalm.

* Plead thou my cause O Lord with them that strive with me: for they have
laid their net to destroy me without a cause, yea even without a cause have
they made a pit for my soul.

Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me: neither let
them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.

* For they speak not peace, but they devise deceitful matters against them
that are quiet in the land.

They rewarded me evil for good, to the great discomfort of my soul.

* Stir up thy self and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause, my God
and my Lord.

Judge me O Lord my God according to my righteousness, and let them not
rejoice over me.

* And my soul shall be joyful in the Lord: it shall rejoice in his salvation.

All my bones shall say, Lord who is like unto thee which deliverest the poor
from him that is too strong for him, yea the poor and needy from him that
spoileth him?

* Let them shout for joy and be glad that favor my righteous cause, yea let
them say continually, let the Lord be magnified which has pleasure in the
prosperity of his servants.

Trust in the Lord and do good, so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily
thou shall be fed.

* Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him: fret not thy self because of
him who prospers in his way, because of the man who brings wicked devices
to pass.

For the Lord shall laugh at him: for he sees that his day is coming.

* Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
Minister.

The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy Spirit.

Let us pray.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The Collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God who hate nothing that thou have made, and
love not that a sinner should die; before thee and before thy Angels there is
joy in heaven at the conversion of a sinner; thou have promised pardon to the
penitent, and salvation to them that persevere: O grant that we may never
presume on thy mercy, or despise the riches of thy goodness; but that thy
forbearance and long suffering may lead us to repentance: create and make in us
new and contrite hearts, that we truly mourning for our sins, and forsaking
them, condemning our selves, and justifying thee, crucifying the old man, and
becoming new creatures may obtain of thee mercy and remission, that though we
are now worthily punished for our sins, by the comfort of thy grace we may be
mercifully releived through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

I. The prayer for the Church.
O Eternal God, thou preserver of men and the Great lover of souls, have pity
and compassion upon thine afflicted handmaid the Church of [ England] Thou have
humbled us for our pride, and chastised us for our want of discipline. O
forgive us all our sins by which thou have been provoked to anger and to
Jealousy, to despise our sorrows and to arm thy self against us.

II.
Blessed God smite us not with a final and exterminating judgment, call not
the watchmen off from their guards, nor the Angels from their charges: let us
not die by a famine of thy Word and Sacraments: If thou smitest us with the rod
of a man, thou can sanctify every stroke unto us, and can bring good out of
the evil, and delightest to do so: but nothing can bring us a recompense if
thou hate us, and suffer the souls of thy people to perish.

III.
Unite our hearts and tongues, take away the Spirit of error and division from
amongst us; and so order all the accidents of thy providence that religion may
increase, and our devotion may be great and popular, and truth may be
encouraged and promoted, and thy Name glorified, and thy servants comforted and
instructed, that thy holy Spirit may rule, and all interests may stoop and
obey, publish and advance the honor of our Lord Jesus. Amen.

For the Superior Clergy.

O Most blessed Savior Jesus, King of Heaven and earth, the head and prince of
the Catholic Church, who have appointed thy servants Ministers and stewards in
the house of thy Father to give bread to the hungry, and drink to them that
thirst after the water of life flowing from the Fountains of our Savior:
continue and bless, sanctify and adorn with thy gifts and graces all the
Spiritual guides and governors which thou have appointed over us; that they
may continue in thy service to comfort the afflicted, to instruct the ignorant,
to confirm the strong, to defend and promote thy truth, to intercede for thy
servants, to open the kingdom of heaven to all beleivers, and to shut up the
disobedient and rebellious in everlasting prisons, by the keys of the
Kingdom, by thy word and Sacraments, by thy power and by thy Spirit; remove
not the Candlestick from us, neither do thou quench the light of Israel; but
let thy servants [our Bishops, and Priests] be like burning and shining lights
in the Temple of God by a continual, never failing, never broken succession,
offering up the daily sacrifice, rejoicing in the plenty of peace and the
employments of thy house, in holy offices and a daily ministration; that thou
being for ever pleased and for ever glorified, we may be thy peculiar people, a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, clothed with righteousness and singing
with joyfulnesse Eternal Hallelujahs to the honor of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

For Priests and the Inferior Clergy.

MOst Blessed and Eternal Jesu, who art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedek, and have separated thy servants to minister to thee in holy
offices, and to convey holy things unto the people; give unto all thy servants
the Ministers of thy word and Sacraments the spirit of prudence and knowledge,
of faith and charity, of watchfulness and holy zeal, that they as good helps
in Government may declare thy will faithfully to their congregations, and
administer the Sacraments purely and devoutly, and by their holy life become an
example to thy little flock, that so they with cheerfulness and joy may render
an account of their charge, and may by thy mercy obtain the blessing of thy
Preisthood, and the glories of thy Kingdom O most Blessed and Eternal Savior
who live and reignest with the Father and the holy Spirit eternal God world
without end. Amen.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ etc.

To this office may be added the confession of sins taken out of S. Ephraim the
Syrian, [ in the Evening prayer for a family] and said immediately before the
collect.

Or else.

Immediately before the blessing (as opportunity shall require or permit) may
be said the Let any described at the end of these devotions.

Any of these prayers or psalms may upon any occasion ordinary or
extraordinary be used in any of the other offices.

In time of War; to the foregoing offices may be added these following
prayers, taken out of a special office published by the authority of Queen
Elizabeth 1597.

I. A prayer for an Army, or Navy in time of War
O Almighty Lord God of hosts, the prince of peace and the everlasting
Counselor, we humbly beseech thee so to conduct, encourage and defend our [
Armies and Fleets] with thy mighty arm, and thy wise providence that what they
shall attempt or take in hand for defense of this [ Church and State] may be
prosperous and blessed. Direct and lead them all in safety, strengthen their
Governors and leaders with sound counsel and wise Conduct: The officers and
soldiers with ready obedience and valiant resolution. Bless their conflicts
with signal victories; give them blessed opportunities of effecting the
purposes of peace and justice with the least bloodshed. Preserve them from
contagious diseases, from the violence of sword and sicknesses, from evil
accidents, or crafty designs, from treachery or surprise, from carelessness of
their duty, and fromall irreligion, from confusion or fear, from mutiny and
disorder. Give them an happy and an honorable return, that we being defended
from our enemies, thy servant [our Sovereign, or Supreme] may rejoice in thy
mercies, and thy church may give thee thanks in the days of peace, and all
thy people may worship thee in a holy religion, giving thee praise and honor
and glory for ever in Eternal ages through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.

I.
O Most mighty Lord God who reignest over all the Kingdoms of Men, thou have
power in thy hand to cast down and to raise up, to save thy servants and to
rebuke their enemies, and in all ages have given victory to the people,
effecting by small numbers what man cannot do by the multitude of an Host: Let
thy ears be now open unto our prayers and thy merciful eyes upon our trouble
and our danger. O Lord do thou judge our cause in righteousness and mercy,
prosper our arms, and defend our armies. Establish us in the rights thou have
given us, in our lands and in our goods, in our Government and in our laws, in
our Religion and in all the holy orders which thou have appointed to minister
to all who shall be heirs of salvation.

II.
Never let ambition or Cruelty, thirst of Empire or thirst of blood, the
greediness of of spoil, or the pleasures of a victory make us either to love
war, or to neglect all the just ways of peace: and grant unto the Army such
piety and prudence, such happy circumstances and blessed events, that none of
them may do any act misbecoming Christians, Disciples and servants of the
prince of peace. Do thou O God bless them in all their just actions and
necessary defenses, that they may neither do wrong, nor suffer any. Let not
our enemies have their unjust desires, nor their mischeivous imaginations
prosper, leaft we become a scorn and derision to our oppressors. The race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to thestrong, and a horse is counted but a
vain thing to save a man: but our trust is in the name of the Lord our God, he
is our strength and our defense, for it is thou O Lord who can indifferently
save with many or with few.

III.
Wherefore from thy holy sanctuary open thine eyes and behold, stretch forth
thy hand and help, defend and save our Armies and Navies, O thou God of power,
from all evil of man, and all evil of chance. Cover their heads in the day of
battle and danger: send thy fear before thy servants, that our enemies may
flee before them: let thy faith make them valiant in fight, and put to flight
the armies of [Aliens, Rebels etc.] and by this shall thy servants know thou
favourest us in that our Enemy does not triumph against us, and shall always
confess to the praise of thy name that it was thou Lord the shield of our hope
and the sword of our glory, who have done great things for us; and evermore
say, Praised be the Lord that has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants.
Hear us O Lord for the glory of thy name, for thy loving mercy, and for thy
truth sake through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An Office for Prisoners.
THe foregoing ordinary Offices are fitted for all mankind in General, and so
may be also used by these in their Prisons: To which they may add what is fit
for them in the following devotions: and upon Solemn occasion, or upon special
necessity or devotion they may entirely and distinctly use the following
prayers and psalms, etc.

In the Name of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Versicle.

O God make speed to save us.

Answer.

O Lord make have to help us.

Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
The Psalm.
I Will cry unto God with my voice; even unto God will I cry with my voice and
he shall hearken unto me.

In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord; in the night my sore ceased not:
my soul refused to be comforted.

* When I am in heaviness I will think upon God: when my heart is vexed I
will complain.

O remembet how short my time is: wherefore have thou made all men for naught.

* I go hence like the shadow that departs, and am driven away as the
grasshopper: But the Lord shall endure for ever, he has also prepared his seat
for judgment.

For he shall judge the world in righteousness; and minister true judgment
unto his people.

* The Lord also will be a defense for the oppressed, even a refuge in due time
of trouble.

And they that know thy Name will put their trust in thee: for thou Lord have
never failed them that seek thee.

* Deliver me O Lord from the evil man: preserve me from the violent man.

I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the right
of the poor.

* Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto they Name: the upright shall
dwell in thy presence.

O let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before thee: according to
the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die.

* The humble shall consider this and be glad: Seek ye after God and your
soul shall live.

For the Lord hears the poor: and despises not his prisoners.

* Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high?

Who humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth?

* He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the
Dunghill.

Blessed be the name of the Lord, from this time forth for evermore.

* For he satisfies the longing soul: and fills the hungry soul with
goodness.

Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction
and iron.

* He brings them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and breaks
their bands in sunder.

O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders
that he does for the children of men.

Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
Or this.

IN thee O Lord have I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion: but rid
me and deliver me in thy righteousness, incline thine ear unto me and save me.

Be thou my strong hold whereunto I may always resort: thou have promised to
help me, for thou art my house of defense and my Castle.

* As for the children of men they are but vanity: the children of men are
deceitful: upon the weights they are altogether lighter then vanity it self.

O trust not in wrong and robbery, give not your selves unto vanity: if riches
increase set not your heart upon them.

* Up Lord, why sleep thou? awake and be not absent from us for ever.

Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our misery and trouble?

* For our soul is brought low even unto the dust: our belly cleaves unto the
ground.

O cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: and shall not
suffer the righteous to fall for ever.

* For this God is our God for ever: he shall be our guide unto death.

There the wicked cease from troubling: and there the weary be at rest.

* There the prisoners rest together: they hear not the voice of the oppressor.

The small and great are there: and the servant is free from his Master.

* Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in
the Lord his God.

Which helps them to right that suffer wrong, which feeds the hungry.

* The Lord loses men out of prison, the Lord gives sight to the blind, he
helps them that fall: the Lord cares for the righteous.

Praise the Lord O my soul, while I live will I praise the Lord, yea as long
as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God.

Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
The Lesson.
Read Genesis 39. Genesis 40. Isai. 42. 51. Jerem. 32. or Jerem. 37. Jerem. 52.
Matthew 25. Acts 5. Acts 16.

Let these be read at several times: and if the office be said in private, let
him that reads and is interested, meditate a while. After which let him humbly
kneel down and pray.

I. The Prayer for all Prisoners.
O Almighty God, the Merciful Father of all that put their trust in thee, look
down from the beauteous throne of thy glory with much mercy and compassion
upon us thy servants, who are children of misery, full of sin and full of
calamity, whose only hope is in the mercies and loving kindness of the Lord.
O do thou pardon all our trespasses and debts by which we are in arrears to
thee; put them upon the accounts of the Cross; for our Blessed and most
gracious Lord has paid our price to redeem us from the Eternal prisons: and
be thou pleased to enrich us with thy holy Spirit; that we may be strong in
faith, abounding in hope, established in a holy patience, and rich in charity;
expecting with meekness and submission when the times of refreshment shall
come from the presence of the Lord, our Blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesus Amen.

II. For Prisoners of Debt.
ENable us O God thou treasure of all goodness and all plenty and all justice,
to do our duty to those to whom we are obliged, let not their kindness to us
be injurious to them, nor our poverty become their calamity, but do thou
enable us by the miracles of thy mercy to do what we are bound to do; or
incline our creditors to accept what we can, and make us willing to do
according to the utmost of our power; and do thou make it up in the blessings
of plenty and mercy what is diminished to them by our poverty and infelicity.
Restore us O God to the light of thy countenance, to the sense of thy mercies
and refreshments: sanctify our present condition; make us humble and obedient,
quiet and peaceable, temperate and patient: let not our calamities exasperate
our spirit; nor the present affliction make us to seek for comfort in the
creature, much less in vice and the stupors of drunkenness, in profane
noises and evil company. O let our hopes be in thee, and our joy in thee only
and in thy service through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

III. For Prisoners of Crime.
O Eternal and most Holy Savior Jesus, who were brighter then an Angel, purer
then the morning star, and yet were pleased for our redemption to take upon
thee our guilt, that suffering our punishment thou might rescue us from an
intolerable state of evil: Thou did for our sakes suffer thy self to be
imprisoned in the house of the Highpreist, and have thy holy hands bound with
cords, that thou might procure to us the liberty of the sons of God; O look
upon us with a gracious eye. Thou did suffer and yet were innocent, we suffer
less then we have deserved; and hope in thy goodness that we never shall
suffer so much. O hear our cries from the bottom of our prisons, from the
depths of our sorrows; let this affliction be thy discipline to work
contrition and repentance in our hearts. Thou art just O God in all that we
suffer, and thou art to be glorified; and shame and confusion of face belongs
unto us as it is this day: but never let us suffer the confusion of a sad
eternity: Accept our sorrow and repentance, our suffering and our shame; that
in the blood of the Lamb and in the tears of repentance our sins being
washed, our souls may be presented pure and spotless before the throne of
grace, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

IV. If the Prisoners be condemned to death then add this prayer.
O Most merciful Savior who did glorify thy mercy by giving pardon and
promising paradise to the repenting theife; thy mercies have no limit, and thy
loving kindness cannot be measured; O hear the cries and deepest groanings of
miserable perishing sinners, who cannot look up with any hope, but only
because thy glorious mercy is greater then can be understood, and by thy own
measures thou do good to the miserable and calamitous. Thou did add
fifteen years to the days of Hezekiah upon his prayer; but he was righteous.
Thou did lift up the head of Manasses from the Dungeon, and gave pardon to
him when he cried mightily; but he was a timely penitent. O give mercy to thy
Enemies, that feign would be reconciled to thee; to the impenitent, that feign
would be admitted to repentance; to miserable and undone persons, who desire
that the infiniteness of thy mercy should be glorified upon those whom nothing
can relieve but what is infinite as thy self. O give pardon to thy servants,
give patience, a conformity to thy will, and a dereliction of their own; let
thy Blessed Angels stand in circuit round about and rescue this miserable
company [man, woman etc] from all the violence and fraud of the Spirits of
darkness, from the weakness of humane nature, from the curse and power of
evil habits, and from Eternal damnation through the mercies of God and the
grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

I. For Prisoners under oppression, by false accusation, by unjust war, for a
good Conscience, or unreasonable dealings of men, by vexatious lawsuits and
violent, injurious bargains.
O Almighty God most merciful, most gracious Father, who have glorified thy
eternal son and exalted him to be a covenant for the people, a light of the
Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, Jer. 42.
to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness
out of the prisonhouse: Thou stand at the right hand of the poor to save
his soul from unrighteous Judges; thou art a defense for the oppressed and a
refuge in due time, in the time of trouble; O look upon thy servants who
suffer wrong from the violent and unjust usages of our oppressors: If it be thy
will, speedily rescue us from our calamity; we submit to thy will and pleasure,
and adore thy providence and thy wisdom in every dispensation; but we beg
of thee, together with the suffering, give us patience and a way for us to
escape; and sanctify both thy justice in our suffering, and thy mercy in our
delivery. Do thou judge our cause O Lord, defend our persons, give good unto
our persecutors, and not evil, give them a love of justice and repentance,
pardon and holiness; send peace O Lord in all our days and in all our
dwellings; let there be no leading into captivity, no complaining in the houses
of bondage; and let not our portion be with persecutors, but with the poor and
the persecuted, with the harmless and the innocent, with them that do good,
and suffer evil for Jesus Christ his sake, our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

II.
O God of mercy extend thy loving kindness to all thy servants who are under
the same or any other great affliction: deliver them O God from all evil, from
their own weakness and their enemies power; bless them with thy providence,
sanctify them by thy grace, pardon them by thy mercy, defend them with thy
power, conduct them by thy Spirit, enrich them with thy wisdom, and bring
them to all holy and useful comforts in this world, and to never ceasing
glories in the world to come through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communication
of the holy Spirit of God be with us and with all our relatives, and with all
the servants of God for ever and ever. Amen.

An office or form of prayer for Sailers or Mariners.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Versicle.

O God make speed to save us.

Answer.

O Lord make have to help us.

Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
The Psalm.
* BLessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help; and whose hope is in
the Lord his God.

Which made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that therein is: which feeds
the hungry.

* The Lord is great and cannot worthily be praised: he is more to be feared
then all Gods.

His dominion is from one sea to the other: and from the flood unto the worlds
end.

* Whither then shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I go from thy
presence?

If I climb up into heaven thou art there; If I go down to hell thou art
there also.

* If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of
the sea.

Even there also shall thy hand lead me; and thy right hand shall hold me.

* They that go down to the sea in ships, and do business in great waters.

These men see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.

* For he commands and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves
thereof.

They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths: their soul
is melted because of trouble.

* They reele to and fro and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their
wits-end.

Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of
their distresses.

* He makes the storm a calm so that the waves thereof are still.

Then are they glad because they be at quiet: so he brings them unto the
desired haven.

* O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the sons of men.

O Lord God of hosts who is like unto thee: thy truth most mighty Lord is on
every side.

* Thou rulest the raging of the sea: thou stillest the waves thereof when they
arise.

Thou shall show us wonderful things in thy righteousness O God of our
salvation; thou that art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them in
the broad sea.

* They also that dwell in the uttermost parts of the earth shall be afraid at
thy tokens: thou that make the outgoings of the morning and evening to praise
thee.

The Lord has said I will bring my people again as I did from Basan, mine own
will I bring again as I did some time from the deep of the sea.

* Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
Or this; to be said especially in a storm or danger of Shipwreck.

* THE Lord is King: Ever since the world began has thy seat been prepared:
thou art from everlasting.

The floods are risen O Lord, the floods have lift up their voice: the floods
lift up their waves.

* The waves of the sea are mighty and rage horribly: but the Lord that
dwells on high is mightier.

Awake, awake, put on strength O arm of the Lord: awake as in the ancient
days, in the generations of old.

* Art not thou he which has dried the sea, the waters of the great deep,
that has made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over?

Thou art the God that does wonders: and have declared thy power among the
people.

* Thou have mightily delivered thy people, even the sons of Jacob and Joseph.

The waters saw thee O God, the waters saw thee, and were afraid: the depths
also were troubled.

* The clouds powered out waters, the air thundered, and thine arrows went
abroad.

The voice of thy thunder was heard round about, the lightnings shone upon the
ground, the earth was moved and shook withal.

* Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the great waters: and thy footsteps
are not known.

Therefore I will cry unto God with my voice, even unto God will I cry with my
voice, and he shall hearken unto me.

* Hear me O God in the multitude of thy mercy: even in the truth of thy
salvation.

Take me out of the mire that I sink not: O let me be delivered from them that
hate me, and out of the deep waters.

* Let not the water-flood drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up: and
let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

Hear me O Lord for thy loving kindness is comfortable: turn thee unto me
according to the multitude of thy mercies.

* Who is like unto thee O Lord amongst the Gods? who is like thee, glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?

O hide not thy face from thy servants; for we are in trouble: O have and hear
us.

* Our souls are full of trouble, and our life draws nigh unto the grave.

O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come: O let our prayer
enter into thy presence, incline thine ear unto our calling.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
If there be time and opportunity to read any portions of scripture suitable to
the necessity, then read,

If they be pursued by Pirates,

Exodus 14. from verse 21. to the 20. verse of the 15. chapter.

If they be in danger of Shipwreck,

Read Jonah 1. or Jonah 2. or Acts 27.

At other times,

Read Matthew 8. or Matthew 14. or Mark 4. or Luke 8.

The Prayer. I.
O Almighty God and Father of heaven and earth, who set a bound to the sea,
and restrainest his waves by a heap of sand, by mountains and by rocks, by thy
word and by thy Spirit, saying, hither shall thy proud waves pass and no
further; look upon us thy servants, whose lives are in our hands, and we dwell
in the shadows of death night and day; we know O Lord and confess the floods
and waves of passion do frequently overrun us, and we are drowned in the
storms and overwhelmed with iniquity. Our [ Oaths, Blasphemies, Impieties,
Irreligious actions] are louder then the fiercest winds, and call aloud upon
thee for vengeance; and many of us in our greatest danger provoke thee with the
greattest unreasonablenesse and violence of impiety. But O God our God be
gracious unto thy people who accuse our selves, and confess our guilt, and
acknowledge thy justice, and beg thy goodness, and pray to thee for safety and
defense, for deliverance and for pardon, for thy conduct and thy blessing.
Keep us O God from storms and quicksands, from Pirates and Rocks, from error
and impieties, from all evil contingencies and all evil actions; let our voyage
be safe to our persons and to our goods; let it be blessed by thy providence
and thy holy Spirit, that we may return with comfort and with advantages of
trade [or successe] and thy servants may glorify thee in the land of the
living, in the church of the firstborn, the congregation of thy redeemed
ones, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

II. In a storm, or danger of Pirates or Shipwreck.
O Eternal and most holy Savior Jesus, who in the days of thy flesh and thy
infirmity did command the winds and rebuke the seas, and they obeyed thee;
and thou art now exalted far above all principalities and powers, above all
heavens and all Angels, and art the King of the world and the great Prince of
the whole Creation; and thou have commanded us to come boldly to the throne of
grace and have promised we should find help in time of need; look down upon
thy servants, who in the abyss of the seas, and the abyss of our trouble,
invocate the abyss of thy mercies; speak peace unto our consciences, and
command our enemies to be in peace with us, or to have no power against us;
rebuke the winds [restrain the violent and injurious] thou art our refuge; be
thou therefore our defense and our security, and rescue us from the present
danger; we know O God that the Devil is a great prince and rules in the air,
and in the hearts of the children of disobedience; but thou art the King and
Lord over him and all princes of the world; thou art the prince of Spirits and
restrainest the Spirits of princes, let not the enemy of mankind execute his
cruel envy against us; nor any of the elements nor any of his instruments be
able to do us any violence.

III.
O refuse not to hear the prayers, and to consider the cries, and to behold
and pity the need of them that call upon thee, that put their trust in thee,
that have laid up all their hopes in thee and thy infinite and eternal
goodness: we have no strengths of our own; but thou art our confidence; be
thou also our portion and our guide, our defense and our shield, a star in the
night, and a covering by day: Strengthen our faith O God and increase our hope;
that in the greatest danger we may against hope believe in hope, and with faith
and love expect the salvation of the Lord, and may find thy goodness rescuing
us from this present fear, and defending us in all our difficulties, and
sanctifying every accident, and sweetning every event of providence, and
consigning us bythese blessings to a final delivery from all our sins, and
from the evils which our sins deserve; to the glory of God, to the salvation of
our souls in thy day, in thy glorious day O Eternal and most holy Savior and
Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
A form of prayer and blessing to be used over him that in the beginning of a
journey by Land or Sea begs the prayers of the Minister of the Church.

The Prayer.
O Almighty God, most gracious and most merciful, who art a God afar off as
well as nigh at hand, and have sent thy Ministering Angels to Minister good to
them that shall be heirs of salvation; be thou pleased to send thy holy Angel
before this thy servant N. to defend him from the heat of the day, and the cold
of the night, from the arrow that flies at noone, and the evil spirits that
walk in darkness, from errors and falls, from precipices and fracture of
bones, from [pirates and] robbers, from evil intentions and evil accidents,
from violent weather and violent fears, from all impressions of evil men, and
evil spirits; let this journey be safe and useful to thy servant, comfortable
to his relatives, holiness to the Lord, and glory to thy name through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Blessing.
THe Lord bless thee and keep thee; the Lord make his face to shine upon
thee, and be gracious unto thee: He keep thee from all evil by the custody of
Angels, and lead thee into all good by the conduct of his good Spirit. Amen.

Let the providence and love of God be thy defense and thy security, his grace
be thy portion, his service thy employment: He go in and out before thee, and
keep thee in all thy ways, and lead thee in all his.

He bring thee back again in peace and safety, and prosper all thy innocent
and holy purpofes; and when the few and evil days of thy pilgrimage are ended,
he of his infinite mercy bring thee to the regions of holiness and eternal
peace through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

I. A prayer to be used in behalf of Fools, or Changelings.
O Eternal and most blessed Savior Jesus; who art the wisdom of the Father,
and art made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and Redemption,
have pity upon the miserable people to whom thou have given life and no
understanding. Thou did create us of nothing, and gave us being when we
were not, and createdst in us capacity of blessings when we had none, and
gave us many when we did not understand them; thou bring infants from the
womb, and from the state of nature to the state of grace, and from their
mothers breasts thou do often convey them to the bosom of Jesus, and yet
they do nothing, but thou art glorified in thy free gift. O be gracious to all
Natural fools and innocents; for thou hate nothing which thou have made, and
love every soul which thou have redeemed; we that have reason can deserve
heaven no more then these can: but these do not deserve hell so much as we
have done. Impute not to them their follies that are unavoidable, nor the sins
which they discern not, nor the evils which they cannot understand; keep them
from all evil and sad mischances, and make supply of their want of the defenses
of reason by the special guard of Angels and let thy obedience and thy
sufferings be accepted, and thy intercession prevail for them: that since they
cannot glorify thee by a free obedience, thou may be glorified by thy free
mercies to them; and for their destitution of good in this world let them
receive eternal blessings in the world to come through thy mercies O eternal
and most Blessed Savior Jesus. Amen.

II. A prayer for Madmen.
ALmighty God whose wisdom is infinite, whose mercy is eternal, whose
tranquillity is essential, and whose goodness has no shore; In judgment
remember mercy, and do thou delight to magnify thy mercy upon them who need it
but cannot ask it; who are in misery but feel it not; who do actions without
choice, and choose without discretion and sober understanding. Pity the evil
they suffer, and pardon the evils that they have done, and impute not unto them
the evils which they rather bear then act; and let not their entry into this
calamity be an exclusion from their future pardon; but let this sad calamity
and judgment which they bear be united to the sufferings of our Lord, and be
sanctified by his intercession, and become an instrument of their peace. Lord
restore them to their health and understanding; take from them all violent
passions, and remove all evil objects far from their eyes and ears; create a
clean heart, and renew a right Spirit in them: Give them sober thoughts and
meek Spirits, contempt of the world, and love of holy things; suffer them not
to do violence to any man, and let no man do violence to them: let them be
safe under the conduct of thy providence, and the public laws: and be
innocent under the conduct of thy holy Spirit; that when thou shall return and
speak peace to thy people, they may rejoice in thy mercies and salvation; thou
did O God show mercy to Nebuchadnezar and gave to him the heart of a man
after he had sinned and fallen into the lot of beasts and wildness; and thy
hand is not shortened that thou can not help; but let thy mercies and loving
kindness return upon thy servants as at first, that thou may rejoice in
thy mercies and salvation; because thou have pleasure in the prosperity of thy
Servants. Grant this Almighty God and Father, for Jesus Christ his sake our
Lord and dearest Savior. Amen.

III. A prayer in behalf of Heretics and seduced persons.
O Most blessed, most Gracious Savior Jesus, who art the way and the truth and
the life, thou art a light to them that sit in darkness, the light that
lightneth every man that comes into the world; preserve thy Church in peace
and truth, in love and holiness to thy second coming: Reduce every
misbeleiver to the fold of thy Church; instruct every ignorant person in the
ways of Godly wisdom; subdue the pride of man, and bring every understanding
to the obedience of thy sacred law. Let no man's vanity or ignorance divide the
church, let not any holy truth be sullied with the mixture of impure and
heretical doctrines; nor evil principles disorder the beauties of religion and
godly living; nor any doctrines of men be taught as the commandment of God;
but grant that the truth of God may be publicly maintained, constantly taught,
humbly believed, zealously practiced by all men in their several stations: that
in the church of God there be no contention but in giving honor to each other,
and glory to God in all the ways of faith and charity through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

II.
Bless the ministry of thy holy word in its ordinary dispensation; grant it
may prevail mightily for the convincing of them that have no faith, for the
reprooving of the errors of them whose faith is not pure; for the confirming
them who are weak in faith; for the perfecting them who are novices in faith;
open the hearts of all gainsayers, take from them all their prejudices and all
their passions, their secular interests and confident opinions, that they may
humbly and meekely attend to the voice of God in the mouths of thy servants, in
the pages of scripture, in the doctrines of the Spirit; that they may do
nothing against the truth but for the truth; that they may not quench the
Spirit, nor despise prophesying, nor shut their eyes against the light, and
their hearts against the love of God: but grant that in all things being
obedient to the heavenly calling, they may receive the blessings of truth and
peace in this world, and in the world to come, exalting the kingdom, and
partaking the glories of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

These three last prayers are to be used upon any of the great Festivals of the
year; especially Easter day: Ascension day; Whitsunday; and upon 8 days after
these Festivals: or upon good Friday.

Prayers and Psalms to be used by the Minister and Curate of Souls at the
Visitation of the sick.

In the Name of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Minister.

O God make speed to save us.

Answer.

O Lord make have to help us.

* Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
Then recite this Psalm.

* REbuke me not O Lord in thine anger, neither correct me in thy heavy
displeasure.

Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heat me, for my bones are
vexed.

* My soul is also sore troubled: but Lord how long will thou punish me!

Turn thee O Lord and deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake.

* For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in the
pit?

Shall the dust give thanks unto thee? or shall men declare thy truth in the
grave, in the land where all things are forgotten?

* My time is in thy hand, O let me not be confounded: show thy servant the
light of thy countenance, and save me for thy mercy sake.

My life is waxen weak with sorrow, and my years are consumed in mourning.

* Mine eye is consumed with very heaviness: and my strength fails me
because of mine iniquity.

For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore.

* There is no health in my flesh because of thy displeasure: neither is there
any rest in my bones by reason of my sins.

For my wickednesses are gone over mine head; and are like a sore burden too
heavy for me to bear.

* But I will confess my wickedness and be sorry for my sin.

Against thee have I sinned and done evil in thy sight: that thou might be
justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

* O give me the comfort of thy help again: cast me not away from thy
presence; and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

Be thou my strong rock and the house of defense, that thou may save me: be
thou also my guide and lead me for thy Names sake.

* Into thy hand I commend my Spirit: for thou have redeemed me O Lord thou God
of truth.

In God is my health and my glory: he is the rock of my might: in God is my
trust.

* Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and receivest unto thee: he shall
dwell in thy court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house,
even of thy holy temple.

O praise our God ye people: and make the voice of his praise to be heard:
which holds our soul in life; and suffers not our feet to slip.

Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
Or this.

* IN thee O Lord have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion:
deliver me in thy righteousness.

Lord let me know mine end, and the number of my days: that I may be certified
how long I have to live.

* Behold thou have made my days as it were a span long: and mine age is even
as nothing in respect of thee: and verily every man living is altogether vanity.

And now Lord what is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee.

* Deliver me from all mine offenses: take thy plague away from me, I am even
consumed by the means of thy heavy hand.

When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away like as it were a moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is
but vanity.

* Hear my prayer O Lord, and with thine ears consider my calling: hold not
thy peace at my tears.

For I am a stranger with thee and a sojourner; as all my fathers were.

* O spare me a little that I may recover my strength, before I go hence and
be no more seen.

O Lord let it be thy pleasure to deliver me: make have O Lord to help me.

* O send out thy light and thy truth that they may lead me; and bring me unto
thy holy hill and to thy dwelling.

Up Lord, why sleep thou? awake and be not absent from us for ever: hide not
thy face from us, and forget not our misery and trouble.

* For our soul is brought low, even unto the dust: our belly cleaves unto
the ground.

Arise and help us; and deliver us for thy mercies sake.

* Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Then may the Minister read John XI. from the first verse to the 47. or else
this short lesson Matthew 25. from verse 1 to the 14.

THen the kingdom of heaven shall be likened unto ten virgins, which took
their lamps, and went to meet the bridegroom.

And five of them were wise, and five foolish.

The foolish took their lamps, but took no oil with them.

But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.

Now while the bridegroom tarryed long, all slumbred and slept.

And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom comes: go out
to meet him.

Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.

And the foolish said to the wise, Give us of your oil, for our lamps are out.

But the wise answered, saying, we fear left there will not be enough for us
and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

And when they went to buy, the bridegroom came: and they that were ready went
in with him to the wedding, and the gate was shut.

Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord Lord, open to us.

But he answered, and said, verily I say unto you, I know you not.

Watch therefore: for ye know neither the day nor the hour, when the Son of
man will come.

After the lesson as he sees occasion let him add some discourse of his own,
short, and pertinent to the necessities of the sick person; ever being careful
that he do him all his assistances, and call upon him to perfect that which
can never be perfected but in this world, i. e. his repentance.

Immediately after this exhortation; or [if it was done before, or is better
reserved to another time, then immediately] after the lesson, or the Psalm
according to the discretion of him that ministers, and according to the
circumstances of the sick man; let him add these prayers.

Let us pray.

I. A prayer for repentance.
O Almighty God and most merciful Father, who delightest not in the death of a
sinner, but that he be converted from his sin, and thou be turned from thine
anger; give unto thy servant a deep contrition for his [her] sins, a perfect
hatred of them, a timely and an entire dereliction of them; grace to fear
thee, and grace to love thee: powers to serve thee, and time and grace to
finish all the work of God which thy servant ought to do; that the soul of
thy servant being washed white in the blood of Jesus, may be justified by thy
mercy, sanctified by thy Spirit, blessed by thy providence, saved by thy
infinite and eternal goodness through Jesus Christ our Lord.

II. For Patience and Ease.
O Almighty and most gracious Savior who did suffer with meekness and
patience those severe stripes of thy Fathers wrath which we did deserve but
thou did feel, and have established with mankind a Covenant of faith and
patience, a law of sufferings, making the way of the cross to be the way of
heaven: give to thy servant thy grace, that according to thy excellent example
and holy commandment he may bear the burden of the Lord, with an even and a
willing, an obedient and a loving Spirit. O let him never charge thee
foolishly, nor murmr secretly, nor make too much have; but with faith and
hope submit his body and soul to thy merciful and just dispensation; that he
may not discompose the duties of his repentance by a new sin, nor provoke thee
to anger by his impatience, nor offend them who charitably minister to him, nor
neglect the doing of any thing that can be in his power or in his duty, to his
body or his soul. O God be merciful unto thy servant and press not him [or
her] with an unequal load; but remember that we are but flesh, and vanity, that
we are crushed before the Moth, and die in thy displeasure: give him ease and
rest, a quiet mind and a peaceful conscience: make thou all his bed in his
sickness; and deliver him not into the will of his Spiritual enemies: but
glorify thy mercies, and make thy goodness illustrious upon thy servant
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

III. Against death, and the fear of it.
O Eternal God who for the sin of man did send death into the world, and by
the Resurrection of thy holy Son, did bring life to all beleivers; have mercy
upon this thy servant whom thou have smitten with thy rod, and brought into the
valley of tears, and the shadow of death; O let not thy feirce anger go beyond
a fatherly correction: let this rod be discipline, not vengeance; let it kill
his sin, but not the man: but in judgment remember mercy; take from thy
servant all inordinate fear; give him a present mind, a hopeful Spirit, a
faithful heart, a perfectly repenting conscience, a charitable and a devout
soul. Take from him the fear, and take from him the sentence of death;
preserve his life, and restore his health if that be best for him; for to thy
power we submit; on thy goodness we do depend, by thy wisdom we desire to
be governed, and that thy love should choose for thy servant. But if thou have
otherwise decreed, O grant to thy servant the comforts of a holy hope, and the
strengths of an unconquerable faith; the constancy of an unmooved patience, and
the meekness of a perfect resignation; that to him to live may be Christ, and
to die may be gain; that whether he lives or dies he may be thine through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

IV. For Pardon.
O Most gracious and eternal Son of God, who only have power to forgive sins,
and to rescue erring souls from the power of sin, and from the wrath of God,
be gracious to^ thy servant who confesses thy justice in his suffering, and
begs to feel thy mercy in his pardon, and thy pity in his ease and
restitution. Contend no longer with the miserable who confesses himself
guilty: reject him not that begs for remission of his sins and remission of thy
anger; remember not the follies of his childhood, nor the vanities of his
youth, the sins of his tongue, nor the sins of his anger; the sins of desire,
nor the innumerable breaches of charity; his infinite omissions of duty, and
the inexcusable actions of his choice. Thou have glorified thy self in all
generations of the world by giving pardon to the penitent, and ease to the
afflicted, comfort to the comfortless and refreshment to the weary; Behold O
God the sorrows of thy servant; and remember his sins no more. Behold the
passion and the pains which our blessed Lord suffered for our sins; and let
not the sins of thy servants cause thee to take another forfeiture, and produce
another and an eternal anger: but spare thy servant in thy anger; and remember
him in thy mercy, and pity him in thy infinite compassion, and relieve him with
thy mighty grace, and deliver him from his sins, and bring him to thy glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

V. If he be in or near the agonies of death.
O Blessed God thou lover of souls and the Savior of thy servants, who gave
thy Son to die for us that we might live in him; look with mercy and great
compassion upon the soul of thy servant for whom the Lord Jesus gave his
precious blood. Now O God is that sad period in which he is to be consigned
over to his final sentence; now is the day of his great expense; his needs of
mercy are great as his sins, and great as his dangers, and great as all his
enemies; let him [or her] receive the fruit of all his labors, a blessed
return of all his prayers, the grace of thy promises, and the effect of all
the sufferings of the holy Jesus: Now O God let him find the end of his hopes,
and a just peace in his conscience, a spiritual communion with Christ, and the
benefit of all his Passion, pardon of his sins, and the sweetest visitations of
thy holy Spirit the comforter. Now let him feel the effect of thy mighty power
and of thy glorious victory over sin and all the powers of darkness: let them
have no portion in him; and let thine angers end in comfort and pardon, in the
visitation of Angels and the glorious appearing of thy holy Spirit.

Now let him feel the truth of religion, and the substance of the things he
has hoped for; the verification of thy promises, and the goodness of God; let
all the sermons of the Gospel pass into real exhibition of thy loving
kindness; and let thy servant rejoice in the portions of the blessed, in the
redemption of his soul, in the communion of Saints, in the society of the
spirits of just men made perfect, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Then shall the Minister recommend the soul of the Dying man, if it be
departing the body.

I.
O Most Blessed and most gracious Savior Jesus, into thy holy hands we commend
the soul of this our Brother [or Sister] praying thee to defend it from all
evil, from the wrath of God which he has deserved, from the evil Spirits of
darkness which are ready to devour it, from the flames of hell from whence
nothing can rescue it but the mercies of God in our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

II.
Let thy holy Angels receive this soul from her prison and ruinous house of
clay, and carry it to the region of loving and obedient souls in the bosom of
Jesus, there with joy and longing, with the assurance of hope and a peaceful
charity to expect the Resurrection of the just and the day of thy righteous
judgment. Amen.

III.
O let not the Devils accuse this soul before thee, or if they do let them
not prevail; but interpose thy death and passion, thy mediation and
intercession between thy judgment and this soul, now at her departure and at
the day of judgment, that in the terrors of that day, this soul may stand
upright, supported by the arms of thy eternal mercy. Amen.

IV.
Let not this soul carry along with her the infirmities of her present state,
but be immured with a guard of loving and blessed Spirits to defend her against
all the hostilities and incursions of all evil Angels. Now she shall see what
she never saw, and hear what she never heard, and know what was never revealed
below; O grant that she may have aids that her she never did need, even
mighty assistances in proportion to her new and strange erstate, that whatsoever
is in the darkness or in the fire, in the secret regions of wrath, and the
horrible places of torment and fearful exspectations may not afflict or
affright the lamb of thy flock, the price of thy blood, the child of thy
kingdom, and the portion of thine own inheritance. Amen.

V.
O sweetest Jesu say unto this soul This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise; say unto this foul Fear not, for it is my Fathers pleasure to give
thee a Kingdom; Let this soul dwell in safe and pleasant regions; and be
supported with the hope of God, comforted with a holy conscience, rejoice in a
confirmed pardon, be recreated with the visitation of Angels, and walk in
white whithersoever the Lamb shall go. Amen.

VI.
Give unto this decaying dying body a blessed and a glorious resurrection; to
this weary and afflicted, this penitent and redeemed soul a portion in the
blessed sentence of the right hand amongst the blessed children of thy Father,
who shall receive the Kingdom prepared for them from the beginning of the
world. Amen.

VII.
Remember O God the good things which by thy grace and by the aides of thy holy
Spirit thy servant has done in all his life: and remember not his evil deeds
which by the weakness of the flesh, and the temptations of the Devil, and the
evil contingencies of this world have afflicted and humbled the soul of thy
servant: remember thy holy Son did die for these; and thy holy Spirit was the
cause of those; and for whom thou have given thy Son, and to whom thou have
given thy Spirit, give thy eternal pardon, and thy eternal glories, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

After the soul is departed; the Minister may say this prayer in behalf of
the living friends and relatives of the dead.

ALmighty God who governest all things in heaven and earth with infinite
wisdom and infinite mercy, and bring good out of evil, comfort out of
sorrow, and after a gentle visitation do refresh thy children with the light
of thy countenance, with the blessings of thy providence, with the returns of
thy grace, and the comforts of thy holy Spirit; have mercy upon this family,
and return to them all with thy loving kindness, exchanging their present
sorrow into the advantages of holiness and blessing. Be thou now and ever what
thou gloriest in; a Father of the Fatherless, a Husband to the Widow, a God of
comfort to them that mourn^ in secret. Grant that thy servant may not weep as
men without hope, nor murmr at thy dispensation, nor complain of any thing
but themselves, nor desire any thing but that thy will be done, nor do any
thing but what is agreeable to thy holy word and commandment; and grant that
when thou smitest any of us it may increase thy fear in us, and when thou
do good to any of us in smiting or forbearing, in chastising or comforting,
it may increase thy love in us: and let thy holy Spirit so prevail over all our
wills and understandings, our affections and the outward man, our interests and
our hopes, that we may live in this world pleasing to thee, and may go out of
this world with the peace of a holy conscience, and may have a joyful
resurrection in the last day, to a participation of the glories of God thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Blessing.
THE Lord bless you and keep you; the Lord make his face to shine upon you,
and be gracious unto you. The Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon
you and give you peace.

The blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son and holy Ghost, be amongst you
and abide with you and be your portion for ever and ever. Amen.

Prayers and devotions to be used at the Burial of the Dead.
The Minister, before the Corpse entering at the Church door, may begin with one
or more of these sentences.

A Good name is better then precious ointment: and the day of death, then the
day of ones birth.

It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to go to the house of
feasting: for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his
heart.

I am the resurrection and the life says the Lord: He that beleiveth in me,
yea though he were dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever lives and beleiveth
in me shall not die for ever.

It is appointed to all men once to die, and after death comes judgment.

I would not have you to be ignorant concerning them which are asleep that we
sorrow not even as others without hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and
rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

After the Corpse is set down in the body of the Church; let Morning or Evening
prayer be read according to the time of the day, with this difference only.

Instead of the usual Psalms, Read Psalm 39. Psalm 49. Psalm 90.

For the first lesson read Job 14. or 19.

After the first lesson read Psalm 88.

For the second lesson read 1 Corinthians. 15. from verse 12 to the end.

After the second lesson read [ Nunc dimittis.

* LOrd now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word:

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

* Which thou have prepared before the face of all people.

To be a light to lighten the Gentiles and to be the glory of thy people Israel.

Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
After the usual prayers are done; then the Corpse carried being to the grave,
the Minister shall read this lesson.

Ecclesiastes 12.
REmember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come
not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.

While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars be not darkened, nor the
clouds return after the rain:

In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men
shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease, because they are few, and those
that look out of the windows be darkened.

And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is
low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of
music shall be brought low.

Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in
the way, and the almond-tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a
burden, and desire shall fail; because man goes to his long home, and the
mourners go about the streets:

Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the
pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern.

Then shall the dust retrun to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall
return unto God who gave it.

People.

Blessed be God.

The Minister while they are preparing to interre the Corpse shall say this
Psalm.

* THE wicked is driven away in his wickedness: but the righteous has hope in
his death.

I said in the cutting off of my days: I shall go to the gates of the grave;
I am deprived of the residue of my years.

* I said I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living: I
shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.

I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall
not be moved.

* Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices: my flesh also shall rest
in hope.

For thou will not leave my soul in hell: neither will thou suffer thine holy
one to see corruption.

* As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: when I awake with thy
likeness I shall be satisfied.

Thou will show me the path of life: in thy presence is the fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore.

* Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
When the Corpse is in the grave the Minister shall say

Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God to take to himself the soul of our
dear brother here departed; we lay his body in the ground; for out of it was
it taken; dust it is, and unto dust it does return, but we lay it down in a
sure and certain hope of the resurrection from the grave. For the Lord himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first, then those
which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we be ever with the Lord.
Wherefore comfort one another with these words.

Let us pray.

* Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

* Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which art in Heaven etc.

I.
O Almighty God with whom do live the spirits of the just men made perfect, we
give thee humble thanks that thou have delivered the soul of thy servant N.
N. from the calamities of this life; putting a period to his sin and to his
pains; O be pleased shortly to fill up the numbers of thine elect, and hasten
thy kingdom; and to us thy servants grant that we may die to sin and live to
righteousness, living a holy and a gracious life, peaceable and blessed, that
when we have served thee in our generations we may die the death of the
righteous, leaving a good name and a fair example behind, and our good works
may follow us; that being holy in our lives we may be blessed in our death, and
with this thy servant, and all other departed in thy love and fear, may lie in
the bosom of our Lord, till by the trump of God we shall be awakened in the
resurrection of the just, to reign with thee in thy Kingdom through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

II.
O most blessed Savior Jesus who art the resurrection and the life, and in
whose sight the death of thy saints is precious, look upon us thy servants
whose life is vanity, and our days pass away like a tale that it told, and as
the remembrance of a passenger that stays but a night; the days of our
pilgrimage are few and evil, and we disquiet our selves in vain: O look upon
us with a gracious eye; give us thy holy Spirit of wisdom and peace to guide
us in the ways of God, that our affections and our conversation being in
heaven; and being weaned from this world we may die daily, and every day be
doing good; that laying up a treasure of good works, we may rejoice in the day
of our death, and may be freed from the terrors of the day of judgment, and
the gates of hell may not prevail against us. O preserve us from that eternal
wrath which shall destroy all thine enemies, and let our portion be with the
charitable and the merciful, on the right hand of the Father, where thou
sit and reignest in the glory of God to eternal ages world without end Amen.

If it be opportune, then here may be added one of the prayers [for a blessed
death] at the end of Evening prayer throughout the year: ending with the usual
benediction.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ etc.

A form of Devotion TO Be used and said in the days OF Sorrow and Affliction.
A form of Devotion to be used and said, in the days of Sorrow and Affliction
of a family or of private persons.

In the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost.

Our Father, etc.

O God make speed to save us.
O Lord make have to help us.
Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
The Psalm.
HIde not thyface far from me O Lord, put not thy servant away in anger: thou
have been my help, leave me not neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.

O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not, and in the night season
I am not silent.

* But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel.

Our Father trusted in thee, they trusted in thee and thou did deliver them.

* But I am a worm, and no man: smitten of thee Lord, afflicted, tormented,
forsaken.

Thou have filled me with bitterness, and have made me drunken with wormwood,
thou have remooved my soul far off from peace, and I have forgotten prosperity.

* But O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee, be not thou far from me O
Lord, O my strength have thee to help me.

I acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid, I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord, O do thou forgive the iniquity of my
sin.

* Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou shall
compass me about with songs of deliverance.

Lord make me to know my end, and the measure of my days, what it is, that I
may know how frail I am.

* Behold thou have made my days as an hand breadth, and mine age is as
nothing before thee: verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity.

And now O Lord what wait I for! Surely my hope is in thee.

* Deliver me from all my transgressions, remove thy stroke away from me; I am
even consumed by the blow of thy hand.

When thou with rebukes do chasten man for iniquity, thou make his beauty
to consume away like a moath; Surely every man is vanity.

* Hear my prayer O Lord and give ear unto my cry, hold not thy peace at my
tears: For I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner as all my Fathers were.

O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength, before I go hence and be
no more seen.

* Let all those that seek thee, rejoice and be glad in thee: Let such as love
thy salvation say continually, The Lord be magnified.

But I am poor and needy, yet the Lord cares for me: thou art my help and my
deliverer, make no tarrying O my God.

Amen. Amen. Amen.
Then Read,

The second Chapter of Ecclesiasticus.

or The sixth Chapter of S. Matthews Gospel.

or The twelfth Chapter to the Romans.

or The 5 Chapter of the 2d Epistle to the Thessalonians.

or The 1 of Timothy the 6. Chapter.

or Hebrews 12.

or James 5th.

These at several times.

After the chapter is read; sit still a while and consider of such comforts, or
instructions as are in the chapter fitted to your needs.

If this office be said by a Minister in the company of the afflicted person;
then he may add such useful and comfortable discourses as are occasioned by
the chapter, and then say the following Collect.

After meditation or discourse, humbly kneel down, and pray.

I.
An act of Repentance.
O My God and Father, in vain do we beg to have thy heavy hand taken from us,
so long as the cause remains: Our sins, O God, our sins are so great, so
numerous, so intolerable, that we must needs with shame hide our face, and
confess we have deserved all the evil that we suffer, and all that which thou
have threatened: we have O God more to give thee thanks for, then we have to
deplore. It is thy infinite mercy that we are yet kept from feeling thy
severest judgments. It is thy mercy that we have our senses and our
understandings; that we have the use of thy word and sacraments; that we have
not intolerable pains of body, and unsufferable troubles in our mind; It is thy
blessing that we have bread, that we have many friends, that we have the
prayers of thy faithful servants; that we have faith in thee, and that we have
hope. It is thy infinite mercy, that are we yet kept from the unsufferable
pains of hell, and are permitted to pray to thee, to rely upon thy mercies, to
work out our salvation, and to expect thy loving kindness in the Land of the
living.

II.
All the evils that we suffer, we have deserved, but nothing of this good have
we deserved; we are less then the least of all thy mercies; and our sins are
greater then the greatest of all our sufferings. *And now O God thou who have
so mercifully dealt with thy servants in taking a less fine of us, then in
justice thou might have exacted, be pleased also to proceed in the methods
of thy mercy; and make our present sufferings be instrumental of thy glory, of
the pardon of our sins, of the sanctifications of our Spirits, of the
humiliation of our souls, that like silver tried in the fire, we may come
forth more pure, vessels of honor, pleasing and acceptable to thee in Jesus
Christ.

II. An act of patience and resignation.
WE know O God that thou art infinietly wise and infinitely good, and thou
disposest all the events of thy creatures of excellent purposes, and delightest
to bring good out of evil. Behold O God we are thy servants, and thy
creatures, do to us as seems good in thine eyes, only give us patience, and
a long suffering Spirit, that we may not murmr secretly when we complain
openly; that we may not make have in the day of our calamity, but with a quiet
spirit expect and wait for the time of our redemption. But make no long
tarrying O Lord, make have to help us, O God of our salvation; and be pleased
to give us a light from heaven, that with the eye of faith, we may see beyond
the cloud, and look for those comforts which thou did prepare for thy
servants that love thee and put their trust in thee, and have laid up all their
hopes in the bosom of God.

IV. An act of hope.
O God our God, thou have said unto us, I will never leave you nor forsake you;
thou have often eased our calamities, and taken off thy severe hand, thou have
promised to be with us in time of need, thou delightest to deliver them whose
confidence is in thy goodness. Thou have supported our spirits in the day of
our sorrow, and have given us many intervals, and spaces of refreshment, and
renewest thy loving kindness day by day: O let us never have our portion
amongst the hopeless and desperate. Let us always pray to thee, and hope in
thee, and in every period of our affliction let us do some actions of virtue,
by which we may please thee, and be accepted so long as we can pray. Thou have
commanded us to hope, and we do hope that these comforts shall refresh our
souls, that thy mercies will support us under our afflictions, that thy Spirit
shall comfort us in it, and thy grace and thy glorious providence shall
speedily deliver us from it. Amen Blessed Jesu, Amen.

V. The Petition.
ANd now O most merciful Father, give thy servants admittance to present our
complaint before the throne of grace, and let our petition enter into thy
presence: thy arrows stick fast in us, and thy hand presses us sore: Open thy
heart, the treasure and spring of mercy, and thence let comforts and
refreshments descend upon thy servants. Put a blessed period to our sorrows,
but first put a stop to our sins; let us not sin against thee, when for sin
thou art smiting us; Let us never charge thee foolishly, nor behave our selves
peevishly toward others, but use all the means we can to ease their sorrows,
to lighten their burdens, to sweeten their lives, that so we may expect from
thy goodness a more plentiful and abundant measure of loving kindness.

VI.
Lord put a bar and stop unto our passions; make them to be humble ministers
of religion [and prudent government] but never let us suffer any violent
transportations in our selves, never be provoked to any bitterness, never to
be harsh or cruel toward any, never to speak any thing peevishly and
undecently, never to put too much upon any temporal interest; In all things
let us behold thy providence, and reverence thy justice, and adore thy majesty,
and feel thy mercy, and obey thy Spirit; and if thou shall still persevere to
smite us, and to try thy servants, let not thy punishing us ever cause us to
sin against thee. Let not our own follies be our scourges, lest we sin against
thee, and loose thy blessing for ever.

VII.
Be pleased O my God, to add this favor unto thy servants, that our trouble
may not be doubled or increase by our own infirmities: take from us all
troublesome fancies and too quick apprehensions of our sorrows; Blessed be thy
Name, they are finite, and they are temporal sorrows, they are less then our
sins, and they are less then thy mercies; Give me grace to despise the world,
and all its interests and possessions, that while we set not our affections
upon them, we may not be too much afflicted, when we are crossed in them; but
let our great care be to please thee, our greatest fears, least we should sin
against thee; let our duty be our employment, thy providence our portion, thy
Spirit our guide, thy law our rule: That when this cloud is passed over, we may
see the brightness of thy face, and perpetual showers of grace and mercy,
refreshing our sad and weary spirits: so shall thy servants sing praises to the
honor of thy Name, when thou shall have saved our souls from death, our eyes
from tears, and our feet from falling: grant these mercies O blessed God, and
Father, for Jesus Christ his sake our dearest Lord and Savior. Amen.

A private prayer to be said by or for a person (mutatis mutandis) apt to be
afflicted with fear of death or Gods anger, and the uncertain state of his,
of her soul.

O Eternal God most gracious Father, in much mercy and compassion behold me thy
servant laden with my sins, encompassed with infirmity, assaulted by enemies
without, and apt to be betrayed by my own weaknesses within. If I am
cheerful, I am apt to be careless of my duty, If I am sad, I am timorous and
unsafe, too ready to distrust thee, and to sink under the burden of those
calamities which by my sins I have deserved. O God I confess with sorrow and
shame, that I resolve often to give my self entirely to thy service, but I am
so perpetually beaten with the violent tempests and storms of passion, that
all my hopes and all my fears grow unactive and useless and are overcome by
them, and sink under my own evil customs and infirmities. [ Lust, Pride,
Ambition, Anger,] And under this state of infelicity I groan and labor, and
to thee I humbly make my complaint; for thou art my hope and my strength, my
rock and my might, my Savior and defender, my support and my deliverer. O hear
the saddest cries of thy humble and afflicted servant, and give me ease from my
greatest sorrows: Give me a cheerful heart, and a severe spirit, a love of
thy mercies, and a trembling at thy judgments, an infinite desire to please
thee, and a great fear to offend thee; and though I humbly desire of thy
glorious goodness, to secure and promote my eternal interest by what
instruments thou please, yet because thou art my Father and my merciful God,
I beg of thy infinite goodness to take care of my infirmities, and to pity my
weaknesses; and make my religion to be to me the pleasantest thing in the
world: that nothing may tempt me from thee, and prevail in the days of my
weaknesses and disadvantage.

II.
O Blessed God be pleased to give me a perfect repentance for all my sins; and
admit me to a full pardon, and not only so, but if it be thy gracious will
consigne this my pardon by some testimony from heaven, by a holy and humble
hope, by a strong faith, and a cheerful spirit, by joy in God, and a command
over my passions, by meekness and charity, by forgiving every one that
troubles me, and every one that offends me. O God my God give to thy servant an
excellent religion, and a devout spirit, and grant that I may take great
pleasure in the service of God, in obedience to my spiritual superiors, in
doing the works of that duty to which thou have called me in my present state
of life; and never suffer me to fall into a despairing or an amazed conscience,
into the evils of a tedious or impatient, a wounded or an afflicted spirit: but
grant that rejoicing in thee evermore and delighting in doing my duty, in
mortifying my passions, in loving and serving my dearest Relations, I may be
preserved in thy fear and thy favor, and nothing may be able to separate me
from the love of God in Christ Jesus. Amen.

III.
O my deareft Savior take from thy servant all inordinate fear of death, and
give me a great desire after heaven and heavenly things: and when thou shall
call me from this world, conduct me by the graces and comforts of thy Holy
Spirit evenly and holily, certainly and cheerfully, to the regions of hope and
joy, that in thy arms I may expect and long for the day of recompenses and of
thy glorious appearing. O God hear the prayer and most passionate desires of
thy servant: and since thou have commanded us in the time of need to come with
boldness to the throne of grace, grant that I may be accepted by thy mercies
and loving kindness, through the merits and intercession of my Lord, in whom I
desire to live, and for whom I will not refuse to die, our Blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus, to whom with thee O blessed Father and most Holy Spirit, I
humbly give all honor and thanks, and glory, and love and service, and desire
to do so for ever. Amen.

A form or prayer of Thanksgiving.

The Preface, to the following office.

Since it has pleased God to hear our prayers and to give us the blessing we
now feel and rejoice in, [the blessing of Peace, Health, Plenty, Victory etc.]
let us faithfully and devoutly give thanks unto God for his great benefit and
grace; and say,

Psalms Eucharistical or of thanksgiving, upon special times of festivity: to
be added to any of the foregoing offices: or to be said distinctly

After a plentiful Harvest.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

* O Be joyful in God all ye lands: sing praises unto the honor of his Name,
make his praise to be glorious.

O come hither and behold the works of God, how wonderful he is in his doing
toward the children of men.

* Thou visitest the earth and blessest it, thou make it very plenteous.

Thou waterest her furrows, thou sendest rain into the little valleys
thereof: thou make it soft with the drops of rain and blessest the increase
of it.

* Thou crownest the year with thy goodness: and thy clouds drop fatness.

They shall drop upon the dwellings of the wilderness: and the little hills
shall rejoice on every side.

* The folds shall be full of sheep, the valleys also shall stand so thick
with corn, that they shall laugh and sing.

Praised be God which has not cast out our prayer, nor turned his mercy from
us.

* Let us now fear the Lord our God that gives rain, both the former and the
latter rain in his season:

He reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest.

* Lord what is man that thou have respect unto him! or the Son of man that
thou so regardest him!

The eyes of all wait upon the O Lord, and thou give them their meat in due
season.

* Thou openest thine hand: and fillest all things living with plenteousnesse.

The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his workers.

* The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him: yea all such as call upon
him faithfully.

He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry
and will help them.

* That our sons may grow up as the young plants: and that our daughters may be
as the polished corners of the Temple.

That our garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of store: that our
sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets.

* That our oxen may be strong to labor; that there be no decay; no leading
into captivity, and no complaining in our streets.

Happy are the people that be in such a case; yea blessed be the people which
have the Lord for their God.

Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
II. After recovery of a City, family or single person from the Plague, or any
great sickness.
* O Come hither and hearken all ye that fear God; and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul.

I called unto him with my mouth, and gave him praises with my tongue: O Lord
my God I cried unto thee and thou have healed me.

* Thou Lord have brought my soul out of Hell: thou have kept my life from
them that go down to the pit.

O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me, and yet did thou
turn and refresh me! yea and broughtest me from the deep of the earth again.

* Sing praises unto the Lord, O ye saints of his, and give thanks unto him
for the remembrance of his holiness.

For his wrath endures but the twinkling of an eye, and in his pleasure is
life: heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

* Praised be the Lord daily, even the God which helps us and powers his
benefits upon us.

He is our God, even the God of whom comes salvation: God is the Lord by whom
we escape death.

* I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have considered my
trouble, and have known my soul in adversity.

Thou have not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: but have set my feet in a
large room.

* Thou have turned my heaviness into joy; thou have put off my sackcloth, and
girded me with gladness.

Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praises without ceasing: O my God I
will give thanks unto thee for ever.

Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
III. After a victory, or the prosperous ending of a War.
BLessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war and my
fingers to fight.

My hope and my fortress, my castle and deliverer, my defender in whom I
turst, which subdueth my people that is under me.

* When my spirit was in heaviness thou knew my path: in the way wherein I
walked had they privily laid a snare for me.

I cried unto the Lord and said, Thou art my hope and my portion in the land of
the living.

Thou did send down thine hand from above: thou did deliver me and take me
out of the great waters, from the hand of strange children.

Thou have given victory unto Kings, and have delivered David thy servant from
the peril of the sword.

* For I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord in above all Gods.

Whatsoever that Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth, in the sea
and in all deep places.

* The Lord is on my side; I will not fear what man does unto me:

The Lord takes my part with them that help me: therefore shall I fee my
desire upon mine enemies.

* It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put any confidence in man.

It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put any cofidence in princes.

* The Lord is my strength and my song: and is become my salvation.

The voice of joy and health is in the dwellings of the righteous: The right
hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass.

* The right hand of the Lord has the pre-eminence: the right hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass.

He makes wars to cease in all the world: he breaks the bow and knappeth
the spear in sunder, and burns the chariots in the fire.

* Behold how good and joyful a thing it is; brethren to dwell together in
Unity.

It is like the precious ointment upon the head that ran down unto the beard,
even unto Aarons beard, and went down to the skirts of his clothing.

* For there the Lord promised his blessing, and life for evermore.

The Lord lives, and blessed be my strong helper: and praised be the God of my
salvation.

* Glory be to the Father etc.
As it was in the beginning etc.
If there be any other occasion, instead of these use Te Deum Laudamus, etc.

After each of these Eucharistical Psalms, shall be added as follows.

Minister.

Lift up your hearts.

Answer.

We lift them up unto the Lord.

Minister.

Let us give thanks unto the Lord our God.

Answer.

It is meet and right so to do.

Minister.

I.
IT is very meet, right and our bounden duty that we should at all times and in
all places give thanks and praise, honor and adoration, love and duty to thee
O Lord God, the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort; who have known
our soul in adversity, and delivered us from the evil we have deserved, and
have given us good things we deserved not: we confess O God that we are less
then the least of all thy mercies; but thy immense thy unlimited goodness and
loving kindness rejoices in doing us good, in preserving us from evil, in
heaping thy benefits upon us, in giving to us witness from heaven [ in feeding
our hearts with food and gladness:] in delivering us from our enemies: [ in
snatching us from the power of the grave] in commanding thy destroying Angel to
hurt us not] Holy Jesus, Blessed be God.

II.
We are thy servants and thy children; we are all thine; and have no interest
but thy service; thou art our God, and all our hopes are laid up in thee: Thou
art gracious when thou smitest us; but we cannot express thy infinite
sweetness when thou releivest our necessity, when thou sustainest our sorrows,
when thou do deliver us from thy wrath, when thou hear our prayers, when
thou powrest thy benefits upon us. O give unto thy servants thankful hearts,
obedient and loving Spirits, carfulness of duty, charity and humility, zeal
of thy glory, submission to thy divine will and pleasure; that serving thee
with all our powers, loving thee with all our faculties, obeying thee in all
instances, delighting in thee in all dispensations, we may be conducted
thorough all varieties of providence, and defended in all temptations of our
enemies, and releived in all the necessities of our life, and assisted in all
particulars of duty, that so we may pass through this valley of tears in
peace and meekness, in faith and charity, with the confidence of a holy hope,
and in the strength of thy righteous promises, to the fruition of those mercies
which are the portion of willing and obedient souls, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

The great penitential Letanies;
To be said according to the discretion of him that ministers: especially in
the time of Lent; and upon solemn Fasting days.

O Blessed God Father of mercies who have sent thy Son to redeem us from sin
and wrath, have mercy upon us rebellious and perishing children, lost and
miserable sinners.

O Blessed Savior Jesus who were the price of lost mankind, and gave thy
self a sacrifice for our sins, have mercy upon miserable and lost, but
sorrowful and returning sinners.

O Blessed Spirit of the Father who did come into the world to sanctify and
to teach, to illuminate and to guide it, have mercy upon us foolish and
ignorant, lost and miserable sinners.

O most Blessed and Mysterious Trinity, God the Fathers, Son and holy Spirit,
have mercy upon us perishing and miserable sinners.

1. Pardon O God the vanities of our childhood, and the sins of our youth, our
backward and dull ignorance, our forward and active malice, our early sins and
slow repentances, our hastiness to all evil, and our unwillingnesse to all
good things whatsoever.

If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may
abide it?

2. O God of mercy pardon our want of discipline, our averseness to learn
good things, our desires of evil, the first insinuations of sin, our morose
delectation in vain thoughts, our pleasure in evil remembrances, our
entertaining little images of sin, our love of the temptation, our fondness
after trifles, our want of love and want of understanding of the things of God.

Cast us not away from thy presence and take not thy holy Spirit from us.

3. O God of mercy, pardon the infinite number of our foolish thoughts and
voluptuous desires, our proud imaginations and fantastic pleasures, our
secret deliciousness in what thou have forbidden, our desires to die, our
contempt and neglect of life; our foolish contrivances and trifling purposes,
our ridiculous designs and unreasonable intentions.

Turn thy face from our sins O Lord and put out all our misdeeds.

4. O God of mercy pardon the infinite omissions of our duty; our seldom
prayers and frequent wandering of our head and heart; our foolish arts to cosen
our selves and to cheat our souls of duty and reward; our wicked rejoycings
when we were forced to omit our devotion, and our listlesse manner of attending
to them; our dullness in hearing, our deadness in observing; our excuses and
pretenses, our weariness of body and tediousness of Spirit, our dullness and
sleepiness, our seldom reading and more seldom meditating, our loss of many
opportunities of receiving the holy Communion, and our making use of all
opportunities of pleasure and vanity.

But there is mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared.

5. O God of mercy pardon all the sins of our proud and prejudicate
understandings, our wilful ignorance and voluntary neglect of the instruments
of salvation, the weakness and imperfection of our faith, and our trifling
notices of things, our distrust of thee and our confidence in the creatures,
our superstitious fancies and foolish opinions, our weak conjectures and
easiness to believe, our suspicions and jealousies of thee, and our wicked
sentences and evil reportings concerning thy actions and thy attributes, our
relying upon dreams, and our not relying upon thy world, our love of being
abused in our persuasions, and our beleiving doctrines for interest and
passion, our weak inquiries and confident opinions, our doubtings and
trepidations in the day of temptations, and our unreasonable confidences,
boastings and presumptions when we are properous, easy and untempted.

Lord be merciful to our sins for they are very many.

6. O God of mercy pardon the sins of our will; our violent prosecutions of
pleasure, and our hatings of religion, our unwillingnesse to please thee, and
our fierceness of desire to please our selves; our unwillingnesse to submit to
thylawes and to the events of thy providence, our disobedience to revelations,
to the advices of the wise and the discourses of the learned, to the voice of
God and the lessons of the Spirit, our unreasonable choice and malicious
determinations, our yeildings to the whispers of the flesh, and our obstinacy
against the motions of illuminated reason.

O give us the comfort of thy help again, and establish us with thy free
Spirit.

7. O God of mercy pardon the inordination and irregularity of our affections;
our anger is hasty and quick, unreasonable and immoderate, a perpetual storm
and a perpetual folly; our desires are passionate and great, sensual and
intemperate, we fear the fears of men, and our hopes are of things that profit
not; we love that which destroys us, and do not love that by which we can be
made alive; we rejoice in the ways of death, and our sorrow is not unto
amendment of life; every sad accident of the world does amaze us, but we are
not afflicted when we loose thy favor, when we do foolish things, and enter
into the portions of thy displeasure.

Lord be merciful unto us, for our sins are very great.

8. O God of mercy pardon the hypocrisy of our lives, our desires to seem
holy, our neglect of being so, our being satisfied with shadows and outsides,
with an unactive faith, with the faith of Devils and the hope of hypocrites,
with the comforts of the presumptuous and the confidences of the proud: we have
rested in outward works and have not secured the truth of the Spirit; we
confess our sins and still commit them; we pray against them and yet we love
them; we call thee Father and obey thee not; we say thou art our Lord and yet
we do not fear thee; we approach thee with our lips, and our hearts are far
from thee; we bow our heads and lift up our hearts and hands against thee: we
humble our selves in flattery, and mortify our affections with deceit; we
pretend religion to serve our own worldly ends; resting in forms of
godliness but denying the power of it.

O God be merciful unto us, for our state is very miserable.

9. O God of mercy pardon our impatience and immortification, our secret
murmures and open rebellions; our temptings of God, our provocations of thee to
anger, our entering into needless dangers, the deferring of our repentance and
the hardening of our faces against thy judgments, our contempt of thy mercies,
and turning thy grace into wantonness, despising thy long suffering and thy
goodness, and trusting boldly where thou have given us no ground of hope or
comfort.

O Blessed Jesu that take away the sins of the world have mercy upon us.

10 O God of mercy pardon the innumerable sins of our tongue, our vain and
common swearings, our bold affirmatives of what we know to be false or know not
to be true, our crafty and insnaring talk, our secret and injurious whispers,
our backbiting and detraction, our undervaluing our Brother and easily
reporting evil, our bragging and vainglorious words, our laying snares for
praise, our flattering some and reproaching others, our clamorous revilings and
uncharitable chidings, and in whatsoever we have spoken against thee or against
our Brother.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world have mercy upon us.

11. O God of mercy pardon our abuses of thy sacred and venerable Name; our
unworthy usages of our selves upon whom thy Name is called, our profanation of
thy word, our irreverent using the Sacraments, our dishonouring thy houses of
prayer, our curious inquiries into the secrets of God and the secrets of men,
our wilful angring and provoking our neighbors to cursing and swearing and all
intemperate wrath, our unnecessary troubling them and betraying them to folly
and indignation.

O remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us and that speedily.

12. O God of mercy pardon our abuse of holy times and holy offices, our
neglect of assembling our selves together, our vain recreations and foolish
employments, the prodigality of our precious time in idle gaming and useless
business, our being idle servants or cruel Masters, false in our trust, or
unreasonable in our commands, our peevish neglect of the customs of the Church
and our schismatical behavior in the congregations of the Lord.

Help us O God of our salvation, and for the glory of thy Name, save thy
sinful servants.

13. O God of mercy, pardon all our rebellions against thee and against thy
representatives, our lawful Superiors; our irreverence and disobedience, our
murmurs and repinings against them, our rude words and perverse disputings, our
neglect of their persons and desires, our publication of their faults and
rejoicing in their infirmi^es, our being asham'ed of their poverty and
condition, our boasting of our kindred and extraction, our secret cursings or
open reviling the ministers of justice, our mocking and scorning old and aged
persons, and whatsoever is irreverent, froward, disobedient, unjust or
uncharitable toward our betters.

O deliver us and purge away our sins for thy Names sake.

14. O God of mercy pardon all our cruel thoughts, our provoking words, and
injurious actions, cleanse our hands from violence and our hearts from
bloud-guiltinesse O God, forgive us our uncharitable treating or our selves or
others, our unjust wranglings and peevish quarrels, our taking things and words
in an evil sense and to purposes of discord and dissension, our threatening and
keeping men in fears, our not rescuing, or not preserving those whom we could
and ought to have preserved, our imbittering the spirit of our neighbor, our
unpeaceable dispositions, our tempting and betraying, our wounding and killing
our own souls and the souls of our brethren, whom we ought to have snatched
from the fire, and according to our powers withheld from the everlasting
burning.

O take away our iniquity from us, and remember our sins no more.

15. O God of mercy, pardon our gluttony and drunkenness, the disorders of our
diet and the disorders of our passion, our wanton thoughts and wandering eyes,
our impure desires and all our actions of uncleanesse, our lascivious dressings
and idle consumptions of our time, our making provisions for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts of it, the dishonourings of our body, and the pollutions of
our spirit, our making the members of Christ be the members of an harlot, and
defiling the temples of the holy Ghost by unnatural actions and desires not to
be named and much less to be entertained, our softness and effeminacy, our
sensualities and studies of the flesh and all the excesses and irregularities
within that state which thou have blessed and sanctified: but we are unclean,
we are unclean.

O Cleanse our souls from sin; take away our iniquity and thou shall find none.

16. O God of mercy, pardon our injustices and rapines, our open invasion and
secret underminings of the rights of others, our greedy desires and fierce
pursuances of money, our love of wealth and our hastiness to be rich, our arts
of unequal bargaining and deceitful words, our unjust law suits and the
vexatious prosecutions of just or unjust, our detaining the wages of the
hireling and our defalking of his dues, our pressing upon the necessities of
the poor, and raising prices for their need, our hard and oppressive
contracts, our rigors of justice and varieties of injustice, our want of
charity and tenacious retaining our money, our reception or retention of unjust
purchases; our sacrilege and simony, our entering into the feilds of the
Fatherless, wronging the helpelesse widow who is thy care; our forwardness to
run into debt and our carelessenesse to come out of it; our improvident conduct
of our estates and our foolish mispendings, our causing diminution to the goods
of others and the avaritious increasing of our own.

Wash us thoroughly from our iniquity, and cleanse us from our sin.

17. O God of mercy forgive us our breach of promise to men, and of our holy
vows made to thee our God: our wilful or careless lying, our false accusation
or false witnessing, our perverting righteous judgment by bribery or false
information, and causing the innocent to suffer; our leading the blind out of
his way; our accusing others, and justifying our selves, our false excuses and
feigned pretenses, our causlesse affirmings and denyings, our jealousies and
suspicions and all the iniquity of our hearts and tongues.

Hide thy face from our sins and blot out all our transgressions.

18. O God of mercy pardon our envy and our discontented hearts, our ambitions
and curiosities, our rejoycings in the evil of our neighbors, and our repining
and displeasure at his advancement, our violent and distracting carfulness
for the things of this world, our affrightments in every sad accident, and all
our covetous thoughts and degenerous and unworthy practices.

Lord Jesu be merciful to us miserable but penitent and returning sinners.

O that our head were waters, and our eyes a fountain of tears that we might
weep day and night till thou were reconciled to thy people. Thy congregation
is an assembly of adulterous and treacherous men.

We have bent our tongues like a bow for lies, but we are not valiant for the
truth upon earth; we have proceeded from evil to evil and we have not known
thee.

[Every one deceives his neighbor, and weary themselves to commit iniquity:
for these things thou have visited us in anger, thou have fed us with wormwood,
and given us water of gall to drink. Thou have sent the sword upon us to
consume us and the spirit of division to scatter us abroad.]

But in thee O Lord is our confidence and our glory; for thou do exercise
loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth, for in these
things thou do delight.

O Lord therefore, correct us, but with judgment, not in thine anger, least
thou bring us to nothing: we pray not against sorrow; but pray to multiply our
penitential sorrows upon us; that we may truly mourn for our offenses against
thee, and may with great caution take care we may no more offend thee, and
redeem the time which we have spent in vanity; and employ the remaining
portion of our days in the ways of peace and righteousness, of wisdom and
the fear of God; that when thou shall send thy Angels to gather the wheat into
thy granary, we may be bound up in the bundle of life and dwell in the house of
God for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

(...)
/ (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
THE END.
THE PSALTER: OR, PSALMS of DAVID, After the KING'S Translation. With ARGUMENTS
to every PSALM.
Te decet Hymnus.


THE BOOK OF PSALMS.
Mo. Pr. PSALM. I.
The good man described: of true piety, and the fruits of it: the judgments of
God upon the wicked.

BLessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful.

2 But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does he meditate
day and night.

3 And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings
forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever
he does shall prosper.

4 The ungodly are not so: but are like the chaff which the wind drives away.

5 Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous.

6 For the Lord knows the way of the righteous: but the way of the ungodly
shall perish.

PSALM. II.
The endeavors of evil m^n against the kingdom of David and of Christ: The
eternity of Christ's kingdom, and the stability and amplitude of the Church:
The attempts of the ungodly against it are ineffectuall: Kings are invited to
be subjects of Christ's kingdom.

WHy do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?

2 The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together,
against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying,

3 Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.

4 He that sits in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in
derision.

5 Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

6 Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.

7 I will declare the decree: the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my son, this
day have I begotten thee.

8 Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

9 Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces
like a potters vessel.

10 Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed ye Judges of the earth.

11 Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

12 Kiss the son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath
is kindled but a little: blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

PSALM. III.
David stying from the face of his son Absalom, strengtheas himself in the
goodness of God, and his experience of it: He prays for himself and his
people: They who are under the Cross must pray, and trust in God.

LOrd, how are they increased that trouble me? many are they that rise up
against me.

2 Many there be which say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. Selah.

3 But thou O Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of mine
head.

4 I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill.
Selah.

5 I laid me down and slept; I awaked, for the Lord sustained me.

6 I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set themselves
against me round about.

7 Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God; for thou have smitten all mine enemies
upon the cheek-bone: thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly.

8 Salvation belongs unto the Lord: thy blessing is upon thy people. Selah.

PSALM. IV.
David prays to God in his trouble^ Exhorts Absaloms party that they should
not be offended at the Kings cause, because he was afflicted: He exhorts his
own party that they should ^ear the cross patiently, rely upon God, and give
him glory, and expect salvation from him; and not to dote upon the prosperity
of the wicked.

HEar me, when I call, O God of my righteousness: thou have enlarged me when I
was in distress, have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer.

2 O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame^ how long will
ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? Selah.

3 But know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly, for himself: the
Lord will hear when I call unto him.

4 Stand in aw, and sin not: commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be
still. Selah.

5 Offer the sacrifices of righteousness: and put your trust in the Lord.

6 There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us.

7 Thou have put gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their corn
and their wine increased.

8 I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou Lord only make me
dwell in safety.

PSALM. V.
David relying on the testimony of a good conscience, and the justice of God,
that he will certainly destroy the wicked, and set his face against proud and
lying rebels, Achitophel or Doeg, comforts himself in Gods goodness, and his
hopes of returning to the house of God: and exhorts the faithful to praise him.

GIve ear to my words, O Lord, consider my meditation.

2 Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king, and my God: for unto thee will I
pray.

3 My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord, in the morning early will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

4 For thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness; neither shall
evil dwell with thee.

5 The foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou hate all workers of
iniquity.

6 Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor the bloody
and deceitful man.

7 But as for me, I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy: and
in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.

8 Lead me, O Lord; in thy righteousness, because of my enemies: make thy way
straight before my face.

9 For there is no faithfulness in their mouth, their inward part is very
wickedness; their throat is an open sepulcher, they flatter with their tongue.

10 Destroy thou them, O God: let them fall by their own counsels: cast them
out in the multitude of their transgressions, for they have rebelled against
thee.

11 But let all those that put their trust in thee, rejoice: let them ever
shout for joy: because thou defendest them: let them also that love thy name,
be joyful in thee.

12 For thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass
him as with a shield.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. VI.
David being afflicted with sicknesse^ and sensible of Gods anger, prays
against it, implores the Divine mercy, renounces all communion with evil men,
and evil works, prays for life and health, ease and rem^ssion: and finding
ease and comfort, gives thanks to God.

O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure.

2 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed.

3 My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O Lord, how long?

4 Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: oh save me for thy mercies sake.

5 For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give
thee thanks?

6 I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my bed to swim: I water my
couch with my tears.

7 Mine eye is consumed because of grief; it waxes old because of all mine
enemies.

8 Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity; for the Lord has heard the voice
of my weeping.

9 The Lord has heard my supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer.

10 Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return and be
ashamed suddenly.

PSALM. VII.
David justifies himself against the reproaches of Shimei, who accused him to
have caused the death of King Saul and his family, and to have usurped the
Kingdom: he prays to be delivered from the injuries of his adversary, to be
restored to his Kingdom, and to be a veng'd of his enemy.

O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust: save me from all them that persecute
me, and deliver me.

2 Lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there is none
to deliver.

3 O Lord my God, if I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands:

4 If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me: (yea, I have
delivered him that without cause is mine enemy)

5 Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it, yea, let him tread down my
life upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust. Selah.

6 Arise, O Lord, in thine anger, lift up thy self because of the rage of mine
enmies: and awake for me to the judgment that thou have commanded.

7 So shall the congregation of the people compass thee about: for their sakes
therefore return thou on high.

8 The Lord shall judge the people: judge me, O Lord, according to my
righteousness, and according to my integrity that is in me.

9 O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish the just:
for the righteous God tries the hearts and reins.

10 My defense is of God, which saves the upright in heart.

11 God judges the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day.

12 If he turn not, he will whet his sword; he has bent his bow, and made it
ready.

13 He has also prepared for him the instruments of death; he ordains his
arrows against the persecutors.

14 Behold, he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and
brought forth falsehood.

15 He made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made.

16 His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall
come down upon his own pate.

17 I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness: and will sing
praise to the name of the Lord most high.

PSALM. VIII.
The glory and magnificence of God, his love to Man, his providence over the
world: an act of praise and adoration of God.

O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who have set thy
glory above the heavens.

2 Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength,
because of thine enemies, that thou might still the enemy and the avenger.

3 When I consider thy heavens, the work work of thy fingers, the moon and the
stars which thou have ordained;

4 What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou
visitest him?

5 For thou have made him a little lower then the angels, and have crowned him
with glory and honor.

6 Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou have put
all things under his feet.

7 All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field:

8 The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passes through
the paths of the seas.

9 O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth^

Mo. Pr. PSALM. IX.
The Church praises God for her victory over her enemies: God takes care of his
Church: will destroy them that oppose her: The faithful are exhorted to put
their trust in God.

I Will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will show forth all thy
mavelous works.

2 I will be glad and rejoice in thee: I will sing praise to thy name, O thou
most high.

3 When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy
presence.

4 For thou have maintained my right and my cause, thou sa^est in the throne
judging right.

5 Thou have rebuked the heathen, thou have destroyed the wicked; thou have put
out their name for ever and ever.

6 O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end: and thou have
destroyed cities, their memorial is perished with them.

7 But the Lord shall endure for ever: he has prepared his throne for judgment.

8 And he shall judge the world in righteousness, he shall minister judgment
to the people in uprightness.

9 The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of
trouble.

10 And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee: for thou, Lord,
have not for saken them that seek thee.

11 Sing praises to the Lord, which dwells in Sion: declare among the people
his doings.

12 When he makes inquisition for blood, he remembers them: he forgets not
the cry of the humble.

13 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, consider my trouble which I suffer of them that
hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death:

14 That I may show forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Sion:
I will rejoice in thy salvation.

15 The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net which they
hid, is their own foot taken.

16 The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes: the wicked is snared
in the work of his own hands. Higgaion, Selah.

17 The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.

18 For the needy shall not always be forgotten: the expectation of the poor
shall not perish for ever.

19 Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail, let the heathen he judged in thy sight.

20 Put them in fear, O Lord: that the nations may know themselves to be but
men.

PSALM. X.
The Church under the oppression of persecutors, sadly complains to God,
describes their m^^ice and violence, and implores the Divine aid against
atheistical and cruel persons.

WHy stand thou afar off? O Lord, why hidest thou thy self in times of
trouble?

2 The wicked in his pride does persecute the poor: let them be taken in the
devices that they have imagined.

3 For the wicked boasts of his hearts desire, and blesses the covetous,
whom the Lord abhors.

4 The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God:
God is not in all his thoughts.

5 His ways are always grievous: thy judgments are far above out of his
sight: as for all his enemies, he puffs at them.

6 He has said in his heart, I shall not be moved: for I shall never be in
adversity.

7 His mouth is full of cursing, and deceit, and fraud: under his tongue is
mischief and vanity.

8 He sits in the lurking places of the villages: in the secret places does
he murder the innocent: his eyes are privily set against the poor.

9 He lies in wait secretly as a lion in his den: he lies in wait to catch
the poor: he does catch the poor when he draws him into his ^et.

10 He croucheth, and humbles himself that the poor may fall by his strong
ones.

11 He has said in his heart, God has forgotten: he hides his face, he will
never see it.

12 Arise O Lord, O God lift up thine hand: forget not the humble.

13 Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? he has said in his heart, Thou will
not require it.

14 Thou have seen it, for thou beholdest mischief and spite to requite in with
thy hand: the poor commits himself unto thee, thou art the helper of the
fatherless.

15 Break thou the arm of the wicked, and the evil man: seek out his
wickedness till thou find none.

16 The Lord is king for for ever and ever: the heathen are perished out of his
land.

17 Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble: thou will prepare their
heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear.

18 To judge the fatherless and the oppressed, that the man of the earth may
no more oppress.

PSALM. XI.
The Church afflicted with the arts and fraud of false brethren, runs to God in
hope and prayer; acknowledges God to be a just Judge, both to the godly and to
the wicked.

IN the Lord put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to your
mountain?

2 For lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon the
string: that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart.

3 If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?

4 The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lords throne is in heaven: his eyes
behold, his eyelids try the children of men.

5 The Lord tries the righteous: but the wicked and him that loves violence,
his soul hates.

6 Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.

7 For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance does behold
the upright.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. XII.
David complains of the iniquity of his time; the falsehood all flattery of men:
he declares Gods care of the poor and the oppressed, and the excellency of the
Word of God.

HElp Lord, for the godly man cease: for the faithful fail from among the
children of men.

2 They speak vanity every one with his neighbor: with flattering lips, and
with a double heart do they speak.

3 The Lord shall cut off and flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks
proud things.

4 Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail, our lips are our own: who is
lord over us?

5 For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise (says the Lord) I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him.

6 The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of earth,
purified seven times.

7 Thou shall keep them (O Lord) thou shall preserve them from this generation
for ever.

8 The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.

PSALM. XIII.
David expostulating concerning his own infirmity, the importunity of his
enemies, and the delaying of the Divine aides, prays to God for deliverance,
hopes and rejoices in his mercy.

HOw long will thou forget me (O Lord) for ever? how long will thou hide thy
face from me?

2 How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily?
how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?

3 Consider and hear me, O Lord my God: lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the
sleep of death.

4 Lest mine enemies say, I have prevailed against him: and those that trouble
me, rejoice when I am moved.

5 But I have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.

6 I will sing unto the Lord, because he has dealt bountifully with me.

PSALM. XIV.
The practical atheism of the world, and the universal iniquity of mankind is
here complained of, and their readiness to oppress the poor: but God will
call them to judgment, and relieve the oppressed.

THe fool has said in his heart, There is no God: they are corrupt, they have
done abominable works, there is none that does good.

2 The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men: to see if there
were any that did understand, and seek God.

3 They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy: there is none
that does good, no not one.

4 Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they
eat bread, and call not upon the Lord.

5 There were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the righteous.

6 You have shamed the counsel of the poor; because the Lord is his refuge.

7 O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! when the Lord brings
back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. XV.
The godly, and they who are to be heirs of heaven, are described by their
integrity of life, their truth, their justice, and contempt of money.

LOrd, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill?

2 He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth
in his heart.

3 He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, not
takes up a reproach against his neighbor.

4 In whose eyes a vile person is contemned; but he honors them that fear
the Lord: he that swears to his own hurt, and changes not.

5 He that puts not out his money to usury, nor takes reward against the
innocent. He that does these things, shall never be moved.

PSALM. XVI.
David confesses God to be his G^^, and protests against all idolatrous
worshippings: he rejoices in God for his present blessings, his preservation
and prosperity, the aides of his grace, and the hopes of Eternal life, through
the resu^rection of Christ.

PReserve me, O God: for in thee do I put my trust.

2 O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord: my goodness
extends not to thee:

3 But to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent in whom is all
my delight.

4 Their sorrows shall be multiplied, that hasten after another God: their
drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into my lips.

5 The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou maintainest
my lot.

6 The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly
heritage.

7 I will bless the Lord, who has given me counsel: my reins also instruct
me in the night seasons.

8 I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand, I
shall not be moved.

9 Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices: my flesh also shall rest
in hope.

10 For thou will not leave my soul in hell; neither will thou suffer thine
holy One to see corruption.

11 Thou will show me the path of life: in thy presence is fullness of joy, at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

PSALM. XVII.
David appealing to God concerning his innocence, does passionately implore his
patronage against his prosperous enemies: he prophesies of the resurrection.

HEar the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry, give ear unto my prayer that
goes not out of feigned lips.

2 Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: let thine eyes behold the
things that are equal.

3 Thou have proved mine heart, thou have visited me in the night, thou have
tried me, and and shall find nothing: I am purposed that my mouth shall not
transgress.

4 Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips, I have kept me from
the paths of the destroyer.

5 Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

6 I have called upon thee, for thou will hear me, O God: incline thine ear
unto me, and hear my speech.

7 Show thy mavelous loving kindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand,
them which put their trust in thee, from those that rise up against them.

8 Keep me as the apple of the eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings,

9 From the wicked that oppress me, from my deadly enemies, who compass me
about.

10 They are enclosed in their own fat: with their mouth they speak proudly.

11 They have now compassed us in our steps: they have set their eyes bowing
down to the earth.

12 Like as a Lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young lion
lurking in secret places.

13 Arise O Lord, disappoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul from the
wicked, which is thy sword:

14 From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from men of the world, which have
their portion in this life, and whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure:
they are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes.

15 As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied,
when I awake, with thy likeness.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. XVIII.
David toward the end of his life sings a song of victory to God for all his
triumphs and great successes in his wars: he gives thanks, and puts his trust
in God.

I will love thee, O Lord my strength.

2 The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer: my God, my strength
in whom I will trust, my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high
tower.

3 I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved
from mine enemies.

4 The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made me
afraid.

5 The sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death prevented me.

6 In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he heard my
voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears.

7 Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the hills moved
and were shaken, because he was wroth.

8 There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth
devoured: coals were kindled by it.

9 He bowed the heavens also and came down: and darkness was under his feet.

10 And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of
the wind.

11 He made darkness his secret place: his pavilion round about him, were dark
waters, and thick clouds of the skies.

12 At the brightness that was before him his thick clouds passed, hailstones
and coals of fire.

13 The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice;
hailstones and coals of fire.

14 Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; and he shot out
lightnings, and discomfited them.

15 Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the world
were discovered: at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy
nostrils.

16 He sent from above, he took me, and drew me out of many waters.

17 He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me: for
they were too strong for me.

18 They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the Lord was my stay.

19 He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me, because he
delighted in me.

20 The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness, according to the
cleanness of my hands has he recompensed me.

21 For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from
my God.

22 For all his judgments were before me, and I did not put away his statutes
from me.

23 I was also upright before him: and I kept my self from mine iniquity.

24 Therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to my right^nesse,
according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.

25 With the merciful thou will show thy self merciful, with an upright man
thou will show thy self upright.

26 With the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will
show thy self froward.

27 For thou will save the afflicted people: but thou will bring down high
looks.

28 For thou will light my candle: the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness.

29 For by thee I have run through a troop: and by my God have I leaped over a
wall.

30 As for God, his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried: he is a
buckler to all those that trust in him.

31 For who is God save the Lord? or who is a rock save our God?

32 It is God that girdeth me with strength, and makes my way perfect.

33 He makes my feet like hindes feet, and sets me upon my high places.

34 He teaches my hands to war, so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms.

35 Thou have also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy right hand
has holden me up, and thy gentleness has made me great.

36 Thou have enlarged my steps under me; that my feet did not slip.

37 I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken them: neither did I turn again
till they were consumed.

38 I have wounded them that they were not able to rise: they are fallen under
my feet.

39 For thou have girded me with strength unto battle: thou have subdued under
me those that rose up against me.

40 Thou have also given me the necks of mine enemies: that I might destroy
them that hate me.

41 They cried, but there was none to save them: even unto the Lord, but he
answered them not.

42 Then did I beat them small as the dust before the wind: I did cast them out
as the dirt in the streets.

43 Thou have delivered me from the strivings of the people: and thou have made
me the head of the heathen: a people whom I have not known shall serve me.

44 As Soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: the strangers shall submit
themselves unto me.

45 The strangers shall fade away, and be afraid out of their close places.

46 The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock: and let the God of my salvation be
exalted.

47 It is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me.

48 He delivers me from mine enemies: yea thou liftest me up above those that
rise up against me: thou have delivered me from the violent man.

49 Therefore will I give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the heathen: and sing
praises unto thy name.

50 Great deliverance gives he to his King: and shows mercy to his anointed,
to David, and to his seed for evermore.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. XIX.
David declaring the glory of God manifested in the Creation, and in his Word,
prays to God so pardon of all sins, little and great known and unknown; and
that he may be directed and accepted by God through Christ his Redeem^r.

THe heavens declare the glory of God: and the firmament shows his handy work.

2 Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge.

3 There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.

4 Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of
the world: in them has he set a tabernacle for the sun.

5 Which is as a Bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices as a
strong man to run a race.

6 His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends
of it: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

7 The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the
Lord is sure, making wise the simple.

8 The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoyc^ng the heart: the commandment of
the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.

9 The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the Lord
are true and righteous altogether.

10 More to be desired are they then gold, yea, then much fine gold: sweeter
also then honey, and the honey comb.

11 Moreover, by them is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them there is
great reward.

12 Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.

13 Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have
dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the
great transgression.

14 Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in
thy sight, O Lord my strength and my redeemer.

PSALM. XX.
A Prayer for the King going forth to battle: an act of trust and confidence in
God.

THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend
thee.

2 Send thee help from the sanctuary: and strengthen thee out of Sion.

3 Remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice. Selah.

4 Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy counsel.

5 We will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the name of our God we will set up
our banners: the Lord fulfill all thy petitions.

6 Now know I, that the Lord saves his anointed: he will hear him from his
holy heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand.

7 Some trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember the name of
the Lord our God.

8 They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and stand upright.

9 Save Lord, let the king hear us when we call.

PSALM. XXI.
A thanksgiving to God for the Kings victory over the Ammonites: the
destruction of the Kings enemies: an act of adoration of God.

THe king shall joy in thy strength, O Lord: and in thy salvation how greatly
shall he rejoice!

2 Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not withholden the request
of his lips. Selah.

3 For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness: thou set a
crown of pure gold on his head.

4 He asked life of thee, and thou gave it him, even length of days for ever
and ever.

5 His glory is great in thy salvation, honor and majesty have thou laid upon
him.

6 For thou have made him most blessed for ever: thou have made him exceeding
glad with thy countenance.

7 For the king trusts in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most High,
he shall not be moved.

8 Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies, thy right hand shall find out
those that hate thee.

9 Thou shall make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger: the Lord
shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them.

10 Their fruit shall thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among
the children of men.

11 For they intended evil against thee: they imagined a mischievous device,
which they are not able to perform.

12 Therefore shall thou make them turn their back, when thou shall make ready
thine arrows upon thy strings, against the face of them.

13 Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise
thy power.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. XXII.
A description of the agonies and passion of Christ: his Prophetical office,
Priesthood, and everlasting kingdom: the universality, piety, and perpetuity
of his Church.

MY God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping
me, and from the words of my roaring?

2 O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not; and in the night
season, and am not silent.

3 But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel.

4 Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou did deliver them.

5 They cried unto thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee and were not
confounded

6 But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people.

7 All they that see me, laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lip, they shake
the head, saying,

8 He trusted on the Lord, that he would deliver him: let him deliver him
seeing he delighted in him.

9 But thou art he that took me out of the womb; thou did make me hope, when
I was upon my mothers breasts.

10 I was cast upon thee from the womb: thou art my God from my mothers belly.

11 Be not far from me, for trouble is near; for there is none to help

12 Many bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round.

13 They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion.

14 I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is
like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels.

15 My strength is dried up like a potsheard: and my tongue cleaves to my
jaws; and thou have brought me into the dust of death.

16 For dogs have compassed me, the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me:
they pierced my hands and my feet.

17 I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon me.

18 They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.

19 But be not thou far from me, O Lord; O my strength, haste thee to help me.

20 Deliver my soul from the sword: my darling from the power of the dog.

21 Save me from the lions mouth: for thou have heard me from the horns of the
unicorns.

22 I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation
will I praise thee.

23 Ye that fear the Lord, praise him; all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him;
and fear him, all ye the seed of Israel.

24 For he has not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted:
neither has he hid his face from him, but when he cried unto him, he heard.

25 My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation: I will pay my vows
before them that fear him.

26 The meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the Lord that seek
him; your heart shall live for ever.

27 All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the Lord: and all
the kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee.

28 For the kingdom is the Lords: and he is the governor among the nations.

29 All they that be fat upon the earth, shall eat and worship: all they that
go down to the dust, shall bow before him, and none can keep alive his own
soul.

30 A seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation.

31 They shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people that
shall be born, that he has done this.

PSALM. XXIII.
An act of thanksgiving to Christ our Shepherd for temporal and spiritual
goods given to his sheep: together with an act of trust and hope in him.

THe Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.

2 He makes me to lie down in green pastures: he leads me beside the still
waters.

3 He restores my soul: he leads me in the paths of righteousness for his
names sake

4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

5 Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou
anointest my head with oil, my cup runs over.

6 Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I
will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. XXIV.
Gods dominion ore the world: the just praedispositions of them who are to be
admitted to Gods Temple: a prophecy of Christ's ascension into Heaven, under
the type of placing the ark in Solomon's temple.

THe earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; the world, and they that
dwell therein.

2 For he has founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.

3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy
place?

4 He that has clean hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift up his soul
unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.

5 He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God
of his salvation.

6 This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O Jacob.
Selah.

7 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and
the king of glory shall come in.

8 Who is this king of glory? the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in
battle.

9 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, even lift them up, ye everlasting doors, and
the king of glory shall come in.

10 Who is this king of glory? the Lord of hosts, he is the king of glory.
Selah.

PSALM. XXV.
David oppressed with the Conscience of his sins, and the sense of the Divine
anger, prays for pardon, relyes upon Gods goodness, beggs mercy and
deliverance for himself and for the Church. The Psalm is paenitentiall.

UNto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul

2 O my God, I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed: let not mine enemies
triumph over me.

3 Yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed; let them be ashamed which
transgress without cause.

4 Show me thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy paths.

5 Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my salvation, on
thee do I wait all the day.

6 Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses: for they
have ever been of old.

7 Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy
mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord.

8 Good and upright is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the way.

9 The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach his way.

10 All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his
covenant, and his testimonies.

11 For thy names sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity: for it is great.

12 What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he
shall choose.

13 His soul shall dwell at ease: and his seed shall inherit the earth.

14 The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: and he will show them
his covenant.

15 Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord: for he shall pluck my feet out of the
net.

16 Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and afflicted.

17 The troubles of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my distresses.

18 Look upon mine affliction, and my pain, and forgive all my sins.

19 Consider mine enemies, for they are many, and they hate me with cruel
hatred.

20 O keep my soul and deliver me: let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in
thee.

21 Let integrity and uprightness preserve me: for I wait on thee.

22 Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.

PSALM. XXVI.
David puts^ his trust in God, separates himself from the communion of wicked
persons, but delighting in the Communion of Saints, prays to be delivered from
the evil portion of the wicked.

JUdge me, O Lord, for I have walked in my integrity: I have trusted also in
the Lord: therefore I shall not slide.

2 Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart.

3 For thy loving kindness is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy truth.

4 I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers.

5 I have hated the congregation of evil^ doers: and will not sit with the
wicked.

6 I will wash mine hands in innocence: so will I compass thine altar, O Lord.

7 That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy
wondrous works.

8 O Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine
honor dwells.

9 Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men:

10 In whose hands is mischief: and their right hand is full of bribes.

11 But as for me, I will walk in my integrity: redeem me, and be merciful
unto me.

12 My foot stands in an even place: in the congregations will I bless the
Lord.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. XXVII.
David being forced to be absent from the public assemblies of the faithful
longs to be restored: puts his trust in God, hopes and prays to be delivered
from Saul, and desires immunity from secular troubles, to be directed in the
ways of God, and exhorts the Church to put her trust in God.

THe Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?

2 When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my
flesh, they stumbled and fell.

3 Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear: though war
should rise against me, in this will I be confident.

4 One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty
of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple.

5 For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the secret
of his tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me up upon a rock.

6 And now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me:
therefore will I offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy, I will sing, yea, I
will sing praises unto the Lord.

7 Hear, O Lord, when I cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me, and answer
me.

8 When thou said, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord,
will I seek.

9 Hide not thy face far from me, put not thy servant away in anger: thou have
been my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.

10 When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.

11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because of mine
enemies.

12 Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for false witnesses are
risen up against me, and such as breath out cruelty.

13 I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living.

14 Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart:
wait, I say, on the Lord.

PSALM. XXVIII.
David prays against his secret and treacherous enemies, that he may be quit
of their snares and of their society: and prays for the Church.

UNto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock, be not silent to me: lest if thou be
silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit.

2 Hear the voice of my supplications, when I cry unto thee: when I lift up my
hands toward thy holy oracle.

3 Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity: which
speak peace to their neighbors, but mischief is in their hearts.

4 Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of
their endeavors: give them after the work of their hands, render to them their
desert.

5 Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his
hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

6 Blessed be the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my supplications.

7 The Lord is my strength, and my shield, my heart trusted in him, and I am
helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoices, and with my song will I praise
him.

8 The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his anointed.

9 Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance: feed them also, and lift them
up for ever.

PSALM. XXIX.
A^ psalm of adoration and fear, and of the glorification of God to be said in
great tempests and thunders: Princes and great men are exhorted to worship and
fear before the Great God of Heaven and Earth.

GIve unto the Lord (O ye mighty) give unto the Lord glory and strength.

2 Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; worship the Lord in the
beauty of holiness.

3 The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory thundereth, the
Lord is upon many waters.

4 The voice of the Lord is powerful; the voice of the Lord is full of majesty.

5 The voice of the Lord breaks the cedars: yea, the Lord breaks the cedars
of Lebanon.

6 He makes them also to skip like a calf: Lebanon, and Sirion like a young
unicorn.

7 The voice of the Lord divides the flames of fire.

8 The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness: the Lord shakes the
wilderness of Kadesh.

9 The voice of the Lord makes the hinds to calve, and discovers the
forests: and in his temple does every one speak of his glory.

10 The Lord sits upon the flood: yea, the Lord sits King for ever.

11 The Lord will give strength unto his people, the Lord will bless his
people with peace.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. XXX.
A thanksgiving for restitution to health after a great sickness; which David
sang when he dedicated his new cedar-house to God; after the Hebrew Custom.

IWil extol thee, O Lord, for thou have lifted me up, and have not made my foes
to rejoice over me.

2 O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me.

3 O Lord thou have brought up my soul from the grave: thou have kept me alive
that I should not go down to the pit.

4 Sing unto the Lord, (O ye Saints of his) and give thanks at the remembrance
of his holiness.

5 For his anger endures but a moment; in his favor is life: weeping may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

6 And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved.

7 Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong: thou did
hide thy face, and I was troubled.

8 I cried to thee, O Lord: and unto the Lord I made supplication.

9 What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? shall the dust
praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?

10 Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord be thou my helper.

11 Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou have put off my
sackcloth, and girded me with gladness.

12 To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent: O Lord
my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

PSALM. XXXI.
David prays to God for his salvation, represents his great danger; by his own
example proves God to be bountiful to his servants: prays against his
enemies: gives thanks to God for his benefi^s: exhorts the faithful to love
God, and to constancy of mind.

IN thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy
righteousness.

2 Bow down thine ear to me, deliver me speedily: be thou my strong rock, for
an house of defense to save me.

3 For thou art my rock and my fortress: therefore for thy names sake lead me,
and guide me.

4 Pull me out of the net, that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my
strength.

5 Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth.

6 I have hated them that regard lying vanities: but I trust in the Lord.

7 I will be glad, and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have considered my
trouble; thou have known my soul in adversities;

8 And have not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: thou have set my feet
in a large room.

9 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble; mine eye is consumed with
grief, yea, my soul and my belly.

10 For my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing: my strength
fails because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed.

11 I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my neighbors,
and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that did see me without, fled from me.

12 I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am like a broken vessel.

13 For I have heard the slander of many, fear was on every side, while they
took counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life.

14 But I trusted in thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my God.

15 My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and
from them that persecute me.

16 Make thy face fo shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies sake.

17 Let me not be ashamed, O Lord, for I have called upon thee: let the wicked
be ashamed, and let them be silent in the grave.

18 Let the lying lips be put to silence: which speak grievous things proudly
and contemptuously against the righteous.

19 O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee; which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men!

20 Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man:
thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.

21 Blessed be the Lord; for he has showed me his mavelous kindness, in a
strong city.

22 For I said in my have, I am cut off from before thine eyes: nevertheless
thou heardest the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto thee.

23 O love the Lord, all ye his saints: for the Lord preserves the faithful,
and plentifully rewards the proud doer.

24 Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in
the Lord.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. XXXII.
The blessedness of Man consists in the pardon of sins: which is to be
obtained by confession of them: we are exhorted to repentance, and to joy in
God, who punishes the wicked, and preserves the faithful. The psalm is
paenitentiall.

Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.

2 Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose
spirit there is no guile.

3 When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long.

4 For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my moisture is turned into the
drought of summer. Selah.

5 I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity I have not hid: I said I
will confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity
of my sin. Selah.

6 For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou
may be found: surely in the floods of great waters, they shall not come nigh
unto him.

7 Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou shall
compass me about with songs of deliverance. Selah.

8 I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall go: I will
guide thee with mine eye.

9 Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule which have no understanding: whose
mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thee.

10 Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: but he that trusts in the Lord,
mercy shall compass him about.

11 Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous: and shout for joy all ye
that are upright in heart.

PSALM. XXXIII.
The just are exhorted to fear and to praise God for his goodness and his
justice, his wisdom and his providence in Creating and governing the world: we
are to trust in God alone, and not in any creature. God preserves all that rely
upon him.

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for praise is comely for the upright.

2 Praise the Lord with harp: sing unto him with the psalterie, and an
instrument of ten strings.

3 Sing unto him a new song, play skilfully with a loud noise.

4 For the word of the Lord is right: and all his works are done in truth.

5 He loves righteousness: the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.

6 By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the host of them, by
the breath of his mouth.

7 He gathers the waters of the sea together, as an heap: he lays up the
depth in storehouses.

8 Let all the earth fear the Lord: let all the inhabitants of the world stand
in aw of him.

9 For the spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast.

10 The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught: he makes the
devices of the people of none effect.

11 The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to
all generations.

12 Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord: and the people whom he has
chosen for his own inheritance.

13 The Lord looks from heaven: he beholds all the sons of men.

14 From the place of his habitation he looks upon all the inhabitants of the
earth.

15 He fashioneth their hearts alike: he considers all their works.

16 There is no king saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength.

17 An horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shall he deliver any by his
great strength.

18 Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: upon them that hope
in his mercy:

19 To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.

20 Our soul waits for the Lord: he is our help and our shield.

21 For our heart shall rejoice in him: because we have trusted in his holy
name.

22 Let thy mercy (O Lord) be upon us according as we hope in thee.

PSALM. XXXIV.
David gives thanks to God for his delivery from Achish king of Gath: he
exhorts to piety of life, to trust in God: Angels are the Guardians of the
faithful: the custody of the tongue is the way to live prosperously: God sets
his face against the wicked; and tak's care of the righteous in their
affliction.

I Will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be in my
mouth.

2 My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall hear thereof, and
be glad.

3 O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together.

4 I sought the Lo^d, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears.

5 They looked unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not ashamed.

6 This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him; and saved him out of all his
troubles.

7 The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them.

8 O taste and see that the Lord is good: blessed is the man that trusts in
him.

9 O fear the Lord, ye his Saints: for there is no want to them that fear him.

10 The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord
shall not want any good thing.

11 Come ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

12 What man is he that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see
good?

13 Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.

14 Depart from evil, and do good: seek peace and pursue it.

15 The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their cry.

16 The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the
remembrance of them from the earth.

17 The righteous cry, and the Lord hears; and delivers them out of all
their troubles.

18 The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart: and saves such as
be of a contrite spirit.

19 Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out
of them all.

20 He keeps all his bones: not one of them is broken.

21 Evil shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous shall be
desolate.

22 The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants: and none of them that trust in
him shall be desolate.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. XXXV.
David prays to be defended from Sycophants and informers, and from false
friends his secret enemies, who falsely accused him before Saul: he appeals to
God the judge of their falsehood and his own innocence: he prays against them,
and for his own party, and promises to give praises to God.

PLead my cause (O Lord) with them that strive with me: fight against them that
fight against me.

2 Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help.

3 Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me:
say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

4 Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let them be
turned back and brought to confusion that devise my hurt.

5 Let them be as chafe before the wind: and let the angel of the Lord chase
them.

6 Let their way be dark and slippery, and let the angel of the Lord persecute
them.

7 For without cause have they hid for me their net, in a pit, which without
cause they have dug for my soul.

8 Let destruction come upon him at unawares, and let his net that he has hid,
catch himself: into that very destruction let him fall.

9 And my soul shall be joyful in the Lord, it shall rejoice in his salvation.

10 All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the
poor from him that is too strong for him; yea, the poor and the needy, from him
that spoileth him?

11 False witnesses did rise up; they laid to my charge things that I knew not.

12 They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul.

13 But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my
soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosom.

14 I behaved my self as though he had been my friend, or brother: I bowed down
heavily, as one that mourns for his mother.

15 But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together: yea,
the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not, they
did tear me and ceased not.

16 With hypocritical mockers in feasts: they gnashed upon me with their teeth.

17 Lord, how long will thou look on? rescue my soul from their destructions,
my darling from the lions.

18 I will give thee thanks in the great congregation: I will praise thee among
much people.

19 Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me: neither let
them wink with the eye, that hate me without a cause.

20 For they speak not peace, but they devise deceitful matters against them
that are quiet in the land.

21 Yea, they opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye
has seen it.

22 This thou have seen (O Lord) keep not silence: O Lord, be not far from me.

23 Stir up thy self, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause, my God and
my Lord.

24 Judge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousness, and let them not
rejoice over me.

25 Let them not say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it: let them not
say, We have swallowed him up.

26 Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together that rejoice at mine
hurt: let them be clothed with shame and dishonor that magnify themselves
against me.

27 Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favor my righteous cause: yea,
let them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified, which has pleasure in the
prosperity of his servant.

28 And my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness, and of thy praise all the
day long.

PSALM. XXXVI.
A character of the wicked man: a celebration of the divine goodness, justice
and truth: God communicates himself to his Saints gloriously in the other
world: David prays for the Righteous, and for protection from the violence of
the proud.

THe transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear
of God before his eyes.

2 For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found to
be hateful.

3 The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he has left off to be wise,
and to do good.

4 He devises mischief upon his bed, he sets himself in a way that is not
good; he abhors not evil.

5 Thy mercy (O Lord) is in the heavens; and thy faithfulness reaches unto
the clouds.

6 Thy righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a great
deep; O Lord, thou preservest man and beast.

7 How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God? therefore the children of men
put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

8 They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house: and thou
shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.

9 For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light.

10 O continue thy loving kindness unto them that know thee; and thy
righteousness to the upright in heart.

11 Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the
wicked remove me.

12 There are the workers of iniquity fallen: they are cast down, and shall not
be able to rise.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. XXXVII.
A description of the false prosperity of the wicked: the security and real
happiness of the Godly manifested even under their afflictions. The differing
end of the Godly and the wicked. The Godly are exhorted to piety and patience,
and confidence in God: Great promises to the servants of God: great threatenings
to the ungodly.

FRet not thy self because of evildoers, neither be thou envious against the
workers of iniquity.

2 For they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green
herb.

3 Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily
thou shall be fed.

4 Delight thy self also in the Lord; and he shall give thee the desires of
thine heart.

5 Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to
pass.

6 And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment
as the noonday.

7 Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him: fret not thy self because of
him who prospers in his way, because of the man who brings wicked devises
to pass.

8 Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thy self in any wise to do
evil.

9 For evildoers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord, they
shall inherit the earth.

10 For yet a little while and the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shall
diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.

11 But the meek shall inherit the earth: and shall delight themselves in the
abundance of peace.

12 The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth.

13 The Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming.

14 The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow to cast down
the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation.

15 Their sword shall enter into their own heart: and their bows shall be
broken.

16 A little that a righteous man has, is better then the riches of many
wicked.

17 For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: but the Lord upholdeth the
righteous.

18 The Lord knows the days of the upright: and their inheritance shall be
for ever.

19 They shall not be ashamed in the evil time: and in the days of famine
they shall be satisfied.

20 But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the
fat of lambs, they shall consume: into smoke shall they consume away.

21 The wicked borrows, and pays not again: but the righteous shows mercy
and gives.

22 For such as be blessed of him, shall inherit the earth: and they that be
cursed of him, shall be cut off.

23 The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord: and he delights in his
way.

24 Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down: for the Lord upholdeth
him with his hand.

25 I have been young and now am old: yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.

26 He is ever merciful, and lends: and his seed is blessed.

27 Depart from evil, and do good, and dwell for evermore.

28 For the Lord loves judgment, and forsakes not his saints, they are
preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.

29 The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever.

30 The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom^ and his tongue talks of
judgment.

31 The law of his God is in his heart, none of his steps shall slide.

32 The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him.

33 The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.

34 Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the
land: when the wicked are cut off, thou shall see it.

35 I have seen the wicked in great power: and spreading himself like a green
bay tree.

36 Yet he passed away, and lo he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not
be found.

37 Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is
peace.

38 But the transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end of the wicked
shall be cut off.

39 But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord, he is their strength in
the time of trouble.

40 And the Lord shall help them, and deliver them: he shall deliver them from
the wicked, and save them because they trust in him.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. XXXVIII.
David very grievously afflicted by disease, deplores his sins as the cause of
his calamity: he complains of his sadness and his sickness: that he was
forsaken by his friends and upbraided by his enemies: he flies to God for help,
and begs pardon of his sins and ease from his affliction, The psalm is
paenitential.

O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.

2 For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore.

3 There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there
any rest in my bones, because of my sin.

4 For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden they are too
heavy for me.

5 My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness.

6 I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day long.

7 For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease: and there is no soundness
in my flesh.

8 I am feeble and sore broken: I have roared because of the disquietnesse of
my heart.

9 Lord, all my desire is before thee: and my groaning is not hid from thee.

10 My heart pants, my strength fails me: as for the light of mine eyes, it
also is gone from me.

11 My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore: and my kinsmen stand
afar off.

12 They also that seek after my life, lay snares for me: and they that seek my
hurt, speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long.

13 But I, as a deaf man heard not; and I was as a dumb man that opens not
his mouth.

14 Thus I was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs.

15 For in thee, O Lord, do I hope: thou will hear me, O Lord my God.

16 For I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me: when my
foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me.

17 For I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me

18 For I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin.

19 But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong: and they that hate me
wrongfully are multiplied.

20 They also that render evil for good, are mine adversaries: because I
follow the thing that good is.

21 Forsake me not, O Lord: O my God be not far from me.

22 Make haste to help me, O Lord my salvation.

PSALM. XXXIX.
David being sick, restrains himself from repining against God, tells of the
vanity of life: prays for deliverance from his affliction, for pardon of his
sins, and space and time of further repen^ance. The Psalm is paeniten^ial.

I Said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will
keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.

2 I was dumb with silence, I held my peace even from good, and my sorrow was
stirred.

3 My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spoke I
with my tongue.

4 Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is:
that I may know how frail I am.

5 Behold, thou have made my days as an hand breadth, and mine age is as
nothing before thee: verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity.
Selah.

6 Surely every man walks in a vain show: surely they are disquieted in vain:
he heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather them.

7 And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.

8 Deliver me from all my transgressions, make me not the reproach of the
foolish.

9 I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.

10 Remove thy stroke away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thine hand.

11 When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his
beauty to consume away like a moth: surely every man is vanity. Selah.

12 Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry, hold not thy peace at my
tears: for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers were.

13 O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more.

PSALM. XL.
David praises God for his delivery from troubles: and prays to be desended
from imminent and approaching dangers: The obedience of Christ, and his
sacrifice, and the abolition of the Mosaic rites are prophetically declared.

I Waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry.

2 He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the mirie clay, and set
my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.

3 And he has put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God: many shall
see it, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.

4 Blessed is that man that makes the Lord his trust: and respects not the
proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.

5 Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and thy
thoughts which are to usward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee:
if I would declare and speak of them, they are mo then can be numbered.

6 Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened:
burnt-offering and sin-offering have thou not required.

7 Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me:

8 I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is written within my heart.

9 I have preached righteousness in the great congregation: lo, I have not
refrained my lips, O Lord, thou know.

10 I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy
faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy loving kindness and
thy truth from the great congregation.

11 Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: let thy loving
kindness and thy truth continually preserve me.

12 For innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken
hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up: they are mo then the hairs of
my head, therefore my heart fails me

13 Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me: O Lord make haste to help me.

14 Let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my soul to
destroy it: let them be driven backward, and put to shame that wish me evil

15 Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame, that say unto me, Aha,
aha.

16 Let all those that seek thee, rejoice and be glad in thee: let such as love
thy salvation, say continually, The Lord be magnified.

17 But I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks upon me: thou art my help
and my deliverer, make to tarrying, O my God.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. XLI.
The blessings and rewards of the Charitable man: David complains that his
pretended friends were real enemies: he prays to God, and gives him thanks for
his recovery from his sickness.

BLessed is he that considers the poor; the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble.

2 The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon
the earth; and thou will not deliver him into the will of his enemies.

3 The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou will make all
his bed in his sickness.

4 I said, Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against
thee.

5 Mine enemies speak evil of me: when shall he die, and his name perish?

6 And if he come to see me, he speaks vanity: his heart gathers iniquity
to it self, when he goes abroad, he tells it.

7 All that hate me whisper together against me: against me do they devise my
hurt.

8 An evil disease, say they, cleaves fast unto him: and now that he lies,
he shall rise up no more.

9 Yea, mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread,
has lift up his heel against me.

10 But thou, O Lord, be merciful unto me, and raise me up, that I may requite
them.

11 By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy does not triumph
over me.

12 And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity: and set me before
thy face for ever.

13 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting, and to everlasting.
Amen and amen.

PSALM. XLII.
David (as some suppose) being driven beyond Jordan and forced to be absent
from the place of the Arc and the public service of God, complains and longs
and prays to be restored: he is troubled that his enemies suppose him forsaken
of his God: comforts himself in hope of restitution to the place of Gods
service: he mingles his complaints with hopes: and at last comforts himself in
God, and there rests.

AS the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O
God.

2 My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear
before God?

3 My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually say unto
me, Where is thy God?

4 When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me; for I had gone with
the multitude, I went with them to the house of God; with the voice of joy and
praise, with a multitude that kept holy day.

5 Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? hope
thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance.

6 O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember thee
from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites from the hill Mizar.

7 Deep calls unto deep at the noise of thy water-spouts: all thy waves and
thy billows are gone over me.

8 Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the daytime, and in the
night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life.

9 I will say unto God, My rock, why have thou forgotten me? why go I
mourning, because of the oppression of the enemy?

10 As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me: while they say daily
unto me, Where is thy God?

11 Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me?
hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God.

PSALM. XLIII.
This psalm is an appendix to the former, and of the same argument.

JUdge me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation: O deliver me
from the deceitful and unjust man.

2 For thou art the God of my strength, why do thou cast me off? why go I
mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?

3 O send out thy light and thy truth; let them lead me, let them bring me unto
thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles.

4 Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy: yea, upon
the harp will I praise thee, O God, my God.

5 Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me?
hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance,
and my God.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. XLIV.
The Church under persecution, and in dispersion complains sadly to God, and
craves his defense and aid against her enemies: because she suffers for the
cause of God.

WE have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work thou
did in their days in the times of old.

2 How thou did drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them; how
thou did afflict the people, and cast them out.

3 For they god not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of
thy countenance, because thou had a favor unto them.

4 Thou art my king, O God, command deliverances for Jacob.

5 Through thee will we push down our enemies: through thy name will we tread
them under that rise up against us.

6 For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.

7 But thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that
hated us.

8 In God we boast all the day long: and praise thy name for ever. Selah.

9 But thou have cast off, and put us to shame; and go not forth with our
armies.

10 Thou make us to turn back from the enemy: and they which hate us spoil
for themselves.

11 Thou have given us like sheep appointed for meat: and have scattered us
among the heathen.

12 Thou sellest thy people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by
their price.

13 Thou make us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and a derision to them
that are round about us.

14 Thou make us a byword among the heathen: a shaking of the head among the
people.

15 My confusion is continually before me, and the shame of my face has
covered me.

16 For the voice of him that reprocheth and blasphemeth: by reason of the
enemy and avenger.

17 All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we
dealt falsely in thy covenant.

18 Our heart is not turned back: neither have our steps declined from thy way.

19 Though thou have sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us
with the shadow of death.

20 If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a
strange god:

21 Shall not God search this out? for he knows the secrets of the heart.

22 Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted as sheep
for the slaughter.

23 Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever.

24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face? and forgettest our affliction, and our
oppression?

25 For our soul is bowed down to the dust; our belly cleaves unto the earth.

26 Arise for out help, and redeem us for thy mercies sake.

PSALM. XLV.
A marriage song between Christ and his Church: the glories of the Bridegroom,
and the beauties of the spiritual Bride.

MY heart is enditing a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made
touching the king: my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.

2 Thou art fairer then the children of men: grace is poured into thy lips:
therefore God has blessed thee for ever.

3 Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty: with thy glory and thy majesty.

4 And in thy majesty ride prosperously, because of truth and meekness, and
righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.

5 Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the kings enemies; whereby the
people fall under thee.

6 Thy throne (O God) is for ever and ever: the scepter of thy kingdom is a
right scepter.

7 Thou love righteousness, and hate wickedness: therefore God, thy God
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

8 All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia; out of the ivorie
palaces, whereby they have made thee glad.

9 Kings daughters were among thy honorable women: upon thy right hand did
stand the queen is gold of Ophir.

10 Hearken (O daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear, forget also thine
own people, and thy fathers house.

11 So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty: for he is thy Lord, and
worship thou him.

12 And the daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, even the rich among
the people shall entreat thy favor.

13 The kings daughter is: all glorious within; her clothing is of wrought gold.

14 She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needlework: the virgins
her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee.

15 With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter into
the kings palace

16 In stead of thy fathers shall be thy children, when thou may make
princes in all the earth.

17 I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations: therefore shall
the people praise thee for ever and ever.

PSALM. XLVI.
A thanksgiving after victory obtained against the Enemies of the Church: an
act of trust and confidence in God.

GOd is our refuge and strength: a very present help in trouble

2 Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed: and though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the sea.

3 Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the mountains shake
with the swelling thereof. Selah.

4 There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God: the
holy place of the tabernacles of the most High.

5 God is in the midst of her: she shall not be moved; God shall help her, and
that right early.

6 The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his voice, the earth
melted.

7 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.

8 Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolation he has made in the
earth.

9 He makes wars to cease unto the end of the earth: he breaks the bow, and
cutteth the spear in sunder, he burns the chariot in the fire.

10 Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen, I
will be exalted in the earth.

11 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. XLVII.
The Church of the Jews is exhorted to worship and confess Christ: whose
dominion is over the Jews and Gentiles.

O clap your hands (all ye people) shout unto God with the voice of triumph.

2 For the Lord most high is terrible; he is a great king over all the earth.

3 He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.

4 He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom he
loved. Selah.

5 God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.

6 Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing praises unto our king, sing praises.

7 For God is the king of all the earth, sing ye praises with understanding.

8 Ged reigns over the heathen: God sits upon the throne of his holiness.

9 The princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of the God
of Abraham: for the shields of the earth belong unto God: he is greatly exalted.

PSALM. XLVIII.
A psalm of thanksgiving for Hezekiahs delivery from Sennacherib: The
description of his overthrow: a celebration of the Divine benefit: an
exhortotion of the Jews to rejoice in God^ and to repair Jerusalem.

GReat is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the
mountain of his holiness.

2 Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion, on the
sides of the north, the city of the great king.

3 God is known in her palaces for a refuge.

4 For lo, the kings were assembled, they passed by together.

5 They saw in, and so they marvelled, they were troubled and hasted away.

6 Fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as of a woman in travail.

7 Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east wind.

8 As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, iu the
city of our God, God will establish it for ever. Selah.

9 We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy temple.

10 According to thy name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the earth:
thy right hand is full of righteousness.

11 Let mount Sion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy
judgments.

12 Walk about Sion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof.

13 Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces; that ye may tell it to the
generation following.

14 For this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto
death.

PSALM. XLIX.
The danger of trusting in riches: they cannot redeem a life: rich men die
like the poor: rich men are not to be envied: riches are an evil temptation.

HEar this all ye people, give ear all ye inhabitants of the world.

2 Both low and high, rich and poor together.

3 My mouth shall speak of wisdom: and the meditation of my heart shall be of
understanding.

4 I will incline mine ear to a parable; I will open my dark saying upon the
harp.

5 Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels
shall compass me about?

6 They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of
their riches:

7 None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom
for him:

8 (For the redemption of their soul is precious, and it cease for ever)

9 That he should still live for ever, and not see corruption.

10 For he sees that wise men die, likewise the fool and the brutish person
perish, and leave their wealth to others.

11 Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and
their dwelling-places to all generations; they call their lands after their own
names.

12 Nevertheless, man being in honor, abides not: he is like the beasts that
perish.

13 This their way is their folly; yet their posterity approve their sayings.
Selah.

14 Like sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall feed on them; and the
upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their beauty shall
consume in the grave, from their dwelling.

15 But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave; for he shall
receive me. Selah.

16 Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is
increased:

17 For when he dies, he shall carry nothing away: his glory shall not descend
after him.

18 Though whiles he lived, he blessed his soul: and men will praise thee, when
thou do well to thy self.

19 He shall go to the generation of his fathers, he shall never see light.

20 Man that is in honor and understands not, is like the beasts that perish.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. L.
A Prophecy of the abrogation of the Law, and the preaching of the Gospel: the
sacrifices of Moses, and the rites of hypocrites are unprofitable: praise and
prayer and obedience are the best sacrifices: the wicked preachers are reproved.

THE mighty God, even the Lord has spoken, and called the earth from the
rising of the sun, unto the going down thereof.

2 Out of Sion the perfection of beauty, God has shined.

3 Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before
him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him.

4 He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge
his people.

5 Gather my saints together unto me: those that have made a covenant with me
by sacrifice.

6 And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself.
Selah.

7 Hear, O my people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I will testify against
thee: I am God, even thy God.

8 I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt-offerings, to have
been continually before me.

9 I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goats out of thy folds.

10 For every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills.

11 I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts of the field
are mine.

12 If I were hungry, I would not tell thee, for the world is mine, and the
fullness thereof

13 Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?

14 Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High.

15 And call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

16 But unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my
statutes, or that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth?

17 Seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee.

18 When thou saw a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and have been
partaker with adulterers.

19 Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit.

20 Thou sit and speak against thy brother: thou slanderest thine own
mothers son.

21 These things have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes.

22 Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver.

23 Who so offers praise, glorifieth me: and to him that orders his
conversation aright; will I show the salvation of God.

PSALM. LI.
David upon Nathans reproving him in the matter of Uriah and Bathsheba,
confesses his sin, humbles himself, prays for pardon, and for the restitution
of Gods holy Spirit, for the taking away his sin, and the cleansing of his
soul: He prays for, and prophetically describes the Repentance Evangelical and
the time of the Gospel, and the kingdom of the Messiah. The psalm is
paenitentiall.

HAve mercy on me, O God, according to thy loving kindness: according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

2 Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

3 For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.

4 Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that
thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge.

5 Behold, I was shapen in iniquity: and in sin did my mother conceive me.

6 Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden part thou
shall make me to know wisdom.

7 Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter
then snow.

8 Make me to hear joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have broken,
may rejoice.

9 Hide thy face from my sins; and blot out all mine iniquities.

10 Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me.

11 Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me.

12 Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation: and uphold me with thy free
spirit.

13 Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

14 Deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, O God, thou God of my salvation: and my
tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

15 O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

16 For thou desire not sacrifice, else would I give it: thou delightest not
in burnt-offering.

17 The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise.

18 Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

19 Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness, with
burnt-offering and whole burntoffering: then shall they offer bullocks upon
thine altar.

PSALM. LII.
Upon Doegs informing Saul against Abimelech and the Priests, and their sad
death consequent, David exclaims against the falsehood and fact of Doeg;
denounces the Divine Judgments against him: he comforts the godly; and
incourages himself in hope of his own prosperity through the goodness of God.

WHyboastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? the goodness of God
endures continually.

2 Thy tongue devises mischiefs: like a sharp rasor, working deceitfully.

3 Thou love evil more then good: and lying rather then to speak
righteousness. Selah.

4 Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.

5 God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck
thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living.
Selah.

6 The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him.

7 Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength: but trusted in the
abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness.

8 But I am like a green olive tree in the house of God: I trust in the mercy
of God for ever and ever.

9 I will praise thee for ever, because thou have done it: and I will wait on
thy name, for it is good before thy saints.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. LIII.
The practical Atheist is described: The universal iniquity of the world: he
^^rophesies of the miseries of the Church under Antiochus: and encourages them
to expect deliverance from the goodness of God.

THe fool has said in his heart, There is no God; corrupt are they, and have
done abominable iniquity: there is none that does good.

2 God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were
any that did understand, that did seek God.

3 Every one of them is gone back, they are altogether become filthy; there is
none that does good, no not one.

4 Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people, as they
eat bread; they have not called upon God.

5 There were they in great fear, where no fear was: for God has scattered the
bones of him that encampeth against thee, thou have put them to shame, because
God has despised them.

16 O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! when God brings
back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

PSALM. LIVE.
David complains of his being discovered to Saul by the men of Ziph: he prays
for help from God, and to be avenged of his enemies: promises to glorify God
upon his delivery.

SAve me, O God, by thy name, and judge me by thy strength.

2 Hear my prayer, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth.

3 For strangers are risen up against me, and oppressors seek after my soul;
they have not set God before them. Selah.

4 Behold God is mine helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.

5 He shall reward evil unto mine enemies; cut them off in thy truth.

6 I will freely sacrifice unto thee; I will praise thy name (O Lord) for it is
good.

7 For he has delivered me out of all trouble: and mine eye has seen his
desire upon mine enemies.

PSALM. LV.
David upon his fear of being discovered by the men of Keilah, or upon the
conjunction of Achitophol with Absalom, prays to God for his own safety, and
the division and confusion of his enemies counsel: he complains of his own
restless and insecure condition; the falsenesse of his supposed friends:
encourages himself and others to put their whole trust in God: and foretells the
sudden and immature death of his Enemies.

GIve ear to my prayer, O God: and hide not thy self from my supplication.

2 Attend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise,

3 Because of the voice of the enemy, because of the oppression of the wicked:
for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me.

4 My heart is sore pained within me: and the terrors of death are fallen upon me.

5 Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror has overwhelmed me.

6 And I said, O that I had wings like a dove; for then would I fly away, and
be at rest.

7 Lo then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. Selah.

8 I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest.

9 Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues: for I have seen violence and
strife in the city.

10 Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof: mischief also and
sorrow are in the midst of it.

11 Wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit and guile depart not from her
streets.

12 For it was not an enemy that reproched me, then I could have born it;
neither was it he that hated me, that did magnify himself against me, then I
would have hid my self from him.

13 But it was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance.

14 We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in
company.

15 Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for
wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them.

16 As for me, I will call upon God: and the Lord shall save me.

17 Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud: and and he
shall hear my voice.

18 He has delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was against me: for
there were many with me.

19 God shall hear and afflict them, even he that abides of old, Selah:
because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God.

20 He has put forth his hands against such as be at peace with him: he has
broken his covenant.

21 The words of his mouth were smoother then butter, but war was in his heart:
his words were softer then oil, yet were they drawn swords.

22 Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall never
suffer the righteous to be moved.

23 But thou, O God, shall bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody
and deceitful men shall not live out half their days, but I will trust in
thee.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. LVI.
David being in Gath, and known by the Courtiers of Achish, prays to God to be
defended from his cruel enemies: complains of their snares and their injuries:
comforts himself in God: and promises to give him thanks and praise for his
delivery.

BE merciful unto me, O God, for man would swallow me up: he fighting daily
oppresses me.

2 Mine enemies would daily swallow me up: for they be many that fight against
me, O thou most High.

3 What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.

4 In God I will praise his word, in God I have put my trust, I will not fear
what flesh can do unto me.

5 Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me for evil.

6 They gather themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark my steps
when they wait for my soul.

7 Shall they escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the people, O God.

8 Thou tellest my wanderings, put thou my tears into thy bottle: are they not
in thy book?

9 When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this I know, for
God is for me.

10 In God will I praise his word: in the Lord will I praise his word.

11 In God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.

12 Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render praises unto thee.

13 For thou have delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou deliver my feet
from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living?

PSALM. LVII.
When David had been hid in a cave in the desert of Engedi he prays this
prayer to be delivered from Saul: complains of his sad condition: describes
their impiety: and rejoices in God, and adores his greatness.

BE merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in
thee: yea in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these
calamities be overpast.

2 I will cry unto God most high: unto God that performs all things for me.

3 He shall send from heaven and save me from the reproach of him that would
swallow me up; Selah. God shall send forth his mercy and his truth.

4 My soul is among lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even
the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp
sword.

5 Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: let thy glory be above all the
earth.

6 They have prepared a net for my steps, my soul is bowed down: they have
dug a pit before me, into the midst whereof they are fallen themselves. Selah.

7 My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise.

8 Awake up my glory, awake psalterie and harp: I my self will awake early.

9 I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing unto thee among
the nations

10 For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds.

11 Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: let thy glory be above all the
earth.

PSALM. LVIII.
When David was by Abner and Saul's Council condemned of Treason, be complains
of their injustice: prays against them, and foretells their destruction.

DO ye indeed speak righteousness, O congregation? do ye judge uprightly, O
ye sons of men?

2 Yea, in heart you work wickedness, you weigh the violence of your hands in
the earth.

3 The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray, as soon as they be
born, speaking lies.

4 Their poison is like the poison of a serpent; they are like the deaf adder
that stops her ear:

5 Which will not hearken to the voice of the charmer, charming never so wisely.

6 Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth: break out the teeth of the young
lions, O Lord.

7 Let them melt away as waters, which run continually: when he bends his bow
to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces.

8 As a snail which melts, let every one of them pass away: like the
untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun.

9 Before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as with a
whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath.

10 The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: he shall wash his
feet in the blood of the wicked.

11 So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous: verily
he is a God that judges in the earth.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. LIX.
When David was besieged by Saul's, officers in his own house, he prayed this
Psalm to be delivered from them: he prays against them: and having by Michols
arts escaped, promises to sing praises to God.

DEliver me from mine enemies, O my God: defend me from them that rise up
against me.

2 Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody men.

3 For ^o, they lie in wait for my soul; the mighty are gathered against me;
not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord.

4 They run and prepare themselves without my fault: awake to help me, and
behold.

5 Thou therefore, O Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel, awake to visit all
the heathen: be not merciful to any wicked transgressors. Selah.

6 They return at evening: they make a noise like a dog, and go round about the
city.

7 Behold they belch out with their mouth: swords are in their lips; for who,
say they, does hear?

8 But thou, O Lord, shall laugh at them; thou shall have all the heathen in
derision.

9 Because of his strength will I wait upon thee: for God is my defense.

10 The God of my mercy shall prevent me: God shall let me see my desire upon
mine enemies.

11 Slay them not, left my people forget: scatter them by thy power; and bring
them down, O Lord our shield.

12 For the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips, let them even be
taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which they speak.

13 Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be: and let them
know that God rules in Jacob, unto the ends of the earth. Selah.

14 And at evening let them return, and let them make a noise like a dog, and
go round about the city.

15 Let them wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied.

16 But I will sing of thy power, yea I will sing aloud of thy mercy in the
morning: for thou have been my defense and refuge in the day of my trouble.

17 Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for God is my defense, and the God of
my mercy.

PSALM. LX.
David prayed this in his expedition against the Syrians and Idumeans: he
expostulates with God as if he had left his people: comforts himself with the
word of God spoken by Samuel, that h^ should possess all the land: h^ prays
to God for help, and puts his trust in him.

O God, thou have cast us off; thou have scattered us, thou have been
displeased, O turn thy self to us again.

2 Thou have made the earth to tremble; thou have broken it: heal the breaches
thereof, for it shakes.

3 Thou have showed thy people hard things: thou have made us to drink the wine
of astonishment.

4 Thou have given a banner to them that fear thee: that it may be displayed
because of the truth. Selah.

5 That thy beloved may be delivered; save with thy right hand, and hear me.

6 God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice: I will divide Shechem, and
mete out the valley of Succoth.

7 Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine, Ephraim also is the strength of mine
head; Judah is my lawgiver.

8 Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia, triumph
thou because of me.

9 Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?

10 Wilt not thou, O God, which had cast us off? and thou, O God, which did
not go out with our armies?

11 Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.

12 Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our
enemies.

PSALM. LXI.
David wandering up and down Palestine in his flight from Saul [or Absalom]
impsores the aid of God, which ever was his sa^ctuary: he promis^^ to himself
return to his city, and the Tabernacle; and the lengthning of his life and
kingdom: promises thankfulness to God.]

HEar my cry, O God, attend unto my prayer.

2 From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is
overwhelmed: lead me to the rock that is higher then I.

3 For thou have been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy.

4 I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever: I will trust in the covert of thy
wings. Selah.

5 For thou, O God, have heard my vows: thou have given me the heritage of
those that fear thy name.

6 Thou will prolong the kings life: and his years as many generations.

7 He shall abide before God for ever: O prepare mercy and truth which may
preserve him.

8 So will I sing praise unto thy name for ever, that I may daily perform my
vows.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. LXII.
David in his troubles upbraids to his enemies their falsehood and their
violence: God is the only refuge and security of the faithful: no trust to be
had in man: much less in sin: God is merciful and just in giving reward.

TRuly my soul waits upon God: from him comes my salvation.

2 He only is my rock and my salvation: he is my defense; I shall not be
greatly moved.

3 How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all of
you; as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence.

4 They only consult to cast him down from his excellency, they delight in
lies: they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah.

5 My soul, wait thou only upon God: for my expectation is from him.

6 He only is my rock and my salvation; he is my defense; I shall not be moved.

7 In God is my salvation and my glory: the rock of my strength, and my refuge
is in God.

8 Trust in him at all times, ye people, pour out your heart before him: God is
a refuge for us. Selah.

9 Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be
laid in the balance they are altogether lighter then vanity.

10 Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery: if riches
increase, set not your heart upon them.

11 God has spoken once; twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto
God.

12 Also unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy: for thou rendrest to every man
according to his work.

PSALM. LXIII.
David being compelled to fly complains of his forced absence from Gods
Tabernacle, and the pleasures and the festivities of religion: promises at his
return to fit himself with the joys which he then wanted: comforts himself
with the memory of the deliverances he had formerly.

O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee, my
flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is.

2 To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary.

3 Because thy loving kindness is better then life: my lips shall praise thee.

4 Thus will I bless thee while I live: I will lift up my hands in thy name.

5 My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips:

6 When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches.

7 Because thou have been my help; therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I
rejoice.

8 My soul follows hard after thee: thy right hand upholdeth me.

9 But those that seek my soul to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of
the earth.

10 They shall fall by the sword, they shall be a portion for foxes.

11 But the king shall rejoice in God, every one that swears by him shall
glory: but the mouth of them that speak lies, shall be stopped.

PSALM. LXIV.
David in troubles from the perfecutions of Saul flies to God: he prays to be
defended from their snares and assemblings: he describes their evil tongues:
foretells their destruction and calamity: it shall proceed from God, and be
confessed to do so: he promises that himself and all the true worshippers of
God shall rejoice in him: and their hopes and confidence shall increase.

HEar my voice, O God, in my prayer; preserve my life from fear of the enemy.

2 Hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked; from the insurrection of the
workers of iniquity:

3 Who whettheir tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot their
arrows, even bitter words.

4 That they may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenly do they shoot at
him, and fear not.

5 They encourage themselves in an evil matter: they commune of laying snares
privily, they say, Who shall see them?

6 They search out iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search: both the
inward thought of every one of them, and the heart is deep.

7 But God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded.

8 So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all that see
them, shall flee away.

9 And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God; for they shall
wisely consider of his doing.

10 The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him; and all the
upright in heart shall glory.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. LXV.
God is praised for his blessings to his Church; temporal blessings and
spiritual: a thanksgiving for rain and plenty.

PRaise waits for thee, O God, in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be
performed.

2 O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

3 Iniquities prevail against me: as for our transgressions, thou shall purge
them away.

4 Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and causest to approach unto thee,
that he may dwell in thy courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of
thy house, even of thy holy temple.

5 By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, O God of our
salvation: who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them
that are afar off upon the sea.

6 Which by his strength sets fast the mountains; being girded with power.

7 Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves, and the
tumult of the people.

8 They also that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid at thy tokens; thou
make the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.

9 Thou visitest the earth and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it with the
river of God which is full of water: thou preparest them corn, when thou have
so provided for it.

10 Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou settlest the furrows
thereof: thou make it soft with showers, thou blessest the springing thereof.

11 Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy paths drop fatness.

12 They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness: and the little hills
rejoice on every side.

13 The pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered over
with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing.

PSALM. LXVI.
An exhortation to all people to glorify the name of God: particularly for his
blessings to the sons of Israel: God tries his children; a commemoration of
Gods acts of loving kindness in particular to the Author of this psalm (who
was not David) God regards not the prayers of the wicked.

MAke a joyful noise unto God, all ye lands.

2 Sing forth the honor of his name: make his praise glorious.

3 Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works! through the greatness of
thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.

4 All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee, they shall sing
to thy name. Selah.

5 Come and see the works of God: he is terrible in his doing toward the
children of men.

6 He turned the sea into dry land: they went through the flood on foot, there
did we rejoice in him.

7 He rules by his power for ever, his eyes behold the nations: let not the
rebellious exalt themselves. Selah.

8 O bless our God ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard.

9 Which holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved.

10 For thou O God, have proved us: thou have tried us, as silver is tried.

11 Thou broughtest us into the net, thou laidst affliction upon our loins.

12 Thou have caused men to ride over our heads, we went through fire and
through water: but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.

13 I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings: I will pay thee my vows,

14 Which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in trouble.

15 I will offer unto thee burnt-offerings of fatlings, with the incense of
rams: I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah.

16 Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done
for my soul.

17 I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue.

18 If I regard iniquity in my heart: the Lord will not hear me.

19 But verily God has heard me: he has attended unto the voice of my prayer.

20 Blessed be God, which has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.

PSALM. LXVII.
The Church prays that the kingdom of God may be manifested amongst the Jews,
and be spread unto the Gentiles: and be declared by blessings spiritual and
temporal: and that God may be exalted in all.

GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and cause his face to shine upon us.
Selah.

2 That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations.

3 Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.

4 O let the nations be glad and sing for joy: for thou shall judge the people
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. Selah.

5 Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee

6 Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our own God shall
bless us.

7 God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. LXVIII.
David prophecies of Christ's triumph over his Enemies: of his resurrection and
ascension; of the sending the Holy Ghost: of the gathering his Church; the
calling the Gentiles: the excision of the Jews: and the blessings which shall
be to all Christ's servants under his reign: an act of the glorification of God.

LEt God arise, let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him, flee
before him.

2 As smoke is driven away, so drive the^ away: as wax melts before the sire,
so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.

3 But let the righteous be glad: let them rejoice before God, yea let them
exceedingly rejoice.

4 Sing unto God, sing praises to his name: extol him that rides upon the
heavens by his name JAH, and rejoice before him.

5 A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy
habitation.

6 God sets the solitary in families: he brings out those which are bound
with chains, but the rebellious dwell in a dry land.

7 O God, when thou wentest^^ forth before thy people; when thou did march
through the wilderness; Selah.

8 The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God; even Sinai
it self was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel.

9 Thou, O God, did send a plentiful rain, whereby thou did confirm thine
inheritance, when it was weary

10 Thy congregation has dwelt therein: thou, O God, have prepared of thy
goodness for the poor.

11 The Lord gave the word, great was the company of those that published it.

12 Kings of armies did flee apace: and she that tarried at home, divided the
spoil.

13 Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove
covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.

14 When the Almighty scattered kings in it, it was white as snow in Salmon.

15 The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan, an high hill as the hill of
Bashan.

16 Why leap ye, ye high hills? this is the hill which God desires to dwell in,
yea the Lord will dwell in it for ever.

17 The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels: the Lord
is among them as in Sinai, in the holy place.

18 Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive: thou have
received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them.

19 Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God of
our salvation. Selah.

20 He that is our God, is the God of salvation; and unto God the Lord belong
the issues from death.

21 But God shall wound the head of his enemies: and the hairy scalp of such an
one as goes on still in his trespasses.

22 The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my people again
from the depths of the sea:

23 That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue
of thy dogs in the same.

24 They have seen thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, my king, in
the sanctuary.

25 The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after; amongst
them were the damsels playing with timbrels.

26 Bless ye God in the congregations, even the Lord from the fountain of
Israel.

27 There is little Benjamin with their ruler, the princes of Judah and their
counsel, the princes of Zebulun, and the princes of Naphtali.

28 Thy God has commanded thy strength: strengthen, O God, that which thou
have wrought for us.

29 Because of thy temple at Jerusalem, shall kings bring presents unto thee.

30 Rebuke the company of spear-men, the multitude of the bulls, with the
calves of the people, till every one submit himself with pieces of siver:
scatter thou the people that delight in war.

31 Princes shall come out of Egypt, Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands
unto God.

32 Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth: O sing praises unto the Lord.
Selah.

33 To him that rides upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old, lo, he
does send out his voice, and that a mighty voice.

34 Ascribe ye strength unto God: his excellency is over Israel, and his
strength is in the clouds.

35 O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places, the God of Israel is he
that gives strength and power unto his people: blessed be God.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. LXIX.
David being a type of Christ complains of his evil usage and hard sufferings:
of the wickedness and number of his Enemies: prays for the safety of himself
and the confusion of his Enemies: God takes care of the poor: They shall
praise him.

SAve me, O God, for the waters are come in unto my soul.

2 I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing; I am come into deep waters,
where the floods overflow me.

3 I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried: mine eyes fail while I wait for
my God.

4 They that hate me without a cause, are mo then the hairs of my head: they
that would destroy me being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then I
restored that which I took not away.

5 O God, thou know my foolishness; and my sins are not hid from thee.

6 Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for my sake:
let not those that seek thee, be confounded for mysake, O God of Israel

7 Because for thy sake I have born reproach: shame has covered my face.

8 I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mothers
children.

9 For the zeal of thine house has eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that
reproched thee, are fallen upon me.

10 When I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach.

11 I made sackcloth also my garment: and I became a proverb to them.

12 They that sit in the gate, speak against me; and I was the song of the
drunkards.

13 But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, O Lord, in an acceptable time: O
God, in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation.

14 Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink: let me be delivered from
them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

15 Let not the water-flood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up,
and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

16 Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is good: turn unto me according
to the multitude of thy tender mercies.

17 And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble: hear me
speedily.

18 Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it: deliver me because of mine enemies.

19 Thou have known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonor: mine
adversaries are all before thee.

20 Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness: and I looked for
some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none.

21 They gave me also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar
to drink.

22 Let their table become a snare before them: and that which should have been
for their welfare, let it become a trap.

23 Let their eyes be darkened that they see not; and make their loins
continually to shake.

24 Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take
hold of them.

25 Let their habitation be desolate, and let none dwell in their tents.

26 For they persecute him whom thou have smitten, and they talk to the grief
of those whom thou have wounded.

27 Add iniquity to their iniquity; and let them not come into thy
righteousness.

28 Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with
the righteous.

29 But I am poor, and sorrowful: let thy salvation (O God) set me up on high.

30 I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with
thanksgiving.

31 This also shall please the Lord better then an ox or bullock that has
horns and hoofs.

32 The humble shall see this, and be glad: and your heart shall live that seek
God.

33 For the Lord hears the poor, and despises not his prisoners.

34 Let the heaven and the earth praise him, the seas, and every thing that
moves therein.

35 For God will save Sion, and will build the cities of Judah: that they may
dwell there, and have it in possession.

36 The seed also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that love his name
shall dwell therein.

PSALM. LXX.
David prays for speedy deliverance from the party of Absalom: that they may
be confounded; that all the just may rejoice in God, who is their deliverer and
defense.

MAke haste, O God, to deliver me; make haste to help me, O Lord.

2 Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let them be
turned backward, and put to confusion, that desire my hurt.

3 Let them be turned back for a reward of their shame, that say, Aha, aha.

4 Let all those that seek thee, rejoice, and be glad in thee: and let such as
love thy salvation say continually, Let God be magnified.

5 But I am poor and needy, make haste unto me, O God: thou art my help and my
deliverer, O Lord, make no tarrying.

Mo. pr. PSALM. LXXI.
David express; his trust to be in God, who was his hope from his childhood:
prays for defense in his old age: prays against his enemies: relies upon God:
confesses that by him he has had salvation all his life: he praises God for it.

IN thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion.

2 Deliver me in thy righteousness, and cause me to escape: incline thine ear
unto me, and save me.

3 Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: thou have
given commandment to save me, for thou art my rock and my fortress.

4 Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked, out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man.

5 For thou art my hope, O Lord God: thou art my trust from my youth.

6 By thee have I been holden up from the womb: thou art he that took me out of
my mothers bowels, my praise shall be continually of thee.

7 I am as a wonder unto many; but thou art my strong refuge.

8 Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thy honor all the day.

9 Cast me not off in the time of old age, forsake me not when my strength
fails.

10 For mine enemies speak against me: and they that lay wait for my soul, take
counsel together.

11 Saying, God has forsaken him: persecute and take him, for there is none to
deliver him.

12 O God, be not far from me: O my God, make haste for my help.

13 Let them be confounded and consumed, that are adversaries to my soul: let
them be covered with reproach and dishonor, that seek my hurt.

14 But I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more.

15 My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness, and thy salvation all the
day: for I know not the numbers thereof.

16 I will go in the strength of the Lord God: I will make mention of thy
righteousness, even of thine only.

17 O God, thou have taught me from my youth: and hitherto have I declared thy
wondrous works.

18 Now also when I am old and grayheaded, O God, forsake me not: until I have
showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that is to
come.

19 Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high, who have done great things: O
God, who is like unto thee?

20 Thou which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again,
and shall bring me up again from the depths of the earth.

21 Thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side

22 I will also praise thee with the psalterie, even thy truth, O my God: unto
thee will I sing with the harp, O thou holy one of Israel.

23 My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee: and my soul which thou
have redeemed.

24 My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they
are confounded, for they are brought unto shame, that seek my hurt.

PSALM. LXXII.
David being near his death, prays for a prosperous reign to his son Solomon:
instructs him in the duty of a king: it is Prophetical of Christ's Kingdom.

GIve the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the kings son.

2 He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment.

3 The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills, by
righteousness.

4 He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the
needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.

5 They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all
generations.

6 He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass: as showrs that water the
earth.

7 In his days shall the righteous flourish: and abundance of peace so long as
the moon endures.

8 He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the
ends of the earth.

9 They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him: and his enemies
shall lick the dust.

10 The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents: the kings of
Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.

11 Yea, all kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall serve him.

12 For he shall deliver the needy when he cries: the poor also, and him that
has no helper.

13 He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy.

14 He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and precious shall
their blood be in his sight.

15 And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba; prayer
also shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he be praised.

16 There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the
mountains, the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and they of the city
shall flourish like grass of the earth.

17 His name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long as the
sun: and men shall be blessed in him; all nations shall call him blessed.

18 Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things.

19 And blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let the whole earth be
filled with his glory: Amen, and amen.

20 The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. LXXIII.
Asaph being troubled at the afflictions of the Godly, and the prosperity of
the wicked, and disputing concerning the providence, at last concludes it to be
certain that God loves the pious, exhorts the church not to be offended at this
dispensation: but depend on God: and wait for deliverance at the end of things.

TRuly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.

2 But as for me, my feet were almost gone: my steps had wellnigh slipped.

3 For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.

4 For there are no bands in their death: but their strength is firm.

5 They are not in trouble as other men: neither are theyplagued like other men.

6 Therefore pride compasses them about as a chain: violence covers them as
a garment.

7 Their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more then heart could wish.

8 They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak
loftily.

9 They set their mouth against the heavens; and their tongue walks through
the earth.

10 Therefore his people return hither: and waters of a full cup are wrung out
to them.

11 And they say, How does God know? and is there knowledge in the most High?

12 Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world, they increase in
riches.

13 Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence.

14 For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning.

15 If I say, I will speak thus: behold, I should offend against the generation
of thy children.

16 When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me.

17 Until I went into the sanctuary of God; then understood I their end.

18 Surely thou did set them in slippery places: thou castedst them down into
destruction.

19 How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment? they are utterly
consumed with terrors.

20 As a dream when one awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest thou shall
despise their image.

21 Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins.

22 So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.

23 Nevertheless, I am continually with thee: thou have holden me by my right
hand.

24 Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.

25 Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that Idesire
besides thee

26 My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

27 For lo, they that are far from thee, shall perish: thou have destroyed all
them that go a whoring from thee.

28 But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord
God, that I may declare all thy works.

PSALM. LXXIV.
Asaph expostulates with God his delay to help his people, and of the
greatness of their calamity: he prays for help: h^ commmorates the blessings
of old: and represents the horrid cruelty and impiety of the Churches enemies:
and particularly their sacrilege: he complains that Gods Oracles are ceased:
the Prophets gone: the Enemies suppose that God also is departed; that his name
suffers: h^ prays for the safety of the Church: the glory of God: and the
overthrow of his enemies.

O God, why have thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger smoke against
the sheep of thy pasture?

2 Remember thy congregation which thou have purchased of old: the rod of thine
inheritance which thou have redeemed, this mount Sion wherein thou have dwelt.

3 Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations: even all that the enemy
has done wickedly in the sanctuary.

4 Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations: they set up their
ensigns for signs.

5 A man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees.

6 But now they break down the carved work thereof at once, with axes and
hammers.

7 They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down
the dwellingplace of thy name to the ground.

8 They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together: they have burnt up
all the synagogues of God in the land.

9 We see not our signs, there is no more any prophet, neither is there among
us any that knows how long.

10 O God, how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy
name for ever?

11 Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy
bosom.

12 For God is my king of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth.

13 Thou did divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the heads of the
dragons in the waters.

14 Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to
the people inhabiting the wilderness.

15 Thou did cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty rivers.

16 The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou have prepared the light and
the sun.

17 Thou have set all the borders of the earth: thou have made summer and
winter.

18 Remember this, that the enemy has reproched, O Lord, and that the foolish
people have blasphemed thy name.

19 O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove unto the multitude of the wicked,
forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.

20 Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full
of the habitations of cruelty.

21 O let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy praise thy
name.

22 Arise, O God, plead thine own cause: remember how the foolish man
reprocheth thee daily.

23 Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up
against thee increases continually.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. LXXV.
The Psalm is Prophetical of Christ's Kingdom, his power, and his glory: and
his coming to judgment.

UNto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks: for that
thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare.

2 When I shall receive the congregation, I will judge uprightly.

3 The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear up the
pillars of it. Selah.

4 I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly; and to the wicked, Lift not up
the horn.

5 Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck.

6 For promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the
south

7 But God is the judge: he puts down one, and sets up another.

8 For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full
of mixture, and he pours out of the same: but the dregs thereof all the
wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them.

9 But I will declare for ever; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.

10 All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off; but the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted.

PSALM. LXXVI.
A song of thanksgiving and glorification of God for victory obtained against
the enemies of the Church: the power of God to execute his own will: his anger
is irresistible: all are exhorted to glorify God.

IN Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel.

2 In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dewlling place in Sion.

3 There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the
battle. Selah.

4 Thou art more glorious and excellent then the mountains of prey.

5 The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep: and none of the
men of might have found their hands.

6 At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are fallen into a
dead sleep.

7 Thou, even thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight when once
thou art angry?

8 Thou did cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and
was still,

9 When God arose to judgment to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.

10 Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath shall
thou restrain.

11 Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God; let all that be round about him bring
presents unto him that ought to be feared.

12 He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is terrible to the kings of the
earth.

PSALM. LXXVII.
Asaph pressed with a great calamity argues with God for his long hiding his
face from him: He calls to mind Gods former mercies, the power of his works,
and his mercies to his servants; as arguments to produce a present confidence.

I Cried into God with my voice: even unto God with my voice, and he gave ear
unto me.

2 In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord; my sore ran in the night, and
ceased not: my soul refused to be comforted.

3 I remembered God, and was troubled: I complained, and my spirit was
overwhelmed. Selah.

4 Thou hold mine eyes waking: I am so troubled that I cannot speak.

5 I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.

6 I call to remembrance my song in the night: I commune with mine own heart,
and my spirit made diligent search.

7 Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more?

8 Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore?

9 Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender
mercies? Selah.

10 And I said, This is my infirmity: but I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most High.

11 I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy wonders
of old.

12 I will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.

13 Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God?

14 Thou art the God that do wonders; thou have declared thy strength among
the people.

15 Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph.
Selah.

16 The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee: they were afraid; the
depths also were troubled.

17 The clouds poured out water, the skies sent out a sound: thine arrows also
went abroad.

18 The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings lightened the
world, the earth trembled and shook.

19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy footsteps
are not known.

20 Thou leddest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. LXXVIII.
The history of Gods intercourse with his people from Moses to David; in
blessing, in punishing, in delivering them. The p^rpetuity of the Kingdom in
the Tribe of Judah.

GIve ear, O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth.

2 I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings of old:

3 Which we have heard and known: and our fathers have told us

4 We will not hide them from their children, showing to the generation to
come, the praises of the Lord: and his strength and his wonderful works that
he has done.

5 For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel which
he commanded our fathers: that they should make them known to their children

6 That the generation to come might know them, even the children which should
be born: who should arise and declare them to their children:

7 That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God: but
keep his commandments.

8 And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, a
generation that set not their heart aright: and whose spirit was not steadfast
with God.

9 The children of Ephraim being armed and carrying bows, turned back in the
day of battle.

10 They kept not the covenant of God: and refused to walk in his law.

11 And forgot his works: and his wonders that he had showed them.

12 Mavelous things did he in the sight of their fathers: in the land of
Egypt, in the field of Zoan.

13 He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through: and he made the
waters to stand as an heap.

14 In the daytime also the led them with a cloud: and all the night with a
light of fire.

15 He clave the rocks in the wilderness: and gave them drink as out of the
great dephts.

16 He brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like
rivers.

17 And they sinned yet more against him: by provoking the most High in the
wilderness.

18 And they tempted God in their heart: by asking meat for their lust.

19 Yea, they spoke against God: they said, Can God furnish a table in the
wilderness?

20 Behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams
overflowed; can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people?

21 Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wroth, so a fire was kindled against
Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel:

22 Because they believed not in God: and trusted not in his salvation:

23 Though he had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors of
heaven:

24 And had rained down manna upon them to eat, and had given them of the corn
of heaven.

25 Main did eat angels food: he sent them meat to the full.

26 He caused an eastwind to blow in the heaven: and by his power he brought in
the south wind.

27 He rained flesh also upon them as dust: and feathered fowls like as the
sand of the sea.

28 And he let it fall in the midst of their camp, round about their
habitations.

29 So they did eat, and were well filled: for he gave them their own desire.

30 They were not estranged from their lust: but while their meat was yet in
their mouths,

31 The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and smote
down the chosen men of Israel.

32 For all this they sinned still: and believed not for his wondrous works.

33 Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble.

34 When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned and enquired
early after God.

35 And they remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their redeemer.

36 Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their mouth; and they lied unto
him with their tongues.

37 For their heart was not right with him: neither were they steadfast in his
covenant.

38 But he being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them
not; yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his
wrath.

39 For he remembered that they were but flesh; a wind that passes away and
comes not again.

40 How often did they provoke him in the wilderness: and grieve him in the
desert?

41 Yea, they turned back and tempted God: and limited the holy one of Israel.

42 They remembered not his hand: nor the day when he delivered them from the
enemy.

43 How he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan:

44 And had turned their rivers into blood; and their floods, that they could
not drink.

45 He sent diverse sorts of flies among them, which devoured them; and frogs
which destroyed them.

46 He gave also their increase unto the caterpiller, and their labor unto the
locust.

47 He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sycomore-trees with frost.

48 He gave up their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot
thunderbolts.

49 He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath and indignation and
trouble, by sending evil angels among them.

50 He made a way to his anger, he spared not their soul from death: but gave
their life over to the pestilence.

51 And smote all the firstborn in Egypt: the chief of their strength in the
tabernacles of Ham:

52 But made his own people to go forth like sheep; and guided them in the
wilderness like a flock.

53 And he led them on safely, so that they feared not: but the sea overwhelmed
their enemies.

54 And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary: even to this mountain,
which his right hand had purchased.

55 He cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance
by line: and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.

56 Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God, and kept not his
testimonies.

57 But turned back and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they were turned
aside like a deceitful bow.

58 For they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him to
jealousy with their graven images.

59 When God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel.

60 So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among
men:

61 And delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemies
hand.

62 He gave his people over also unto the sword: and was wroth with his
inheritance.

63 The fire consumed their young men: and their maidens were not given to
marriage.

64 Their priests fell by the sword: and their widows made no lamentation.

65 Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that
shouteth by reason of wine.

66 And he smote his enemies in the hinderparts: he put them to a perpetual
reproach.

67 Moreover, he refused the tabernacle of Joseph: and chose not the tribe of
Ephraim.

68 But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Sion which he loved.

69 And he built his sanctuary like high palaces; like the earth which he has
established for ever.

70 He chose David also his servant and took him from the sheepfolds:

71 From following the ewes great with young, he brought him to feed Jacob his
people, and Israel his inheritance.

72 So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart: and guided them by
the skilfulness of his hands.

No. Pr. PSALM. LXXIX.
Asaph describes the cruelty and impiety of the churches Enemies: he prays to
God to turn his anger against them that know him not: to pardon the sins of
his people: to deliver them: they shall praise him.

O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy temple have they
defiled; they have laid Jerusalem on heaps.

2 The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of
the heaven, the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth.

3 Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem: and there was
none to bury them.

4 We are become a reproach to our neighbors: a scorn and derision to them that
are round about us.

5 How long Lord, will thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like
fire?

6 Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the
kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.

7 For they have devoured Jacob, and laid wast his dewlling place.

8 O remember not against us former iniquities: let thy tender mercies speedily
prevent us: for we are brought very low.

9 Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and deliver us,
and purge away our sins for thy names sake.

10 Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be known
among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of the blood of thy servants
which is shed.

11 Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee, according to the
greatness of thy power: preserve thou those that are appointed to die.

12 And render unto our neighbors sevenfold into their bosom, the reproach
wherewith they have reproched thee, O Lord.

13 So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture, will give thee thanks for ever:
we will show forth thy praise to all generations.

PSALM. LXXX.
Asaph prays for the Church and for the king: complains of the afflicted
state of Gods people: describes it: prays for help to it: and promises
obedience and glorification of God.

Glve ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock, thou
that dwell between the cherubims, shine forth.

2 Before Ephraim, and Benjamin, and Manasseh, stir up thy strength, and come
and save us.

3 Turn us again, O God: and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

4 O Lord God of hosts, how long will thou be angry against theprayer of thy
people?

5 Thou feedest them with the bread of tears: and give them tears to drink in
great measure.

6 Thou make us a strife unto our neighbors: and our enemies laugh among
themselves.

7 Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved.

8 Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt: thou have cast out the heathen, and
planted it.

9 Thou preparedst room before it, and did cause it to take deep root; and it
filled the land.

10 The hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were
like the goodly cedars.

11 She sent out her boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto the river.

12 Why have thou then broken down her hedges, so that all they which pass by
the way do pluck her?

13 The boar out of the wood does waste it: and the wild beast of the field
does devour it.

14 Return, we beseech thee, O God of hosts: look down from heaven, and behold
and visit this vine:

15 And the vineyard which thy right hand has planted: and the branch that
thou made strong for thy self.

16 It is burnt with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the rebuke of thy
countenance.

17 Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: upon the son of man whom
thou made strong for thy self.

18 So will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will call upon thy
name.

19 Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we shall
be saved.

PSALM. LXXXI.
The prophet exhorts the people to praise God with voice and instrum^nts, and
celebrates the feast of trumpets: in the person of God he enumerates Gods
blessings upon the people: how much evil they have suffered for their
disobedience: and how much good they might have received if they had been
obedient.

SIng aloud unto God our strength: make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob.

2 Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel: the pleasant harp with the
psalterie.

3 Blow up the trumpet in the new moon: in the time appointed on our solemn
feastday.

4 For this was a statute for Israel, and a low of the God of Jacob.

5 This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony, when he went out through the
land of Egypt: where I heard a language that I understood not.

6 I moved his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered from the pots.

7 Thou calledst in trouble and I delivered thee; I answered thee in the secret
place of thunder: I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.

8 Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee: O Israel, if thou will
hearken unto me;

9 There shall no strange god be in thee: neither shall thou worship any
strange god.

10 I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it.

11 But my people would not hearken to my voice: and Israel would none of me.

12 So I gave them up unto their ownhearts lust: and they walked in their own
counsels.

13 O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways!

14 I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their
adversaries.

15 The haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him: but their
time should have endured for ever.

16 He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat: and with honey
out of the rock should I have satisfied thee.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. LXXXII.
The duty of Princes and Magistrates: The punishment of them that are evil: God
will judge the Judges.

GOd stands in the congregation of the mighty: he judges among the Gods.

2 How long will ye judge unjustly: and accept the persons of the wicked? Selah.

3 Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and needy.

4 Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked.

5 They know not, neither will they understand; they walk on in darkness: all
the foundations of the earth are out of course.

6 I have said, Ye are gods: and all of you are children of the most High.

7 But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.

8 Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shall inherit all nations.

PSALM. LXXXIII.
The impiety of the sacrilegious viol^ters of the peace and poss^ssions of the
Church: the curse of the sacrilegious: a changing estate.

KEep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God.

2 For lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee, have lift up
the head.

3 They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy
hidden ones.

4 They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a Nation: that the
name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

5 For they have consulted together with one consent: they are co^federate
against thee.

6 The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites: of Moab, and the Hagarens.

7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tire.

8 Assure also is joined with them: they have helped the children of Lot. Selah.

9 Do unto them as unto the Midianites: as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the
brook of Kison:

10 Which perished at En-dor: they became as dung from the earth.

11 Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea all their princes as Zebah,
and as Zalmunna:

12 Who said, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.

13 O my God, make them like a wheel: as the stubble before the wind.

14 As the fire burns the wood: and as the flame sets the mountains on
fire;

15 So persecute them with thy tempest; and make them afraid with thy storm.

16 Fill their faces with-shame: that they may seek thy name, O Lord.

17 Let them be confounded and troubled for ever: yea let them be put to shame,
and perish.

18 That men may know, that thou whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most high
over all the earth.

PSALM. LXXXIV.
David being banished from the place where the Ark was, declares his own
unhappiness, and admires the felicity of them that attend there: be prays to
be restored to it: God is the sure defense of his servants.

HOw amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!

2 My soul longs, yea, even faints for the courts of the Lord: my heart and
my flesh cries out for the living God.

3 Yea, the sparrow has found an house, and the swallow a nest for her self,
where she may lay her young; even thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my king, and
my God.

4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still praising thee.
Selah.

5 Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are the ways
of them.

6 Who passing through the valley of Baca, make it a well: the rain also
fills the pools.

7 They go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion appears
before God.

8 O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah.

9 Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of thine anointed.

10 For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand: I had rather be a
doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

11 For the Lord is a sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: no
good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

12 O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee.

PSALM. LXXXV.
A commemoration of the redemption from captivity: he expostulates concerning
Gods anger: he prays for restitution: he ^ rcis^s an act of hope in God.

LOrd, thou have been favorable unto thy land: thou have brought back the
captivity of Jacob.

2 Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their
sin. Selah.

3 Thou have taken away all thy wrath: thou have turned thy self from the
fierceness of thine anger.

4 Turn us, O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to cease.

5 Will thou be angry with us for ever? will thou draw out thine anger to all
generations?

6 Will thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in thee?

7 Show us thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy salvation.

8 I will hear what God the Lord will speak: for he will speak peace unto his
people, and to his saints: but let them not turn again to folly.

9 Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him; that glory may dwell in our
land.

10 Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have kissed each
other.

11 Truth shall spring out of the earth: and righteousness shall look down from
heaven.

12 Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good: and our land shall yield her
increase.

13 Righteousness shall go before him: and shall set us in the way of his
steps.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. LXXXVI.
David prays in the day of his trouble: he c^lebrates Gods praises, his mercies
and his bounty: prophesies of the universality of Christ's kingdom: prays and
imp^ones the excellency of the Divine mercy to give him some signal testim^^y
of his favor.

Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me: for I am poor and needy.

2 Preserve my soul, for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy servant that
trusts in thee.

3 Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thee daily.

4 Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee (O Lord) do I lift up my soul.

5 For thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy unto
all them that call upon thee.

6 Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer: and attend to the voice of my
supplications.

7 In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou will answer me.

8 Among the gods there is none like unto thee (O Lord) neither are there any
works like unto thy works.

9 All nations whom thou have made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord:
and shall glorify thy name.

10 For thou art great and do wondrous things: thou art God alone.

11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear
thy name.

12 I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will glorify
thy name for evermore.

13 For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou have delivered my soul from the
lowest hell.

14 O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men
have sought after my soul: and have not set thee before the^.

15 But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious:
long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.

16 O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy servant,
and save the son of thy handmaid.

17 Show me a token for good, that they which hate me may see it, and be
ashamed: because thou, Lord, have helped me, and comforted me.

PSALM. LXXXVII.
A mystical description of the beauties of the celestial Jerusalem.

HIs foundation is in the holy mountains.

2 The Lord loves the gates of Zion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob.

3 Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah.

4 I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon, to them that know me; behold
Philistia, and Tire, with Ethiopia: this man was born there.

5 And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the
Highest himself shall establish her.

6 The Lord shall count when he writes up the people, that this man was born
there. Selah.

7 As well the singers, as the players on instruments shall be there: all my
springs are in thee.

PSALM. LXXXVIII.
A description of the passion and dolours of Christ, suffering his Fathers
anger for our sins.

O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee.

2 Let my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry.

3 For my soul is full of troubles: and my life draws nigh unto the grave.

4 I am counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man that has
no strength.

5 Free among the dead like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou
remembrest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.

6 Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.

7 Thy wrath lies hard upom me: and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves.
Selah.

8 Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from me: thou have made me an
abomination unto them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.

9 Mine eye mourns by reason of affliction, Lord, I have called daily upon
thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee.

10 Will thou show wonders to the dead? shall the dead arise and praise thee?
Selah.

11 Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness
in destruction?

12 Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land
of forgetfulness?

13 But unto thee have I cried, O Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer
prevent thee

14 Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me?

15 I am afflicted and ready to die, from my youth up: while I suffer thy
terrors, I am distracted.

16 Thy fierce wrath goes over me: thy terrors have cut me off.

17 They came round about me daily like water: they compassed me about together.

18 Lover and friend have thou put far from me: and mine acquaintance into
darkness.

PSALM. LXXXIX.
A Prophecy of Christ's kingdom: its perpetuity and eternity: and under the
type of the successors of David, he teach^s that God will punish the Christian
people if they sin; but the promises to the Church shall never fail.

I Will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever; with my mouth will I make
known thy faithfulness to all generations.

2 For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy faithfulness shall
thou establish in the very heavens.

3 I have made a covenant with my chosen: I have sworn unto David my servant.

4 Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all
generations. Selah.

5 And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Lord: thy faithfulness also in
the congregation of the saints.

6 For who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord? who among the sons of
the mighty can be likened unto the Lord?

7 God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints: and to be had in
reverence of all them that are about him.

8 O Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? or to thy
faithfulness round about thee?

9 Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou
stillest them.

10 Thou have broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou have scattered
thine enemies with thy strong arm.

11 The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world, and the
fullness thereof, thou have founded the^.

12 The north and the south thou have created them: Tabor and Hermon shall
rejoice in thy name.

13 Thou have a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.

14 Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth
shall go before thy face.

15 Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O Lord,
in the light of thy countenance.

16 In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousness shall
they be exalted.

17 For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy favor our horn shall
be exalted.

18 For the Lord is our defense: and the holy one of Israel is our king.

19 Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and said, I have laid help
upon one that is mighty: I have exalted one chosen out of the people.

20 I have found David my servant: with my holy oil have I anointed him.

21 With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall strengthen him.

22 The enemy shall not exact upon him: nor the son of wickedness afflict him.

23 And I will beat down his foes before his face: and plague them that hate
him.

24 But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my name shall
his horn be exalted.

25 I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.

26 He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God, and the rock of my
salvation.

27 Also I will make him my firstborn: higher then the kings of the earth.

28 My mercy will I keep for him for evermore: and my covenant shall stand fast
with him.

29 His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days
of heaven.

30 If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;

31 If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments:

32 Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes.

33 Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him: nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail.

34 My covenant will I not break: nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips.

35 Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David.

36 His seed shall endure for ever; and his throne as the sun before me.

37 It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness
in heaven. Selah.

38 But thou have cast off and abhorred, thou have been wroth with thine
anointed.

39 Thou have made void the covenant of thy servant: thou have profaned his
crown, by casting it to the ground.

40 Thou have broken down all his hedges: thou have brought his strong hold to
ruin.

41 All that pass by the way spoil him: he is a reproach to his neighbors.

42 Thou have set up the right hand of his adversaries: thou have made all his
enemies to rejoice.

43 Thou have also turned the edge of his sword: and have not made him to stand
in the battle.

44 Thou have made his glory to cease: and cast his throne down to the ground.

45 The days of his youth have thou shortened: thou have covered him with
shame. Selah.

46 How long, Lord, will thou hide thy self for ever? shall thy wrath burn like
fire?

47 Remember how short my time is: wherefore have thou made all men in vain?

48 What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his
soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.

49 Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses, which thou swarest unto David
in thy truth?

50 Remember (Lord) the reproach of thy servant: how I do bear in my bosom the
reproach of all the mighty people;

51 Wherewith thine enemies have reproched, O Lord, wherewith they have
reproched the footsteps of thine anointed.

52 Blessed be the Lord for ever more. Amen, and amen.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. XC.
Moses prayer: God is our everlasting defense: he is eternal: he has made our
life short and frail: a prayer for a holy and a happy life.

LOrd, thou have been our dewlling place in all generations.

2 Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the earth
and the world: even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.

3 Thou turnest man to destruction: and say, Return ye children of men.

4 For a thousand years in thy sight, are but as yesterday when it is past, and
as a watch in the night.

5 Thou car^iest them away as with a flood, they are as a sleep; in the morning
they are like grass which grows up.

6 In the morning it flourishes, and grows up: in the evening it is cut
down, and withers.

7 For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled.

8 Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance.

9 For all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a
tale that is told.

10 The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of
strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow: for
it is soon cut off, and we fly away.

11 Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy
wrath.

12 So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom,

13 Return (O Lord) how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants.

14 O satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice, and be glad all
our days.

15 Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the
years wherein we have seen evil.

16 Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children.

17 And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: and establish thou the
work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.

PSALM. XCI.
Gods particular care of his servants in the time of imminent danger, and
popular diseases, and contingencies: our trusting in God procures his patronage.

HE that dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty.

2 I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge, and my fortress: my God, in him
will I trust.

3 Surely, he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler: and from the
noisome pestilence.

4 He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust:
his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

5 Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night: nor for the arrow that
flies by day:

6 Nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness: nor for the destruction
that wastes at noon day.

7 A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but
it shall not come nigh thee.

8 Only with thine eyes shall thou behold, and see the reward of the wicked.

9 Because thou have made the Lord which is my refuge, even the most High, thy
habitation:

10 There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling.

11 For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy
ways.

12 They shall bear thee up in their hands: lest thou d^sh thy foot against a
stone.

13 Thou shall tread upon the lion, and adder: the young lion and the dragon
shall thou trample under feet.

14 Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will
set him on high, because he has known my name.

15 He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in
trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him.

16 With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation.

PSALM. XCII.
The Church admires the works, the greatness and goodness of God: the sudden
fall of the wicked: the prosperity and security of the Godly.

IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy
name, O most High:

2 To show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness
every night;

3 Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the psalterie; upon the harp
with a solemn sound.

4 For thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy work: I will triumph in the
works of thy hands.

5 O Lord, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.

6 A brutish man knows not: neither does a fool understand this.

7 When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity
do flourish: it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.

8 But thou, Lord, art most high for evermore

9 For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for lo, thine enemies shall perish: all the
workers of iniquity shall be scattered.

10 But my horn shall thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shall be
anointed with fresh oil.

11 Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies: and mine ears shall hear
my desire of the wicked that rise up against me.

12 The righteous shall flourish like the palmtree: he shall grow like a cedar
in Lebanon.

13 Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the
courts of our God

14 They shall still bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat and
flourishing.

15 To show that the Lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. XCIII.
The m^gnificence and power of Christ our eternal King: his power and truth in
d^fending his elect in the days of storm: the ho^inesse of Christ's law: and
Christ's Church.

THe Lord reigns, he is clothed with majesty, the Lord is clothed with
strength, wherewith he has girded himself: the world also is stablished, that
it cannot be moved.

2 Thy throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting.

3 The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted up their voice:
the floods lift up their waves.

4 The Lord on high is mightier then the noise of many waters, yea then the
mighty waves of the sea.

5 Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becomes thine house, O Lord, for
ever.

PSALM. XCIV.
David inveighs against them who supposing God not to take care of humane
affairs, do what they list, and oppress the poor: H^ proves the Divine
omniscience: he encourages the just to put their trust in God: God will reward
the wicked, and defend the righteous.

O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs: O God, to whom vengeance belongs,
show thy self.

2 Lift up thy self thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the proud.

3 Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?

4 How long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the workers of
iniquity boast themselves?

5 They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage.

6 They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.

7 Yet they say, The Lord shall not see: neither shall the God of Jacob regard
it.

8 Understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will ye be wise?

9 He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he
not see?

10 He that chastises the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teaches man
knowledge, shall not he know?

11 The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.

12 Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of
thy law:

13 That thou may give him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit
be dug for the wicked.

14 For the Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his
inheritance.

15 But judgment shall return unto righteousness: and all the upright in heart
shall follow it.

16 Who will rise up for me against the evil doers? or who will stand up for me
against the workers of iniquity?

17 Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence.

18 When I said, My foot slippeth: thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.

19 In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul.

20 Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frames
mischief by a law?

21 They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous: and
condemn the innocent blood.

22 But the Lord is my defense: and my God is the rock of my refuge.

23 And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in
their own wickedness: yea, the Lord our God shall cut them off.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. XCV.
An invitation to the worship and the service of God; to a speedy repentance:
The example of ob^ durate and impenitent persons: Gods w^ath and zeal against
them.

O Come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful noise to the rock of
our salvation.

2 Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise
unto him with psalms.

3 For the Lord is a great God; and a great king above all Gods.

4 In his hand are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the hills is
his also.

5 The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry land.

6 O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our maker.

7 For he is our God and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his
hand: to day if ye will hear his voice,

8 Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day of
temptation in the wilderness:

9 When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work.

10 Forty years long was I grieved with this generation; and said, It is a
people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my ways.

11 Unto whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest.

PSALM. XCVI.
Jews and Gentiles are invited to praise God: a prophecy of Christ's kingdom
and of his coming to judgment.

O Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord all the earth.

2 Sing unto the Lord, bless his name: show forth his salvation from day to
day.

3 Declare his glory among the heathen, his wonders among all people.

4 For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above
all gods.

5 For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the Lord made the heavens.

6 Honor and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.

7 Give unto the Lord (O ye kindreds of the people) give unto the Lord glory
and strength.

8 Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: bring an offering and come
into his courts.

9 O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: fear before him all the earth.

10 Say among the heathen, that the Lord reigns: the world also shall be
established that it shall not be moved; he shall judge the people righteously.

11 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea roar, and
the fullness thereof.

12 Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the trees
of the wood rejoice

13 Before the Lord; for he comes, for he comes to judge the earth: he shall
judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth.

PSALM. XCVII.
A prophetical description of the day of judgment: a curse to idolaters: an
exhortation to good life: the joys of the Godly.

THe Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice: let the multitude of isles be glad
thereof.

2 Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are
the habitation of his throne.

3 A fire goes before him, and burns up his enemies round about.

4 His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw and trembled.

5 The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of
the Lord of the whole earth.

6 The heavens declare his righteousness: and all the people see his glory.

7 Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast themselves of
idols: worship him all ye Gods.

8 Sion heard, and was glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced; because of
thy judgments, O Lord.

9 For thou, Lord, art high ahove all the earth: thou art exalted far above all
gods.

10 Ye that love the Lord, hate evil: he preserves the souls of his saints,
he delivers them out of the hand of the wicked.

11 Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.

12 Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous: and give thanks at the remembrance of
his holiness.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. XCVIII.
A hymn of glorification of Christ triumphing over his enemies and givi^g
judgment against them.

O Sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done mavelous things: his right
hand, and his holy arm has gotten him the victory.

2 The Lord has made known his salvation: his righteousness has he openly
showed in the sight of the heathen.

3 He has remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel: all
the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

4 Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth: make a loud noise, and
rejoice, and sing praise.

5 Sing unto the Lord with the harp: with the harp, and the voice of a psalm.

6 With trumpets and sound of cornet: make a joyful noise before the Lord, the
king.

7 Let the sea roar, and the fullness thereof: the world, and they that dwell
therein.

8 Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful together,

9 Before the Lord; for he comes to judge the earth: with righteousness shall
he judge the world, and the people with equity.

PSALM. XCIX.
The glory of the kingdom of Christ: his justice and his power: his
mercifulness: and his praise.

THe Lord reigns, let the people tremble: he sits between the cherubims,
let the earth be moved.

2 The Lord is great in Zion, and he is high above all people.

3 Let them praise thy great and terrible name: for it is holy.

4 The Kings strength also loves judgment, thou do establish equity, thou
executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.

5 Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool: for he is holy.

6 Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his
name: they called upon the Lord, and he answered them.

7 He spoke unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his testimonies, and the
ordinance that he gave them.

8 Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God: thou wast a God that forgavest them,
though thou tookest vengeance on their inventions.

9 Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his holy hill: for the Lord our God
is holy.

PSALM. C.
A glorification of God: a commemoration of his excellencies, his truth and his
mercy.

MAke a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands.

2 Serve the Lord with gladness: come before his presence with singing.

3 Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, and not we our
selves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

4 Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise: be
thankful unto him and bless his name.

5 For the Lord is good; his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures to
all generations.

PSALM. CI.
David being newly made King, promises to reign in righteousness and holiness:
that he will entertain none but good men to his counsel and employments: that
he will do justice upon the evil doers.

I Will sing of mercy and judgment: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.

2 I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, O when will thou come unto
me? I will walk within thy house with a perfect heart.

3 I will set no wicked thing before my eyes: I hate the work of them that turn
aside, it shall not cleave to me.

4 A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person.

5 Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off: him that has an
high look, and and a proud heart, will not I suffer.

6 Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with
me: he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me.

7 He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house: he that tells
lies shall not tarry in my sight.

8 I will early destroy all the wicked of the land: that I may cut off all
wicked doers from the city of the Lord.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. CII.
The Psalmist prays to God in behalf of the Jews in their captivity:
describes their calamity: foretells their return speedily: he complains of
their enemies; he prays to be preserved from an untimely and an hasty death:
The mortality of the Heavens: and the eternity of God.

Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come unto thee.

2 Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble, incline thine ear
unto me: in the day when I call, answer me speedily.

3 For my days are consumed like smoke: and my bones are burnt as an hearth.

4 My heart is smitten and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat my
bread.

5 By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to my skin.

6 I am like a pelican of the wilderness: I am like an owl of the desert.

7 I watch, and am as a sparrow alone upon the house top.

8 Mine enemies reproach me all the day: and they that are mad against me, are
sworn against me.

9 For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping:

10 Because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for thou have lifted me up, and
cast me down.

11 My days are like a shadow, that declineth: and I am withered like grass.

12 But thou, O Lord, shall endure for ever, and thy remembrance unto all
generations.

13 Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favor her, yea
the set time is come.

14 For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof.

15 So the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord: and all the kings of the
earth thy glory.

16 When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.

17 He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer.

18 This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people which
shall be created, shall praise the Lord.

19 For he has looked down from the height of his sanctuary: from heaven did
the Lord behold the earth

20 To hear the groaning of the prisoner, to loose those that are appointed to
death;

21 To declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem:

22 When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms to serve the Lord.

23 He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days.

24 I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy years are
throughout all generations.

25 Of old have thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the
work of thy hands.

26 They shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea all of them shall wax old
like a garment: as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed.

27 But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.

28 The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be
established before thee.

PSALM. CIII.
A celebration of the Divine mercies and bounty: his great readiness to
forgive: the vanity of man's life: the permanent goodness of God to his
servants: the praises of God.

BLess the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy name.

2 Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.

3 Who forgiveth all thine iniquities: who heals all thy diseases.

4 Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: who crowns thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies.

5 Who satisfies thy mouth with good things: so that thy youth is renewed like
the eagles.

6 The Lord executes righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed.

7 He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of Israel.

8 The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.

9 He will not always chide: neither will he keep his anger for ever.

10 He has not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities.

11 For as the heaven is high above the earth: so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him.

12 As far as the east is from the west: so far has he removed our
transgressions from us.

13 Like as a father pitieth his children: so the Lord pitieth them that fear
him.

14 For he knows our frame: he remembers that we are dust.

15 As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field, so he
flourishes.

16 For the wind passes over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shall
know it no more.

17 But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that
fear him: and his righteousness unto childrens children.

18 To such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments
to do them.

19 The Lord has prepared his throne in the heavens: and his kingdom rules
over all.

20 Bless the Lord ye his angels that excel in strength, that do his
commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word.

21 Bless ye the Lord all ye his hosts, ye ministers of his that do his
pleasure.

22 Bless the Lord all his works in all places of his dominion: bless the Lord,
O my soul.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. CIV.
A psalm celebrating the honor of God in the fabric, the beauty, the order,
the government of the world; declaring the goodness, the wisdom, ^the
omnipotence, and omnipresence of God.

BLess the Lord, O my soul: O Lord my God, thou art very great, thou art
clothed with honor and majesty.

2 Who coverest thy self with light, as with a garment: who stretchest out the
heavens like a curtain.

3 Who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, who makes the clouds
his chariot, who walks upon the wings of the wind.

4 Who makes his angels spirits: his ministers a flaming fire.

5 Who laid the foundations of the earth; that it should not be removed for
ever.

6 Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood above
the mountains.

7 At thy rebuke they fled: at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.

8 They go up by the mountains: they go down by the valleys unto the place
which thou have founded for them.

9 Thou have set a bound that they may not pass over: that they turn not again
to cover the earth.

10 He sends the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills.

11 They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild asses quench their
thirst.

12 By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which sing
among the branches.

13 He waters the hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with the
fruit of thy works.

14 He causes the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of
man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth:

15 And wine that makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to
shine, and bread which strengthens man's heart.

16 The trees of the Lord are full of sap: the cedars of Lebanon which he has
planted.

17 Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir-trees are her
house.

18 The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats: and the rocks for the
conies.

19 He appoints the moon for seasons; the sun knows his going down.

20 Thou make darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the
forest do creep forth.

21 The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat, from God.

22 The sun arises, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in
their dens.

23 Man goes forth to his work, and to his labor until the evening.

24 O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the
earth is full of thy riches.

25 So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable,
both small and great beasts.

26 There go the ships; there is that leviathan, whom thou have made to play
therein.

27 These wait all upon thee: that thou may give them their meat in due
season.

28 That thou give them, they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are
filled with good.

29 Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled; thou take away their breath,
they die, and return to their dust.

30 Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face
of the earth.

31 The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his
works.

32 He looks on the earth, and it trembles; he touches the hills, and they
smoke.

33 I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praise unto my
God, while I have my being.

34 My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord

35 Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no
more: bless thou the Lord, O my soul. Praise ye the Lord.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. CV.
David exhorts the Church of God to praise him for the gracious covenant he
made with Abraham; and all the favors from that time to the time of their
departure out of Egypt.

O Give thanks unto the Lord; call upon his name: make known his deeds among
the people.

2 Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him; talk ye of all his wondrous works.

3 Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.

4 Seek the Lord and his strength: seek his face evermore.

5 Remember his mavelous works that he has done, his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth.

6 O ye seed of Abraham his servant: ye children of Jacob his chosen

7 He is the Lord our God, his judgments are in all the earth.

8 He has remembered his covenant for ever: the word which he commanded to a
thousand generations.

9 Which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac:

10 And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an
everlasting covenant.

11 Saying, unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your
inheritance.

12 When they were but a few men in number: yea, very few, and strangers in it.

13 When they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to another
people.

14 He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for their sakes:

15 Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.

16 Moreover, he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the whole staff
of bread.

17 He sent a man before them, even Joseph who was sold for a servant.

18 Whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron.

19 Until the time that his word came: the word of the Lord tried him.

20 The king sent and loosed him: even the ruler of the people, and let him go
free.

21 He made him Lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance

22 To bind his princes at his pleasure: and reach his senators wisdom.

23 Israel also came into Egypt: and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.

24 And he increased his people greatly: and made them stronger then their
enemies.

25 He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtly with his
servants.

26 He sent Moses his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen.

27 They showed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of Ham.

28 He sent darkness, and made it dark: and they rebelled not against his word.

29 He turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish.

30 The land brought forth frogs in abundance, in the chambers of their kings.

31 He spoke, and there came diverse sorts of flies, and lice in all their
coasts.

32 He gave them hail for rain: and flaming fire in their land.

33 He smote their vines also and their figtrees: and brake the trees of their
coasts.

34 He spoke, and the locusts came: and caterpillars, and that without number,

35 And did eat up all the herbs in their land: and devoured the fruit of their
ground.

36 He smote also the firstborn in their land; the chief of all their strength.

37 He brought them forth also with silver and gold: and there was not one
feeble person among their tribes.

38 Egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell upon them.

39 He spread a cloud for a covering: and fire to give light in the night.

40 The people asked, and he brought quails: and satisfied them with the bread
of heaven.

41 He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out, they ran in the dry places
like a river.

42 For he remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his servant.

43 And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness:

44 And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the labor of
the people:

45 That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. Praise ye the Lord.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. CVI.
A narrative of Gods dealing with the Israelites after their departure out of
Egypt till they were possessed of the land of Canaan: Gods goodness to them:
their sins against him: his smiting them: their repenting: Gods healing them;
and so by a continual revolution.

PRaise ye the Lord, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy
endures for ever.

2 Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? who can show forth all his praise?

3 Blessed are they that keep judgment: and he that does righteousness at all
times.

4 Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people: O
visit me with thy salvation.

5 That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of
thy nation: that I may glory with thine inheritance.

6 We have sinned with our fathers: we have committed iniquity, we have done
wickedly.

7 Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered not the
multitude of thy mercies, but provoked him at the sea, even at the Red sea.

8 Nevertheless, he saved them for his names sake: that he might make his
mighty power to be known.

9 He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them through the
depths as through the wilderness.

10 And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them: and redeemed them
from the hand of the enemy.

11 And the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them left.

12 Then believed they his words, they sang his praise.

13 They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his counsel:

14 But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the desert.

15 And he gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul.

16 They envied Moses also in the camp, and Aaron the saint of the Lord.

17 The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of Abiram.

18 And a fire was kindled in their company, the flame burnt up the wicked.

19 They made a calf in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image.

20 Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that eats
grass.

21 They forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt:

22 Wondrous works in the land of Ham, and terrible things by the Red sea.

23 Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen
stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy
them.

24 Yea, they despised the pleasant land: they believed not his word:

25 But murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord.

26 Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them in the
wilderness:

27 To overthrow their seed also among the nations, and to scatter them in the
lands.

28 They joined themselves also unto Baalpeor, and ate the sacrifices of the
dead.

29 Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the plague brake
in upon them.

30 Then stood up Phineas, and executed judgment: and so the plague was stayed.

31 And that was counted unto him for righteousness, unto all generations for
evermore.

32 They angered him also at the waters of strife, so that it went ill with
Moses for their sakes:

33 Because they provoked his spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his
lips.

34 They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the Lord commanded them:

35 But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works.

36 And they served their idols: which were a snare unto them.

37 Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils.

38 And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their
daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan: and the land was
polluted with blood.

39 Thus were they defiled with their own works: and went a whoring with their
own inventions.

40 Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, insomuch
that he abhorred his own inheritance.

41 And he gave them into the hand of the heathen: and they that hated them,
ruled over them.

42 Their enemies also oppressed them, and they were brought into subjection
under their hand.

43 Many times did he deliver them, but they provoked him with their counsel,
and were brought low for their iniquity.

44 Nevertheless, he regarded their affliction when he heard their cry.

45 And he remembered for them his covenant, and repented according to the
multitude of his mercies.

46 He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives.

47 Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to give
thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.

48 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting: and let
all the people say, Amen. Praise ye the Lord.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. CVII.
A declaration of the goodness and gentleness of God to the afflicted that
call upon him: particularly to the banished, to the strangers, to the Captives,
to the sick, to Mariners in storms; and in his providence in the varieties of
the world.

O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.

2 Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of
the enemy:

3 And gathered them out of the lands, from the east and from the west, from
the north and from the south.

4 They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way, they found no city to
dwell in.

5 Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.

6 Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of
their distresses.

7 And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of
habitation.

8 Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

9 For he satisfies the longing soul, and fills the hungry soul with
goodness.

10 Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in
affliction and iron:

11 Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel
of the most High;

12 Therefore he brought down their heart with labor, they fell down and there
was none to help.

13 Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them out of
their distresses.

14 He brought them out of darkness, and the shadow of death, and brake their
bands in sunder.

15 Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

16 For he has broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder.

17 Fools, because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are
afflicted.

18 Their soul abhors all mannner of meat, and they draw near unto the gates
of death.

19 Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, he saves them out of their
distresses.

20 He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them from their
destructions.

21 O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

22 And let them sacrifice their sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his
works with rejoicing.

23 They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters:

24 These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep

25 For he commands, and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves
thereof.

26 They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths: their soul
is melted because of trouble.

27 They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits
end.

28 Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of
their distresses.

29 He makes the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still.

30 Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he brings them to their
desired haven.

31 O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

32 Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and praise him
in the assembly of the elders.

33 He turns rivers into a wilderness, and the water-springs into dry ground:

34 A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.

35 He turns the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into
watersprings.

36 And there he makes the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a city for
habitation:

37 And sow the fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield fruits of increase.

38 He blesses them also, so that they are multiplied greatly, and suffers
not their cattle to decrease.

39 Again they are minished and brought low through oppression, affliction and
sorrow.

40 He pours contempt upon princes, and causes them to wander in the
wilderness, where there is no way.

41 Yet sets he the poor man on high from affliction, and makes him
families like a flock.

42 The righteous shall see it, and rejoice; and all iniquity shall stop her
mouth.

43 Whosoever is wise, and will observe those things, even they shall understand
the loving kindness of the Lord.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. CVIII.
David rej^yces for a late deliverance from his enemies: he recites the
promises of God: and intimates a prayer that God would enlarge his kingdom: he
directly prays for help: and puts his trust in God.

O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise, even with my glory.

2 Awake psaltery and harp: I my self will awake early.

3 I will praise thee O Lord, among the people: and I will sing praises unto
thee among the nations.

4 For thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reaches unto the
clouds.

5 Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth;

6 That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand and answer me.

7 God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem, and
mete out the valley of Succoth.

8 Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine, Ephraim also is the strength of mine head,
Judah is my lawgiver.

9 Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: over Philistia will I
triumph.

10 Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?

11 Wilt not thou, O God, who have cast us off? and wilt not thou, O God, go
forth with our hosts?

12 Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.

13 Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our
enemies.

PSALM. CIX.
David being almost oppressed with the calumnies of Do^g, and the injuries from
Saul's family, does bitterly curse them: he complains to God for protection and
deliverance: and puts his trust in him.

HOld not thy peace, O God of my praise.

2 For the mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the deceitful are opened
against me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue.

3 They compassed me about also with words of hatred: and fought against me
without a cause.

4 For my love, they are my adversaries: but I give my self unto prayer.

5 And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.

6 Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand.

7 When he shall be judged, let him be condemned, and let his prayer become sin.

8 Let his days be few, and let another take his office.

9 Let his children he fatherless, and his wife a widow.

10 Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg; let them seek their
bread also out of their desolate places.

11 Let the extortioner catch all that he has: and let the stranger spoil his
labor.

12 Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to
favor his fatherless children.

13 Let his posterity be cut off, and in the generation following let their
name be blotted out.

14 Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the Lord: and let not the
sin of his mother be blotted out.

15 Let them be before the Lord continually, that he may cut off the memory of
them from the earth.

16 Because that he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor and
needy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart.

17 As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted not in
blessing, so let it be far from him.

18 As he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment: so let it come
into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.

19 Let it be unto him as the garment which covers him, and for a girdle
wherewith he is girded continually.

20 Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the Lord, and of them that
speak evil against my soul.

21 But do thou for me, O God the Lord, for thy names sake: because thy mercy
is good, deliver thou me.

22 For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.

23 I am gone like the shadow when it declineth: I am tossed up and down as the
locust.

24 My knees are weak through fasting: and my flesh fails of fatness.

25 I became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me, they shaked
their heads.

26 Help me, O Lord my God: O save me according to thy mercy:

27 That they may know, that this is thy hand: that thou Lord have done it.

28 Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise, let them be ashamed: but
let thy servant rejoice.

29 Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame: and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion, as with a mantle.

30 I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth: yea, I will praise him among
the multitude.

31 For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those
that condemn his soul.

Mo. pr. PSALM. CX.
David prophesies of the Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ: of his glorious
victories over his enemies; but of his passion in the way to it.

THe Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool.

2 The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the
midst of thine enemies.

3 Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of
holiness from the womb of the morning: thou have the dew of thy youth.

4 The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever, after
the order of Melchisedek.

5 The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his
wrath.

6 He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead
bodies: he shall wound the heads over many countries.

7 He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up the head.

PSALM. CXI.
A Paschal hyma reci^ing the great benefits the Church receives by our
redemption wrought by Christ.

PRaise ye the Lord, I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, in the
assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.

2 The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein.

3 His work is honorable and glorious: and his righteousness endures for
ever.

4 He has made his wonderful works to be remembered: the Lord is gracious and
full of compassion.

5 He has given meat unto them that fear him: he will ever be mindful of his
covenant.

6 He has showed his people the power of his works, that he may give them the
heritage of the heathen.

7 The works of his hands are verity and judgment; all his commandments are
sure.

8 They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and uprightness.

9 He sent redemption unto his people, he has commanded his covenant for ever:
holy and reverend is his name.

10 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have
all they that do his commandments: his praise endures for ever.

PSALM. CXII.
The blessedness of the just: the stability of the charitable: the envies of
the wicked.

PRaise ye the Lord. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that delights
greatly in his commandments.

2 His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright shall be
blessed.

3 Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousness endures for
ever.

4 Unto the upright there arises light in the darkness: he is gracious, and
full of compassion, and righteous.

5 A good man shows favor, and lends; he will guide his affairs with
discretion.

6 Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in everlasting
remembance

7 He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in the
Lord.

8 His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see his desire
upon his enemies.

9 He has dispersed, he has given unto the poor; his righteousness endures
for ever; his horn shall be exalted with honor.

10 The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth, and
melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish.

PSALM. CXIII.
A publication of the Divine providence: Gods graciousnesse to the humble and
a^^^icted.

PRaise ye the Lord, praise, O ye servants of the Lord, praise the name of the
Lord.

2 Blessed be the name of the Lord, from this time forth and for evermore.

3 From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the Lords name
is to be praised.

4 The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens.

5 Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high?

6 Who humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the
earth?

7 He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the
dunghill:

8 That he may set him with princes, even with the princes of his people.

9 He makes the barren woman to keep house; and to be a joyful mother of
chidren: praise ye the Lord.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. CXIV.
The miracles which God wrought for Israel in the widerness when they came from
Egypt.

WHen Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange
language:

2 Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion.

3 The sea saw it, and fled; Jordan was driven back.

4 The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs.

5 What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou wast
driven back?

6 Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills, like lambs?

7 Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the God
of Jacob:

8 Which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain of
waters.

PSALM. CXV.
A glorification of God for his truth and mercy: the vanity of idols: no
trusting in them: all sorts of men are exhorted to praise God, and to hope in
him: God blesses us: and we must bless God.

NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy,
and for thy truths sake.

2 Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now their God?

3 But our God is in the heavens, he has done whatsoever he pleased.

4 Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.

5 They have mouths, but they speak not: eyes they have, but they see not.

6 They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they smell not.

7 They have hands, but they handle not: feet have they, but they walk not;
neither speak they thorough their throat.

8 They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusts in
them.

9 O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.

10 O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield

11 Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.

12 The Lord has beeen mindful of us, he will bless us, he will bless the
house of Israel, he will bless the house of Aaron.

13 He will bless them that fear the Lord, both small and great.

14 The Lord shall increase you more and more, you and your children.

15 You are blessed of the Lord, which made heaven and earth.

16 The heaven, even the heavens are the Lords: but the earth has he given to
the children of men.

17 The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into silence.

18 But we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore. Praise ye
the Lord.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. CXVI.
David being delivered from Saul in the wilderness of Maon, sings praises to
God in this psalm.

I Love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my supplications.

2 Because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live.

3 The sorrows of death compassed me; and the pains of hell gat hold upon me:
I found trouble and sorrow

4 Then called I upon the name of the Lord; O Lord I beseech thee, deliver my
soul.

5 Gracious is the Lord, and righteous: yea, our God is merciful,

6 The Lord preserves the simple: I was brought low, and he helped me.

7 Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee.

8 For thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling.

9 I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

10 I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted.

11 I said in my haste, All men are liars.

12 What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me?

13 I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

14 I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all his people.

15 Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.

16 Oh Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy
handmaid: thou have loosed my bonds.

17 I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the
name of the Lord.

18 I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all his people.

19 In the courts of the Lords house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise
ye the Lord.

PSALM. CXVII.
A Doxology to God for his mercy and truth: it is also prophetical of the
calling the Gen^iles.

O Praise the Lord, all ye nations: praise him all ye people.

2 For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of the Lord
endures for ever. Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM. CXVIII.
A thanksgiving and gratulation to God for his being victorious over the
Philistims, and his establishment in his kingdom: it figures the Church going
to her Temples, giving thanks to God, praying for blessing, and the priests
blessing God and the people, and appointing sacrifices: The coming of the
Messiah: and the joys of the world at his coming.

O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: because his mercy endures for
ever.

2 Let Israel now say, that his mercy endures for ever.

3 Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endures for ever.

4 Let them now that fear the Lord say, that his mercy endures for ever.

5 I called upon the Lord in distress: the Lord answered me, and set me in a
large place.

6 The Lord is on my side, I will not fear: what can man do unto me?

7 The Lord takes my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my
desire upon them that hate me.

8 It is better to trust in the Lord then to put confidence in man.

9 It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in princes.

10 All nations compassed me about: but in the name of the Lord I will destroy
them.

11 They compassed me about, yea, they compassed me about: but in the name of
the Lord I will destroy them.

12 They compassed me about like bees, they are quenched as the fire of thorns:
for in the name of the Lord I will destroy them.

13 Thou have thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the Lord helped me.

14 The Lord is my strength and song: and is become my salvation

15 The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of the
righteous: the right hand of the Lord does valiantly.

16 The right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the Lord does
valiantly.

17 I shall not die but live, and declare the works of the Lord.

18 The Lord has chastened me sore: but he has not given me over unto death.

19 Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go in to them, and I will
praise the Lord.

20 This gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter.

21 I will praise thee, for thou have heard me, and art become my salvation.

22 The stone which the builders refused, is become the head-stone of the
corner.

23 This is the Lords doing, it is mavelous in our eyes.

24 This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.

25 Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now
prosperity.

26 Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord: we have blessed you out
of the house of the Lord.

27 God is the Lord, which has showed us light; bind the sacrifice with cords,
even unto the horns of the altar.

28 Thou art my God, and I will praise thee; thou art my God, I will exalt thee.

29 O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for
ever.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. CXIX.
David teaches that all true happiness consists in keeping the commandments: he
prays to God to produce in him a great love of them, and to give him right
understanding in them: promises and threatenings are intermingled with great
variety of expressions of the same earnest desire he had keep to the laws of
God.

BLessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.

2 Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole
heart.

3 They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.

4 Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.

5 O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!

6 Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments.

7 I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have learned thy
righteous judgments.

8 I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly.

BETH.
9 VVHerewithall shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy word.

10 With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy
commandments.

11 Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.

12 Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy statutes.

13 With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.

14 I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches.

15 I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways.

16 I will delight my self in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word.

GIMEL.
17 DEal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live and keep thy word.

18 Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.

19 I am a stranger in the earth, hide not thy commandments from me.

20 My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all
times.

21 Thou have rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do err from thy
commandments.

22 Remove from me reproach and contempt, for I have kept thy testimonies.

23 Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate in
thy statutes.

24 Thy testimonies also are my delight, and my counselors.

DALETH.
25 MY soul cleaves unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy word.

26 I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy statutes.

27 Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk of thy
wondrous works

28 My soul melts for heaviness: strengthen thou me according to thy word.

29 Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law graciously.

30 I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid before me.

31 I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O Lord put me not to shame.

32 I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart.

Mo. Pr. HE.
33 TEach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end.

34 Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law: yea I shall observe it
with my whole heart.

35 Make me to go in the path of thy commandments, for therein do I delight.

36 Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.

37 Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity: and quicken thou me in thy way.

38 Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear.

39 Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judgments are good.

40 Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy righteousness.

VAU.
41 LEt thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord: even thy salvation according to
thy word.

42 So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reprocheth me: for I trust in
thy word.

43 And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have hoped in
thy judgments.

44 So shall I keep thy law continually, for ever and ever.

45 And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.

46 I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and will not be ashamed.

47 And I will delight my self in thy commandments which I have loved.

48 My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, which I have loved: and
I will meditate in thy statutes.

ZAIN.
49 REmember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused to me hope.

50 This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word has quickened me.

51 The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not declined from thy
law.

52 I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord: and have comforted my self.

53 Horror has taken hold upon me: because of the wicked that forsake thy law.

54 Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.

55 I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy law.

56 This I had, because I kept thy precepts.

CHETH.
57 THou art my portion, O Lord, I have said, that I would keep thy words.

58 I entreated thy favor with my whole heart: be merciful unto me according
to thy word.

59 I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

60 I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.

61 The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy law.

62 At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous
judgments.

63 I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
precepts.

64 The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes.

TETH.
65 THou have dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, according to thy word.

66 Teach me good judgment, and knowledge: for I have believed thy commandments.

67 Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now have I kept thy word.

68 Thou art good, and do good; teach me thy statutes.

69 The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts with
my whole heart.

70 Their heart is as fat as grease, but I delight in thy law.

71 It is good for me that I have been afflicted: that I might learn thy
statutes.

72 The law of thy mouth is better unto me, then thousands of gold and silver.

Ev. Pr. JOD.
73 THY hands have made me and fashioned me: give me understanding, that I may
learn thy commandments.

74 They that fear thee, will be glad when they see me: because I have hoped
in thy word.

75 I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right; and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me.

76 Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, according to
thy word unto thy servant.

77 Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my
delight.

78 Let the proud be ashamed, for they dealt perversely with me without a
cause; but I will meditate in thy precepts.

79 Let those that fear thee, turn unto me, and those that have known thy
testimonies.

80 Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed.

CAPH.
81 MY soul faints for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word.

82 Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, When will thou comfort me?

83 For I am become like a bottle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy
statutes.

84 How many are the days of thy servant? when will thou execute judgment on
them that persecute me?

85 The proud have dug pits for me, which are not after thy law.

86 All thy commandments are faithful: they persecute me wrongfully: help thou
me.

87 They had almost consumed me upon earth: but I forsook not thy precepts.

88 Quicken me after thy loving kindness; so shall I keep the testimony of thy
mouth.

LAMED.
89 FOr ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven.

90 Thy faithfulness is unto all generations: thou have established the earth,
and it abides.

91 They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are thy
servants.

92 Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then have perished in mine
affliction.

93 I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou have quickened me.

94 I am thine, save me: for I have sought thy precepts.

95 The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy
testimonies.

96 I have seen an end of all perfection; but thy commandment is exceeding
broad.

MEM.
97 O How love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day.

98 Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies: for
they are ever with me.

99 I have more understanding then all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my
meditation.

100 I understand more then the ancients: because I keep thy precepts.

101 I have refrained my feet from every evil way: that I may keep thy word.

102 I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou have taught me.

103 How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter then honey to my mouth.

104 Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way.

Mo. Pr. NUN.
105 THy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.

106 I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments.

107 I am afflicted very much: quicken me, O Lord, according unto thy word.

108 Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill-offerings of my mouth, O Lord, and
teach me thy judgments.

109 My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law.

110 The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy precepts.

111 Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the
rejoicing of my heart.

112 I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the
end.

SAMECH.
113 I Hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love.

114 Thou art my hiding place, and my shield: I hope in thy word.

115 Depart from me, ye evil doers; for I will keep the commandments of my God

116 Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be
ashamed of my hope.

117 Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto thy
statutes continually.

118 Thou have trodden down all them that err from thy statutes, for their
deceit is falsehood.

119 Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross: therefore I
love thy testimonies.

120 My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.

AIN.
121 I Have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors.

122 Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress me.

123 Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousness.

124 Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes.

125 I am thy servant, give me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

126 It is time for thee, Lord, to work: for they have made void thy law.

127 Therefore I love thy commandments above gold, yea, above fine gold.

128 Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right; and
I hate every false way.

PE.
129 THy testimonies are wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them.

130 The entrance of thy words gives light: it gives understanding unto the
simple.

131 I opened my mouth, and panted: for I longed for thy commandments.

132 Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto
those that love thy name.

133 Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.

134 Deliver me from the oppression of man: so will I keep thy precepts.

135 Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: and teach me thy statutes.

136 Rivers of waters run down mine eyes: because they keep not thy law.

TSADDI.
137 RIghteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments.

138 Thy testimonies that thou have commanded, are righteous, and very
faithful.

139 My zeal has consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.

140 Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loves it.

141 I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts.

142 Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is the
truth.

143 Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy commandments are my
delights.

144 The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me
understanding, and I shall live.

Ev. Pr. KOPH.
145 I Cried with my whole heart, hear me, O Lord: I will keep thy statutes.

146 I cried unto thee, save me and I shall keep thy testimonies.

147 I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word.

148 Mine eyes prevent the night-watches, that I might meditate in thy word.

149 Hear my voice according unto thy loving kindness: O Lord quicken me
according to thy judgment.

150 They draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from thy law.

151 Thou art near, O Lord: and all thy commandments are truth.

152 Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old, that thou have founded
them for ever.

RESH.
153 COnsider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do dot forget thy law.

154 Plead my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according to thy word.

155 Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes.

156 Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord, quicken me according to thy
judgments.

157 Many are my persecutors, and mine enemies: yet do I not decline from thy
testimonies.

158 I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved: because they kept not thy
word.

159 Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O Lord, according to thy
loving kindness.

160 Thy word is true from the beginning: and every one of thy righteous
judgments endures for ever.

SCHIN.
161 PRinces have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart stands in aw of
thy word.

162 I rejoice at thy word, as one that finds great spoil.

163 I hate and abhor lying: but thy law do I love.

164 Seven times a day do I praise thee: because of thy righteous judgments.

165 Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall offend them.

166 Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments.

167 My soul has kept thy testimonies: and I love them exceedingly.

168 I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are before
thee.

TAU.
169 LEt my cry come near before thee, O Lord: give me understanding according
to thy word.

170 Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy word.

171 My lips shall utter praise, when thou have taught me thy statutes.

172 My tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy commandments are
righteousness.

173 Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy precepts.

174 I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord: and thy law is my delight.

175 Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and let thy judgments help me.

176 I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant: for I do not
forget thy commandments.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. CXX.
The Psalmist being compelled to live amongst ungodly and factious people,
complains to God, and craves help and remedy.

IN my distress I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me.

2 Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue.

3 What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false
tongue?

4 Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of Juniper.

5 Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar.

6 My soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace.

7 I am for peace: but when I speak, they are for war.

PSALM. CXXI.
This Psalm is an act of trust in God, our great preserver by day and night, at
home and abroad.

I Will lift up mine eyes unto the hills from whence comes my help.

2 My help comes from the Lord, which made heaven and earth.

3 He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keeps thee will not
slumber.

4 Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.

5 The Lord is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.

6 The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.

7 The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul.

8 The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in, from this time
forth and even for evermore.

PSALM. CXXII.
A preparatory hymn for the people of God in their ascent to the places and
solemnities of religion: he prays for the prosperity of the Church.

I Was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord.

2 Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.

3 Jerusalem is builded as a city, that is compact together:

4 Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of
Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.

5 For there are set thrones of judgment: the thrones of the house of David.

6 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.

7 Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.

8 For my brethren and companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee.

9 Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.

PSALM. CXXIII.
The people under the tyranny of Antiochus complain to God of their sad
condition; and humbly wait on God.

UNto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the heavens.

2 Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as
the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so our eyes wait upon the
Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us.

3 Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are exceedingly
filled with contempt.

4 Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease,
and with the contempt of the proud.

PSALM. CXXIV.
The people newly escaped from their enemies acknowledge their great danger,
and God only to be the author of their safety and their victory.

IF it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel say:

2 If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us:

3 Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us:

4 Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul:

5 Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.

6 Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth.

7 Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the snare is
broken and we are escaped.

8 Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

PSALM. CXXV.
The perpetuity of the Church: Gods continual presence with her: the lot of
the wicked differs from the portion of Gods people.

THey that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever.

2 As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his
people, from henceforth even for ever.

3 For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous: lest
the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.

4 Do good, O Lord, unto those that be good, and to them that are upright in
their hearts.

5 As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them
forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. CXXVI.
Thy joy of the Jews at their retu^n from Babylon: they pray for the remaining
part: the future joy of them that presently mourn.

WHen the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream.

2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: Then
said they among the heathen, The Lord has done great things for them.

3 The Lord has done great things for us: whereof we are glad.

4 Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the south.

5 They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

6 He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless
come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.

PSALM. CXXVII.
Without God we must und^rtake nothing: children are a blessing to the
righteous.

EXcept the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it: except the
Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.

2 It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of
sorrows: for so he gives his beloved sleep.

3 Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his
reward.

4 As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man: so are children of the youth.

5 Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them: they shall not be
ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.

PSALM. CXXVIII.
The blessi^gs of them that fear God; in their wives and children, and the
peace of the Church.

BLessed is every one that fears the Lord: that walks in his ways.

2 For thou shall eat the labor of thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it
shall be well with thee.

3 Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house: thy
children like olive plants, round about thy table.

4 Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed, that fears the Lord.

5 The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion: and thou shall see the good of
Jerusalem, all the days of thy life.

6 Yea, thou shall see thy childrens children, and peace upon Israel.

PSALM. CXXIX.
The indefatigable malice of the enemies of the Church: they prevail not: but
are at last accursed and cut off.

MAny a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say:

2 Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth: yet they have not
prevailed against me.

3 The plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their furrows.

4 The Lord is righteous: he has cut asunder the cords of the wicked.

5 Let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Zion.

6 Let them be as the grass upon the house tops, which withers before it
grows up:

7 Wherewith the mower fills not his hand: nor he that binds sheaves, his
bosom.

8 Neither do they which go by, say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you: we
bless you in the name of the Lord.

PSALM. CXXX.
A prayer for pardon of sins: an act of hope in God: and a celebration of his
mercy. The Psalm is paenitential.

OUt of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord.

2 Lord hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications.

3 If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities; O Lord, who shall stand?

4 But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.

5 I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his word do I hope.

6 My soul waits for the Lord, more then they that watch for the morning: I
say, more then they that watch for the morning.

7 Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him
is plenteous redemption.

8 And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

PSALM. CXXXI.
David being accused by Saul's servants that be aspired to the Kingdom, protests
his innocence, his humble thoughts, and meek deportment: he calls on all to
trust in God.

LOrd, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I exercise my
self in great matters, or in things too high for me.

2 Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a child that is weaned of his
mother: my soul is even as a weaned child.

3 Let Israel hope in the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. CXXXII.
David h^ving vowed to build a Temple to God was not permitted; but the place
was shown to him where his son should build it: he prepares this psalm for the
dedication of it: prophecies of the stability of Christ's Church, and the
blessings of his Ministers and people.

LOrd, remember David, and all his afflictions.

2 How he swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob.

3 Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my
bed:

4 I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids,

5 Until I find out a place for the Lord: an habitation for the mighty God of
Jacob.

6 Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the wood.

7 We will go into his tabernacles: we will worship at his footstool.

8 Arise, O Lord, into thy rest: thou, and the ark of thy strength.

9 Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness: and let thy saints shout for
joy.

10 For thy servant David's sake, turn not away the face of thine anointed.

11 The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it, Of the
fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.

12 If thy children will keep my covenant and my testimony, that I shall teach
them; their children also shall sit upon thy throne for evermore.

13 For the Lord has chosen Zion: he has desired it for his habitation.

14 This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell, for I have desired it.

15 I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor with bread.

16 I will also clothe her priests with salvation: and her saints shall shout
aloud for joy.

17 There will I make the horn of David to bud: I have ordained a lamp for mine
anointed.

18 His enemies will I clothe with shame: but upon himself shall his crown
flourish.

PSALM. CXXXIII.
The amability of peace, and the blessings of Christian unity are described.

BEhold, how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in
unity.

2 It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the
beard, even Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of his garment.

3 As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of
Zion; for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.

PSALM. CXXXIV.
An exhortation to the Ministers of Religion to attend to their appointed
hours of prayer.

BEhold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord, which by night stand
in the house of the Lord.

2 Lift up your hands in the sanctuary: and bless the Lord.

3 The Lord that made heaven and earth, bless thee out of Zion.

PSALM. CXXXV.
The Ministers of Religion are further called upon to attend to the recitation
of the Divine praises, by arguments drawn from consideration of the works of
God, from the greatness of his name, from his justice to all, and his loving
kindness to his servants: the vanity of Idols, and their worshippers.

PRaise ye the Lord, praise ye the name of the Lord, praise him, O ye servants
of the Lord.

2 Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our
God.

3 Praise ye the Lord, for the Lord is good: sing praises unto his name, for it
is pleasant.

4 For the Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar
treasure.

5 For I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is above all gods.

6 Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth, in the
seas, and all deep places.

7 He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, he makes
lightnings for the rain: he brings the wind out of his treasuries.

8 Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast.

9 Who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh,
and upon all his servants.

10 Who smote great nations, and slew mighty kings:

11 Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of
Canaan:

12 And gave their land for an heritage, an heritage unto Israel his people.

13 Thy name, O Lord, endures for ever, and thy memorial, O Lord, throughout
all generations.

14 For the Lord will judge his people, and he will repent himself concerning
his servants.

15 The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.

16 They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not.

17 They have ears, but they hear not, neither is there any breath in their
mouths.

18 They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusts in
them.

19 Bless the Lord, O house of Israel: bless the Lord, O house of Aaron.

20 Bless the Lord, O house of Levi; ye that fear the Lord, bless the Lord.

21 Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, which dwells at Jerusalem. Praise ye the
Lord.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. CXXXVI.
The people of God are called upon to confess the greatness and goodness,
the providence and mercy of the Lord: by arguments taken from the works of God
to the children of Israel and to all the world: all Gods works are in mercy:
This mercy is Eternal.

O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.

2 O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his mercy endures for ever.

3 O give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy endures for ever.

4 To him who alone does great wonders: for his mercy endures for ever.

5 To him that by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endures for ever.

6 To him that stretched out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endures
for ever.

7 To him that made great lights: for his mercy endures for ever.

8 The sun to rule by day: for his mercy endures for ever.

9 The moon and stars to rule by night: for his mercy endures for ever.

10 To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn: for his mercy endures for ever.

11 And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endures for ever.

12 With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm: for his mercy endures
for ever.

13 To him which divided the Red sea into parts: for his mercy endures for
ever.

14 And made Israel to pass through the midst of it: for his mercy endures
for ever.

15 But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea: for his mercy endures
for ever.

16 To him which led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endures
for ever.

17 To him which smote great kings: for his mercy endures for ever.

18 And slew famous kings: for his mercy endures for ever.

19 Sihon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endures for ever.

20 And Og the king of Bashan: for his mercy endures for ever.

21 And gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy endures for ever.

22 Even an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endures for ever.

23 Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endures for ever.

24 And has redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endures for ever.

25 Who gives food to all flesh: for his mercy endures for ever.

26 O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endures for ever.

PSALM. CXXXVII.
The Jews being in the Babylonish Captivity deplore their sad condition: they
remember the pleasures of Jerusalem and the religion of the Temple; they long
to be there: and pray for the Divine Judgments to descend upon their
persecutors.

BY the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea we wept, when we remembered
Zion.

2 We hanged our harps upon the willows, in the midst thereof.

3 For there they that carried us away captive, required of us a song; and they
that wasted us, required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion.

4 How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land?

5 If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning.

6 If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if
I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.

7 Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem; who said,
Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.

8 O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed: happy shall he be that
rewards thee, as thou have served us.

9 Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones.

PSALM. CXXXVIII.
David being freed from the persecution of Saul, and invested in the Kingdom,
promises to celebrate the Divine praises before all the Kings of the earth:
whom he exhorts to do the same: he puts his trust in God for the future: he
prays to have these mercies continued and enlarged.

I Will praise thee with my whole heart, before the gods will I sing praise
unto thee.

2 I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name, for thy loving
kindness, and for thy truth: for thou have magnified thy word above all thy
name.

3 In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me: and strengthenedst me with
strength in my soul.

4 All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord, when they hear the
words of thy mouth.

5 Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord: for great is the glory of the
Lord.

6 Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly: but the proud
he knows afar off.

7 Though I walk in the mids of trouble, thou will revive me; thou shall
stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand
shall save me.

8 The Lord will perfect that which concerns me: thy mercy, O Lord, endures
for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. CXXXIX.
The Divine Omniscience, and Omnipresence largely described: the thoughts of
God are unsearchable: the wicked are cursed: the Psalmist prays to be defended
from them: he hates their ways: and prays to be conducted in the ways of God.

O Lord, thou have searched me, and known me.

2 Thou know my down-sitting, and mine up-rising, thou understandest my
thought afar off.

3 Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my
ways.

4 For there is not a word in my tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it
altogether.

3 Thou have beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me.

6 Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it.

7 Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy
presence?

8 If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell,
behold, thou art there.

9 If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
sea:

10 Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.

11 If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me: even the night shall be
light about me.

12 Yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day:
the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.

13 For thou have possessed my reins: thou have covered me in my mothers womb.

14 I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; mavelous are
thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

15 My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret: and
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.

16 Thine eyes did see my substance yet being unperfect, and in thy book all my
members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there
was none of them.

17 How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God? how great is the sum
of them?

18 If I should count them, they are mo in number then the sand: when I wake, I
am still with thee.

19 Surely thou will slay the wicked, O God: depart from me therefore ye bloody
men.

20 For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemies take thy name in
vain.

21 Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those
that rise up against thee?

22 I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.

23 Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts.

24 And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting.

PSALM. CXL.
David being persecuted by Do^g and the men of Ziph prays to God for his
safety and defense from their evil tongues: he prays against his Enemies: he
trusts in God that he shall be safe; and that his Enemies shall be destroyed.

DEliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: preserve me from the violent man.

2 Which imagine mischiefs in their heart; continually are they gathered
together for war.

3 They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; adders poison is under
their lips. Selah.

4 Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked, preserve me frm the violent
man, who have purposed to overthrow my goings.

5 The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords, they have spread a net by the
way-side: they have set gins for me. Selah.

6 I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my supplications, O
Lord.

7 O God the Lord, the strength of my salvation; thou have covered my head in
the day of battle.

8 Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked, further not his wicked device,
lest they exalt themselves. Selah.

9 As for the head of those that compass me about, let the mischief of their
own lips cover them.

10 Let burning coals fall upon them, let them be cast into the fire; into deep
pits, that they rise not up again.

11 Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth: evil shall hunt the
violent man to overthrow him.

12 I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the
right of the poor.

13 Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name, the upright shall
dwell in thy presence.

PSALM. CXLI.
David being in his flight and trouble prays that God would so, compose his
mind, and restrain his tongue that through anger or impatience he may not
offend: and that he may have no part or society with the wicked: he prays to
be defended from their snares, and that they may perish with their own arts.

LOrd, I cry unto thee, make haste unto me, give ear unto my voice, when I cry
unto thee.

2 Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, and the lifting up of my
hands, as the evening sacrifice.

3 Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth, keep the door of my lips.

4 Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with men
that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties.

5 Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me,
it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head: for yet my prayer
also shall be in their calamities.

6 When their judges are overthrown in stony places, they shall hear my words,
for they are sweet.

7 Our bones are scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth and
cleaves wood upon the earth.

8 But mine eyes are unto thee, O God the Lord: in thee is my trust, leave not
my soul destitute.

9 Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and the gins of the
workers of iniquity.

10 Let the wicked fall into their own nets, whilst that I withal escape.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. CXLII.
David being imprisoned in a cave, and besieged by Saul, prays to God to be
delivered out of his present danger: he intends this delivery to be in order to
the glorification of God.

I Cried unto the Lord with my voice: with my voice unto the Lord did I make my
supplication.

2 I poured out my complaint before him: I showed before him my trouble.

3 When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knew my path: in the
way wherein I walked, have they privily laid a snare for me.

4 I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know
me: refuge failed me: no man cared for my soul.

5 I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the
land of the living.

6 Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low; deliver me from my
persecutours: for they are stronger then I.

7 Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name: the righteous shall
compass me about: for thou shall deal bountifully with me.

PSALM. CXLIII.
David being persecuted by Absaloms party implores Gods aid: confesses his
unworthiness and sin: describes his sad state of affairs: he com^orts
himself with the memory of Gods greatworks: he prays for defense against his
enemies, and deliverance from them: and to be conducted by the good spirit of
God: and that his Enemies may be cut off. The psalm is paenitential.

HEar my prayer, O Lord, give ear to my supplications: in thy faithfulness
answer me, and in thy righteousness.

2 And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

3 For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my life down to the
ground: he has made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have been long
dead.

4 Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me: my heart within me is desolate.

5 I remember the days of old, I meditate on all thy works: I muse on the work
of thy hands.

9 I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul thirsts after thee, as a
thirsty land. Selah.

7 Hear me speedily, O Lord, my spirit fails: hide not thy face from me, lest
I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

8 Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee do I
trust: cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul
unto thee.

9 Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: I flee unto thee to hide me.

10 Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: thy spirit is good, lead me
into the land of uprightness.

11 Quicken me, O Lord, for thy names sake: for thy righteousness sake bring
my soul out of trouble.

12 And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my
soul: for I am thy servant.

Mo. Pr. PSALM. CXLIV.
David praises God for helping him in battles against the Philistims: and
giving him an entire possession of his kingdom: he admires Gods goodness to
man, and the condescensions of his providence: he prays for defense against
the preparations of other Enemies against him: and for prosperity to his
people, and plenty in the field and in the stall: the blessedness of the
servants of God.

Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight.

2 My goodness and my fortress, my high tower and my deliverer, my shield,
and he in whom I trust: who subdueth my people under me.

3 Lord, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of man,
that thou make account of him?

4 Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passes away.

5 Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall
smoke.

6 Cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows, and destroy
them.

7 Send thine hand from above, rid me, and deliver me out of great waters: from
the hand of strange children,

8 Whose mouth speaks vanity; and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood.

9 I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: upon a psaltery, and an instrument
of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee.

10 It is he that gives salvation unto kings: who delivers David his servant
from the hurtful sword.

11 Rid me and deliver me from the hand of strange children; whose mouth
speaks vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.

12 That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that our daughters
may be as corner-stones, polished after the similitude of a palace:

13 That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store: that our sheep
may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets:

14 That our oxen may be strong to labor; that there be no breaking in, nor
going out; that there be no complaining in our streets,

15 Happy is that people, that is in such a case: yea, happy is that people,
whose God is the Lord.

PSALM. CXLV.
This Psalm is part of the Allelujah: it is wholly a celebration of the Divine
praises, from the greatness of God, his infinite power, his immense Majesty,
his goodness, his clemency, his justice, his providence and bounty, and his
readiness to hear the prayers of them that fear him.

I Will extol thee, my God, O King, and I will bless thy name for ever and
ever.

2 Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.

3 Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, and his greatness is
unsearchable.

4 One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy
mighty acts.

5 I will speak of the glorious honor of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous
works.

6 And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts; and I will declare
thy greatness.

7 They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness, and shall
sing of thy righteousness.

8 The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger, and of great
mercy.

9 The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works.

10 All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy saints shall bless thee.

11 They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom and talk of thy power.

12 To make known to the sons of men, his mighty acts, and the glorious majesty
of his kingdom.

13 Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures
throughout all generations.

14 The Lord upholdeth all that fall: and raises up all those that be bowed
down.

15 The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due
season.

16 Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.

17 The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

18 The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon
him in truth.

19 He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their
cry, and will save them.

20 The Lord preserves all them that love him: but all the wicked will he
destroy.

21 My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless his
holy name for ever and ever.

PSALM. CXLVI.
An exhortation to praise God: in him alone we are to trust: he is the Creator
of all: his truth is eternal: he is just, bountiful, and gracious, and King
for ever.

PRaise ye the Lord: praise the Lord, O my soul.

2 While I live, will I praise the Lord: I will sing praises unto my God, while
I have any being.

3 Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no
help.

4 His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth: in that very day his
thoughts perish.

5 Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the
Lord his God:

6 Which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is: which keeps
truth for ever:

7 Which executes judgment for the oppressed, which gives food to the
hungry: the Lord loses the prisoners.

8 The Lord opens eyes of the blind: the Lord raises them that are bowed
down: the Lord loves the righteous.

9 The Lord preserves the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless and widow:
but the way of the wicked he turns upside down.

10 The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all generations.
Praise ye the Lord.

Ev. Pr. PSALM. CXLVII.
An exhortation to recite Gods praises from the consideration of his blessings
to his people: his defense and establishment of them: his power and wisdom
manifested in the heavens: his care over all the creatures, men and beasts:
from summer and winter: and especially from consideration of the excellency of
his Law and of his Word communicated to his people.

PRaise ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our God: for it is
pleasant, and praise is comely.

2 The Lord does build up Jerusalem: he gathers together the outcasts of
Israel.

3 He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds.

4 He tells the number of the stars: he calls them all by their names.

5 Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite.

6 The Lord lifts up the meek: he casts the wicked down to the ground.

7 Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving: sing praises upon the harp unto our
God:

8 Who covers the heaven with clouds, who prepares rain for the earth, who
makes grass to grow upon the mountains.

9 He gives to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry.

10 He delights not in the strength of the horse: he takes not pleasure in
the legs of a man.

11 The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his
mercy.

12 Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Zion.

13 For he has strengthened the bars of thy gates: he has blessed thy
children within thee.

14 He makes peace in thy borders, and fills thee with the finest of the
wheat:

15 He sends forth his commandment upon earth: his word runs very swiftly.

16 He gives snow like wool: he scatters the hoar frost like ashes.

17 He casts forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold?

18 He sends out his word, and melts them: he causes his wind to blow, and
the waters flow.

19 He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel.

20 He has not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they have
not known them. Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM. CXLVIII.
All the Creation in the several ranks of creatures is called upon to be
instrumental in the celebration of the Divine praises.

PRaise ye the Lord. Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise him in the
heights.

2 Praise ye him all his angels: praise ye him all his hosts.

3 Praise ye him sun and moon: praise him all ye stars of light.

4 Praise him ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that be above the heavens.

5 Let them praise the name of the Lord: for he commanded, and they were
created.

6 He has also stablished them for ever and ever: he has made a decree which
shall not pass.

7 Praise the Lord from the Earth, ye dragons and all deeps.

8 Fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind fulfilling his word.

9 Mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all cedars.

10 Beasts and all cattle, creeping things, and flying fowl.

11 Kings of the earth, and all people; princes, and all judges of the earth.

12 Both young men and maidens, old men and children.

13 Let them praise the name of the Lord: for his name alone is excellent, his
glory is above the earth and heaven.

14 He also exalts the horn of his people, the praise of all his saints; even
of the children of Israel, people near unto him. Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM. CXLIX.
The praises of God and his glory in the prosperity of his Church: the
privileges and advantages of the saints in the old Testament; and in the
spiritual sense to be translated to the Christian Church.

PRaise ye the Lord: sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise in the
congregation of saints.

2 Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of Zion be joyful
in their king.

3 Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with
the timbrell and harp.

4 For the Lord takes pleasure in his people: he will beautify the meek with
salvation.

5 Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds.

6 Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in
their hand.

7 To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people.

8 To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron.

9 To execute upon them the judgment written: this honor have all his saints.
Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM. CL.
David calls upon the Church to recite Gods praises: and especially upon the
Levites, whose office it was to sing and play on instruments of music in the
service of God: he uses the word [ praise] thirteen times in this short Psalm,
according to the number of the thirteen Attributes of God which the Rabbis
usually reckon.

PRaise ye the Lord. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the firmament
of his power.

2 Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent
greatness.

3 Praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the psaltery and
harp.

4 Praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed instruments
and organs.

5 Praise him upon the loud cymbals: praise him upon the high sounding cymbals.

6 Let every thing that has breath, praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord.

The End.

