A TRUE RELATION OF The Proceedings at Hereford by the Lord St. John's and his
Regiment there, of the Kings coming thither and his Intertainment, and the
late proceedings at Manchester; With the Cashiring of the Earl of Derby and
his Forces from before that Town. From the fourth of October to the eight, upon
which day they left the siege. 14. October. 1642.

LONDON, Printed for R. Walbanke. 1642.

A true Relation of the proceedings at Hereford by the Lord St. John's and his
Regiment, etc.
FRiday the seventh of October last, the Lord St. John's with his Regiment of
Horse and Foot came before Hereford, and the said Lord commanded Captain
Cooper to demand entrance into the Town in the name of the Parliament, and
yield up the possession thereof to the said Lord St. John for the use of King
and Parliament, which Captain Cooper performing accordingly, Answer was
returned by the Recorder in the name of the Major, Aldermen and Townsmen, that
his Lordship was right welcome to their town, rendering many hearty and humble
thanks to the Parliament for their care of their peace, and safety against all
attempts of the adverse party that may be made against them, by sending to
their assistance such a worthy and noble person so well affected to their
proceeding, and the peace of this Country, in whom they may safely confide and
rely upon; Giving many assurances by Protestations of the good affection of
that City to the King and Parliament, therewith causing the Gates to be opened,
and the said Lord with his Forces permitted entrance, and with much joy were by
all the well affected Townsmen received; But for those that were ill affected,
and such Welsh Cavaliers as before were by the private means of the said
illaffected persons in the town received into the same, secretly in the night
made their escape, and are fled to Marquess Hartford, and his Accomplices into
Wales; after which the next day the Lord St. John fortified the City with his
soldiers, and prepared to plant Ordnance for the preservation of the town
against any assault of the adverse party that shall be made against it, they
daily expecting (according to a late information they received) the coming of
the said Marquess Hartford, Lord Herbert, son to the Earl of Worcester; who
has raised diverse Welchmen in Wales; the Lord Seymour, the Earl of Darby, who
all of them with their respective Forces intend to March thither to besiege the
town, and regaine the possession thereof for the use of his Majesty, upon
which the Lord St. John sent Letters to the Earls Excellency the Lord General
for to send him some troops of Horse and some Foot for his assistance; Upon
which his Excellency resolved to march thither in person with his army, having
notice also that his Majesty intended to go thither in person with his Forces.

Saturday the eigth of October, his Majesty came hither before this Town,
guarded with about two thousand Horse and Foot, and demanded entrance into the
Town, upon which the Recorder was sent to his Majesty from the Town, with a
Message intimating that his Majesty was not come but to a faithful part of his
people, and if his Majesty would be graciously pleased to disband his
extraordinary Guard, he should with all duty and joyfulnesse of their hearts
be entertained, humbly desiring his Majesty to return to his Parliament, and
hearken to their faithful Council, and abandon such evil persons, as have
insinuated themselves into his favor, who have been the only cause of these
present distractions and distempers in the State, which if this their just and
humble desires be rejected, they are bound in duty to oppose his Majesty's
Followers for entering into their town, upon which his Majesty was much
incensed, and in passion departed with his army toward Chester, hearing the
Earl of Essex was marching toward Hereford.

Then the Commons received a Letter from Manchester, of the late proceedings
there, since the fourth of October last to the eigth, that the Earl of Derby
with his army are quite defeated, and driven from the Town, they would not
leave their assault, day nor night, till he had not so many men left to march
withal, as were slain and run away, there being slain in that time of his
lying before the Town about 500 of his soldiers, and 200 taken prisoners,
most of them of the common soldiers, not worth the sending to London, nor
troubling the Country prisons with, making great lamentation for being drawn,
and as it were enforced to serve the said Earl, that they have for this months
time of their service, received not one penny of pay, but lived on nothing but
robbing and pillaging the Countries in their march: promising to be faithful
to the Parliament, if they may have their lives pardoned. Therefore the Town
desires the pleasure of the House concerning them, whether they shall be
executed, or some of them for example to others, and the rest made to serve the
Town as soldiers for the better securing thereof against future assaults,
that the Earl of Derby does much damage in the County with his soldiers,
which if not speedily suppressed, will utterly destroy and spoil the same,
that his Majesty has sent command to the Earl to attend with his Forces, his
Majesty's person, and speedily to march to his Majesty to Chester, upon which
the said Earl is in a great strait, being ashamed to return to his Majesty
with so few men, and endeavors what he can by promise of reward and otherwise
to gather his scattered men, that ran away from him, again to his service, but
few or none will come to him being altogether weary of his employment.

Upon which the Commons falling into debate, appointed a Committee, to take the
said Letter into consideration, and make report thereof to the House the next
morning.

FINIS.
MOst loving sister, my love remembered unto you, hoping to God you are in good
health as I am at this time, thanks be to God for it, this is to let you
understand, we have had a great fight at Manchester the last week, the Lord
Strange came to assault the Town with 2000 men, and 700 horse, he came the 25
of September, and stayed till the first of October, and it is credibly reported
that he lost nine score men, beside a great many horse. And it is to let you
understand that there was but three slain, in the Town. And we do expect his
coming again, this is true, for I was in the battle. So I rest,

Dated October. the 4 day, Your loving Brothers, William Birch, Robert Birch.


A CONTINVATION Of certain Special and Remarkable passages from both Houses of
PARLIAMENT, and diverse other parts of the Kingdom, from Wednesday the 12. of
October till the 15 of October. 1642. Containing these particulars* viz.
1. A True relation of Letters to the Parliament from the Earl of Essex, by
which it is informed that of a certainty his Majesty is upon advancing his Army
toward London, with Order of Parliament to the City of London concerning the
said information.

2. A true relation of the strength of the Kings Army sent to the Parliament
from the Lord General.

3. Of the Lord Coventryes leaving his Majesty, and submitting himself to the
Lord General, desiring to be safely conducted by him to the Parliament.

4. Of Letters from the Kingdom of Scotland to both Houses of Parliament, with
certain propositions concerning the present distractions* and the resolution
of the Houses concerning the same.

5. An Order of Parliament for the sending of so many Arms into Scotland as
they have sent with their forces into Ireland.

6. Of the Commitment of Master Fountain the Lawyer by Order of the House.

7. Also of the Commitment of one Master Dorrell a Citizen for speaking words
against Master Pyus.

8. Of a Letter to the Parliament from Secretary Nicholas by Order from his
Majesty.

9. An other Letter to the Parliament from Ireland informing the state of
things there.

10. A certain relation of the taking of five ships by the Adventurers
forces in Ireland coming from Spain with Ammunition and moneys to relieve the
Rebels.

11. Of the sending of certain Soldiers to the Lord General to receive
M^rshall Law that ran from their Colors and were taken in London.

12. An Order of Parliament for the setting up chains and posts about the
Suburbs.

13. A true relation of Letters to the Parliament from Holland.

14. Of the bringing up of the Earl of Bath, Sir Henry Berkly* Sir Hugh
Pol^^^^ (...) to the Parliament* with diverse other passages.

A CONTINVATION OF Certain Special and Remarkable passages from both Houses
of Parliament and diverse other parts of this Kingdom, From Wednesday the
twelfth of October, till Saturday the Fifteenth of October 1642.
Wednesday the 12. of October.
THe Earl of Essex sent Letters to the Parliament which were this day read in
the houses, by which it was informed that he has received certain
information, that the King is brought to so great distress and want of means
to pay his Army withal, that he will be suddenly enforced to march from
Shrewsbury, and as it is reported intends to advance with his forces toward
London, That the King is confidently persuaded to find a strong party in
London, and then the Cavallires intends to plunder the Roundheads, but under
that name the Lord General informs, that the Cavalliers comprehends all
persons that have any Estate, for they begin now to show themselves in their
proper Colors, and spare none that are worth any thing, whether they be
Roundheads or Rattle-heads, and no doubt they will be now less favorable in
London, if once they get thither, and those that so much plead in their
behalfes will have then as little cause to speak well of them as any other.

But the Lord General desires the Parliament that Trained Bands in and about
London may be put into a readiness for their own defense, that provisions may
be made to fortify the City, and that the Parliament would take Order to
secure the persons of such of the chiefest of the City as are most suspected to
raise a party against the Parliament, whereby if occasion of trial shall
happen, there may not be a Civil munity in the City amongst themselves.

Whereupon the Houses upon debate of this business have ordered that the trained
bands of London, Middlesex and Surrey shall be put in a readiness (as is
desired) and that the close Committee shall make diligent inquiry of all the
chief Malignants in the City, and send out warrants for them to have them
examined before the Houses.

The Lord General by his letters also informed the Houses that he was of a
certain informed, that the Kings Army consists of 9000. foot 2500. Horse
and 1500. Dragoneers, and however it has been reported that he is 40. or
50000. strong there could not at any Muster as yet be more found than the said
number.

Also the Lord General informed that he intends to march close after the
Kings Army, and if it be possible intercept them in their passage; and that
the Lord Coventrie came to him to Worcester and freely yielded himself up to
the Parliament desiring to be conveyed up to them with a strong Guard, which
the Lord General intends accordingly, and to send him up with all
convenience.

There came Letters to the Parliament from the Kingdom of Scotland, giving
them thanks for admitting the Clergy of their Kingdom recommended by them to
the Assembly of Ministers appointed to consider of Religion: As also to inform
the Parliament upon consultation of the affairs of this Kingdom at an
Assembly held at Edenborough 29. of September last, according to the late
pacification; they have appointed 51 Commissioners of the Earls, Lords,
Gentry, and Commons, to offer certain propositions to the Parliament, to be
treated off for the reconcilement of the present distractions, whereby the
division of both Kingdoms according to the said pacification may be preserved.

Desiring the Parliament that there may be the like number out of both Houses
appointed to treat with the said Comissioners from Scotland upon the said
propositions, and that the Parliament would take order that their said
Comissioners may have safe Conduct to this Kingdom, and back again without
molestation by the Kings party, which propositions the Parliament have taken
into consideration and have resolved to join with the Kingdom of Scotland in
the said Treaty and to satisfy them in their other desires.

And the Parliament have also ordered that there shall be forth with such a
quantity of Arms bought and sent into Scotland, in exchange for those Arms
which they have sent over into Ireland against the Rebels, accordingly as was
then agreed by the propositions concerning that business.

Master Fountain the Lawyer in London was brought before the Commons as a
delinquent for questioning the power of the Parliament by what authority they
did appoint Commissioners to tender the propositions for the raiseing of horse,
money or plate, and giving out other speeches against the Parliament for which
it was ordered he should be committed to Prison to answer the same.

There was one Master Dorrell a Citizen brought before the House of Commons for
saying that Master Pyus had taken a bribe of 30 pounds and being demanded how
he could prove the same, he said he had heard it so reported by others, but
could not name any that had so said besides himself where upon it was ordered
that he should be committed to Prison and brought to condign punishment for
raising the said scandell.

The Parliament having lately sent a message to his Majesty to desire his
consent for the sending of Master Goodwin and Master Reynolds into Ireland to
view the state of things there, Secretary Nicholas by Command, from his Majesty
sent a letter to the Houses informing them that his Majesty does expressly
Command that the Parliament do not send any of their members into Ireland for
the end aforesaid, whereupon after some debate of the business, the Houses
ordered that the said Gentlemen should be forthwith sent over into Ireland by
the authority of Parliament and to have instructions from the Houses to enquire
into the state of things there, there was a letter then also read in the
Commons coming from Ireland by which it was informing by what cunning and
deceitful means, the Papists and Jesuits have incensed the Armies against the
Parliament, telling them that the Rebels have the Kings hand and seal for
what they do, and that if they set themselves against the Kings authority,
they will incense his Majesty above what the Parliament are able to defend
them, his Majesty having disclaimed the courses of the Parliament and resolved
to grant pardon to none that hold Arms by the authority of Parliament, (as
they pretend our forces there do) without the Kings consent.

By which means they have deluded many that would otherwise have taken part
with the protestant forces and the Parliament have of late been debarred from
sending into Ireland, whereby to clear themselves of those unjust accusations.

There was also certain information given to the Commons on Thursday last by
letters from the Adventurers forces in Ireland that they have lately taken at
Sea upon the Irish Coasts five ships coming from Spain with Ammunition and
other provisions intended to be sent to the Rebels in Ireland which prize is
valued to be worth at least 50000. pound in Bullion found in the said ships,
and Ammunition and pieces of Ordnance worth above as much more, all which is
now to be employed for the service of the Protestant forces there against the
Rebels.

There was 4. or 5. of the Lord Generals Troops that rann from their Colors
taken in London and Committed to Prison, and a company of Dragooniers were
appointed to carry them down to the Army there to receive Condign punishment
for their base Couardize according to marshall Law.

The House of Commons have drawn up an Order that there shall be Posts and
chains set up in all the Eminent passages in Coven Garden, Saint Martins,
Southwarke, and other places about the Suburbs for the better security in case
of any opposition.

It was also informed the Houses by letters from the Army that the King
refuses to exchang Captain Wingate for young Stranguage, but will either have
Captain Bampfeild, or 5000. pounds in money for his ransom.

It was also informed the Houses by letters from Holland that since the Queen
understood that Captain Stradling and Captain Kettlebeys ships were taken,
she has altered her purpose of coming to England, and sent into Erance for
her Almoner who is expected every day at the Hague and that he brings with him
certain propositions for the Queens going over into France.

That the States General and the States of Holland have had some bickering
about the Parliaments Declaration, the States of Holland declaring themselves
for the Parliament and desiring to hold a correspondency with them, the States
General declare themselves not as neutrall betwixt the King and Parliament.

Also informing that the Prince of Orange is come to the Hague upon occasion to
christen his young Daughter; but the States of Holland intend to call him to
an account concerning the aid which he has sent to the King, before he
departs from thence.

There was also a Letter presented for the Queen of Bohemia, expressing her
hearty sorrow for the proceedings of her son in England against the
Parliament, discovering their Accounts, and that they came not over hither with
any such purpose with her knowledge or consent, and therefore desires the
Parliament that in whatsoever they have offended, they may be strictly called
to an account for the same.

Upon Thursday night last the Earl of Bath, Sir Henry Berkley Sir Hugh Pollard
Sir Ralph Sidneham and some others, were brought up to London by the Earl of
Pembrooke and on Friday by Order of Parliament they were Committed to several
Prisons, Sir Edward Rdony Sir Edward Berkley and the Marquess of Hartfords
Chapline were brought to Town on Tuesday last and Committed to Prison.

And it was then informed the Houses from Dorset-shire, that 7. Troop of
Horse, and a 1000. foot of the Earl of Bedfords forces are gone into Cornwall
against Sir Ralph Hopton and intend very suddenly to join them selves to the
Lord Generals forces.

The adventurers for Ireland came to the Parliament and offered them that they
would take in Galloway at their own charges and maintain the forces there if
they might have a further allowance out of the Rebels land^ belonging to the
said place, which propositions were very well approved of by the Houses, and
ordered accordingly.

And it was then informed the Houses by letters from the North of Ireland that
Colonel Leish^y has given the Rebels a very great defeare before
Charlemount, that he has killed and taken Prisoners above 4000. of them, and
recovered the place from them, which is a very great victory, it being as
considerable a place as any is in that part of the Kingdom.

Upon Friday last also the Commons after long debate agreed ^n a vote That all
such as have refused to give or lend either ^orse moneys or plate upon the
propositions for the service of the King and Parliament shall be disarmed as
delinquents whereby they may be disabled from offering prejudice to the
Par^iament or Kingdom.

FJNJS

