Faults escaped, by reason of the Authors absence, when the Book was in
printing.

Page 6. l. 7. For Hepos, r. Nepos. p. 8. l. 27. for rules in r. rule is. p. 9.
l. 12. add may imagine. p. 33. marg. r. Ephesians. 5. 4. p 36. l. 1. r. many. l. 7.
r. continued. p. 41. l. 28. r. indicat. p. 54. marg. r. Demosthenes. p. 62.
marg. for hereof, r. hereof.

A TRVE RELATION OF THE PROPOSING, THREATENING, AND persuading the VINTNERS to
yield to the Imposition upon WINES.

DECLARING, The dislike of the Generality of Retailers, And whatsoever they
either did or suffered therein, was merely by compulsion.

AND Hereby is also truly set forth their great, and almost insupportable
Loss by this IMPOSITION.

Together with the extreme Wrongs and Injuries they have suffered in their
Arreare-Money, in their Meat-Money, and by MEDIUM-WINE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXLI.

A TRVE RELATION OF THE PROPOSING, THREATENING and persuading the VINTNERS to
yield to the IMPOSITION upon WINES.
THE Imposition upon WINES was proposed and required almost three years before
Alderman ABEL became Master of the Company; during which time it was always
strongly opposed, and refused by the generality of Retailers. And in the last
time of proposal before his being Master they utterly refused it, and chose
rather to lay themselves down at his Majesty's feet, and stand to his mercy
then to consent to that Imposition, and humbly gave in their Answer, that such
payment could not be made without the undoing and overthrow of them, their
Families and Trades, as appears by an Order entered in their Hall-Booke,
bearing date the 27th. of March, 1637. Hence appears the A book entitled A
true discovery, etc.
Discovery to be defective, and the Author thereof deceitful in the very
entrance of his Book, who would cunningly make the World believe that this
Project had its beginning on the 6th. of November. 1637. Therein subtly and of
purpose leaving out both the time of contrivement by the Alderman and Mr.
Kilvert, and also the time of resolute denyals by the Retailing Vintners, as
appears not only by this Order already named, but also by another bearing date
the 25. of October 1637. which Order does plentifully show Mr. Richard Kilvert
to have a prime hand in the work.)

In the Summer following Alderman Abel (being Sheriff of London, was made
Master of the Company, who did then call many Courts to press the yielding (as
he said) to the Kings desire in this Imposition. Amongst some of the first
Meetings there were reasonable great appearances, to whom the Alderman proposed
the matter, v^ry vehemently urging their consents (most especially) with two
sorts of Arguments.

The first consisting of many promises, viz. That the Promises:
King would pardon all former faults of dressing and selling victuals contrary
to the Decree of Star Chamber; of selling Wines above the rates (unknown who
was guilty of) and that (for the future) they should have privilege to dress
and sell victuals, to sell Tobacco, Beer, Sugar, etc. and be kept free from
the danger of informers, as also have the Coopers debarred from buying of
Wines, saying he had gotten the best and learned Counsel that could be
had for gold, who told him it was lawful, and that the King might put what
Imposition he pleased upon Wines, they being a foreign Commodity; and
further he said it should be for the good of the whole Company, and that
their Posterity after them, and the Child unborne should have cause to bless
God for them. But these persuasions failing, he sets upon them with

The second sort of Arguments consisting of diverse Threatenings.
fearful threatenings; namely, That they should be prosecuted for dressing of
meat contrary to the Decree, that they should be always perplexed with
Informers, and disabled to use their trades: That the King was resolved to
settle the Imposition whether they yielded or no, and this his resolution he
would not alter: Nay, he said further, That the King would as soon loose the
profit of his Crowne-land as that benefit; And that (if they consented not)
either the Merchants or Coopers would step in and allow it the King.) That the
Coopers had already Petitioned for it very earnestly, offering a great sum of
money, and pretending themselves better able then the Vintners to do the
Service: And that if the Coopers prevailed, the Vintners should become their
slaves; and still as any one spoke in dislike of it, the Alderman retorted most
bitter words, frowns and sharp rebukes As may by many be sufficiently
testified.
(able to daunt a weak spirit) causing to be put apart, and not permitting him
any further liberty of speech, telling them that when he was a young man they
durst not speak so saucily, or oppose the Master and Wardens; for if they did,
they should be sent away by an Officer to prison.

All these ways still failing him, and finding himself not able thereby to
prevail with the major part of the retailing Vintners, he ceased not to warn
them daily to the Hall, intending to weary them into a consent by his extreme
and importunate urging, notwithstanding their often resolute denialls,
whereupon they did then forbear to make their repaires, to the Hall so
frequently as formerly they had done to prevent his course and unsavory usage,
and this their slacknesse in appearing, did so vex the Alderman, that he
required those that were present to write down their names, that so notice
might be taken of those that were absent: whereby the Discovery is discovered
to be false, which says, in page 15. A greater number of drawing Vintners
appeared at those general Courts then has been known at any Court of former
times. And afterward at some such meeting, when the greatest appearance (for
the most part) were the Assistants, and other the ancient and chief of the
company (whose expectation of sharers in the profit, made them well affected to
the work) they got (if ever) this general consent pretended, expressed (as
they say) by the greater part than present holding up their hands. Those who
had no relation to their plot, and had formerly denied their consents, being
the greatest number of the Company were almost totally absent; and if any of
them that were then present did yield, it might be out of Ignorance, supposing
themselves bound to obey, the Alderman being Master of the Company, or out of
fear to offend a man so potent, he frequently threatening and menacing those
which opposed the work. These things considered, may convince those which
pretend the Retailers prosecuted it with such cheerfulness and earnest desire
that Alderman Abel did not, nor needed not to persuade them, as Discovery, page
10.

Moreover, upon every meeting of the retailing Vintners, they were not admitted
into their Court at their first coming (though it were after the hour
appointed) but were forced to stay below, sometimes two, three, or four hours
ere they were called up, in all which time the Contractors (doubtless) were
plotting and contriving how to obtain the others consent, and in what manner
to propose and accomplish their design: so when the rest of the Company were
admitted, the business was suddenly moved to them, who wanted such competent
time to deliberate thereupon, as the Alderman and Farmers had formerly allowed
to themselves.

But the Discoverer says, It was agreed upon by a general Court at the Hall,
that the common seal of the Company should pass to seal the Indenture;
whereupon, says he, what can be more plain then that this was the work of
the whole Company? page 14.

To which is answered, that there has been already a Certificate presented to
the Committy, whereunto is about 300. men's hands, all which are ready to
testify upon Oath that they never gave their consents to the passing of the
seal. Moreover, the Court so called to obtain their consents, were not
lawfully summoned; for, besides the Farmers and Assistants, the rest of the dry
Vintners were not warned, who had as much right to the Seal, and intrest in
the Hall as any other of the Company: so this was a warning of some Vintners in
particular, not of the whole Company in general; the truth of this has been
manifestly proved already; therefore by this it does not appear to the work
of the whole Company.

Nay Alderman Abels owne-words will prove it to be none of the Companies Work,
for at a certain time after his effecting of it, he took so much delight and
pleasure in it, that he clapped his hands upon his breast and said, I thank God
I have now brought that to perfection which I have been two years a working.

Furthermore, when the Alderman had wrought his ends, and a Proclamation came
forth commanding the imposition, both by Tonne and Quart to be paid; some
Vintners continued to sell for 6. pence and 12. pence, whereupon Alderman Abel
sent for them, and threatened one to shut up his doors if he would not change
his price and sell for 7. pence, and 14. pence, and would utterly disable him
for drawing of Wine; relating thereupon that he had (not long before) procured
an Order from the Council Table against one in the country, by virtue whereof,
he caused his doors to be shut up, and disabled him utterly for ever keeping
Tavern any more, only because he retailed his Wine at a penny a quart under
the Proclamation: and he threatened another, that he would set up a Tavern
right against his door to undo him, because he sold for six pence a quart.

And for those which did not, or could not pay the Imposition of forty
shillings a tun within a short time after he required it, he took out
Extents, and seized their goods, to their great and insupportable loss and
detriment, Insomuch that by his cruel threats and tyrannical dealings, they
neither durst refuses to pay the imposition, nor yet retaile their Wines at a
lower rate, than the Lords by their Proclaimation had limited. All these
things considered does make it evidently appear (as the truth is) that
Alderman Abell as he contrived and plotted the project cunningly, so he
prosecuted it earnestly to the very utmost in the acting thereof.

Losses to the Retailers of Wines.
Further, it may plainly appear that the Retailers (those only excepted that
had their shares in the Farm) are and have been great losers by this
imposition, for almost all the wines imported the last three years wanted much
of gage; particularly, in some of the French Wines there wanted 16. gallons
in the tonne, in others 32. 40. 48. 56. and 64. In some few Spanish Wines, but
eight gallons in most of them 16. 20. and 24. gallons; yet notwithstanding so
every two Buts or Pipes of Spanish wine, and every 4. undergag'd-hogs-heads of
French wines, the 40. shillings was completely exacted and paid without any
rebates for their wants, (by which it may appear that the Retailers have paid
about 50. shillings for every tonne of clear wine which they have bought)
besides the great quantities of Lees in them, and other several losses, as
leakage, both in carriage home, and in their cellars, spilling, long deeping,
eecaying, on their hands, bad debts, and their great damages by Mediums.

Also the Retailers were enforced for many of these wines to pay extraordinary
prises, far exceeding the Rates set down by the Lords; as namely, for some 4.
pound. 4. pound 10. s. 5. po. 5. po. 10. s. 6. po. 6. 10. s. and 6. po. 15. s.
and such like rates were paid and exacted more and higher than the allowance
from the Lords to sell at; to which may be added the several charges incident
unto them, yet for all this the Retailers never did exceed the price allowed by
the Lords and set out by Proclamation: all these particulars are manifest
trueths sufficiently known to all that are dealers in wine: whence the Author
of the Book entitled, A Discovery: is discovered to be Ignorant of these
things, or very impudent that shall offer to fill three of his pages so full of
untruthes, viz. page 25, 26, 27. Read, Compare, Consider, and Judge.

Wrongs and Injuries imposed by Alderman Abel and the Farmers.
1. In the Arreare Money.
Whereas the Proclamation gave them no power to receive or impose 40. s. a
tonne till the 11th. of June, 1638. at the soonest, yet these Contractors,
caused a search and view to be made the last day of May being eleven days
before, taken an exact account of the wines in all the Vintners cellars in
London, and in all other places within three miles compass of the ^itie,
though some of them had been bought long before, which account they kept upon
record till Vintage time. And when diverse of the Vintners had bought new wines
(without which their trades, could not be managed) they would not permit them
to carry them home without Tickets, which Tickets the Office would not grant,
although they paid the 40 s. a tonne, except they also discharged the Arreare
according to their account, or sealed bonds to discharge it, otherwise they
could not have home their wines to draw, (though they were already bought of
the Merchants and paid for) In this exigent either they must seal those bonds,
or themselves, their wives, children and Families, must be utterly ruinated in
the loss of their trades for want of wines to supply their daily Rent and
Customers; so they sealed those bonds; whereby they have been forced to pay
this Arreare Money as by their bonds taken appear.

2. Medium Wine.
Also they suffered very much by the great quantities of Medium wines enforced
on them being both very bad and very dear, whereby they were not only
hindered in their trades, but also much damnified in their reputation, in that
they were compelled to part with great sums of Money for these Mediums, and
were thereby disabled to keep day with Merchants of whom they had bought good
wines for time, and that time expired. The insupportable wrongs and injuries
thereby suffered (almost to the utter undoing of maney Retailers) has been
sufficiently manifested (not only by the imprisoning of many of them, but
also) by the several testimonies thereof made before the Committee.

The occasion of this Medium was that Invetterate malice and hatred that was in
Alderman Abel against the Coopers, that, and that only was both the begetting
of the Medium, and the very Original occasion of the Coopers restraint.

Also the contriving of the Medium, was the Aldermans work, as for the
Retailers, they knew not what it meant when he proposed it; whereupon he took
great pains, and spent much time in the explanation of it to them.

And himself, together with Mr. Griffith often pressed the consent thereunto
very earnestly with many persuasions, telling the Retailers it would prove as
small a matter as Fleabiting, etc. whereby it appears, that the Book
entitled, A true Discovery, is a discoverer of untruths, in page 19. and 21.

3. Meat-Money.
Lastly, the Six thousand pounds formerly disbursed by the Retailers for
dressing of Meat they could never yet get repaid them, though his Majesty
allowed it to the Atlerman and the rest of the Contractors: And for their
defense in so unjust a detention they allege for themselves two notorious
untruths.

First, that they were at 2000. l. charge to procure it, in respect whereof
they would pay but only 12. s. in the pound.

Whereto is answered; First, if that assertion were true (which is indeed most
false) yet two thirds of the Money remains good to the lenders which is xiij s.
iiij. d. in the pound.

Secondly, it is further answered, that the 2000. l. (which they pretend it
cost them to procure the said Money) they gave it merely for the obtaining
their Farm, as has been already proved.

In the second place, they allege that it was agreed at a Meeting in the Hall,
there should be only 12. s. in the pound repaid.

To which is answered, that at that meeting there were very few of the Lenders
present, and of them no general consent was obtained; as may evidently appear
by the Hall Book wherein (after the mentioning of some men's names then
present) there was entered these very words: Touching the Retribution, Division
happened, and not settled. And when the Court was dismissed, Alderman Abel and
Mr. Griffeth asked Mr. Child the Clerk of the Company, if he had entered down
the Order of yielding to take xij. s. ith'pound? he replied no, for it was not
agreed upon, nor ordered; they said it was, and the Alderman saidshe must find
such an Order, and would have forced him to make the entry: But he replied
again that it was unjust for them to require it, and more then they could
answer to detain the Lenders money, for they had no power to give away other
men's Estates without their consents: And because Mr. Child refused to enter it
as an Order agreed upon, they gave him very ill words both that day and diverse
times afterward threatening him, and said it was a good deed to have him turned
out of his place.

FINIS.

