Truth will out: A SERMON Preached on the 20th. of June, 1683. upon THE
DISCOVERY OF THE New PLOT.

By a Presbyter of the CHVRCH of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Manhood, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of
London, 1683.

TO THE READER.
PLotting Treason and Rebellion, and Machevilian Wilds, and Ahitophelian
Conspiracies to ruin Kings, and involve Kingdoms and Commonwealths, in
Confusion and Blood, has ever been the custom of ill men in all Ages of the
World, who besides a natural inclination they have to mischief and rapine,
which makes them delight to be fishing in troubled waters, are ambitious also,
and aspire to raise themselves to wealth and grandeur upon the public ruin;
and by Sacrificing all that is Sacred, to their ambitious desires, and their
insatiable thirst after an Usurped Rule, strive to acquire Honor and Renown,
and make their names swell and look big in the Rolls of Fame, by the hellish
Intricacy as well as the multiplicity and fatality of those Plots whereby they
vainly flatter themselves into a confidence, that they shall accomplish their
accursed Designs; yet no Age ever abounded with so many; nor can any History
possibly be produced, that is able to furnish us with a parallel of our times
wherein we live, which has abounded wonderfully, nay almost to an infinite
variety of those kind of Contrivances; for we have found by woeful experience,
that almost nothing else for several years together, has saluted our unhappy
and amused Ears, but Plots and Re-Plots, real Plots and sham-Plots. Plots to
Murder our Sovereign: Change the Government, and Destroy the Pestilent Heresy
that has so long Reigned in these Northern Parts; and then Plots to cover
those Plots, and prevent their Discovery; or if discovered, then to serve as a
sponge to wipe out and obliterate them. All which makes it a matter of
wonderful Intricacy, to know how to order and demean our selves, in such a
juncture as this is; But for thy better direction therein, I Commend thee to
the serious perusal of the following Sermon, and leave thee to the Protection
of Heaven; heartily wishing, That He whose Power is infinite, and whose Wisdom
and Goodness are both equal to his Power, would preserve the Kings Majesty, and
the English Nation from the fatal effects of All Plots and Conspiracies
whatsoever.

TRUTH will OUT, OR, A Sermon occasioned on the Discovery of the New-Plot.
HOSEA 10.2. Their Heart is divided, now shall they be found faulty.
CHAP. I. The Text opened, and suitableness of it to our Times, showed.
NO Marvail though Israel be charged, ver. 1. to be an empty Vine, seeing their
heart is divided. Heartdivision will cause emptiness of good, both in Men's
Spirits, and in Church and State. The least dividing of the Heart, in any one
part from another, if it be but by the prick of a Pin, is Deadly, a great gash
in the head is Curable. There may be much difference in Men's Opinions without
any great hurt, if this difference gets not to the Heart; but if once it gets
there, the danger is great, Now shall they be found Faulty; Now shall they be
Guilty, or as some Diaffected, Now they will Offend, as if Heart-division
contracted the greatest Guilt, and by it Men were the greatest Offenders of
any. The word signifies also to Perish, to be made Desolate, (...)
so Arias Montanus, Desolabuntur. Heart division is a Desolating Sin, by the
Judgment of God upon them for it, they shall be convinced in their own
Consciences, and in the sight of all Men, that they were Guilty; that by such a
Sin as this, they had bound themselves over to the Justice of God, and those
desolating Evils that came upon them, were the Righteous Judgments of God upon
them for those Divisions that were amongst them. Men will not be convinced of
their Sin, till Gods Judgment is upon them for it; and then their Consciences
will, and others shall see that God is Righteous, and they are vile and Sinful
before him, even in such things that before they pleaded for, or at least could
not be brought to own their own guiltiness in.

The Lord convince us of, and humble us for the Sinfulness of our Divisions, by
his Word, that Desolating Judgments be not upon us to convince and humble us.

That one Text, 1 These. 4.9. were enough alone to pierce our Hearts thorough
and thorough, as touching Brotherly Love, Ye need not that I Write unto you,
says the Apostle, for ye your selves are taught of God to Love one another. Oh
Lord, what are we in these days such kind of Christians as these were? Oh that
it were so with us, that we had no need to be wrote to, to be Preached to,
concerning this. Does it appear by our Carriages one toward another, that we
are Taught of God, To Love one another? But Beloved, that God may Teach us this
day, attend to what shall be said to you at this time, which I shall cast into
these five Heads: 1. Joining Principles. 2. Joining Considerations. 3. Joining
Graces. 4. Joining Practices. 5. Conclude with Exhortation.


Wherein we shall endeavor to set before you the Beauty and Excellency there
is in the Heart, Union, and Mutual Love of Christians. But I shall not need to
be long in these: For take away Dividing Principles, Dividing Distempers,
Dividing Practices, and be thoroughly convinced of the Evil of Divisions, and
one would think our Hearts should of themselves run into one another. But that
I may not seem to leave our Wounds open, so that Air should get into them, but
endeavor the closing of them, and so the healing, I shall Speak something to
these five Heads.

The First Joining Principle.
In the midst of all Differences of Judgment, and Weakness of the Saints, it is
not Impossible but that they may Live in Peace and Love together.
IF notwithstanding differences from Gods mind, and many weaknesses, there may
be Peace and Love between God and his Saints: then surely notwithstanding these
things, the Saints may be at Love and Peace among themselves. Let this be laid
for a Ground, and let our Hearts be much possessed with it, we shall find it
very helpful to our closing. Away with that vain conceit which has been the
great disturber of Churches in all Ages, if Men differ in their Judgment and
Practice in matters of Religion, though it be in things that are but the
weakness of Godly Men, yet there must needs be Heart-burning and Division. Let
all peaceable Men deny this consequence, let us not say it will be so, and that
our words may be made good afterward, indeed make it so: certainly the
connection of them, is rather from the corruption of our Hearts, then from the
Nature of the things.

I have Read of two Rivers in the East, Sava and Danuby, that run along in one
Channel threescore Miles together, without any noise, and yet they keep
themselves distinct, the color of the waters remain distinct all along: why
should we not thing it possible for us to go along close together in Love and
Peace, though in some things our Judgments and Practices be apparently
different one from another? I will give you who are Scholars a Sentence to
write upon your Study-doors, as needful an one in these times as any; it is
this.

Opinionum varietas, and Opinantium unitas non sunt (...).

Variety of Opinions, and unity of those that hold them, may stand together.

There has been much ado to get us to agree: we labored to get our Opinions
into one, but they will not come together. It may be in our endeavors for
agreement, we have begun at the wrong end, let us try what we can do at the
other end, it may be we shall have better Success there. Let us Labor to join
our Hearts to engage our affections one to another: if we cannot be of one mind
that we may agree, let us agree that we may be of one mind.

Eusebius Records a Letter that Constantine sent to Alexander and Arius, before
he apprehended the grosseness of Arius his Heresy, conceiving them to differ
but in smaller things, he endeavors to Reconcile them: For that (says he) the
things wherein you differ, concerns not any weighty substance of our
Religion, there is no reason why it should breed at all any Division in Mind,
or discord in Doctrine; and this I say not to compel you in this light
question, of what sort soever it be, altogether to condescend unto the same
Sentence: and though you Dissent amongst your selves about a matter of small
Importance, nevertheless for all that, the Sacred Unity may be soundly and
Inviolably retained among you, and one Consent and Fellowship conserved between
all.

I have Read of the like peaceable Disposition in diverse German Divines,
meeting to Confer about matters of Religion in difference in Marpurg. The
conclusion of their Conference was this, Although we see we cannot hitherto
fully agree about the corporal presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the
Bread and Wine, yet both parts ought to declare Christian Love one to another,
as far as any one can with a good Conscience. Oh that this were the conclusion
of all our Debates and Conference, wherein we cannot come up fully to one
another Judgments. If we stay for Peace and Love till we come to the Unity of
Faith in all things, we must stay for it, for ought I know, till we come to
another World. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. He gave some Apostles, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and Teachers, for the work of the Ministry, till we all come in the
Unity of the Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man. The
Unity of Faith, and the perfect Man, will be both together; and when they are,
there will be no more need of any Ministry, there shall be no more Preaching
after we are all come to this Unity: when that is done, our work is done for
this World.

The Second Joining Principle.
That should never be got by Strife, that may be had by Love and Peace.
WE would all fain have our wills: now that which lies uppermost upon many men's
hearts, that which is the first thing they do, if their wills be crossed, is
presently to strive and contend: but this should be the last thing, after all
other means are (...): this should never be made use of but in case of pure
necessity. We should first think, Is there any way in the world whereby it is
possible we may have our desires satisfied with peace, let us try this, and
another way, a third, a fourth, yea, a hundred ways, if they lie between us
and the way of strife, before we come to meddle with that. This rule you will
find of very great use to order all our businesses in Churches and
Commonwealths, of Towns, Families, yea, whatsoever concerns any of your
persons in reference to any other. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. Rebuking the
divisions of that Church, of which they were guilty more than any, for they had
many among them of raised parts, of Eminent gifts, and therefore puffed up more
then others. Except God joins Eminency of Grace, men of Eminent gifts join less
then others, whose gifts are meaner. Among those means he directs for union,
when he speaks of love: I will show you, says he, a more excellent way, ver.
last; (...), a way of the highest excellency, beyond any expression. The way of
Love, of the engaging hearts one to another, is the only way to bring men to
unity of judgment: yea, the only way when all is done, for men to have their
Wills. I may give you this or the other rule to bring you to think and do the
same thing, but that which has an excellency in it with an Hyperbole, is the
way of Love. If you could get your minds by other ways, certainly you cannot
enjoy it with that sweetness and comfort as you may if you have got it this way.

Marcus Cato repented that ever he went by Sea when he might have gone by Land
(it seems the skill of those times for Navigation was not great) but certainly
there is no man living but has cause to repent him that ever he got that by
strife and contention that he might have got by Love and peace. What hinders
why soft and gentle words may not prevail, as well as hard and bitter
language? If it may, thou providest ill for thine own peace and comfort, to
leave this way, and betake thy self to the other. Tell me, were it a sign of
valor in a man to draw his sword at every Whappet that comes near him? yea at
every Fly that lights upon him? Were it not folly and madness? Why? he may by
putting forth his finger put them off from him. Thy froward choleric spirit is
ready to draw at every thing that thou likest not. This is thy folly: thou
may with less ado have what thou have a mind to. If I would put a Feather
from me, I need not strike violently at it, a soft gentle breath will do it
better. Why should a man labor and toil till he sweats again, to take up a
pin? Have none of you made a great Stir in your Families about that which when
the Stir is a little over you plainly fee you might have had as well with a
word speaking: and has not your heart secretly upbraided you then? Try the
next time what you can do by fair and gentle means. Why should we let the
strength of our spirits run wast?

Plutarch reports of Philip of Mecedon, that when one Arcadion railed on him,
the Courtiers would have had him dealt severely with; but Philip took another
course, he sends for him, and speak gently to him, and showed great Love and
respect to him: upon this Arcadions heart was turned, so as there was no man in
the world that Arcadion spoke more Honorably of then of Philip, wheresoever he
came. After a while Philip met with those who would have had him to have
revenged himself upon Arcadion, What say you now of Arcadion? says he: How
does he now behave himself? There is no man living, say they, speaks better of
you now then he. Well then, says Philip, I am a better Physician then you; my
Physic has done that which yours would never have done.

The like he reports of Fabius, who was called the Romans Target: When he heard
of a soldier who was valiant, yet practi^ed with some others to go to serve
the Enemy, he calls him to him, and instead of dealing with him in rigor,
tells him he had not had recompense according to his desert, and gives him
Honorable gifts, and so gains him to be faithful for ever. And says he, As
Hunters, Riders of Horses, and such as tame wild beasts, shall sooner make
them leave their savage and churlish nature by gentle usage and manning of
them, then by beating and shackling them; so a governor of men should rather
correct by patience, gentleness, and clemency, then by rigor, violence, and
severity. None but a cruel, harsh, sordid spirited man, will say, I had rather
men should fear me then Love me: God prizes most what he has from us by Love.

The Third Joining Principle.
My good is more in the Public then in my self.
THe strength, safety, excellency of a Cabin in a Ship consists not so much in
the boards of the Cabin, or the fine painting of it, as in the strength and
excellency of the Ship.

It is because we have such private spirits that there are such contentions
among us: were we more public Spirited, our contentions would vanish. When I
read of what public spirits many of the Heathens were, I am ashamed to look
upon many Christians. Paulus Aemilius hearing of the Death of his children,
spoke with an undaunted courage thus, That the gods had heard his prayer, which
was, that Calamities should rather befall his family, then the Commonwealth.
The publikeness of his spirit made it very sweet and Lovely: the story says of
him, he entreated them gently and Graciously whom he had subdued, setting
forward their causes, even as they had been his confederates, very Friends and
near Kinsmen. Public Spirited men are men of sweet and peaceable Spirits.

The Fourth joining Principle.
What I would have others do to me, that I will endeavor to do to them.
WOuld not I have others bear with me? I then will bear with them. I would have
others do offices of kindnesses to me, I will then do offices of kindnesses to
them. I would have the carriages of others lovely, amiable to me, mine shall be
so to them. I would have others live peaceably with me, I will do so with them.
This rule of doing to others as I would be done to, is a Law of justice; such
justice as keeps the peace. Alexander Severus the Roman Emperor, was much
taken with this: he says, he Learned it from the Christians, if he had to deal
with his common Soldiers that did wrong, he punished them: but when he had to
deal with men of worth and dignity, he thought it sufficient to reprove them
with this sentence, Do as you would be done by.

Chrysostom in his 13. Sermon to the People of Antioch, makes use of this
principle, thus, After Christ had spoken of many blessednesses, (says he) he
then says, Those things you would have others do to you, do you to them: as
if he should say, There needs not many words, let thine own will be thy Law:
would you Receive benefits? bestow benefits then: would you have mercy? be
merciful then: would you be commended? commend others: would you be Loved?
then love. Be you the Judge your self, be you the Lawgiver of your own Life.
That which you hate, do not to another. Cannot you endure reproach, do not you
Reproach others. Cannot you endure to have others envy you? do not you Envy
others. Cannot you endure to be deceived? do not you deceive others.

The fifth joining Principle.
It is as great an Honor to have my will by yielding, as by overcomming.
MAny in their anger will say, I will be even with him. I will tell you a way
how you may be above him: forgive him, by yielding, pardoning, putting up the
wrong, you show you have power over yourself, and this is a greater thing then
to have power over another. Numb. 14.17, 18. Now I beseech thee, let the power
of my Lord be great; pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this People, ver.
19. and by this thou may Honorably prevail with thy brother: hereby shall
thou heap coals of fire upon his head.

I have read of two famous Philosophers falling at variance, Aristippus and
Aeschines, Aristippus comes to Aeschines, Shall we not be friends? says he, Yes
with all my heart, says Aeschines. Remember, says Aristippus, that though I
am your elder, yet I sought for peace. True, says Aeschines, and for this I
will always acknowledge you the more worthy man; for I began the Strife, and
you the Peace.

The Sixth Joining Principle:
I had rather suffer the greatest Evil, then do the least.
IF when others wrong you, you care not what you do to Right your self: This is
your folly and madness, such a one hurt me; and I will therefore mischief my
self; he has pricked me with a Pin, and I will therefore in an anger run my
Knife into my Side. If in all we suffer we be sure to keep from Righting our
selves by any ways of Sin, there will not be much peace broke. Such an one is
thine Enemy, and will thou of one Enemy make two? will thou also be an Enemy to
thy self, yea a greater Enemy then he or any man Living can be to thee? for all
the Men in the World cannot make the Sin, Except thou will thy self.

The Seventh joining principle.
I will Labor to do good to all, but provoke none.
A Father has not so much power over his child, as to Provoke him, Col. 3.21.
Fathers provoke not your children to wrath. Surely if a man has not this power
over his child, he has it not over his friend, his neighbor, much less his
superior: yet how many take delight in this, Such a thing I know will anger
him, and he shall be sure to have it! Oh wicked heart! do thou see that this
will be a temptation to thy brother, and will thou lay it before him? do not
thou pray for thy self and for him, Lord lead us not into temptation? we should
account it the greatest evil to us, of all the evil of afflictions, to be any
occasion of sin to our brother; but what an evil should this be to us, to
provoke our brother to sin? if we will needs be provoking, then let the
Apostles exhortation prevail with us, Heb. 10.24. Let us consider one another
to provoke unto love, and to good works: Let us not consider one another in a
way of curiosity and emulation, to envy, or find fault with one another, from
whence frowardness, pride, hatred, dissentions, factions may arise, says
Hyperius upon the place; but consider one another, so as we may further the
good of one another, so as to make one another quick and active in that which
is good.

The Eighth joining Principle.
Peace with all men it is good, but with God and mine own conscience it is
necessary.
BUt how will this join us one to another?

Answ. Very much, both as it holdsforth the goodness of peace with all men, and
as it carries the heart strongly to the making and keeping peace with God and a
man's own conscience. This peace with God and a man's own conscience will so
sweeten the heart, that it cannot but be sweet toward every one; a man who
has satisfaction enough within, can easily bear afflictions and troubles that
come without. When Saul had made great breaches between God and his soul, and
in his own conscience, than he grew to be of a very froward spirit toward
every man; before his Apostasy he was of a very meek and quiet spirit, but
this sowred his spirit, and made it grow harsh, rugged, and cruel; This is the
cause of the frowardness of many men and women in their families, and with
their neighbors, there are secret breaches between God and their own
consciences,

The last joining Principle.
Peace is never bought too dear, but by sin and baseness.
WE use to say, We may buy Gold too dear, and so we may peace: but whatsoever
we pay for it beside sin and baseness, we have a good bargain, Suidas tells of
the Emperor Trajan, that he would cut his own clothes to bind up the wounds of
his Soldiers. We should be very pitiful to soldiers, who are wounded to keep
us whole. We should bind up their wounds, though it cost us dear; but
especially, our care should be to bind up those wounds, that by divisions are
made in Church and State: and well may we be willing to cut our clothes to
bind them up, when the evil of them is such as either does or should cut our
hearts. But though peace be a rich merchandise, yet she must not sail too far
for it, not so far as to sin. We read 2 King. 23.13. Mount Olivet is called the
Mount of corruption, because of the Idolatry committed upon it. Though we are
to prize Mount Olivet at a very high rate, with the Olives growing upon it, yet
we must take heed that we make it not a Mount of corruption. We may give peace
to buy truth, but we may not give truth to buy peace. We may be bold with that
which is our own to purchase peace, but not with that which is Gods: yet we
must not be base in our yielding in things natural or civil for peace sake;
that is,

First, we must not for our own private peace yield to that which is like to
prove a public disadvantage and disturbance. There is a notable story of a
Turkish Emperor, perceiving his Nobles and people to be offended that he was so
strongly in love with his Concubine Irene, his heart was so taken with her,
that he grew remiss in his regard to the Stern of the State. Nothing must be
done but as Irene would have it: whatsoever resolutions there were of any good
to the State, yet Irene must be consulted withal before they were put in
execution, and if they pleased not her, all was dashed; so much did he dote
upon Irene. This the Nobles and State could not bear: he therefore at last so
far considered the public, as he overcame his doting affections. He brought
Irene before them, and says, That ye may see how much I prize the content of my
people, I sacrifice her to them, and so drew his sword, and slew her with his
own hands before their eyes. If according to her demerits for drawing his heart
away from the good of the commonwealth, she had been given up to the sword of
justice, it might have satisfied as well. But lest I be thought to be too
literal, give me leave to allegorize upon this Irene. Her name is a Greek name,
(...) it signifies peace: we must not so dote upon our Irene, our private
peace, that the public should suffer for the sake of it: This is baseness: let
her be sacrificed for public good; this is true generousness.

Secondly, that is baseness, when our yielding is through ignorance, cowardice,
base fear, not from a principle of wisdom and understanding: not so much out of
true love to peace, as a foolish, ignorant, sottish, sordid spirit of our own:
whereas had we had a spirit of wisdom and courage, we might have peace upon
more honorable terms. Indeed many think every kind of yielding, baseness, but
they are for the most part such as are not put to any great trial themselves;
but when our consciences tell us that what we do is what the Rule allows us; it
is not because we would avoid trouble, but we find through Gods grace, our
hearts in some measure prepared for suffering, if God were pleased to call us
to it, in any thing wherein he may have glory, and the public may be
benefited. But because all things duly considered, we see that God in such a
way shall have more glory, and our brethren generally more good: therefore
whatsoever becomes of our particular in regard of esteem, or other ways, we
are willing to yield, and in this we find our hearts as much closing with God,
enjoying communion with him in all holiness and godly fear, and in other things
that go as near to us, we are able to deny our selves as much as ever: in this
we may have comfort, that it is not baseness that makes us yield, but rather
the grace of God enabling us to rule over our own spirits. The peace that we
thus purchase with the suffering much in our names, and the loss of many
comforts does not cost us too dear.

Joining Considerations.
The first. The consieration of the many things wherein God has joined us.
GOd has joined us together as we are men: we are not dogs, not wolves, let us
not be so one to another: Act. 7.26. Moses speaks thus to those who strove one
with another: Sirs, ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one another? The words in
the Greek are, (...) men, yet are brethren. There is a consideration in this,
that ye are men: if there were no more, yet ye should not strive one with
another, but much more considering ye are brethren. If we be men, let us be
humane. What is the meaning of humanity, but courteousness, gentleness,
pleasantness in our carriages one toward another? But still the consideration
grows higher, as we are the same Countrymen, of old acquaintance, in the same
employment, of the same family and kindred, but above all, joined in such a
blessed root, the fountain of all love and peace. Ephesians. 4.4. presents this
consideration most fully to us. The reason the Apostle gives, why we must keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, is, because there is one body,
and one spirit, ye are called in one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all. Here you have seven Ones together in two or three
lines. It is very much that the Spirit of God should join so close together
seven Ones; surely it is to be a strong argument for us to unite

First, one Body. The meanest member, yet it is in the body. Is it comely for
the body of Christ to be rent and torn? any reference to Christ might persuade
unity, but union with Christ as the members with the body, what heart can stand
against the strength of this? What can cause one member to tear and rend
another, but madness?

2. One Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.11. that one and the self same spirit: he does not
only say, The same spirit; but, The self same spirit: and as if that not
enough, he adds One to the self same; and that yet not enough, he says That
one, all this is in ss the Greek, (...). The repeating the Article has a great
elegancy in it. And is not this one Spirit the Spirit of love and meekness?
What does a froward contentious spirit do in thee, who professest thy self to
be a Christian? What, says Cyprian, does the fierceness of Wolves, madness of
Dogs, the deadly poison of Serpents, the bloody rage of Beasts, in a Christians
breast?

3. Called in one hope. Are not you heirs, joint heirs of the same Kingdom, and
do you contend as if one belonged to the kingdom of light, and the other to the
kingdom of darkness?

4. One Lord. You serve the same Lord and Master. Is it for the credit of a
Master, that his servants are always wrangling and fighting one with another?
Is it not a tedious thing in a family that the servants can never agree? Mark
how ill the Lord takes this, Mat. 24.49, 50, 51. that evil servant who begins
to smite his fellow servants, provokes his Lord against him so as to come upon
him with such severity as to cut him asunder, and to appoint his portion with
the hypocrites, (...) he will dichotomize him, divide him in two; he by his
smiting his fellow servants makes divisions, but his Lord will divide him. It
may be he pretends that his fellow servants do not do their duty as they ought;
as if he were more careful of the honor of his Lord, then others who are of a
different way from him.

5. One Faith. What though we agree not together in some things of lesser
moment, yet we agree in one faith. Why should we not then keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace? The agreement in the faith one would think should
swallow up all other disagreements. We should rather bless God for keeping men
sound in the faith, then contend with them for lesser mistakes. When the
Pharisees, Acts 23.9. understood that Paul agreed with them in that great
doctrine of the Resurrection, they presently overlook his other differences,
saying, We find no evil in this man.

Master Calvin in his Epistle to our Countrymen at Frankford, fled for their
lives in witness to the truth, yet miserably jarring and contending one against
another there, to the scandal of all the Churches of God in those Parts,
begins his Epistle thus, This does grievously torment me; it is extremely
absurd that dissentions should arise among brethren, Exiles, fled from their
country for the same faith, and for that cause which alone in this your
scattering, ought to be to you as a holy band, to keep you fast bound together.
Their contentions were about Church-worship.

6. One Baptism. We are baptized into Christ's death, and is not that to show
that we should be dead to all those things in the world that cause strife and
contention among men? Our Baptism is our badg, our livery, it furthers somewhat
the unity of servants that they wear all one livery.

7. One God. Though there be three Persons in the Divine Nature, and every
Person is God, yet there is but one God; here is an union infinitely beyond all
unions that any creature can be capable of; themystery of this union is
revealed to us, to make us in love with union. Our interest in this one God is
such a conjunction, as nothing can be more.

Joseph's brethren Genesis 50.17. looked upon this, as having very great power in
it to make up all breaches, to heal all old grudges. After their Father was
dead, their consciences misgave them for what they had done to Joseph, they
were afraid old matters would break forth, and that Joseph would turn their
enemy; now how do they seek to unite Joseph's heart to them? We pray thee, say
they, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of thy Father; and the
Text says, Joseph wept when they spoke unto him. Oh this was a heartbreaking
speech to Joseph, The servants of the God of my Father; Shall my heart ever be
estranged from the servants of the God of my Father? The Lord forbid. Their
offense indeed was great, but their God is my God, and he was my Fathers God:
this argument had more in it to draw Joseph's heart to them, then if they had
said, We are your brethren, we came from the same loins you did: True, that is
something, but the servants of the God of thy Father is much more. Let us look
upon all the godly though thy have many weaknesses, though they have not
carried themselves toward us as they ought, yet they are the servants, yea the
children of our God, and of our fathers God; let this draw our hearts to them.
If they be one with us, in their interest in one God, let them be one with us
in the affections of our heart, to love them, delight in them, and rejoice in
communion with them.

One God and Father, Mal. 2.10. Have we not all one Father? has not one God
Created us?

Is it seemly that one man's children should be always contending, quarrelling,
and mischieving on another? do you think this is pleasing to your Father? It
follows in that of Ephesians. 4. who is above all, and through all, and in you all.
You have enough in your Father to satisfy your souls for ever, whatsoever you
want other ways; he is above all; he that is so glorious and blessed,
infinitely above all things, has put honor enough upon you, that he is your
Father; why will you contend and quarrel about trifles? He has absolute
authority to dispose of all things as he pleases; let not the different
administrations of his, to some in one kind, to some in another, be matter for
you to contend about. And he works in all.

You will say, If indeed we could see God in such, if we could see grace and
holiness in them, our hearts would close with them, but we see not this.

1. Take heed thou do not reject any from being thy brother, whom Jesus
Christ at the great day will own for his, and God the Father will call Child.

2. Suppose thou can not be satisfied in their godliness, yet the gifts of
the Spirit of God that are in them, should cause some kind of closing; common
gifts are of a middle nature, between nature and grace, as the spirits of men
are neither of the same nature with the soul, nor of the body, but between
both, and serve to unite the soul and body together, which otherwise are of
natures very different. The common gifts that men who are not yet sanctified
have, may and should cause some union between the godly and them while they
live in this world, so far as to be useful one to another in what God has
given them.

The second joining Consideration.
Let us consider how far we can agree.
WE differ thus and thus, but what do we agree in? do we not agree in things
enough, wherein we may all the days of our lives spend all the strength we
have in glorifying God together? Many men are of such spirits, as they love to
be altogether busied about their brethrens differences; their discourse, their
pens, and all their ways are about these, and that not to heal them, but
rather to widen them. You shall (...) hear them speak of, or meddle with their
agreements; their ^^^ength is not bent to heighten and strengthen them: if at
(...) time they do take notice of their agreements, it is to ^^ke advantage of
them, to render their disagreements the ^ore odious, or to strengthen
themselves in what they ^^ffer from them; they desire to get in men, and to get
from ^^em, only to serve their own turns upon them, this is an ^vil spirit. No
marvel therefore though some be so loath to ^iscover to them how near they can
come to them.

Pliny tells us of Apelles, that drawing the face of Antiochus the King who had
but one eye, that he might hide this deformity, he devised to paint him turning
his visage a little away, so he showed but the one side of his face: and from
him, says Pliny, came the invention first of concealing the defects and
blemishes of the Visage. But the Painters of our time are quite in another way,
if there be any deformity, or defect on any side, they will be sure to paint
that side in all the lineaments of it, that must be set forth fully to the View
of all men; yea if it may be made to look more ugly and monstrous then it is,
all the skill they have shall be improved to do it. But my Beloved, this ought
not to be: God does not so with us: he takes notice of the good of his
Children, but conceals their evil. There was but one good word in Sarahs speech
to Abraham, Genesis 18.12. she called him Lord, the speech otherwise was a speech
of unbelief, yet the Holy Ghost speaking afterward of her, in reference to
that speech 1. Pet. 3.6. conceals all the evil, and mentions only that reverend
title s^^ gave to her Husband, commending her for it. Thus should we do; had we
peacable hearts, thus we would do: All the good of our Brethren we would
improve to the uttermost, and what is evil, so far as with a good Concience we
might (and no farther) we would conceal.

When I shall see this temper in men's Spirits, I shall hope there will be
peace.

The third joining Consideration:
Let us consider of man's Temper, Spirits, Temptations, Education, Years, Gifts.
THere must be a due consideration of all these, and we must indulge something
to them all. This would allay much strife: as we read Numb. 31.23. Every thing
that may abide the fire, ye shall make go thorough the fire, and all that
abides not the fire ye shall make go thorough the water. We must deal with
every man according to his temper. Some men are by their complexions of a more
harsh and rugged temper then others. Consider what is the best way of dealing
with such: in the main they are faithful and useful; they will join with you
there, and spend their lives for you: if the harshness of their natures cause
some excrescencies, unpleasing carriages, consider their tempers, though no
evil in them is to be justified, yet deal tenderly with them, indulge them what
lawfully you may. Some men's spirits, though upright to God and you, yet they
have a fervor in them that is not qualified with that wisdom, meekness,
humility, as they ought, do not presently take these advantages against them,
that they in their heat may perhaps give you; do not fly upon them as if those
unjustifiable expressions that come from them, came from a spirit of malignity:
You know the man and the manner of his communication; pass by weaknesses,
accept of uprightness. Some men's temptations are very strong; it may be their
hearts are pressed with disappointments, it may be they are pricked with the
want of many comforts you have, they have family-temptations, and personal
temptations that you are free from: you do not know what you might do if you
were under the like temptations. Bless God that you are delivered from them;
but do not add to your brethrens affliction, by taking advantages against them,
but according to the rule of the Apostle, Gal. 6.1. If a man be overtaken in a
fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another burdens,
and so fulfill the law of Christ. Consider their education, some all their days
have lived in wicked families, they never were acquainted with the society of
the Saints, with that way of Godliness that have the most strictness and power
in it. You must not deal with them for all things you see amiss in them, in the
same way you would deal with such who have had godly education, who have had
acquaintance with the most strict and powerful ways of godliness, but now
manifest a spirit against them.

Consider men's years: old age looks for respect, and justly; especially such as
have gone thorough the brunt, and suffered much for your good: though some
infirmities should break forth that are incident to old age, we must cover and
pass by what we can, not forgetting that reverent respect that is due to the
heary head found in the way of godliness. Consider men's gifts: it may be they
are not able to rise to your height, to understand what you do; thank God for
your strength, but be not angry with your brother because he is weaker. This
was one of the arguments for peace that Constantine in that forementioned
Letter of his to Alexander and Arius, used; we are not in all things like
minded, neither have we all the same nature and gift ingrafted in us.

The fourth joining Consideration.
What we get by contention will never quit cost.
A Merchant thinks it an ill venture, if when he casts up his accounts he finds
the charge of his voyage rises to more then his incomes. If thou have so much
command of thy spirit, if thou can so far overcome thy passions as to get a
time in cool blood to cast up thy accounts truly, what good thou had done, or
what thou have got by such and such contentions; and on the other side cast up
what the hurt thou have done, what sin has been committed, what evil has got
into thy spirit, I fear you will have little cause to boast of, or rejoice in
your gains. To be freed from that expense that comes in by strife, is not a
little gain, says S. Ambrose. In strife you will find there is a very, great
expense of time, of gifts, and parts. Many men in regard of the good gifts God
has given them, might have proved shining Lights in the Church, but by reason
of their contentious spirits, they prove no other then smoking firebrands. It
may be by all the stir you keep you shall never get your mind; if you do, it
will not quit cost; the charge you have been at for it, comes to much more then
it is worth. God deliver me from having my mind at such a dear rate.

The fifth. Consider how the heart of God is set upon making peace with us, and
what it cost him.
GOd was in Christ reconciling the world to himself: this work has taken up
the thoughts, counsels, heart of God from all eternity above any thing that
ever he did: this is the chief masterpiece of all the workers of God. There is
more of the glory of God in this, then in all that God has done. This is and
shall be the object of the admiration of Angels and Saints, the matter of their
praises to all eternity. The heart of God was so in this, that he was resolved
to have it whatsoever it cost him; it cost the dearest that ever any thing in
this world did; yea the price of it was more then ten thousand worlds are
worth: it was no less then the blood of the Son of God, of him who is the
second person in Trinity, God blessed for evermore. Col. 1.14. In whom we have
redemption through his blood who is the image of the invisible God, the first
born of every creature: by him were all things created, he is before all
things: by him all things consist, in him all fullness dwells: and having made
peace through the blood of his Cross, ver. 20. What God has done for peace
with us, calls aloud to us to prize peace one with another. It is the Apostles
argument, 1 John 3.16. He laid down his life for us, we ought to lay down our
lives for the brethren. It cost his life to make our peace with God. We should
be willing to do any thing we are able, even to the hazard of our lives, to
make peace among the Saints. Christ laid down his life even for this peace
also, Ephesians. 2.14. For he is our peace who has made both one, and has broke
down the middle wall of partition between us, having abolished in his flesh the
enmity, to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace, and that he
might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross. Christ reconciles both
unto God: but how? it is in one body. Lay this Consideration warm at your
hearts, and it will comfort your hearts, and so preserve and increase peaceable
dispositions in you toward one another.

The Sixth. Consider the presence of God and of Christ.
OUr God, our Father, our Master, our Savior, stands by looking on us. It is a
most excellent passage that I find in an Epistle of Luther to the Ministers of
Norimberg. There were great divisions amongst them: he writes to them that he
might pacify their spirits one toward another. Suppose (says he) you saw
Jesus Christ standing before you, and by his very eyes speaking thus unto your
hearts, What do you, O my dear children, whom I have redeemed with my blood,
whom I have begotten again by my Word, to that end that you might love one
another? Know that this is the note of my Disciples. Leave this business, ye
wholly cast it upon me, I Will look to it, there is no danger that the Church
should suffer by this, though it should be stilled, yea though it should dye,
but there is a great deal of danger if you dissent amongst your selves, if you
bite one another: Do not thus sadden my spirit, do not thus spoil the holy
Angels of their joy in heaven; am not I more to you then all matters that are
between you? then all your affections? then all your offenses? What? can any
words of a brother, can any unjust trouble penetrate your hearts, stick so fast
in you as my wounds, as my blood, as all that I am to you, your Savior Jesus
Christ? Oh that we had such real apprehensions of Christ looking upon us,
speaking to us!

The Seventh. Consider what account we can give to Jesus Christ of all our
Divisions.
WHen Christ shall come, will you stand before him with scratched faces, with
black and blew eyes? 1 These. 3.12, 13. The Lord make you to increase and abound
in love one toward another, and toward all men: To what end? To the end,
says the Apostle, he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before
God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his
Saints. It will be a sad thing to be found in our divisions, at the coming of
Jesus Christ. Mat. 24.50. the coming of Christ is mentioned as a terror to
those who shall but begin to smite their fellow servants. We may wrangle and
stand out one against another in our contentions now; but it will not be so
easy to answer Jesus Christ, as it is to answer one another. In the Name of
Jesus Christ I now speak unto you, yea as from him charge you, let no
inconsiderable reason move you to contend with, dissent or separate from your
brethren, but live together in Love and Unity.

The Eighth. Let us consider our mortality.
IT is but a little time we have to live; shall the greater part of it, nay why
should any part of it be raveld out with cont^ntions and quarrels? I have read
of Pompey, that upon a time passing over diverse hills, where there lived many
people in caves, but their order was that the man lived in one cave and the
wise in another; he asking the reason, they said, In those parts they live not
long, therefore they desired that the little time they did live, they might
have peace and quiet, which they had found by experience they could not have,
if man and wife live constantly together. Though the means they used for their
quiet was sordid, yet the good use they made of the shortness of their lives
was commendable. Vilgil says, if swarms of Bees meet in the air, they will
sometimes fight as it were in a set battle with great violence; but if you cast
but a little dust upon them, they will all be presently quiet. Sprinkle upon
your hearts the meditations of death, that within a while this flesh of yours
will be turned to dust, this will quiet you.

The Ninth. Consider the life of heaven.
THere is and will be perfect agreement there. We are here as Bees, flying up
and down from flower to flower all day, but at night they come all into the
same Hive; That is a place where Luther and Zuinglius will well agree: Shall
not we whom God from all eternity has ordained to live coheirs in heaven, to
join together in praises there, agree together here on earth?

CHAP. III. Joining graces.
1. Wisdom.
THe deepest seas are the most calm, so men of the deepest judgments are most
quiet. A man of understanding is of an excellent spirit, Prove. 17.27. or thus,
is of a cool spirit, for so the word signifies; his spirit is not heat with
passion, there is a cool dew of examination and deliberation upon his spirit,
he weighs the circumstances, consequences, and issues of things; he orders and
disposes of things so, as jarrs, contradictions and oppositions are prevented.
The wisdom that is from above is pure, peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, James 3.17. Reason and Wisdom have a majesty in them, and will force
reverence. Let passion reverence the presence of Reason, says Basil, as
children doing things unseemly are afraid of the presence of men of worth.

2. Faith.
1. THis unites us to Christ and God, and in them to one another.

2. Faith commits all causes, all fears, injuries to God.

3. Faith lays hold upon, and improves those gracious promises that God has
made to his Churches for union. Faith sues out the Bond.

4. Faith is able to descry the issue of troubles and afflictions; Though Sense
says, It will not be, Reason, It cannot be, yet Faith gets above, and says,
It shall be, I descry land: and thus it quits all in the soul; all being quiet
there, the turbulent motions that are in our spirits one toward another are
soon quieted.

3. Humility.
COloss. 3.12. Put on as the elect of God, bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind. Ephesians. 4.2. With all lowliness and meekness, and
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace. Philip. 2.3. Let nothing be done through
strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem others better
then himself. We may say of Humility, as Tertullus, Acts 24. said of Felix, By
thee we enjoy great quietness. An humble heart looks upon every truth of God as
infinitely above it self, therefore it is willing to receive it from any; a
child may lead it, Esa. 11.6. One Baldassar, a German Divine, writing to
Oecolampadius, has this notable expression, Let the Word of the Lord come, let
it come, and we will put under six hundred necks if we had them. Such a
disposition as this would make much for peace. Esa. 32.18, 19. we have a
promise, that the people of God should dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in
quiet resting places, and the City shall be low, in a low place. When the heart
lies lowest, it is quietest.

4. Self-denial.
THe joints in the body cannot join, but one part must be hollow, and give way
to the other. Condescension of one to another is a principal thing in
friendship. Phil. 2. the example of Christ emptying himself, and making himself
to be of no reputation, is set before us as an argument for our union, that
therefore we should do nothing through strife, be like minded, having the same
love, and be of one accord, and one mind. It is indifferent to a heart emptyed
of Self, whether it conquers, or be conquered, so Truth may triumph. In other
conflicts the Conqueror has the honor, and the conquered is disgraced; but
in the conflict for truth, both conquered and conqueror are honorable; the
mercy is the greater to him that is conquered, but he must have a self-denying
heart to make him think so.

5. Patience.
THe Olive, the Emblem of Peace, will continue green, though overflown by the
waters for a long time together. After Noah had been so long in the Ark, the
Dove brought an Olive leaf in her mouth to him. It may be an emblem of Patience
as well as Peace. Patience and Peaceableness are near akin. Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
Long-suffering is amongst the graces, where the unity of the spirit is to be
kept in the bond of peace.

There is a notable story I find in the lives of the German Divines: One Vitus
Theodorus a Divine, sends to advise with Melancthon what he should do when
Osiander preached against him; Melancthon writes to him, and beseeches him for
the love of God, yea charges him, that he should not answer Osiander again, but
that he should hold his peace, and behave himself as if he heard nothing. Vitus
Theodorus writes back again, This was very hard, yet he would obey. Let not men
be too hasty to oppose oppositions, but let them go on patiently in a constant
way, resolving to bear what they meet with, and God at length will make their
righteousness break forth as the light. Confute evil reports by thy life. He
that knows not to bear calumnies, reproaches, injuries, he knows not how to
live, says Chytraeus, another German Divine.

6. Joy in the Holy Ghost.
Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of Heaven is righteousness, peace, joy in the Holy
Ghost. This grace in the heart puts a grace upon all a man's conversation; it
makes it lovely and amiable. The beams of the Sun shining upon the fire will
put it out; The beams of this spiritual Joy will put out the fire of our
passions.

7. Meekness, Gentleness.
MIlk quenches Wildfire, Oil (says Luther) quenches Lime, which water sets on
fire. Opposition will heat, will fire men, when meekness and gentleness will
still and quench all. Cicero says, Sweetness in speech and carriage is that
which seasons friendship; severity in every thing and sadness must not be among
friends in their converse; such a kind of carriage may have a seeming gravity,
but friendship must have a remisness, it must be more free and sweet, disposed
to all mildness and easiness, Ephesians. 4.2, 3. Meekness comes in as a special
grace for peace and unity, so Col. 3.12.

8. Love.
THat is the special uniting grace; Faith indeed has the pre-eminence in our
union with Christ our head, but Love is the Grace that Unites the Members. 1 Corinthians. 13. the Apostle shows many of his Fruits of this Grace, all tending to
Union and Peace; It suffers long, it envies not, it is not puffed up, it
behaves not it self unseemly, it seeks not her own, it is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil, bears all things, believes all things, hops
all things, endures all things; Bearing all things, and Enduring all things
seem to be the same, therefore some would have it, it covers all things, for
so the word also signifies; but there is a greater elegancy in it in the
Translation, Bears all things, it is like the cross main Beam in a House,
supporting the whole Building; and were it not for some who have the love of
God and his truth, and the good of the public, enabling them to undergo what
they do, all things in Church and State would be ready to fall into confusion,
to be nothing but a heap of Rubbish, but this Love enables to bear all things:
But if they have no encouragement, but see that tho they hazard themselves
never so much, be of never so great use, do the greatest Services that can be
expected from men, yet when men's turns are served, they are little regarded,
but envyed and narrowly watched. 4. Spy out any thing that may have some show
of excepting against them, and left to shift for themselves as well as they
can, when they might justly expect a greater reward of their Services, yet are
disappointed, their hearts are grieved; but yet because they are acted by a
principle of Love to God, his cause, the public, they therefore still hold
out, go on in their way, labor to be as instrumental as they can for good,
commit themselves and all their endeavors to God, expecting encouragement from
him, and so they endure all things; such men are worth their weight in gold;
here is a heart that has much of the Spirit of God in it: God is love, and he
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him: No marvel though these
men act so swiftly in their way; no marvel though their motion in public
service be so speedy, for their Charet is like that Charet of Solomon's, Cant.
3.10. The middle thereof is paved with love, and this is for the daughters of
Jerusalem: Now the love of God be for ever with these his servants, the
blessing of the Almighty, and all his Saints, be with them, upon them, in them
and theirs for ever.

These with other uniting graces that might be mentioned, are the graces that
God expects should be in a special manner acted in these times; and this is in
a holy manner (...), to serve the time, as some Copies have it, Romans 12.11.
This is the most suitable work for the times wherein we live. What is more
seasonable for divided times than uniting graces? and that union that comes
from the acting of these graces, is a spiritual, holy, truly Christian union, a
raised union to a far higher pitch than any natural excellencies can raise
unto. It is an excellent saying of Clemens Alexandrinus, If the spiritual man
be in us, our humanity is fraternity. What then is our fraternity? it is raised
to that which has no name to express it: The union of the Saints in heaven is
beyond the union of fraternity; this which is of grace is of the same nature.

CHAP. IV. Joining Practices.
The first, the practice of the Tongue. Gentle Language.
A Soft answer turns away wrath, Prove. 15.1. In your disputes let your
arguments be as hard as you will, but let your words be soft. Soft words and
hard arguments make a good dispute: Gentle language gains much upon the hearts
of men, 1 Chronicles. 28.2. Hear me my Brethren, and my People, says David: This
was better, and tended more to union between King and People, than the ruggid
churlish answer of Rehoboam, My Father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to
your yoke: But what came on it? Ten Tribes were rent from him; as good a man as
he could say, Hear me my Brethren and my People: Good words are as cheap as
bad, gentle courteous language is as easy as rough and bitter, Genesis 49.21.
Napthali is said to give goodly words, sayings of goodliness or fairness; so
the Hebrew has it, that is, fair, pleasing words; this Tribe were fair spoken
men: Now compare this with Deuteronomy. 33.23. There Napthali is said to be satisfied
with favor, and full with the blessing of the Lord: Fair, courteous language
has an acceptance among men, and the blessing of God is with it.

The second joining Practice. Be ingenuous. 1. Do not lie at the catch to take
advantages. 2. Make the best interpretation of things you can.
IF God should catch advantages against us, what would become of us? This is
most unseemly, when men are seeking to find out truth, if then they shall
piddle about words, catch at phrases, get hold of Expressions, and seek to make
their advantages out of them; and in this shall be the greatest strength of
their answer, though this may have a specious show before men, who are willing
to receive any thing which makes against what they would have crushed, yet this
will (...) abide before the throne of Christ. We read Matthew. 4. Christ had a
great dispute with the Devil, in which he had him at great advantage in his
quotation of a Scripture, ver. 6. He shall give his Angels charge concerning
thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash
thy foot against a stone. This was quoted out of the 91. Psalm. ver. 11. there
it is, He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways.
Yet Christ did not catch this advantage, he did not so much as upbraid him for
leaving out that passage, which he might justly have done, but he answers to
the thing. Yea Christ might have taken a further advantage against the Devil,
for the words following in the Psalm are a Prophecy of Christ destroying the
power of the Devil; Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion
and the Dragon shall thou trample under thy feet. Christ did not take the
advantage of this neither, and upbraid him with it, he had enough against him
in the thing it self he brought. It is a sign that men have less advantage in
the matter, when they seek so much to catch at all the advantages they can in
the manner of the expressions of those whom they oppose.

2. Make the best interpretation of things you can, 1 Cor. 13.5. Love thinks no
evil. It may be if you meet with a man in the streets, if he stays not to talk
with you, if he takes not special notice of you, you presently think it is his
pride, his sleighting, disregarding you, this is the worst interpretation that
can be. Why? is it not possible that it may be thorough multitude of business
in his head that you know not of? May it not be that his eyes and thoughts were
another way? he did not take notice of your passing by him; is it not thus
often with your self in respect of others? Again, perhaps such a man you find
not in his behavior toward you when you are with him, looking so smilingly
upon you, carrying himself in that familiar affable way as you expected; you
presently think and say, Surely it is his pride and surliness, whereas it may
be it is because his head is fuller than yours, which may afterward be for
your good, if you would be but patient a while; it may be it is from some
trouble of his Spirit at that time; it may be it is from the temper of his
body, his constitution, or some weakness in it at that time; if such a fair
Interpretation may be made, why should not an ingenuous candid spirit mke it?
This very exception I find was taken against Basilius Magnus, and Nazianzen in
one of his Orations, in which he highly commends Basil, answers it, and
justifies him; It is hard to keep unity, love, and peace with men who are of
exceptious carping dispositions; if God were strict to mark what we do amiss,
what would become of us? God is strict to mark what good there is in his
Saints? if there be any little good in the midst of much imperfection, Gods way
is to pass by the imperfection, and take notice of the good; but our way is
often, if there be a little bad, though but through a very pardonable mistake,
in the midst of much good, to pass by all the good, and to seize upon the
mistake, to make it the seed of contention, to brood over it, and so beget the
brats of Contention from it.

The third joining prastice: If you will needs be striving: strive who shall do
one another most good, who shall engage one another in the most and greatest
offices of love.
THis is a good combat; such striving as this is, God and his blessed Angels
look upon, and take much delight in.

I find a notable story in the life of Alexander the Great, which may put on
and encourage Christians in such a combat as this: There was a great King in
India, his name was Taxiles, who on a time came to salute Alexander, and said
unto him, What should we need to fight and make Wars one with another, if thou
come not to take away our water and our necessary commodity to live by, for
which things men of judgment must needs fight? as for other goods, If I be
richer than thee, I am ready to give thee of mine; and if I have less, I will
not think scorn to thank thee, if thou will give me some of thine. Alexander
being pleased to hear him speak thus wisely, embraced him, and said unto him,
Think thou that this meeting of ours can be without fight, for all these
goodly fair words? No, no, thou have won nothing by them, for I will fight and
contend with thee in honesty and courtesy, because thou shall not exceed me in
bounty and liberality. So Alexander took diverse gifts of him, but gave more to
him.

Oh that our contentions were turned into such contentions as these are! Let us
rejoice in any opportunity of doing any Office of love to those we differ from,
yea to those who have wronged us. It was wont to be said of Archbishop Cranmer,
If you would be sure to have Cranmer do you a good turn, you must do him some
ill one; for though he loved to do good to all, yet especially he would watch
for opportunities to do good to such as had wronged him. Had we but a few
leading men of such spirits among us, how great a blessing of Peace might we
yet enjoy!

Lastly, pray much.
PLiny says of the Pearls they call Unions, though they be engendered in the
Sea, yet they participate more of the Heavens than of the Sea. Certainly this
precious Union, though it be amongst men, yet it has its luster and beauty,
yea its very being from the Heavens. You must look up to Heaven therefore for
Peace, for the preservation, increase, luster, beauty of it if you would have
it.

Job 25.2. God makes peace in his high places, the Lord can make peace between
high and low. Let us carry men's rugged, crooked, perverse hearts to God in
Prayer, who is the great joyner of hearts; it is he that makes men to be of one
mind in a house, he makes the wars to cease. Psalm. 122.6. Pray for the peace
of Jerusalem. In your prayers for the Church this must be mentioned as a
special blessing. If praying prevail not, fighting will not. Those are the most
peaceable men in Church and Commonwealth, that pray most for the peace of
them; God has more prayers for the peace of this Church and State upon the
file, of theirs whom some of you, beloved, account hinderers of it, than of
yours. You complain much for want of peace, you inveigh much against those whom
you are pleased to mark out as hinderers of the peace, but do you pray as much?
You have these means presented unto you for the furtherance of peace; what
other you may meet with any way, make use of. 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. The Lord of peace
give you peace always by all means.

And that all may be the better improved, let the exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. sink into you, Study to be quiet, the words are, Love the honor
of being quiet: There is great excellency in it.

CAP. V. Exhortation to peaceable and brotherly Union, showing the excellency
of it.
AND now, my brethren, as the Eunuch said to Philip concerning his Baptism,
Here is water, what lets but I may be baptized, I shall say concerning our
uniting in peace and love one with another. Here are Joining Principles,
Joining Considerations, Joining Graces, Joining Practices; what now lets, but
that we may join in love and peace one with another? surely nothing can let but
extreme corrupt, perverse hearts of our own.

The Apostle Paul is mighty earnest in his desires, in his exhortations for
this: 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment. The word translated perfectly joined, signifies such a joining, as
when a bone is out of joint, is perfectly set right again.

So Philip. 2.1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies,
fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind, let nothing be done through strife, etc. The Apostle pours
forth his Soul in this exhortation, it is a heartbreaking exhortation.

Luther, though a man of a stirring, hot spirit, yet writing to the Pastors of
the Church of Stratsburg, has these words: I pray you be persuaded, that I
shall always be as desirous to embrace concord, as I am desirous to have the
Lord Jesus to be propitious to me.

I find also in a Letter that Martin Bucer writes to a godly Minister, a very
high expression of that high esteem he had of and earnest desires after the
curing of divisions: Who would not (says he) purchase with his life, the
removing that infinite scandal that comes by Dissension? Oh that there were
such hearts in us! Christ expects it from us all, but especially from his
Ministers, for they are his Ambassadors for peace, to beseech men in his stead
to be reconciled to God; reconciliation with God will reconcile us one to
another: If God so loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1 John 4.11.
The faces of the Cherubims in the Temple looked one toward another, which some
think signified the agreement that should be amongst Ministers of the Gospel.
So the six branches in the Candlestick joined all in one; those who hold the
light of truth before others, should be united in peace in one, amongst
themselves. The first thing Christ's Ministers were to do when they came to any
place, was to say, Peace be to that place; if any sons of peace were there,
they were to abide, otherwise not: Surely then it is expected that themselves
should be sons of peace. The contentions of private Christians are offensive,
but the contentions of Ministers is a scandal with a witness.

Genesis 34.21. The great commendation that Hamor and Shechem give of Jacob and
his Sons as an argument to persuade the men of Shechem to join with them in the
giving their Daughters to them for Wives, and in taking theirs, is, These men
are peaceable with us. A peaceable disposition is very convincing.

Cant. 6.6. My dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her
Mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her. What then follows? The
Daughters saw her and blessed her, yea the Queens, and the Concubines, and they
praised her; Who is she that looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon,
clear as the Sun, terrible as an army of Banners? Let the Saints be but one,
and then they will appear beautiful and glorious indeed, yea they will be
terrible as an Army of Banners.

Euagrius in his Ecclesiastical History records an Epistle of Cyrill of
Alexandria, written to John of Antioch, upon the occasion of a Pacificatory
Epistle of John unto him, his Spirit was so taken with it that it breaks forth
thus: Let the Heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad, the mid-wall of
rancour is battered down, the boiling choler which bereaved the minds of
quietness, is purged from among us, and all the occasion of discord and
dissension is banished away, for our Savior Jesus Christ has granted peace
unto the Churches under Heaven.

Lastly, the Saints enjoyment of the sweetness of love, peace and unity among
themselves, what is it but heaven upon earth? Heaven is above all storms,
tempests, troubles, the happiness of it is perfect rest. We pray that the will
of God might be done on earth as it is done in heaven; why may not we have a
heaven upon earth? this would sweeten all our comforts, yea all our
afflictions. But the Devil envies us this happiness. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

FINIS.

