A TRVE RELATION Of the late VICTORY Obtained at NORTHAMTON: Against the
MALIGNANT Army, on Tuesday the 9th. of MAY. 1643.

Together with An exact Recital of the names of diverse Prisoners of remarkable
note taken in the said Battle, and the true number of them that were slain.

As it was presented to the PARLIAMENT by the usual Post on Thursday; the
11th. of this present Month.

LONDON, Printed for I. P. in the Year. 1643.

A True Relation of the late Victory obtained at Northampton against the
Malignants on Tuesday the ninth of May.
THe Malignant Army under conduct of the Earl of Northampton, and Colonel
Young were with about sour thousand Horse and foot the sixth of May before
BANBVRY. but being there Valiantly repulsed came from thence with much
disgrace, and marched toward BRACKLY on Sunday where they continued before the
Town until Monday morning, but the Country coming in such abundance, there
intentions of assaulting that Town was made frustrate and without doing any
harm were enforced to march away and turn there foot Army into dragoones for
their speedy March, and directed their Course toward the Town of NORTHAMPTON,
the Country rising in every place and pursueing them, but they obtained their
purpose in coming to the Town before they could be overtaken; upon which
their approach the Town prepared themselves for their entertainment, and sent
to a Town called Ashton 8. Miles from thence within two miles of TOCETUR,
where part of the Lord GRAYES forces were quartered for their assistance and
coming to their aid.

On Tuesday the Malignants set themselves in batalia against the Town and gave
a present assault with great fury and outward show of Courage, on the South
side of the Town, between Hardingstone and Northampton in the plain by
Queens Cross, where they amounted four pieces of Ord^ance against that part
of the Town, upon which the Townsmen and Parliaments forces therein recharged
the Malignants with great Magnani^ity and valuor, making the Cannons fly from
the South-gate called Barge-Street end, and from the Castle which standing upon
a hill on the west side of the Town, they discharged Cannons which over shot
the Town, and just reached the enemy and made great spoil amongst them, the
fight had not continued above 2 hours but the Country came in and the forces
of the Lord GRAY, and begirt the Cavaliers on their back which they perceiving
would have fled, but could not, and were enforced to fight nolence volence or
yield themselves, and having fought it out above six hours, yielded themselves
to the Parliaments forces many of them privately run away which were upon the
left wing of the Army.

In this fight were slain of the Malignants 8. hundred men, of the men of note
were Collonell Young, Collonell Elmes, Captain Sanders, Captain Willoby,
Coronet Mouutague, Coronet Williamson, Lievetenants Wilson Rogers, Morton
Blewart the rest Common Souldies, six Colors taken, four Pieces of Ordinance,
1000 Arms, and three wagons of Ammunition, of prisoners were taken about 600
men of quallity Collonell Ockenham, Captain Winch Captain Bromsted, Captain
VVittenbutge, Corronets Osboen, Ashton, Wilton, Lievetenants Makwell, Croshy,
Craven, and diverse others, the Malignants being thus vanquished and Routed, and
the Town setleed public thanksgiveing was given in the Town for that victory,
and the Parliaments forces being well refreshed with victual were ordered to
return to their several places of trust and stations, in their particulars
and respective guards.

Of the Parliaments forces were not slain above 40. and not one of note, as is
certainly informed, this relation was received from good hands and men of
worth.

Many Gentlemen also of quality, and pious deviues, to wit Master Ball of
Northampton, Master Perne, Master Bollefant, and diverse others have sent diverse
Letters to their friends in London, in which they have related this battle
but not so sadly, therefore J omit the recital thereof, these proceedings
makes it manifest that the cause of God is by them undertaken and maintained
and is great encouragement to the good party to go on in their enterprises, and
fear not the power and force of the advarsaries and enemies to peace and
Tranquillity, no power is able to resist the power of God, vain is the strength
of man, weak is the Arm of flesh* unless strengthened by God, what man then
that has such experiences from time to time of the protection of the almighty
the overthrow and confusion of his enemies* the great Victories atcheiud by
such small means as in outward show has bin obtained by the Parliaments
forces in most Parts of the Kingdom, but would adventure willingly his person
and plat^ in the defense of such a cause, which has God it is patron if God be
on our side who can be against us. All the plots and machnations of the
Malignants are still by divine providence, discovered and avoided, none of
their council, have bin observed to take any effect but have bin brought to
naught and the shame therefore has lied upon their own heads.

Thus much of the fight at Northampton. which if the success happen to the
Parliaments forces in other parts of this Kingdom which God grant an end of
these present wars many sudenly be expected, for the Malignants cannot long
cutinue in any considerable strength having no hopes of increasing their Army
any further, the universally desert their actions and cleve to the Parliament
only the principal of their forces consist of Gentry Malignants, who will not
adventure their persons in any fight, only their purses and estates which if
common soldiers cannot be gotten for their money, they cannot expect to hold
ou^ long, unless foreign aid may be admitted to enter the Kingdom for
their assistance which is not once to be immagined if the same can in any waves
be prevented and avoided, much news is spread abroad of a late fight obtained
in Yorkshire against the Queens Army by the Parliaments forces but the truth
thereof cannot be certainly affirmed, till the next post, the residue of the
Malignants escaped from Northampton, and are reported to be gone to join with
Prince Rupert his Army, who intends very shortly to march against Northampton
to reveng the disgrace of his soldiers now received their and threatons to do
much mischief in the country in his march but the Lord Gray is resolved to com
into that County to aswayge his fury and inveterate malice against the
Protestants and Parliaments Forces.

FJNJS.

