MEDITATIONS Divine and Moral By H. T. M: A: and sometimes of St John's
College, Cambridge.

Give ear to my words, o Lord, consider my Meditations.

Ps. 5.1 LONDON Printed for Robert Gibbs at the Sign of ye Golden Ball in
Chancery Lane near Serjants Inn 165^

MEDITATIONS.
I
A Good Preacher should be a good Orator. Pure language and Sound doctrine may
well stand together. Bad Rhetoric will mar the Text, which a gentle
paraphrase can make both plain and pleasant. Oratory though it do not
constitute a Divine in his Essence, yet it makes him powerful in his speech.
The word of God is not the (...) words of A^^, and (...) ^ ciples prove more
effectual by a gracious utterance. Divinity is the Queen and the Mistress of
all other Sciences; and it is sit that such a Sovereigne should be dressed in
stately Robes. The Minister is the Ambassador of Heaven, and shall he present
his message in a scurvy Style? his expressions may be clear and yet Eloquent. A
sentence well clothed does not perplex, but help the understanding, and
quicken the memory. What reasonable Hearer can sleep at a Sermon composed by a
wakeful brain? An Elaborate phrase should make our ears glow and stir up our
attention to a diligent admiration. An affectation of Eloquence in the pulpit
is unhandsome; but fit allusions and significant terms are both comely, useful,
and necessary.

II.
There is much difference betwixt knowledge and true wisdom. Learning sometimes
makes men very fools. It Is true indeed, that the Arts and Sciences are the
riches of the soul, but without a discreet use no better then a treasure either
prodigally spent, or superstitiously kept under lock and key. Some have grown
more wise by experience than others by their deep study and revolution of
Authors. They that want most do not always catch most; and oftentimes a natural
wit far excels the greatest industry. Labor does but rack the brains, and
often overturn it. The most learned are so far from a solid understanding, that
many times they fall into madness the extremity of folly. Men's writings for
the most part are full of formality, but their actions speak the proper sense
of their minds. Books commonly are nothing but phrase, and style, and fancy;
but the soakest instructions proceed from Example. He that has no other way to
discover himself but by the Pen, will prove an object of more scorn then
admiration. Much reading is a great hindrance to good breeding; and hence it is
that the best Scholars are such perfect clowns. The truth is, the deepest
apprehension, the quickest judgment may be very ignorant in the matter of our
conversation both toward God and toward man. Learning of it Self is neither
grace nor manners, though it may be an Ornament to both.

III.
When I behold some rare picture or any other curious piece, my judgment
presently informs me that some curious Artist had a hand in it. Every stately
building directs us to the consideration of him that built it. And shall not
the contemplation of the world and the knowledge of so many excellent things
therein contained, constrain us to acknowledge a Supreme power that overrules
all? The Ship cannot sail in a direct course without a Pilot: the City cannot
be well governed without a Magistrate: and can any man conceive that those
lights of heaven, the Stars could continue their equal courses without his
providence that made them? or that the earth could remain so well ordered by
Natures Law, if there were not some overruling Lord to command and direct? He
is but dim sighted that cannot behold the omnipotence of God, the goodness,
the favor, and love of God to man in this outward frame and fabric of created
powers; Yet the Sun will shine though men be blind, and the invisible Deity
is still himself, though the Atheist will not believe it.

IV.
Friendship if once broken is hardly made up again. Those things which are of a
most pure composition if once dissolved are never united. Pieces of crystal
cannot be sodered: so hard it is to reconcile them, who from close familiarity
are divided into mutual hatred. Where is there greater enmity then betwixt
Brethren? whom Nature has linked together, the Devil can divorce into
everlasting discord. The Reason of this (I conceive) is, because the best
things corrupted become worse: and when virtue it self shall degenerate into
sin, who can hope for any reparation or recovery to goodness?

V.
Too much desire of learning leads a man into a discontented ignorance.
Curiosity is the bain of our souls, the nurse of infidelity. He that would
know more then he can, will not believe so much as he ought. He that thrusts
himself into unnecessary speculations, will first neglect, and at last forget a
necessary truth. He that strives for more then he can well apprehend, may lose
what he has already obtained. A modest search into the secrets of nature is
both easy, pleasant, and profitable; but to dive into the depths of an
impossible Art will but puzzle and distract the brain. An inquisitive soul may
go far, and find out much; but still he shall see more ground before him
then he has left behind. Some men that would seem to understand all things,
are most ignorant. A curious inquiry puts them into a vain conceit of their
own strength and parts, the only traitor to the understanding. The beams and
light of the Sun refresh the sight; but if we fix our eye upon it, the object
offends, and but dazels the beholder. He that knew most, Eccl. 1.14
knew that the upshot of all was but vanity and vexation of Spirit.

VI.
We are naturally more sensible of Affliction then of comfort. Haman is more
troubled with one cross from Mordecai, then satisfied with all the reverence
of his Adorers; which yet proceeds from an over-valuation of our content:
whence it is that we are so affected in the loss or least interruption of our
happiness; presently struck dead if our expectation be deceived. David cries
out for his son Absolon, 2 Samuel 18 33
as if the whole frame of nature had been involved in his destruction, when for
his own sake he had more reason to be transported with passions of joy. Here
was not only an excess, but a misprision of love; a mistake of natural
affection. He was so swallowed up with the sense of his supposed misery, that
he knew not how to value a good turn. The Object of his fond delight did
suppress the clearness of his judgment, that he could not distinguish betwixt
a benefit and an injury. So apt are we to repine at our crosses from too much
indulgence to our delights, that commonly we take one for the other.

VII.
Idleness is the barrenness of the soul. All living creatures have by nature
some kind of employment, the benefit of which is communicated to the rest of
the world. The worst things have some goodness, and are still busied in some
active engagement for a general use and profit. Plants and herbs which have no
visible motion advance themselves by degrees into a fruitful state and
condition. The creature without life, is not without action. With what a brave
carere the shining Sun spreads his diurnal pace? And how the sister Moon in a
constant change follow this leading dance? How nimble is the fire, how piercing
is the air? How the Sea rowles about with perpetual waves? All which may teach
man a lesson of laborious diligence, and raise him from the lethargy of a
non-imployment. Laziness corrupts both the body and the mind. Nothing can be
so tedious and irksome as to want business. Exercise keeps the heart in tune,
and feeds the spirits with a lively sense, whereas doing nothing disorders the
brain, and starves the quickest wits into a dull discontent.

VIII.
Boldness is an Ornament to a virtuous man: but when it is put on to boulster up
a vicious act, nothing more odious. Bashful virtue it is a foolish sin, and bold
vice is a sinful bravery. Too much modesty intangles the soul with many
impediments; and over-daring drives headlong into infinite dangers. Remorse for
sinning is a divine grace, but to be ashamed of goodness is the next way that
leads to impiety. How many good natures have betrayed themselves for want of
courage to deny an unreasonable importunity? As I would not stubbornly reject
the worst request, so I shall never grant the bent without some intimation of
power in the liberty of a denial. I will neither accept nor afford any thing
in such a manner, but that the world shall see, I could easily forbear to
confer, and as easily refuse a benefit.

IX.
If a man were nothing but all ear, yet a boundless tongue would tire his
patience. And commonly those that are tedious in their discourse, are also
impertinent. He that regards his matter, will not strive for words. He that
loves to hear himself talk, considers not what will please others. How was
poor Horace tortured with the shuffling shifting voice of Crispinus! Like the
scraping of a trencher, or the noise of a drum to a learned Student, such are
the ill sounds of a talkative mouth to a judicious hearer. The teeth and lips
seem to be drawn out as a circle to keep in the slippery speech; which must
needs run some hazard when it runs too far without these lines of
communication. But if a present danger cannot fright the secure speaker, I wish
those that love to speak much would Mat. 12.36
consider that one day they must give an account for every idle word.

X.
It is an easy task to censure another. Hardly any thing can be undertaken
without some mistakes. No man can express himself so exactly, but a censorious
critic will find matter enough to work upon. We may easily spy a fault where
there are many virtues. It is not always a part of wisdom to discover a folly.
Ignorance is a busy fool that would seem wise by condemning others, when it
knows least it self. He that is always raking in ashes will but foul his own
face; and he that seeks to diminish the credit of his neighbor, may cast a
blemish upon his own reputation.

XI.
There are certain birds of Paradise which make the best music in a Cage. The
sweet singer of Israel was most full of melody in his greatest Afflictions.
David could bless God in a cave, Job on the dunghill. The prison sometimes is
the Saints Quire, where the heart is at liberty, while the body is under
restraint, and their very groans are acceptable notes of praise and benediction.

The good man's sorrow is never without some joy. Our very hope can afford us
songs of deliverance. When our heavenly father makes up the consort, who can
forbear to tune his voice and keep time with him? Heaven and happiness waits
upon them that with patience attend his leisure. Gods presence translates the
Dungeon into a Sanctuary, turns Babylon to Jerusalem, captivity into triumph.
Our Jaylors are our lifeguard, our enemies our servants, since they serve but
as instruments to his will upon us, who is indeed our Master. He is happy
enough that can patiently expect salvation. As the Mariner keeps under
hatches till the tempest be allayed, so our present misery is nothing but a
safe retiring till all dangerous storms be blown over, and we arive at last to
the Haven of our Rest.

XII.
In experience I shall observe this Rule; rather spend too little then too
much. For covetousness there may be some satisfaction, but the Prodigal is lost
beyond all Redemption. He that spends above his abilities will never be able to
make himself amends. I had rather deceive the expectations of others, then
cosen my self. He that strains his estate to be accounted liberal, may be
thought covetous when all is spent: for the world is most apt to censure those
that decline their former course. Give God his due in Tithes, the poor in
Alms, and thy self in Necessaries, and there will remain no great
superfluity of wealth to cast away in vanity.

XIII.
Our joys in this world do not always run smooth and clear. The best
Contentments have some kind of muddy mixture; the sweetest cup has some Lees
at the bottom. Our outward peace is frequently interrupted; our inward peace is
oftentimes eclipsed. Here is no constant satisfaction in this Region of
vicissitude. Our comforts are neither full nor permanent. We must look for that
happiness in heaven. Who would live in this vale of brittle earth where every
thing consumes, and nothing is everlasting? In the highest advancement some
clouds will overshadow us. In the height of joy, there may be a depth of
sorrow. There is a kind of connection in contrarieties. Here prosperity and
adversity are linked together. It is said of Hezekiah after his glorious
victory over the host of Zenacherib, Isa. 38.1.
that in those days Hezekiah was sick to the death. Those days are these
days, and all days in our sphere, where the greatest blessings are
perpetually attended with some discontents, and such sometimes that sickness
or death would be a blessed remedy.

XIV.
Nothing makes the work of God in the compositions of our bodies more admirable
then the beauty of their shape and curious Art used in the workmanship. For
this cause the Royal Prophet considering his Creation cries out as one ravished
with admiration, I will praise thee, Psalm. 139.14
for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. No image or picture can be compared
with the form of a man's body: no imbroydered piece can be so well wrought, or
set out with such variety of excellent figures. But when we consider that
besides, there is a soul enclosed in this exquisite frame, as far above it as
that above all other things, we cannot be so unthankful or unreasonable as not
to acknowledge that the divine hand of heaven has a peculiar influence of
benediction and favor to the race of mankind, beyond all other Creatures
whatsoever.

XV.
In every work, we are to regard as well the manner of performing it, as the
work it self. It is not enough to say our prayers, to go to Church, to hear a
Sermon, to receive the Sacrament, to gives alms; but all this must be performed
with hearty devotion. Though the Ark be brought to his place of Rest, yet God
is not well pleased to have it drawn with Oxen in a Cart. 1 Samuel 6.
The widows two mites were more acceptable then all the others wealth: she gave
all she had with all her heart, whereas they perhaps out of pride, or
ostentation, cast in their superfluities into the common treasure. A cup of
cold water freely given shall not want a reward. Matthew. 10.42
Our best services are nothing worth if not seasoned with truth and discretion.
Therefore God once made a breach upon his people, because they sought him not
after the due order. Our duties are undutiful if not duly marshalled and fitly
ranked. Service without a method is worse then ill manners. No action can be
well done without a good meaning; none well meant without a comely and decent
behavior. Every circumstance must bear the sense of sound wisdom and clear
justice.

XVI.
Beauty is a grace that proceeds from the proportion, agreement, and harmony of
things; it is then most seemly in the body of man when it follows nature alone
without any blemish or defect. How far we may use the help of Art, and disguise
a deformity to appear more comely then we are by our Creation, a sober
Christian may easily resolve. As God is not pleased if we mangle and ma^erate
our bodies with cruel tortures, so he cannot but be offended when we
over-garnish them with gaudy colors, and lay on the varnish of a deep
complexion. It is to be feared that they can hardly speak from their heart,
that cannot blush from their own blood. When the face can dissemble so well,
the tongue may be suspected too. A painted feature is the emblem of vice, which
would seem to be adorned with the blushing colors of virtue, when she intends
nothing but temptation. We are not to disfigure our faces when we fast in our
greatest sorrow; nor reform them too much when we feast in our highest mirth;
we must not mar Gods work; we must not mend it so as if it should need no
additions of glory hereafter.

XVII.
Wicked men judge of other men's afflictions by their own. 2 Samuel 1.
The Amalekite was very well pleased with the death of Saul; and therefore
thought the news would be welcome to David, for which, instead of a reward, he
lost his life. It sounds very ill in David's ear that his enemy was destroyed;
though he stood betwixt him and a Crown. He desires not to rise in his Throne
by the fall of another. He finds no matter of joy in a Kingdom got by blood.
Thus different are the thoughts of a good soul from the vain conceits and
imaginations of a worldly mind. Therefore they deceive themselves that measure
the disposition of others by their own standard. The giddy drunkard thinks the
world runs round as well as his brains. The vicious man accounts virtue an
impossibility, and will not be persuaded that there is any such thing indeed as
conscience or Religion, till at last woeful experience constrain him to confess
the truth with too late Repentance.

XVIII.
The prosperity of wicked men may breed in weak minds some doubt of Gods
providence. They live as if they had a security for everlasting happiness.
Whereas virtue lies unregarded, and contemned, assaulted with continual storms
of misery. The bold sinner never misses of preferment, but modest innocence may
starve without compassion. How seldom do we see any preferred for his
deserving qualities? Villainy is so much in fashion, that it is absurd to be
virtuous. It Is true, Vice is the gallant of this world, and the only favorite
of fortune; but our observation may yet inform us, that shame is the consequent
of sin. There are few exorbitant crimes but have their attended torments,
though not always apprehended. Both punishments and blessings have their
season of maturity. The Judgments of God never fail, though they may be
protracted. Some corrections are in secret. All offenses are not branded with a
public mark. If there were no other torment but the guilt it self, it were
enough to express the misery of a sinful life.

XIX.
The soul in respect of the body may be compared to an excellent Workman, who
cannot labor in his occupation without some necessary instruments, and those
well wrought and prepared to his hand. The most skilful Musician cannot raise
any harmony from an instrument of music out of tune. We are therefore to be
very careful of these external parts, since the spirit which moves in them can
naturally produce no actions of worth, if this instrumental frame be out of
order. Hence it is that those men who abuse their bodies by the violence of
intemperate sins, are sometimes over-taken, either with a sleepy dullness, or
a wild distraction. Their souls are not able to produce any worthy Act after a
defect contracted upon their Organs, or else are unwilling to be restrained and
confined to a bad lodging, or a loathsome dungeon. A good servant is a credit
to his Master: a fine case is an Ornament to the jewel: a sound body is an
honor to his immortal mistress, and is most fit to be a partner with her in
everlasting glory. Whereas we may justly fear that they who bury themselves
alive in rottenness, shall inherit nothing but that which is worse then
corruption, a generation of perpetual torments.

XX.
It is strange to see what alterations time will make. Those works which were
built to perpetuate the memory of our Ancestors, are now laid level with the
dust, how miserable were man if all his happiness consisted in the remnant of
a glorious Name! and yet this was all the immortality which some expected after
death. The strongest Bulwarks of Renown cannot resist the breath of
all-devouring age. Change and decay are the elements of every state and
condition. The most ancient monuments and bones of the dead have been defaced
with sacrilegious hands. There is so little certainty in what we enjoy, that we
cannot hope to bequeath an infallible substance to our posterity. We may
sometimes observe more changes in a few years, then in all probability of
expectation many ages could produce. The world is like a Lottery where a man
may be made or undone in a moment. The same person is Craesus to day and Irus
tomorrow. There is no confidence or assurance in any worldly thing; we can
neither recall what is past, command what is present, nor prevent what is to
come.

XXI.
Amongst all those varieties of instruments made for the service and use of
man, we cannot but admire the great nobility and worth of speech, with which he
is endued above other creatures. By this we can convey our counsels and
thoughts to one another, without this there would be but little benefit of the
sense and understanding which God has bestowed upon us. Beasts have a confused
noise, and by that in some measure can declare their meaning: but men only can
dispense an articular sound. We have reason therefore to be careful how we
deliver our selves, and utter our conceptions in such words as may tend to the
edification of others, and the glory of our Maker.

XXII.
Asa was a very good son of very bad parents. Goodness proceeds from the favor
and grace of God, is not born with us, nor yet conveyed into our hearts by
breeding and strict education. The best instructions are often rejected; and
the worst principles cannot corrupt that heart which the holy Spirit is pleased
to sanctify. If men could entaile their virtues with their estates, what a
world of glorious Saints would this world afford? On the other side, if vice
were hereditary, what swarms of wickedness would still increase? In all events
whether of good or evil, let us always admire the gracious providence of our
heavenly Father.

XXIII.
He that has but a mean fortune must be careful not to plant himself amongst
his Superiors, for great men always suspect the endeavors of those that are
below them; and fearing their own greatness may be supplanted in time, prevent
such a suspected mischief with the ruin of their neighbors. Power and Majesty
can brook no equals. A rich neighbor is compared to a Pyke, that devoutes all
the younger Fry. Pharaohs fat-kine eat up the lean. And the Sea swallows the
smaller Rivers. The poor live best with the poor, as Bees thrives together in
a swarm. But the sheep are in continual fear when the wolf is near.

XXIV.
Religion and riches seldom meet together. They that are kept down with such
cloddes of earth can hardly reach at the joys of heaven. The Rich-man is so
puffed up with the leaven of his wealth, that he cannot enter in at the
strait-gate, and the way thither is too narrow for his spreading greatness.
Poor Lazarus was advanced to the bosom of Abraham, while Dives lay frying in
the bowels of Hell. Grace and abundance are not always inconsistent; but
Poverty has fewer temptations, and less danger. Nay even in this world, plenty
does but cross content; and he that has all things to his mind, yet wants a
mind to enjoy all he has. Fear of loosing, care of preserving, envy of
neighbors, opposition of enemies, so disturb his rest, that he cannot truly
say, soul, take thy ease here, or soul, go to heaven hereafter.

XXV.
God and the world never agree in the measure of time. The purpose of his will;
not the motion of the Sun determines his hours. Did we set our wills by his
decree, Gods clock and ours would always strike together. Our affections are
poised with the weights of self-love and ambition, which move too fast in
regard of our true necessity which he only respects. The least delay seems
tedious to an hasty mind, the longest is but short to the patient soul. Think
not then that he is slow who never fails in the hour of his promise, though
he answer not the very minute of our expectation.

XXVI.
Presumption is the harbinger of destruction. When men grow wanton in their
sins, judgment is not far from their elbows. 1 Samuel 15.32.
Agag cries out most sweetly, the bitterness of death is past, when ready to be
hewed in pieces. When his hopes were at the highest pitch, Samuel laid him even
with the ground. The candle makes the greatest blaze in the socket, but
presently expires with an unwholesome smell. The bold sinner is most confident
at his latter end, but that confidence betrays him to the power of utter
darkness.

XXVII.
He that begins well gives a good hope of his future proceedings. Yet the first
actions of men do not always entaile a perpetuity of grace. Perseverance is a
rare and emiment virtue. Ioash and Nero were two virtuous Princes under two
excellent Tutors; but very bad Kings both, their after reigns did utterly
disprove their former subjection. He that is rightly instructed in his youth
will do something worthy of his education; but those precepts which our
Masters distill into the brain, are not ever rooted in the heart. Time will
wear out the impression of goodness made upon our tender years, if not
preserved and blessed by the secret insinuations, and continual motions of a
divine spirit.

XXVIII.
It is impossible to gain the good opinion of all the world. Let my
conversation be never so innocent, there will be found some detractors to
undervalue my reputation. If I do ill, the virtuous cannot love me; if well,
the wicked must needs be my enemies. He that can clearly avoid the strokes of a
censorious tongue has more wit then honesty, and may be presumed to comply
with all occasions to maintain his credit, and in that loses what he so
slily endeavors to preserve. I shall labor therefore to approve my self to
God and my conscience; and let others say what they please: my own innocence
is my own satisfaction.

XXIX.
He that sowes the wind, reaps the whirlewinde. Bad actions are only
fruitful to destruction. Wickedness is always attended with death. The end
still answers the beginning. We cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thistles. He that means to thrive, let him use those means to which the
Providence of God adds a blessing. For what can any man expect but wages
answerable to his work? The evil of sin, and the evil of punishment go hand in
hand together; but grace and goodness are united with everlasting glory.

XXX.
Sin in the very act may be full of pleasure; but it always leaves a sting
behind it. The guilt and horror lies close a while in ambush, and then starts
up to surprise the offender. The devil leads us in a dance to hell, and so
leaves us to our ruin: like a crafty strumpet that with her flattering outside
draws in the secure sinner to his own destruction, fits him with a fine disease
in the rear of his delight. Vain man! How is folly ingraffed to thy very
nature, that having so often tried the deceit of vice, wilt yet give credit to
her pleasing smiles, and be thus courted to a miserable downfall.

XXXI.
The want of things makes them precious. We are scarce sensible of a benefit
which we enjoy. Before possession we think our selves miserable; and when our
desires are satisfied, we grow weary of our happiness. The fond lover can
court his Mistress with Oaths and Protestations, whom afterward he esteems no
better then his necessary drudge. A poor man knows the value of a penny, when
the rich Prodigal throws away his pounds. How sweet is Liberty and Redemption
to the Captive? Health and strength to the diseased? We are eager for those
blessings which are denied us, and unthankful for those which we obtain. The
apprehension is still fixed upon the object which is absent, as not thinking
that which is present worth a serious and steadfast view. But certainly that man
is most true to his own content that can rightly value a blessing enjoyed, and
comfortably use those favors which God and nature have bestowed upon him. As I
would not overvalue any thing, least I be too much affected with grief in the
loss, so, I will learn to know the just price of what I have, least my desire
of more increase beyond all measure of satisfaction.

XXXII.
Those of the ancient Philosophers that were great admirers of Eloquence have
propounded the image of an Orator, as it were of one who in speaking drew out
the golden chain from his tongue, and fastened it to the ears of his Auditors.
Such virtue and power it has to hold men to moderate and guide their
affections; such is the pleasing violence of a few well placed words, that our
desires seem to be captivated and bound up to the will of the Speaker. Truth
indeed is truth though it be plainly delivered; Religion can oblige the soul
without these glorious bonds: yet when the daughter of time, and the mother of
peace appear in their handsome Robes, the heart must be very stubborn and
obstinate that will not yield it self a willing slave.

XXXIII.
There is no design be it never so wicked but is masked with a pretense of
some good: for that which is absolutely evil, and plainly appears so to be,
has no agreement with the will of man: and therefore the worst mischiefs are
commonly set on foot under a color and shadow of goodness. Vice is like a
painted strumpet which seems extraordinary fair and comely, when perhaps there
is rottenness in the bones, as well as deformity in the soul. Treachery and
mischief have always a pleasing outside, whereas virtue for the most part goes
plain and naked. Well may that man set himself out that has nothing lovely
within. Wickedness if it be not courtly, will never be courted. And the ghastly
visage of sin, if it were not covered with an handsome veil, could never tempt
men to forsake their own freedom and become the servants of so vile a
Mistress.

XXXIV.
I will be kind and courteous to all, but familiar with none but my intimate
and equal friends: for the love of inferiors oftentimes degenerates into
contemp^. Yet I had rather my carriage should savor of too much humility then
overmuch state: for the affections which proceed from popularity are not so
dangerous as those passions of fear and envy which always attend the proud. I
will not think my self too good to look upon any man; but I will be sure that
he whom I receive into my bosom acquaintance shall be at least as good a man
as my self.

XXXV.
The death of a Martyr is attended with much glory and renown: who would not
willingly embrace and entertain that profession which is more precious then
life it self? The condemned innocent has sometimes converted the unjust Judge,
and by a glorious eluctation over-thrown the malice and envy of his
adversaries. Eternity is the reward of every true Christian: yet they that die
for Religion think they purchase heaven at an easy rare. The lively voice of a
powerful preacher is not armed with such effectual Eloquence. They that will
not be won with words, cannot but admire the cheerful Rhetoric of their
constant resolutions. The Roman ensigns never spread so far as the Christian
standard: and those Red-characters have confuted the Egyptian learning. If we
cannot maintain this Doctrine with the loss of life, it is in vain to teach it
with the expense of breath. But how far are they out of fashion that study to
disgrace it with both; and cannot be persuaded to entertain this profitable
instruction within the verge of their opinion or practice.

XXXVI.
As we cannot live without eating and drinking, so it is requisite that we
receive our sustenance with that moderation that no more be taken in then is
necessary for the nourishment and refection of our bodies. If we take too
little, we are guilty of Theft and Robbery upon our selves; if too much, of
violence and oppression, and instead of satisfaction impose a burden upon the
flesh, and for preservation induce destruction; but the danger that falls out
by not observing a mediocritie is more to be feared on one side then the other.
Our appetite is more apt to offend in the excess then in the defect. They that
use their daily bread as Gods blessing, cannot transgress either way; but like
a skilful Chemist that can refine his gross materials into a pure quintessence
by the Art of sobriety, temperance and gratitude, are wont from their bodily
food to extract a diet for the soul which shall feed and preserve it to
eternal life.

XXXVII.
A counterfeit zeal will degenerate into malice. There are no such Enemies to
the House of God as those that seem to be the greatest friends. A professed
adversary to the Church may be avoided; but a close enemy will not discover his
hatred till it be too late to resist. Thus mischief can walk in the disguise of
Religion; and Envy plays the Jesuit in a holy mask. I will always suspect his
heart whose tongue flames with sacred words, when wanting their fit
opportunities, and delivered in a hasty fit of devout passion. Prove. 7.16
Be not righteous overmuch is good Counsel. For Extreme purity will turn at
length into manifest impiety.

XXXVIII.
There can be no condition of peace allowed to our souls, except, while we
remain here in this earthly Garrison, with our utmost strength and power we
resist the rebellious corruption and tyrannical enforcements of sin. Some
learned Critics would have Peccatum, sin, to be derived from Pecus a Beast;
Properly enough if we consider the nature thereof: for by that we degenerate
into a beastly disposition. How then can we expect the friendship and love of
him who made us men, when we entertain that which deprives us (as it were) of
our peculiar liar existence and proper Being? If we make an Agreement, or keep
in league with wickedness, he that as a friend is able to crown his blessings
with eternity, as an enemy to destroy without end will redouble his anger and
revenge.

XXXIX.
I will endeavor to live so, as if I saw God a perpetual spectator of my
actions. Never yet was sinner so destitute of shame and grace, so armed with
impudent boldness, that he durst always act a mischief before every man's face.
If I consider that God sees my secret sins more plainly then any man my best
works. I should out of modesty forbear to commit a shameful fault; and out of
fear to offend him who is both witness and Judge.

XL.
Nothing is so generally beloved as the immortality of a Noble name; and yet
this in it self confers nothing to our happiness or misery, either before or
after death: it matters not how we are censured so we be really good; and if we
be ill, a little credit may hide, but cannot abate our vileness. The
hypocrisy of a false renown does rather aggravate then diminish our
unworthiness. We may trample upon the graves of the dead, but cannot hurt
their ashes: we may Canonize a Saint, but cannot make him such by our greatest
adoration. The goodness of an action is in the stamp and character of its own
nature, not in the value of a vain report. It were labor lost to pursue
virtue, if it could be taken from us by the violence of a railing tongue. And
though false witness may prevail for a time against the best innocence, yet
the Judge of all the world cannot be unjust in his judgment.

XLI.
By the composition and stature of our bodies we are admonished how to behave
our selves one toward another. Every man ought to dwell within his own bounds
and limits, without incroaching upon his neighbors part. As there is space and
room enough in the Head for those operations that are there fixed, and the
like in the rest of the Members, by reason of that good order and consent
settled amongst them: So, the world is sufficiently great to serve all, if we
had but skill to bear with one another, if every man would be content with his
own state and condition, and satisfy himself with those peculiar gifts which
he has received from our Sovereign Lord as a member of the same body.

XLII.
'Twas well said of one, Dreams are but dreams, that is, nothing but vanity.
Yet by these a wise man can make a large discovery of his own inclination. The
night sometimes represents things clearer then the day. Sleep (which is but the
shadow of death) can furnish our souls with lively thoughts. The retired fancy
is not disturbed with any outward object, and finds room enough to expatiate it
self. To give credit to every dream, and to neglect all, argues too much
indiscretion in both extremes. Superstion, will make a God of nothing;
contempt, will make nothing of God. The Brain is not destitute of her vigilant
motions under the greatest load of drouzie Morpheus. It will become our wisdom
to make a useful collection of our most extravagant fancies; which we may do
well enough and yet not abuse our faith with too much curiosity or observation.

XLIII.
What miseries attend this life, when our best things are but vanity and
vexation. Solomon had a general experience of this universal frame, yet could
find nothing but emptiness at the bottom. The world was made of nothing,
consists of forms worth nothing, and at last shall return to nothing. This
will give our discretion wings to fly to heaven, the state of true bliss, of
everlasting joy. As God made every thing by his power of nothing, so let us by
grace from God make nothing of every thing: let us slight and neglect these
transitory fading toys: let us behold all as nothing, and behold our Lord as
All in all.

XLIV.
He that would settle a distracted State, must first subdue all his Enemies. To
exalt a troubled Kingdom, it is necessary that some should be made shorter by
the hoad. The humble sheep can never rest securely, while the devouring wolves
are at liberty. Mercy and favor prove cruel sins when exercised upon a brood
of Traitors; for the innocent suffer when such guilty men are reprieved. The
members of a Commonwealth are torn in pieces, when Rebels get a head above
their Sovereign. Divisions and factions are the tortures of a Crown; and he
that neglects a correction must needs fall under it. A quick dispatch is the
only cure for such desperate diseases. A Prince that stays to hear what his
good rebellious Subjects can say for themselves, does but suffer them to
destroy him in a way of complement and send him to heaven for his happiness.

XLV.
We are all apt to dispute for a privilege of revenge; and every man would
have the power of a King within him and something more. The little shrub will
contend with the lofty Cedar for supremacy. Therefore those primitive Champions
underwent as hard a service in subduing their affections to be prepared for a
ready submission to the wilful tyranny of some wicked Prince, as when they
endured their fiery trial, or the most subtle torments of persecution. This (I
believe) was the greatest conquest. The sweet assurance of an innocent death
will countervaile the worst extremity of pain and miserable torture. A good
conscience is a continual feast: or (to use the expression of a learned Divine)
food in famine, freedom in fetters, health in sickness, life in death.

XLVI.
As the body cannot live except it receive such food and nourishment as is
agreeable to its nature, so the soul cannot thrive if it want the knowledge to
which it is naturally inclined. And as life is preserved by heat in our bodily
parts, so the being of our fowls consists in the apprehension of that fervor
which the love of God bestows upon it. The Spirit which is separated from the
favor of God is in a mortal condition. The blessed estate of eternity belongs
to those that are animated with the warm beams of a living mercy. The means
appointed to obtain this happiness is the heavenly and eternal word, which we
use as a preparative to receive those precious viands of everlasting glory.

XLVII.
Marriage is a composition of both Sexes. The Creation was imperfect till Adam
parted with a piece of himself to be returned with interest. It is some kind
of an affront to Nature, if there be no impediment to reject wedlock. It is
that by which the world subsists; and he that upon reasonable terms will not
improve such a benefit, is an enemy to the very essence and whole constitution
of mankind. The chastity of a single life is a rare jewel; and blessed are
they that can preserve it entire: yet honest Matrimony is the best remedy,
either to prevent or cure a lascivious disease. When couples join with mutual
favor and affection the danger of temptation is not so great; but a solitary
virtue is not so well armed against the fiery darts of Satan.

XLVIII.
Nothing becomes Authority so well as a grave and sober moderation. Violence
can never consist with peace. He that rises above his height may fall below
himself. Preferment is a curse to him that knows not how to use it; and many
men had been happy if they had not been exalted. A man may know his distance,
and yet not part with his humility, for it is a virtue requisite in all
conditions. It is good to moderate the greatness of our prosperity with humble
thoughts; for he whose mind exceeds his fortune is miserable enough in the
highest advancement.

XLIX.
When the tongue runs over, we may presume the heart is full of vanity. He
that speaks much of himself never considers what he ought to do. His intention
upon the fame makes him neglect the worth of his actions. He takes it for
granted that all his deeds are current coin, and therefore is bold to assume
the glory of a high renown as the natural purchase of his merit. Thus presuming
that he cannot act amiss he passes by the best opportunities of doing good;
and is only great in the tinkling sound of his own applause and commendation.

L.
He that marries merely to satisfy his lust, may chance to have an ill match
by the bargain; for if there be not abilities to maintain an estate, as well as
strength to satisfy desire, true love and affection will soon grow cold. We
cannot feed upon beauty: embraces will not cloth the back. A single man may
have patience enough to endure the worse of evils; but when poverty afflicts
two souls together, the pain is intolerable. If fortune frown upon my self
alone, I can find the wars a remedy for such a disease: but what grief can
be conceived greater then this, to see my second-self ready to starve without
power of relief, my little Infants crying for brea^ when I have nothing but my
tears to comfort them? The meanest beggar after death is as the greatest
Prince: but he that leaves his wife a poor widow, starves in his memory, and is
miserable in his grave.

LI.
Death can find us out when we least look for it. A Summer Parlour is no
ominous place of destruction: Judge. 3.20
yet there Eglon perished by the hand of Ehud. 2 Samuel 13.28
A brothers feast has little show of danger; yet there Amnon fell by the
treachery of Absolon. Sitting is a posture of safety and ease: yet Eli by ill
news was cast down from his seat and brake his neck. 1 Samuel 4.13
The house of God is no stage of violence: 2 Chronicles. 24.21.
yet there Zechariah (or not far from thence) was stoned by the people at the
Kings Commandment. Where Ioash found a Sanctuary, the faithful Prophet finds a
way to his grave. The same Ioash was slain on his bed, Verse. 21.
a receptacle of safe repose and quiet rest; slain by his own servants, the
Ministers of preservation and defense; as if their cruelty meant to prevent his
sickness, and give the first blow to dissolution. His killing diseases could
not secure him from violent hands. He little thought to be killed when he was
ready to die. So his latter end came upon him unawares. Nay, then was the last
year of his reign and life when he expected to live long, and rule at pleasure.
The sword of Justice can destroy the sinner any where, at any time, beyond all
expectation. And the best Saints sometimes are sent to heaven in a trice:
though never unprepared, yet always ignorant of the time; though not against
their will, yet without their desire.

LII.
When God resolves to make his wisdom known by suppressing the counsels of
Wise men, it is commonly done by small means, and weak instruments; thus the
poor man shall save the City: Eccl. 9.15,
thus Iaell Judge. 4.21
shall prevail against Sisera above an army of men: thus the folly of preaching
has confounded all the learning of the world. To teach us that nothing can be
done without him. The streams of our strength run dry unless the spring of
his bounty be full. The best knowledge, if not attendant to his grace will
faint and tire at last, but the least spark of wit animated by his goodness
shall mount up with Eagles wings. Nothing can act rightly except he inspire the
motion; Yet he that looks for Revelations, and expects a divine assistance to
his undertakings without all endeavor on his own part, intends but to deceive
himself and others. As too much confidence in the external helps of devotion
brings in superstition, so too much neglect does but advance profaneness. The
very name of a University is hateful to ignorant Atheists; and Heresies thrives
best in the suppression of all learned diligence. Industry and grace will stand
well together; strength and glory have a mutual compliance: Let us not trust
overmuch to the one, nor caution our selves with a conceit* of the other.

LIII.
The common people judge of persons and things by the issue and event. Their
love is violent upon a flourishing object, and their hate as cruel to those
whom adversity has overthrown. Who but a Saul after his great victory over
the Ammonites? How miserable is Job afflicted by his seeming friends? Success
is the Baud to vulgar admiration, while misfortune and misery do but court
contempt and hatred. Prosperity may challenge respect and observance when
ragged honesty can hardly move compassion. If a good conscience did not make
amends for all extreamities, nothing were more miserable then virtue in a low
condition. Our miseries may inform us that God himself is offended: yet such
is the profit of Affliction that by it we may learn to prepare our hearts for
endless joys, and everlasting blessings.

LIVE.
There is not any vice more hateful to Almighty God, nor more disdainful or
ridiculous in the society of man than pride: whereas a modest humility does
procure many divine favors, and knits the souls of men in a loving sympathy; a
powerful cement, a binding virtue; that glues and ties all relations together:
a center wherein every line of the circumference meets: the magnetique Lady of
all other honorable graces: the Queen Regent of all other virtues; whose
Scepter is tipp'd with a commanding power to tame the most desperate devil, and
becalm all the turbulent combustions of a distracted enmity. Why should the
mind disdain to be submissive to her self, to be humble in her own thoughts?
if she contemplate the greatness of that power that can depress the Cedars,
and bring the hills down to the valleys; that has not spared the inhabitants
of the Heavenly Court, but has deprived Lucifer and his train of that blessed
Association? God cannot endure this swelling humor which flies like stinking
smoke into his nostrils, and goes out like an unsavory snuff, that gives
offense to all, and serves but to be thrown away and trod upon. Can I be proud
of beauty, when I meet every day others far more beautiful? Is my coxcomb
curried with a little learning? do my brains begin to crow? there are those in
the world, in comparison of whom I am but a plain dunse, a forlorn idiot, a
mere ignoramus. If we have much, how much more do we want? enough to make us
humble. The proud Peacock is soon taken down when he beholds the blackness of
his feet: the mournful Hien makes the height of pride recoile into a bashful
penance: he can no more admire the glittering bravery of his feathered
rainbowe. So true is that of Solomon, Pro. 11.2.
when pride comes, then comes shame: but with the lowly is wisdom. Nay such
is the danger of this sin, that from thence he inferres the consequence of
all mischief and misfortune. Chapter 16.18
Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall; that
alone is the cause of all jarring discord, and confusion; only by pride comes
contention. Chapter 13.10.
When I look upon the sweet behavior and humble carriage of our great and
powerful Redeemer, I cannot but wonder at the pride of those ambitious spirits
that can hardly brook either Equal or Superior. I cannot be proud if I
consider what I am in my self, and what God has done and suffered for me.

LV.
Learning as well as Religion is necessary in a Divine. Truth may be
apprehended without much knowledge, but it cannot be taught without a large
measure of understanding. A man may have faith enough for himself; and yet want
power to infuse it into others. The Arts are nothing else but Reason improved;
and Divinity though it transcend, does never cross nature. Morality is a
servant to Grace; and such a Queen cannot be without her attendants. Conscience
and Philosophy may well stand together; a good Pastor is well furnished with
both: Without the first none will, without the second none can rightly instruct
the people.

LVI.
I will ever suspect that man that makes too much haste to gain my
acquaintance. A violent affection goes away as fast as it comes; a fire of
straw is easily kindled and quickly out. Love that is ripe too soon, like
Summer fruit, will not hold out in the Winter of affliction. A durable
friendship is built upon consideration: He that thrusts himself upon me may be
presumed to want honesty or judgment: either he has some design upon my
person, or else is not worthy of my knowledge. Religion is the best ground of a
familiar society: And I shall think that he has but little in himself, that
will venture upon me, not yet informed of mine.

LVII.
Travel to a wise man is a lesson of experience. The deepest Scholars cannot
by their reading comprehend so much as others that want learning have seen and
observed. A narrative information is sometimes no more then a dream, many
times a very lie; and it is impossible to make so good a collection of what we
hear or read as of that which is clearly represented to the sight. Our Maps do
but contract the understanding, which is enlarged by a full view and open
contemplation of the place. There are some so wedded to their home that they
will not approve of any voyage into foreign parts. As it is a practice
commonly taken up by young gallants merely for fashion sake, I cannot but
condemn it; but if we go with a thrifty intention to inform our selves, and
have a care to the maine chance; if Gods grace and goodness do not leave us
when we leave our Country. I know not any thing that can be (especially to
persons of honor, and men of great birth and fortune) more convenient, lawful,
and in some sort necessary.

LVIII.
War is our misery, and yet oftentimes proves necessary; an inevitable malady
that turns to a benefit, as it may be the means to prevent a greater mischief,
or procure an unexpected happiness. It is the best way sometimes to expel
poison by a contrary poison, and such destructive medicines may preserve the
patient, and ruin the sickness. When our Peace is corrupted with luxurious
sins, it is time to launch it with a revengefull sword: and the state must be
wounded to the quick to let out her putrefaction. Who would not rise from his
sleep when a just cause calls him forth? when the Warlike Trumpet sounds an
Alarm to our drousie spirits, who is he that can willingly embrace a senseless
ease? War is a remedy as well as a disease, though sometimes it prove a
remedy worse then the disease: brings health as well as sickness; and preserves
the active mind, which having no object to work upon, consumes it self: it
renues the Nobility of a decayed house, and scoures off the foul aspersions of
a long contracted infamy, whether false or real: it revives the natural fire
that lies raked up in dust and ashes, and stirs the heart to a generous
contention.

LIX.
A good Soldier is a good man; for grace and valor are never separated. He
knows that the practice of sin is a dishonor to his Lord, and a disgrace to
that service and employment which he has undertaken. Holiness he accounts the
best prize, and thinks Religion a thing as necessary in the field as in the
Church. His carriage and conversation is most eminent and conspicuous. The most
exemplary pattern of virtue, and severe example of goodness. He maintains
Christianity with his life, and his perfections shine brighter than his sword.
He bears a just and single heart in a righteous cause. As conscience brought
him to the War, so that shall preserve him alive or dead: nor can he proceed
valiantly in any action without it. He always endeavors to march like a
Christian, and walks worthy of his extraordinary calling. Such he esteems it, a
profession of extreme necessity, not like our mercenary Swordmen, a common
trade of villainy and destruction. The ten Commandments are his millitary
orders: He measures Martial-Law by the decalogue; and has skill to overcome
his enemies without a breach upon that precept which forbids murder. He loves
conscience better then fame; and thinks it impossible to obtain the last
without the first. He carries a clear countenance in a cloudy brow; looks
boldly like a lion, and as he would fright the devil and all his Host, but
humbly fearful like the modest Publican at the sight of God. He is free and
kind to his friends; charitable to his worst enemies; courteous and merciful
to his captives; faithful and loyal to his Prince; good and just to all. You
may discern a mannerly rudeness in his behavior; an eloquent plainness in
his speech, hearty sweet expressions without complement. He is full of all
deserving qualities, wisdom, justice, temperance, liberality: These are all
companions to fortitude his peculiar virtue. He fears not the worst mischief
that can befall him, and will go on though all the powers in Hell should rise
to his destruction. He is confidently assured that he can lose no more then his
body. His peace is made with heaven; and the greatest dangers of outward War
cannot disturb that happy union. He dares entertain Death in any habit, in any
place, or at any time. He is provided in the field, and in his chamber: and
every hour he expects his last hour. In the greatest storm of ill success he
carries yet fair weather in his face. His countenance is the Almanac by which
others prognosticate their hopes and expectations. If sometimes he miscarry
through a light error or mistake; his pardon may be as just as merciful: nor is
it fit that all former deserts should be covered in the grave of one
misfortune. A foil or two will add more strength and courage for the next
engagement. Shall small offenses be writ in Marble, and constant virtues in
fleeting sand? shall one unlucky trespass blot out the remembrance of many
victories?

LX.
Me thinks the very name of Man should persuade us to a peaceful quietness:
but if natural Reason cannot prevail, yet the respect we have unto Religion
the profession of a Christian should work effectually. When I hear the name of
Man, I am taken with delight as conceiving him the Subject of peace; but when I
read the title of a Christian, my hope is confirmed beyond expectation; yet
amongst Christians we find that discord which the Heathens would have blushed
to own. The Market, the Court, the Exchange, the Hall, the Church, all places
are filled with contention. Such a general deluge of distraction has
overwhelmed the world, The earth is so besprinkled with the bloody Characters
of ruin, that peace cannot find a place to keep her footsteps dry. I look
upon the City and there hope to find an agreement, where all are guarded with
the same Walls, and governed with the same Laws, and (as men in one ship)
embarked in the same common danger. But (oh shame!) How are all things here
corrupted with strife and debate: Every house a Bethlem, a cage of madness,
where every man in a distempered rage corrects his fellow? I sail out of this
tempest to the Court as to a certain Haven of Rest. Sure this is the Palace of
peace: Here are men of wisdom and state: Here is the very heart of the people,
and the eye of the Commonwealth: Here are his Vicegerents who is the Prince
of peace. The Court is the abstract of government and order; a place free from
all tumultuary violence and unruly dissension; and all things promise fairly;
courteous language, sweet embraces, cheerful meetings, and other offices of
civility and humanity are placed within this circle. And yet (alas!) all this
is not the shadow of true peace; but painted bravery, and mere hypocrisy. The
true discerning spirit may behold under this mask, divided factions, secret
enmity, undermining treachery. Ambition and envy, self-love, and pride, grow up
in this rank ground like ill weeds that can never be rooted out notwithstanding
the best endeavors of a good Prince. That which I thought the habitation of
peace proves a nursery of distraction, a stage of confusion, a seminary of
discord; a curious brave model of folly and madness; where contention, scorn
and contempt play their wanton revels under the disguise of Love. I will go to
the Schools of the learned. Learning makes us men, Philosophy more then men,
Divinity Saints. Surely amongst such I cannot miss of peace; but these have
their War too, though less bloody, yet not less cruel. One School fights
with another. In the same Academy the Orator and the Logician are together by
the ears. He thinks all the Majesty of Eloquence is dilated upon the palm of
his hand; And the other thinks all the strength of reason is contracted into
his fist: and in this posture they enter the lists. What strange and different
opinions do we find in several Authors? and that not for the substance but
ceremonies, not for the kernel but the shell of learning: a letter, a syllable,
a point makes the difference: fighting and scolding, as if Religion and their
souls lay at stake: and are not more angry with themselves than with others
that admire them not, conceiving every man bound to attend their loud noise
with fearful reverence. The height of disputation swells into a chollerick
rage; and if the matter escape the daggers point, yet there are words which cut
like a razor; a sharp style that will fetch blood from the very soul, and
destroy a good name. Their subtle distinction serve for no other use but to
divide themselves. Whether shall I go at last, there is but one harbor left,
Religion. Now certainly I am not far from my beloved Port. I see the very
Emblems and colors of peace, civil garments; I hear the very sound of peace,
the name of brother and son, terms of charity and community, sweet
compellations, and peaceful salutations, willing instructions, and courteous
admonitions. Yet even among these I meet with such Impostors as make all this
but a glorious show, a rare outside. There is no where so much intemperance and
immoderation as in matters of judgment concerning Religion. Hence it is that
we find such miserable distractions in the Christian world. The hearts of men
divide as well as their faces; and it is hard to find two as of equal form, so
of one opinion. A self-conceited pride rules in every breast, and no man will
be bound to forsake the conceits of his own brain. Difference in affection
breeds division in doctrine, and variety of opinions drown the power of love
and peace. I will venture once again and search amongst the Matrimonial
assemblies for a pair of Turtles, an husband and a wife that will not be
separated: whose love is contracted to one family, to one fortune, to one bed:
who are become one nature in a twofold habit; the same person in a divided
skin, a mutual representation of one heart in two souls. Here, affection sits
like a Prince attended with his Royal progeny, the most lovely object that can
be represented to the sight; yet as in all other Relations, so likewise here,
some difference has crept in, which oftentimes proceeds to an absolute
divorce, or else continues in a raging jealousy and mortal division. I have
but one wish more: this is the last step of my desires, that I may enjoy a
resting place in the breast but of one man, or feel some sense of quietness
and tranquillity in my own heart. I am denied this happiness. The same man
fights with himself. Reason wars with the affection; and passion with
passion. We find such a contradiction of humors in some men that they can
turn into any form. The mind is sometimes a Bull, sometimes a Serpent, and
sometimes a flame of fire; and then the music of the soul is quite out of
tune; the Bells ring backward as in some general conflagration. Piety drives
one way, Desire another. Ambition, anger, etc. a various lust divides the four
quarters of this little world. This is our wilful misery. And yet we are bold
to usurp the style and title of a Christian, although we do agree in every
thing from the most absolute pattern, and prime Author of Christianity. Look
upon the whole volume of his life: what can we find written there but a
doctrine of goodwill, and steadfast reconciliation? what do all his precepts and
parables found of, but peace and charitable forbearance? and no wonder, for by
the judgment of a Poet, peace is the best of things; Isa. 32.17
by the sentence of a Prophet, the work of righteousness; by the decree of an
Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.13
the greatest virtue; for this is that charity which like a true Doctor of
peace he prefers before the tongues of men and Angels, before the gift of
Prophecy, above all mysteries, and all knowledge, and all faith.

LXI.
We may observe that in times of danger and destruction, good men are little
regarded, and for the most part live obscurely. In this injustice of the world
the goodness of God is most conspicuous. When the birds of prey are fluttering
abroad, the careful hen calls in her chickens to the safe protection of her
wings; when the street is filled with violence and tumults, the tender parent
locks up the children within doors, not denying them their liberty, but thus
providing for their safety and security. What greater happiness then a quiet
close retiring room, when blood and ruin are making merry without? Can we
complain of obscurity, when scarce any open place is secure enough? How happy
was the Church under ground, when in that darkness there was light enough to
see heaven? In that narrow imprisonment they were yet free from persecution. 1
King. 19 18
Those seven thousand which Elijah knew not of were well known to him that
preserved them. And when Elijah himself was sought for by Iezabel, where had he
been if he had been every where? They that have strength enough to burn in
glorious flames, may scorn to save themselves by flight; but if God afford
this help to our weakness, we have reason to be thankful for an easy
judgment, which appointed as the means of our deliverance turns into a
blessing. Let me be separated from the comfortable society of my dear friends,
deprived of the benefit of my own country air, exposed to misery and the
contempt of strangers, always forgotten, never observed, let me be an obscure
dark inmate, a son of earth, an ignominious bastard in the worlds opinion, a
neglected slave; I shall think this disgrace a great honor, if I may rest
safely under the shadow of the Almighty.

LXII.
Although man's greatest excellency above other creatures consists in the
nobility and worth of his Soul; yet there are other points of high value and
concernment in the matter, form and use, of all the parts of which the body is
composed, not to be found in any other creature besides Man. Whereby we are
taught, that Almighty God having prepared and built this earthly lodging for
such a spiritual guest, it is therefore not to be neglected; no not after the
dissolution. Our bodies are the bodies of immortal souls; whilst living not to
be abused by intemperance; when dead not to be cast away with a dishonorable
neglect. Our Members are the Organs of a divine Spirit, without which it cannot
exercise those admirable faculties, from whence proceed all those operations of
grace and virtue, which make men great and famous in the world; favorites of
heaven, and glorious Saints. Our happiness is not complete till both meet:
They that destroy and vilify this outward fabric, as much as in them lies
endeavor a perpetual divorce and separation.

LXIII.
The heart is the spring of life, and the fountain of all vital spirits
dispersed into every part of the body: yet notwithstanding this pre-eminence
and dignity it cannot subsist without the cool refreshing of the lungs, or the
veins proceeding from the liver, or the strings of the sinews, or the
necessary support and guard of the ribs and bones; which are as so many strong
Forts and Bulwarks on every side. Thus the greatest men who in regard of their
power and authority have the lives of others at their command, are yet so far
from being able to maintain their own greatness, that without the aid and
defense of inferiors they must needs fall to dust. Nothing but Almighty God is
absolute of it self, and there is not any thing that depends not in such sort,
at least of something else, as that it cannot remain long in any firm state and
condition without the service of another. Who then can be so proud as to
advance himself above his neighbor, in such an high conceit as not to know he
may want the least of Gods creatures for his preservation. No man is great but
by comparison; which implies so much defect that he stands in need of more then
what he has, or is, to constitute the worth or being which he enjoys.

LXIV.
The Newter is an Hermophrodite in his opinion. One of little use or benefit to
his Country. He dares hardly profess any religion, but for the time thinks
that best which is most prevalent. We may well wonder to see the strange
distractions of Church and Commonwealth; but we may wonder more that any
should be so indifferent to partake of either side; such men love truth only
for their ease, and can easily dispense with conscience for a little pleasure.
But they that are thus content to serve two Masters at once, shall have none
but the devil to serve at last. He that will halt between two opinions can
never go upright in his conversation; and we may safely conclude that that man
has little grace that has too much Religion.

LXV.
We may find by experience that our inward corruptions are more dangerous than
outward provocations. There is no such bait as the affection Self; which many
times betrays the sweetest natures, and best dispositions to an unruly
wantonness. Lust is a Serpent, which if once entertained winds it self into
the Soul, and gnawes the Conscience while it destroys the body; till in the end
it prove an inextricable misery of madness. When the memory shall recollect the
secret pleasures of our wanton youth, and knows not whether to entertain them
with horror or delight, but is feaver-shaken betwixt both, being kept warm with
the remaining embers of desire, and benumbed with the fear of hell, what a
hard knot will this be to untie; what a labyrinth to get out of? what a riddle
to resolve? if there were no other remedy the due condsideration of the
holiness of God were a sufficient coercion from this evil. When I contemplate
the divine Nature, void of all profanesse and filthy corruption, so full of
purity and absolute perfection, that will not endure the least defilement of
sin, my thoughts run round in a desperate carere, I begin to condemn my self,
and almost repent that I was made a man. How is it possible to please him that
can delight in nothing but a spotless innocence, while we bear about us this
heavy burden of miserable uncleanness. How was the wisdom of Solomon befooled
that could not shut his eyes from beholding this vanity? where was the virtue
of those holy Patriarchs that could not drive off such a wickedness? what was
the integrity of David's heart that would entertain such a deceitful monster?
was this the unhappiness of their condition; and can I be free? Lord! what
flesh and blood are we made of, if circumvented with the necessity of such a
sinful misery? which yet by the contemplation of the infinite and celestial
beauty, may be restrained, though while we dwell here in this earthly
Tabernacle, we cannot procure a total suppression. How can I run into any
actual transgression of dishonesty if I believe the God of chastity cannot
behold such a debauchment without offense? When therefore I feel a wanton
provocation dancing in my blood, and the fire of lust begin to keep her unchaste
revels in this consecrated Temple, I use no other charm but thus whisper to my
self, Genesis 39.9
How can I do this great evil and sin against God.

LXVI.
Those afflictions strike deepest which bereave us of the object of our love.
How many parents are unwilling to be rid of a charge by the loss of a child,
desiring still to be happy in the riches of their poverty? How loath was David
to part with his rebellious Son, loving him better then the safety of his
Crown and Kingdom? There is a kind of Empire in the mind that will enjoy
nothing but what it likes, and had rather want it self then her peculiar
pleasure? We are so devoted to the subject of our desires, that we seem to die
in the departure. The active soul cannot but appropriate her self to some
delight, which when it fails, must needs leave behind it the torment of a sad
discontent. It will be our wisdom therefore to settle our affections upon
those things which never perish, which can both satisfy in the enjoyment, and
not be lost in the pursuit; which will neither wear out in the fruition, nor
slip from us in our expectation. Such is God; and he that relies upon any thing
without relation to him, shall be sure to loose his hold, and cannot possibly
obtain the benefit of a perpetual satisfaction.

LXVII.
Good Council should be welcome from whomsoever it comes. The advice of a
Servant is sometimes the best part of his service. An inferior may direct
though he cannot command; and he that will not receive any directions, because
it proceeds, from one below him, is possessed with a scornful spirit of
contradiction, which favors more of pride than wit. A pearl may be taken up
though it lie in the dunghill; and it is madness to reject a benefit in a mean
benefactor. Humility should instruct us that the best of us are but men, and
the worst are no less. Our humanity makes us subject to error, which another
may see better then our sel^es. We may justly presume that he that will never
be advised by one under him, would not willingly submit to any above him.

LXVIII.
There are secrets that cannot well be communicated to our deare^t friends, nor
will any reasonable man desire to know all that another knows; yet some men are
of such a searching nature that they will sift every corner of the heart, and
never rest satisfied till informed of that which perhaps will but trouble them
when revealed. This is a mistake of those that think there is no greater
obligation of friendship then a mutual participation of each others thoughts;
and indeed the relation must needs be very great that depends upon such a
trust. Yet there may be that in the mind which cannot be imparted without a
wound to the receiver, nor extracted without violence; and such importunity
does mar the peace and content of affection. I will ever reserve in my self a
power of concealment whether the matter concern me alone or another. There are
some griefs that find ease, others that grow worse by discovery. I will give
my sorrows vent if the vessel be two full; but if there be no danger of
dissolution, it is best without mere harm to let them lie still smothered up
within a silent breast, lest breaking loose they get fresh air, and maintain a
new life to increase my affliction.

LXIX.
Good Order is the life and soul of Government. In the external frame of
nature we may observe a regular disposition and uniformity of creatures. The
Heavens walk in a constant course of circular motion. The Sea ebbes and flows
at certain seasons. All things have their just beginning, progress and
dissolution; confusion and disorder dwell no where but in Hell; and the wicked
man is but an irregular limb of that Region. Disorderly tumults proceed from
the Prince of darkness, whose Kingdom is but a medly of violence and
rebellion. Factious men are of the Devils kindred; still perplexed in
disturbing others. One jarring string puts all the rest out of tune; one unruly
companion will spoil the peace of a fair society. I shall endeavor to keep
my mind within a reasonable compass; for if the least passion once usurp upon
the intellectual faculties, I shall be no more able to govern my self then a
little Infant or a madman to hold the reins of a Commonwealth.

LXX.
There is a moderate use of the Creatures which exceed not the bounds of
temperance; and he is most miserable that denies himself this freedom. Mirth is
a jewel if beset with modesty; otherwise but a light toy to please trivial Apes
and wanton Girls. Nothing does less become humanity then a scurrilous and
abusive wit. To laugh at the imperfections of others implies a kind of malice
that must be fed and maintained with continual mischief. Charity commands a
strict inquiry into our neighbors goodness; which by a liberal commendation
must be discovered unto the world; while defects and errors are laid up in a
silent grave; and may sooner be reformed by example, then confined by disgrace.
If the heart be clear, the brain will not run in a muddy channel. If my
thoughts be disposed to entertain some sport and mirthful solace, I will be
sure not to transgress the limits of a charitable indulgence, a chaste
behavior, and a religious integrity. I will play within the lists, and not
rang abroad; then I shall not need to say, I am sorry for what I have said; or
follow my invention with this unprofitable complaint, Wit, whither will thou?

LXXI.
Of all afflictions, poverty is none of the least: which to some is more
terrible then death it self. And truly, what can more afflict a generous mind
then a penurious want? yet against this and other miserable events of our
various life I have a sufficient cordial from the powerful virtue of my
Religion. I have learnt therefore to be thankful in the lowest condition. The
course of this world is full of change, so that I am never dejected with the
terror of my own wants, knowing that the next day or hour may make a prize.
Our happiness is no exhalation drawn from any earthly matter, but like the
Sun in the circle sometimes clouded never put out, continues an everlasting
race of glory. Poverty is not the object of my fear, which though unexpected
may find cheerful entertainment: nor shall the tyranny of a cruel want make
me sacrifice my soul in sighs and tears. Brownbread and the Gospel is the best
fare said Master Bradford. However if I cannot fancy so great a happiness, I
will yet keep fast my integrity. The greatest Cross shall not force me to be
dishonest. I think I should rather starve then play the parasite for a morsel
of bread.

LXXII.
Only the heart of man can make him miserable: for our afflictions depend much
upon opinion; and we had rather s^ffer with repining than be happy with
content. He that bears his necessities without murmuring may be subject to the
gripes of fortune, but cannot be o'rewhelmed with misery. I can look upon the
riches of other men with the same mind that I behold my own poverty, and make
as great a benefit of that as some of their increase. I shall not envy the rich
man's superfluity, if I can but enjoy the sweetness of my own content. I have so
much joy laid up in store as will enable me to congratulate the greatest
extremity. I admire not the glorious state of wickedness; but therein
contemplate the justice of Divine Providence: for virtue is not distinguished
by any sensible reward from vice. And who dares consult with the eternal
wisdom; or who can compare with Omnipotence? This makes me cheerful in the
greatest calamity, and contemn all worldly things in respect of an honest fame.

LXXIII.
I know the separation of the body and soul in regard that nature abhors all
evacuation, disunion, and dissolution, may be said to be unnatural: yet I can
apprehend this dis-junction as a necessary means to a more glorious
redintegration and incorruptible union. I know that there is a mutual relation
and commerce, a friendly society and interchangable conversation betwixt these
two: Yet I can see an image of Divinity, a picture of heaven, an impresse of
eternity, in the inward part, which cannot appear and shine forth in its true
luster, in that genuine purity and brightness till this dirty clay, this red
earth, this body of dust be scoured off and refined for a resurrection. I know
that both shall meet again so purified, so rarefied, so together glorified, as
now I cannot conceive an expression to certify my understanding, but can
understand enough to strengthen and confirm my faith. I believe and know that
both shall be renewed with such perfection and absolute grace that there shall
be no room left fit for a temptation, for a disease: the Soul without hope, or
fear, or anger, or grief; free from all tumultuary passion, and rebellious
lusts: the body free from all pain, and anguish, and sickness; the whole man
void of all necessity of sin and misery. I will not fear death that is the
occasion of all this blessedness. Life is nothing else but a progress unto
death; and death is nothing else but an entrance into life. I know it is the
end of all misery, and the beginning of all happiness. Against the fear of
death, and the desire of death, I do thus conclude. I will so live that I may
die happily; I will so die that I may live eternally. Lord, give me thy grace
here, and I will not doubt of thy glory hereafter.

LXXIV.
Let our course of life be what it will we shall find misery enough. Abroad,
the Courts of Justice torment us as much as our own cares at home. The Country
is a kind of oppression with continual labors; the Sea a confusion of dangers.
Travel if we go out rich, is but a temptation of spoil and rapine; if poor, a
provocation of scorn and contempt. Matrimony is no more then a conjunction of
mutual calamities; and a single life, a solitary mischief. Children are
monuments of care; and barrenness a curse of Oblivion. Youth is a tormenting
fury; Age a stump of weakness. What is all this life of ours which we dote
upon so much but a point of time, a little grain of salt, a summer flower, a
fading pleasure; and yet sleep like a severe Publican and other idle diversions
our officious enemies toil away above half this inconsiderable stock of
nature. What is Man but an Earthen vessel, a frail bottle, a statue of snow or
wax that melts at every blaze and will admit any impression; a rotten chip, a
withered leaf, a course thread spun out into Atoms. This is that animal (...),
a creature for a day, that starts up like a mushrum, and vanishes like a shoure
of frogs. All things under the Sun are vanity; but he is All vanity: a
circle, a whimsey, a figure, a fancy, a feather, a trifte, a nothing, a dream
of a shadow, and the shadow of a dream. He is but a living carcass, a walking
Ghost: something in a trance, a monument of death. If this be our condition
while we live, who would not be ambitious to die?

LXXV.
We are but generated dust at first, and at last degenerated ashes. The soul in
the body is but confined as it were to some dark prison. The grave is not so
strait a lodging to the body, as the body is to the soul; for the body is not
sensible of this narrow imprisonment, but the soul every day feels the iron
weight of her fleshly fetters. The flesh is a burden to the soul: are we afraid
of ease? we shall never find rest and quiet till God the Lord and proprietary
call for his abused talent, and repose it safe in those eternal Mansions. What
a benefit is this to be deprived of that darkness and stupidity which hindered
our prospect? to be estated in an unchangable condition? to enjoy an
undeterminable felicity? why should we be less unwilling to put off this
fleshly garment than we are to undress our selves every night? why should we be
loath to change this vile body for eternity? to shift this thread-bare-coat to
be superinvested with immortal glory? what but some strange misbelief and
infidelity can obstruct the desire of this happy dissolution? The world is full
of miseries, and heaven is full of blessings; enough to excite the most dull
heart to pant after this glorious change. Death in it self is nothing: are we
afraid of nothing? are we frighted with a Chimaera? How shall I encounter with
an Host, if I tremble at a shadow? There is nothing fearful in death if we
embrace it with a good conscience. An honest man cannot die a dishonest death*
It is reported of the Emperor Vespasian, that when he lay upon his deathbed
breathing out his last, he made a sudden start, and raised himself upon his
feet. Being requested to lie down again, he refused, and yielded up his spirit
with these words, Oportet imperatorem stantem mori, It behooves an Emperor to
die standing; which with a little change may become the mouth of a good
Christian, Oportet Christianum triumphantem mori, It behooves a Christian to die
triumphing.

LXXVI.
Every day we suck in fresh air and breath it out again. Our very Being is but
an Emblem of mortality: but after death we are no more dead: then we live
indeed when we cannot die. Here we die many deaths, but hereafter we shall live
one everlasting eternal life. Here we are subject to many inconveniences, and
much distress, there we are free from all. Who would not more willingly pass
out of this world, and (if it were lawful) thrust himself out than stay behind
in a throng of woeful confusions; can there be a worse Hell then is exercised on
Earth? if there be any greater torment then the guilt of sin, sure it is
prepared for those that remain miserable in the judgment: What is it that
does so trouble our apprehension? Other afflictions because usual and familiar
we endure well enough; by acquaintance with our misery we can arm our selves
against the violence of fortune, the fury of injustice, the raging of poverty,
the cruelty of a Tyrant. Familiarity (they say) breeds contempt: now what more
common then Death? what more natural? what a world is gone before us? of all
sorts and degrees? Kings, Prophets, Martyrs? Philosophers, Atheists, Magicians?
And what a world will follow after? Then why do we look upon this monster with
such a fearful reverence? This is the public lot of all generation and
corruption. Let the manner of our death be what it will; violent, or natural;
painful, or sudden, or strange; let the cause be extrinsecal, or intrinsecal;
from within, or from without; death it is no more but death, and what every
living thing must feel. Plants wither, Flowers fade, Beasts perish, and old
men die, and young m^n too; it is but a defect of heat, an eclipse of natural
light. The necessity and inevitable certainty of death well considered may
advance our courage, and banish all fear. If they that delivered us into the
world are themselves delivered out of it; we may easily conclude our own
mortality, and say to corruption, Thou art my Father; to the morme, Job 17.14
thou art my mother and my sister. The whole Commonwealth of man is subject to
this universal Law. Let unregenerate men afright themselves with this
suspicion: the Religious heart is brim full of joy and assured confidence in
the merits and mercy of a powerful Savior. The faithful Christian has learnt
his lesson beforehand in the practice of an honest life: He knows death to be
a liberal Science, an Art of freedom and preferment, of privilege and
immunity, of recompense, of glory and immortality. To wicked guilty souls,
death is both terrible and odious: because it puts an end to their transitory
joys, and begins their everlasting grief and torment: But to the gracious
heart, this furious fiend appears in the form of a most lovely friend. It
prepares him for another world while he is going out of this. Here is advantage
enough to make amends for every loss. Phil. 2.21.
To die is gain. He that led captivity captive, and swallowed up death in
victory, is ready with embracing arms to receive and entertain us. This
glutton that devoures all flesh, is meat for every true spirit. Through the
cold jaws of death we find entrance to eternal life. When death labors to
block up all passages, it finds and makes way for us to our immortal
happiness.

LXXVII.
God and a good Christian are always good company. He cannot want the
accommodation of any place who enjoys the presence of him that is every where.
Let me be barred the society of my best friends, deprived of the comfortable
air of my own country, not suffered to see the face of any man that affects
me and my welfare; in all this deprivation of outward happiness, I can yet
behold his face who is all goodness, and comfort, and content; who instead of
pleasing discourse to pass away the time, can afford me the blessed operations
of his holy Spirit. As it was said of Athanasius, he fled for the Trinity, and
with the Trinity; So, if I be carried to the utmost corners of the earth, or
confined to a dark solitude, a narrow prison, a loathsome dungeon, in such a
strict restraint I shall find room enough to contemplate, to enjoy, to
admire, to adore three persons in one Deity; I shall have courage enough to
hope for the happy enterview of Saints and Angels at the resurrection, to be
one of that heavenly association which shall never be dissolved.

LXXVIII.
That man's wisdom is mere folly that reproves another in his wrath. Good
counsel is then unseasonable and therefore unreasonable; but when his anger is
past he will be more apt to understand his fault, and more ready to mend it.
When the mind is in a calm, our advice may sail over it with ease; but in a
raging tempest the best admonitions run upon a desperate rock, and their labor
is but cast away. Phisicians are not wont to administer in the height of a
Feavor: nor will any wise man apply physic to the soul in a distempered fit of
madness.

LXXIX.
A Wise man is always more ready to hear then to speak. It is well observed,
that Nature has given us two ears and but one tongue: as intimating that there
is more need of those then of that. This unruly instrument is oftentimes the
shame of others and the owners ruin. We read of none that ever were undone by
hearing, but thousands by speaking. The ear, though it may receive, cannot
possibly reach any evil; but the other talkative Organ may discharge such
mischief and folly as can never be recalled.

LXXX.
I would not desire to be made a Judge between two friends, but endeavor all
I can to reconcile them. So shall I gain the increase of a double love, and
obtain a blessing from heaven for procuring peace. But if the controversy be
decided on either side, I am sure to lose a friend, whose ill will may hurt me
more then the others favor can do me good. So, though my judgment be never so
upright, I am like to get little by the bargain.

LXXXI.
Nothing does less represent a sound and active resolution than anger or
revenge. The Philosophers place this Passion in that part of the soul which is
unreasonable, as conceiving that, the fittest habitation for so wild a guest.
It is said that the anger of Kings is great. Pro. 19.12
The Kings wrath is as the roaring of a lion. But this is no part of their
greatness, except attended with Justice. And in that sense our great
Peacemaker did accept of that Motto to his standard. Est Nobilis ira Leonis.
God himself whose just privilege it is to be angry, yet is quickly pacified.
Psalm. 30.5
His anger endures but a moment. And shall men that are unjust in their wrath
accept of no satisfaction? will no length of time abate the strength and unruly
violence of their furious spirits? The same God is as backward to entertain a
displeasure, as ready to forgive. For amongst his other attributes of mercy
this is one, slow to anger. For our parts we are suddenly apprehensive, but
never forgetful of the least offense. A perverse and froward disposition is
quite opposite to the nature of our heavenly father. Does he deserve the name
of Man that is sensible of every wrong, and has not will and power to strangle
his passion in the birth, and at the first insurrection suppress that
chollerick matter with a careless smile? How much better is it to contemn than
imitate the folly of another? If any man think to hurt me with an angry malice,
shall I be his Ape to do the like? To revenge an others fury with my own is a
gross absurdity. How can I be justly angry with him when I am angry with my
self? If I neglect an injury, the standers by will understand that I am
wronged: If my chollar rise, I shall but raise a ground for my adversary to
plead a cause; so the difference will be propagated to an endless strife.
Enmity increases. The wound is kept bleeding till at last it prove incurable;
but by a mild forbearance we may purchase the very love of our enemies. This
is the best way of conquest, to overcome without blows; to conquer not only the
power, but the affections and will of an adversary: What can be more honorable
than for malice to obtain mercy, for cruelty compassion, for hatred friendship?
The evil which we think to drive away by an indiscreet revenge will return with
Usury: and thus we make a reciprocal bargain of inveterate hatred. When both
sides demand satisfaction and neither side will grant it, what can be expected
but everlasting discord? what shall be the period of such a controversy? By
repining at an injury we make it our own; and then it may well hurt the
Author. Who would be willing to do himself a mischief? He that loves himself
cannot hate his neighbor. For my own sake I will forbear a revenge; for
whatsoever hurt another may suffer thereby, I am sure to feel the smart at
home. What unequal injustice is this? We can soon forget a great benefit but
never lose the remembrance of a small displeasure: and when perhaps the same
man had a good intention in both: and when we also have offended in a greater
measure. In point of policy I will pardon him, that by my example he may be
compelled to favor me. Can he expect forgiveness from God that will not
forgive his neighbor? We cannot hope for more then we are willing to part
with. How can I address my self to the Throne of grace with any confidence or
hope of reward, when my own prayers shall prove me a notorious liar? how can I
from my heart say, Forgive us as we forgive, Mat. 6.12.
when I am resolved never to forgive?

LXXXII.
Some would have this word Ira, Anger, to be derived from uro, to burn: because
it burns and consumes all before it. It consumes the lodging wherein it lies,
the heart; it consumes the object whither it goes; and looks death and
destruction upon every thing in the way. So the Philosopher defines it, A
burning (or boiling) of the blood, or an exuberancy of heat about the heart. Or
you may derive our word Anger from Ango; which first sagnifies to strangle or
suffocate; and then by Metaphor to torment, vex, grieve, or trouble, as well
the mind as the body. And this reaches to both: it destroys the vital parts,
and hinders the due operation and exercise of the intellectual faculties: it
puts all out of frame and order. So the moral definition fits very well; which
terms this troublesome grief (...), appetitum recontristationis, an appetite
(or desire) of interchangable sorrow, of continual distraction. Others would
have Ira come from Ire, to go, because the angry man goes out of himself and
runs mad: but whither he will go, or where he will stop, God knows; for the
devil drives him. If he be so mad to increase the flames, let him enjoy his
fiery death alone. Let him live like the Salamander, and die like the Phaenix.
Oh sweet revenge! I would be loath with my load of mutual wrath to increase the
Funeral Peal. It is the sweetest revenge to forget an injury. If thou be angry
indeed, let not the person but his sin offend thee. Ephesians. 4.26
Be angry, and sin not. Be angry with sin, or else you sin in not being angry.
Be angry with any thing but sin, and you cannot but sin in being angry. Be
angry and sin not, be not angry and sin. Consider betimes what thou have done
or said in thy inconsiderate wrath which with too late repentance thou may
wish were now made void. Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause
shall be in danger of judgment, Mat. 5.22.
says our Savior. When the blood begins to revel in your veins, give this
sudden check to that rebellious motion. I am strangely affected now; but I
shall be of another mind by and by. Why should I deliver that in anger which
cannot be unsaid when I am pleased? why should I do that now in these mad fits
which will vex me when I am well in my wits? After a shower of wrath comes a
flood of grief. Cannot Religion, and Piety, and Conscience obtain that of me
at this instant which a little time will enforce.

LXXXIII.
The best way to suppress Anger is to compose and fold up the affections that
they may never ravel out, that there may be no commotion, or at least no
appearance of sedition, or disturbance in the irascible faculty. Not to be
angry at all is the best character, the most fit similitude, the sweetest
representation of the Deity. To overcome evil with good, to assuage the malice
of a wicked heart, with the goodness of a temperate disposition, is the
perfection of Christian charity. To restrain anger is the part of a discreet
man, a valiant champion; but to give way to the violence of this wild passion
is far beneath the dignity of humane nature: I am loath to wrong the sensual
creatures with a comparison. When we see a man set out with this brave
demeanor of his parts; a flaming eye, cheeks somewhat pale, and sometimes red,
a wry mouth, foaming lips, trembling joints, a roaring voice, a wavering and
inconstant gesture; this verily is the posture and complexion of Mars himself.
He that knows how to use a looking glass may thus circumscribe every limb, and
in spite of his Creation make himself a Beast. Nothing can represent a man so
deformed and ugly as this foul vice. The difference betwixt an enraged person
and a frantic man, we find to be no more than betwixt a short and a continual
madness. Anger is a fit of frenzy, and that a perpetuity of rage; madness
both: the difference is only in the time. Both the same disease, though one
more violent; or one an ague, the other a Fever: which agree in quality:
though not in the extent and power: and sometimes one succeeds the other: an
Ague multiplies into a Fever; and anger begets madness, with the succession of
many supernumerary evils. To conclude: If thou find it an hard task to appease
a raging spirit, think what the Savior of the world suffered in thy behalf.
What made him lay down his beloved soul for thee an injurious and despightful
enemy? with what meekness did he suffer reproach, and bonds, and stripes, and
wounds; a medley of cruel torments? and to close up his stomach, a disgraceful
ignominious death? why do thou boast of thy relation to the Head, if thou will not maintain an entire friendship and union in the body? If thine enemy
be not worthy of pardon, then surely he is not worth thine anger. Nevertheless,
he deserves more from thee, than thou can expect from God. Thou have felt the
experience of a loving mercy, and wilt use nothing but extreme severity. The
least offense against the Majesty of heaven, is more than all the injuries or
injustice that the world can give; yet the infinite power is willing to look
over, and pass by, many sins and transgressions, to renew and confirm his
innumerable mercies notwithstanding all affronts, expecting only repentance
and future amendment.

LXXXIV.
It is some kind of happiness to be under restraint. The wide world affords
many mischiefs, of which we are free in a prison. A man can hardly go abroad
and preserve his own innocence; such is the contagious infection of sin, that
it spreads it self into our hearts through our eyes: we can scarce behold
wickedness and be safely honest. Conversation is full of danger; so that he
which enjoys his liberty may want protection. Besides security, in imprisonment
we have the benefit of contemplation. The soul can best enlarge her faculties
when the body is a close prisoner. Then the Spirit will expatiate it self,
when the flesh is confined to a narrow room. The Tower and the Fleet have
produced many works which shall prove their Authors famous to posterity; who
perhaps if they had not bin buried thus alive, had died in obscurity: neither
their persons, or their knowledge had been ever known. The light of grace
shines forth in the darkest dungeon: and we may find the way to heaven though
wanting elbow-room. This use we may make of our worst miseries, and thus be
contented with our discontents.

LXXXV.
When wicked men are full of iniquity, then God makes empty the vials of his
wrath; till then his own dear Saints must expect their deliverance. The
Amorites are reprieved to the fourth generation; but judgment comes at last,
and cannot be resisted: great provocations leave us no room for mercy. The
voice of blood cries for revenge. Fruitful sins grow into punishment. When the
harvest of folly is ripe, then our heavenly Father puts in the sickle of his
justice, that he may reap to himself glory out of our corruptions. Those that
use Cart-ropes to draw on vanity, deserve to be lashed with a cordy whip. When
head and heart, when hands and feet, are employed in continual mischief, when
all interests are improved, and all means used to a sinful end, what can be
expected but utter confusion. A stiff-necked people must be hardly dealt with.
If sin grow impudent, the judge will not be modest, or moderate in his anger. A
brazen forehead may be blasted with iron lungs. When sinners never stop but at
judgments, they must look to be well paid for their pains. It is fit that
their wages should be answerable to their work. There is a day of Recompense
wherein every man shall receive his due. All accounts must be made even: they
that have done much shall obtain more, whether of good or evil.

LXXXVI.
The greatest mercies are best observed in the depth of misery. As a black
foil to a sparkling Diamond, such are our afflictions to the goodness of God.
Though nothing can give addition to his glory yet then his grace appears most
graceful to us when set off by the shadow of our miseries. Continual prosperity
is an oppression to the soul, whereas happiness after suffering fills the
heart with active joy. If we suffer always, our pains cannot be long because
life it self is short; but a good name which follows it, is everlasting. The
advantage of a fair report after death will swallow up the judgments of our
present time; the dark mist of our mournful condition cannot obscure the
brightness of such a favor, if we have but faith enough to apprehend it. Gods
mercy is more wonderful in deliverance then in preservation. Where there is
more danger there is more honor. The state of Redemption is better then that
of innocence. Had Adam never fallen, Christ had never risen to our
justification. We that were cut off by sin and death are made lively monuments
of rich compassion. This is our wonder: this is the greatness of his good
will, when we are delivered from the very jaws of destruction, then it plainly
appears that his mercy is above all his works.

LXXXVII.
The Doctrine and discipline of the Church of England is such as was first
established by general Councels and Synods, and afterward confirmed by the
Laws of the State. Unity and uniformity; necessity and order, strength and
beauty, are the ingredients of our religion: and who would not love such a
wholesome sweet composition. They that take a delight to broach new opinions, to
introduce strange innovations, cannot wish well to the peace of our aged
mother. It may be needful to repair a breach, but it is neither wisdom, nor
justice to pull down the frame of an ancient building, to make way for an
alt^^ation. God bless us from such a reformation that must be advanced in the
ruins of a wel-setled Government and constitution.

LXXXVIII.
The Schismatic is a creature that abhors the very name of a Counsel or a
Synod. He cannot endure the weight of an obligation to any Law: for he thinks
himself advanced in an higher degree of glory then weakly to submit to the
tuition of an external government: He has found out a nearer way to heaven
then by following the doctrine of the Catholic Church. He makes no account of
Canonical obedience, but as a quality only fit for them that wear the livery
and mark of the Beast. Subordination to a Superior power, whether civil or
Ecclesiastical sounds worse with him then chains or shakels, as destructive to
the liberty of Saints, and the freedom of a Christian fellowship. In brief, he
is such a piece of confusion that he knows not himself what he is, and we are
extremely perplexed to think what he may be when he comes in the way of our
Meditations.

LXXXIX.
A true jeere is a jest in earnest: which is worse then downright railing. A
smiling cutthroat is the most injurious villain. To turn truth into a matter
of mirth is to banish all favorable compassion, which is the bond of society
and friendship. An abusive wit is but a sweet poison, which though for the
present it affect the taste, yet afterward it infects the heart. A generous
spirit scorns to solace himself with the disgrace of another. I will not
triumph in the wounds of an enemy, nor insult upon the weakness of a friend.
For the common frailty of our nature is such, that we may condemn our selves
when we laugh at others.

XC.
He is neither wise nor good that will take any advantage of another by way of
insultation. Revenge may make a Giant of a dwarf; and no man can be so
miserable but one time or other he may have happiness enough to require an
injury. Every little Be has his sting; and the least of creatures has malice
enough to right it self. Despair will put life into a very coward; and he that
will suffer much will not suffer always. A fury that proceeds from disdain will
ruin him that caused it. We may neglect an enemy with safety and honor; but
to contemn him is both dangerous and damnable.

XCI.
Nothing puts a man so much out of tune as discontent. A little mudd will
defile a whole cistern of fair water. A fretting spleen like a mist that puts
out heavens eye obscures the soul with cloudy fumes, and makes the mind so
intent upon her misery that she never seeks for a redress. Society cannot cure
this disease; for it disturbs all conversation. A froward man offends all, and
all offend him. But those discontents are most irksome which may not be
revealed: for then the heart withers and consumes without hope of comfort. Good
Counsel is restorative; the want of which drives men into a desperate ruin.
Sorrow smothered up murders the patient, and like an undermining Pioner digs
for destruction.

XCII.
Too much freeness will make any man poor and miserable. An excessive bounty
concludes in a loathsome defect. Mischief ever follows him that has overmuch
goodness. Necessity makes them vile whom fortune made liberal, and liberality
made wretched. Prodigality must have fuel to maintain it: hence those that give
most, covet most. A treasure strangely wasted must be supplied by extraordinary
means; yet what pity is it that a Noble-nature should be forced to commit
unworthy Acts? How have the best dispositions been thus violated by an
extravagant sweetness? Many men had held out better if they had not gone so
fast at first. A sober pace never tires. Put a horse to his full speed in the
beginning and he will fail before the journeys end: but a gentle rider
prevents both the danger of stumbling, and the trouble of tyring.

XCIII.
Conceit will make any thing unpleasant; we are built much upon opinion, which
yet is but a sandy foundation. One man is all for mirth and music, company and
revels; another finds more pleasure in a retired privacy. Spending is a
recreation to some, gain to others. In all this variety of humors, the
imagination breeds content and delight. Our own thoughts are the mould in which
we cast the model of our happiness. Our affections are minted by the
inclination of the heart, and every passion bears the stamp of a conceited
belief. But how miserable is our greatest glory that has no other
consideration to make it valuable but our own persuasion? He that relies upon
such a credit for his welfare may quickly drive himself into a fools Paradise.
But fancy of prosperity is adversity indeed; and to have no assurance of heaven
but by a dream is to fall headlong into hell.

XCIV.
Nothing is so full of change and alteration as man. Proteus never knew so many
various shapes. Our Passions turn us round in a perpetual circle of
vicissitude. Love sometimes whirles about to an extremity of hatred. Many have
killed those for whom they have been willing to die. What a slender thread
holds together the patron and his favorite; and how small a matter can undo or
break this union? How hardly are some men pleased in their Diet, being constant
in nothing but variety, and yet not satisfied! Our Recreations do discover a
giddiness, and our most solemn actions speak something of mutability. Our
apparel is the very emblem of inconstancy. A plain suit to day; rich robes to
morrow. This is the imperfection of humanity. The weakness of our nature
bewrays it self in an unsteadfast motion. Other things alter not but according
to their object. Constancy is a noble virtue; yet where vice is predominant it
is no more then wilful folly. The way to perfection is to change for the
better. Therefore a firm resolution without discretion is most dangerous. His
condition is desperate that will not be persuaded to leave his sins.

XCV.
There is no temptation or adversity which has not a peculiar and proper
medicine from some part of our Saviors cross. When the wind of Ambition
swells the sails of my affection, I will think how the head of the Church was
dejected in this exaltation: what reproach and scorn he endured from those
that were not worthy to behold him: He that was Supreme judge of all, would be
content to undergo the death of a malefactor. When the sting of Envy plucks my
heart, I will remember how sweetly and ingeniously he gave up himself in our
behalf; what a favorable friend he was to his worst enemies. When I am
solicited by Intemperance, how he was pleased with gall and vinegar, besides a
full cup of his Fathers wrath. When tempted with some dishonest pleasure, how
his whole life was void of all delight, what were the pains of his tormenting
Agony and cruel passion. If I am moved with anger, how like the quiet Lamb he
never opened his mouth but for a prayer or blessing. Who can be angry with his
neighbor, when he hears him pray for his enemies? Luke 23.34.
Father forgive them for they know not what they do. If poverty afflict my
soul, or a covetous desire incline my heart to an unlawful gain, then I will
consider how the Lord himself, the Lord of the whole universe was content to be
borne in a Stable, and die in the Field: a manger for his cradle, and for his
deathbed the cross. In this manner I can please my self, and find
extraordinary comfort in the greatest Affliction of body or mind. I can boast
of my infirmities, rejoice in my adversity; be proud of my unhappiness, and
bless God that I am counted worthy to follow the footsteps of my dear
Redeemer: and thankfully embrace all the miseries both of life and death.

XCVI.
The entertainment of any sin whatsoever may work our final overthrow. That
enemy is most dangerous which is least regarded: and many men are thus soothed
to destruction. They flatter themselves in some little transgresgression, yet
bear a professed hatred to every grand impiety. Every man will profess an
absolute enmity with those apparent vices, as these, Rapine, Murder, Adultery,
Incest, and the like: but simple fornication is but a moderate use of pleasure,
an harmless trick of youth, an easy escape, a sweet Trespass. Who can claim a
propriety in goodness or virtue, that does thus delight himself with a spotless
innocence? The Gnat a small creature flying into the eye of a Caldean Lion,
which are of a clear wit, tender composition, so torments that fierce and
mighty Prince of Beasts with his little sting, that he is forced by the
extremity of pain with his own claws to deprive himself of sight and life:
Thus the least offense is sometimes great enough to drive the purest conscience
of the strongest Christian into a wound and mortal despair.

XCVII.
That man is a Prince indeed that knows how to command his tongue. Silence will
prevent a mischief, which too much talk will induce and aggravate. A
discourtesie may be smothered up and hushed by a temperate forbearance of
words; but we seldom see blows given without a volloy of ill language.
Superfluity of speech like water sprinkled upon coals does raise the fire of
contention, which otherwise would go out of it self. Thus thinking to
extinguish we inflame discord, and our breath becomes the bellows to a fiery
fewd. Thus when we endeavor to cool, we increase the heat: and the mouth
while it labors to blow out the sparks, stirs up the fuel of indignation
till it flame about our ears. It is well said, that we hold our peace when we
say nothing; for all war proceeds from the jarring discord of an ill-tun'd
voice. A long oration many times concludes in sorrow; and though it may be for
our disadvantage to be silent, yet properly we cannot repent of what was never
uttered. He that speaks much seldom speaks truth; which being plain or naked
needs not the trim or habit of a large discourse: and he that lies often will
at last discover himself by a contradiction. Whoever therefore would be wise or
honest let him say little: for he that talks without compass can never mean
fairly, nor handsomely deceive. An everlasting Speaker is a troublesome fool that
will still be saying something, because he understands nothing; and if
sometimes he hit upon the right, he is more beholding to his mistrisse Fortune,
then his own good skill or knowledge.

XCVIII.
An industrious diligence never makes too much haste. Things of wonder are not
accomplished without long and serious consideration. We cannot catch at virtue
with a leap; her Throne is fixed upon a rock, whither it is impossible to ascend
but by degrees. Blessings may fall into our mouths, but like the rain or dew
by drops; and he that greedily gapes for a flood may be choked with an
inundation of curses. The way to heaven is up-hill; and he that would get
thither by running, may tire before he can come to the top of the mountain. God
himself spent six days in creating the world; and do we think to obtain
everlasting happiness in a moment? How many men have been undone in an eager
pursuit of wealth and honor, while others by a sober thirst have sped better.
It becomes every man to have some employment; but he that is too quick and
overhasty in a business seems to be weary of it before it be well begun, and
will never stay to see it happily ended. He that makes light of the burden will
hardly arrive at the profit of an action.

XCIX.
As true it is as Truth it self, that the true servants of God shall never
want. The Heavens shall rain down Manna, the hard rock shall melt into water,
varieties shall come flying upon the wings of the wind. We read of a dry
cruse, that became a fountain of oil, the Lions jaws that afforded honey, the
devouring Ravens that could spare meat, the fish with money in his mouth. All
creatures contribute to the relief of those that abound in grace. In the barren
wilderness David was satisfied with marrow and fatness. Our Infant Savior is
safe in Egypt, a Nation ever hated of of the Jews. St. Chrysostom found
friends in Armenia, where he could expect nothing but famine and death. Great
Athanasius lived six years in a Cystern, and four months in his fathers Tomb.
The Divine Providence can preserve those that are appointed to die. His hand is
never too short to confer protection and salvation. Thus indeed the Protestants
have a God for all purposes; one that never fails to provide for those that
trust in him. Conceive the worst, and we can be but beaten out of Gods ground
into heaven; where our immortal souls shall be free from all farther trouble,
persecution, and distress.

C.
It is reported of Pliny the Elder, that while he was overcurious in searching
out the cause of the continual burning of mount Aetna, the smoke that ensued
from thence at last choked him. Thus some men are overwhelmed with their own
curiosity. To seek for a sign of Gods visible proceedings in his unrevealed
decrees, is both vain and dangerous. Why should I endeavor to know that which
is impossible to be known? To comprehend that which is above the reach of
humanity? If I acknowledge a Deity I cannot deny him those secrets of State
which constitute his essential power. Even earthly Kings have their secret
resolves; and shall the King of heaven lie open to any mortal eye? God is a
consuming fire. Heb. 12.29.
He that comes too near to inform himself of his Nature and essence may be
suffocated with the smoaky blasts of his fiery indignation. I will admire him
in all his works but inquire the meaning of none, no farther then he is
graciously pleased to render an account of his Actions in his holy word. His
Public declarations are full of satisfaction, and he that seeks for other
Reasons then are there set down is most unreasonable. All conceptions of the
mind are either Relative, Negative, or Absolute, By the first we understand
God no otherwise then he stands in relation to our selves, as a Father, a
Governor, a Creator, or the like, which cannot positively express his Nature.
By the Second as when we say, he is not Mortal, not Material, not Finite, we
understand not what he is, but what he is not. By the Third, we cannot
apprehend him at all. If such a conception should be granted, it must be such
as whereby we shall be able to comprehend all those real Attributes which
formerly and properly belong to his divinity; which no natural understanding
can embrace any otherwise then by reflection in the Creatures. Lord, if it be
so hard to understand what thou art by the Strength of Reason, how vain is
their wisdom that would prove there is no God at all, and because they cannot
know thy essential truth will disclaim all belief in thy power and existence.

FINIS.

